This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

https://books.google.com

x-

OUT L IN E

OF

A NEW SYSTEM OF LOGIC.

OU T L IN E

of

•

A N EW

SYSTEM
• OF

LOG I C,
WITH

A CRITICAL EXAMINATION

OF

DR. WHATELY'S “ELEMENTS OF LOGIC.”

BY

GEORGE BENTHAM, Esq.

LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY HUNT AND CLARKE,
4, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

1827.

W

£)
.N.
CWf My
BRITAN
*

*

| "...' I. . .

Printed #: Mallett,
59, Wardour Street, Soho, London.

PRE FACE.

I HAD been for some time engaged in revising
and completing a mass of manuscripts which my
uncle, Mr. Jeremy Bentham, had put into my
hands, and in drawing up a general treatise of
the science, when I heard of the publication of
Dr. Whately’s “Elements of Logic.” Having
procured this work, a first glance convinced me
that the author had done much towards divesting
the science of that useless jargon, of those un
meaning puerilities, with which it had been
loaded by the schoolmen; and which, being the
only apparent result of their efforts, have cast

so much opprobrium and ridicule on the very

-

name of Logic. On a more careful perusal of
the work, Dr. Whately appeared to me to have
pointed out, in a very able manner, several of

vi

PREFA C E.

these errors of his predecessors, and to have gone
over the field of the science, such as he had

marked it out, with great attention on his

part,

and consequent advantage to the learner. Still,
however, I saw much remaining to be done.
Some errors presented themselves to me in that

part which Dr. Whately had investigated in the

closest manner; and other topics, which I had
been led to consider as the most important, were
barely touched upon by him. From these con

siderations, I thought it might perhaps be at
tended with some use to logical students, were I
to point out the instances where these Elements

appeared to be susceptible of improvement, in
point of clearness or accuracy, as well as those

where I thought the subject might require
further development; and were I at the same

time, in order to enable the reader to judge the
better of the accuracy of my observations, to
give, on each occasion, a general analysis of the

principal topics treated of in the larger work I
am preparing, And I am the more induced thus

to publish immediately an outline of the new
system which I purposed developing in that

general Treatise, as various circumstances may
render it adviseable that I should delay the com
t

vii

PREFACE.

pletion of the larger work till my ideas have be

come more certain and fixed with regard to some
of the details.

In pursuance of this plan, I have not, on the
present occasion, departed materially from the

order adopted by Dr. Whately, but have endea
voured to follow him, step by step, comparing

his view of every portion of the field with that

which Mr. Bentham has taken of it in the above
mentioned, manuscripts, in as far as the subject
has been there treated of; and with my own ideas,
in regard to those parts which Mr. Bentham had
left untouched.

f

The reader may perhaps consider that I have
devoted too much space to the critical examina
tion of Dr. Whately’s work, and may ask why I

have not extended my remarks to other logical
treatises. My reason for this preference has
been merely because I look upon the Elements

in question as the last and most improved edition
of the Aristotelian system; that, therefore, it is
useless to say any thing more of the errors which
he has corrected, or of the superfluities which he
has eliminated; and that, by criticising whatever

appeared to me still to be defective in Dr.
Whately's work, my strictures would apply, not

viii

PREFACE.

so much to any individual system of his, as to
the Aristotelian Logic in general, as improved by
this his last commentator.

I have also omitted all mention of French

logical writers, who consider the subject in a
totally different light from that in which British
authors have viewed it. Condillac first rejected

the whole Aristotelian theory, and applied the
name of Logic to the enquiry into the mode of

action of our intellectual faculties. Since then
Destutt de Tracy, in the commencement of the
present century, published four volumes of Ele

ments of Ideology (including one of Logic), which
have become the standard to which the subse

quent continental writers have generally referred.
His principles are founded on those of Condillac :
he suppresses, not only the theory of syllogisms,

guidance of any

of our
intellectual faculties, confining the science to
“pure speculation,” unapplied to any practical
use. I read over his work some years ago, and

but also all rules for the

on the present occasion I have looked into it
again, for the purpose of comparing his ideas
with mine: but I found his “Logic” so totally
different from the branch of art and science to

which I have applied that name, that I thought

ix

PR.EFACE.

it would be a needless waste of time, were I to
enter into any analysis of his doctrines, more
particularly as clearness of exposition, order in
the ideas, or systematic connection of the various
principles and theories, are qualities which it
would be vain to search for in his “Elements of

Ideology.”

-

The above-mentioned manuscripts of Mr.
Bentham’s were written chiefly in the year 1811;
some,

however,

bear a date as old as 1795, and

for the last fifteen years they had not been looked
into, with the exception of such as were revised
for insertion in the appendix to Chrestomathia,

published in the year 1817. The subject upon
which they give the fullest details is that which
may be called the tactical part of Logic, com
prehending the rules of exposition and of me
thod. The ratiocinative part, or that which
relates to reasoning, which, in the eyes of most

logicians, constitutes the whole of the science,
had not yet been entered upon by Mr. Bentham.
The rules or systems which I may, in such cases,
propose to substitute for Dr. Whately’s, being
thus entirely my own, are here given with far
less confidence than those which relate to the

tactical part.

But with regard to these also,

X

PREFA CE.

Mr. Bentham must not be considered as respon
sible for the principles I have exhibited. His ma
nuscripts not having been prepared for the press,
are, in many instances, in a state far from com
pletion, and, in others, the subject may have ap
peared to me in a different light from that in
which he had viewed it. It is to myself, there
fore, that the reader must attribute any errors he
may observe in the details of my system; of
which, however, the leading principles must be
considered as founded on those of Mr. Bentham.

C O N T E N T S.

Page

CHAP. I. Introductory remarks on the style and arran ge
ment adopted by Dr. Whately...................

•

CHAP. II. Definition of Logic, and enumeration of the topics

of which the science consists......................

11

CHAP. III. Analytical Outline.—Examination of Dr.Whate
ly's Chap. I.-General classification of entities. . . . . .

26

CHAP. IV. Intellectual Faculties enumerated, and the list
compared with Dr. Whately's........... . . . . . . . .

CHAP. v. on Terms—Review of Dr. Whately's Chap. II,
Part I... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

CHAP. VI. Exposition.—The various modes enumerated and
compared with Dr. Whately's species of definition...

74

CHAP. VII. Methodization, successive and distributive.

Considerations upon which the theory of division de
pends, and examination of the Aristotelian rules of
division.........................................

CHAP. VIII. On Propositions, considered with a view to

logical deduction.—Their classification and reduction

97

xii

CONTENTS.

to their simplest forms.-Examination of Dr. Whate
ly's classifications. . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . ............ 119
CHAP. IX. Deduction, or Syllogistic Ratiocination.—Forms
of syllogisms substituted for the Aristotelian moods
and figures................ . . . . . . . .............. 142
CHAP. X. Induction.—Refutation of the assertion, that there
are not two kinds of reasoning.—Definition of induc
tion.—Considerations upon which the validity of the
operation depends.—Review of Dr. Whately's Disser
tation on the Province of Reasoning................ 172
CHAP. XI. Fallacies defined, enumerated, and classed.

Review of Dr. Whately's Chapter on Fallacies...... 220

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY REMARKs,

IN reading over the elegant exposition of his
views, which Dr. Whately has prefixed to his

Elements of Logic, I felt that I generally con
curred in his observations on the utility of Logic,
in his refutation of the arguments of its detrac
tors—of those who set up Common Sense in op
position to Logic,—and in his remarks on the
erroneous system proceeded upon with regard to
this subject in our University Education. The
absurdity of comprehending, within the province
of Logic, every branch of art or science to which

it may be applicable, will readily be admitted by
any reader; but, on the other hand, it may per
haps appear to him that the author of the Ele
ments has fallen in some measure into the oppo
site error of restricting too much the field of the
science. This is a point, however, which will be
B

2

CH.

I.

INTRODUCTORY

more properly considered when we come to the
examination of the definition of Logic. At pre
sent I must devote a few pages to some observa
tions suggested by the perusal of Dr. Whately’s
Preface.

The author excuses himself for censuring
several of the doctrines and explanations of logi
cal writers, and of Aldrich in particular. On this
occasion he appears to me to go farther than is ne
cessary; and, upon the whole, the commendations
given to Aldrich’s compendium are probably
greater than the work is deserving of. However,
I must now apply the same excuses to my own
case. If, in the remarks contained in the follow

ing pages, criticism will be found to occupy more
space than eulogium, it is not from any desire to
depreciate the value of the improvements here
introduced into the science, but from the con

sideration of the greater practical use resulting
from the investigation of the matter of disagree
ment, than from a detailed repetition of those
doctrines in which my views coincide with those

expressed by the author in question. Should my
remarks be deemed inapposite or incorrect, the
reader may at least have been led, by their means,
to form a better-grounded judgment.

R.E.MARKS.

3

In adverting to the style which he has

adopted, the object stated by Dr. Whately as
that which he had in view, is so strictly what
should be wished, that I cannot do better than

transcribe this short paragraph.
“With regard to the style, I have considered
perspicuity not only, as it always must be, the
first point, but as one of such paramount import
ance in such a subject, as to justify the neglect”
(the comparative neglect, I should rather say) “of
all others. Prolixity of explanation,—homeliness

in illustration,—and baldness of expression, I have
regarded as blemishes not worth thinking of,
when any thing was to be gained in respect of
clearness.” Elements—Preface, p. xxii.
Generally speaking, the result answers to the
expectations raised by the above paragraph;
and, not confining himself to the qualifications
which he deems to be necessary, he has also suc

ceeded in combining elegance and dignity of
language with that perspicuity which, on scien
tific subjects, has the precedence over every other
qualification; he falls but rarely into any of the
three defects which he very properly describes as
more than pardonable, wherever clearness would
otherwise be sacrificed. If his style is in any re
B 3

4

CH. I.

INTRODUCTORY

spect to be blamed, it is rather for the occasional
departure from the precepts which he has thus
laid down, for a disposition to wander into that
elegant rhetorical confusion which is so apt to
lead the reader astray, and sometimes to convey

a notion (an erroneous one I have little doubt
of) that the author himself has not always a
very clear idea of the import of his lan
guage.

-

“Ornaments of style,” says he, page 146,
“such as metaphor, epithet, antithesis, &c.” are
“by no means necessarily adverse to perspicuity,
but rather, in many cases, conducive to it.”—
To a certain degree, fiction is not only con
ducive to perspicuity, but no discourse can be

carried on without it.

No operation of the mind,

none of its qualities, nothing that has any rela
tion to it, can, in general, be expressed but by
metaphorically comparing them to those which
relate to really existing objects. For ex. My mind
comprehends, retains an idea; my idea on the sub
ject is enlarged, restricted, cleared up, defined,
&c. All these are expressions quite as figura

tive, and even more so than that of a vessel
ploughing the ocean. The mind is supposed to

be a vessel or receptacle, which comprehends (i.e.

5

REMARKS.

encloses) or retains (i. e. prevents escaping,

keeps in confinement) an idea, which
supposed to be a real object.

again is
Again, idea is

supposed to be a collective term, designative of a
set of real bodies; one of these is defined to be the

one which lies upon another body, which is called
the subject (from subjaceo), and this body lying
upon another is described as being increased or
diminished in bulk, cleared up (i.e. by the re
moval of objects which hid it from us), defined,
(i.e. by fixing limits to separate it from other con
tiguous bodies), &c.
This necessary defect in all human languages,
—necessary, because it is the result of the con
formation of our minds,—is the perpetual antago
nist to perspicuity. Obliged to describe as real
what is only fiction, and what the narrator intends
should be understood as fictitious, he is in con

tinual danger of seeing the idea of reality attached
to it by the reader in a greater or less degree; or
still more so, of seeing the connection between
the two, differently conceived by the different
minds to which his discourse is directed.

This

is the source of most of the deceptions which

prevail in every stage of human intercourse, and

6

CH.

I.

INTRODUCTORY

this it is that renders rhetorical language so easy
an instrument of delusion and erroneous persua
sion.

Where correct information, and conse

quently perspicuity in language, is the object, the
greatest attention should be paid to employ, in
preference to others, such figures as have, by long
use, lost, as it were, their original sense; or,
where that object cannot be accomplished, to use

such others as represent ideas as analogous as
possible to the particular one intended.

To per

sist in the same figure beyond the point where
analogy ceases between the metaphor and its
type, is directly productive of erroneous concep
tion; to represent the same idea by metaphors

derived partly from one, partly from another
source, generates confusion ; to combine figura
tive expressions in a manner in which the real
types could not have been combined, gives to the
whole an air of absurdity. Yet nothing is more
common among those who, like the author of

the Elements, are apt to give way to a general
propensity for decoration in their style. I do
not deny that most of his figures are good and
appropriate; but one is apt to be startled at meet

ing with such expressions as the following:

REMARKS.

• .

7

“They overlooked the boundless field that was
before them within the legitimate limits of the
science.” (p. 7.)
Another instance of inappropriate figures is that
of building a science. To “build morals into a
science” occurs in p. 223; and again, in p. 245,
he says that a certain collection of rules cannot be
“built into a regular sciel ce.” In the latter in
stance I have not been able to form any clear idea
of his meaning; for it is difficult to conceive,

that the knowledge of any collection of rules for

the performance of any operation, or indeed
that the knowledge of any one such rule does
not constitute a portion of science.
A slight deficiency in point of perspicuity
may also be observed in another respect. This
is in the occasional entanglement of sentences, a

species of confusion, the source of which may be
traced to the same pursuit of elegance—a most
desirable quality, one with which but few are .
really gifted,—but which, in a scientific treatise,
should never be opposed to perspicuity. The
long sentence on plainness, which occupies two
thirds of p. 146, may serve as an instance of this

defect; and in general the long parentheses which

8

CH. I.

INTRODUCTORY

occur throughout the work, are the occasion of

much strain upon the reader's attention.
The frequent use of the letters i.e. and e.g.,
abbreviations of the Latin words id est and erem
pligratia, is also productive of inconvenience to

the reader. They are usually read that is and
for example; words which bear no apparent

analogy to their signs, in the eyes of anyone who
is not a Latin scholar; and, even if the reader be

acquainted with that language, he must perform
the additional operation of translation before he
can pronounce these words. The use of these

abbreviations is of old standing; but I think
there might be much gained by substituting,

for e. g. at least, the abbreviation for er, now
much more generally adopted.

Let not any of my own defects in style be
objected against these remarks: every author

is ready to detect the inaccuracies in the style of

others, and to consider himself as a competent
judge; but few can be convinced of those of
their own writings, and this for a very plain
reason, independent of all self-love: every person
being necessarily more accustomed to his own

arrangement of ideas than to that of any other
person.

-

REMARKS.

9.

The general arrangement of the subject
matter of Dr. Whately’s Elements appears to
be well calculated to answer their professed object

—first, the introducing into the field of syllogistic
reasoning one who is as yet wholly unacquainted
with the science, and the giving a moredetailed in

struction to the scholar who has already acquired
some general notions. With this view, after hav

ing, in the introduction, defined the science, and
dissipated in a great measure the clouds in which
former logicians have wrapped the whole subject,

the author proceeds to give an Analytical Outline,
calculated to convey a general idea of the end-in
view and of the subject-matter, in as clear and in
telligible a manner as can be done without entering
into minute details.

The several elements of the

science are next investigated, and gradually put
together and combined in that part which he has

denominated a Synthetical Compendium; and the
remainder of the work refers to subjects which
he considers, not as appertaining to Logic, but as

being so intimately connected with it, as to
require the entering into some details for the
purpose of exhibiting the distinctions by which
they become excluded from the field.
In the Treatise which, as above mentioned, I
**

10

CH. I.

INTRODUCTORY

REMARKS.

am preparing, I have followed a plan in some
respects analogous to this one; but, as I have
extended so much further the limits of the field,

and as I differ from him as to the comparative
importance of its several parts, correspondent

modifications will be seen in the details of my
plan. Those subjects which he considers as con
nected only with the field, are, by Mr. Bentham,
included within it; and the subject-matter of Dr.
Whately’s last chapters are therefore interwoven
with the rest of the treatise. On the present
occasion, however, for the purpose of facilitating

the comparison of our respective systems, I shall,
with few exceptions, follow the arrangement
adopted in Dr. Whately’s Elements.

11

CHAPTER II.

DEFINITION OF LOGIC.

IN every treatise, whether for the purpose of
elementary instruction, or for that of completing
and methodizing the stock of knowledge already
acquired, it is most important that the author
should begin by distinctly stating his object and
subject—the end that he wishes to attain, and the

subject-matter on which he purposes to work.
By this mode of proceeding, the reader, having
in view the same end as the author, is enabled to

keep pace with him during the whole course of
his progress, and the author himself is the better
assured of not wandering from the paths which
lead to that end.

Thus, in these Elements of

Logic, Dr. Whately sets out by a definition of
the art-and-science he treats of, according to his
ideas on the subject, together with a critical
examination of the extent ascribed to it by former
logicians.

Though this definition be not given in that ri
gorous and precise manner which might have been

12

CH. II.

DEFINITION

wished, yet the author's meaning, upon the whole,
may be ascertained with tolerable clearness. He
has in particular brought to view one very im

portant fact, overlooked by all his predecessors,
though so obvious, when once exhibited, as to
make us wonder that it should not have been

remarked: viz. that Logic is a science as well as
an art. The universally prevailing error that hu
man knowledge is divided into a number of
parts, some of which are arts without science,
and others sciences without art, has been fully
exposed by Mr. Bentham in his Chrestomathia".
There also it has been shown, that there

cannot

exist a single art that has not its corresponding
science, nor a single science which is not accom

panied by some portion of art. The Schoolmen,
on the contrary, have, with extraordinary effort,

endeavoured to prove that Logic is an art only,
not a science, and, in that particular instance, Dr.
Whately is, I believe, one of the first who has
ventured to contradict this ill-founded assertion.

* Chrestomathia, &c. by Jeremy Bentham, London, 1815
and 1817, Part I, p. 8; and “Essai sur la Nomenclature et la

Classification des principales Branches d'Art et Science.”
Paris, 1823, p. 23. The latter is a short Essay founded on the
former work, and which I published in French in 1823.

OF

13

LOGIC.

Next, as to the field appertaining to this art
and-science, there is a wide difference between

the extent ascribed to it by Dr. Whately and that
which appears to me to be best suited to the ordi
nary acceptation of the word Logic. In the
Elements, the science in question is restricted

to mere correct reasoning, or (in the precise
language adopted by Mr. Bentham) to the opera
tion of ratiocination, and, yet further, to that
ratiocination alone which can produce absolute

conviction, viz. to syllogistic ratiocination or
deduction—to the rules for the correct perform
ance of this operation, and to that scientific know
ledge of its subject-matter and object which is
necessary for the purpose.
Mr. Bentham defines Logic to be—“that
branch of art-and-science which has for its object
or end-in-view, the giving, to the best advantage,
to the human mind, direction, in the pursuit of

every branch of human knowledge;” a definition
founded upon that of Saunderson—“Ars instru
mentalis dirigens mentem nostram in cognitionem
omnium intelligibilium.”
-

Neither of the above definitions answer to the

idea I should be disposed to entertain of the sub
ject in question.

That of Dr. Whately confines

14

CH. II.

DEFINITION

it to matter which, of itself, appears to me of so

little importance, that it may be very doubtful
whether even all the eloquence he displays on the
occasion, together with his practical simplification
of the science, can ever bring Logic into general
repute; and, upon some occasions, he may per
haps himself be found to have used the word in a
more extensive and, at the same time, more ordi

nary and less obnoxious sense. Mr. Bentham's
definition, on the other hand, might be so con
strued as to comprehend every other branch of

art and science; thus rendering Logic synony
mous to universal knowledge.

In the endea

vour to avoid these opposite defects, I had defined
Logic to be—“the branch of art-and-science

which has for its object the advantageous applica
tion of the human mind to the study of any other
branch of art-and-science.”

If accurately analyzed, it may be found that
this definition cannot infer the extension of the

science to any spot which is the exclusive domain
of any other branch, but to such only as are com
mon to all. It does not imply “such a system
of universal knowledge as should instruct us

in the full meaning or meanings of every term,
and the truth or falsity,–certainty or uncertainty,

OF

LOGIC.

.

15

—of every proposition, thus superseding all
other studies;” but relates merely to directions for
attaining and transmitting any such knowledge

or instruction. It does not refer to particular
subjects, but to such modes of proceeding as are
universally applicable to art-and-science, what
ever be the subject-matter in question.
In Dr. Whately's preface, p. x, the subject of
Logic is supposed to be expressed by the answer
to the question, “What is the most appropriate
intellectual occupation of Man as Man ?” mean
ing, as it is evident from the subsequent develop
ment of the question: what is the universal
occupation of man (as distinguished from brutes),
whatever be his particular pursuits?
The
author answers, “Evidently in Reasoning.” I
should say, “In the exercise of his intellectual
faculties.” Knowledge, it is true, cannot be
made use of unless belief be attached to it;

and the producing that belief is certainly one
of the important operations of the mind; but
it does not constitute the whole of that universal

occupation which distinguishes man from brute
—which constitutes the Animal rationale.

Has

any one of the brute creation been observed to

define, for instance, or to class objects under

16

CH. II.

DEFINITION

genera and species?—or are these operations less
universally applicable than the deduction of a
conclusion from two premises?”
On this occasion, one might be led to sup
-

pose that the author had fallen, in some measure,
into the error with which he very properly

reproaches. Locke—that of confounding reason
with ratiocination—reason in its ordinary sense

(viz. that use of the mental faculties which dis
tinguishes man from other animals), with ratio
cination as above defined (that is, the process of
deducing or inferring one proposition from one
or more others). Thus it is that he probably
considered that man, as man, is endowed with

reason; therefore reasoning is the characteristic
operation performed by man".
But Logic is to be still further restricted.
-

It is not to the whole field of ratiocination that

the word reasoning is to be applied; but it
is henceforth confined to syllogistic

argument,

which mathematical argument is a species.

of

It is

true that this alone can, strictly speaking, produce .
absolute conviction: but how few are the cases

* This is a fallacious argument, referrible to the head
denominated hereafter, Fallacy of Paronymity. See Ch. xi.

17

OF LOGIC.

where such reasoning can be put in practice?

How much are we not, every day, every moment of
our life, obliged to reason by analogy, for in
stance? The latter species of reasoning is indeed
more subject to fallacy than any other: there is no
test to prove absolutely that any one argument
founded on analogy is not fallacious; but, is that
a reason for discarding it altogether from the field

of ratiocination? If we cannot prove, otherwise

than by analogy, that food will satisfy our hunger,
should we therefore dispense with food?

The

force of each particular argument is founded, it
is true, upon the nature of the particular observa
tions made with relation to it, and is therefore the

subject-matter of the application, not of the science
of Logic; but, so much of the mode of operation
as can be abstracted from particular cases, in this

case, as well as in that of syllogistic reasoning,
is assuredly contained in the answers to the above
mentioned question, and is therefore equally

entitled to be classed under the head of Logic.
But moreover, reasoning, whether deductive
or inductive, is not the only universal intellectual
occupation of man. Whatever be the subject
matter of his thoughts, in order to derive any

degree of advantage from them, he must be able
C

18

CH, II.

DEFINITION

to learn and to retain the ideas of others, and
to communicate his own,-and, in order to

derive the greatest possible advantage from them,
he must be able to improve them; that is, to form

in

his own mind new combinations, wherever

such combinations may be usefully made; for

when will the time come when any man may
be assured of having arrived at perfection on any
one subject? All general rules for accomplish
ing these several purposes, that is, all such as are
independent of any particular subject-matter of

knowledge, form, in my idea, an independent
branch

of art-and-science—one which should

be entered upon and studied separately, by all
who intend to devote their time to scientific

pursuits—one of which the practical rules are
afterwards applicable with the greatest possible
advantage to every art and science, and without
which, in a greater or less degree, no one can
be studied with an adequate use. To this aggre

gate branch, I have given the name of Logic;
and, among the subdivisions of its field, I include
ratiocination, both deductive and inductive—

one of which alone constitutes Logic, according
to Dr. Whately’s idea. Other authors again have
still more extended or restricted the sense of this

OF

LOGIC.

19

word, but in too vague a manner to render any ex
planation necessary on the present occasion. As to
which of these several subjects should be defi

nitively regarded as the matter of Logic, this may
be admitted to be a “mere verbal

question,

relating to the extension, not of the science, but
of the name.” (Elements, p. 250.) But, do not

let us confound together the whole with its part;
do not let us, for the sake of a word, refrain from
dispelling the thick cloud which darkens this
spot,-at a time too, when, in physical science, it
is thought advantageous to overwhelm us with a
deluge of hard words on the most insignificant
subjects.
If there be a reason for applying any deno
mination, become vague and indeterminate by
long and ever-varying use, to one of its senses
-

more than to another, it is in favour of that

sense in which its use is at once the most ordinary

and the most appropriate".

And this, I think, is

the case with the word Logic, as applied to
*

* Even those Logicians who confine the science within the
narrowest limits, though they avowedly exclude every thing
but ratiocination, yet, in their treatises, definition, method,
&c. are touched upon, although it be but slightly. Dr.

Whately, as will be seen, has, as well as others, a section on
each of these subjects.
C 2

20

CH.

II.

DEFINITION

the extended sense above alluded to; and to this

one therefore I should attach it;-—not including

any application of the science to particular pur
poses,—but merely the general abstract part of
it,—like Mathematics, which treat only of such
general abstract properties of form and quantity,
as are always the same, whatever be the nature of

the subject-matter. If the above definition of
Logic be not adopted, I should propose the total
suppression of the word, on account of its con
tinued misuse. The general science might then
take the name of Noology, given to it by Mr.

Bentham; and the particular operation of rea
soning, that of ratiocination (to avoid the con
fusion of reasoning with reason); this operation
would be subdivided into deduction or syllogistic
ratiocination, and induction or

analogical

ratio

cination.

A clearer idea may perhaps be obtained of
the extent of the field of Logic or Noology, as I
have defined it, by the following enumeration of
the several topics of which it may be said to
consist.

-

1. Exposition of the object or end-in-view,
viz. the advantageous application of the human

mind to the study of any branch of art-and
science.

-

OF

LOGIC.

21

2. Analysis of the subject-matter, viz. the
human mind, with the classification and descrip

tion of its several powers or faculties.
3. Exposition of the means by which the
subject-matter may be applied to the object.
These are—1. The transference of knowledge,

comprehending, on the one hand, learning,
on the other, teaching, either narrative or proba
tive, to the exclusion of excitative communi
cation, which belongs to Rhetoric; 2. The im
provement of knowledge, including self-teaching.
4. Analysis of the operations performable
with relation to those means, and rules for their

due performance. These operations are-1. Ex
position in all its various modes; 2. Methodization,
including perhaps observation, generalization,
&c.; 3. Induction; 4. Deduction.

5. Analysis of the instrument, viz. Language.
This includes the theory of Universal Grammhar,
in as far as it relates to the process by which our
thoughts are expressed, and the order and modes
in which such process is best suited to its object.
In the hasty review of the several writers,
ancient or modern, who invented, or have since

made any important changes in, the system of

Logic, Dr. Whately omits to mention any of the

22

CH. II.

commentators

DEFINITION OF

LOGIC.

or editors of the

Aristotelian

system in modern times; but, in the course of
the work, it is to Aldrich’s Compendium which he
commonly refers. There is a work, however, by

Bishop Saunderson, which was commonly in
use at Oxford in the middle of the last century,
and which appears to me to be superior to those
which have been more recently published.
It contains, indeed, the usual superfluity of nomen
clature and of systematic ingenuity which charac
terizes the Aristotelian syllogisms; but, upon
the whole, it is drawn up in a comparatively
clear and methodical manner.

It was this work

which originally suggested to Mr. Bentham his
new ideas on the subject; and it is to this treatise

in particular that I shall refer, whenever I have
occasion to speak of the Aristotelian system.

23

CHAPTER III.

ANALYTICAL OUTLINE.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. I. p. 18.)

THIs chapter of Dr. Whately’s is a very useful

one to beginners. By thus giving them a general
idea of the subject-matter before the entering into
any details, the author is enabled more readily
to point out, as he goes on, the use of those details
and their connection with the object in view. As,
however, this has only reference to beginners,
every rule and principle being repeated in the
Synthetical Compendium, and as, upon the
whole, this part of the Elements appears to

be well drawn up, I consider it as need
less to enlarge upon the subject at present;
but shall merely have to make a few observations
relating chiefly to some errors of detail, which,
though small in themselves, may be productive
of much misconception in their results. To these
observations I shall add, as a necessary prelimi
nary to the science of Logic, a general classifica

24

CH.

III.

ANALYTICAL

tion of the various subject-matters of thought
and discourse.

The author’s remarks on the ambiguity of
words, and on the very great degree in which it
may contribute to fallacy in argument as well as
in conception, are, generally speaking, just and
appropriate; but, in some cases, he has not been
very happy in clearing up this ambiguity. He
adverts (Analytical Outline, p. 25,) to that of the
words because and therefore, which denote, some
times the connection of premises and conclusion

(a species of connection of logical subalternation),
sometimes that of cause and effect.

As an illus

tration, he gives the example, “Yonder is a fixed
star because it twinkles.” This is a good ex
ample of a connection of subalternation; but,

when he reverses it to this form, “It twinkles
because it is a fixed star,” he fails in giving an
instance of the relation of cause and effect. A

star does not twinkle because it is fixed, any
more than it is fixed because it twinkles.

The

relation, in this case, as in the former, is that of

logical subalternation exhibited in another form.
This example is the more unhappily chosen, as
no philosopher has as yet ascribed a plausible
cause for the twinkling of a star. If he had

OUTLINE.

25

said, “I no longer see the star, because a cloud
is interposed between it and my eye,” this
would have been an apt illustration of the use of
because, expressive of the connection between
cause and effect.

And here I may advert to another kind ofinex
actness which frequently occurs. Though he has
expressly confined the first part of his work to de
duction or syllogistic reasoning, he is continu
ally trespassing on the field of induction, as in

this same page (26), in the use of the word proof.
Here he plainly refers to inductive proof (which,
not producing certainty, can scarcely be called
proof), as well as to syllogistic. The former
alone is applicable to future events, or indeed
to any particular class of events. The principle,
that syllogisms are entirely independent of the
subject-matter, is one of those which he lays the
most StreSS upon throughout the book.
Of the whole system, that part, which he has
left the most confused and least intelligible, is the
theory of the “distribution of the middle term ;”
and that, in a great measure, from the ill-chosen
fiction made use of. The word distribution, it is
true, is the one used by Latin logicians for this

purpose, and may, in that language, have been, for

26

CH. III. ANALYTICAL

ought I know, very appropriate; but this is no
reason for transferring it to our language in that
sense, when it already has acquired a totally dif
ferent one, and that in very common use. Be
cause a figure is used in one language, it does
not follow that it must be translated into another

by the same figure.
the French

Should we have to translate

expression,

“Ces hommes sont utiles

dans le rapport de leur puissance,” should we

say, “These men are useful in the report of their
power” or translate into French, “He visited his
relations,” by the words, “Il visitases relations?”
Dr. Whately has undertaken to divest Logic of all
those technicalities which have hitherto rendered

it so formidable to students as compared with its
use—to render its study easy and its language
familiar. For this purpose he has translated the

precepts and rules into our own language. He
should also have translated the words, and thereby
avoided the misconstructions that distribution,
necessary, particular, &c. are liable to, in the
cases where he uses them.

-

-

Distribution, in English, applies only to a
number of objects, either physically placed into
compartments ready to receive them, or ficti

tiously ranged under the several classes to which

OUTLINE.

they belong.

27

Logicians call the distribution of

a term the saying that it is meant to be applied to a
whole class, (or to every object contained in a
class, according to the sense in which you take

the word class), and not to one part only of
the class. When a man has had frequent occa
sion to use the word in its former sense, what
time, what labour, what efforts does it not re

quire to accustom his mind to the latter one !

As for myself, long as I have been acquainted
with this logical sense, I own that it still puzzles
me on every occasion.

Would not the words universal and partial
answer the purpose ? they are not as appropriate
as one might wish, but they are better at any rate
than distributed and non-distributed; for, at
least, they convey no perplexing or erroneous
ideas. “A term is distributed,” says Whately,
“when it is taken universally, so as to stand for
every thing it is capable of being applied to,” and
consequently undistributed when it stands for a
portion only of the things applied to it. Here, in
my opinion, is as good a definition of universal

and partial as could easily be given. Substitute
these adjectives to the above-mentioned parti

28

CH. III.

ANALYTICAL

ciples wherever they occur, and you will dissi
pate no small part of the confusion which still
predominates in this part of the Elements.
Referring to p. 77, the words “universal and
particular (or partial)” are there applied in this
Same SenSe to propositions ; and the being univer

sal or particular, is called the quantity (or extent)
of these propositions. I do not see why the same
locutions might not have been applied to the
terms also of a proposition, and thus have obviated
the confusion above alluded to. But here again I

cannot approve of the anglifying the Latin words
instead of translating them. Dr. Whately him
self has perceived that extent is in this sense
the translation of quantitas, and partial that of

particularis : then why persist in saying quantity
and particular,—in speaking Latin disguised
under an English mask, rather than plain, honest,

intelligible English?
Some inaccuracy is also perceptible in the
syllogistic formula which he mentions here—an
inaccuracy, resulting from the confounding in
general the substantive with the adjective form

of the predicate, and the not defining its extent
in the case of the former. But, as syllogisms are

• OUTLINE.

29

but slightly touched upon in this chapter, I shall
refer

these

considerations

to the time when

we come to their detailed explanation.
The remainder of this Analytical Outline
is devoted to the definition of the processes of
abstraction and generalization, which are here
very aptly distinguished, and to the very useful
exposure of the common error of ascribing real
ity to generic terms. This should have been
carried still farther; he should have exhibited

the pernicious effects resulting from the realiza
tion of those subject-matters which D’Alembert

first called étres fictifs, and which Mr. Bentham
has described under the name of fictitious en
tities. He should have pointed out the constant
but unavoidable fiction which must enter into the
composition of any discourse, and should have
given some indications by which error, in this re

spect, may be guarded against. To give, in as few
words as possible, a general idea of Mr. Ben
tham’s view of the matter, I must devote a few

pages to the general classification of Entities.
This subject does not strictly belong to the field

of Logic, but rather to that of Ontology (com
monly called Metaphysics). It is, however,
so important for the logical Scholar to bear

30

CH, III.

ANALYTICAL

in mind the leading principles upon which that
classification is founded, that I have introduced

a chapter of considerable length on this subject,
in the Treatise on Logic to which I have already
adverted.

In that work, the word Entity and some of
its species being incidentally explained in the
course of the chapter on the Mind and its opera
tions, the general systematic exposé is deferred

till the end of the work; as it there serves as
an exemplification of the rules of exposition
and methodization. On the present occasion,
I have thought it more advisable thus to intro

duce the subject at the outset, as my object is
only to enable the reader to comprehend any

references I may have occasion to make to the
leading classes of entities.
I have said, that this classification is Mr.
Bentham’s; and so it is with regard to the most

important heads; but it had not been completed
by him; several of the subdivisions and other

details have here been added, and, in many cases,
I have thought it advisable, with reference to the

present purpose, to make some alterations in his
system.

In other instances, I have been obliged

to stop far short of the point to which he

-

31

OUTLINE.

had carried the operation, considering that
any further details would be irrelevant to the
present purpose.

The word Entity is that most extensive and
all-comprehensive term, which is used to desig
nate every subject-matter of perception, thought,
or discourse,—every being, every thing, every

operation, every property, whether real, abstract,
or fictitious, whether reckoned as certain, con

tingent, or impossible, by any mind, at any time,
in any place. Every noun-substantive, -every
substantive expression, in any language, is the

name of an Entity.
Entity being therefore the most extensive
-

term that can be imagined, it has no superior

genus, and cannot be defined per genus et diffe
rentiam". Enumeration is the only mode by
which the word can be expounded, and is the one
which I have attempted. If the above enumera
tion be not all-comprehensive, if there can be
imagined any one thing which be not compre
hended in it, it is incomplete, and consequently
the exposition incorrect.

Entities in general may be referred to the
* See hereafter, Modes of Exposition, Ch. vi.

32

CH.

III.

ANALYTICAL

following classes; or, in other words, the sum
mum genus Entity may be divided as follows.
I. A real Entity is one which has physical
existence; that is, one which is perceptible by
means of any of our senses, as a rock, a star, a
man, &c. A real entity must therefore be an
individual, or a collection of individuals definite
in number, as a landscape, an army, a man
on horseback, &c. But, if by these expressions,
a particular class be meant, they are no longer
names of real, but of collective entities, of which

mention will presently be made.

-

II. An inferential Entity is one which we
believe to have real existence, but which is

imperceptible to any of our senses; such is,
in relation to every man, the Divinity he wor

ships; such is our mind, or the thinking part of
our frame.

-

-

III. A fabulous Entity is one which has
been believed in by others, but to the existence
of which we attach no belief.

Such are, with

relation to us, the Heathen Gods, which were
inferential entities with relation to those who
believed in them.

Between real or inferential

and fabulous entities there is no distinct line

of separation, even with relation to one indi

-

OUTLINE.

33

vidual mind, as belief admits of every degree
from positive to negative certainty.
IV. A collective Entity is the result of the
operations of abstraction and generalization.

Certain properties possessed by one entity, or by
several entities in common, are abstracted from

all other properties which those entities may
happen to possess, and an indefinite number
of individuals are imagined as being all endowed
with those abstracted properties; these indivi
duals form a class, and are designated collec
tively by a common name.
Every common

name is therefore the name of a collective entity,
—of an indefinite number of individual entities

considered with respect of certain properties
common to all the entities so contained in the

class.

Where those entities are real, the class

which contains them is a physical collective

entity; where they are fictitious, the corre
sponding collective entities are also fictitious.

V. A fictitious Entity is one which neither

has, nor is supposed to have, any real existence,
but which is grammatically spoken of as real.

We say: colour is a property, benevolence is
a quality; and yet we do not suppose that

colour, property, benevolence, or quality, are
D

34

CH.

III.

ANALYTICAL

really existing objects. These four words are
therefore names of fictitious entities.
Fictitious entities, as well as real, are refer

rible to classes, which classes may be termed

collective

fictitious entities.

Fictitious entities

are individualized by referring them to real
objects; as, for example, the colour of that
object, that man’s benevolence.
As to the subdivision of these several heads,
-

it is only in regard to real, and to fictitious
entities, that it appears to be necessary on the
present occasion.
In the case of real entities, the summum

genus is commonly designated by the word
matter, which may be divided into bodies and
substances, according to whether the individuals
referred to are or are not, for the particular pur
pose in view, supposed to be limited in configu
ration. Thus, man, tree, house, &c. are names
of classes of bodies,—metal, bone, flesh, &c.
are names of classes of substances.

These two genera, bodies and substances, are
susceptible of regular and distinctly-characterized
divisions and subdivisions, which may always be
rendered all-comprehensive; that is, such as that,
when taken together, they shall comprehend

oUTLINE.

35

every conceivable real entity. Such an operation,
however, is foreign to the present purpose, being
the subject-matter of physical science.

But fictitious entities can by no means be so
easily reduced to order.

The vague and indefi

nite nature of the operation of fiction renders
the classification of its results a very arduous
task. In the following sketch, I have endea
voured to refer them to a few general heads; but,
such is the difficulty of bringing them under all
comprehensive genera and species, that, in some
instances, it will be found that the lowest species
here mentioned, must, for the purpose of exposi
tion or ulterior division, be considered as summa
genera*.

I. Physical fictitious entities are such as
relate to real individuals.

A real individual may be considered as being
either in motion or at rest.

Thence the division

of physical fictitious entities into motions and

states of things. Physical actions and opera
tions are species of motions more or less com
plicated.
* Such are, for example, some of the jurisprudential ficti
tious entities, here classed under the head of Immediate
Results of Political Operations.
D 2

36

CH.

I II.

ANALYTICAL

States of things or properties may be divided
into absolute and relative. The absolute pro
perties of a body are such as have place inde

pendently of any other body, and consist in the
effect which that body produces upon our mind.

The relative properties of a body are such
as result from its comparison with another body.
The summum genus of absolute properties
is existence. Its division may be founded on
various principles or sources. Thus, for exam.
ple, we may divide Existence:
1. According to the degree of belief attached

to it, into certainty", contingency in its various
degrees, impossibility, &c.;

* All the substantives given as examples under this head of
states of things or properties, are to be reckoned as names
of properties. Some of them are commonly used in other
senses also; as, for example, organization, which means either

the operation of organizing or the property of being organized.
It is in the latter sense that it is here to be understood.

This is an imperfection in language much to be regretted, but
which, I fear, cannot be easily remedied.
There are, in fact, but few instances, comparatively speak
ing, where there is a substantive in use for the designation of

properties; and, on many occasions, it might not even be
desirable to make use of it, should it exist. Thus the adjec
tive is a very common and a very useful abridged form; as, for

37

OUTLINE.

2. According to the degree

of

perceptibility

by any one of our senses, into presence and ab
sence (that is, the being within or without the
reach of any of our senses), in respect either
of place or of time, or of both. Absence, in

respect of place, may be subdivided into attain
ability (the property of being susceptible of
becoming within reach), unattainability, &c.

A corresponding division of absence, in

respect

of time, is into past and future;
3. According to the particular sense by means
of which the properties are perceived. Thus–
1st, by the sense of sight we perceive colour
and its species, opacity and transparence, &c.;
2dly, by the sense of hearing we perceive
example, when we say that an object is red, we mean that it
is endowed with redness, a species of absolute properties. If
we say that it is large, we refer to largeness, a species of rela

tive properties. Sometimes properties are designated in the
verbal form; as, for example, he can move. By this expression
is understood, that he is endowed with that species of absolute
properties which cannot be substantively expressed otherwise
than by some such hard word as locomoveability. The words
before, behind, above, belon, are examples of relative properties
expressed in the adverbial form. That language is the most
convenient for use, in this respect, which enables the writer to
choose, on each occasion, that form of expression which is
best suited to his particular purpose.

38

CH.

III.

ANALYTICAL

sound and its species; 3dly, by that of tasting,
taste and its species; 4thly, by that of smelling,

smell and its species; 5thly, by that of feeling,
either alone or combined with that of sight, we

perceive form and its species; quantity, num
ber, and size, and their species; consistence and its
species, such as solidity, fluidity, gazêity, &c. &c.
4. According to the intrinsic nature of the
properties, into organization and inorganization,
animation and inanimation, &c.

Animation

comprehends all the physical powers or faculties
which are all absolute properties.

Relative properties or relations may be re
ferred to the following heads:

1. Relations of contiguity and distance in
place. Propinquity and remoteness are degrees
of distance.

These relations may also be subdi

vided into inherence", exclusion, the properties of
being relatively above, below, behind, before, &c.

2. Relations of simultaneity and succession in
*

* By inherence, it is understood that one body is a part of
another. Absolute identity in place cannot exist (in regard to
real entities, to which alone, it must be remembered, these
properties relate,) without reference to succession in time,

and therefore belongs to the head of relations of time and place
combined.

39

OUTLINE.

respect of time.

Coewistence is simultaneity;

but generally implies duration, which also be

longs to this head. To succession may be referred
previousness and subsequentness, propinquity and
remoteness in time.

3. Relations of time and place combined.
Succession in time may be combined with iden

tity, contiguity, or distance, in place. Simulta
neity can only be combined with contiguity and
distance in place.
4. Relations independent of time or place,

viz. relations of identity and diversity. Simili
tude, dissimilitude, and opposition, are degrees of
diversity. - These relations are susceptible of all
or nearly all the several divisional operations
which are above performed on absolute proper
ties.

H. Tactical fictitious entities.

These entities

belong to the class of relations, and are commonly
termed relations of subalternation.

Such are

the relations of genus and species, of subordina
tion, superordination, coordination, &c.
III. Noological fictitious entities. They con

sist of such as relate to the intellect. To this
head may be referred,

1. The absolute properties of the mind, viz.

40

CH. I I I.

ANA LYTICAL

its powers or faculties, of which an enumeration
is attempted below in Ch. IV.
2. The relative properties of the mind, such
as intensity of its faculties, sanity and insanity of
the mind, &c. But whenever any expression of

approbation or disapprobation is conveyed, it
does not belong to this head, but to a species of
ethical fictitious entities.

3. The several operations performable by
means of these faculties, which operations are
also exemplified in the course of the following
pages.
4.

The immediate

results of these several

operations, viz. impressions and ideas, with
their several species, simple or combined.
IV. Pathological fictitious entities, which re
late to the sensitive mind.

These are denomi

nated sensations, and comprehend pleasures,
pains, and neutral sensations. Pleasures and
pains have been subdivided into fourteen heads
by Mr. Bentham, in his Table of the Springs of
Action.

W. Ethical fictitious entities, or such as re

late to desire and will, that is to the desiring
and volitional mind. These may be classed
mnder the following heads:

41

OUT LINE.

1. Properties of the desiring mind, or desire,
and its species. With relation to any event or

object, desire may be divided into positive desire
or hope, and negative desire or fear; and either
of these may be subdivided according to its object.

Thus, hunger, thirst, ambition, curiosity, &c.
are species of desire, distinguished by their re

spective objects, viz. solid food, liquid food,
social preeminence, acquirement of know
ledge, &c.

3. Motives for ethical operations; a species
of entities, intimately

connected with the preced

ing, but which are distinguished by the ad
ditional intimation of the relation they bear to
operations.
4. Ethical operations, which are either moral,
-

-

such as approbation *, vituperation, entreaty,
refusal, &c.; or political, such as command,
empowerment, obligation, punishment, &c.
5. Immediate results of ethical operations.
Such are, 1, with relation to moral operations,
neutral, laudatory, and vituperative qualifica
tions of fictitious entities, viz. reputation, virtue,
• By these words must be understood, on the present occa
sion, the operations of approving, blaming, entreating, refus
ing—commanding, empowering, obliging, punishing, &c.

not any results or effects of those operations.

-

42

CH. III.

A NALYTICAL

and vice, with all their several species; 2, with
relation to political operations, command, obli
gation, right, power, &c.

6. Ethical relations. Such are society and
conditions in life, moral or political.

Moral

conditions are those of friendship, inimity, &c.
Political conditions are, trades, professions,
situations, places, offices, &c.
This last head comes very near to that of
physical relations; it differs in this, that it is not
by the perceptive, but by the conceptive faculty,
that they are attached to the idea of the persons
to which they relate.
A barrister, for ex. is
not perceptibly different from a solicitor, like a
tall man from a short one. Barristership and

solicitorship are ethical fictitious entities; tallness
and shortness are physical fictitious entities.
The farther subdivision and classification of

theseseveral heads of entities,—the completing the
several enumerations of species,—the characteriz

ing these species by expositions,—are operations
which would no doubt be attended with consider

able advantage; but they are irrelevant to the pre
sentpurpose. Theclassification of physicalentities

belongs to Physiology, (comprehending Natural
History and Natural Philosophy, in the ordinary

OUTLINE.

43

sense of these words); that of pathological en
tities to mental Pathology; that of ethical entities

to Ethics (including Morals, Politics, Jurispru
dence, &c.). Logic relates to noological entities
alone, and with regard to this class, some attempt
at methodizing and expounding them will be
made in the following pages. What I have

thought necessary to say of the others, was merely
with a view to render myself intelligible, when
ever I have occasion to speak of the general
classes to which I have referred them.

44

CHAPTER IV.

INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. II. Synthetical Compendium,
Part I. p. 54.)

-

WE now come to Dr.Whately’s second chapter,
or Synthetical Compendium, which he considers
as a concise, regular, and systematic arrangement
of the details of the science, for the use of those

who have already made some progress in the
study.
Its object is to make the student
thoroughly acquainted with every part of the
subject, so as that he may retain, compare, and
apply to use every idea which may be therein
elicited. Such is evidently the author’s inten

tion, as implied in the exposé of his plan at the
close of the introduction. Whether this inten

tion has or has not been fulfilled—whether the
expectations raised in the reader’s mind, by the

merits of the preceding Analytical Outline, have
or have not, in this instance, been realized,—is

the subject of the present investigation. The

INTELLECTUAL

FACULTIES.

45

result, I fear, as to completeness at least, may not
be found so satisfactory as might be wished.
This chapter of the Elements is thus di
vided:

Part I. Of the Operations of the Mind, and
Terms.

§ 1. Operations of the mind.
§ 2 and 3. Terms.

§ 4 and 5. Generalization and its result.
§ 6. Division.

$ 7. Definition.
Part II. Of Propositions.
Part III. Of Argument.
The comparative importance I am induced to
attach to the several subjects, differing in many

respects from that which Dr. Whately has attri
buted to them, I have been obliged to alterin some
respects the above arrangement. Thus, this pre

sent chapter (IV) relates to the intellectual facul
ties, enumerated by him in Part 1, § 1, and in
cidentally in § 4 and 5.
My Chapter IV, on Terms, refers to Dr.
Whately’s Part I, § 2 to 5.
My Ch. V, on Exposition, to his Part I, $7,
-

Definition.
My Ch. VI, on Methodization, to his Part I,

46

CH. IV . .”

INTELLECTUAL

$6, Division, and to that part of $ 5 which re
lates to Classification.

-

*

My Ch. VII, on Propositions, to his Part II,
with the exception of the two last sections.

My Ch. VIII, on Deduction, to his Part III,
with the addition of sections 3 and 4 of Part II,
and of his Supplement on Model Syllogisms
and other Arguments.
-

Dr. Whately’s Ch. III, on Fallacies, is here
deferred till after the theory of Induction; which
latter operation is the subject matter of my

Ch. IX, and answers, in some measure, to his
Dissertation on the Province of Reasoning.
OPERATIONs of THE MIND (Whately's

Elements, Ch. II, Part I, § 1, p. 54). Their enu
meration, in as far as they relate to argumenta
tion, opens the Synthetical Compendium. on
this occasion I must quote the author’s words.

“There are three” (meaning, of course, only
three) “operations of the mind which are con

cerned in argument: 1st. Simple Apprehension;
2d. Judgment; 3d. Discourse or Reasoning.”
And, in a note, he says, “Logical writers have in
general begun by laying down that there are,
in all, three operations of the mind (in universum
tres): an assertion by no means incontroverti
\

FACULTIES.

47

ble,” as will be shortly seen, “and which, if
admitted, is nothing to the present purpose: our
business is with argumentation, and the opera
tions of the mind implied in that; what others
there may be, or whether any, are irrelevant ques
tions.”

-

As to this assertion, I cannot exactly concur
in the author’s opinion. In the first place, I
should think, that even argumentation cannot be
carried on without making use of all the simple
faculties of the mind; that attention, memory,

and abstraction, to go no farther, are equally
necessary with the three which he enumerates.
And secondly, I have already stated, that I do
not consider argumentation alone as constituting
the science of Logic; but that I also include ex

position, methodization, and other intellectual
operations.

For these purposes, it is necessary to

be acquainted, in as far as possible, with all the
powers or faculties of the intellectual mind.
In the same note, the author proceeds to say,
“The opening of a treatise with a statement
respecting the operations of the mind universally,
tends to foster the prevailing error (from which
probably the minds of the writers were not
exempt) of supposing that Logic professes to

48

CH. Iv.

INTELLECTUAL

teach “the use of the mental faculties in general:”

– the right use of reason, according to Watts.”
In one sense of the word, I fear that I must

admit that my mind is “not exempt from this

prevailing error;” for I certainly suppose that
Logic teaches the “use of the mental faculties

in general,”—that is, so much of their use, as
is applicable to any branch of art-and-science,
whatever may be its subject-matter. By this

limitation, I hope to avoid the threatened danger
of “intruding into the province of Natural Phi
losophy.” When logical principles are once
generally laid down, they may indeed afterwards
be applied to any one art-and-science—to Ethics,
to Physiology, or to any other; but it is this

application, not the general theory, that has been
improperly ascribed to Logic, in the same manner
as if the application of Mathematics to Astronomy
were considered as belonging to Mathematics,
not to Astronomy.
* I shall now proceed therefore to the enumera

tion of the intellectual faculties, founded on the
general view given by Mr. Bentham in Chresto
mathia, p. 143 (Essai, &c. p. 35), with some
few alterations suggested by a closer investigation
of the subject. And, in order to establish the

FACULTIES.

49

precise distinction between the intellectual and
volitional faculties, I must first extract from Mr.

Bentham’s MSS. a summary view of the human
faculties in general.

By human faculties, I mean all those proper
ties which are either the result, or the character

istics of human life—the result, if, by life, we
understand the cause of the phenomena that take
place in the human frame—the characteristics, if
life be taken for the aggregate of those pheno
Inena.

These faculties are either physical or psychi
cal. The physical are those of which the action
is perceptible by our senses; that is, which take

place in our body: the psychical, those which
take place in our mind (taking this word in its
most extensive sense), and of which, therefore,
the action is imperceptible to our senses. The
study of the nature and operation of the physical
faculties of the human frame belongs to that por
tion of Zoology which relates to Man.

The psychical faculties may be divided into
original and derivative.
The original psychical faculties are desire and
will; these are denominated original, because it
is their successive operation that produces that of
E

50

CH.

IV.

INTELLECTUAL

the derivative faculties, whether bodily or mental.

The ethical sciences (moral and political) relate
entirely to the nature and operation of these two
faculties.

The derivative psychical faculties may be
considered as either active or passive.

The

active, as well as the passive, when unconnected
with any idea of pleasure or pain, are usually

comprehended under the name of intellectual
faculties, and constitute that which is generally
denominated the mind, or, more properly, intel
lect, when mind is taken in the more extended
sense I have formerly alluded to. These faculties
alone belong to the province of Logic. The

passive faculties, or sensations, when connected
with pleasures and pains, appertain to mental
Pathology.

The following enumeration of intellectual
faculties may perhaps be yet incomplete: the
analysis of what passes within ourselves is so
difficult an operation, that I fear much that some
of the more simple ones may not be found suffi
ciently distinct; and, as to the more complicated
ones, new combinations might very possibly be
made, and corresponding faculties might be
added to this list.

Those, however, which I

FACULTIES.

51

have here inserted appear to me to be all that
are brought into practical use.

The intellectual faculties, I have said, are
either passive or active.
I. The passive faculties are:

1. Perception,-as communicated to the mind
by the immediate operation of the senses, or of

physical faculties. The result of perception is an
impression; that of the operation of any other
intellectual faculty is an idea.
The difference between an impression and an
idea may be illustrated by the following example:
place an object before your eyes; as long as you

see it, you have an impression of it; take your
eyes off it, there remains in your mind the idea
only of that object.
2. Conception,—differing from perception in
this, that it is communicated to the mind by theim

mediate operation of intellectual, not of physical

faculties. If I see a horse, Ireceive an impression
of it by means of the perceptive faculty. If the
word horse be mentioned to me, I entertain a cor

responding idea by means of the conceptive
faculty. Suppose I read the word horse in a

book, I perceive so many black marks, I conceive
the idea of a horse. Perception is applicable
E 2

52

C II.

IV.

INTELLECTUAL

only to real individual entities: conception is un
limited in its field; it is applicable to any entities
of any class whatsoever.
Conception is designated by Dr. Whately (in
imitation again of the Latin) by the name of sim

ple apprehension.

He had better have adopted

that of conception, which he inserts in a parenthe
sis, by way of explanation. Apprehension, in
England, is usually expressive of fear; but con

ception is more generally used in the sense here
given to it.
The division of simple apprehension into

complew and incomplex does not appear to be in
strict conformity to the rules of logical division.

What does simple mean, if it be not synonymous to
incomplex? and, in that case, what is to be under
stood by dividing that which is simple into that

which is and that which is not simple? The fact
is, that every conception of any really existing
object is complex; that of a man, just as much as
of a man on horseback; for each of these is com

posed of a great number of simple conceptions.

A simple conception is that of a single property,
that of a colour, for instance, without those of
form, of extent, or any other: it is the result of

an operation of the abstractive faculty.

FA CULTIES.

53

Has not the author of the Elements, in this in
stance, been led astray by words? Does he not con
sider as simple,an ideaexpressed by a single word,
and as complex, one which is expressed by several
words? For I see no other distinction, in point of
complexity, between the idea “cards” and “a
pack of cards;” “man,” “horse,” and “man
on horseback.”

In order to entertain the idea

“cards” in the plural, we must conceive a
certain number placed in a certain relative

situation,-a bundle, or a heap, or some such
collection of cards; and is either of these less

complex than a “pack of cards?” In like man
ner, as a man on horseback is composed of two
separate individual objects, placed in a certain
relative situation, so is a man composed of a head,
neck, body, and limbs; all of them separate
individual objects, placed also in a certain rela
tive situation.

3. Passive Memory,–closely allied with ac
tive retention. To this head may be ascribed

the faculty of mental habit (habitude of French
logicians), more or less of which is displayed
in dreams, involuntary thought, &c.
II. Active intellectual faculties.

The deno

minations by which they are here designated are,

54

CH.

IV.

INTELLECTUAL

universally, the names of the corresponding ope

rations; for our language does not afford single
worded substantive appellations for the faculties

themselves. When occasion may require that
they be distinguished from the operations, it may

be done by changing the termination tion into

that of tive, and by adding the word faculty;

as,

for example, abstraction—abstractive faculty.
4. Attention—the giving force and duration
to the exercise of any one or more of the other
intellectual faculties.

-

5. Retention. If this be distinct from passive
memory, it may perhaps be the combination of
that faculty with attention.
6. Judgment. This word must not be here
understood in the sense in which Dr. Whately
makes use of it. His operation of Judgment is
what is here denominated comparison; at least
the first part of it, viz. “the comparing together
in the mind two of the notions (or ideas) which

are the objects of apprehension.” The pro

nouncing that they agree or disagree is, indeed,
one occasion on which the judicative faculty is
called into exercise; but it is only one. Judg
ment usually pronounces either the degree of

belief attached by our intellectual mind to,

FACULT I E.S.

55

-

or the degree of pleasure or pain produced in
our sensitive mind by,–an impression or an idea.
It is an instantaneous operation which accompa
nies, and forms part of that of every other

intellectual faculty.

It is affirmative, negative,

or contingent. Each operation of this faculty, if
expressed, is a proposition; the portion of lan
guage, by means of which it is expressed, is a
Sentence.

7. Comparison—is the alternate application of
attention to two separate impressions or ideas,
with a view to pronouncing a judgment upon the
several relations which they may bear to one
another,-relations, for instance, of identity and
diversity in time, place, or state, or as to depen
dence of cause and effect, or of logical subalter
nation, &c. &c. These several relations have been
further detailed in the general classification of

entities at the end of Ch. III. of this Outline.
8. Deduction—the deducing a proposition
from two others,—a conclusion from two premises.
This is what logicians designate by the term

reasoning, or, more correctly, by that of argu
mentative or syllogistic reasoning; the expression
of the operation at full length, and in a regular
form, being termed a syllogism.

56

CII. IV.

INTELLECTUAL

Dr. Whately’s definition of reasoning upon
this occasion does not appear to me either cor
rect or conformable to those which he gives else
where.

Here he speaks but of one premiss—

“Reasoning (or discourse) is the act of proceed
ing from one judgment to another founded upon
it (or the result of it).” This may be applicable
to his conversion of propositions", (which I have
termed “a deductive operation, consisting of two

propositions only”); but, certainly, not to his
syllogism as defined, p. 88. And the addition,
in the form of a synonym to reasoning, of the
word discourse, only tends to confuse the mind,
as it refers to an operation totally different. This

is another instance of devotion to Anglo-Latin
words in preference to plain English.
9. Abstraction—the isolating a simple idea
from all others connected with it,—the consider

ing separately a single property possessed by one
or more entities, to the exclusion of any others
which those entities may happen to possess.
Thus the idea redness, for instance, is the result

of an operation of the abstractive faculty.

The

property of being red, is separated from all other
* Elements, p. 83.

57

FACULTIES.

properties possessed, at the same time, by the
several red bodies that have come within reach

of our perception. The object of this operation
is the formation of new aggregates, by means,
either of the generalizing, or of the synthetical
faculties.

10. Generalization—has place when, after
having abstracted one or more properties com
mon to several individuals, we suppose an in
definite number of individuals endowed with the

same properties, and give to them a common
name; that is, a name applicable to any or all
such individuals, in respect of the possession of
such abstracted properties.
The two latter operations of abstraction and
generalization are well explained by Dr. Whately,
pp. 68 et seq. pp. 259 et seq. &c.; yet he has
omitted them on the present occasion, in speak
ing of the “operations of the mind concerned
in argument.”
11. Synthesis"—the combining several indi
|

* The words synthesis and combination, and their converse
analysis and division, are used for the designation of three dis
tinct operations: 1. Physical or real combination and di
vision, which is either mechanical or chemical.

2. Mental

combination and division, that is, the supposing or imagining

58

CH. IV.

INTELLECTUAL

vidual ideas or impressions, simple or compli
cated, into one definite individual idea; for ex.
The calling London the combination of houses,
streets, &c. which constitute that town.

This is probably what Dr. Whately under
stands by “complex simple apprehension.” In his
example of a “man on horseback,” the man and
the horse, two separate individual (though com
plicated) ideas, are combined into one individual
idea, a “man on horseback,” by a synthetical
operation.
12. Division (logical)—the converse of gene
ralization. From a general class, constituted by
the combination of any number of properties, the
forming subclasses, by the additional considera
tion of other properties applicable only to a part
oftheindividuals to which the general classinques
tion refers. Thus, the class animal having been
founded on the consideration of the property
of animation, by the additional consideration of

the property of rationality, we form the two sub

two real objects to be combined mechanically or chemically.
It is to these operations that I have applied the denominations
synthesis and analysis. 3. Logical or subalternate com
bination and division, which are above designated by the
words generalization and logical division.

FACULTIES.

59

classes of man—consisting of those animals which
are possessed of that property, and of brutes—or
those which are deprived of it. These subclasses
are called parts of the general class, because they
refer to a part only of the individuals referred to
by that general class; yet, in both cases, the in
dividuals are indefinite in number, that is, in a

number greater than our mind can conceive.
For a fuller investigation of this operation, see
Ch. VII. Methodization.

13. Analysis—the converse of synthesis. It
operates on individual ideas, in the same manner
that logical division does on classes. Man, for
ex., may be divided logically into Negroes and
Whites. A man may be analyzed (mentally as

well as physically) into his head, neck, body,
and limbs.

14. Simple imagination—the forming, by the
mental combination of abstracted properties, an
image analogous to the impression that would
have been created by the perception of such

properties, were they really so combined. Thus,
when we are told that “a quadruped is an
animal with four legs,” in order to fix this idea
in our mind, we immediately refer it to some

imaginary individual, to which we consequently

60

CH.

IV.

IN IT ELLECTUAL

ascribe a number of properties not contained in
the idea of “an animal with four legs.” These
imaginary properties may perhaps belong, in fact,
to some real individual contained in the class; but

the images will, much more frequently, be vague
or incorrect: as, for ex. when we have heard
much mention made of a man whom we have

never seen, we figure to ourselves his person and
features; and how often are we not surprised,
when afterwards we really meet with him, to
find his appearance totally different from the
image we had formed of him ? It is in order to
obviate erroneous images, that we seek to give
correct and exact ones, by description, a mode of
exposition which will be treated of in Ch. VI.

15. Observation—the combined operation of
the perceptive, retentive, judicative, and attentive

faculties, applied to the recurrence of the same
phenomena, or relations of things in various
analogous instances, and commonly directed to
the accomplishment of some particular end.
Observation must not be confounded with ex

periment, which is a physical operation, per
formed for the purpose, and with a view to ob
servation, and therefore preceding it.
16. Induction. After we have, by observa

61

FACULTIES.

tion, or by evidence, ascertained the recurrence
of phenomena, or relations of things in some in
stances, we pronounce that the same phenomena,
or relation of things, have recurred, do, or will re
cur, in some other instance which we judge to be
analogous in the same degree. This operation is
called induction. It seldom produces absolute
belief in all minds, but merely a greater or lesser

degree of contingent belief, according to the state
of the mind, that is, to its confidence, either in

the veracity of the observation or evidence, or in

the constancy of recurrence of those phenomena
in those instances.

See Ch. X.

Induction.

Expectation appears to be the immediate
result of the exercise of the judicative faculty on
an inductive operation, of which the conclusion

relates to futurity. It can scarcely be classed,
however, as an intellectual faculty.
17. Methodization—the arranging" the seve

* When we speak of arranging ideas in the mind, it is not
meant, that these ideas are real objects actually placed in dif

ferent parts of the brain, but that we imagine them (that is,
their signs or nords) to be so arranged either on paper or
elsewhere,—to be placed above, below, or by the side of one
another,-those which are most similar, with reference to the

particular object in view, being supposed to be nearest to

62

CH. IV.

INTELLECTUAL

ral impressions or ideas produced by the exercise
of any one or more of our intellectual faculties,
in a certain order, with a view to facilitate any

subsequent operation of any of those same facul
ties. Distribution and collocation are species of
methodization. Some farther details upon these
operations, with the accessory ones of generaliza
tion, division, synthesis, analysis, and observa
tion, will be found in Ch. VII. Methodization.
18. Invention—the combining ideas in a man

ner that has not yet been done, and with a view
to the attainment of some particular end.

19. Communication—the communicating an
idea to another person is the causing his mind
to conceive and to entertain that same idea. Com

munication includes exposition, the subject of
Ch. WI. of this Outline.

This last faculty of communication may ap
pear, at first sight, to be semi-physical, as it
gether in the arrangement,-or those which follow one another
in the order of thought, being placed after one another in the
supposed physical order.
It must be observed, that the word methodization is here
-

-

used in a more limited sense than that which is attributed to

it hereafter. But it would be difficult to find a synonymous
word which is not liable to the same inconvenience.

FACULT 1 E.S.

63

requires the aid of the physical faculties of speak
ing or writing to bring into exercise. But, in as
far as it is mental, it appertains to Logic, and
claims a place in this enumeration. Besides
that, if any one of the others be closely exa
mined into, it will be found that few, if any, can
be made use of without the assistance of those

signs which are furnished by language.
In the above list, I have endeavoured to place
the faculties in the order of their complexity; the
latter ones consisting chiefly of combinations
of some of the preceding and more simple ones.
It would not be a very easy task to arrange them

systematically in distinct classes; there might,
however, be some use in referring them generally
to the following heads:
1. Simple faculties.

Attention, retention,

judgment, and abstraction.
2. Tactical faculties. Comparison, observa
tion, generalization, synthesis, division, analysis,
and methodization.
3. Ratiocinative faculties.

Deduction and

induction.

4. Imaginative faculties.
tion and invention.

Simple imagina

64

CH. IV.

INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES.

5. Communicative faculties.
tion.

Communica

*

These several faculties would require much
more explanation and exemplification; but I
should thereby be led away from my present
object. I shall therefore reserve all further de
tails for my general Treatise, and shall now pro
ceed to follow Dr. Whately in his progress over
the field of Logic.

CHAPTER V.

ON TERMS.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. II. Part I, § 2, 3, 4, 5, p. 55.)

SECTIONs 2 and 3 of this part of the Ele
ments are devoted by the author to the exposition

of language and its several component parts.
“Language,” he says, “affords the signs by
which these operations of the mind" are expressed
and communicated. An act of apprehension,

expressed in language, is called a term; an act of
judgment, a proposition; an act of reasoning, an
argument, which, when regularly expressed, is a
syllogism.”
-

The enumeration of the intellectual faculties

being no longer confined to that of the three
which are here mentioned, and the sense of the

denominations given to these three faculties
having been much modified in my preceding

chapter, correspondent alterations are requisite
in the above exposition.
* Simple apprehension, judgment, and reasoning. See the
preceding chapter. .

66

C.H. V.

ON

Language, I should say, is the aggregate of
the signs by which any mental operation is ex
pressed or communicated. An impression or an
idea, when expressed in language, is a term; an

operation of the judicative faculty, a proposi
tion; that of the ratiocinative faculty, an argu
ment; that of the deductive faculty, a syllogism.
With regard to the remainder of these two
sections of the Elements, I have but one observa

tion to make. The author says", that, in a propo

sition (for the purpose of deduction) an adjective
cannot be made the subject, but may be employed
as a predicate. The inconveniences arising from
expressing the predicate in an adjective form will
be exhibited in the chapter on Deduction; and
there it may perhaps be shown, that this is not
absolutely “a question of no practical conse
quence.”

-

The next section (4) relates to genus, differ

ence, and properties, which are thus defined:
“Whatever term can be affirmed of several

things, must express either their whole essence,

which is called the species; or a part of their es
sence, (viz. either the material part which is
* Elements, p. 59.
*

TERMS.

67

called the genus, or the formal and distinguishing
part, which is called the differentia, or in com
mon discourse characteristic) or something

joined to the essence; whether necessarily (i.e. to
the whole species, or, in other words, universally,
to every individual of it) which is called a pro
perty; or contingently (i. e. to some individual
only of the species) which is an accident.”
There appears to be some confusion in this

paragraph, in which again the meaning of En
glish words is perverted, in order to make them
conformable to the Latin.

The differentia or

characteristic is a species of property, not distinct
from it; it is exactly that which belongs necessa

rily to an entity—necessarily, in the ordinary
sense of the word, though in the sense here given

to it (which is that of universally) this may not be
the case. If we are assured that a property is
universal, it becomes essential and characteristic.
If we are not assured of this universality, we
cannot consider the property as essential; though

it may happen to be universal; and, as long as we
know of nothing to the contrary, we may speak
of it as such.

I should therefore say, that whatever term

can be affirmed of another is either a synonymous
F 2

68

C.H.

V.

ON

term, or it is expressive either of the class (or ge

nus) to which the subject belongs, or of a property
which appertains to this subject. This property
is either essential (or characteristic), that is, with
out which the subject would not be what it is said
to be, or accidental, that is, such as may or may

not belong to all the individuals referred to by the
subject.

-

*

Suppose man to be the subject—the predicate
animal is its genus, rational its essential property

or difference, the properties of having a white skin
or ten fingers, &c. are accidental, though in
different degrees of contingency.

That of hav

ing ten fingers, for instance, amounts almost to
what we should call an universal property; yet it

is not essential;

for, if a man had but nine, he

would still be a man.

The accidental and essential properties may

be easily distinguished by applying to them the
following

question:

An entity, which has not the

property in question, is it, or is it not, thereby
excluded from the subject in question? If it be
so excluded, the property is essential; if not, it is
accidental.

-

Logically speaking, every class is a genus
when compared to its subclasses, or to the indivi
*

69

TERMS.

duals to which it refers; it is also a species when
compared with the more general aggregates in
which it is contained. Thus, when we say,
“What is Caesar?” Answer, “a man";” we

predicate the genus of Casar, in the same man
ner as when we say, “What is man?” Answer,

“an animal,” we predicate the genus of man.
As to predicating the “whole essence” of a
subject, in one term, that is impossible, unless
that term be a strict synonym. Dr.Whately does
not appear to have been aware of this; he im
plies, that, if we predicate the genus, we predicate
a part of the essence; if the species, we predicate
the whole essence; considering species in the
sense in which naturalists employ the word, in

which case it is, in fact, a logical genus with refer
ence to individuals. “If I predicate,” says hef, “of
Caesar that he is an animal, I say the truth indeed
but not the whole truth, for he is not only an
animal, but a man.” But this is not yet the
whole truth; for he is not only a. man, but a

white man; not only a white man, but a Roman;
and so on, till we come to the individual Caesar.
Logical species and genus are only relative, not
absolute terms, and the use of them always im
* Elements, p. 64.

t Ibid. p. 63.

70

CH.

V.

ON

plies subalternation; that is, relation, either to a
superordinate genus, or to a subordinate species
or individual.

“$5. Subalternate genus and species.” Ele
ments, p. 63. Of summa genera (or genera
generalissima), properly so called, there is but
one, viz. Entity; yet, as it may have been seen
in the classification of entities, there is a conveni

ence in considering as summa genera several
ethical and other terms. But it is a great mis
take in logicians to suppose that there is such a

thing as an infima species, that is, one which con
tains under it nothing but individuals. The num
ber of individuals contained in a logical aggregate
is always indefinite; when a class, therefore, is
divided and subdivided, each part refers also to

an indefinite number of individuals,—the very
property of infinity is, that it cannot be so
divided as to be reduced to “nothing but indi

viduals;” for then these individuals would be
no longer indefinite in number.

“Magnet,”

says Dr. Whately, “is an infima species, (i. e.
only a species).” What is meant by the ex
planation “only a species,” is more than I can

make out; assuredly this is not the translation of
infima species: but let us take these Latin

71

TERMS.

words in their real sense, viz. “a species of

the lowest degree,” it may be allowed, that no
two individual magnets are exactly alike in every
respect.

Suppose one to be square, another

round; there may well be imagined an indefinite
number both of square and of round magnets.
Here are then two subspecies of an infima

species, two species below the lowest ; and so it

may happen in any case.
With respect, however, to each particular
subject-matter of classification, there may be a
eonvenience in considering the whole aggregate
of that subject-matter as a summum genus, and
any class of the last degree to which it is ad

visable to carry the subalternate division, as an
infima species.

But this can

only be said

rela

tively to that particular system : not generally, as
it is here asserted.

As to the particular sense in

which naturalists make use of the word species,
it is very different from the logical sense of the
word, the only one in which it should be made
use of on the present occasion.
The great labour spent on the distinction be
-

tween differentia and property, p. 65, might have
been spared, if it had been considered that the

72

C.H.

V.

ON

one is but a species of the other. The author
himself has, on a subsequent occasion", made
use of the word property in that general sense,
which must include essential as well as accidental

properties.

Accidents (that is, accidental properties) are
next divided into separable and inseparable, a
division which may not, perhaps, be found to be
in strict conformity to the standard rule, “Mem
bra condividentia sint contradistincta et oppo
sitat;”for in the two examples here given (a Inall

walking and a man native of Paris) I cannot dis
cover any difference in the respective separability
of the properties in question.
What does
the property of a man walking mean?—That the
man of whom it is affirmed, was walking, at such
a time, in such a place.—And that of a man’s
being a native of a place P—That he was born at
such a time in such a place.—The man is no
longer walking in that place.—True, but he is
no longer being born either.—You cannot, how

* “If one of two properties, &c.” Elements, p. 242.
t Saunderson's Logic, p. 27. “The parts or members
must be opposed.” Whately's Elements, p. 69.

TERMS.

73

ever, take away from him his property of having
been born.—No : nor can you take away that of
his having been walking. Where then is the dis
tinction between the separable property of hav
ing been walking, and the inseparable property
of having been born ?

74

CHAPTER VI.
EXPOSITION.

(whately's Elements, Ch. II. Part I, 57, Definition, p. 71.)
WE now come to the important operations of

Exposition and Methodization, to each of which I
shall devote a chapter. Dr. Whately commences

with division, and then treats of definition. I
have reversed this order, considering exposition
to be the more simple operation of the two, and
therefore as presenting itself naturally before the
other.

In the general Treatise which I am prepar
ing, I have devoted a long chapter to the explana

tion and exemplification of the various modes in
which exposition may be performed. On the
present occasion, however, I can only give a

short analysis of the subject; my purpose being
merely to enable the reader to compare generally
my view of the matter with the few words which
will be found in Dr. Whately’s Elements, and
other Logical works.

C.H.

VI.

75

EXPOSITION.

Exposition is a name, which may be applied
to the designation of every operation, destined to

enable the learner" to attach, to the word or sen
tence expounded, an idea precisely the same as

that which is attached to it by the teacher.
Any portion of discourse may be unintelli
gible to him to whom it is directed, either by
conveying to his mind no idea at all, or by con

veying to it, a confused, incomplete, or errone
oust idea. The object of exposition is there
fore either to attach an idea to a word, or to give
clearness, completeness, or correctnesst, to an
idea already attached to it. Exposition is that
which Logicians call definition, taken in the

most extensive sense of the word. Expounding
a word may be also termed explaining the idea
attached to that word.

In the following enumeration of the different
modes or species of exposition, the order at

tempted to be adopted, is that in which they
* The word learner is here made use of to designate him to
whom discourse is addressed, and teacher, him who makes use
of such discourse.

-

-

-

+ By a correct idea is meant, upon this occasion, the idea
which was intended to be conveyed; by an erroneous idea,
one which was not intended to be conveyed.

76

C.H.

VI.

would present themselves for use; commencing .
with that which must be resorted to in the case

where the learner is entirely ignorant of any

word comprised, either in the language to be
taught, or in any other language known to the
teacher.

1. Physical designation. In the above-men
tioned case, this is the only mode of exposition
that can, at first, be used.

It consists in the

designating objects by signs, (as by pointing to
real objects, by performing perceptible operations,
&c.) and at the same time pronouncing the name
to be given to those objects; this name being the
word to be expounded. Thus may be formed,
though with much labour and little accuracy, the

rude outline of a language, consisting, in the first
place, of proper names only. In process of time
a few common names, adjectives, verbs, and other
expletives may be added; so as to allow the use of

any of the following modes, which may be termed
logical or discoursual modes of exposition, in

contradistinction to this physical or non-discour
sual mode.

2. Translation—the expounding a locution by

the exhibition of a synonymous locution already
known to the reader; that is, one which already

77

EXPOSITION.

conveys to his mind the idea intended to be
attached to the locution expounded.
This mode is applicable either to the case
where the object is to instruct the learner in a
language unknown to him, or where it is to teach
him, in the same language, synonymous terms;

either because they have been made use of by au
thors whom he may have occasion to refer to, or
because the new term may be more convenient for

some particular use. The expressions “Hombre
is the Spanish for man,” “The peduncle is the
botanical name for a flower stalk,” are examples
of exposition by translation.
3. Etymologization—the exposition of a

word by the exhibition of the grammatical rela
tion it bears to another word called its
from whence it is said to be derived.

root,

and

Grammati

cal relations have place whenever it has been
found convenient to express, by regular modifica

tions in the form of a word, any regular relations
in the sense of two words; such as of time, sex,
number, &c. the relation between the operator
and the operation; between a property and its
subject-matter, &c. as, for ex.: governor, go
verness; actor, actress; write, wrote, &c. The

exposition of a word by the exhibition of its

78

CH.

VI.

root, may be, on some occasions, attended with
considerable clearness and conciseness; but this

mode is, in general, liable to fallacy; that is, to
erroneous and deceptive exposition, as will be
shown in Ch. XI, on Fallacies, under the head

of Fallacies of Paronymity and of Etymology:
the root and the word derived being collectively

designated by the name of paronymous words.
The two preceding modes are comprehended
by logicians under the denomination of nominal

definitions, which they distinguish from real by
saying that the former explain the meaning of the
term, the latter the nature of the thing. Dr.
Whately observes, that, in most cases, “the
meaning of the word and the nature of the thing
are exactly the same.” He might have said in all
cases.

Yet there does exist a difference between

the two modes in question, and those which will
follow; a difference which Dr.Whately had proba

bly in view, but has not succeeded in explaining
to his readers.

It consists in this, that, in what

may still perhaps be termed nominal exposition,

the meaning of the word (or nature of the thing)
is represented at once, by means of a single term

already known to the learner.

In the real" ex

* It must be remembered that the word real is here op

79

EXPOSITION.

position, the operation is performed by the com
bination of a number of terms, expressive of ideas
different from that which is explained. Thus, it

may be said, that, in nominal exposition, words
only are considered; in real exposition, the ideas
also connected with the words.

4. Definition—the exhibition of the genus
to which a collective idea belongs, and of the
properties which distinguish it from all other spe
cies of the same genus. This is that mode which
Aristotelians term “Definitio per genus et diffe
rentiam,” and which Dr. Whately has denomi
nated “Essential Definition.” It is applicable
only to common names, and, when practicable, is
the most exact of all modes of exposition. Ex.
Homo est animal rationale.

The characteristic

phrases of naturalists are all definitions.
5. Individuation—the corresponding opera
tion performed on the name of an individual,
viz. the exhibition of its genus and characteristic

properties. This mode differs from definition;
because, in this case, the only characteristic pro

perties are those of time and place, which must
both be exhibited. No other properties, nor yet
posed to verbal; a sense different from that in which I have
used it on other occasions where it is opposed to fictitious.

80

-

C.H.

VI.

one of these without the other, can ever distin

guish an individual from all others which may
exist, or can be conceived to exist. As time and

place are constantly varying, exposition by indivi
duation alone, can never enable the learner to

recognize the individual whose name is thus ex
pounded. Definition, on the contrary, affords
him the means of pronouncing, on all occasions,
whether an individual belongs or not to the genus
of which the name is defined.
-

Examples of individuation: John is the man
who is sitting in that chair. Louis XVIII is the
man who was King of France at the time you
were at Paris.

-

6. Paraphrasis. The exposition, by paraphra

sis, of a fictitious entity, is the combining the
word in question with others, so as to make up

a complete proposition, and then translating that
proposition into an equivalent one, composed of
names of either real or physical fictitious entities".
These two successive operations may be denomi

nated phraseoplerosis and equivalence. The fol

lowing examples are expositions by paraphrasis
of the words obligation and right.

“A man

* See the classification of entities, at the end of Ch, III.

EXPOSITION.

81

being under an obligation to do a thing, means
that he is liable to punishment if he does not

do it.” “A man having a right to do a thing,
means that any other person, who prevents him

from doing it, is liable to punishment for so pre
venting him.”
This mode is applicable only to names of fic
titious entities; and, amongst those, it is for the
exposition of such as may be considered as sum
ma genera, that it is particularly appropriate, and
indeed the only practicable mode.
7. Archetypation. This is the exposition of
the name of a fictitious entity by the exhibition of

the name of the physical entity (or archetype)
upon which the imagination of the fictitious
entity in question has been grounded. Take for
example the two following expositions of the
term end-in-view:

“The end-in-view bears the same relation to a

mental operation, that a physical end, or place
which it is wished a body in motion should

arrive at, bears to the motion of that body.”
“The idea of end-in-view, applied to a mental

operation, is derived from that of the end which
is the object of a body in motion; as, for instance,
the winning-post in a race-course.”
-

G

82

C.H. VI.

8. Description is a detailed exposition of ac
cidental properties; that is, of those of which the
exhibition is not necessary for the distinguishing
the object in question from all others which are
not designated by the same name. Description
may accordingly become more and more ample to
an indefinite degree. Suppose, for example, a
quadruped to be defined, “Animal mammifer
pedibus quatuor;” in the description, we may
add the properties of living out of water, having

no wings. These properties belong to the gene
rality of quadrupeds; they may belong to all;
yet, if a mammiferous animal with four legs be
hereafter discovered or imagined, either living in
water, or possessing wings, this animal would
still be a quadruped.
Such is specific description, or description ap
plied to logical aggregates or collective entities.
The object of description is, in this case, either to
enable the learner to recognize a species, with
greater readiness, or to furnish his mind with an
image such as may fix the collective entity in his

mind. By recognizing a species, must be under
stood, the being enabled to say whether any indi
vidual that may come within reach of our percep
tion, does, or does not, belong to such species.

83

EXPOSITION.

Definition is the only mode that can enable us
to determine this with positive certainty; but the

characteristic properties (which alone are exhi

bited by definition) are frequently difficult to per
ceive. Description, in these cases, furnishes us
with more striking properties, though less univer
sal; recognition becomes more ready, but less ac
curate. Description should therefore be always
accompanied, or rather preceded, by definition.
The importance of this rule has been felt in the
case of naturalists’ descriptions, for instance,
where the characteristic phrase (which is a defini
tion per genus et differentiam) always precedes
the detailed description.
It has been said, in speaking of the imagina
tive faculty, that our mind, in order to retain any
-

physical idea presented to it, must form to itself
an image

consisting

of more properties than

those given by the definition. One object of

specific description is to furnish the imagination
with such properties as are actually possessed by
some, at least, of the individuals referred to, and

perhaps by all; which is better than if the image
were formed of such as were never possessed by
any of them.

Individual description, or description applied
G 2

84

C.H. VI.

to individuals, is of still more importance; for,
though liable to the same uncertainties and in
accuracies as specific description, it is the only
one that can serve for physical recognition; as
the properties exhibited by individuation, viz.
those of time and place, are continually chang
ing. Portraits, personal descriptions in pass
ports, particulars of sale of estates, &c. are ex
amples of individual description.
9. Parallelism, including antithesis.—This
may be considered as a species, or at any rate, as
a slight modification of description. It is appli
cable to the case where an entity is essentially
distinguished from another by minute or difficult
characters, (that is, characters which it is difficult
to perceive or to comprehend). By parallelism,
in this case, the two objects are compared with
respect to other properties than those given in the
definition.

Relations of similitude and dissimili

tude between the two objects in question, are
thus pointed out. In as much as similitude is
exhibited, the operation receives more especially
the name of parallelism; when it is dissimilitude,
and more particularly opposition that is ex
hibited, the operation is termed antithesis.
10. Enumeration,—considered as a mode of

EXPOSITION.

85

exposition,-is the successive exhibition of all the
minor aggregates comprehended in a superordi
nate genus, or of all the several individuals com

prehended in a synthetical entity, that is to say,
of the several parts of an individual; the super

ordinate genus and the synthetical entity being
in these cases the entity to be explained. Hence
the division of enumeration, into specific and in
dividual enumeration, according to whether it be

applied to a genus or to a synthetical entity.
Enumeration can only serve for exposition,
in as much as it is complete; when incomplete,
it is mere exemplification. Hence it is that
specific enumeration is seldom accurate. For
if you expound the name of the genus, Equus,

by saying that it consists of the four species,
Horse, Ass, Zebra, and Couagga, you do not give
an accurate idea of it; for there may be other spe
cies, hitherto unknown, belonging to the same
genus. Enumeration in this case can only be com

plete when the species are formed by the contra
dictorily bifurcate system hereafter explained".
Individual enumeration is exemplified in the
case of catalogues, &c.
* See Ch. VIII. Methodization.

-

86

-

C.H.

VI.

11. Exemplification—is the exhibition of one
or more individuals comprised in a collective
entity, or of one or more species of a superordi
nate genus, for the purpose of giving a clearer
conception of the properties ascribed to that col
lective entity, or superordinate genus, by any
other mode of exposition. Exemplification is
applicable only to the exposition of collective en
tities, not to that of individuals. Caesar’s hand
cannot serve as an example of Caesar; but Caesar
is an example of a Roman.
12. Illustration.—This operation may assist
the exposition of names of fictitious entities, and
particularly those of mental operations. It is
performed by describing some analogous real
entity or physical operation. Its object is to fa
cilitate conception in the learner’s mind, in re
spect of readiness and clearness; but it is liable
to defect in respect of accuracy. It may be said
to have the same relation to paraphrasis and
archetypation, which description has to definition.

With respect to the classification of the fore
going twelve modes of exposition, there might
perhaps be some advantage in reducing it to the
form of the following synoptical table:

-

1S

ū.

L| ogical

or

Exposition.

[

Real

or

i

.
f

either
Nominal

-•
*

subsidiary

Or

either
Essential

Physical....
[Either

exhibition
with
either

|

asuperordinate
of

exhibition
without
or

asuperordinate
of

-•- ----

viduals..........

of
exhibition
by
or
of
is,
that
parts;
| subspecies,
indiof
or

/*

•

belong
properties
of
exhibition
by
or

entities...
.

comparison
or
by
analogous
with

ana
with
parison
entities...
lagous

com
without
either

-

complete..............
either

oth
some
Uing
to

exhi
by
either
pro
of
bition
be
perties
to
longing
exponendum

Description.
Physical
1.

Individuation.
5.

Definition.
4.

in
or
Enumeration,
specific
11.
....

Antithesis.
and
Parallelism
9.

in
or
Description,
specific
8.

$
Exemplification.
.Lor
incomplete.....................
12.

dividual.

-

Illustration.
10.
entity.
er

dividual.

Archetypation.
7.

*

Etymologization.
3.

Translation.
2.

Paraphrasis.
Phraseoplerosis..
6.
previous
with
either
Phraseoplerosis..........
without
or

individual....
or

specific.....................
either

words......
paronymous
of
exhibition
by
or

.
of
either
exhibition
by
properties........

.
genus

. --genus.

|
{

•-

words...............
synonymous
of
exhibition
by

{:

EXPOSITION.
MODES
OF
TABLE

88

CH. VI.

If exposition be considered with respect to its

immediate object, it may be divided into Ono
matopaea, or the giving a new name to an idea,
and into Exposition of existing words.
In following the same principle of division,

exposition of existing words may be subdivided
into the following operations:—

-

1. Substitution of a new sense to the one in

which a word has already been used, an opera
tion resembling onomatopoea, but attended with
much more practical inconvenience, excepting

where the use of the word in its old sense be at
once disadvantageous, and of rare occurrence.

2. Elucidation—where the object is to give
clearness to an obscure term.
3. Disambiguation—where it is to fix the
sense of an ambiguous term. This operation has
been termed distinction by some Logicians, and
erroneously reckoned as a species of division.
4. Ampliation—where it is to extend the
sense of a term.
5. Restriction—where it is to restrict the sense
of a term.

The above division of the operation of expo

sition may not at first appear to be attended with
much practical use. Yet there might probably

EXPOSITION.

89

be found some advantage, if every writer who
gives a new exposition of a term were to con
sult this list, and observe to which of the above
species his exposition may be referred. He might
thereby be the better enabled to judge whether it

answers the special purpose for which it was
framed.

Let us now proceed to examine the view taken

of this field by Dr. Whately.
“Definition” (says he) “is another meta

phorical word, which literally signifies, ‘laying
down a boundary; and is used in logic to signify
“an expression which explains any term, so as

to separate it from every thing else, as a bound
ary separates fields.” P. 71.
The first part of this exposition is performed
in that mode which is above denominated arche

typation, and will probably be found correct,
though, in this case, it can scarcely suffice.

Let

us submit the second part to a logical scrutiny,
according to the rules given in p. 74 of the
Elements.

According to the first rule, “the definition
must be adequate, i. e. neither too extensive nor
too narrow for the thing defined;” meaning, of
course, that whatever is designated by the name

90

C.H.

VI.

of the thing defined, must answer to the defini
tion, and that whatsoever is not so designated,
must not answer to it.

-

A definition is “either essential or acci
dental.”

“An accidental definition assigns cir

cumstances belonging to the essence, but which
are not constituent parts of the essence,” “e. g.
Philip was a man of Macedon who subdued
Greece, &c.”

Is this definition conformable to

the above rule, and does it agree with the above

exposition of the word definition? Does it dis
tinguish Philip from every thing else? Might
there not, for aught we know, have been another
“man of Macedon who subdued Greece?”

It

is true there is an &c.; but you may continue to

substitute properties for the &c. to all eternity,
without arriving at any certainty of distinguish
ing Philip from every other man, unless indeed
you

mention time and place; but then the defini

tion becomes essential, not accidental.

The fact

is, that the explanation here given of the word defi

nition is such as to make it refer only to the essen
tial, not to the subsidiary modes of exposition".
* Thus, Dr. Whaley has observed that description of spe
cies cannot belong to this head, because the properties may not
be universal; that is, that if an individual be deprived of

EXPOSITION.

91

The rule also quoted above is applicable only to
the essential modes.

Again, he says that definition is an expression
that

explains

“any term so as to separate it from

every thing else.” So, if we were to define
Logic a “term consisting of the letters L, o, g,

i, c,” it would be separated from everything else:
but is that a definition according to the author’s

ideas? In order to include all the matter which
he probably intended, and no more than that,
he might have said, “any term so as to separate

the idea represented by it from any other idea.”
The second rule is, that “the definition must
be in itself plainer than the thing defined.” He
explains the expression “in itself” by the word

“generally;” that is to say, that the definition
must be plainer to the generality of the persons

to whom it is addressed than the term (not the
thing) defined. In the above-mentioned exposi
tion of the word definition, “it is an expression

that explains,” this rule may not be found to be
any such property, such individual may still belong to the spe
cies; but so it is in the case of individual description (time
and place excepted). Thus, if it be discovered that there is
reason to believe that Philip was not born in Macedon, he
would still be the man who, at such a time, subdued Greece.

92

C.H. VI.

so strictly conformed to as might have been
done; for explain, in this sense", is a mere syno
nymous word to define. The exposition would
perhaps be clearer and more correct if thus ex

pressed: “Definition is an operation performed
in respect of any term, so as to, &c.” This would
be a definition per genus et differentiam; “opera
tion” being the genus, and “performed in respect

of any term, so as to, &c.” the species.
There are several divisions given here of the

genus definition; that is, several classifications of
species, or modes of definition.
The first division is that of definition into no

minal and real, which has already been examined,
p. 78.
Secondly; each of these is divided into acciden
tal and essential. With regard to real definition,
these submodes correspond nearly to description
-

(or rather to individual description only) and
to definition according to the list above given.
But how is nominal definition divided into acci
dental and essential?

If it makes no mention at

all of any ideas, and consequently of properties,
* I have used it in a different sense; considering explana
tion of the idea as an operation corresponding to exposition of
the nord.

EXPOSITION.

93

how can it be divided according to the properties
it lays down?

No examples are given of these

submodes of nominal definition; and it might
not be a very easy task to find any.

“Lastly, Essential Definition is divided into
physical (i. e. natural) and logical or metaphysi
cal: the physical definition lays down the real
parts of the essence which are actually separable.

Thus a plant would be divided physically, by
enumerating the leaves, stalks, roots, &c. of
which it is composed".” By a plant is meant, I
suppose, the collective entity plant, or some spe

cies of plant, not an individual plant. Now a
species, as is ably shown in many parts of the Ele
ments, has no real existence, and has therefore no

real parts. Real leaves, stalks, roots, &c. may
appear at first to be parts of the collective entity
“a plant;” but this is owing to the inaccuracy of
language. The real idea is this; that to the

genus plant belong all those entities which are
endowed with the property of possessing leaves,
stalks, roots, &c. If these properties are not
essential to the constitution or to the essence

of the genus plant, (as in the case of leaves, for
instance,) their enumeration belongs to descrip
* Elements, p. 72.

94

CH. VI.

tion, not to essential definition; which would thus
be reduced to the second part, viz. logical defini
tion. In the example of the Proposition of which
the parts subject, predicate, and copula, are
enumerated, this enumeration is again one of pro

perties which, in this case, are all essential; but I
do not see any thing more physical in the property
of being expressed by means of two terms and a
copula, than in the property of expressing an
affirmation or a negation.
These distinctions between Dr. Whately’s
several modes of definition may be thus exhibited
in a tabular form:

Be!

© od M * w ©

$

z
Definition.
Physical

:
Definition.
Nominal
Accidental

\

Definition.
Nominal
Essential

Definition.
Real
Accidental

Definition.
Logical

soynonya
giving
cBy
to
essential
properties
of
exhibition
the
(By
nstitution

DEFINITION
SPECIES
OF
TABLE

By
|
De(Nominal
idea.
i.e.
essence;
to
belonging
properties
of
exhibition
the

eof
the
By
(Real
essential
nxupmrersateido.n
Donly,
perfoinpietritoin.e)s
man
whatever
in

becof
may
which
not,
or
the
to
essential
(the
“It
words
by
expressed
idea
the
onstitutionconsists
deOR.
definienthe
by
expressed
-(such
of
finiendum)
Brnoupmerytaieso,nperties
(
proof
exhibition
eBy
pthe

Elements.
Whately's
Dr.
to
According

constitu
to
essential
not
properties
of
exhibition
the
By

-

expres ed.
be
they
ner
DefiOR
|
idea
the
of
nature
nition.

fof
coinstituitoin.)
the
to
essential
not
idea.
such
it.
to
belong
do
which
but
idea,
such
of
tion
definiendum.
by
expressed
idea
the
of
without
word
mous
{properties.)”
Real
Essential
dum.
the
exhibiting
By
to
regard
any
OR.

oR

place
has
a term
of
Definition

96

CH. VI.

EXPOSITION.

By comparing this table with that of Modes
of Exposition given above, the reader will be
enabled to judge to which author the following
paragraph may be applied.
“It is scarcely credible how much confusion
has arisen from the ignorance of these distinctions
which has prevailed among logical writers.”
Elements, p. 74.

.

97

CHAPTER VII.

METHODIZATION.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. XI. Part I, § 6, Division, p. 68.)

THE exposition of the general principles
of Methodization, and of its application, in the
instance of some of the most important subjects,
form a considerable portion of Mr. Bentham's
MSS. on Logic. The following short exposé of
the theory is chiefly abstracted from those papers.
As the object of exposition is the conveying a
clear, correct, and complete conception of the
idea represented by a word, so that of methodiza
tion is to enable the mind to entertain a clear, cor
rect, and complete notion of a number of ideas,
either simultaneously or in succession, in such
manner as to be able with facility to retain, to
compare, or to combine them with a view to the
accomplishment of any particular end.
Methodization may therefore be defined, the
H

98

GH. VII.

putting a number of objects together in a particu

lar manner, directed by design to a particular
end.

Methodization is either physical or logical;
physical, when the objects methodized are real
entities; logical, when they are ideas. But, as
ideas themselves have no real existence, and

therefore cannot actually be placed in any order,

it is upon the signs only which represent those
ideas that logical methodization can operate.
These signs being words or names of the

ideas, nomenclature (that is, the giving names) is,
as well as exposition, an operation essentially

subservient to methodization; and is accordingly
treated of in detail in the MSS. before me.

Much has, however, been already published on
this subject, both in Mr. Bentham’s Chrestoma
thia and in my above-mentioned “Essai sur la
Nomenclature et la Classification, &c.” I do
not think it therefore necessary to repeat, on the
present occasion, what has there been said.

Methodization may be divided into two dis
tinct operations, according to whether it has place
with or without regard to succession; that is, to

priority and posteriority. These two modes of
methodization may be termed successive colloca
/

METHOD1 ZATION.

99.

tion, or simply collocation, and distributive or
perhaps tabular methodization.

The former di

rected more particularly to the purpose of facili
tating conception; the latter to that of assisting
the operations of retention, comparison, and com
bination.

Conception is produced by communication;
and this operation by means of discourse.

It is

therefore upon the elements of discourse that
collocation operates.
Ideas are communicated in the succession of
time; but, as audible signs alone can be given in

the order of time, visible signs, their permanent
representatives, must be arranged in the order of
place, which, according to certain conventional
rules, is considered as emblematical of the order

of time. Thus, priority, with us, is usually
ascribed to the top and to the left-hand of the
sheet; but some nations consider the right-hand
side as the first: upon some occasions, priority is
also ascribed to the bottom of the sheet, &c.

The elements of discourse are words, the signs
(either singly or taken together) of simple ideas.
These words constitute sentences, the signs of
propositions. Every discourse is formed of the
combination of sentences which, when the dis
H 2

100

CH. VII.

course is of sufficient length, are combined into
more general aggregates termed paragraphs, sec

tions, chapters, &c.
Collocation consists therefore in the arrange
ment—1st. of words in sentences; 2d. of sen

tences in paragraphs, sections, &c.; 3d. of
paragraphs, sections, &c. in a discourse. The .
particular rules of collocation belong to the
theory of language; a subject intimately con
nected with Logic, and which will form the
second part of my Treatise; but which might
appear irrelevant, were it further detailed on the
present occasion.
Distributive methodization has place where
ideas are realized, either in the shape of a whole,
-

consisting of a number of parts, or of a receptacle,
containing a number of other ideas.

It is indivi

dual or generic, according to whether those ideas
are representative of individual or of collective
entities.

In the latter case, it has received more

particularly the name of classification.
Thus, for example, when we divide a regi
ment into battalions, the regiment is considered in

the character of an individual whole, consisting
of so many individual parts. But, if we divide
regiments, into regiments of infantry, of cavalry,

METHODIZATION.

101

of engineers, of artillery, &c. the word regiments
represents a collective entity or genus, consisting

of so many species, or collective entities of an in
ferior order.

Distributive methodization may be performed
by three distinct operations:

1. By dividing a given entity into parts.

This operation has been denominated analysis,
when performed upon individual entities; logical
division, in the case of collective entities.

2. By uniting a number of given entities into
a whole: an operation termed synthesis” in the
case of individuals; generalization, when per
formed upon collective entities.
3. By distribution. For the performance of
this operation, a number of wholes, as well as

of parts, are supposed to be already given ; but,
as, in the case of real entities, the exhibiting of
wholes and parts might appear to constitute the
whole of the operation, the figure is now changed,

the aggregate ideas are realized as receptacles,
* Also, by some logicians, physical division. It includes
both the resolutio and the partitio of Saunderson's Logic; for
I do not perceive any distinction between his “partes consti

tutive” and “partes integrantes.” See Saunderson's Logic,
p. 47.

102

CH. VII.

into which the several given partial ideas are

supposed to be placed or distributed,
Of these several operations, those which re
late to individual methodization can scarcely be
considered as appertaining to the province of
Logic; the tactical branch of which science re

lates rather to classification, and more particularly

to division, as being the most important, in the
present state of human knowledge. The theory
of generalization belongs chiefly to the logical
history of the formation of ideas and of lan
guages, which will be attempted, in as far
as it is suggested by conjecture, in a chapter

of the Theory of Language, forming the se
cond part of my above-mentioned Treatise

on Logic. Distribution is so closely allied to
division, that it may not be worth while to con

sider it separately.

A single example may

suffice on the present occasion, to shew the mode
of operation of generalization and distribution.

A botanist visits a country with whose pro
ductions he is as yet unacquainted; he sees a
number of plants which resemble one another
very strongly, and which differ considerably from
any other plants which he has seen or heard of;
he discovers successively several of these sets of

METHODIZATION.

103

plants, and by generalization he forms as many

new species, characterized by the properties he
has observed in these several individual plants.
On referring to his books, he compares the
several properties there given as characteristics
of general classes, with those which are possessed
by his several new species, and thus decides to
which of these general classes the species in ques

tion belong. This may be termed distributing
those species under their superordinate genera.
Suppose that by the addition of these new

species, some one class (or logical genus) may
now consist of so many, as to render it difficult
to compare them or to retain their distinctive
properties without the help of some intermediate
classes; these classes may be formed either by
dividing the genus into subclasses, or by dis
tributing the species into groups. In this case
division and distribution appear to be so closely
allied, as scarcely to be distinguishable otherwise
than by the form of expression.
The operation of logical division has been
thus characterized in a preceding page: “From
a general class, constituted by the combination
of any number of properties, the forming sub
classes, by the additional consideration of other

104

C.H. VII.

properties, applicable to a part only, of the indi
viduals to which the general class in question

refers.” This general class is termed superordi
mate with relation to the subclasses into which

it is divided; the subclasses are subordinate to

the general class, and coordinate with regard to
one another.

Dr. Whately, following the example of Ari
stotelian Logicians, lays down three or four
general rules for division; but these rules are not
equally applicable on all occasions, nor to all
modes of division. The theory of the operation
may be said to consist of five considerations: 1.
The particular end in view, or object of the di
vision. 2. The nature of its subject. 3. The
source or principle. 4. The mode of division.
5. The extent to which it should be carried.
I. The first consideration is that of the end

in-view, or purposes which it is intended that the

division should accomplish. These purposes are
either practical or logical. The practical pur
poses depend upon the particular branch of art
and science which it is intended to assist, as for

ex. Agriculture, Natural History, the Commis
sariat-art, &c. (See Elements, p. 68.) The
logical purposes relate to the manner in which it

105

METHODIZATION.

is intended that this assistance should be given;

that is, upon the mental operation, for the per
formance of which, method is to serve as an in

strument; as for ex. for exposition, retention,
invention, &c.

II. The Logician should next consider the
nature of the subject of his division, that is, of
the summum genus or general aggregate, which
contains the whole subject, with the characters
which separate it from all other aggregates which
may happen to be connected with it, or contigu
ous to it, with reference to the particular end-in
view.

Thus, if a “Farmer’s stock” be the sub

ject of classification, it is necessary to know what
constitutes stock, how it is distinguished from

farm-buildings, &c. &c.
III. He must choose the most advantageous
source* of division, that is, the nature of the

properties which are best suited for the charac

terizing the parts or results of division. This
selection of properties depends of course upon
the end-in-view, and particularly upon the prac
* I have preferred the word source to that of principle,
made use of by Dr. Whately: the latter word appearing to me

to be too general, and applicable perhaps to the aggregate of
the above five considerations.

***
*

106

CH. VII.

tical purpose of the classification.

Thus the

agriculturist may divide Live Stock according

to the usefulness for cultivation of the differ
ent animals, as compared with the expense of

keep, prime cost, &c.

The naturalist divides

animals according to their conformation ; the
commissary may derive his divisions of ani

mals from their usefulness as furnishing food, or
as beasts of draught, &c.
When two separate divisional operations
are performed upon the same genus, and are
derived from different sources, they may be
termed coordinate divisions.

-

IV. The mode of division to be adopted on
each occasion will be found to depend upon the

logical purpose of the operation.

If the object

be to give an exact and complete exposition of

the parts into which the subject is divided, the
only mode which can answer the purpose is that

which may be termed contradictory bifurcate divi
sion.

Where either relention of the names of the

species and of their reference to the genus, or

exemplification of the genus, is the chief purpose
in view, the loose or irregular multifurcate di

vision may be found adequate or even more ap
propriate.

METHODIZATION.

107

The contradictory bifurcate mode consists in
the dividing the genus into two species, accord
ing to some property possessed by all the indi
viduals referred to by one species, and by none
of those referred to by the other. Irregular
multifurcate division consists in the dividing
a genus into any number of species, whereby
this opposition is rendered impossible. The
former mode can only ensure what Logicians

call a perfect division; the latter being liable to
incompleteness, incorrectness, or indistinctness of
parts.

The rules for division usually given by Lo
gicians apply to their perfect division. Dr.

Whately gives but three, Saunderson and others
have four, which it may not be amiss to examine
on the present occasion.

1. “Membra absorbeant totum divisum.”
Let the parts exhaust the whole subject. Saun
derson, p. 47. “All the parts together must be
exactly equal to the thing divided; therefore we
must be careful to ascertain that the summum

genus may be predicated of every term placed
under it, and of nothing else.” Whately’s Ele
ments, p. 69.

If the division be conformable to this rule,

108

CH, VII.

it may be termed complete, and the aggregate of
the species may be said to be all-comprehensive.
Such a division has also been termed exhaustive;
but this can only be said of it with reference to
the particular source of division adopted, and not
generally, as every genus may be divided accord
ing to an infinite number of sources of division.

2. “Divisum esto latius singulis suis mem
bris; adaequatum universis.” Let the subject be
more extensive than each of its parts; equal to

them all. Saunderson, p. 47. Here we have two
rules; the first is thus given by Dr. Whately:
“Each of the parts, or any short of them all,
must contain less, (i.e. have a narrower signifi
cation) than the thing divided.” In other words,
the rule amounts to this : “Let the whole be

greater than each, or any short of all of its
parts.” If any means be found of dividing any
thing so that the whole shall not be greater than
its parts, then the utility of this rule may be dis

cussed: till then, few persons will derive much
advantage from learning a rule which they can
not transgress". The second part of the above

* Du Trieu (Manuductio ad Logicam, ed. Lond, 1826, p.
107), after giving the rule, “Divisum debet plus continere

109

METHODIZATION,

rule of Saunderson is but a repetition of the first
rule of completeness.
-

3.

“Membra condividentia sint contradis

tincta et opposita; ita ut confundi nequeant, vel
coincidere.”

Let the condivident members be

contradistinct and opposed; so that they may

neither be confounded nor coincide. This may
be termed the rule of contradistinction and oppo

sition, or, generally, the rule of distinctness; con
tradistinction applying to distinctness in expres

sion, opposition to distinction in the partial ideas
themselves. This rule is thus given by Dr.
Whately: “The parts or members must be op

posed; i. e. must not be contained in one an

other,” which does not appear to me so clearly
expressed as it is by Saunderson.

quam singula membra dividentia,” thus exemplifies the

cor

responding defects. “Hinc vitiosa est ista divisio, anima
tium aliud sensitivum, aliud homo, aliud brutum: nam sensiti

vum, quod est unum e membris dividentibus, est convertibile
cum diviso.” But who is there who would think of dividing

“animals” into “men,” “brutes,” and “sensitive beings?”
Aristotelian logicians usually include the distinction of

the two senses of an ambiguous word amongst the modes of
division. I should rather reckon it as a species of exposition.
See above, p. 88.
f

-

110

C.H.

VII.

After these three rules (the only ones given

by Whately), Saunderson adds a fourth, which
may rather be considered as an attempt to indi
cate the mode of division best adapted for secur
ing completeness and distinctness, than as a gene
ral rule of division.

4. “Divisio fiat in membra proxima et im
mediata, et (quam fieri commodè potest) pau

cissima. A proximis porro ad remotiora et minu
tiora descendendum per subdivisiones.

Dicho

tomiae sunt laudatissimae, ubi commodè haberi.

possunt, non tamen nimium superstitiosé et anxiè

ubique venandae; quod faciunt Ramaei".”
Having given completeness and distinctness
as essential qualities of the “divisio perfecta,”
and having perceived that opposition is necessary
to distinctness, and that opposition supposes two
objects only, as our minds can only compare two
objects together at the same time,—Saunderson

was naturally led to conclude, that, in each divi
sional operation, the result should be two parts
only. But, upon reflection, he was probably led
• Dr. Whately makes no mention of this rule: Du Trieu
and others say, “Membra dividentia sint pauca.” Dr. Watts
has greatly enriched the vagueness of these expressions in his
rule, “Let not your subdivisions be too numerous without
necesssity.”

METHODIZATION.

111

to consider, that, if the successive bifurcate divi

sions of logical aggregates were carried on to
the lowest stage necessary for classification, and
if, at the same time, names were given to every
one of the intermediate aggregates so formed,—
this operation would, on many occasions, be
attended with more labour than advantage, and
would require too great a strain on the memory.
He therefore added the restriction, that dichoto

my was only to be made use of when it could be
easily performed; and that it should not be sought
out on all occasions with that superstitious strict
ness with which the Ramaeans followed it.

On this occasion, he has not considered that

there are generally two distinct logical operations
which classification is intended to assist: the one

is exposition, which requires the perfecta divisio
performed by contradictory bifurcation; the other
is retention, which may be better assisted, in many
instances, by multifurcate divisions. The latter
may happen to be as complete and distinct as the
other; but it cannot be made so, nor can any
assurance be had of its being actually so, unless it
be proved by the application of a contradictory
bifurcate division to the same subject-matter.
The above principle may be rendered more

112

C.H.

VII.

intelligible by means of an example. Take, for
instance, as a summum genus, or subject-matter
of division, the class of animals called Vertebra
ta. If the object be merely to give a general
idea of the kind of animals that are compre

hended in that class, and if it be not necessary,
with reference to that particular object, to define

exactly the nature of the several subclasses or spe

cies which it contains, you may divide Vertebra
ta generally into Mammifera, Birds, Fishes,
Lizards, and Serpents; and you may thus de
scribe these several species of animals: “Mam

miferae are those who suckle their young; Birds
are animals which have wings and feathers; Fish
have fins and live in water; Lizards are little ani

mals with four legs and scaly skins; Serpents
have no limbs at all, but crawl upon their bellies.”

This classification may answer the purpose of
those who only wish to obtain a slight and general
idea of vertebrated animals; but it cannot suffice

for the naturalist, who must always be assured of

the all-comprehensiveness of his classes and sub
classes; he must always be enabled to ascertain

precisely to which of them he should refer any
individual animal that comes under his observa

tion. For this purpose, his classes and sub

METHODI ZATION.

I13

classes must all be distinctly characterized; they
must be all-comprehensive and contradistinct (or
opposed); and his divisions must therefore have
been performed in the contradictory bifurcate
mode.

,

It may be objected, that, if a genus be di
vided into any number of species, such characters
may be given to them, as that each shall be dis
tinguished from all the others, and that, when
taken together, they shall comprehend the whole

of the individuals included in the genus. This
certainly may be done, and is done; but, if the
process be analyzed, it will be found, in such
cases, to be, in fact, the same mode of contradic

- tory bifurcation expressed in another form. For
the characters to answer the purpose of distin
guishing a species, that species must be succes
sively compared with all the others, and a pro
perty must be mentioned by which it is distin
guished from each of them. The species is then
constituted by the coexistence of these properties,
and all the other species are mentally combined

into one second species, characterized by the
absence of any one or more of these properties.
Let us again take as an example the above
mentioned class of vertebrated animals, and di
I

114

CH.

VII.

vide it into four subclasses or species, thus cha
racterized:

Mammifera.—Vertebrata endowed with mam
mae and with lungs.
Birds.—Wertebrata deprived of mammae, but
endowed with lungs and with wings.
Fish.—Wertebrata, deprived of lungs.

Reptiles.—Vertebrata, deprived of mammae
and of wings, but endowed with lungs.
This division is complete and its species are
distinct; but only because it is, in fact, the result
of three successive divisional operations, carried
on according to the contradictory bifurcate mode,
as may be seen by reducing it to the following
tabular form:

VERTEBRATA are
A.

r

-

Y

either endowed with lungs, or deprived of lungs,
these are

viz. FISH

e------,

either endowed with

or deprived of

mammae, viz.

mammae,

MAMMIE ERA

these are

r-----,

either endowed
with wings, viz.

or deprived of
wings, viz.

BIRDS

REPTILES,

It must be carefully remembered, that these
observations apply to the logical division of
collective entities only, not to the analytical divi

METHODIZATION.

sion of individuals.

115

Analysis, not being per

formed by the attribution of

properties, the above

contradictory formula cannot be applied to it; as
was attempted by Reid and Kaimes, when they
endeavoured to cast ridicule on this mode, by

dividing England into Middlesex and that which
is not Middlesex; that which is not Middlesex,
into Kent and that which is not Kent, &c.

Middlesex, Kent, that (that is, that part of En
gland) which is not Middlesex, &c. are not pro
perties, but names of individual entities.
The advantages and importance of this con
tradictory bifurcate division being fully detailed
and exemplified in the Essays on Nomenclature
and Classification" above alluded to, I shall not,

for the present, proceed any further with this
subject.
• In the English work (Chrestomathia), in a synoptical
table of the principal branches of art and science, this mode of
division was pursued to a considerable extent; and, in the
French Essai, I carried it, in some instances, still farther. At
the same time,

single-worded, or, at any rate, two-worded de

nominations were given at every stage to each of the species
formed. As these names were necessarily derived from a

foreign language, (for the purpose of comprising them in the
compass of one or two words), they have, for the most part,
a harsh and barbarous appearance; a circumstance which
I 2

116

C.H. VII.

W. The mode of division, as well as its
sources, being determined, the next and last con
sideration relates to the extent to which it is ad

viseable to carry the successive subdivision of
the subject-matter. The further it is carried,
the more complete is the idea entertained of the
aggregate; but, at the same time, the labour,
both of the operation itself, and of the conception
and retention of the distinctive characters of the

several species, is increased in proportion to the
number of those species. The point where con
tradictory bifurcation should cease, and multi

- may tend to throw discredit upon the system of division which
is there adopted, though it be entirely unconnected with that
system. It might have been better, in framing the above
mentioned table, to have omitted those adjective appellations
derived from the Greek, and usually terminating in scopic;
and, in some instances, even the substantive

appellations

of

several of the branches do not appear to have been necessary;
as, for example, Anoopneumatology, all those which commence
with Parono and Prostheno, &c. The advantages, as well of
the distinctness and all-comprehensiveness of the divisional
operations, as of the introduction of denominations, such as
Somatology, Pneumatology, Posology, Physiurgics, Anorgano
logy, Noology, &c. would have been more readily perceived,
had these denominations been abstracted from all others which,
\

as above, might be considered as superfluities.

117

METHODIZATION.

furcate division (which is, in fact, mere exem
plification) take its place,—as well as that where
even multifurcate division should stop alto
gether,—are considerations which must be de
termined, upon each occasion, with reference to

the particular object in view. They will, of
course, depend upon the comparison of the ad
vantages gained by, with the inconveniences of,
the operation.
The species resulting from the last subdi
visional operation performed upon any subject
matter, is termed, with relation to the superor
*

dinate aggregates, the infima or lowest species.
But this can only be said with reference to the
particular object in view; for, generally speak
ing, as it has already been shewn, there is no
such thing as an infima species, as any one, how
ever low, is susceptible of still further subdi
vision.

To return to Dr. Whately’s Elements. In the
view which this author has taken of the present
subject in the short section" he has devoted to di
vision, he gives threerulesfor division, which have
already been examined. Of the above-mentioned
* See Elements, Ch. II. Part I. § 6. Division, p. 68.

118

C. H. VII.

METHODI ZATION.

five necessary considerations, he mentions but the

source of division with reference to the purpose in
view. I can discover nothing which relates to
methodization in general, nor to any particular
modes of division, except that he generally dis

tinguishes Logical from Physical (or analytical)
division.

As to his explanation of the figurative expres

sion of the “genus containing its species”,”
it might perhaps be considered in a somewhat

different light.

The names genus and species

are not usually given absolutely to the aggre

gate of characteristic properties (as it is im
plied by Dr. Whately), but figuratively to
the aggregate of the individuals possessed of
those properties, and considered with relation to
those properties only. In this sense the genus

(that is, the indefinite number of individuals re
presented by the name of that genus) is formed

of the sum of the several species (that is, of the
several indefinite numbers of individuals repre

sented by the names of those species), and it
therefore may well be said to contain those
species.
-

* See Elements, p. 70.

1 19

CHAPTER VIII.

*

ON PROPOSITIONS*.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. II. Part II. On Propositions, p. 75.)

WE now come to the theory of Ratiocination,
and other subjects intimately connected with it.
On this occasion I must claim additional indul

gence with regard to any errors that may be de
tected in my observations, as the ratiocinative part
of Logic had not yet been entered into by Mr.
Bentham, in the above-mentioned MSS.

I have

on that account felt greater diffidence in exhibit
ing new systems wherever those established by
Logicians appeared to be defective, and have
been induced, on some occasions, to enter into

* The reader must bear in mind that it is Logical propo
sitions only that are here spoken of Mathematicians give
the same name of proposition either to the whole of a mathe
matical argument, or to any particular assertion which they
undertake to prove.

120

C.H.

VIII.

more details than the nature of the subject might,
perhaps, otherwise have warranted.
Before entering upon the theory of deduction

(or syllogistic ratiocination) Dr. Whately devotes
the second part of his synthetical compendium to
the exposition and classification of the various
species of propositions, which are also the sub
ject of the present chapter.
The author defines a proposition—1st, a
“Judgment expressed in words.” 2dly, a
“sentence indicative,” excluding demands and

questions. I should rather say that judgment,
in the sense in which it is here used, is synony

mous to proposition, and that a sentence, not a pro
position, is a “judgment expressed in words.”
A proposition, I have already said (in speaking
of the mental faculties), is the result of an exer
cise of the judicative faculty, which faculty is also

occasionally designated by the same name, judg
ment. A sentence is the enunciation of a propo
sition by visible or audible signs. The two ap
pear to me to be exactly coextensive in sense,
only that in one case ideas are referred to, in the
other case words only. But as ideas cannot be
represented but by words, we are obliged, in

speaking of a proposition, to have before our

PROPOSITIONS.

121

eyes the very same object which we also call a
sentence.

Thence arises the confusion between

these two words; but a careful attention to the

cases where each is made use of, will, I believe,
prove that, in ordinary practice, when the idea is
meant to be understood, the word proposition is

made use of, and when the physical expression of
the idea is referred to, it is by the word sentence.
To borrow an example from the work before
us, let us take the proposition or sentence “an

intemperate man will be sickly,” p.77. Call it
a proposition, and we should say, it consists of

three parts, viz. a subject, an intemperate man,
a predicate sickly, and a copula will be. Speak
of it in the character of a sentence, and you
would say that it is composed of six words, viz.
an article an, a substantive man, two adjectives,

intemperate and sickly, an auxiliary verb will,
and a verb in the infinitive be.

“A sentence,” says Dr. Whately, is the

“genus” of a proposition, and, consequently, more
extensive in signification.

This genus of his

appears to contain three species, the indicative
(that is, the enunciative), the imperative, and the
interrogative. To the first of these alone he ap
plies the term proposition.

122

•

CH.

VIII.

Further on, he divides the same genus “sen
tence,” into two species, the absolute and the
hypothetical; a division which he says is also ap
plicable to propositions, because it is a species of
sentence. For the exposure of the fallaciousness
of this argument, it may be necessary to quote

the author's words, by means of which another
conclusion may be drawn, directly contradictory
to the above-mentioned limitation of the sense of

the word proposition.
“Since the substance (i. e. genus, or material
part) of a proposition is, that it is a sentence; and

since every sentence (whether it be a proposition
or not) may be expressed either absolutely, (as
“Caesar deserved death”), or under an hypothesis
(as “if Caesar was a tyrant he deserved death”),
on this we found the division of propositions ac
cording to their substance; viz. into categorical

and hypothetical.” Elements, p. 76.
In the same manner we might say:
“Since the substance (i. e. genus or material

part) of a proposition is, that it is a sentence; and
since every sentence (whether it be a proposition

or not) may be expressed either affirmatively (as
“Caesar deserved death,”) or under an interroga
tion (as “did Caesar deserve death?”), on this we

PROPOSITIONS.

123

found the division of propositions according to
their substance, viz. into affirmative and interro
gative.” And what then becomes of the exclusion
of questions?
The fallacy of the above arguments may be
more easily detected by reducing them to the
following form":
*

A proposition is a species of sentence.
A sentence may be divided into two species, the absolute
and the hypothetical:
therefore
A proposition may be divided into two species, the abso
lute and the hypothetical.

This fallacy (according to my classification,
Ch. XI of this Outline) belongs to the head of
Obscure expression and to the species which I

have denominated “Fallacies in extent.”
* Or in the simple abstract form hereafter explained. Let

X be a proposition, Y a sentence, A an hypothetical thing, B
an absolute thing, we have
-

tX=pY
pY = p A

and again t X = p Y
pY=pB

therefore

therefore

pA=pX

pB= pX

Here it may be seen that no such conclusion can possibly
be drawn from the premises, as nothing shews that it is the

same part of Y that is referred to in both premises.

124

C.H.

VIII.

If propositions be defined, as above, “the
immediate result of the exercise of the judicative
faculty,” questions would, of course, be included;

as they are, in fact, the enunciation of the state of
our mind with regard to the faculty of desire; of
that species of desire of which the object is the
acquirement of some particular information.
“Did Caesar deserve death?” is an abbreviation

for the expression, “I desire to know whether
Caesar deserved death.”

On account of these abbreviative forms used

on the occasion of questions, commands, &c.
I should say that propositions are either simple or
compound; simple, when the two terms are both
of them names of entities, single or many
worded, common or proper; compound, when
one of the terms is a proposition, and the other,

expressed or implied, some one of our psychical
faculties.

-

Simple propositions are those which are deno

minated by Logicians pure and categorical.
Compound ones include Dr. Whately’s modal
categorical propositions, as well as commands
and questions, the affinity of which to the modal
will readily appear from the analysis of the ab
breviative forms of discourse.
*

-

PROPOSITIONS.

125

Let us take the following examples, extracted
from Dr. Whately’s Elements:
Did Caesar deserve death?

An intemperate man will probably be sickly.
In these instances, the interrogative form in
the former, the word probably in the latter, are
but abbreviations for propositions expressive of
states of our mind, with relation to the proposi
tions “Caesar deserved death,” “An intempe

rate man will be sickly;” and might be thus
translated:

“I am desirous of knowing whether Cae
sar deserved death”—an expression of the state
of my faculty of desire, analogous to the simple
proposition, “I am hungry;” that is, “I am

desirous of food.”
“I am believing in the probability" that an
intemperate man will be sickly”—an expression
of the state of my faculty of belief.

As to the proposition, “Brutus killed Caesar
justly,” it is an abbreviative form for the follow
ing proposition:
The action of Brutus's killing Caesar was a.
just action.
* **,
s I know of no verb or participle expressive of that degree
of belief which answers to probability; an intermediate de
gree between conjecture and certainty.

126

CH, VIII.

A command may, in the same way, be called.
an expression of the state of the faculty of will.
It might be objected, that every proposition
which I have called simple is the expression of
absolute belief with relation to another proposi
tion, and therefore not simple but compound.
True it is, that absolute belief is generally im

plied; but, as it is not intended to be absolutely
expressed, nor even, in many cases, intended to be
implied, I should prefer considering as simple all

propositions in which neither the state of the
speaker's mind is expressed, nor yet the relation
of the proposition with any other.
I have not mentioned hypothetical proposi

tions, which, if they be propositions at all, should
be referred to the class of compound ones.

But

I should only consider as such those which Dr.
Whately subsequently calls conditional proposi
tions, and of which I shall give an analysis, in
speaking of the irregular forms of syllogistic ar
guments, in my next chapter.
As to the other species of propositions which
are included amongst Dr. Whately’s hypotheti
cals, and of which he gives the following exam

ple: “Caesar was either a hero or a villain:”
it appears to me to be nothing more than a simple

proposition, of which “Caesar” is the subject,

127

PROPOSITIONS.

and the aggregate “hero and villain” the pre
dicate.

Simple propositions are next divided by Dr.
Whately into affirmative and negative, universal

and partial (which word I should prefer to par
ticular).

Before I examine into these divisions,

it appears to me necessary to define, more exactly
than he has done, the nature of the several com
ponent parts of a proposition, reduced, for the

purpose of deduction, to its most simple and
regular forms.
Every simple proposition may be reduced to the

expression of a relation between two ideas: thetwo
ideas are represented by the two terms (subject
and predicate): the relation itself by the copula.
The two terms must therefore be expressed
by nouns-substantive, or by substantive locutions;
the copula by the verb-substantive, with or with
out the addition of other words, according to the
nature of the relation expressed.
-

The species of relation here referred to are
those of identity and diversity", and of logical
• The diversity expressed in logical proposition. is always
absolute, not contingent. Resemblance and difference, and other
modifications of diversity mentioned in the classification of
entities, are not taken into consideration in the syllogistic
process. Diversity here signifies non-identity.

128

-

C.H.

VIII.

subalternation. These are the only ones which
are taken into consideration in syllogistic argu

ments; the expression of every other relation
whatsoever being included in the substantive
names of the terms".

* There is another species of relation,—or rather a modifi
cation of the relation of identity,+of which the expression is
commonly included in the copula. This is that of time; but

this relation is not taken into consideration in the process of
logical deduction. The only precautions to be taken against
being led into error by any modifications of time are, either that
the identity be the same, in respect of time, in all the proposi
tions which enter into a syllogism, or that that of the major
premiss be general and indefinite; in which case, that of the
conclusion must be the same as that of the minor premiss.
For these reasons, the copula is commonly used in the present
tense, as referring generally to any indefinite portion of time,
or particularly to one point, which must always be the same
in all the propositions of a syllogism. If the copulae of all
the propositions be in the past or the future tenses, no
logical deduction can be made, unless the exact time be fixed
by some such expressions as “always,” “at such a time,’
during such an operation,” &c.
go.

Thus, in the syllogism, “A robber is a man pernicious to
society; every man pernicious to society is a man deserving
punishment; therefore, a robber is a man deserving punish

ment,”—the copulae of all three propositions are in the pre
sent tense, as expressive of no particular portion of time. If
we say, “Caesar nas a tyrant; tyrants are men deserving

PRO POSITIONS.

129

These terms may be either both of them
individual, or one of them individual and the

other collective, or both of them collective.
I. If both terms are individual, the relation
of identity and diversity is the only one that can
be expressed, as logical subalternation refers
only to collective entities. Identity is expressed

by the copula is, diversity by the copula is not;
as, for example, “Giovanni is John,” “John is

not Peter.” An affirmative proposition is that
which expresses identity; a negative one, that
which expresses diversity.

II. A common name (that is, the name of
a collective entity) has already been defined “a
name given to the aggregate of an indefinite
number of individuals.”

From this definition

death; therefore, Caesar nas a man deserving death,”—the
minor premiss is in the past time; and, as the major is in the
present indefinite, the conclusion is in the same past time as
the minor premiss. But, if we say, “Caesar nas a tyrant,”

“Tyrants will be men deserving death,” we cannot, syllogisti
cally, deduce any conclusion from these premises, in which the
two copulae express two different portions of time; nor yet
could we draw any logical conclusion, if the two propositions
were “Caesar nas a tyrant,” “Tyrants nere men deserving
death,” unless some words were added to indicate that
they both refer to the same portion of past time.
K

130

2

CH. VIII.

may be deduced the relations which a collective
entity can bear to another collective entity, or
to an individual; relations which have been
termed relations of subalternation.

There cannot exist any identity between an

individual and a collective entity; for the one is
always definite in number, the other never is so;
but there may or there may not be identity

between the individual entity in question and
some one of the individuals represented by the
collective entity. The intimation that it is some
one individual contained in the collective aggre
gate, and not the whole aggregate that is spoken
of, is conveyed, in Latin, by the addition of the

word aliquis to the name of that aggregate; as,
for example, “Aliquis homo est Johannes.” In
English the same relation is differently expressed,
according to whether the individual is placed first
or last in the proposition. In the former case,
the word a is prefixed to the common name; as,
for example, “John is a man.” In the latter
case, it can only be done by prefixing some such
many-worded expression as some one; for exam
ple, “Some one man is John.”

III. In the case where both terms of a propo
sition are collective entities, identity and diversity
may have place:
*
-

131

PROPOSITIONS.

1. Between any individual referred to by one
term, and any individual referred to by the other.

Ex. The identity between equiangular and equi
lateral triangles.

.

.

.

2. Between any individual referred to by one
term, and any one of a part only of the individu

als referred to by the other. Ex. The identity
between men and animals.

3. Between any one of a part only of the

individuals referred to by the one, and any one of
a part only of the individuals referred to by the
other term. Ex. The identity between quadru
peds and swimming animals. . .

Wherever a term is intended to be applied to
any individual referred to by a common name,
that term is called universal.

Wherever it is

intended to be applied to any one of a part only

of such individuals, the term is called partial.
~

In affirmative propositions, universality is
ascribed, to the first term by the prefixing to the

common name the words every or any, to the
second term by the word

any:

but, in the latter

case, it seems necessary to express identity more

distinctly than by the simple copula is; by some
such expression as is the same as. In the same
propositions, partiality is ascribed to the first
R 2

132

C.H.

VIII.

term by the words some or some one (in Latin,
aliquis); to the last term by the same words
when the first term is partial; by the word a
when the first is universal.

Ex.

Every horse (universal) is a quadruped (par
tial).
Some quadrupeds (partial) are some" flying
animals (partial).
Every equiangular triangle (universal) is the
same as any equilateral triangle (universal).

In negative propositions, universality is
ascribed in the same manner; as also partiality
to the first term; but, in the case of the first
term being universal, the negative sign (in the
English language) must be combined with the
sign of extent of the second, in order to avoid
ambiguity. Ex. gr.

Every horse (universal) is no cow (partial or
universal).

Some quadrupeds (partial) are not flying ani
mals (partial).

* The idea is usually conveyed by putting the term
in the plural, without any prefix; but then partiality is rather
implied than expressed; and, on some occasions, for the pur

pose of logical accuracy, it may be found necessary to express,
as above, the prefix some.

133 -

PROPOSITIONS.

Every equiangular triangle (universal) is the
same as no isosceles triangle (universal or partial).
If we were to say, Every horse is not a cow, it
might also imply that some horses are cows.
Every individual entity being incapable of
logical division, and therefore of being expressed

partially, is logically considered as an universal
term.

Simple propositions, considered in regard
to the above relations, may therefore be either
affirmative or negative; and each term may be
either universal or partial. These propositions
are therefore reducible to the eight following
forms, in which, in order to abstract every idea

not connected with the substance of each species,
I have expressed the two terms by the letters X
and Y, their identity by the mathematical sign =,

diversity by the sign II, universality by the words
in toto, and partiality by the words ex parte; or,
for the sake of still farther brevity, by

prefixing

the letters t and p, as signs of universality and
partiality.

These forms are,

1. X in toto = Y ex parte
2. X in toto Il Y ex parte

or tx = py

3.

X in toto = Y in toto

or t X = t Y

4.

X in toto

or t X || t Y

||

Y in toto

or t X | p Y

134
5.
6.
7.
8.

C.H.

X
X
X
X

exparte =
exparte ||
exparte =
exparte ||

Y
Y
Y
Y

VIII.

ex parte
ex parte
in toto
in toto

or
or
or
or

pX
pX
pX
pX

=
|
=
||

pY
pY
tY
tY

But, as in all equations, it matters not which
member is expressed first, the two last of these
forms are identical with the two first, and may
therefore be omitted; it being more common, as
well as more convenient, to express the universal
term before the partial one. The second form
may also be suppressed, as the fourth expresses
the same idea in a manner more convenient for

the deductive process.

For, if all the individuals

represented by X be different from any portion of
those represented by Y, they must be different
from all of those represented by Y.
We shall therefore reduce these forms to five.

1.

X in toto

= Y in toto

2. X in toto = Y ex parte
in toto or

•

3.

X in toto

or t X =

|| Y

}:

tY

or t X = p Y
t

or t X ||

pY

4. X ex parte = Y ex parte

or p X = p Y

5. X ex parte || Y ex parte

or p X | p Y

Logicians in general make no mention of the
first form, which they consider as useless, and
they say that the predicate (or second term of

PROPOSITIONS.

135

a proposition) is never distributed * (that is, uni
versal).

I should think however, that this

assertion can scarcely be logical. Many fallacies
arise from the considering terms as synonymous
which are not so in reality; and it may be
found as advantageous to reduce perfect identity
to a logical form; as partial identity, or perfect or
partial diversity.

The other four of the above forms of propo
sitions are usually designated by the four letters,

A, E, I, and O, and are called universal or partial,
according to the extent of the first term, which
rule is expressed by the following verses.
Asserit A, negat E, sed universaliter ambae.
Asserit I, negat O, sed particulariter ambo.

But as the dependence of propositions upon
one another, when reduced to the above forms, will

always be self-evident, I should consider that the
science would be much more simple, and at the
same time less liable to fallacy, if the whole system
framed by means of the changes rung upon

these four letters were entirely omitted. I shall
not therefore enter into any further details on
* Elements, p. 42.

136

CH. VIII.

the subject, but proceed to examine into the

other species of propositions mentioned by Dr.
Whately.

-

I perfectly agree with him that indefinite pro
positions should not be considered as a class in

respect of quantity; but I should go still farther,
and say that they are neither more nor less than
a species of ambiguous propositions; and if we
do not know, in any other manner, the exact
sense in which an indefinite must be construed,

that proposition in itself cannot clear up the am
biguity.
As to the division of the matter of propositions
into necessary, impossible, and contingent, it
might be as well to suppress it altogether, both
as useless and, in the present instance, ill ex
pressed. By employing these words in a sense
so different from that which is usually attached to
them, an appearance of something very learned
and intricate is given to two propositions or rules,
-

which we are told to bear in mind, but which really
convey no information at all; and as to any other

practical result that may be afforded by this

division of propositions, I cannot find any exem
plification of it in the work before me.

PROPOSITIONS.

137

The two above-mentioned rules are as fol
lows:

“In necessary matter all affirmatives are
true and negatives false; in impossible matter,

vice versa; in contingent matter, all universals
false, and particulars true.” p. 81.
“In necessary and in impossible matter, an
indefinite is understood as an universal.... in

contingent matter, (i. e. where the terms partly
(i.e. sometimes) agree and partly not) an indefi
nite is understood as a particular.” pp. 78, 79.
These rules may be thus translated into plain
English, by the application of- the author’s
own definitions to the technical terms he makes
use of.

“When two terms of a proposition agree essen
tially and invariably", the assertion that they do
agreet is a true one; and the assertion that they
disagreet is a false one; when the two terms
* “Necessary matter of a proposition—is the essential or
invariable agreement of its terms.” Elements, Index, p. 337.
t “Affirmative—denotes the quality of a proposition which

asserts the agreement of the predicate with the subject.” Id.
p. 833.

-

# “Negative categorical proposition—is one which asserts
the disagreement of its term.”

Elements, Index, p. 337.

138

C.H. VIII.

altogether disagree.*, vice versa. When one term
agrees only partially t with the other, the asser

tion that it agrees wholly: with that other, is a
false one, and the assertion that it agrees par

tiallys with that other is a true one.”
“When it is not expressed whether it be
wholly or partially, that two terms agree or disa
gree, you are to understand these propositions
according to their meaning. If it is meant that
they should be universal, you are to understand
them so, if it is meant that they should be partial,
you are to understand them as such.”
These rules might thus be still further sim
plified, “What is true, is true; and what is false
is false;” and “If the meaning of a proposition
is not expressed, you must guess at it.” Is it
worth while, for the sake of these simple truisms,
to perplex the learner’s mind with the above ab
* “Impossible—the matter of a proposition is so called
when the terms altogether disagree.” Id. p. 336.
t “Contingent—the matter of a proposition is so called
when the terms of it in part agree, and in part disagree.”
Id. p. 334.
# “Universal Proposition—is one whose predicate is
affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject.” Id. p. 340.
§ “Particular Proposition—is one in which the predicate

is affirmed or denied of some part only of the subject.” Id.
p. 338.

PROPOSITIONS.-

139

struse and complicated rules and unusual defini
tions?”

-

Dr. Whately speaks next of singular propo
sitions,—those whose subject is a proper name

(for a common name with a singular sign is
nothing but a proper name), and which, as I
have already said, may, logically speaking, be
reckoned as universal.

Yet, it is here asserted

that “some may fairly be reckoned as particu

lar (that is partial); and in support of this asser
tion, the three following examples are given:
“Caesar was not wholly a tyrant,” “this man is

occasionally intemperate,” and “ non omnis
moriar.” In the first of these examples, the
idea that the term Caesar was a partial term, was
probably suggested by the apparent resemblance

between the words whole and wholly; but this
resemblance is physical, not logical. The above
proposition does not mean that a part of Caesar
was a tyrant and that a part was not, but that
Caesar was sometimes (or in some of his actions)

a tyrant, and sometimes not.

Not wholly in this
proposition, like occasionally in the next, are

expressive of modifications in time, a species of
relation totally unconnected with those of logical
subalternation, which the words universal and

140

C.H.

VIII.

particular or partial refer to, on the present
occasion.

As to the third example, “non omnis

moriar,” the non omnis, forms logically one en

tire individual, viz. my soul or the immortal
part of me, -in the same manner as, in the pro
position “my head aches,” the term “my
head,” though it be but a part of “me,” forms,
logically, one entire individual.

If my reduction of propositions to the above
mentioned five formulae, be adopted, the several
rules of distribution, given in page 80 of the
“Elements,” become useless.

The subject-matter of the two remaining sec
tions of this Part II, viz. the dependence of pro

propositions one upon another, may be more
properly referred to the next chapter. I shall
now, therefore, close my observations on propo
sitions, taken singly, by the following synoptical

table of their several species, as characterized
and classed for the purpose of deductive argu
ment.

*

PROPOSITIONS.

either
affirmative as
either
universal

l negative as

either
A

Or

141

ji, tx=tv.
l2.tx =p Y
3.t X || £y

simple

Propo-

either

sition is

Or

partial

affirmative as 4. p X=p'Y
Or

negative as

5. p X || p Y

or

compound, as I ask, command, hope, fear, &c.
that (this or that proposition t).
* In the three first of these species of propositions, if X be
an individual, the proposition is singular; if X be a collective
entity, the proposition is general.
The first proposition may be said to be expressive of ab
solute identity; the third, of absolute diversity; Nos. 2, 4, .
and 5, of partial identity and diversity.

t If these propositions were completed by a substantive
term,not by a proposition, they would be simple, not com
pound. Thus, for ex. “I fear death,” is a simple propo
sition, which may be thus reduced to its syllogistic form, “I
am a person-fearing-death.” But “Come here” is a com
pound proposition, which may be thus paraphrased, “I com
mand that you come here.” The latter part of this expres

sion being an entire proposition, not a substantive locution.

142

CHAPTER IX.

DEDUCTION,
OR SYLLOGISTIC RATIOCINATION.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. II. Part III. Of Arguments, p. 86.)

“THE third operation of the mind,” says
Dr. Whately, “viz. reasoning, (or discourse)
expressed in words, is argument.” p. 86. “An
argument is an expression in which, from some

thing laid down and granted as true (i. e. the Pre
mises) something else (i. e. the Conclusion)
beyond this must be admitted to be true, aS
following necessarily (or resulting) from the
other.” p. 88.

“An argument stated at full length, and in
its regular form, is called a syllogism” (p. 86.):
“a syllogism” is “an argument so expressed,
that the conclusiveness of it is manifest from the

mere force of the expression, i. e. without con

CH. 1x.

DEDUCTION.

143

sidering the meaning of the terms".” p. 88.
From these definitions, it is evident that the words
reasoning, discourse, and argument are not only
confined to the deductive process, but that they
only differ from single syllogisms by the loose and
irregular mode of expression.
The various senses attached to the word rea

soning have been spoken of in a former chapter of
the present Outline; I have also adverted to the

uselessness and inconvenience of considering the

word discourse as a synonym to reasoning. It is
only upon these two occasions (pp. 54 and 86)
that Dr. Whately preserves this Aristotelian ap
plication of the word; for, in the rest of his
work, he employs it in its ordinary English sense;
as, for instance, in p. 87, “as is often done
*>

in common discourse,” a few lines after having
said, “Discourse expressed in words is argu
ment.”

As to the words argument and syllogism,
which are more particularly the subject of the
• In the Elements, this definition, with that of an argu
ment, are combined in the form of an argument of which one
of the premises is, “since Logic is nholly concerned in the

use of Languages.” If this proposition had been entirely
free from obscurity and ambiguity, the reader might have had
at once the benefit of an example and a definition.

144

CH. IX.

above definitions, the distinction which Dr.
Whately here establishes between them is, that

the one, the argument, may be expressed in any
words whatever; the other, the syllogism, is

an argument reduced to a certain regular form of
expression. Thus the sense of the word argument
is much further restricted than he himself pro
bably intended; for it cannot include the Sorites,
for instance, which he afterwards classes amongst
“all arguments besides pure and categorical syl
logisms.”

It might be more convenient, however, to
make use of this word argument in its more ordi
nary and far more extended sense; applying it to

any ratiocinative operation, however complicated.
The leading definitions which relate to the pre

sentsubject might then be expressed as follows:
Every process of ratiocination, when ex
pressed in language, is an argument.

A syllogism is a name given to every portion of
an argument, which, without altering the sense,
is reduced to that simple and regular form in
which the absolute truth of a simple proposition
follows necessarily from the exhibition of one
or two other simple propositions, also regarded as
absolutely true.

DEDUCTION.

145

Every argument which is reducible to one or

more syllogisms is a syllogistic argument. When
ever it contains doubtful propositions, or when
the absolute truth of one proposition does not
follow from the exhibition of the others, it is
called an inductive argument.
“Every argument consists of two parts; that

which is proved; and that by means of which it is
proved; the former is called, before it is proved,
the question; when proved, the conclusion (or in
ference"); that which is used to prove it, if stated
last (as is often done in common discourse), is
called the reason, and is introduced by “because,”

or some other causal conjunction (e.g. “Caesar
deserved death, because he was a tyrant, and

all tyrants deserve death’). If the conclusion be
stated last (which is the strict logical form, to
which all reasoning may be reduced), then that
which is employed to prove it is called the pre
mises; and the conclusion is then introduced by
some illative conjunction, as ‘therefore: e.g.
“All tyrants deserve death;
Caesar was a tyrant;
therefore,

He deserved death.’” Elements, pp. 86, 87.
* See hereafter, Ch. XI, on Induction, the distinction be
tween inference and proof, &c.
L

146

CH.

IX.

The theory of Logic, in as far as it relates to
deduction, consists in the reducing syllogistic ar
guments to the simple and regular form of syllo
gisms. This operation is generally considered as
the only immediate object and practical result
of the whole study of Logic: to this it is that Dr.
Whately, through the whole course of his work,
labours to restrict the field of that branch of art
and-science; and it is the apparent futility of this
operation, as compared with the abstruse and

complicated system invented by Aristotle for the
effecting the purpose, that has brought so much
discredit upon the name, as well as upon the

study, of Logic in general.
I need not to repeat, upon this occasion, what
I have so frequently said of the greater extension

which I have given to the field of the science;
but I must devote a few words to the refutation of

the alleged inutility of the operation, which forms
the subject-matter of the present chapter.

Few persons would probably consider the
pursuit of so difficult a science as satisfactory,
if convinced that it were of no other use than as
an exercise to the mind; though, in the established

course of education, much time and labour be
devoted to no better purpose. This exercise

-

DEDUCTio N.

147

may be an advantage, attending upon this study,
as well as upon any other; but it cannot be

one of great weight in the scale of comparison of
the various human sciences. If I had thought
the importance of the theory of deduction had
been derived from no other source, if I had even

attached so much weight to such a consideration
as appears to have been done by Dr. Whately", I
might perhaps have continued to follow Aristotle's
ingenious contrivances so well suited for that pur

pose. But the exercise required of the mental
faculties, in the pursuit of science in general, is
already so great, that the object of the instructor
must be rather to diminish that which is neces

sary, than to add to that which is otherwise use

less. The utility therefore of the theory of
deduction can only, on the present occasion,
be derived from the means it affords for detecting
* * Even

supposing that no practical improvement in ar

gumentation resulted from the study of Logic, it would not

by any means follow that it is unworthy of attention. The
pursuit of knowledge on curious and interesting subjects, for
its own sake, is usually reckoned no misemployment of time,

and is considered as, incidentally, if not directly, useful to the
individual, by the exercise thus afforded to the mental facul
ties.” Elements, Preface, p. xi.
L 2

T48

CH. IX. *

fallacies. Many are the occasions when an argu
ment, by its lengthy and complicated form, ex
hibits apparent proof, and thereby produces con

viction of a question which may be replete with
error; when, if the argument were strictly ana
lyzed, and if, at every step the proof were reduced
to its simplest form, the various obscurities, ambi

guities, and other devices made use of by the
artful argumentator, would be detected, and the
delusions he had created would at once disappear.
This effect of the reduction of argument may
have already been exemplified in the course of the

preceding pages, upon one or two occasions
where I have sought to point out the errors of some
of Dr. Whately’s arguments; and the general
theory of the detection of fallacies will be more

particularly the subject-matter of a future chap

ter. For the present, having stated this as the
general object of the theory of deduction, I must
now proceed to the details of that theory, and
first to the analysis of a syllogism when reduced

to its simplest form.

-

.

. .

. ..."

A syllogism consists of one or two simple

propositions called premises, and of the conclu
sion, consisting in another simple proposition,
The premises are stated first, and are connected

149

DEDUCTION.

with the conclusion by means of the illative con

junction therefore.…The conclusion is said to be
proved by or deduced from the premises. The
exhibition of the premises from which a conclu

sion is deduced is said to be the proof of that
conclusion.

-

These several propositions must, each of
them, be reduced to some one of the five simple
forms which are exhibited in the preceding Chap
ter VIII; that is, they must consist of “two sub
stantive terms with their respective signs of ex
tent, and of a copula, expressive of the identity
or diversity of those terms.”
When there is but one premiss, the syllogism
may be termed a conversive syllogism. In this

case the terms of the conclusion are the same
as those of the premiss: the difference consists in
their transposition, as, for ex.
Some boasters are cowards, or
therefore,
Some cowards are boasters *

* ******

p X = p Y,
therefore,

p Y = p X,

*

‘Forthebetter comparison of my system with Dr.Whately's,
I have every where selected my examples of syllogisms from
his Elements. I have also added the simple abstract forms to

which they are reducible, expressing always the mean term

150

CH,

I X.

In transposing the termis, care must be taken
not to change their sign of extent; and it is in
order to avoid this defect that the extent should

always be distinctly expressed. If left to be
understood, it is apt to be mistaken, and thereby
to produce erroneous deduction; as, for ex.
it might appear that “if cowards are men,
men must be cowards;” but if the understood

signs of extent be expressed, this argument stands
thus:

-

All cowards are some men, or t X = p Y,
therefore,

All men are some cowards,

therefore,

t Y = p X.

which is evidently no syllogism. .
It might be objected that this rule has not
been observed in the following syllogisms, where.

a term which is partial in the premiss is univer
sal in the conclusion, viz.
No virtuous man is a rebel, or t X || p Y,
therefore,

No rebel is a virtuous man.

• therefore,

t Y || p X.

But it has already been proved that, in a simple
logical proposition, “where two terms are sepa
by the letter Y, the extremes by the letters X and Z, X

being the minor, Z the major, wherever this distinction has
place.

151

D EDUCTION.

rated by the sign of diversity, if the one be uni
versal, the sense is the same whether the other
be universal or partial.” The first terms being
universal in both these propositions, we may
consider the last terms as universal also ; in which

case we have the self-evident syllogism: t X ||t Y,
therefore t Y II t X.
This species of syllogism is, by Logicians,
termed conversion, and is treated of by Dr.
-

-

Whately under the head of Propositions, (Ch. II.
Part II. § 4). Yet, from his own definition, as
compared with that which he gives of an argu
ment, it cannot but be considered as a species of

argument. “No conversion,” he says, p. 83,
“is employed for any logical purpose, unless it

be illative, i. e. when the truth of the converse
follows from the truth of the exposita, (or propo
sition given.)” The only difference between
this definition of conversion and that of argu
ment, p. 88, is, that in the former case the

premiss is called the exposita, and the conclusion
the converse.

-

The exposition of what constitutes illative

conversion, and conversion by limitation or per
accidens, which occupies the whole of p. 84, is so
replete with technical phraseology, as to render

152

CH. IX.

itdifficult to discover itsreal object, which appears,
however, to be no other than the following simple:
rule, that “in transposing the terms, their respec
tive signs of extent must not be changed.” " ":

Conversion by negation, or contraposition
(p. 85), is no syllogism, but merely one step
taken in the reduction of a proposition to its
simple form; it is merely the substitution of an
affirmative instead of two negatives, or vice versä,
as, for ex. “every man is for “no man is not.”
If this be considered a conversion, we may say
that the whole operation of reduction of argu

ments is a series of conversions; and in this case
every syllogism also must be considered as a step
in the process of reduction. But this is not the
sense which I should think it most convenient to

attribute to these words on the present occasion.
The reduction of an argument, I should say, is
the successive substitution of strictly synonymous
locutions, till each proposition be reduced to some
one of the five simple logical forms. The syllo

gism (including the conversive syllogism) is the
* *
deduction of one such proposition from one or
•

-

from two others.

•

, ,-

*

*

.

When a syllogism consists of three proposi
tions, there are two premises and a conclusion. .

DEDUCTION.

153

- “. Every syllogism has three, and only three
terms, viz., the two terms of the conclusion” one

of which is contained in each of the premises,
and which are called the two extremes; and the

mean" term, which is the other term of each of

the premises, as, for ex. t X = p Y, t Y = p Z,

therefore t X = p Z.
Where the mean term is universal in one

premiss and partial in the other, the former
premiss is called the major premiss; the latter,
the minor premiss; and the two extremes are
also termed major and minor, according to the
premiss in which they are placed. Thus, in the
foregoing example, “t X = p Y” is the minor
premiss, “t Y = p Z” is the major premiss, X.
the minor term, Z the major term, and Y, the
H16all.

-

Logicians usually say that all syllogisms
have a major and minor premiss; but in the fol
lowing example:
*
* *
*

* I have preferred the word mean to that of middle, as being

more familiar in an analogous sense in mathematical ratios,
as well as for the sake of avoiding such expressions as am
biguous middle, undistributed middle, which occur so frequently
in Dr. Whately's Elements.

154

CH.

All wits are dreaded,

IX.

Or

t Y = p X,

All wits are admired,

t Y = p Z,

therefore,

therefore,

Some who are admired are dreaded. p Z = p X.

which is the major and which the minor pre
miss P

-

Observe, that in every syllogism the terms
must be so arranged that, where their extent is
different, the universal is mentioned first, the
partial last.
The five species of simple propositions, as
given in the table at the end of my last chapter,
may be combined three by three in a variety of
ways by transposing the terms, and by changing
the signs of extent, or those of identity or diver
sity. Nineteen of these combinations have been
separately designated by Logicians by a set of
appellations thus collected into five Latin verses:
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris,
Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroko secundae.

Tertia Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton,
Bokardo, Feriso, habet. Quarta insuper addit
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison.

and a variety of rules, more or less complicated
*

or incomprehensible, have been invented, to
shew in what cases each of these combinations

-

155

DEDUCTION.

produces a legitimate syllogism. Dr. Whately
has in some measure simplified this system, and
rendered it more intelligible to the student; still
however preserving the greaterpart of it. But,
if every legitimate syllogism must, by the defini
tion of the word, be self-evident without the help
of these rules, might we not suppress altogether
a system which requires so much labour to un
derstand it, so much strain on the memory to keep
it in mind, and which, after all, rather takes away
from, than adds to, this self-evidence P Might
not we substitute a few plain and simple axioms,
the truth of which cannot be denied, and which

may be found to contain, in general terms,

every

principle upon which a syllogistic conclusion
can be founded ? Such may, perhaps, be found

the four following:

-

-

1. Things which are equal to the same, are
equal to one another.
2. When of two things, one only is equal to
a third, and the other is not equal to that third,

these two things are not equal to one another.
3. Parts of a part are parts of the whole of

that part (that is, of the whole of which that
part is a part).
4. When the whole of a class is said to be

156

. . . .CH. IX. *

equal to, or different from, the whole or any
part of another class, it is meant that every indi
vidual referred to by the first class, is the same
as, or different from, any individual referred to
by such whole or part of such other class.
The first two of these four axioms are given

by Dr. Whately as “axioms or canons, by which
‘the validity” of all pure categorical syllogisms.
are to be proved,”—in the following words:
1. “If two terms agree with one and the same
third, they agree with each other.” 2. “If one
term agrees, and another disagrees with one and
the same third, these two disagree with each
other.”

-

But these two axioms, thus expressed, are only
applicable to those syllogisms in which the mean
term is universal in both premises; for it is

then only that the two extremes are precisely
equal to the same mean. Take, for instance,
the syllogism “Every X is a Y, every Y is a Z,

therefore, every X is Z.” If we prove it by the
first of the above axioms, and say, that the two
terms X and Z agree both with the term Y,
therefore they agree with one another, and do

not take into account the signs of extent, we
should then be obliged to admit the truth of the

DED UCTION.

157

syllogism—an X is a Y, a Z is a Y, therefore an
X is a Z, which is evidently false, though strictly
conformable to Dr. Whately’s canons, of which
he says “no categorical syllogism can be faulty,
which does not violate these canons.”

-

. . It is true that, in page 92, he attempts to
explain away this difficulty by saying that, in
the case of the mean term being universal in one
premiss and partial in the other, “if one extreme

has been compared to a part of the middle term,
and another to the whole of it, they must have

been both compared to the same.” But what is
meant by the word same? to what substantive is
this adjective understood to be applied? Cer
tainly not to the same substantive, which is under
stood in the axiom.

There it is a term.

Here it

cannot but be “some particular portion of the
collective entity designated by the mean term”—

which is a very different thing. There he says,
“When two terms agree with the same third”

(understand term).

Here he says, “if one ex

treme be compared to a part of the middle term,
and another to the whole of it, they must have
been compared to the same” (understand part of

the middle term).
It is in order to obviate all these difficulties of

158

CH. IX.

expression with regard to the concordance and
disagreement of collective entities, that I have
thought it necessary to modify the expression
of Dr. Whately’s two axioms, and to add two
others, the last of which may perhaps be consi

dered rather as an explanation of the relations of
collective entities to one another, than, strictly
speaking, as an axiom.
In order to show the all-comprehensiveness of
these rules or axioms, in as far as they relate
to syllogisms, it might not appear irrelevant, if I
were to exemplify them in the case of some of the
-

syllogisms given by Dr. Whately in his $4 and 5,
as examples of the “Barbara” forms. I shall,
therefore, after quoting each of these syllogisms
in the form in which it is exhibited in the Ele

ments, reduce it to the simple forms above de
seribed, subjoining, on each occasion, the simple
general expressions of the several propositions of
which it is composed.
1. Barbara. “He who possesses prudence,
possesses all virtue; He who possesses one virtue,
-

must possess prudence; therefore, He who pos
sesses one, possesses all".”

p. 99.

* This example appears to be rather unfortunately chosen,
as, by the nature of the premises, prudence is assumed to be

159

DE DUCTION.

Every man-possessing-prudence
is a
man-possessing-all-virtue;
s

or t Y = p Z

Every man-possessing-one-virtue is a

tX = pY

-

man-possesing-prudence;
therefore,

therefore,

Every man-possessing-one-virtue is a
man-possessing-all-virtue.
-

-

tX = pZ

-

2. Darapti.

“Allwits are dreaded; Allwits

are admired; therefore, Some who are admired

are dreaded.”

p. 101.

Every wit is a person-admired;
Every wit is a person-dreaded;

or

therefore,

therefore,

Some persons-admired are persons-dreaded.

3. Darii.

t Y = pK
tY = pZ
pZ = pX

“All wits are dreaded; Some who

are admired are wits; therefore, Some who are

admired are dreaded.”

p. 102.

Every wit is a person-dreaded;

Some persons-admired are wits;
therefore,

Some persons-admired are persons-dreaded.

or t Y = p Z
p X = pY
therefore,

pX = pZ

4. Camestres. “All true philosophers ac
count virtue a good in itself; The advocates of

pleasure do not account virtue a good in itself;
therefore, They are not true philosophers.” p.
102.

perfectly synonymous to virtue, which is seldom or never the
case, at least in the English language.

CH. Ix.

160

"}

Every true-philosopher is a
counting-virtue-a-good-in-itself;

Every advocate-of-pleasure is no person-

-

-

t Z || p
||t Y

accounting-virtue-a-good-in-itself;
-

or t X = p Y

-

therefore,

therefore,

Every advocate-of-pleasure is no

*}

t X ||

"Z

philosopher.

5. Baroko. “Every true patriot is a friend
to religion; Some great statesmen are not friends
to religion; therefore, Some great statesmen are
not true patriots.” p. 102.
Every true-patriot is a friend-to-religion; or t X = p Y

Some great-statesmen are no friends-toreligion;

p Z || 'Y
t

therefore,

therefore,

Some great-statesmen are no true-pa-Q
triots.

!

6. Bokardo.

p Z |||

p
t

x

“Some slaves are not discon

tented; All slaves are wronged; therefore, Some
who are wronged are not discontented.” p. 103.
Some slaves are no discontented-persons; or p Y ||
All slaves are wronged-persons;

RZ

tY = pX

therefore,

- therefore,

Some wronged-persons are no discontented-persons.

}

p7

px II # Z

These examples will probably suffice to show
the uselessness of thus distinguishing syllogisms

into so many moods and figures, as these “Bar

bara” species are called. The operation of re
*

161

DEDUCTION.

duction, which is the same in all cases, is all that

is necessary; as, when thus reduced, all syllo
gisms are equally self-evident. It might be ob
jected, that so complete a reduction is a compli

cated and tedious operation; but is not this ope
ration equally necessary in the “Barbara” sys

tem? Dr. Whately, it is true, does not always
exhibit his syllogisms in this reduced state; his

terms are sometimesin the verbal form (being.com
bined with the copula), sometimes in the adjective,
&c.; but does he not suppose them to be men
tally reduced to the substantive form?

Is not

this regularity of form the character he gives of
a syllogism? Thus, when he has given as a
premiss, “All wits are admired,” and has occa
sion to introduce the same term “admired” into

the conclusion, he is obliged to express it sub
stantively, transforming it to “Some who are
admired,” and leaving to his readers the task

of verifying the exact identity of the two terms.
The syllogism would have been much clearer,
and certainly not more complicated, if so much

so, if this term had been, from the first, ex
pressed substantively.
As to the six or seven rules for trying syllo
-

gisms, the theory of moods and figures, the
M

162

CH.

IX.

ostensive reduction, the reductio ad impossibile,
and the indications conveyed by the consonants
employed in the “Barbara” verses,—contained
in sections 2 to 7 of this part of Dr. Whately’s
Elements, as well as the theory of opposition ex

plained in § 3 of Part II,-all these are, no
doubt, very ingenious contrivances, and indicate
great powers of mind on the part of the Grecian
Philosopher who invented them. But, if mere
reduction, with the help of the above four
axioms, be found to answer the purpose, and

to be sufficiently clear and comprehensible, this
whole Aristotelian system might henceforth be

very properly consigned to oblivion, as tending
rather to conceal than to expose fallacies, to im

pede, rather than to assist, fair intellectual argu
ment.

There only remains now therefore to

examine into the mode of reduction of the various

irregular arguments which are treated of in the
Supplement to Part III of Dr. Whately’s Synthe
tical Compendium.
Arguments, in common discourse, are fre

quently exhibited at full length ; that is to
say, that the premises, as well as the conclusion,
are all expressed: in this case, all that remains to

be done for their reduction is to place the several

DEDUCTION.

*

*

163

propositions in their proper order, and to reduce
these propositions themselves to their respective
simple forms.
The subject of a proposition is, in the English

language", usually expressed substantively, and
is what is called the nominative of a sentence;
the infinitivef of a verb being also included
amongst substantive expressions. In this case,
the only difficulty is in the sign of extent, which
in common discourse is frequently omitted, but
which, in a logical argument, must be distinctly
exhibited, in order to prevent its being misunder
stood.

The predicate of a proposition is frequently
expressed by adjectives, verbs, or other parts

of speech, complicated in sense, though abridged
in form.

The adjective, being expressive of a charac

teristic property of the subject, must be reduced
to the substantive form by the addition of the
superordinate genus of the subject, with the sign
* In Latin, the expression called ablative absolute is an en
tire proposition, of which the substantive is the subject, the
adjective or participle the predicate, and the ablative form im

plies the copula, which is understood.
t See Whately's Elements, p. 58.
M 2

164

CH. IX.

' of partiality. Thus, in the proposition “Crassus
is rich,” the adjective predicate rich may be
transformed into the equivalent substantive ex
pression a rich man by the addition of man;

the name of a superordinate genus of Crassus,
with the sign of partiality a.
The verb is generally a combination of the
copula with the whole or part of the predicate.

By substituting the corresponding participle with
the ordinary copula, the predicate is separated,
and converted to the adjective form, from whence

it is reducible to the substantive by the foregoing
rule; as, for example, “He preaches,” reduced

first to “He is preaching,” and lastly to “He
is a man-preaching;” “He possesses virtue” to

“He is a man-possessing-virtue.”
As a verb generally expresses some modifica
tion of time, particular attention must be paid, in
this reduction, not to alter the sense in this re

spect. Thus, if the proposition “He spoke
to me” were to be reduced to “He was speaking
to me,” the particular modification of time
would be altered, unless it were limited by some

such expression as “at that particular time,
&c".”

* See above, note, p. 128.

DEDUCTION.

165

Wherever negatives occur in a proposition,
they must be reduced to the single sign of nega
tion attached to the copula, or else they must be
included in the substantive term, not attached to

it; for, in that case, they would render it adjec
tive. Thus, in the proposition “Plants are not
animials,” not must be considered as attached to
the copula; for, if we were, by what is called
conversio per accidens (see Elements, p. 84),
to attach the not to animals, the term not-animals

becomes adjective, the superordinate genus must
be added, and the proposition thus reduced be
comes “Every plant is a being-not-animal.”
All negative propositions might thus be reduced
to affirmatives; but it appears to be a useless

complication. Where two negatives, however,
occur in a proposition, the corresponding affirma

tive should be substituted; as “No man is not an
animal,” reduced to “Every man is an animal.”
With regard to such arguments as are not, in
common discourse, expressed at full length,
that is to say, those of which one or more propo
sitions are omitted, or combined with others,

in the several syllogisms of which these argu
ments may consist,-they form the subject-matter

of Dr. Whately's Supplement to Part III, entitled

166

CH.

IX.

“Of Modal Syllogisms, and of all Arguments
besides regular and pure Categorical Syllo
gisms.”

Under this

head he comprehends-1,

Modals; 2, Hypotheticals, including Condition
als, Disjunctives, and the Dilemma; and 3, En
thymeme, Sorites, &c.

As to modals, he speaks only of modal pro

positions, although he thus classes them under
the head of syllogisms. These propositions
have been analyzed in a former chapter.
With regard to hypotheticals, propositions
and syllogisms are also, in some measure, con
founded together in the Elements. A hypo

thetical proposition is there defined “two or

more categoricals united by a copula (or conjunc
tion).” Amongst these conjunctions are the
causal. In page 86 we learn that a syllogism
consists of three categorical propositions, united
by a causal conjunction. Might we not, from
these premises, draw the conclusion, that a syl
logism is a hypothetical proposition?

According to my view of the subject, the de
nomination of hypothetical proposition should
be restricted to those which Dr. Whately terms

conditional. The hypothetical proposition may
therefore be considered as a “Compound propo

167

DEDUCTION.

sition, in which both terms are exhibited in the

form of propositions, and in which doubt is ex
pressed,—not as to the relation of the terms, –
but as to the existence of one of the terms, -or

rather, in which it is intended to assert the rela
tion alone, and not to express any judgment upon
the truth of the existence of the subject.
Thus, for example, in the hypothetical pro
position, “If A is B, C is D,”—thus reduced to
the form of a categorical proposition, “The case

of A being B, is a case of C being D”—the rela
tion of dependence is expressed between the
circumstance of “A being B,” and that of “C

being D;” but it is not asserted either that A is
B, or that C is D.
A hypothetical syllogism is that in which one
-

of the propositions is hypothetical, as, “If A is
-

B, C is D, but A is B, therefore C is D,” thus
reducible to the ordinary form :
The case-of-A-being-B is a case of C-being-D, or t Y = p Z
This case is a case of A-being-B,
tX=pY
therefore

This case is a case of C-being-D

therefore

tX =p Z

The disjunctive proposition, “Either A is B
or C is D,” contains two hypothetical propo
sitions: “If A is B, C is not D,” and “if C is

168

-

CH.

IX.

D, A is not B,” only one of which is necessary.
for the syllogism of which it forms a premiss.
The complex hypothetical argument, the di
lemma, and the hypothetical sorites, are all re

ducible to several hypothetical syllogisms, and
thence to the ordinary forms, as explained by Dr.
Whately. But in the case of all these combinations
of hypothetical syllogisms, their validity being
much more evident in these abridged forms than
in any other, their reduction, in practice, would

be entirely useless. What has here been said
on the subject, has only been for the purpose
of distinguishing them from such as require re
duction.

The enthymeme, when exhibited, as an ar
gument, should always be completed for the
purpose of ascertaining what is the suppressed

premiss. Arguing from a premiss which is left to
be understood by every hearer as he pleases, will,
of course, and frequently does, lead to fallacious
conception, the avoiding of which is the object
of the theory of deduction.

An enthymeme expresses nothing but one
premiss, and a conclusion which does not follow
from that premiss alone. It therefore does not
express a syllogism, but merely a compound pro

DEDUCTION.

169

position, of which both terms are single proposi
tions, and which differs from the hypothesis by the
assertion it contains of the truth of these elemen

tary propositions; that is, of the truth of the ex

istence of the terms which they constitute. When
we say, “Caesar was a tyrant, therefore he de
served death,” one of these propositions does
not follow from the other, and therefore it is

no argument, but merely a compound propo
sition.

But if we suppose a tyrant to have been de
fined “a person deserving death,” which is the

same as if we suppose there to be another pre
miss, “All tyrants deserve death,” thus reduced,
“Every tyrant is a person deserving death,” the
enthymeme becomes a syllogism of which this

premiss is understood.

The use of these distinctions is to avoid a very
frequent fallacy arising from the use of the en
thymeme. By this form an appearance of argu
mentation is often given to a single assertion;
the conclusion may appear to be the result of the
expressed premiss, the truth of which may be in
controvertible; but when you come to examine

what must be the understood premiss, in order to
form

such a conclusion,

you will often find that

170

CH.

IX.

it is one of which the truth is very doubtful, not
to say absolutely impossible.

The sorites (Elements, p.122) might be easily
reduced to a regular series of syllogisms, were

there any use in the operation. The enthymematic
sentence (p. 124) is one in which a pronoun is used
for a noun; at least in the author’s example;
for I cannot conceive that, in the proposition,
“All useful studies deserve encouragement,
Logic is such,” such is any thing but a pronoun
referring to useful studies; nor can I conceive
that any such proposition as “since it helps us
to reason accurately” is implied or understood.

Induction (Elements, p.123) forms the subject
matter of my next chapter.

The syllogisms apparently incorrect, which con
clude this section of the Elements, relate only tothe
“Barbara” system. If a syllogism has been defined
an “argument of which the validity is evident
from the mere force of the terms,” it is difficult

to conceive a syllogism apparently incorrect.

In concluding thepresent chapter, Dr.Whately
reverts once more to the great extension of the
field of Logic, of which he accuses logicians in
general; a topic which has been too often dis

cussed to be again entered into at present. His

DEDUCTION.

171

mention of it is on the occasion of introducing
the chapter on Fallacies: an important one in
the ratiocinative part of Logic. But this is a
subject of which I must defer the consideration

till after having treated of Induction; as fallacy
in argument applies to the inductive as well as
to the deductive operation.

172

CHAPTER X.

INDUCTION.

(Whately's Elements, Province of Reasoning, Ch. I. Induction,
p. 207.)

The next mental operation, which, according
to the general view I have taken of the field of
this science, comes under the head of Logic, is

that of Induction, which may be thus character
ized: “From the existence of a fact, or from the
occurrence of a phenomenon, certain or probable,
in any one case or in several similar cases, the in

ferring that a similar fact or phenomenon has
place in some other analogous case.” Whatso

ever general rules can be given, as to the degree
of probability of the data or premises, as well as
to that of the conclusion or fact inferred,—such

rules form the subject-matter of the theory of in
duction.

-

This operation is, by Dr. Whately, excluded

from the province of Logic, and only treated of

*

C.H.

X.

173

INDUCTION.

incidentally, in his Elements, as a subject con
nected with Logic. He therefore has not thought
it necessary to give a regular definition of the
word induction ; but the meaning he attaches to

it (when different in sense from deduction or
syllogistic ratiocination) may be gathered from

the following passage:
“Whether the induction (in this last sense") has
been sufficiently ample, i.e. takes in a sufficient
number of individual cases,—whether the charac

ter of those cases has been correctly ascertained—
—and how far the individuals we have examined

are likely to resemble, in this or that circumstance,
the rest of the class, &c. &c., are points that re
quire indeed great judgment and caution; but
this judgment and caution are not to be aided by
Logic, because they are, in reality, employed in

deciding whether or not it is fair and allowable
to lay down your premises; i. e. whether you are
authorised or not, to assert, that what is true of
the individuals you have examined, is true of the
whole class, and that this or that is true of those

individuals.” p. 210.

-

* That is, when it cannot be stated syllogistically.

I74

-CH.

X.

The above is not an incorrect general expo
sition of the operation of induction; and, true it

is, that this operation cannot be of any practical
use without applying it to some particular sub
ject, and that then, the correctness of the opera
tion “cannot be decided without a competent
knowledge of the nature of the subject.” But it
may be useful, in a general point of view, to
know in what that competent knowledge con
sists,—in what light the several subject-matters
of induction must be considered for the purpose

of that operation, and,—as induction cannot (as
has been already stated) produce a conviction of
absolute certainty, but only of probability to a
greater or less degree,—what are the best means
of ascertaining that probability. And these seve
ral investigations of the process of enquiry, or

rules of induction, might, I should think, with no
great impropriety, be considered as a portion of
the study of Logic.
And if it has been shown that syllogistic de
duction also cannot be of any practical use with
out applying it to some particular subject, —if,
moreover, it has been proved that it cannot be

performed with accuracy unless the terms shall

INDUCTION.

175

be free from ambiguity or obscurity, and shall
be exactly defined in point of extent,—and if
these qualifications cannot be given to the terms
without a competent knowledge of the nature of

the subject,—then it may probably be admitted
that deduction, as well as induction, consists only
in “general rules for the most advantageous ap
plication of a mental operation, whatever may be
the nature of the subject to which it is applied.”
And in such case, it may not appear quite clear,
why the deductive process should, in preference
to the inductive, claim the sole right to the com
mon denomination of Logic.
Dr.Whately insists much upon the erroneous
ness of the prevailing idea, that there are two
kinds of reasoning ; for he conceives that that
portion of the inductive operation which may be
called reasoning is in fact syllogistic; that is,

that if two premises are granted as true, the con
clusion must be true.

But how many cases are

there not where the absolute truth of the

pre

mises is not granted, or where that of the con
clusion does not certainly follow from such pre
mises, and yet where a certain degree of reason
ing has place? No one fact, no occurrence, nor

176

CH.

X.

even the existence of any thing which does not
come immediately under our own observation,
can be proved by syllogism alone, though

founded on observation, without the help of in
duction. Suppose A tells me that a certain
event has occurred, if I have always found that A
has told the truth whenever I have had opportuni
ties of verifying his assertions, if there is nothing
in the event in question in contradiction to what

I myself have observed in analogous cases, may
I not infer that that event has in fact occurred?
Is not this reasoning? Is it not an argument?

And can it be reduced to asyllogism? Arethere
here “two (and only two) premises from which
the truth of the conclusion follows by the mere.
iforce of expression?” If these questions bean

swered in the negative, it can scarcely be possi
ble to agree with the author, who asserts that
there are not two species of reasoning,

the in

ductive and the syllogistic,..., , , , , , ,
This assertion is attempted to be explained
by saying that when induction is reasoning, it is
a syllogism in which the major premiss is not
expressed but understood." Thus he b would:

probably convert the above example to the fol."
lowing syllogism:
"… " -" "
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. .

-

INDUCTION.

177

A tells me that a certain event has occurred,
A always tells the truth",
therefore, ,
That event has occurred.

But this is nothing to the purpose. I do not
intend to assert that A always tells the truth, so
that I cannot absolutely prove that the event he

tells me of has really occurred; yet I wish to
infer the very great probability of it, and this I
do by the above-mentioned induction, not by any

syllogism.
In the general survey I had taken of the field
-

of Logic with a view to my Treatise, I purposed

devoting a chapter of that work to the exposition
of the considerations upon which the validity of
an induction appear to depend. I shall now at
tempt to give an outline of these several con

siderations, but without any pretensions to com
pleteness. The subject appears to me to be new :
it had not even been treated of in Mr. Bentham’s

* In this exemplification of Dr. Whately's system, I have
considered the assumption of this premiss as warrantable; it

appearing to me to be strictly analogous to the assumption of
the premiss “Nature is uniform in her operations,” in the

analogous instances he gives in his Elements, p. 243.
N

178

C.H.

X.

MSS.; and it is on account of the diffidence I feel

with regard to my own view of it, that I must,

for the present, refrain from entering into minute
details.

Induction appears to consist in the resolution
of the following problem:
A fact or phenomenon having probably taken
place in a certain number of cases, how far is its

occurrence probable in a certain other case?

The answer appears to depend on the combi
nation of the following considerations:
I. Ascertainment of the degree of probability
of the data.

II. Generalization of the data.

III. Application of the general rule to the

case in question.
I. Ascertainment of the degree of probability
of the data ; that is, of the facts or phenomena
which have been observed to have taken place in
a certain number of cases.
This operation, (the judgment pronounced
on the occasion as to the belief in those data),

may be founded on personal observation, on
testimony, or on previous induction; three ele
ments, which by some writers are collectively
designated by the denomination of Evidence;
*

INDUCTION.

179

taking this word in the most extensive sense of
which it is susceptible.
1. Personal observation of a fact, that is, the
perception of it by means of the senses, is that

which in most cases produces the highest degree
of belief in the mind of the observer. The pro
bability in these cases is so nearly equivalent to
certainty, that it requires a very strong combina
tion of other sources of inference to produce any
doubt; and scarcely anything but contradictory
observation, or inductive proof founded on per
sonal observation, will destroy the probability.
Thus, when a spherical body, placed in a glass
of water, appears to me to be oval, if I had
never observed myself that the body was in fact
spherical, or had never inferred it from analogous

observations of my own (such as that other bo
dies placed in a glass of water alter their appa

rent form, &c.), I should not, perhaps, believe
any one who were to tell me that the body..which
I, perceived to be oval was in fact spherical.
“Can’t you believe your own eyes?” is gene
rally supposed to be a conclusive argument, and
is in reality such, whenever there is not very

strong contradictory evidence.
..., 2. The credibility of testimony is a vast and
-

N 2

-

180

-

CH. X.

complicated question, which has been often con

sidered in its several bearings by a multitude of
writers; by Mr. Bentham amongst others, who
has examined the question with much detail,

in a judicial point of view, in the work edited
by M. Dumont, under the title of Traité des
Preuves Judiciaires", and in another work of

five volumes, now in the press. Considering
the subject at present in a logical, and therefore
more general, point of view, the credibility of

testimony may be said to depend upon the fol
lowing circumstances:—

-

1st. Upon the moral disposition of the witness
or witnesses. These moral dispositions may be
comprised under two heads, veracity and atten

tion. The veracity of the witness depends upon

the motives which he may have on the particular
occasion in question, for giving true or false

testimony; and upon his general habits of sin

cerity or insincerity.

Under the head of atten

tion, may be classed in like manner that degree
of attention with which he may be supposed to
* This work has been translated into English, under the
title of “A Treatise on Judicial Evidence.” What I here de

nominate testimony corresponds to Mr. Bentham's personal
evidence, my personal observation relates to his real evidence, my
previous induction forms part of his circumstantial evidence.

INDUCTION.

181

have applied to the observation of the particular
fact in question, and the general habit of accu
rate or careless observation which he may have
Contracted.

2dly. Upon the intellect of the witness. Upon
the perfection or imperfection (or the sanity or
insanity, taking these words in their most ex
tended sense) of the several simple mental facul
ties which are called into action by the observa
tive faculty. It has already been stated, that these
simple faculties are chiefly those of perception,
conception, attention, memory, judgment, and
perhaps comparison and abstraction. Any one
of these faculties may be, and is frequently found

to be, impaired either by want of intensity or
by erroneous operation, whilst the others may
be perfectly sound and possessed of great inten
sity. , Want of intensity may be exemplified in
the case of the states of mind generally termed

stupidity, carelessness of mind or inattention,
forgetfulness, &c. By erroneousness of opera
tion of a faculty, I mean that which has place,
when, by disease or otherwise, the operation pro
duces a different result from what it would have
.

done in the natural and healthy state of the facul
ty; as when, by a defect in the

sight,

things

182

C.H.

X.

appear smaller, or of a different colour, from
what they are in reality. Under this head may

also be classed misrecollections and the substitu
tion, by the retentive faculty, of the produce of
the imagination, for the results of perception or

conception; as, for ex. when we believe that a
thing has really happened which we have only

imagined in our dreams. Erroneousness of opera
tion of the mental faculties has been frequently
termed insanity of mind, and should also com
prehend what is occasionally called unreasonable
ness, taking this word in the sense in which
it signifies the not being convinced by absolute
proof.

3dly. Upon the transmission of the testimony.
Under this head must be considered—1st, the

number of persons through whom the testimony
has been transmitted since it was founded on per
sonal observation; to each of which transmittors
the consideration of the several sources of cre

dibility must be applied: 2d, the mode of trans
mission in each particular case, -whether or not

such as likely or not likely to have given place to
misexpression on the part of the transmittor, or to
misconception on the part of the receiver of the

testimony. The several modes of misexpression

INDUCTION.

183

and species of misconception will be adverted to
in the next chapter, on Fallacies.
3. When a fact is inferred from previous in

1 *

duction, its degree of probability is necessarily
founded on the combination of the various consi

derations I am now detailing.

II. Generalization of the data. Generaliza.
tion has been defined, in a former chapter, “the
imagining a class or indefinite number of indivi
duals endowed with certain properties abstracted
from all the others possessed by the particular
individuals observed.”

Such is the definition of

the term, when taken in its general logical sense;
upon the present occasion, this sense will be
found to be somewhat modified. The particular

species of generalization which is subservient
to induction may be characterized as follows:
“the supposing that certain facts are likely to oc
cur in a certain class of cases.” In logical gene
ralization, the property generalized is essential to
the class formed; that is, it is the one which con

stitutes that class. In inductive generalization,
it is an accidental property to which a greater

or less degree of universality is ascribed, with
reference to the individuals belonging to a class
already formed.

184

CH. x. . .

... This distinction may be illustrated by the ex
ample of a magnet, extracted from Dr. Whately’s
Elements.

*

: * || |

A number of individual substances were ob

served to attract iron; by logical generalization
a class was formed, of which this circumstance

was made the characteristic property or connect

ing tie, and to which class was given the common
“name magnet".

•

Subsequently to this, a number of these indi
vidual magnets were observed to possess also that
property which is denominated polarity; and,

by inductive generalization, universality was
ascribed to that property, and it was supposed
that all magnets are endowed with polarity.

... This example leads me to advert to a slight
incorrectness which may be observed in the Ele
ments, where logical generalization appears to
have been confounded, not only with inductive

generalization, but with the whole operation .
of induction.

“In Natural Philosophy,” it is

said, p. 210, “a single instance is often accounted
a sufficient induction; e. g. having once ascer-,
tained that an individual magnet will, attract
** ***: *

* See Elements, p. 64.

INDUCTION.

185

iron, we are authorized to conclude that this pro
perty is universal.” But, in this example, the
operation is logical generalization, not induction.
Having observed that an individual substance
attracts iron, we form a class of which “the
attracting iron” is the characteristic property

(see Elements, p. 65); and, when we give to this
class the name of magnet, we merely substitute a
single-worded denomination to the compound
appellation “substances attracting iron.” There
fore, in the example above quoted, the concluding
that “this property is universal” is merely
the concluding that magnets are magnets.

The validity of inductive generalization, or
the degree of universality to be ascribed to a cer
tain fact with reference to a certain class of cases,

appears to depend—1st, on the constancy of the

fact in the cases observed; that is, on the number
of individual cases in which this fact has been ob

served to exist or not to exist: 2d, on the nature
of the connection between the fact and the cases in

question; that is, on the nature of the relation be
tween the property of which the universality is
supposed, and that which constitutes the class to
which this property is applied.
1. The constancy of occurrence of the same

186

C.H. X,

facts in analogous circumstances has been attri
buted to what is termed the “stability of the laws,

of nature;” upon which occasion it may be well
to quote Dr. Whately’s words:
“‘The stability of the laws of Nature,” which
is our constant assumption in inquiries relating
to Natural Philosophy, assumes many different
shapes, and in some of them does not appear to
possess the same absolute certainty as in others:
*

e.g. when, from having always observed a cer
tain sheep ruminating, we infer, that this indi
vidual sheep will continue to ruminate, we assume

that “the property which has hitherto belonged

to this sheep will remain unchanged; when we
infer the same property of all sheep, we assume
that “the property which belongs to this indi
vidual belongs to the whole species: if, on com
paring sheep with some other kinds of horned
animals, and finding that all agree in ruminating,
we infer that “all horned animals ruminate,’ we

assume that ‘the whole of a genus or class are
likely to agree in any point wherein many species,

of that genus agree; or in other words “that if
one of two properties, &c. has often been found.
accompanied by another, and never without it,

the former will be universally accompanied by

INDUCTION.

187

the latter:” now all these are merely different
forms of the maxim that “nature is uniform in

her operations, which, it is evident, varies in
expression in almost every different case where
it is applied, and admits of every degree of evi
dence, from absolute moral certainty, to mere
conjecture.” pp. 242,243.
I have made this long extract for the purpose

of exemplifying the different degrees of con
stancy of a fact in a class of cases. At the same
time the above passage has suggested some ob

servations which may not be found out of
place.
Dr.Whately having constantly in view the re
ducing inductive arguments to syllogisms, con

siders inductive generalization as the assumption
of a major premiss; which major premiss, in
Natural Philosophy, he says, is always some form
of the maxim: “Nature is uniform in her ope
rations.” Thus, in the three inductive operations
contained in the above passage, the following
major premises are respectively assumed: “A
sheep which has ruminated will ruminate as long
as it lives,”—“all sheep ruminate;”—and “all
horned animals ruminate.”

Now all these general propositions can only

188

CH. X.

be assumed when the supposed universality is at
tended with that degree of probability, which is,

for every practical purpose, equivalent to abso
lute certainty, and which is usually termed moral
certainty. But this certainty is never in itself
absolute, an expression which should, logically,
be reserved to the result of the mathematical or

syllogistic proof; or at farthest to that greatest

degree of probability which, as has been said, is
produced by personal observation. And how
many are the cases when the “operations of na
ture” cannot be reduced to any rule of unifor

mity! How many are the aberrations, daily ob
served, from those general rules, which have been
regarded as the most constant! Thus it is that
more or less of doubt is thrown upon all induc
tive conclusions; and it is this want of uniformity
that is so much in the way of regular classifica
tions of physical entities. . . . . . .” - 1.2s to

These variations in the stability of the laws of
nature are observable with relation to ethical

sciences as well as in Natural Philosophy. In
the general propositions that “men who have
long associated with those who consider robbery
as a meritorious act, will themselves acquirea dis

regard for the right of property,’” that iff white

INDUCTION.

189

men are more generally intelligent than ne

groes,” that “gravity is general in Englishmen,
levity in Frenchmen,” &c.; there is the samegra
dation in the universality of these several facts,
as that which is observable in physical cases. …,
- The degree of constancy of a fact is ascer
tained by the number of cases where this fact

has place, as compared with the number of cases
of the same class where it has not place. If the
occurrence or non-occurrence of facts could be

ascertained at all times with absolute certainty,
inductive generalization, founded on the degree
of constancy, would be reduced to a mere ma-.
thematical calculation of chances. But as it has
been shown that this is not the case, in the calcu
lation of the degree of constancy, We must also

take into consideration the relative degree of

probability of the facts which militate in favour
or against the universal proposition in question,
and their relative proportion as to number, that
is, the number of the facts recorded on each side
of the question, as compared with the total sup

posed number of cases of the same class.
* Thus, in the inductions brought forward by
Phrenologists, all the cases which they observe
to be in favour of their system, are carefully ex

190

CH.

X.

hibited and recorded, whilst their opponents, less
interested in the controversy, allow innumerable
instances, which they might have adduced in
refutation, to be neglected and forgotten. If a so
ciety of Anti-phrenologists had been instituted at
the same time as that of the partisans of that sys
tem, and if they had pursued their object with the
same zeal, perseverance, and talent, they might
probably have discovered, that, if, in the cases ac
tually recorded, so great a number appear to give
some colour to their adversaries’ doctrine, those

cases which have been neglected are equally con
-clusive on the other side of the

question.

But

there are always but few who devote their life to
the refuting an erroneous system, as compared

with those whose sole object is the support of one
which is so flattering to the mind by its apparent
ingenuity and importance. In no case does any
one examine skulls with so much perseverance as

a professed phrenologist, who, like all those who
apply their whole faculties to any particular
branch of study, is generally ardent in support

of this his favourite pursuit. Is it then to be
wondered, that he should endeavour to conceal,
2 . . . . . . ".
even from himself, those cases where he had seen
*

*,

led to pronounce an erroneous judgment; and

INDUCTION.

191

that he should carefully treasure up and publish
those where he had applied his theory with suc
cess P.

2. The second consideration upon which the
validity of inductive generalization appears to
depend, has been stated to be the nature of the

connection between the fact generalized, and the
cases in which it is supposed to have place.
For the purpose of induction, these connections
may be generally divided into coexistence" and
dependence. Two facts may be said to be

merely coexisting, when we suppose that the
non-existence of the one would neither influence

nor modify in any way the existence of the other;

and to be dependent on one another, when we
suppose that the existence of the one would not
have place in the same manner, if the other did

* Coexistence in this case is with reference to place, not
to time, or, at any rate, not constantly and absolutely so. Thus,
coexistence should in this case include those relations upon
which is founded the proverb, “ misfortunes never come
alone,” applicable to the case where several misfortunes occur
successively, though with no intervals of any length. So in
the case of the general assertion, that “nations generally rise
gradually till they reach a maximum of prosperity, and then
commence to decline till their ultimate fall.”

192

CH.

X.

not exist. The importance of this distinction
will appear from the great difference of the va

lidity of inductive generalization in the two
CaSeS.

-

In the example above given, “all horned
animals ruminate,” the relation between the two

properties is merely that of coexistence, without
any probability of dependence, either of rumi
nation upon horns, or of the existence of horns
upon the power of ruminating. But as this co
existence has been observed in all cases, and as the

contrary has not been observed, nor even sus
pected, we are fully authorised to come to the
above conclusion. And yet there is so little cer
tainty in it, that, were we to hear of the existence

of an animal that had one of the above properties
without the other, however small the degree of
credibility we attached to the information, we
should not, on account of the general proposition
we had formed, deduct from the value of that

evidence, but rather modify our generalization
in consequence of such information.

With regard to ethical science, amongst the
examples above given, inductive generalization
is founded on mere coexistence; in the instance

of the assertion, “gravity is general in English

193

INDUCTION.

men, levity in Frenchmen, &c.; for no percep
tible dependence has been observed between those

general moral dispositions and the being born in
one or the other country. Such coexistence is,
for the purpose of induction, reckoned of still
less value than that which relates to physical
science; and this is so much the case, that, when
ever a general coexistence of two ethical proper
ties, has been perceived, it is always supposed
that there must exist some dependence, although
hitherto unobserved, of one property upon the
other. Thus, if levity has been observed to be
a distinguishing feature in a Frenchman’s cha
racter, it has been attributed to the climate, to
the common mode of education, &c. of that
country.., ,
1, Coexistence of facts, or phenomena is the
only ground upon which the theories of unlucky
-

-

days, of many astrological predictions (as in Ger
man almanacks), &c. &c. are founded. The
arguments, adduced in support of these theories
are at best mere calculations of chances, and in

general these calculations are far from being fair,
as every evidence of any moderate degree of pro
bability is brought forward if it tend to favour

the theory; and, on the other hand, no evidence
O

194

C.H.

X.

of an opposite tendency is admitted, but that
which produces all but certainty, and which
cannot be in any manner set aside.
Relations of dependence are of far greater
importance, and in a number of cases give a
degree of probability to the induction which may
amount to moral certainty, though, in many
others, a variety of circumstances may cast over
it a considerable degree of doubt.
These relations of dependence are those of cause

and effect. An inductive generalization, founded

upon these relations, may be reduced to one of
the following general forms:
1. Similar" causes produce similar effects.
2. Similar effects are produced by similar
CauSeS.

-

But these two propositions are very different
in the constancy of their application. The first
has been so universally observed, that it produces
in most minds absolute certainty, and an induc

• By the word similar is here meant similar in every re
spect, except as to the individual case to which it is applied.
The idea is generally conveyed by the word same; but, in strict
logical language, the latter word appears to indicate the same
individual cause, not the same species of causes.

INDUCTION.

195

tion founded upon it seldom fails to convey proof
(supposing the operation to be valid in other re
spects). Upon this is founded every act of our
life. If we eat, it is because we have experienced
that food satisfies hunger, and infer that food
will again produce the same effect. If we punish
a man, with a view to prevent his committing a
second time a crime that he has been guilty of,
it is because we have observed, or heard, that a

similar effect has been produced by punishment
in other instances.

The investigation of the cause of an effect is
by no means so certain in its results. The same
effect is often observed to be produced, sometimes
by one cause, sometimes by another; and in those
cases the chance is generally equal, as to which

is the efficient cause in the instance in question,

provided, however, that there is no ground for
inference of the cause other than the knowledge
of the effect. And yet how often do we not form
inductions, in which we are obliged to content

ourselves with these uncertain grounds of in
ference.

-

In physical science we are continually re
ferring to this second of the two above-men
tioned

general

rules.

Amongst the subject
o2

196

C.H. X.

matters of this science, many effects come under

our observation without their cause being in any
way perceptible. In these cases, the method by
which we explain those facts or phenomena (that
is, assign causes or reasons for them) is, by an in
duction founded upon the analogy between those
facts and similar ones of which the causes are

known to us, to which analogy we apply the above
proposition, that “similar effects are produced by
similar causes.” It is in this way only that we
explain the nature of heat and light, &c.
The degree of reliance that may be placed

upon this species of induction may be illustrated
by the following example. Suppose a mechanist
had never heard of any such thing as a spring,
that the rotatory motion of clocks and similar

instruments had never been observed by him to
have been produced otherwise than by weights;

if a clock set in motion by a spring be so pre
sented to his view that he cannot see the clock

work (supposing

him to know that the primum

mobile is not directly applied to it, but only for
the purpose of winding it up), would he ever
imagine that the motion was immediately pro

duced otherwise than by a weight?
Thus, heat and light are supposed by some

INDUCTION.

197

to be substances, by others to be vibrations, and
it is said that the effects produced can only be
accounted for in one of these two ways; what is
meantismerely thatsuch are theonly causes which,
in analogous cases, have been observed to pro

duce analogous effects. Such is the tendency of
the observations and experiments on which are
founded the inductions adduced, by the partisans
of each of these theories, in support of their own

cause; and, as a further proof of his own system,
each one endeavours to shew the impossibility of
the other; but why may we not be in this respect
in a similar case to that of the above-mentioned

mechanist P why may there not be some other

cause, totally unknown to us, which produces
light and heat
Nothing shews that there is
such a one, nor does it appear probable that there
should be; but nothing shews positively that
there is not—nothing but a general unwilling
ness on our part to admit that there be one which
we can neither know nor guess at,—a feeling of
shame at the thought of the number of in

stances where the causes of the physical phe

nomena we observe are entirely hidden from
uS.

In the case of generalization founded on re

198

CH. X.

lations of dependence, there is another difficult
and important consideration to be taken into
account, which is, whether such relations have
or have not place, and what degree of influ
ence each particular cause may have on the
effect produced.
In ethical science, it is often very doubt
ful whether a general proposition be founded
on mere observed coexistence of facts, or upon
the relations of cause and effect.

Thus when,

from having observed that A told the truth
on all the many occasions when we have been
enabled to verify his assertions, we conclude that
A always tells the truth; this conclusion may
be in some measure founded on mere obser
vation of the hitherto coexisting facts of A’s

speaking, and of his telling the truth, which,
by a calculation of chances, produces a pro
bability of his telling truth on all occasions.
But we may also suppose a slight dependence
of the fact of A's telling truth, upon a cause
(viz. a habit acquired of telling truth) result
ing from the data.
In the above example, the degree of in

fluence of the cause, or supposed cause, is but
small—very small if compared to that which is

INDUCTION.

199

exemplified by the proposition “A hungry man
will eat the food which is placed before him,
when there is no more powerful motive tending
to restrain him from doing so.”
With reference to the degree of reciprocal in

fluence of cause and effect, these relations may
be generally divided into immediate and remote,
into direct and incidental.

Thus, the immediate effect of attraction of gra
vitation is to make all bodies approach the centre
of the earth, as long as no obstacle prevents their
so doing; yet a body may be so placed (as for
example, on one end of a lever) as that attraction

of gravitation may cause it to rise; that is, to
remove farther from the centre of the earth.

In

this case, the attraction of gravitation is the more
remote cause of the effect produced.
-

The direct effect of a shower of rain is to
make the ground wet, an incidental effect is to

promote vegetation, which produces a very dif
ferent degree of universality in the two general
propositions, “All showers of rain wet the

ground on which they fall,” and “All showers
of rain promote vegetation.”
From the above several examples, some idea
may, it is hoped, be formed of the various cir

200

C.H.

X.

cumstances which influence the validity of the
universality of an inductively general propo

sition. I shall now proceed to examine into the
last of the three considerations, upon the combi
nation of which I have said that the validity of
an inductive operation depends.
III. Application of the general rule to the
case in question. Having ascertained the degree
of probability of the data, and thence of the
general proposition founded upon these data,
there remains to be examined how far such

general proposition is applicable to the case to
which the induction refers; whether there may

not be other modificative or contradictory gene
ral propositions applicable to the same case; and,
if there may, to which of these general rules the
preference is to be given in regard to credibility

or to connection with the case in question.
In many instances, a general proposition ap
pears at first to be applicable to a particular case,
when, in fact, there may be a number of circum

stances attending upon this case, which may
take away its analogy with those upon which the
generalization was founded. For ex. “A tells
the truth upon this occasion, because he has al

ways been found to speak truth.”

But he may

INDUCTION.

201

be at present in some degree insane, or he may
himself entertain an erroneous idea on the sub

ject in question, &c., which is supposed not to
have been the case upon the occasions on which
was founded the general rule of his veracity,
and thus the analogy is entirely destroyed.
With regard to the comparison of the several
conflicting general propositions, more or less ap
plicable to the case in question, it may be exem
plified in the following arguments:

Suppose that A asserts a fact and B denies it,
that A has always been found to speak the truth,
and that B has been frequently detected in false
hoods. If these be the only data which can be
obtained, the probability of the truth of the fact
in question will, by most persons, be reckoned
as-considerable.

But if it be added that A has

on this occasion a strong motive for concealing
the truth, and B an equally strong one for de

claring it, and if it be ascertained from other data,
not only that men will in general depart from
their usual habits when actuated by a strong
motive, but also that they will naturally speak
the truth when uninfluenced by any particular
motive either one way or another, these proposi
tions, in contradiction to the former ones, will

202

C.H.

X.

induce a much greater belief in the falsity of the
fact asserted by A and denied by B, than was
formerly entertained of its truth. And this be
cause, on a comparison of the reasons for its
truth with those against it, it will be seen, that .
the former were founded upon mere observed co
existence of facts; whilst the latter, resulting from
a supposed dependence of cause and effect, are
therefore attended with a much greater degree of
credibility.
It is owing sometimes to the inability, some
times to the unwillingness, of the human mind to
take into consideration, and to weigh the com
parative value of the several reasons or general
propositions which militate in favour or against
a particular theory, that so many effects are prac
tically produced so different from those which
were intended or expected. It is to the same
cause that must be ascribed the origin of the fal
lacious proposition, that a thing may be good in
theory and bad in practice; for, in such a case, the
theory is incomplete from not having taken into
consideration the obstacles to its application; that
is, the contradictory general propositions. If
the famous steam-engine which, two years ago,
was, in the belief of many eminent engineers, as

203

INDUCTION.

well as in that of its inventor, to have produced
such extraordinary effect as to supersede all
existing steam-engines, has, on the contrary, been
found capable of producing no effect at all, or
next to none, it is because, in the theory on
which it was founded, the waste of heat and other
obstacles were not taken into account.
tain

philosophers have imagined

If cer

that they have

discovered a mode of establishing amongst men
absolute equality and commonalty of rights and
goods, attended with absolute and lasting har
mony, if their reasonings have appeared to be
convincing to their followers, it is because they

have contrived to overlook such general (and by
no means improbable) propositions as that

“men

are not and cannot be made, either perfectly free
from prejudices and passions, or perfectly equal
in natural capacity,” or many other such ob
jections which might be opposed to them.

Such is the analysis of the process of induc
tion according to the view which I should be

disposed to take of the subject, and which in
duces me to differ in opinion from the author of
the Elements, and to consider that there is a pro

cess of reasoning different from syllogism, which
process I call induction.

And having thus ex

204

CH. X.

plained the nature of the operation of the ratioci
native faculties, there remains only to exhibit
what are the occasions upon which the operation
of these faculties is likely to produce an erro
neous effect; a subject which will form the mat
ter of the ensuing chapter on Fallacies; but,
before I conclude the present one, I must pass a

hasty glance over the remainder of Dr. Whately’s
Dissertation on the Province of Reasoning; the

greater part of which will be found to bear some
relation to the present subject.
Next to the chapter on Induction, is a long
one “on the Discovery of Truth,” in which we
have a great variety of matter; much which had
already been said in former chapters; some
which is now first brought to view, and may
require some comment.
First comes the demonstration of this propo
sition: “It is not by a process of Reasoning that
new truths are brought to light,” which is de
duced from the following premises:
“All reasoning may be resolved into syllo
gisms,” and
“A syllogism proves nothing but what is
virtually asserted in the premises.”
/

In order to facilitate the comprehension of

205

INDUCTION.

this demonstration, he premises three things;

that is, he requires that three things be granted,
on which he founds his demonstration.

The first of these three premises or pos
tulates, is an explanation of the proposition to
be proved. When he says that “It is not by a
process of reasoning that new truths are brought
to light,” he does not mean to say that “any kind
of truth can be elicited without reasoning,” but
that “no new truth can be elicited by reasoning
alone.” It is very fortunate that he has given

us this explanation; for I confess that the omis
sion of the word alone, in the first enunciation
of the proposition, was leading me far astray as
to his meaning.

-

By the second postulate, the word reasoning
is again restricted to syllogistic argument, to
the exclusion of induction; thus shewing that,

in the conclusion, the word reasoning is taken
in the same sense as that which it has in the first

(or major) premiss.
The argument now stands thus:
Syllogisms prove nothing but what is virtually asserted
in their respective premises;
Reasoning consists entirely in syllogisms;
therefore,

---

206

CH,

X.

Reasoning proves nothing but what is virtually asserted
in the premises it contains;

from which he passes to the conclusion, that “by
Reasoning no new truth can be elicited,” in vir
tue of the third postulate, viz. that a new truth
is that which is not “virtually implied and in
volved in any thing already known.”

With the help of all these explanations, we
learn that we are to understand his argument as
follows:

/

No new truth can be elicited by syllogisms alone;
Reasoning consists entirely in syllogisms;
therefore,

No new truth can be elicited by reasoning alone.

Unfortunately for myself, not only can I not
see any use in this argument, supposing it to be
correct, but I cannot even admit either of the

premises. I have often enough said why I do
not consider reasoning as consisting entirely in
syllogisms; I shall now shew why I believe that

new truths can be, and actually are, elicited by
syllogistic reasoning.

Suppose I do not know, or that nobody
knows, that “all equilateral triangles are equi

angular;” and suppose I discover this by a pro
cess of mathematical (a species of syllogistic)

INDUction.

207

reasoning, and by that alone, (which was pro
bably the case with the mathematician who did
discover it); is not this discovery of mine the
discovery of a truth? and is not that truth new
to all mankind P-as new as the first discovery
of any unknown real object
Both truths ex
isted before, as is implied by the word discovery,

but neither were known. I do not deny, that if
new be defined “that which is not known, nor

can be deduced from anything which is known,”
the author may be right; but I cannot see any
reason for distorting, in so great a degree, the
meaning of a word, when that meaning has
been established on so firm a basis, by long and
universal use; a use adopted by Dr. Whately
himself, upon all other occasions but the present
One *.

With regard to the several bearings of a pro

position, and to the ten categories (pp. 217, 218),
I must refer to what I have already said of pro
perties, in Ch. W.; of description, in Ch. WI; and
* See p. 239, “nen, that is, unperceived and unthought
of.” The fallacy exhibited on the occasion of the above
argument of Dr. Whately's appears to arise from something

more than mere obscurity of expression, and to be referrible
to the head of “Fallacies of erroneous expression.”

208

CH.

X.

to the classification of Entities, at the end of
Ch. III.

-

|

In the next pages of the Elements (218 et seq.)
the author appears to repent of having limited the
application of the word new to “that which cannot
be deduced from what is already known,” and
considers it, perhaps with more propriety, as a
relative term, applicable to whatever is not yet

known;—relative, both as to person—for a thing

which is new to one man may be old to another
—and as to time—for a new thing, when once
exhibited, becomes an old one, with regard to
the person to whom it is exhibited.
The discovery of a new truth, therefore, now
stands defined, “the elicitation of anything .
which is not yet known;” and, as this discovery
may be made, either with or without the imme
diate aid of observation and testimony, two spe
cies or modes are here mentioned, which are cer

tainly perfectly distinct, and which Dr. Whately

calls information and instruction;—I should

rather say, elicitation by observation, and elici
tation by ratiocination; including, under ob
servation in general, both personal observation
and testimony; and under ratiocination, both
induction and deduction. The sense of these

/

INDUCTION.

209

several words has been so frequently detailed,

that I do not think it necessary to enlarge any

more upon this part of Dr. Whately's Elements,
which appears to be generally rather confused
in its style, and by no means rendered clearer by

the above-mentioned alterations in the meaning
of the words new truth, in the course of so few

pages.
In the second section of the same chapter
*

(p. 226), discoveries are divided into physical
and logical. This division corresponds, in a
certain degree, to the preceding one, into infor
mation and instruction : the difference is, that

induction is now coupled with observation in
the characteristic operations of physical disco

very, and deduction alone constitutes logical
discovery. I do not perfectly comprehend the
use of this double division; nor can I form to my
self any clear idea of the particular object the
author had in view in writing this section: I
must, therefore, request him to excuse any of my
remarks which may be found to be incorrect, in
consequence of having mistaken that object.

“In all cases,” it is said, p. 227, “of the es
tablishment of a general fact from Induction, that
general fact . . . . . is ultimately established by
P

210

.** - CH,

K.

Reasoning; e.g. Bakewell, .... observed. &c.
... . these facts were his data from which com

bining them with the general principle that Na
ture is steady and uniform, in her proceedings,
he logically drew the conclusion that &c. . . . .
but then his chief merit was in making the ob
servations, in so combining them as to abstract

&c. ... also in conjecturing &c. ...The making
of such observations and still more the combina

tion, abstraction and judgment employed are
what men commonly mean when they speak of
Induction, and these operations are certainly dis
tinct from Reasoning.”
-

Reasoning is the drawing a logical conclu
-

sion, . . . . Bakewell drew a logical conclusion by
combining observations,.... This combination of
observations is distinct from Reasoning. I really
am greatly at a loss where to class, this mode of
reasoning, and am only the more inclined to

apply that same word reasoning to induction
as well as to deduction. I should very much
doubt that Bakewell ever thought of the “uni
formity of the proceedings of Nature;” he pro
bably had only found that facts were of such and
such a nature wherever he had attended to them,

and that he had never heard of any instance .
-

**

211

INDUCTION.

where they were not so; accordingly, by induc
tive generalization, he supposed these facts to
have place in all similar instances.

I see reason

‘ing in this operation, but no syllogism.
One word more as to matter of fact. Dr.
Whately applies the term to such facts only which

rest upon the authority of observation or induc
tion, not to those which are mathematically or
syllogistically proved. Is this in conformity to

the ordinary senses of the locution ? When it
has been proved that “all equilateral triangles
are equiangular,” is not this coincidence a matter
of fact?
Section 3 (p. 231) relates to Definitions.
Having already spoken of the identity of the
-

meaning of the term and the nature of the thing,
I have now to advert only to the distinction made
between a mathematical and a logical definition;
for there appears to me to be none. A mathe
matical definition of a square is strictly analo
gous to a logical definition of an animal, a man,
or any other common term,-an enumeration of
the essential properties of the collective entity so
designated, abstracted from all accidental pro
porties which any individual square body, ani

mal, man, &c. may possess. If the definition of
P 2
*

212

CH. K.

a square may be given in the form of the postu
late, “let a foursided figure, of equal sides and

rightangles, becalled asquare’’(Elements, p.233),
so may any other logical definition; as, fortin

stance, that of a man (“man is a rational animal”)
may be thus expressed: “let a rational animal

be called a man.” Square (as above defined) is

the name of a collective entity formed of the pro
perties which constitute the superordinate genus
surface, with the addition of that of “being
bounded by four sides equal in length, and placed
at right angles to one another,” and is appliea
ble to every individual object endowed with those
properties, whatever others such object may
have.

Man, in like manner, is the name of a

collective entity formed of the properties which
constitute the superordinate genus animal, with
the addition of that of rationality, and is appli

cable to every individual object endowed with
those properties, whatever others such object
may have.
* * * * ** ** *
In the fourth section of this same chapter

(p. 234), after two or three more pages on the
restriction of the word reasoning to syllogistic

argument, are a few lines upon observation and
experiment. A definition of the latter term might

213

INDUCTION.

not have been useless on this occasion, but has

been neglected by the author. By experiment is
commonly understood any physical operation
which is performed with a view to assist obser
vation; as, for ex. placing two substances in con

tact, with a view to observe their reciprocal che

mical action, or the hanging a weight to a bar of
iron, with a view to observe the quantity that it
can support without breaking, &c.

Experience

is passive; observation is active, but purely

mental; experiment is a physical operation.
Chapter III, on Inference and Proof, Elements,
p.245. Upon this occasion I should again differ, in
some measure, from the author, in my idea of the
sense commonly attached to the words he defines.
“Proving,” he says, “is the assigning of a reason

or argument for the support of agiven proposition,

and inferring the deduction of a conclusion from
given premises.” They “are not two different
things, but the same thing regarded in two dif
ferent points of view.... he who infers, proves;
and he who proves, infers.” Now suppose A
asserts that heat is a substance, B objects that it
cannot be proved to be so. “True,” says A,

“we cannot prove it, but we may infer it from
such and such well-attested observations.”

is

214

. A CH. X., ; 1

this an incorrect mode of speaking? and, if not, is

not inference best applicable to induction which
produces mere probability; proof to deduction
or to such inductive operations only, which, by
the moral certainty of the conclusion, are re
garded as equivalent to deduction?
- ". . . .

... True it is that “the word infer fixes the mind
first on the premiss, and then on the conclu
sion; the word prove, on the contrary, leads the,

mind from the conclusion to the premiss;” but
this appears to be an incidental circumstance
which has arisen from the nature of the two ar
guments, not a characteristic difference, or, at
any rate, not the sole essential distinction be
tween the two operations. In deduction, the
conclusion is equally certain with the premises,

and is usually stated first, as being considered,
the most important. In induction, the premises:
are first held to view, as being more certain than
the conclusion. But in neither case is this ne

cessarily so; and the questions, How do you...?

and What do you...? might without impropriety.
be respectively completed by the words prove or ;

infer. It may not be very good English to say,

“What do you prove from that?” but I do not
think that the most rigid grammarian would :

215

INDUCTION,

object to the expressions, “What do you prove
by means of that?” “How do you infer this
from that?”

-

-

* . It might be objected to me, that the word
proof is also frequently applied to inductive ar
gument; but this is only the case when it is in

tended to show that the value of the inference
amounts to moral certainty, and then induction
is considered as equivalent to, and spoken of as
being the same as, deduction. And I should not

think that the word infer could ever be aptly ap
plied to mathematical demonstration.

It appears to me also, that the words inference.
and proof cannot strictly be opposed to each other.
If the proof and the conclusion are the two por
tions of a deductive argument, the reason and

the inference may be considered as the corre
sponding portion of arguments in general, or of
the inductive species in particular.
The next section of this third chapter is headed,
-

“Investigator, and Advocate,” and the distinc
tion between the two is founded upon that which
had been established between inferring and

proving; but it appears to me that both these
operations may be necessary both to the investi
gator and the advocate.

An investigator, I

216

, -CH. X. * * * *

should say, is he who combines experiment,
observation, and ratiocination, with a view to
clearing up any doubt he may entertain upon,

any subject, or to the adding to the stock of
information which he may possess with regard
to it.

An advocate is he who endeavours to

prove to another person a proposition (true Gr.
false) of which he himself has no doubt, or affects

to have no doubt. An advocate may be an in
vestigator; the investigator ceases to be such
when he puts on the advocate.
The word investigator, however, is only
given in the marginal title of the section in
question. In the text the word philosopher is
substituted; a word which cannot fail to throw
, more or less of obscurity over every topic in
which it is suffered to intrude. The term phi
*

* *

* * *

losophy has ever been strangely ill used from
its first coining by the ancient Greeks to the

present day: scarcely may there be found two
authors who agree upon its meaning.

It has

sometimes been extended to the designation of
the pursuit of science in the aggregate, and often,
restricted to that of particular branches; it has
been exclusively applied to various ethical,

noological, or physical studies; and here the

217

INDUCTION,

philosopher's field is confined to the “combin
ing and selecting known facts.... for giving....
conclusions. ... implied in the premises;” to the
“making-logical discoveries;” or, in a word,
to mere syllogistic reasoning. . . . . . . . " :

* In the next page, however, our philosopher's
duties are again enlarged: the whole field of
observation and experiment is now allotted to
him for exercise; he is restricted only as to the
mode in which he is to make use of his ratiocina

tive faculties; he is to draw conclusions from his

observations; but he must not seek for argu
ments in support of any fact; for this is the

advocate's or rhetorician’s province. Are these
two functions as distinct as Dr.Whately conceives
them to be and might we not, from the data
before us, draw up the following syllogism?
The philosopher infers, the advocate proves (p. 247);
He who infers, proves, and he who proves, infers (p. 246);
therefore, *

-

The philosopher is an advocate; that is, the two words are
synonymous.

Rhetorician, a term incidentally introduced

upon this occasion as a sort of synonym to advo
cate, appears to call for a few words in explana

tion of its import. A rhetorician, according to

218

CH. X.

4

my view of the matter, is the advocate who seeks
to convince, not by logical argument, but by
influencing the affections and passions. The
ideas he seeks to convey are more generally false
than true; his arguments more frequently falla
cious than logical. Rhetoric is an art of which
the practice is useful, when a truth is to be im
pressed upon intellects too narrow for the ready
conception of logical arguments,—when the dif
fusion of a false idea may happen to be necessary
for any purpose of general utility,—or for the
purpose of giving amusement, when the subject
is of so little importance that its truth or falsity.

matters not,

Beyond this, rhetoric is ever a

baneful art, and the grand object of the logician
is to guard against its influence, and to counter
act its evil effects.

-

The remaining chapter of this Dissertation
on the Province of Reasoning relates to verbal
and real questions. Its chief object appears to
be to shew the importance of definition (or rather

exposition in general), without which it is shewn
that no logical argument can be carried on.

This importance of exposition might have been,
still more generalized, and might perhaps be

exemplified, were it worth the labour, in more

219

INDUCTION.

than one instance, where a certain degree of ob
scurity prevails over this very chapter of the Ele
ments, over the whole of the Appendix, and the
greater number of the professed definitions in
the Index. But it would probably exhaust the

reader's patience, and that to little purpose, were
I to pursue this investigation any further. I shall
therefore proceed immediately to the theory of
fallacies.

.

. ... .

. . .

*

**

*

220.

G#.

CHAPTER xi.

ON FALLACIES.

(Whately's Elements, Ch. III. p. 131.)

DR. WHATELY's chapter on Fallacies is
introduced by the following exposition of the
subject:

“By a fallacy is commonly understood any
unsound mode of arguing, which appears to

demand our conviction, and to be decisive of
the question in hand when in fairness it is
not.”

-

*

* *

-

This definition may be fully applicable to
all apparent arguments, in which an

erroneous,

conclusion is deduced from the premises

by a

mere play upon words; as, forex. “No cat has
two tails, one cat has a tail more than no cat,
therefore, one cat has three tails;” and of which
the very absurdity of the conclusion is enough

CH. XI,

#221

FALLACIES.

to shew the error. But is the above definition
equally applicable to that most dangerous of all
classes of fallacies, to that which most of all

needs detection and exposure; namely, to that
which, without producing any direct conviction,
tends to throw confusion in the way of concep
tion, and to give to a false and pernicious argu
nt a degree of probability far more difficult
to destroy than any fact which, though appa
rently proved, is, primâ facie, absurd?
A much more general and comprehensive ex

position is given by the editor of Mr. Bentham's
Book of Fallacies; which exposition I shall here

transcribe, in order that the reader may judge
whether his or Dr. Whately’s is the most appli

cable to the term fallacy, in its most ordinary

and most useful sense.
“By the name of fallacy, it is most common

to designate any argument employed or topic

proba

suggested, for the purpose, or with the

bility of producing the effect of deception,—of

causing some erroneous opinion to be enter
tained by any person, to whose mind such

argument may have been presented.”

Fallacies, p. 1.

-

-

Book of
.

-

. .
-

.
"
*

*

.

.

1322

.* * : **** 6H. XI. . . . .

Before I examine the logical view" which
Dr. Whately here professes his intention of tak
ing of the subject, I must attempt the classifica

tion and exposition of the principal fallacies,
according to my own ideas. In this operation

I

shall be, in some measure, guided by the above

mentioned Book of Fallacies; but the method

there adopted must, for the present purpose, be
considerably modified. Only one part of the
field, that of political fallacies, was there at

tended to, and that with a view to political and
particularly to parliamentary argument. The
object being different on the present occasion,
the source of division will also be different.
Fallacies must now be considered in a more

general point of view: the whole field should be
* “We propose to take a Logical view of the subject,
-

referring the different fallacies to the most convenient heads,

and giving a scientific analysis of the procedure which takes

place in each.” Elements, p. 131.

Either I ammuch mistaken,

or, by a logical vien, is here meant

methodization, expo

'sition, and analysis, without any, or, at any rate, without

much ratiocination; and here at last Dr.Whately's view agrees
with mine, as to the extent to which the field of Logic is to
be carried, notwithstanding the restricted limits he has
hitherto been repeatedly assigning to it.
- "-

.

-

FAI.L.A.C.T.E.S.

223

embraced, and the division carried on as far as
it is applicable to arguments in general, without
reference to any particular subject.

This is an

undertaking for which I certainly do not feel that
competency which would be desirable; but as,

without it, a great blank would be left in the
science of Logic, I shall endeavour to exhibit
generally my views, leaving ulterior details for

the more comprehensive work I am preparing.

Before I proceed to the division of the genus
fallacies, I must observe that there may be a
number of assertions of which the fallsity is so

very evident, that it is useless to exhibit them in
the character of fallacies, there being; no possi
bility of any persons being led astray by them;
as, for ex. if we were to assert that a thing which

is, is not. And one great error of Logicians ap
pears to be, that, after defining a fallacy “an
argument which appears to prove: a question

which is not fair or true,” they give as examples
of fallacies, arguments (or rather puns) which
can never, in this sense, appear to be correct ;
that is, can never convey to any mind any degree
of belief of the false assertion adduced. Who
will ever

believe, for instance, that “a river has

*

224

CH.

XI.

feet because it runs,” or that “a constellation

barks because it is a dog"?”
Fallacies may in general be referred to one of
the two following classes:

-

1. Fallacies arising from the manner in which

the ideas are communicated, or fallacies of ex
pression.

-

-

2. Fallacies arising from the nature of the
ideas themselves, or fallacious ideas.
This first division of fallacies answers, in some

measure, to the common one, into fallacia in
dictione and extra dictionem, but I have given a

somewhat greater extent to the former class
than that which is usually ascribed to it, as I in

clude in it nearly the whole of Dr. Whately's

semilogical

fallacies, &c. as will presently be
seen in my examination of his system.
* *
Fallacies of expression have place when the
learner fails to entertain a clear, correct, and com
plete idea of the arguments or propositions com

* “Fallacia AEquivocationis......1. cum dictio mulla princi
paliter significat: ut, si probetur aliquod coeleste sidus esse
animal, vel latrare, quia est canis. 2. cum dictio unum pro
priè significans, per Analogiam, aut Metaphorum ad alia trans
Jertur: ut, si probetur aquam pedes habere, quia currit; aut

pratum os, quia ridet;” &c. Saunderson's Logic, p. 155.

225

FALLACIES.

municated to him by the teacher. That defect

in the operation of communication which is the

cause of these fallacies, is termed misexpression
when the fault is considered as lying on the part
of the teacher, and misconception when on that
of the learner *.

Defective

expression

may be generally re

ferred to one of the three heads of ambiguity,

obscurity, and error of expression.

-

I. Ambiguity of expression has place when a
word may be understood by the learner in either

of two or more different senses.

Such ambi

guity becomes a source of fallacy, when, amongst
these several meanings, the learner is induced,
by chance or from any other cause, to adopt
a different one from that which the teacher had
in view.

-

-

-

This definition of ambiguity will be found to
be much more limited than that which is usually
given by logicians. All homonymous terms,

that is, all those which may happen, in the same

or in different circumstances, to designate two or
* It should be remembered that by the word teacher is

here to be understood he who makes the communication
who utters the proposition or argument; by the word learner,
he to whom it is addressed.

226

C.H.

XI.

more different objects, are by them included

amongst ambiguous terms"; but I should
make use of the latter denomination only in the

cases where there is room for hesitation, on the
learner’s part, as to which sense he should adopt;

and there are a great number of instances where
it is impossible he should be mistaken as to the
intended import of a homonymous term. Thus
in the example already quoted from Saunderson,
of a river running, though “running” has ano
ther sense than that of “flowing” in which it is
here used, yet, to no one would the idea occur
that it was that other sense which was here
meant,—to no one would this homonymous word

appear in the smallest degree ambiguous.
Ambiguity may be seated in words alone or
in sentences. When it is in the words alone, the
fallacies arising from this source may be termed

fallacies of equivocation; when it is the sentence
that is ambiguous, the corresponding fallacies

are those of amphibology.
1. As examples of ambiguous terms pro
ducing fallacious conception, we may refer to the
* “Fallacia AEquivocationis sive Homonymia est, quando

vox aliqua simplex aliter atque aliter accipitur in argumenta
tione.” Saunderson’s Logic, p. 155.

FALLAC1Es.

227

observations I have made in preceding chapters,
with regard to the double meanings of the words
“distributed,” “necessary,” “particular,” “dis
course,” “new truth,” &c. as used by Dr.
Whately and other logicians. In my above
mentioned “Essai sur la Nomenclature et la

Classification,” &c., I pointed out the ambiguity
of the words “physic” “physics,” &c. in seve
ral of their various conjugates in French and

English—applied as they are, sometimes to me
dicinal science, sometimes to Somatology in
general, sometimes to technological science:
in the same work may be seen several other in
stances of ambiguous and obscure general deno

minations of arts and sciences.
Another cause of ambiguity in terms is de
rived from the diversity of import which custom
has often ascribed to paronymous" words. A

conjugate is naturally supposed to correspond in
import to its root; and when this is not the case,

it will always take some time for the learner to
dismiss the original meaning from his mind.

Ambiguity in conjunctions and other words
by which terms and propositions are connected,

is strikingly exemplified in the instance of the
* See hereafter fallacies of paronymity.
Q 2

228

C.H.

XI.

word or. In almost all European languages this
conjunction may express either synonymity or

alternation, and often in a manner in which the
learner is much puzzled as to which of the two

is to be understood.

The word either becomes

in some degree ambiguous, from its occasional
modern use as a synomyn to both or to each.

The ambiguity of some causal conjunctions has
been exemplified by Dr. Whately. (See above, p.
24, and Elements, p. 25). The present tense of
the verb is in many cases ambiguous, as it is
sometimes used indefinitely, that is, to denote the
action without

any regard to time, as animals live

eat ;

sometimes it is definitely applied to the
present time, as, He is in London.
2. Ambiguity in sentences, or Amphibology,

and

-

may arise from miscollocation, or from the double

meanings of grammatical inflections".
* Ambiguity from miscollocation has place
when, by a defect in the order in which the
* Inflections are the modifications in words by which are
expressed certain grammatical relations, (such as time, mood, .
number, gender, case, &c.); as, for ex. “rego, reri,” “write,

wrote,” &c.

Languages are said to be more or less inflected

according to the proportion of such relations expressed by .
modifications in the words themselves, as compared to those
which are expressed by separate auxiliary words.

FALLA CIES.

229

component parts of a portion of discourse are ex
hibited, it remains uncertain to which of two

terms or propositions a clause, a parenthesis, or
a relative pronoun, or other term, should be re
ferred. Various examples of this species of am

phibology may be seen in Dr. Whately’s Ele
ments, p. 165, note.
Grammatical amphibology will, of course, be
found much more common in the more inflected

languages than in the English.

The following

example, however, is given by Dr. Whately:
“The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose.”
This, as well as other species of ambiguity, was

much practised by ancient priests, to save the
credit of their oracles; as in the instance of the

celebrated oracle given to Pyrrhus at Delphi;

“Aio te Eacide Romanos vincere posse.” Here
either of the terms “te” and “Romanos” may

be taken either as agent or patient, both of these
grammatical relations being expressed by the
accusative case.

-

Another example of amphibology is that

of negative propositions in which the word

not is the sign of negation; as, for ex. I shall not
speak because he desires it, may signify either
that It is not because he desires it that I shall

-

230

CH. XI.

speak, or that His desiring me to speak, is my
reason for not doing so.

II. Obscurity of

expression has place where
the teacher’s propositions or arguments fail, in

any degree, to convey positive, exact, or distinct
ideas to the learner’s mind. It is productive of
fallacy when the learner (ascribing, perhaps, his
defective conception to his own want of

ability

or of application) adopts the teacher’s proposi
tions and conclusions, taking for granted their
respective connections and dependence, or what

ever else there may be that he cannot clearly
comprehend.

If the reader seeks for examples

of obscurity, he has only to open the first
German metaphysical treatise, ancient or mo
dern, which he may lay his hands upon; and he

will probably not have perused many pages
before he finds them replete with obscurity in

every shape: and their power of producing fallacy
is amply proved by theextraordinary faculty which
enables these same Germans, after having be
wildered their senses during the perusal of two
or three octavos, to come to such a conclusion as

the following: “In all plants there is but one

organ ; the root, leaves, petals, seeds, &c. &c.,

are all the same thing—or were all originally

*

231

FALL ACIES.

exactly similar, but have only been modified in

order to perform their different functions:” an
assertion which I have often heard seriously ar
gued by botanists of the German school, other
wise clever and intelligent.

An obscure expression is either vague or con
fused.

In the former case it is chiefly the nature

of the import of the words that is productive of .
obscurity; confusedness usually arises from their
collocation.

1. Wague nomenclature may be exemplified in

the instance of the words philosophy, reasoning,
&c. and in that of a great number of general

ethical terms, (virtue, vice, charity, faith, &c.).
On these occasions, the teacher may perhaps en
tertain, in his own mind, exact and distinct cor
respondent ideas; yet, to the learner, they will

always appear more or less vague, unless accom
panied by precise and repeated exposition. Thus
it is that these words, by their obscurity, must
produce more or less of fallacy in all arguments
in which they are introduced.

-

2. Confusedness of expression is often observed
in the writings of certain authors, whose long
winded arguments grow, as it were, one out
of the other, in one never-ending sentence, and

CH. x1.

232

are accompanied and intersected with so many
incidental and often irrelevant clauses, that, ,

before the reader has reached a full stop, he
has completely forgotten the point whence he ,

started and the object of the discourse, as

well as the respective connection of its compo
nent parts. An over attention to general rhetori
cal elegance, and the contrary efforts to sacrifice
every thing to the preciseness of each individual
proposition, (as, for ex. in our legal and statutelan-.
guage), may be alike productive of general confu
sedness. This defect may also originate in a want
of ability, on the author’s part, of embracing the
whole of his subject at once, and from his giving
way to that natural propensity of the human mind

to wander in its thoughts from one subject to an.
other, as suggested to his memory by any acciden

tal apropos. See hereafter Fallacies of Artful
Diversion.

III. Error of expression has place when a
different idea is conceived by the learner from

-

that which was intended to have been expressed
by the teacher, though at the same time each
may, in his own mind, have attached a clear and

distinct idea to the expression in question.
Error of expression, with regard to names of .

FALL ACIES.

233

real entities, seems little worth mentioning as a
source of fallacy; as, in such cases, it does not
proceed from inattention on the part of the
teacher, but chiefly from mistake or ignorance;
and in that case the learner’s misconception is
owing to his not having duly weighed the value
of the teacher’s testimony; and the fallacy exem

plified is referrible to the head of Defective Evi
dence. If a man calls a horse a dog, or a book
a table, through ignorance, his testimony is de

fective by the erroneousness of operation of his in
tellectual faculties; if he wilfully misuses any such
names of real entities, his moral dispositions are de

fective—he tells a lie. See, in the preceding chap
ter, what has been said on the value of Evidence,
and hereafter the Fallacies of Defective Evidence.

It is then to the misuse of fiction that falla

cies of erroneous expression must be attributed.
Fiction, it has already been shown, is absolutely

necessary in all discourse, and thatto suchadegree,
that it is scarcely possible on all occasions to guard
against fallacy from this cause. The connection
between a fictitious entity and its type is in most

cases so vague and uncertain, that, to ensure cor
rect conception, it would require an exact defi

nition of the meaning intended to be attached to

234

Chi.

XI.

the name of every fictitious entity on the part of
every succeeding author. This, however, cannot
have place, on account of the diffuseness which
would be the result. Every author, therefore,

selects for exposition such terms only as he con
siders, at the same time, as the most important
and the most liable to misconception. But these
very terms may be such as appear to be the
plainest to his readers; and there may be many
others, upon which his whole arguments may
rest, that may be taken in an entirely different
sense from that which he had in view, and thus
convert a whole treatise into absolute nonsense.

When a reader is puzzled with his author’s ar
guments, his first attention should be directed
to the meaning to be attached to the words; and
in order to facilitate, on all occasions, the ascer

taining the correctness of the ideas conveyed, no
author, whose object is perspicuity and instruc
tion, should fear the multiplication of expositions
of terms.

For the exemplification of fallacies of fiction

(by which name we may designate such as arise
from erroneous expression, as above limited), we
may refer to that head the following species:

1. Ascribing reality to a fictitious entity.

235

FALL ACIES.

This is a very common source of error, and is
much used by rhetoricians. All fallacies in
ethical and physiological arguments, derived
from the personification of Reason, Nature, &c.
may be referred to this head.
2. Assuming that the connection between
two fictitious entities is the same as the corre

sponding connection between real entities, that
is, as the real connection designated by the
same name. Thus, when we say that a genus
contains so many species, we do not represent to

ourselves that a genus is a receptacle which would
still remain (though empty), if all those species
were taken away from it, but that it consists of,
or is divided into, so many species; and yet, if
it be kept in mind that figurative expressions
must not be argued upon in their real sense,
there appears to be no great inconvenience in
adopting the common expression, that “a genus
contains its species.”
3. Ascribing reality to a collective entity,
that is, the supposing that a common name is.
the name of some one really existing object,
distinct of course from every individual object
contained in the collective entity in question.
The errors arising from this source are frequently
-

236

C.H. XI.

mentioned by Dr. Whately (p. 49, p. 259, &c.),
and have also been adverted to in the course of the

preceding pages of this Outline. .
4. Mistaking the extent of the name of a col
lective entity. When a generic term is made
use of by the teacher to designate one particular
species of the genus, -the only species, perhaps,

which occurs to him at the moment, or, at any
rate, that which appears to him the most import
ant, the species par excellence,—and when the

learner at the same time applies that same term
to the whole genus, or to some other of its spe
cies, his conception is erroneous, -he is mistaken
as to the extent which the teacher intended to as

cribe to the term in question. The example
given by Dr. Whately of the word faith, em
ployed by Christians to denote the Christian
faith, by Mussulmen to denote the Mahometan,
&c. belongs to the present species of fallacy,

(provided the double meaning be considered as
seated in the generic word faith). But I cannot
agree with this author in considering the word
faith as having “not two different senses, but

two different applications.” If the “Christian
faith” and the “Mahometan faith” be both de

signated by the same name, these two entities

-

FALLAcies.

237

being different from one another, that name
which is common to both must surely be con

sidered as having two different senses.

“A

word, having a particular sense,” and “a name,

being applied to a particular object,” are, I
should think, but two modes of expressing the
same idea".

5. An error, closely allied to the preceding,
is, the mistaking the object to which a relative
* “The elliptical character of ordinary discourse causes
many terms to become practically ambiguous, which yet are
not themselves employed in different senses, but with different
applications, which are understood. Thus, ‘The Faith would
be used by a Christian writer to denote the Christian Faith,
and, by a Mussulman, the Mahometan; yet the word Faith

has not in these cases, of itself, two different significations.
So &#xócroi, “elect, or “chosen, is sometimes applied to such
as are “chosen, to certain privileges and advantages ; (as the
Israelites were, though they were overthrown in the wilder

ness for their disobedience; and as all

Christians are fre

quently called in the New Testament) sometimes again to
those who are “chosen, as fit to receive a final renard, having
made a right use of those advantages; as when our Lord says,
‘many are called, but few chosen.’” Elements, p. 164.
In the latter example, the generic term “chosen” is em

ployed, in the first instance, to designate the species “chosen
for certain privileges and advantages;” afterwards to denote
the species “ chosen for a final reward.”

238

ch. x1.

expression refers; as, for ex. if two adversaries
were to discuss the merits of any particular
person, first designated by both parties by some
such expression as “the man who was there,”
&c. and were each to have in view some different
man. But this error is comparatively unimport
ant, as being rarely exemplified, and producing,
in general, but a momentary fallacy.
6. Fallacies of paronymity—the assuming that
the difference in sense of paronymous words

corresponds to the modifications given by the
conjugation.
Paronymous words, taking the term in its
most general sense, are all those which are
derived from the same root.

Words are derived

from a root when, an entity being designated by
any name, other words, either names of entities,

or abbreviative words, are formed by modifica
tions in that name or root.

The words so formed

are said to be conjugates of their root, or of one
‘another.

When these modifications in sense, so desig
nated, are reducible to regular classes, and are,
moreover, applicable to all words of the same

Part of speech, the relations between the conju
gates are termed grammatical relations, and the

-

FALL ACIES.

239

conjugates are more especially denominated in
jlections. Such are those of case, number, and
gender, as applied to the noun, substantive or

adjective; of degree, as applied to the adjective; of
voice, mood, tense, number, person, and gender,
as applied to the verb, &c. In the case of these
grammatical conjugates thereis seldom anyaltera
tion in the sense of the root but that which is

designated by the inflection: it is seldom, there
fore, that any fallacy is to be apprehended from
their use.

But in regard to those less regular conjugates,
which are more particularly termed paronymous
words, and which belong either to different parts

of speech (as, for ex. actor, to act, active, actively,
&c.), or to different classes of words in the same

part of speech, (as governor, the governed, go
vernment, &c.), the root often undergoes some
modification in sense besides that which is indi

cated by the conjugation.

The neglecting to

take these modifications into account is the

source of the present fallacy of paronymity,
which answers to that one termed by Dr.

Whately “Fallacia figurae dictionis” (Elements,
p. 157).

In the example he gives of the words

project and projector, the former word designates

240

CH. XI.

the result of an operation; the latter the apparently
corresponding operator: but in fact the word pro
jector implies, moreover, an expression of vitupe
ration, which project does not. The use which Dr.
Whately appears to have made, in his Introduc
tion", of the words reason and reasoning, may fur
nish another example of this species of fallacy f.
7. The fallacies of etymology are closely allied
to the preceding, as shewn by Dr. Whately, p.
161. They appear, indeed, to refer only to those
* See above, Ch. II, p. 16.
+ The distinction between grammatical and other conju
gates is very vague, and may perhaps be said only to consist
in the greater regularity of the former; that is to say, that
grammatical conjugates more rarely differ, otherwise than as
expressed by the inflection. Yet this is not always the case;

as, for ex. in the English future tense, “I shall go” merely
indicates futurity; “You shall go” intimates a command;
-

so likewise, “You will go” simply expresses futurity; and
“I will go” implies determination. The distinctive character

given in the text, that grammatical conjugates are applicable
to all words of the same part of speech, is only relatively

speaking; for then comes the question, as to what is, and
what is not, to be considered as a separate verb, substantive,
&c. “Regor” is commonly said to be—not a separate verb—but
the passive of “rego;” and yet, “governor” and “the go
verned” are said to be substantives, distinct from “ govern

ment,-not grammatical inflections of this substantive.

FALL ACIES.

241

cases of fallacious paronymity where the conju
gates are the more remote in sense or in form.—
See, for examples, Whately's Elements, p. 161.
. These several fallacies of expression will be
found to be very convenient instruments in the
hands of the sophist, for the fallacious reduction
of arguments, that is, for the reduction of a fal
lacious argument to a form approaching more or
less to the syllogism, at the same time altering
imperceptibly the propositions of which it may
consist, so as to make it produce conviction in
his adversary’s mind. In the instance of any of
the fallacious arguments which I have pointed
out as observable in the course of Dr. Whately’s
Elements, it might not, perhaps, be found diffi
cult to reduce them, apparently, to correct syllo
gisms, by means of a small degree of ingenuity

in profiting of double meanings of terms, of the
non-correspondence in sense of paronymous
words, &c.

-

Returning now to fallacious ideas, the second
general division of fallacies, and which I have
said to be such as “arise from the nature of the

ideas themselves;” they may be generally re
ferred to the following heads:
I. Fictitious argument.
R

242

CH.

XI.

II. Defective argument.
III. Irrelevant

argument.

These classes may not, perhaps, be found to
be so distinct in some of their details as might be
wished; but, in every deceptive argument, the
fallacies exemplified are usually so numerous,
and so intimately blended together, that it be
comes a very difficult operation to reduce them to
regular and distinct heads. In the following enu
meration, my object is chiefly to exhibit the most
important and most common modes, in which

more or less of erroneous conviction is produced;
I do not, therefore, give this list of fallacies as
complete; and, with regard to their arrangement,
I have merely endeavoured to group together
those which appear to bear the greatest analogy
to one another, in order that they may be the
more easily retained in the mind and glanced
over, when it is wished, for the purpose of refu
tation, to discover what particular fallacy has
been made use of in an adversary’s argument.

I. A fictitious argument is that which elicits
no fact or assertion, other than such as were

expressed in the propositions from whence the

sophist has started. To this head may be referred
the following fallacies:

FALL ACIES.

243

1. Petitio principii, or begging the question,
that is to say, assuming in the premises the very
thing you wish to prove. This may be in some
measure productive of fallacy, by the mere sub
stituting in the premises synonymous terms for
those made use of in the conclusion, as in the

example given in the Book of Fallacies, “Why
does opium produce sleep? Because it is sopo
riferous;” or in that given by Dr. Whately, “to
allow every man an unbounded freedom of
speech must always be, on the whole, advan
tageous to the state; for it is highly conducive

to the interest of the community, that each in
dividual should enjoy a liberty, perfectly un

limited, of expressing his sentiments.” But
petitio principii is a much more efficient fallacy,
when the fact to be proved is indirectly assumed
in the premises, by means of some term which
implies it, but does not so openly assert it; as,
for ex. if it were argued that “This action was
a most

virtuous

one, therefore, the man who

performed it deserves to be highly commended
for it.”

Here, virtue, and that which deserves to

be commended, are in fact two names for one

and the same thing.

One mode of disguising the concluding as
R 2

244

CH.

XI.

sertion in the premises, is by exhibiting it in the

conditional form, as if it were the intention of
the arguer to prove it; and, after more or less
verbiage, by concluding with the same assertion,
given in a positive form, but without its having
been supported by any thing but the original
conditional assumption. In this instance petitio

principii is combined with artful diversion.
I do not comprehend under the petitio
principii all the fallacies arising from the ques

tion-begging appellatives of the Book of Fallacies
(Part IV, Ch. I); as they appear to me to be
referrible, in some cases, to confusion of ideas,
in others to fallacious qualifications.
2. Arguing in a circle. This fallacy has
place when a conclusion is deduced from pre
mises which have themselves been proved by
means of the assumption of the proposition
which forms the conclusion in question. See
the example relating to gravitation, &c. in Dr.
Whately’s Elements, p. 180.
-

-

II. Defective argument—referring, of course,
to inductive arguments in particular, as the fal

lacies of expression relate rather to the syllogism.
The different sources of fallacy exemplified in a
defective argument must correspond, in some

FALLACIES.

245

measure, to the different considerations upon
which the validity of a sound one has been said
to depend, and may therefore be distributed, in
a manner analogous to that in which these con

siderations have been classed, under three gene
ral heads.

1. Defective evidence.

tive generalization.

11. Defec

111. Defective application.

1. Defective evidence—becomes a source of

fallacy when the sophist induces his opponent to

neglect, to gloss over, or to misconstrue any of
those elements of evidence, referred, in the last

chapter, to the heads of personal observation,

testimony, and previous induction. I shall not
repeat what I have said in the exposition of these

elements in my preceding chapter, but shall
merely add a few examples of the most common
fallacies of evidence.

1. Fallacies of personal observation—are

produced, when physical facts or phenomena
are so exhibited or commented upon as to pro
duce inattentive, or even directly erroneous ob
servation.

The illusions by which men have,

for some particular purpose, been persuaded to

believe that they actually saw or heard spectres
and phantoms; Richard the third's exhibition
of the pretended effects of witchcraft on his arm:

246

CH. XI.

the erroneous observation of inspecting visitors,
&c. resulting from the efforts of prison keep
ers, accountants, or office holders in general,

to prepare for their visits, &c., are all exam
ples of the present species of fallacy. Jugglers’
tricks, theatrical illusions, &c., not producing
belief in the results exhibited, are not fallacies,

but bear the same relation to the present class,
which jests and puns bear to fallacies of ex
pression.
2. Fallacies of testimony—are the effect, .
either of an artful misrepresentation or colour
ing of well-attested facts, or of endeavours to
depreciate or to enhance the moral or intellec
tual credibility of the attesting witnesses. No
example can illustrate this class of fallacies in
a more striking manner than that of the judge, ..
who, after summing up a case, so as to pro
duce in the minds of the whole audience a con- .

viction of the justice of the plaintiff’s demands,
by clear and incontrovertible proof, apparently
resulting from the testimony, shifted his ground, .
and recommencing his exposé, produced, from

the very same evidence, an equally convincing
statement of the defendant’s right. The varia
tions in the inferences drawn by adverse his

FALLACIES.

247

*

torians from the same series of events, are ad
ditional proofs of the repeated occurrence, the
facility in practice, and the difficulty of detection
of fallacies of testimony.

A very common mode of misrepresenting.
well-attested facts is by the gratuitous appli

cation of fallacious epithets; that is, by the
giving, to facts or to objects, epithets expressive
of some qualifications ascribed to them, for the
purpose of argument—not because the objects
are really supposed to be possessed of such quali
fications. This fallacy is chiefly applicable to
ethical subjects, and comprehends most of Mr.

Bentham's question-begging appellatives (Book
of Fallacies, p. 213); his impostor terms, p. 221;
matchless constitution, p. 236; glorious revolu
tion, p. 256; and perhaps the paradovical asser
tions contained in Part IV. Chapter X. of the
same work.

To the head of fallacies of testimony belongs
also that which Dr. Whately has defined and

exemplified (Elements, p. 185) under the name
of fallacy of references. In France, where it is
the custom to give the authority and rationale

(Les vus et considérants) of local and other acts
of the various administrations and judicatures, it

248

-

CH. x1, .

is often found convenient to support an unjust

arrété by reference to laws and regulations, which
to the vulgar eye may exhibit, in the title at
least, some distant analogy to the case in point,
but which, upon investigation, are discovered to

be totally irrelevant.

Considered in another

point of view, this example might also be re
ferred to the head of irrelevant argument, with

which defective testimony is closely connected.
With regard to the “undue assumption of
premises” in general, that is, to the assertion of
individual facts not sufficiently well attested, no
general rules can be given as to what is or is
not sufficiently well attested; this must depend,
in each individual case, not only on the general
value of the elements of evidence, but upon the
nature of the object in view, and on the judg
ment of the person to whom the argument is

addressed. A fact which may be considered as
highly probable by one person, may be judged
by another person, from the same grounds, to be

equally improbable. If a close investigation of
the several observations, testimonies, and induc

tive processes, upon which the truth of the fact
has been assumed, cannot settle a dispute on the
correctness of the assumption, neither party can

249

FALLACIES.

hope to convince his adversary by any other
logical process; for no inductive argument, as has
been already shown, can produce positive incon
trovertible proof.
11. Defective Generalization.

To this head

may be referred the following classes of fallacies.
1. Undue generalization. This applies to
inductive generalization, and has place when
constancy is ascribed to a fact from insufficient
grounds; as, for ex. when, from one individual act,
a habit or custom is inferred.

Thus, if a man,

upon some one occasion, perhaps under some
extraordinary temptation, had appropriated to
himself some property not belonging to him, and
if he were to be set down as an habitual thief,
and ejected from society without enquiring into
other circumstances of his character; or if a tra

veller were to give a general account of the cha
racter, manners, and customs of the nations he

visited, from one or two individual observations;
these fallacies would belong to the present head,
of which other examples may be found in my
last chapter.
From the Book of Fallacies we may refer to
the present species the sweeping classifications ex

emplified by the expressions, “crimes of kings,”

250

CH.

XI.

p. 265, and “cruelties of Catholics,” p. 266."
Also the fallacy of popular corruption, p. 279.
2. Vague generalities—“comprehend a nu
merous class of fallacies resorted to by those who,

in preference to the most particular and deter
minate terms and expressions which the nature
of the case in question admits of, employ others
more general and indeterminate.” Book of Fal
lacies, p. 230°. Besides the words order, esta
blishment, and balance of power, which are given
in that work as instances of vague generalities
with reference to political argument, we may in

physical science refer to this head the vagueness
of such assertions as “Nature has an object in all
her operations, and all her works are adapted to
their intended use,” a proposition to which no
one has probably ascribed any definite meaning,
and which may beargued for or against, according
* In the same page of the work here quoted we find the
following definition: “An expression is vague and ambi

guous when it designates, by one and the same appellative,
an object which may be good or bad, according to circum
stances.” The editor has probably not perceived that he ap

plies here a generic definition to one species of the genus. He
should have said, “One species of vague and ambiguous ex
pression is that which designates, &c.”

FALLACIES.

251 :

to the construction put upon it. “Matchless con
stitution” and “glorious revolution” included
in this class by the author of the Book of Falla

cies, appear to me to be more appropriately re
ferred to fallacious epithets.

3. Vague distinctions, or sham distinctions of
the Book of Fallacies, p. 271. I prefer the epi
thet vague in the present instance, as more ap
propriately designative of the fallacies here men
tioned by the author of the Book of Fallacies.

For it is admitted, for instance, that the press may
convey unjust imputations against the private
character of individuals, and that such imputa
tions may be productive of very serious injury,
and therefore require repression. A distinction,
therefore, there must exist, between liberty and
licentiousness of the press. This distinction is at .
present vague, and thereby produces fallacy in ar
gument, but it does not appear to me to be sham.
The fallacies of “good in theory, bad in prac
tice,” Book of Fallacies, p. 303, and “From
the abuse, argue not against the use,” id. p.

339, arise from the vagueness of the distinc
tions between theory and practice and between
abuse and use. In physical science, the vague
distinctionsestablished between the leading terms,

252

CH.

XI.

have been pointed out in a former work to which
I have already referred"; and, in the course of
the preceding pages, instances of the same de

fect have been mentioned, as having been ob
served in Dr. Whately’s Elements.
4. Sham distinctions. I have just said that
I do not consider as absolutely sham, the dis
tinctions so denominated in the Book of Falla

cies; yet it must be admitted that many authors
have often laboured hard to establish distinctions,
when really, according to their own definitions,
there exists none.

Such are D’Alembert’s dis

tinctions between “Histoire naturelle des ani

maux, plantes et minéraux,” and “Zoologie, Bo
tanique et Minéralogief.” Such are those of

Logicians between the meaning of a term and
the nature of the thing represented by that term;

between the sense of a word and its application,
&c.

-

5. Fallacies of confusion—not confusion of

expression, arising from the names only of the

* See Mr. Bentham's Chrestomathia and my Essai sur la
Nomenclature et la Classification.

t See his Système Figuré des Connoissances Humaines,

in the Discours Préliminaire of the Encyclopédie.

FALLACIES.

253

ideas, and of which I have treated under the
head of obscurity of expression,—but confusion
in the ideas, that is, the confounding together en
tities which are different in their nature.
One of the most common of these fallacies of

confusion is that which has been called non causa

pro causa, or the mistaking, for the cause, that
which is not the cause.

Thus an obstacle is

mistaken for the cause, when the system of edu

cation pursued in our universities is represented
as the cause of useful national learning (Book of
Fallacies, p. 334). So it has frequently been an
nounced that the destruction of all government
would be productive of perfect individual liberty,
when in fact it is the greatest obstacle to it.
The effect may also be mistaken for the
cause; as, for instance, when the Turks are ex

cused for their ill-treatment of the Greeks, by
representing it as the natural effect of the de
pravity of these their subjects, when it is rather

this tyrannical treatment the Greeks meet with
from their oppressors that is the cause of their
depravity.
On the present occasion it may have been

observed that the denomination, fallacies of con
Jusion, has been taken in a much more limited

254

'CH'. - XI.

sense than that which is given to it in the Book
of Fallacies.

I have endeavoured to class, and

eonsequently to name, fallacies either according
to their subject-matter or to their source: Mr.
Bentham’s denominations are occasionally (as
in this instance) derived from the supposed ob

ject of the sophist.

His fallacies of confusion are

those which produce confusion and perplexity:
mine are those which arise from the confounding
together distinct entities.

6. Post hoc ergo propter hoc,—a very com
mon argument, and frequently a fallacious one,
in the instance of a variety of physical subjects.
In medicine, it is, on many occasions, the only
argument upon which the efficacy of remedies
can be established; and when the recurrence of

the post hoc is frequent, with comparatively few
instances to the contrary, the inference of the

propter hoc may not be unfair.

But when ap

plied to individual instances, it becomes com
pletely fallacious.
7. Co-existence implies dependence. It has
been argued, in the same manner, that when two

things are constantly observed to accompany one
another, the one must depend upon the other.
Thence, for ex. in natural science, classes have,

-

FALLACIBs.

. .

255

been formed from two properties which have
been found to exist together in certain animals
or plants; and it has been asserted that one must
depend upon the other, and that therefore every
object possessed of one must have both. Some

time after, a new being has been discovered pos
sessed of one of these properties and not of the
other, and the whole theory falls to the ground.
Nothing has contributed more to the overthrow
of physiological systems, than the discovery of
so many anomalous animals and plants in New
Holland.

-

8. Similar effects must be derived from simi

lar causes. The fallacy arising from the too
general assumption of this rule has already been
fully exposed in the chapter on Induction, to
which I must also refer for examples.

111. Defective application—referring to the
third general class of the elements of induction,
namely, to the “application of the general rule
to the individual case in question.” From this

source are derived the following fallacies:
1. Fallacious analogy—having place when a
fact is exhibited as being referred to by a general
proposition which is not fairly applicable to it.

256

*

C.H. XI.

2. Neglect of obstacles or of contradictory or
modificative propositions.—See the chapter on
Induction for the exposition of these two sources.
of fallacy.
3. Fallacy of illustration—that is, when a

general analogy is argued from a partial resem
blance of two individual cases—a fallacy ex

plained and exemplified by Dr. Whately, under
the name of parallelism (Elements, p. 186). The
similes of rhetorical sophists belong to the pre
sent head.
4. Insufficient

argument—when

the argu

ment does not prove so much as what is asserted

in the conclusion: See Whately's Elements,
“Fallacy of proving a part of the question,”
p. 199.
III. Irrelevant argument. Under this deno
mination, I should comprehend any general ar
guments, not really connected with the subject

matter of discussion, but adduced by the sophist,
with a view to deterring his opponent from ap
plying his reasoning faculties to the drawing a
fair inference from the data set before him. This

class answers in some measure to Dr.

Whately's

irrelevant conclusion, or ignoratio elemchi of

FALLACIES.

257

other logicians; it may be subdivided into the
three following species; 1. Fallacious authority;
II. Irrelevant objections; 111. Artful diversion.
I. Fallacious authority. Fallacies of autho

rity consist in the sophist's adducing, in various
shapes, authority which appears to support a
question different from that which would be

deduced by fair reasoning,-in his causing his
adversary to trust rather to the opinions of
persons inconsiderately reckoned infallible, than
to his own powers of ratiocination. For the

analysis of authority and of the cases where an
appeal to it may be fallacious, I must refer to the
Book of Fallacies, Part I. Chap. I., where the
subject has been treated of with a degree of
detail which renders useless any further investiga

tion on the present occasion. Among the species
of fallacious authority we may enumerate the
following.
1. Appeal to the wisdom of our ancestors, –
the arguing in favour of the introduction or con

tinuance of any measure, because it was prac
tised or approved of by men who, in former
times, inhabited the country of those who are

discussing it,—these practices and opinions being
collected, either from the express words of some
S

258

c".

XI.

writer living at the period of time in question, or
from laws and institutions that were then in
existence, See Book of Fallacies, p. 69.
2. Appeal to the vices of existing institu
tions. The arguing, from the supposition that
every measure derived from our ancestors must
be bad,—for the entire suppression of existing
institutions, and for the general adoption of new
systems without sufficient practical experiment.
This fallacy is not admitted in the Book of Falla
cies; but it appears to me to be frequently pro
ductive of great evil. Under the name and dis
guise of a zeal for the reform of abuses, what im
mense havoc and devastation has there not been

produced in modern revolutions? The present
fallacy is the opposite defect to the preceding
one. It may not be so generally exemplified, nor
so pernicious in its results, as the “appeal to
the wisdom of our ancestors;” but there certainly
are instances when its influence is very prejudi
cial. It appears to arise from the natural self
love which reformers possess as well as other
men, from their blind admiration for all theories

of their own creation. In the case of every new
system, there is a probability of there being some

inconveniences arising from its first adoption,
x

-

FALLACIES.

259

which may have been overlooked by its author;
and for the purpose of discovering and obviating
such defects, it may, on many occasions, be ad
visable not to adopt, on a large scale, many ap
parently excellent institutions, till they have been
thus tried on a small scale. Individuals, farmers
and manufacturers in particular, are well ac
quainted with this rule, which may be equally
applicable to governments and other public
bodies.

3. Appeal to irrevocable laws and vows,—
the considering certain laws and vows as irre
vocable, that is to say, as absolutely indissoluble,
even by the concurrence of the parties who made
them, with those for whose benefit they were
made,—and therefore the rejecting, upon this
ground only, measures which would otherwise
receive the consent of both parties. See Book
of Fallacies, p. 82.
4. Laudatory personalities,—the arguing in
favour of a measure, an opinion or doctrine on
account of the alleged good character of those

who support, profess, or profit by it. See Book
of Fallacies, p. 123. The self-assumed authority
of the same work may be also referred to the

present head. In this case it is to his own cha
s2

260

C.H.

XI.

racter that the sophist applies the laudatory ex
pressions.
-

-

*

11. Irrelevant objections. This term may be

applied to the designation of those fallacies which
consist in the arguing for the rejection of pro
posed practical measures or scientific doctrines,
by the adducing general irrelevant objections for
the purpose of preventing fair discussion. These

objections are exemplified in the following fal
lacies.

-

1. Vituperative personalities. “The object
of vituperative personalities is to effect the rejec
tion of a measure, on account of the alleged bad
character of those who promote it.” Book of
Fallacies, p. 123. “The fallacies that belong to

this cluster may be denominated—1. Imputation

of bad design. 2. Imputation of bad character.
3. Imputation of bad motive. 4. Imputation of
inconsistency. 5. Imputation of suspicious con
nections. 6. Imputation founded on identity of
denomination.” Id. p. 127.
2. Innovation,—the objecting to a proposed
measure or doctrine on account of its being an

innovation, that is a change, and thereby Sup
posing that every change must be a bad change.
See Book of Fallacies, p. 143.
**

*

261

FALLACIES.

3. No precedent,—the objecting to a pro
posed measure or doctrine, on the plea of its

being novel and unexampled, – of its having
never before been put in practice or adopted. Id.
p. 113. This fallacy is scarcely distinguishable
from the preceding one.
-

4. Rejection from partial objections,—the
arguing for the rejection of a measure or doctrine
because there are objections against some part of
it, without considering whether there be not pre
ponderant reasons in favour of it, or objections to
the alternative, that is to the measure which
must be adopted if this be rejected; or whether
in the adoption of the measure in question these

objections cannot be obviated. The fallacy of
objections of Dr. Whately (Elements, p. 197)
refers to the present species which is denomi

nated rejection instead of amendment in the
Book of Fallacies (p: 349).
5. Dangerous consequences. This fallacy is
exemplified when,—“an arrangement or set of
arrangements being proposed, so plainly bene
ficial, and at the same time so manifestly in
noxious, that no prospect presents itself of bring
ing to bear upon them, with any effect, the cry

of no innovation,”—the objector argues on the

262

CH.

xi.

supposition of there being some more remote

and hidden evil intentions on the part of the pro
poser, and frightens the supporters with the idea
of some dangerous and undefined consequences

which may ensue. This is the fallacy of dis
trust of the Book of Fallacies, p. 154; and we

might, perhaps, refer to it also the official male
factor's screen of the following chapter of the
same work (p. 158).

111. Artful diversion.

In employing this

class of fallacies, the sophist endeavours to di
vert the attention of his audience to some topic
unconnected with the question in discussion,

and thereby to procure a tacit assent to his
measures, or admission of his doctrines, or a

forbearance from, or delay in, altering or reject
ing such as he is desirous of preserving. The

following are the principal species referrible to
this head.

-

1. Diversion by the form of argument used.
Such are the fallacies of combating the two pre

mises alternately (Whately’s Elements, p. 196),

the suppressed conclusion (id. p. 201), &c.
2. Fallacies of excitation—consisting in the

exciting the passions or affections (the indigna
tion, admiration, wonder, curiosity, shame, &c.)

FAL LACIES.

263

of the audience, and thereby inducing them to
adopt a conclusion which is inconsistent with

fair ratiocination. Such are, for ex. the argu
mentum ad populum (Whately’s Elements, p.
191), the excitation of shame and wonder men
tioned by the same author, p. 184, &c.

3. Comparative insignificance. The deter
ring your adversaries from the consideration of
a proposed measure by the exhibition of some

more important one, to which it is asserted that
the preference should be given, when the two
are not incompatible with one another. The de
nomination of artful diversion is exclusively re
served to this species in the Book of Fallacies

(p. 209).
4. Fallacies of delay, -consisting in the
sophist's diverting his opponents from the con
sideration of a proposed measure, by means of
some expressions tending to induce delay; as,
for ex. “This is not the time,” “Not too fast,

one thing at a time,” &c. (Book of Fallacies,
Part III, Ch. 1, 2, 3, 4.)
Having thus given a general outline of a

system of classification of these instruments of
deception, I must refer to Mr. Bentham’s Book
of Fallacies for any further investigation which

264

CH.

XI.

may be required of fallacies in general, of their
causes and mischiefs, of the use of their exposure,

and of the different degrees of fallacy of which
the same argument is susceptible, according to
the cases to which it is applied. I have only to

observe, on the present occasion, that many of the
propositions quoted in the course of the preced
ing pages, as examples of fallacious arguments,

may in some instances become perfectly fair and
conclusive.

If, for example, the blind observ

ance of the laws and opinions of our ancestors,

and a universal confidence in their

wisdom, are

practically pernicious, and therefore theoreti
cally fallacious; yet there are certainly instances
of our ancestors having known better than our
selves on particular points. The fallacy lies in

the general assumption of the proposition; and

the contradictory assertion, if taken universally,
would also be fallacious, though in a much
smaller degree.
Referring now to the view Dr. Whately has
taken of the subject, we perceive that he first

distributes fallacies into three classes, the purely
logical, the semi-logical, and the non-logical.
Purely logical fallacies are defined to be

those which are exhibited in the form only of the

FALL ACIES.

<

265

expression, without any regard to the meaning
of the terms; these terms being supposed to be

-

exactly defined, and free from any ambiguity or
obscurity. In the same manner, as no regard is
to be had to the sense, the argument must be
supposed to have been also previously reduced

to a syllogistic form; as this operation cannot be
performed “without any regard to the sense.”
But, when the argument is thus reduced, will
not any defect in form be so very apparent to

any one whose mind is at all capable of any de
duction, as to render it useless to speak of such

defects as fallacies 2 that is, as such as cause the

argument to be apparently decisive of a false
conclusion. Take, for instance, the example,
“Whatever is universally believed must be true,
the existence of a God is not universally believed,

therefore it is not true.” (Elements, p. 155).
This fallacious argument is certainly not yet re
duced to a syllogistic form; for we have in one pre
miss a substantive term, whatever is universallybe
lieved, and an adjective one, true; in the second

a different substantive and adjective, “existence

of a God,” and “universally believed”; and, in
the conclusion, a pronoun and the adjective term

266

CH,

XI.

of the first premiss—in all, five terms, and there
fore no syllogism". The pronoun, it is true,
might be reckoned as the same as the noun which
it represents; but even then we have one term
too many; for I do not see how an adjective ex
pression can be converted into an equivalent
substantive one, without any regard to the sense,

—nor can it, perhaps, be done without a very
close attention to the meaning, as may be seen in
Dr. Whately's examples of the Fallacia figurae
dictionis, p. 158.

Let us now suppose all these “non-logical”
operations performed, and the above argument
reduced to a “pure syllogism containing only
three terms;” and to be more certain of disre

garding the sense of the terms, let us substitute
unmeaning symbols; we have “Every X is a Y,
Z is not an X, therefore Z is not a Y.”

Who is

there who would admit of such reasoning? How

can this “unsound mode of arguing” “appear
to demand our conviction, and to be decisive of
the question in hand, when in fairness it is
not”?

*

\

* “Every syllogism has three and only three tems."
ments, p. 90.

Ele

FALL ACIES.

267

It may be objected that when this argument
is involved in a complicated labyrinth of words,

it may amount to a fallacy; but then that fallacy

does not rest in the form, but in the ambiguity
or obscurity, and particularly in the confusedness
of the expression, and thence of the sense con
veyed in that expression; and in so far as this
is the case, the fallacy belongs to other heads.
Dr. Whately admits that this first division is not
distinct, that fallacies may frequently be referred
to either of its condivident members, a defect

which must be more or less observable in any
classification of these complicated instruments of

deception; but, in the present instance, the dis
tinction will be found to be eminently vague,
and, moreover, useless, if it be considered that

any defect in a pure syllogism is so obvious as not
to be worth designating a fallacy; and that when
the argument is not in its simplest form, the fal

lacy is always referrible to the same author's se
milogical, or to his non-logical fallacies".
* I have thought it necessary to verify these observations,
in the example of that species only which Dr. Whately has
termed illicit process; but they will be found to be equally
applicable to any of his other purely logical fallacies, as it will

appear evident by reducing them to the syllogistic form. Thus,

.268

CH, XI.

It is for these reasons that, in my classifica
tion of fallacies, I have entirely omitted those
which Dr. Whately calls “purely logical.” Let

us now proceed to his semi-logical fallacies, which
he defines to be “all the cases of ambiguous
middle except its non-distribution.” Elements,
p. 138.
In the next page he gives as a reason for call
ing these fallacies semi-logical, that here Logic
teaches us not how to find the fallacy, but only
where to search for it, and on what principles to
condemn it. But, take the example: “Every

X is a Y, every Y is a Z, therefore every X is a
Z.” If Logic is nothing more than syllogistic
reasoning, it can detect no fallacy in this argu

ment, which answers perfectly to the rules of
syllogism. Now, suppose we are told that there
is here a concealed fallacy, does such “Logic”
tell us that it must rest in the ambiguity of the
mean Y " may it not be in the obscurity of X or
for example, the undistributed middle (rather a singular expres
sion in the English language): Every X is a Y, some Y’s are
Z’s, therefore every X is a Z—or the syllogisms which “have

palpably more than three terms,” every A is a B, every C is a
D, therefore, every A is a D, would scarcely produce belief in
their respective conclusions.
-

FALL ACIES.

269

of Z? or in the ambiguity of either X or Z;
these terms meaning one thing in the premiss,
another in the conclusion ? or in the falsity of
either of the assertions 2

If therefore Dr.

Whately’s limitation of the field of Logic be
adopted, that science does not appear to be en
titled even to the share here ascribed to it in the

detection of “ambiguous middle :” it has been
shewn that the fallacies called purely logical, are
no fallacies at all; the consequence is that Logic,
thus restricted, is totally unconnected with the
exposure of any fallacies.

However, the author himself now departs a
little from the system of rigorous exclusion he
has hitherto pursued. I have already observed
that in p. 131 he calls classification and analysis
“the taking a Logical view;” again in p. 153

he speaks of Logical analysis; and on the present
occasion (p. 139) he positively admits that gene
ral rules for definition belong to Logic. Let him
but admit that the science includes also general
rules for induction, and we are perfectly agreed
as to the extent of its field.

The passage I have just alluded to is too
strongly in support of my opinion, for me to re
frain from quoting it.

270

CH.

XI.

“It has been made a bitter subject of com
plaint against Logic, that it presupposes the most

difficult point to be already accomplished, viz.
the sense of the Terms to be ascertained....The

objection is peculiarly absurd when urged against

Logic, because the object which it is blamed for
not accomplishing cannot possibly be within the

province of any one art whatever. Is it indeed
possible or conceivable that there should be any
method, science, or system, that should enable
one to know the full and exact meaning of every
Term in existence"?

The utmost that can be

done is to give some general rules that may assist
us in this work.”

-

The giving general rules is all I require of
Logic, and here I agree with the author of the

Elements; but I leave it for the reader to judge
* I certainly admit that all this is not the province of Lo
-gic; but I should be tempted to ask, in reply, whether it be
not the professed object of a dictionary 2 This object is not
in general attained so well as it might be wished; but it is as
easy to conceive a good expositive dictionary as a good scien
tific treatise or theory. In order to know the full and exact
meaning of a term, there is no occasion to treat of all the dif

ferent properties of the idea it represents, nor of the relations
of this idea with others.

FALL ACIES.

271

how far he is right when he adds, “which is done
in the two first parts of Logic,” meaning proba

bly in his Elements; where the section on defi
nition, for instance, may perhaps have been shown,
in a preceding chapter, to be somewhat inade
quate for the purpose.

But to return to ambiguous middle, on the
occasion of which this digression has been sug

gested: this fallacy, or rather source of fallacy,

which might be more appropriately denominated
ambiguity in the mean term, belongs to the head

of ambiguity in terms of my arrangement;
and I see no reason for making a separate class
of those cases where the ambiguity rests in the
mean term, not in the extremes; much less for

attaching more importance to ambiguity in this
case than in any other, as it may, if any thing, be,
generally speaking, easier of detection than that
of the extremes.

Under the head of ambiguous middle are
classed—.

1. Fallacy of equivocation (p. 157), not here
defined nor exemplified, but meaning, I pre
sume, that which has place when a word is taken
in one sense in one premiss and repeated in another

sense in the other. I have, as above, adopted this

272

CH. XI.

name; but I have applied it to all cases where a
word, forming part of an argument, may be un
derstood in more than one sense. It is, in general,
of all fallacies the easiest to detect, and therefore
the least important.

2. Fallacia figurae dictionis (p. 157), where
paronymous words are erroneously supposed to
have a correspondent meaning.

This I have re

ferred, under the name of fallacy of paronymity,
to the head of fallacies of fiction, to which it
appears to me to belong, rather than to the head
of fallacies arising from ambiguity.
3. Fallacia figurae dictionis, when resting in
other terms than the mean (p. 158). 4. Am

biguity in other terms than the mean (p. 159).
Do these two fallacies belong to ambiguous mid
dle? and if not, is there any use in thus classing
fallacious expression according to the terms in
which it rests?

5. Fallacy of etymology (p. 161). I have said
that this is a modification of fallacious paronymity,
differing only inasmuch as the conjugates in the
present instance are more remote from one another
in sense and in form. The fallacy is thereby more

apparent, and therefore less important.
6. Fallacy of interrogations ($ 9, p. 162).
/

FALL ACIES.

273

This does not appear to me to differ from the
ordinary fallacy of equivocation, otherwise than

by the form in which the argument is expressed,
and by the slight degree of obscurity which is

thereby added to it. The proposition to be proved
is, in the present instance, given as an interroga
tion, and the fallacy lies in the supposed answer,
not in the question itself. Dr. Whately’s first ex

ample, taken from Cicero, turns upon the ambi
guity of the term “anything expedient;” the
second on that of the sign of extent attached to
the term “motive.”

7. Fallacy of application (§ 10, p. 161). This
is a case of error of expression where two per
sons ascribe a different extent to the name of a

collective entity. See above, fallacies of fiction
No. 4, “mistaking the extent of the name of a
collective entity.”

8. Fallacy of double construction (p. 165,
note).

See above ambiguity in sentences, under

the head of fallacious expression.
9. Dr. Whately next gives some instances of

ambiguity in terms, which he refers to the fol
lowing heads:
1. Accidental ambiguity—arising from words
-

being accidentally homonymous, -an ambiguity
T

274
*

CH.

XI.

of very small importance, as it does not appear
that, to any one acquainted with the language
spoken, the misuse of them would be productive
of any thing but evident nonsense.
11. Ambiguity in the first and second inten
tion of a word. This has been applied to the

case where a word, originally obscure or vague,
has been precisely defined, and is subsequently

used both in its original and in its newly-acquired
sense. This species of negligent homonymity,
though it may not often be the immediate source
of fallacy, is frequently productive of much con
fusion, and is therefore important.

I do not

however, consider the two significations of such
words as being very happily denominated first
and second intentions. The precise scientific
sense of a word often comes nearer to that of the

root whence it is derived than the more vague

and popular sense, and occasionally precedes it in
formation; as, for ex. the word gas, which was

coined by chemists for the designation of any
substance when in that particular state; by the
vulgar it has subsequently been vaguely attached.
to combustible gasses in general.

-

111. Ambiguity from resemblance or analogy.
This homonymity is scarcely distinguishable, for

FALL ACI E.S.

275

the present purpose, from accidental homonymity

whenever the analogy is real: the leg of a table
or the foot of a mountain can hardly be con
founded with the leg or foot of a man. But when

the analogy is fictitious (or fanciful, as Dr.
Whately has it), the ambiguity is far more im
portant or rather the error of expression—for it is
under the latter head that I have considered this

source of fallacy as being more appropriately
classed. This subject is scarcely mentioned by
Dr. Whately; I shall therefore refer the reader to

what I have said in a former chapter on fictitious
entities in general, and to my head of fallacies
of fiction in the present chapter.
Iv. Ambiguity from ideas being connected
by vicinity of time and place. I should rather
designate this source of fallacy by the denomina

tion, homonymity of paronymous words. Amongst
the examples given in the Elements on the present
occasion, the homonymity of operations and their
results had been frequently remarked by Mr.
Bentham as a great source of confusion in dis
course, and thence of error. The double mean

ing of the word shot can scarcely be referrible
to the present head, but approaches very near
to accidental homonymity.
T 2

276

C.H.

XI.

10. Fallacy of division and composition (Ele

ments, $ 11, p. 173). In the section thus headed,
several examples are given of fallacies which ap
pear to me to be somewhat heterogeneous in their
nature. The two first contain no fallacy, but mere

jests, which turn upon the double meaning of the
words all and and. In the third, “He who necessa

rily goes or stays is not a free agent; you mustne
cessarily go or stay, therefore you are not a free
agent” (p. 174), the fallacy arises from the am
biguity of the conjunction or. In the next, “the
gaining of a high price, &c.” there is a combi
nation of obscurity of expression and error in the
extent of collective entities.

The latter source

of fallacy is that which may be observed in the
remaining examples, and appears to be the one
which Dr.Whately had more particularly in view
in applying to these cases the denomination of

fallacies of division and composition.
11. The fallacia accidentis and others, men

tioned in § 12 (p. 177), appear to be among those
which are founded on obscurity in expression.
So it is, at any rate, in the case of “Protestant
ascendancy” (p. 178). As to the phrase, “what

is bought in the market is eaten &c.” the fallacy
or rather the jest or quibble, rests in the ambi

FALLA CIES.

277

guity of the word what, which may mean either
whatever or some thing.
We now come to the material or non-logical
fallacies, which lie in the sense either of the

premises or of the conclusion, not in the con
nection between them. Such, at least, is the
definition which may be gathered from what is
said in p. 141. Whether this denomination is
an appropriate designation of the group of falla
cies to which it is applied, is a question which
may best be answered by a short examination of
the several species it contains.
These species are arranged by the author

under the three following heads: 1. Begging
the question. II. Undue assumption. 111. Irrele
want conclusion.

1. Begging the question or petitio principii,
which l have referred, under the same name, to

the head of fictitious argument. The argument
in a circle (also a species of fictitious argument)
is here reckoned as a petitio principii; but I have
thought it more convenient to restrict the latter
denomination to that species of fictitious argu
ment in which the question to be proved is an
nounced in the premises, though it be in dis

guise, as in the example given by Dr. Whately

278

C. H. XI.

in p. 181, where the conclusion is a repetition, in
other words, of the proposition exhibited in the
premiss. In an argument in a circle, of which
an example is given in p. 180 of the Elements,
each separate reasoning process may be such as
to exhibit no other fallacy than that of defective
evidence; but the whole chain of reasoning, when

connected together, shews that no one proposi
tion can be adduced in support of the others, as
the validity of each one rests only upon that of
those others. This sort of reasoning may be il
lustrated by the theory of the ancients, who sup
posed the sky did not fall because it was sup
ported by pillars resting on the earth; the earth,
in the same manner, did not fall because it was
suspended from the sky by chains. In the state
of knowledge at that time, there was no reason to
deny that either of these causes separately might
be followed by such their respective effects; but,
put the two arguments together and the question
is immediately suggested: Why do not both earth
and sky fall down together ?
*

*

11. Undue assumption ($ 14, p. 181). That

of the minor premiss may in general be referred
to my defective evidence: the undue assumption,
or rather supposed assumption of a major pre

279

FALL ACI ES.

miss, is what I have termed undue generali
zation.

But the “contrivances by which men may
deceive themselves or others, in assuming pre
mises unduly,” are most of them fallacies of a

different nature.

Dr. Whately’s examples may

be distributed as follows:

-

- 1. In Horne Tooke's induction (Elements,
p. 183), relating to nouns and verbs, the fallacy
is that which I have termed fallacy of etymology,
applied, in the present instance, to an universal

proposition.
2. When men are shamed into admitting a
false fact by being assured that it would argue
weakness to doubt it (p. 184), the fallacy is one
of irrelevant argument, and contains a mixture

of vituperative personalities and of fallacies of
excitation.

3. When the truth of a fact is caused to be

admitted by the assertion that it is curious or

remarkable (p. 184), the fallacy is one of excita

tion, referrible to the head of artful diversion.
4. The fallacy of references (p. 185) has above
been classed with the fallacies of testimony.
5. The fallacious parallelism (p. 186) is that
which I have denominated fallacy of illustration. .

280

CIH.

XI.

111. Irrelevant conclusion or ignoratio elenchi

-(§ 15, p. 187). This genus is defined “the
coming to a conclusion which is not the one re
quired,” and contains a variety of fallacies which
I should distribute in the following manner:
1. “If a sophist has to defend one who has
been guilty of some serious offence, which he
wishes to extenuate, though he is unable dis

tinctly to prove that it is not such, yet if he can
succeed in making the audience laugh at some
casual matter, he has gained practically the same
point,” p. 187. Here there appears to be noir
relevant conclusion—nor indeed any conclusion
at all. The fallacy is that which I have termed
artful diversion.

2. “Let it be a case of peculation, and that

many mitigating circumstances have been brought
forward which cannot be denied, the sophistical

opponent will reply, “well, but after all, the
man is a rogue, and there is an end of it,’” p.
188. This belongs to fallacious epithets, which
I have classed under defective testimony.

3. The fallacy quoted (p. 189) from Thucy
dides, where Cleon proved the justice of a
measure, when its expediency was the question,
is a case of artful diversion.

FALLACIES.

281

4. “When in a discussion one party win
dicates, on a ground of general expediency, a
particular instance of resistance to government
in a case of intolerable oppression, the oppo
nent may gravely maintain, that we ought not
to do evil that good may come.” p. 190. In
this answer there is both obscurity in the terms
good and evil, and defective application of the
general proposition contained in the answer, to
the particular case in question.

5. Argumentum ad hominem (p. 191) is
referrible either to vituperative or to laudatory
personalities.

6. Argumentum ad verecundiam (p. 191)
to fallacies of authority.

7. Argumentum ad populum (p. 191) to fal
lacies of excitation.

8. The shifting the burden of proof to the
adversary, as in the case of the sportsman who,

when accused of barbarity in sacrificing un
offending hares to his amusement, answers,

“why do you feed on the flesh of animals?”
(p. 192, note) belongs to the head of artful di
version.

9. In the example relating to the efficacy of

282

CH. XI.

faith (p. 193) the fallacy is in the expression, and
belongs to the head of error in extent of a col
lective entity.
10. The note to p. 194 refers, in the first
place, to fallacies of excitation. With regard to
the other observations contained in the same note,
I may presently have occasion to return to them.
11. The example relating to the neglect of
the study of mathematics in one of our univer
* **

-

** *

sities (p. 195) is one of artful diversion.

-

12. The fallacy of combating the two premi

ses alternately (p. 196) is artful diversion by
the form of expression.
13. The fallacious substitutions of the partial
for the universal, the possible for the probable,
-

the probable for the necessary, &c. (p. 196) are
fallacies of insufficient argument.

-

14. Fallacy of objections ($17, p. 197). This
answers, in some measure, to the rejection in
stead of amendment of the Book of Fallacies.

It

is one of the fallacies most commonly exempli
fied in the arguments both of innovators and

anti-innovators.

I have designated it by the

name of rejection from partial objections, and

classed it as a species of irrelevant objections.

FALLACIES.

283

15. Fallacy of proving part of the question
(§ 18, p. 199). This is again the fallacy of insuf
ficient argument.

16. Suppressed conclusion (§ 19, p. 201) is
another instance of artful diversion by means of
the form of expression.

-

After a chapter so long as the one I am
now speaking of, devoted to the exposure of
fallacies, it would be rather unfortunate for the

author to terminate by affording an example of
fallacy in his own discourse. Any one, it is true,
is liable to fall into error; it is much easier
to detect fallacies than to avoid them ; the reader

may, perhaps, have observed them in unlimited

number in the preceding pages, in the same
manner in which I have pointed out occasional
ones in Dr. Whately’s Elements, and, so far, the
one which I now speak of may be excused. What

I allude to is in section 20 of this chapter on
fallacies of that work, where the author speaks of
the “just and ingenious remark, that jests are
fallacies.” . A fallacy has been stated by him to

be “an unsound mode of argument, which ap
pears to demand our conviction, and to be deci
sive of the question in hand, when in fairness it
is not.” After this definition, I do not think it

284

CH.

XI.

too much to assume that, to be fallacious, an ar

gument must be so formed as to produce some
degree of deception; otherwise it would be either
no fallacy, or no argument at all, real or apparent.
A jest, he now tells us, is “a fallacy so palpa

ble as not to be likely to deceive any one,” and
therefore no fallacy.

Here is, if I mistake not,

ambiguity, obscurity, or error. That a jestis in
some points analogous to a fallacy, that it bears.
“that resemblance of argument which is calcu
lated to amuse by the contrast,” are points which
I do not deny; but that a jest is a fallacy, that it

produces deception, can surely not be admitted.
An imitation is not a species, a picture of a man
is not a man.

Before I conclude, I must say a few words
respecting a note to p. 194, in which Dr.
Whately mentions the Book of Fallacies to which
I have so often referred.

The few observations

he makes on the character of this work must

be admitted to be generally fair and moderate;

but there is one fallacy of which he accuses
the author of falling into perpetually, which
I cannot discover in any of Mr. Bentham’s

writings: I mean that of petitio principii, as
thus distinguished from the use of vituperative

FALLACIES.

285

or laudatory appellatives. It would have been
much easier to decide upon this question, if Dr.
Whately had supported his assertion by quoting
some of the particular instances in which this
fallacy had been exemplified.
In order to facilitate the comparison between

Dr. Whately’s classification of fallacies and the
method which I propose substituting to his, I
shall here conclude by subjoining them both in
the tabular form, reprinting Dr. Whately’s table
in the form in which he has given it in his
Elements, p. 144.

:
Y

Premises.)
from
follow
does
conclusion
the
when
e.
(i.
iPremiss
Conclusion
assumed.
unduly
r elevant.

Fallacy
ad
passions;
the
to
appeals
of
comusing
verecundiam,
ad
hominem;
&c.

iis
(
elemchi.)
fagnoratio
the
where
e.
(i.
ambeing
middle
(the
appal aciousnes

Non-Logical
Material.
or
ebiguous
of
form
mere
the
from
rent
sense.)
in
xpres ion.) Premiss
UPremiss
pmiddle.
(Petitio
or
false
&c.
process,
Illicit
nrdisntrcibuptied .)
Cnosnucpluosritoend.
the
on
udepending
V
f"

circle.
not
propositionbetween
a
assuming
implying
unfairly
but
senses.
different
the
caocnidenctalioyn.tion,
some
from
ques
as
same
very
the
*-Y

w
r

14.)
(S.
15.)
16.)

13.).
12.)
(S.
-"
—A- -\

Terms.
general
and
plex

it.

—Y
-r
\

to
Premiss
from

alternately.
Fallacies.
A.

acciden
fallacia
and
Division
of
Fallacy

ground.
shifting
of
Fallacy
&c.
tis,
Composition.

Reasoning;
of
process
very
in
strictly,
is,
fault
the
when
e.
(i.
Logical.
Purely
Semi-Logical

itself,
in
context,
the
from

11.)
(S.
10.)
-

irre
wholly
something
to

PCroenmcilsuesi.o)n
the
from
following
not

levant.

&c.
resemblance,
effect,
and
cause
analogy.
objections,
|
&c.
Logical.

7.)
(S.

f

*
r

