This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

https://books.google.com

600068294Z

1

\Kv^

/

MB

TREATISE
ON

LOGIC,
ON THE BASIS OF ALDTUCH,

WITH ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES.

BY

JOHN HUYSHE, M. A.
BRAZENOSE COLI.EGE, OXFORD.

It Is to be hoped tint those academical bodies who hare been wise
enough to retain this science, will, instead of being persuaded to abandon
it, give their attention rather to its improvement and more effectual cul
ti?ati'ih.—Dr. Whatri.y, Elements of Logic, Preface, ad rinem.,-^ e /S 7>v

s>\
OXFORD,
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.
SOLD BY SHKRIYOOI), OII.BKUT, AND IMI'KR. I.ONn i\.

1827-

q(u.

PRINTED BY D. A. TALBOYS, OXFORD.

PREFACE.
The author of the following pages is
aware that it may be deemed not a little
presumptuous, to offer to the public a
Treatise on Logic ; more particularly at
the present time, when two publications
on this science have so lately made
their appearance : he trusts, therefore,
that he shall be pardoned, if he briefly
states the reasons which gave rise to
the present volume. Aldrich's Logic has
been long and deservedly held in high
estimation ; but it seems to be generally
admitted, that it is too concise, and too full
of technicalities, to be easily intelligible
to a beginner : many of these difficulties
have been removed by Dr. Whately, in
his excellent work, entitled, " The Ele

IV

PREFACE.

ments of Logic ;" but this treatise,
though it contains a very admirable dis
sertation on the science, and proves
that its author was completely master
of his subject, yet is more adapted to
those who have made some progress in
the study ; added to which, its length
% would be likely to daunt the young stu
dent.
Of the treatise lately published by
Mr. Bentham, entitled, " Outline of a
New System of Logic," little need here
be said, especially as it has been no
ticed in some of the following pages ;
suffice it to observe, that he utterly
condemns, and wishes to annihilate, the
whole Aristotelian system, as being
" more or less complicated and incom
prehensible," in order to pave the way
for a new system of his own, which,
with surprising self-complacency, he ex-

PREFACE.

V

tols with no usual praises : he finds fault
with the Aristotelian system, (and espe' cially with Dr. Whately's work,) be
cause it is " so replete with technical
phraseology ;" forgetting that his own
_" Outline" is liable to recrimination, as
containing more technicalities, and also
as being possessed of an amazing num
ber of new-coined words, which it is
impossible to understand, and almost
impossible even to pronounce.
The present Treatise is intended to
assist those who wish to study Aldrich's
Logic, in order to pass their examination
in the Oxford Schools. The author's
sole endeavour has been, to render the
study of the science as easy as he
could ; and he has freely made use of
the suggestions of others, wherever he
thought that they were calculated to
elucidate any difficulty.

VI

PREFACE.

With regard to style, he has endea
voured to explain with perspicuity, and
not with elegance; for " prolixity of
style, homeliness of illustration, and
baldness of expression, are to be re
garded as blemishes not worth thinking
of when any thing is to be gained in re
spect of clearness." Elements of Logic,
Preface, p. 23. Whether the object of
the author, in this point, has been at
tained, is left to the judgement of those
who may deem the following pages
worthy of their perusal.

TREATISE ON LOGIC.

PART I. SECT. I.
»

ON THE OPERATIONS OF THE MIND.

There are three operations of the mind— operations of
the mind.
simple apprehension, judgement, and discourse
or reasoning.
Simple
apprehension
is the mere intellectual simple
aP■
x ■
prehension :
conception of a thing. It is sometimes termed
perception, because the apprehension of the
mind was thought
to be analogous
to per- analogous.
to what
0
ox
ception by the senses; thus it was imagined
that, by apprehension, an idea of any object
was imprinted on the mind, just as its image
was, by sight, on the eye. The result of this i« result.
operation is properly termed a notion, or, me
taphorically, an image, idea, representation, or
conception.
There are two kinds of simple apprehen- Tw0 kindssion, viz. incomplex and complex.
B

XJ
Incomplex
apprehen-

Complex ap
prehension.

Judgement.

ON THE OPERATIONS

Simple incomplex apprehension is the con
ception of one object, or of many taken con
fuse, i. e. without any grammatical relation
to each other a. It is by this kind of appre
hension, that the mind gains the ideas repre
sented by each word, in any sentence, when
taken separately.
Complex apprehension is the conception of
several objects taken with a certain order and
reference to each other. And it is by this
kind of apprehension that the mind under
stands the meaning of all the words of a sen
tence taken collectively—or, in other words,
the complex idea which that sentence may
intend to convey.
Of these two kinds of apprehension, the incomplex is prior in point of time.
Judgement b is the decision on the agreea Any one word (whether representative of a simple or a com
pound idea) denotes an incomplex simple apprehension in its
logical sense. So also any number of words when combined so
as to form a sentence, become representatives of complex appre
hension. Though, as Mr. Bentham justly observes, (Outline of
a new System of Logic, p. 52.) " Every conception of any really
existing object is complex ; that of a man, just as much as of a
man on horseback ; for each of these is composed of a great
number of simple conceptions. A simple conception is that of a
single property, that of colour, for instance, without those of
form, of extent, or any other; it is the result of an operation of
the abstractive faculty."
b Dr. Whately (p. 55.) defines judgement to be "The com
paring together in the mind two of the notions (or ideas) which

OF THE MIND.

3

ment or disagreement of any two objects when
compared with each other; and until this de
cision is made, judgement cannot be said to be
formed.
There are two kinds of judgement, qffirma- -*■<«' "»<•»■
tive and negative.
Affirmative judgement (which is also termed
composition) is that which expresses the agree
ment of the two objects which were compared.
Negative judgement, or division, expresses
their mutual disagreement.
. ■
The copula is that which indicates the act copula.
of judgement, viz. it serves to express the
agreement or disagreement of two objects. It
is the substantive verb alone in its present
tense; and is either affirmative or negative.
It is by deciding whether the affirmative Difference between judge-

copula est, or the negative non est, should "mp^lp.
be applied, that judgement differs from com- Preh<:ns'onare the objects of apprehension, whether complex or incomplex,
and pronouncing that they agree or disagree with each other ;
(or that one of them belongs or does not belong to the other.)"
He thus considers the comparison as much a part of judgement
as the decision itself—whereas the latter is the result of the
former : for the object of comparison is to pronounce a judge
ment on the relations which the objects compared may have to
each other. Mr. Bentharn says, ' ' Judgement usually pronounces
either the degree of belief attached by our intellectual mind to,—
. or the degree of pleasure or pain produced in our sensitive
minds by,—an impression or an idea. It is an instantaneous
operation which accompanies, and forms part of, that of every
other intellectual faculty."

b2

4

ON THE OPERATIONS

plex apprehension : for the mere act of under
standing the sense conveyed by any assertion,
whether affirmative or not, is the office of com
plex apprehension ; but in judgement, the mind
not only understands the meaning of the asser
tion, but, by determining the copula, shows that
it acquiesces in, or dissents from, that assertion.
use of the
Since the copula serves to indicate the
agreement or disagreement of two objects, it
is obvious, that the affirmative copula expresses
their agreement, and the negative their dis
agreement. Thus, " The soul is immortal," is
an affirmative judgement, and " The earth is
not stationary," is a negative judgement.
Reasoning.
Reasoning, or discourse, is the motion or
progress of the mind from one or more judge
ments to another resulting from them. It is
also termed ratiocination0; and it is expressed
or signified by some illative, viz. inferential
particle, as hence, ifierefore, consequently, etc. ;
thus,
Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit :
Ego sum mortaiis :
Ergo, Non omnibus horis sapio.
c Care must be taken not to confound reason with reasoning.
For reason, in its common acceptation, signifies "That use of
the faculties of the mind which distinguishes man from any
other animal," viz. " It is the characteristic of man." But
reasoning, or ratiocination, (discursus,) is " the process of in
ferring a proposition or conclusion, as necessarily resulting from
one or more other propositions."

OF THE MIND.

O

Owing to the weakness of human nature, the The mental
m
operations
mind of man is fallible, and its operations are li*ble to deconsequently liable to certain errors or defects.
The error incidental to apprehension is termed
indistinctness, that of judgement, falsity, and
of reasoning, " a faulty mode of inferring6."
Thus man's ideas of eternity, omnipotence, in- instances
.
of these deJinity, must be indistinct. So if I were to de- ^^
cide that " the sun moves round the earth,"
my judgement would be false; and if from
these two judgements, viz. " Qui sapit pauca
loquitur," and " Pauca loquor," I were to de
duce this third judgement, " Sapio," the in- •
ference would be erroneous.
In order to obviate these defects, certain Wl'y losic
was taught.
rules have been laid down, the knowledge of
which is termed logic, or the art of reasonins. It is defined to be " ars instrumen- Jotfc <•*■
°

fined:

talis dirigens mentem in cognitione rerum"
for logic, when applied to practice % becomes

d The words " mendosa collectio" do not exactly mean " er
roneous inference," as they are most frequently translated ; but
rather " a faulty arrangement of the terms of an argument."
This will be more clearly shown in the third part of logic.
e Every art must have its corresponding science, for a science
is engaged about knowledge, whilst an art is the knowledge of a
science applied to jrraetice ; thus, logic is a science, when con
versant solely about the theory of reasoning ; but when applied

b3

6

an art:

iis object:

ON THE OPERATIONS OF THE MIND.

an art; and since it is not studied for its own
sake, but with a view to some ulterior object,
it is not a final or master art, but an instrumental or subordinate art. The object which
logic has in view, is, " to direct the mind
in the attainment of knowledge f," and the

to practice it becomes an art : and it is from not having a due
consideration of this circumstance that much perplexity has
arisen. See Mr. Bentham's Outline of a New System of Logic,
p. 12.
Mr. Bentham says, (p. 12.) " There cannot exist a single art
that has not its corresponding science, nor a single science which
is not accompanied by some portion of art."
' Few sciences have fallen into such disrepute as that of logic,
the sole cause of which has been the error into which even lo
gicians themselves have fallen respecting the true nature of it ;
and thus the censure, due to those who caused the error, has
fallen upon the science itself. Many have supposed that logic
was a science, the object of which would be the attainment of
knowledge ; not remembering that it would be utterly impossible
for any science to effect such a thing ; for how could any rules
be laid for guiding the human judgement, or instilling clear
ideas into the mind? Logic cannot give any rules for asceitaining whether all propositions are true or not ; inasmuch as
such facts depend on circumstances wholly unconnected with the
science. The truth or falsehood of a proposition depends upon
that science to which the subject-matter of the proposition belongs.
Logic lays down certain rules as tests of the validity of any argu
ment, as far only as theform of its expression is concerned. It
does not profess to cotvmunicate any knowledge, but to guide and
direct the mind in the acquisition of knowledge. It cannot sup
ply mental faculties to those who have them not, so neither could
an eyeglass make a blind man see. All arguments can ulti-

ON WORDS.

7

means which it adopts to attain that object are, how attained.
" the showing the proper use of words :" for
since, in reasoning, terms may be indistinct,
propositions false, and arguments fallacious ;
hence, by remedying these defects, i. e. by
showing the proper use of language, logic does
guide and direct the mind in the attainment of
knowledge.
Since there are three operations
of the mind,' Three
pan.
r
of logic.
and consequently three defects to correct, hence
also there are three parts of logic.
f

SECTION II.
In order to express
these operations
of the language.
Pri«in of
*
x
mind, and to communicate them to each other,
men were compelled to invent certain signs
or tokens, which are called words; a know
ledge of the proper use of which must be
necessary, in order that the mental operations
may not be defective.
A word is denned to be,' " Signum
rei vel Definition
o
of a word :
conceptus ex instituto vicarium ;" i. e. " An ar
bitrary vicarious sign of a thing or idea 8."
mutely be applied to the tests which logic has laid down, and by
them their validity or fallacy may be ascertained.
s Words are merely arbitrary signs, and they do not naturally
possess any fitness in their sound or form, as necessary in order

8

* word is

ON WORDS.

1 . A word is a sign, i. e. it is a token of the
existence of some thing or idea meant to be
represented by it.

a word is
a thing.

2. A word is the sign of a thing, because it
_
does serve to represent the particular object
which that word conveys to the mind of the
hearer.
The sign of
3. A word is the sign of an idea, because a
an idea.
word, when uttered, conveys the very same
idea to the hearer's mind which the speaker
had in his own.
a vicarious
4. A word is a vicarious sign, inasmuch as
sign
it not only conveys the idea of an object, but
it supplies the place of that object, or, " primo
declarat conceptum, deinde supponit pro reh,"
the sign of

i. e. a word first declares the idea or concep
tion of any object intended, and afterwards
acts as a substitute for that very object itself.
An arbitrary
5. A word is also an arbitrary sign, for it
sign.
requires the mutual agreement of men, in order
to acquire any signification.
Sounds, therefore, which are suggested by na-

that they should express the ideas or objects intended. If this
were the case, all languages would have the same words to ex
press the same ideas, which is not the case, For the same
sound conveys different ideas in different languages, and not
only in different but in the same language, as is the case with
equivocal words.
h Aldrich, p. 7.

'.

^

ON WORDS.

i*

ture, such as sighs, groans, shrieks, etc. are not Natural
sounds arcWOrds, for they are not formed " ex instituto." n»t words.
As there are three mental operations, there Three kinds
1
of words.
are three kinds of words expressive of them :
those which express simple apprehension are
called simple words, those which express judge
ment, complex1, those which express discursus,
decomplex.
Every decomplex word consists of three com
plex, and every complex word of three simple
words; for a complex word, which is com
monly called a proposition, consists of, 1 . The component
parts of a
subject, i. e. " that concerning which something proposition.
else is said;" °Z. The predicate, i. e. " that
which is said of another;" and, 3. The copula*,
which comes between the subject and predi1 Since (from the definition of judgement) the word expres
sive of it must consist of some combination of simple words,
hence has arisen the term complex word. Also since the word
expressive of discursus must be a certain combination of complex
words, hence it is termed decomplex, i. e. doubly complex.
k It should be remembered, that the copula is the substantive
verb, in the present tense ; whenever, therefore, the copula be
found, in a proposition, in the past or future tenses, such a fact
is to be regarded only as necessary for making the sentence
grammatical, or, if any modification of time be intended, this
must particularly be specified by the introduction of " always,"
" at such a time," or some similar expression. For no conclu
sion could logically be inferred under such circumstances, unless
the exact time intended be fixed. On this point, see Mr.
Bentham's Outline, p. 128. note.

10

ON WORDS.

cate. It frequently happens that these three
words are united in one, e. g. " Loquor," viz.
" Ego sum loquens;" or the copula is joined to
the predicate, as " Cats eat mice," i. e. " Cats
are animals which eat mice ;" or they may be
composed of a great number of grammatical
words, as, " The opening of this epistle ex
hibits a connexion with the history, which
alone would satisfy my mind that the epistle
was written by St. Paul, and by St. Paul in
the situation in which the history places him."
The whole of this sentence consists of but one
proposition ; the subject of which is, " The
opening of this epistle :" the copula " is," and
" an opening which exhibits a connexion," etc.
is the predicate.
subject and
The subject ought to be the first word in
•ometimes every proposition, and the predicate the last;
transposed.
.
.
but this verbal arrangement is sometimes
changed1: thus in the following examples, the
predicate stands first in the propositions; and
the grammatical words which compose the sub
ject and predicate are united by a hyphen, the

1 An infinitive mood is never the predicate, unless where two
infinitives occur in one proposition : e. g. " To do good to all
men is to act according to the dictates of Christianity." " To take
an undue advantage over another is not to act the part of a true
gentleman."

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

11

subject, predicate, and copula being separated
by an asterisk.
" Blessed * are * the - poor - in - spirit."
. " Faded * is * the - flower - which - once - decked - her fair- bosom."
" Apex - senectutis * est * amicitia."
" Varius - et - multiplex * est * auctoritas."
" AiiTxp&v * iffri * to - ipevdrj - \syuv."
" Kfpro/jijaic * kan * ro'X>j0)j - \eyuv."

These three words, though (as it has been subject, pre.
dicate, and
shown)' they* are not always
three in number,* copula,
are
•*
always three
are always to be considered as three in sense. in senseSince the subject
and predicate are, as far Terms
of a
e
proposition.
as regards the sense, the extremes of a propo
sition; hence they are called " the terms," from
the Latin word " terminus."
The first part of logic is, therefore, said to with what
words the
treat of simple
terms,' or words expressive
of of
th/,ee
parts
Jr
logic arc
simple apprehension ; the second part treats of engaBedcomplex words or propositions, which express
judgement ; and the third part, of decomplex
words or syllogisms, which express reasoning.

SECTION III.
Simple words are of three kinds, categore- Division of
#
simple words.
matic, syncategorematic, and mixed. Catego- categorerematic words, which are also called simple
terms, are such as may be used alone, either

12

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

as the subject or predicate of a proposition.
And such words are nouns substantive in the
nominative case, as well as verbs in the in
finitive mood ; which (see Dr. Whately, p. 58.)
are properly nouns substantive. No nouns,
therefore, in the oblique cases can be categorematics m.
Syncategorematic words are such as in sense
can form only a part of the subject or pre
dicate, as adjectives, nouns in oblique cases,
verbs, and other parts of speech ; for though
an adjective is often used as the predicate of a
proposition, yet some substantive must always
be considered as understood and implied, though
not expressed".
m A categorematic word need not be one grammatical word ;
e. g. " Man that is born of a woman hath but a short time to
live." " Man- that -is - born - of - a- woman" is the subject,
and is one categorematic word, and "a - being - that - hath - but
- a - short - time - to - live" is the predicate, and is also only one
categorematic word.
'i This fact is denied by Dr. Whately, (p. 59;) but I am of
opinion, that an adjective cannot ever be strictly said to be the
predicate of a proposition ; and this may be shown to be the fact,
by converting a proposition in which the predicate is expressed
adjectively, e. g. " Some men are learned ;" the simple con
verse of which is, " Some learned beings are men :" in which
" beings," or some such word, must be expressed, in order that
the proposition, when converted, may be grammatical. Now
since conversion is the transposition of the extremes of a proposi
tion without any change in the extremes themselves, the word
" beings" must have been implied, though it was not expressed,
in the predicate of the converted proposition.

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

13

Mixed words are such as are formed by Mixed word»
some combination of the two other species;
and of these there may be three classes, exam
ples of which are given in Aldrich, (c. 1 . §. 3.)
the first, " semper," being compounded of two
syncategorematics ; the second, " nemo," of a
categorematic and a syncategorematic ; and the
third, " currit," of a syncategorematic and
the copula, to which last class all grammatical Grammatical
*
°
verbs are
verbs may be referred ; for they may all be mixeA word.
resolved into the copula and the participle :
thus, " I walk" is equivalent to " I am walk- How rewir
ing." " Moneo," i. e. " Ego sum monens,"
" ypdfa" is equivalent to " iyo tlfu ypaipuv."
There is but one verb in logic, which is the The logical
.
verbcopula, the substantive verb in the present
tense.
The logical noun" is denned to be " termi- Definition of
°
the logical
nus simplex sine tempore significativus ;" i. e. a nounlogical noun is " a word which is significant,
and has no reference to timep;" that is, it is

° The words " recta vox" (Aldrich, c 1. §. 3.) signify " a
word in the nominative case ;" for grammarians considered the
form of the noun as erect or upright ; i. e. " rectus;" and the
various changes which that noun received in government, they
considered as " fallings down" (or '* casus") from that upright
ness. Hence the other cases were termed oblique.
* A more accurate definition would be, a logical noun is
C

14

ON THE OIVtStONS OF NOUNS.

equivalent to a categorcmatic word. Adverbs,
conjunctions, etc. are not, therefore, logical
nouns ; for they have not any actual significa
tion, but they serve to qualify those nouns to
which they are joined.
of nouns •

There are many divisions of logical nouns,
three of which are most necessary to be obwhich most served : viz. the common, unifocal, and noun
necessary.

of the second intention, because the union of
these three forms what is termed " a predi
cate."
singular and
The first division of nouns is into singular
common
nouns.

°
an(J common\

" a word which is significant, and inexpressive of relation or
time." Thus excluding adjectives and nouns in oblique cases.
1 The division of nouns into singular and common is the true
division of nouns, inasmuch as it comprehends the whole class ;
for every noun must either be singular or common^. The other
divisions are not so much the divisions of nouns, as the different
modes of employing the same noun. For these divisions of
nouns into positive, privative, and negative, are not really dif
ferent divisions of the nouns themselves, but rather the different
modes of employing the same noun ; for a noun may be used
both relatively and oppositely ; or equivocally or analogously ;
as may be shown by the following example.
Thus, for instance, the word " bull" may be used equi
vocally ; for it may signify " an animal" or " a blunder in an
expression;" two ideas ^which apparently have not any ana
logy to each other : so when considered as meaning " an ani
mal" only, it will be univocally used; for then its one signifi
cation, which is that of an animal, will be applicable in the
same sense to many objects. Again, when it is used to signify

•'•

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

15

The singular noun speaks of individuals
alone, the common noun of a whole class of in
dividuals, and is applicable to every individual
of that class, inasmuch as it comprehends them
in its signification : thus " Oxford," " Lon
don," " Bristol," are singular nouns, because
they express or stand for individuals ; and
" city," " town," etc. are common nouns, and
they not only represent the whole class which
they express, but are likewise applicable to
" Oxford," " London," " Bristol," etc. ; which
are individuals comprehended in those classes.
N. B. Every thing which has actual exist
ence is represented by a singular noun; a
common noun does not represent a thing which
has actual existence, but an idea or nature
common to many individuals; i. e. that idea
which is the result of the abstractive faculty.
[See Section IV.]
A common noun may be considered as sin- common
nouns used
gular when a sign of singularity is affixed to it, as singulars.
thus: " He is gone to the river" -meaning the
Isis. " River" would here be considered as a
singular noun, because its signification applies singular
nouns einto but one object.
So also a singular
noun Ploved
M
"
o
common.
" a violent enemy," it is used analogously ; this signification
being derived from the analogy between " a bull" (the animal)
and " a violent enemy," who seems to partake of the disposition
of such an animal.

c2

1G

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

might be employed as common, by extending
its signification to many individuals. " The
Ccesars were emperors of Rome."
Definite and
A definite noun is such as has not the parindefinite
noun«.
tide nonT prefixed to it. The indefinite is that
to which the particle non is prefixed. Thus,
" That quadruped is not a dog :" dog is here
used indefinitely ; for since it is predicated of
that certain quadruped, that it is not a dog,
the class dog alone is excluded, and it remains
wholly undefined to what other class of qua
drupeds it may belong.
Positive,
privative,

The positive noun speaks of a thing as it
m

and negative were present; i. e. possessed by any subject.
The privative denotes the absence of a thing
from a subject capable of possessing it; and the
negative denotes the absence of a thing from a
subject incapable of possessing it. Thus " ra
tional" is spoken positively, " unlearned" privatively, of man; and " irrational" is spoken ne
gatively of brutes.
Again, Positive, A man of sense.
Privative, A senseless boy.
Negative, A senseless stone.
'The particle rum is consequently called indefinitant ; be
cause when prefixed to a noun, it renders that noun indefinite.
For the use of the definite and indefinite nouns in division, see
note on this subject in sect. vii.

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

17

An univocal noun' is that which has but one Unseat
nouns.
signification, and in that one signification is
equally applicable to many objects.
An equivocal noun has more than one siani- Equivocal
1
°
nouns.
fication, and in each signification is equally ap
plicable to many objects : such as post, bull,
mail, etc. Such words are an imperfection in
a language ; for the same sound is intended to
convey two distinct ideas, the result of which
must be frequent mistakes.
Analogous nouns are such as have but one Anaiagous
nouns.
signification ; but in that one signification they
are unequally, viz. with unequal propriety, ap
plied to many things. When any objects are
united by some resemblance which they bear
to each other, the same word is often used to
apply to them, which word is called analogous;
as ' a vein in the body,' and ' a vein of metal :'
where the resemblance is obvious. Analogous
nouns are also used to represent any two or
more objects which have no resemblance to
each other; as ' a sour apple,' and ' a sour
s Thus the word dog is an univocal word, and is applicable
in the same signification to many dogs : equivocal words are
such as are the same in sound, but convey different ideas; as
the words mail, which signifies armour, and the post-bag ; and
page, which signifies either the side of a leaf in a book, or an
attendant. Fallacies often result from using such words ; these
fallacies are termed " fallacia? equivocalionis." See Dr. Whately,
p. 164.

c3

18

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

look ;' though even in this instance some ana
logy may be perceived in the ideas conveyed
by these words.
Concrete
Concrete nouns are such as express some
nouns.
quality, at the same time implying the subject
in which that quality exists ; as prudent, wise1.
Abstract
Abstract nouns express a quality by itself,
nouns.
and, as it were, independent of the subject
possessed of it : such as prudence, wisdom.
Concretes
Concrete nouns are not always adjectives",
not always
adjectives.
although most frequently so : e. g. fool, philo
sopher, astronomer, geometrician, etc. which
are concretes; the abstracts to them being
jolly, philosophy, astronomy, geometry, etc.
Absolute and
An absolute noun is that whose sense is Cor
relative
nouns.
plete in itself; and does not imply a relation
' Prudent is a concrete noun, because it cannot be used with
out at the same time implying or referring to the being who is
possessed of that quality : but prudence is an abstract noun, and
may be used without any reference whatsoever to the subject
which is possessed of it ; it is a word which expresses an ab
stract idea.
u It may perhaps be questioned whether all concrete nouns
are not strictly adjectives, though substantively used : but this
is a question of no importance, as far as regards logic. It has
before been shown, that the same word may be used univocally ,
equivocally, and analogously : so also the same word may lie
considered as relative, opposite, etc. ; e. g. brother is the con
crete to fraternity ; and it may also be regarded as a relative
noun, for it suggests the idea of its correlative sister: so again,
great and small are relative nouns ; and they may be regarded
also as opposite, for they caunot both be predicated of the same
thing at the same time : this is the case with many nouns.

_

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

19

to any other thing. The relative noun implies
the idea of its correlative, as husband, which
implies the idea of wife.
Agreeing
qualities
Agreeing
o
o nouns are such as express
■
*
opposite and
which may be said of any one object at tlie nounssame time, as ' a horse may be both swift and
tractable.' Opposite nouns express qualities
which cannot be said of any one object at the
same time : thus ' a horse could not be said to
be at the same time both swift and slow.' At
different times opposite nouns may be predicated
of the same object: thus ' a horse may be said to
be tractable to-day and intractable to-morrow.'
The first intention51 of a word is its common Nouns of first
signification ; i. e. its vague colloquial meaning, intention.
Its second intention is its strict and definite
sense, limited as may be required when it is
used in any particular science or art. When
therefore we speak logically, all words are
limited in their signification, and may conse
quently be considered as in their second inten
tion. As the same word may be used in many
different sciences and in different significations,
" The first intention of a word is its common and colloquial
sense, which is opposed to the more limited and accurate signi
fication, in which it is used in any particular science, and which
is termed its second intention ; thus, when we speak accurately
and logically, every word will be used in a secondary meaning :
in fact, any word which is applied in a limited sense, in an ar
gument, may be considered as used in a second intention.

20

ON THE DIVISIONS OF NOUNS.

it is evident that such a word will have as many
second intentions as there are sciences in which
Many second it is used : thus the word triangle in matheintentions to
word™6
matics is ' a plane rectilineal figure contained
hy three straight lines ;' but in music it signi
fies ' a musical instrument.' All second in
tentions bear a resemblance in part of their
signification to the primary or first intention.
Care must be taken not to confound the lo
gical first and second intention with the etymoEtymoiogicat logical ; for the etymological first intention of
second
a word, is that meaning
which most nearly
apintention.
°
*
r
proaches to the root of that word ; any de
viation in signification from which would be
termed its etymological second intention.

ON THE FORMATION OF PREDICABLES.

21

SECTION IV.
A singular noun y is also termed in logic of singula
indivisible, because it is incapable of being
logically divided, inasmuch as its signification
extends to one object, and one only, i. e. its
object is numerically one : but nevertheless
whatever can be called one, is" not therefore
necessarily singular; for many things, which
possess any common quality, may (as far as
that resemblance goes) be considered as one
in sense though not one in number ; and thus
one common name may be assigned to them,
which (as far as they resemble each other)
will be applicable to any one or to all of them.
i Singular nouns, which denote any one individual object,
cannot be affirmatively predicated of any thing except them
selves, i. e. they cannot be the predicate of any affirmative pro
position, unless its subject be a word expressive of that same
individual object which the singular noun represents ; thus,
this university and Oxford are singular nouns, which cannot be
predicated of any thing but themselves; for we may say, lAis
university is Oxford, but we cannot predicate of any other uni
versity that it is Oxford. Singular nouns may be used as the
predicate of any negative proposition, whose subject does not ex
press the same individual object, e. g. London is not Oxford, etc.
Common nouns denote a whole class, and any individual in
that class ; and consequently may be predicated of all or of any
<"1', of those individuals; thus university, city, are common
nouns; and we may predicate of Oxford that it is an university,
or that it is a city; for Oxford is an individual which is compre
hended under each of those common nouns.

22

ON THE FORMATION

Abstraction. This operation is termed abstraction', which
its deflni- is defined to be " that faculty of the mind by
which, in the contemplation of many singulars
or individuals, it neglects all those points in
which the singulars differ from each other,
regarding those only in which they agree."
its result. The result of such an operation is an abstract
idea; i. e. the idea of an universal nature which
extends over many individuals, not being dif
ferent in each, but the same in all. Hence it
is termed universale, or ens unum in multis.
The word expressive of such an abstract idea
a predicabie. is termed a predicable, because such universal
nature may be affirmatively predicated of each
z When in contemplating any individual object, we consider
any one property or quality which that individual may possess,
to the exclusion of all its other qualities, we are said to abstract
this quality; thus, if in looking at any individual horse, we
should regard only the property of his having four legs, exclud
ing all thoughts respecting his colour, height, temper, etc. we
should be employing the faculty of abstraction : but if we con
template many horses, and from finding that they are all fourlegged animals, we give to them a common name, which may
(as far as they agree with each other) be applicable to all or
each of them, (as, quadruped,) we are then employing what is
termed generalization. Such generalization may obviously be
carried to almost any extent by considering such common nouns
(as, for instance, quadruped,) as singulars ; and by abstracting
their differences, we shall thus arrive at new aggregates, and at
some more universal term : thus by abstraction from quadruped
we should arrive at the more common term animal ; so from
animal we should gain the still more universal term corporeal
being, and so on.

OF PREDICABLES.

23

of those singulars, and of them all collectively.
Such a common terma or predicable is defined iudennition
to be " nomen commune, univocum, secundce
intentionis" or, a common, univocal noun of
the second intention: for this common noun,
although applicable to many individuals, is
considered as representative of only one idea ;
hence it is univocal. And since a word when
thus applied is not used in a vague but limited
and definite sense, it is also said to be a word
of the second intention.
This abstract nature does not denote any
really-existing thing, nor can it be supposed to
exist, unless combined with some singulars:
the motive for conceiving it to exist is merely n. object,
with a view to generalization b and classifica-

* The idea expressed by a common term is (as Dr. Whately
observes, p. 50.) " merely an inadequate (or incomplete) notion
of an individual; and from the very circumstance of its in
adequacy, it will apply equally well to any one of several indi
viduals :" e. g. if I, when considering Oiford, were to omit all
consideration of any of those circumstances and accidents which
are peculiar to Oxford, and distinguish it from any other city,
the notion which I have thus formed of Oxford, (which is ex
pressed by a common term, city,) is evidently an inadequate and
incomplete notion of it, for such common term is as applicable to
any other city as to Oxford; and therefore inadequately ex
presses it, because it does not imply or designate any of its
peculiarities.
b Abstraction may exist without any generalization : the for
mer may be employed on one individual only, for we may re-

24<

ON THE SPECIES.

tion. " The object of this operation is the
formation of new aggregates, by means either
of the generalizing, or of the synthetical facul
ties."—Bentham, p. 57.

SECTION V.
Essence

The essence c of any thing is " that which

makes it to be what it is." If, therefore, it be
deprived of its essence, or of any part of it, it
no longer exists as it was. This essence is not
really-existing, but is an imaginary nature, the
its two pans, notion of which may be resolved into two
parts, viz. that part of an essence which is
common to it as well as to other essences, which
Material part is also called the material part or genus ; and
or genus.
.
.
that part which is not common to any other
essence, but is peculiar to this one essence,
and distinguishes it from all others, and con
stitutes it what it is. This part is called the
gard any one quality, (which such an individual may pos
sess,) to the exclusion of all others, which is abstraction; but
in order to employ generalization, we must abstract some one
quality from a great many individuals, and denote this quality
by some common name, which (as far as this resemblance goes)
will be applicable to them all. This has been explained above,
see p. 22. note z,
c Essence is the nature of any thing, even though that thing
has not any existence : thus a lily in winter has an essence, but
in summer it has an existence also.

OF PREDICABLES.

25

formal or characteristic »part, i. e. the differenFormal
pan
M
or differentia.
tiad. Thus a triangle is " a plane figure con-

"

d Mr. Bentham (p. 67.) says, " The differentia or character
istic is a species of property, not distinct from it ; it is exactly
that which belongs necessarily to an entity—necessarily, in the
ordinary sense of the word, though in the sense here given to it
(which is that of universally) this may not be the case." Now,
putting aside the last clause of this sentence, the meaning of
which I confess that I cannot understand, I should not be in
clined to admit, that " the differentia is exactly that which be
longs necessarily to an entity." It does not necessarily belong to
or result from an essence, but it is an actually-constituting part
of that essence, and must therefore be distinct from property,
which does not form a part of an essence, but only necessarily
Hows and results from it. Mr. Bentham wishes to prove, that
" differentia is not distinct from property ;" and therefore he
begs the question, viz. " that differentia is exactly that which
belongs necessarily to an entity ;" which if he had proved, his
conclusion might have had more pretensions to accuracy.
Again, he says, (in the same page,) " If we are assured that
a property is universal, it becomes essential and characteristic."
And, (p. 68.) the property " of having ten fingers, for instance,
amounts almost to what we should call an universal property ;
yet it is not essential ; for if a man had but nine, he would still
be a man." Now, even if it were conceded, that " every uni
versal property must also be essential," (to disprove which pro
position would not be very difficult,) I would ask Mr. Bentham
what meaning he gives or intends to give to the word " assured,"
as he has used it, and also in what manner it qualifies his asser
tion: for " the fact of an universal property becoming essen
tial," seems to depend on the degree of assurance (or, as I
suppose, confidence amounting almost to certainty,) which we
may possess of its universality. I am (and I doubt not but
that the generality of men are) as well assured that man is a
ten-fingered animal, as that he is a rational one. The property
of having ten fingers may justly be termed not almost but alto
gether an universal property. There may have existed, and per
haps there now do exist, men with more or less than ten fingers,
D

26

ON THE SPECIES

species.

tained by three sides." The common or ma
terial part of the essence of triangle, viz. its
genus, is " a plane figure," which is common
to squares, circles, oblongs, etc. ; but its be
ing " contained by three sides," is the cha
racteristic part of its essence, viz. its differen
tia; for it constitutes the distinction between
triangle and any other figure whatsoever ; for
no figure can be a triangle which is not con
tained by three sides, nor can any three-sided
figure be an}- thing but a triangle.
The whole of any essence is called the spe

Genus and
differentia

cies : hence it is evident, that every species is
made up
byJ the union of the genus
and dif*
°

Species? the ferentia; for every whole is made up by the
union of all its parts; e. g. by uniting the
two parts, " a plane figure," (the genus,) and
" contained by three sides," (the differentia,)
we form triangle, which is a species of figure.
Qualities
essence.

joined to an

To any essence different qualities may be observed to be joined ; and of such qualities there

of two kinds, may be two kinds, for they may either be nebut such facts do not disprove the universality of the property ;
so neither could it be argued, that rationality was not peculiar
to man, because there are some idiots in the world wholly desti
tute of that characteristic. The fact is, that every property
(strictly so called) is universal ; and, as Dr. Whately very cor
rectly observes, (p. 62.) a property is that which is " necessarily
joined to the whole essence, i. e. to the whole species, or, in other
words, universally, to every individual of it."

OF PREDICABLES.

27

cessarily jbined to the essence, or only con
tingently, i. e. accidentally. Such as are ne
cessarily joined to any essence are termed
properties, and such as are only contingently Properties
or accidentally joined are called accidents; e.g. Accident.
" the having three angles" is a property of
a triangle, for it necessarily accompanies its
essence ; or, as Dr. Whately says, it is " the
result of the differentia." So " the being
equilateral, right-angled," etc. are accidents
to a triangle, for such qualities do not of neces
sity belong to triangles ; the absence of which
would not affect the essence or species; for
(Dr. Whately, p. 66.) " every accident must
be separable from the species, else it would
be a property6."
e Properties are those qualities which are predicated of any
essence as necessarily joined to it ; but it must not therefore be
supposed, that no property can be separated from its essence ; for
this may frequently be the case, particularly with such proper
ties as may be termed physical properties, e. g. the property of
a man's having ten Jingers, two legs, two arms, etc. ; such pro
perties are actually separable from the individuals who possess
them, for they may be cut off without injuring the essence or
even existence of such individuals : but this is not the case with
other properties, which may be termed ideal properties: such
properties have not any actual existence, and do not admit of
any beparation from the essence of which they are predicated ;
c g. risibility in a man, and the having three angles in a tri
angle; and " such a property," Dr. Whately observes, (p. 65.)
" it is often hard to distinguish from the differentia ; but what
ever you consider as the most essential to the nature of a species,
with respect to the matter you are engaged in, you must call the

28

Five head, of
predicables.

ON THE SPECIES

From the foregoing considerations, it is ma°
°
nifest that there can be but five heads of pre
dicables : for whatever can be asserted of many
things, must be predicated either as their whole
essence, or as a part of their essence, or as
joined to their essence—whence will arise these
five heads f.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Species, or the whole essence.
Genus, or the common part of the essence.
Differentia, or the formal part.
Property, or something necessarily joined
to the essence.
5. Accident, or something accidentally joined
to the essence.

differentia; as rationality to man; and whatever you consider
as rather an accompaniment (or result) of that difference, you
must call the property ; as the use of speech seems to be a result
of rationality." And, note, (p. 73.) " that the difference is not
always one quality, but is frequently ' compounded of several
together, no one of which would alone suffice." For the dis
tinction between a property and an accident, see note n, p. 38.
1 It should be borne in mind, that each of these heads of pre
dicables are relative terms ; for that which is a genus if predi
cated of some things, will be a species when predicated of
others, or a property or an accident, etc. ; for " we cannot say
what predicable any term is, or whether it is any at all, unless it
be specified of what it is to be predicated: e.g. the term red
would be considered a genus in relation to the terms pink,
scarlet, etc.; it might be regarded as the differentia, in relation
to red-rose ; as a property of blood; as an accident of a house,"
etc.—Whately, p. 67.

OF PREDICABLES.

29

These predicables, therefore, are predicated or
asserted of those things in which there is sup
posed to exist that abstract nature of which
such predicable is the representative. Thus
the genus (which is the material or common
part of many essences or species) is predicated
of many things differing in species ; i. e. it is
predicated. of those different species which it
includes under its more extensive signification.
Thus figure is predicated of triangles, circles,
squares, etc. which differ in species. But spe
cies is predicated of things differing from each
other in number; i. e. of those individuals,
each of which possesses an essence signified
by the word which expresses the species.
. The other three heads of predicables, viz.
differentia, property, and accident, are predi
cated of things differing as well in number as
in species ; because they have a relation either
to a genus or a species. If to a genus, they
can be predicated of all the species which that
genus contains ; and if they have a reference
to a species, they can be predicated of all the
different individuals of that species.
Genus and species are commonly said to be
predicated in quid; thus if the question be
asked " Quid est illud?" the answer must be
returned by stating its genus or species. Dif
ference is predicated in *' quale quid," and pro
d3

30

ON THE SPECIES

perty and accident in " quale." Hence we may
easily form the usual definitions of the five
heads of predicables g.
Definition

Genus is a predicable predicated in " quid"

of many things differing in species, as the ma
terial or common part of their essence.
of difference.
Difference is a predicable which is predicated

of species.

in " quale quid" of many things differing either
in number or in species, as the distinguishing
part of their essence.
Species is a predicable which is predicated

in " quid" of many things differing in number,
as the whole of their essence.
of property.
Property is a predicable which is predicated
in " quale" of many things differing in species
or in number, as necessarily joined to their
essence.
of accident.
Accident is a predicable which is predicated

Genus a

in " quale," of many things differing in species
or in number, as contingently joined to their
essence.
Genus is called a logical whole*i, because it

logical whole.

is the most comprehensive term in its significa! It must be remembered, that the predicable and the uni
versal are not one and the same, for the former is the sign ex
pressive of the latter : the predicable is that which is asserted
of many, and the universal is one nature existing in many.
h A logical whole is that term which has the most extensive
signification ; a metaphysical whole is the most comprehensive
term. Hence genus is a logical whole, for it contains the spe-

OF PREDICABLES.

31

tion, and contains species as its subject parts ;
viz. includes it under its own more extensive
signification; for the genus may be affirma
tively predicated of all its contained spe
cies, e. g.

fMen

"

I Beasts
All ^ Birds J> are animals.
Fishes
^Insects
Thus animal is the logical whole, and men,
beasts, etc. are its subject parts.
Species, being the whole essence, necessarily sPecie. >
,
metaphysical
implies the genus, which is a part of that es- wi'oie.
sence ; it is a more complete and comprehen
sive term than genus', and is therefore termed
cies ; but species is a metaphysical whole, inasmuch as it im
plies the genus. Genus expresses a less comprehensive idea
than species, for the species denotes the whole essence ; i. e. a
complex idea, formed by the union of the less complex notions
of the genus and the difference.
' Mr. Bentham (p. 69.) says, " As to predicating the whole
essence of a subject, in one term, that is impossible, unless that
term be a strict synonyme. Dr. Whately does not appear to
have been aware of this ; he implies, that if we predicate the
genus, we predicate a part of the essence ; if the species, we
predicate the whole essence ; considering species in the sense in
which naturalists employ the word, in which case it is in fact a
logical genus with reference to individuals. ' If I predicate,' .
says he, ' of Caesar, that he is an animal, I say the truth indeed,
but not the whole truth ; for he is not only an animal, but a
man.' ' But this is not yet the whole truth ; for he is not only a

32

Difference
divides the
genus and
constitutes
the species.

ON THE SPECIES OF PREDICABLES.

a metaphysical whole ; e. g. man is a metaphy
sical whole, and implies rational animal.
The difference is said to divide the genus,
because when added to the genus it forms dif
ferent species, and thus divides, as it were, the
genus into its subject species ; and, as the dif
ference when added to the genus makes up the
species, hence it is said to constitute the spe
cies, inasmuch as it completes its essence.
man, but a white man ; not only a white man, but a Roman ;
and so on till we come to the individual Caesar." Can Mr.
Bentham really suppose, that " the being a white man and a
Roman" are any parts of the ideal essence of Caesar? When Dr.
Whately says, that " if he predicates of Cassar, that he is a man,
he predicates the whole truth ;" let us see what the whole truth
is, and what Dr. Whately intends by it. The whole essence, i. e.
the species, means " the whole of the ideal parts of the essence ;"
and therefore Dr. Whately does predicate the whole truth when
he predicates of Caesar that he is a man, for he predicates the
whole of his ideal essence. " To be a white man and a Roman,"
are accidents inseparably joined to the essence of that individual
Caesar; nor can they strictly be considered as parts of that
essence. It is therefore very possible to predicate the whole es
sence of any subject in one term, even though that term be not a
synonyme ; for by predicating the species, we do predicate the
whole ideal essence, and this is what is meant by Dr. Whately.
The two ideal parts of the essence are the genus and the dif
ferentia, the union of which makes up the whole ideal essence
or species.

Ac idental y
joined,
or Ac ident.

with
Psof
their
headi
ruview
the
Table
beThe
fat
dpresents
oionevlciasibolnwesi.,ng
joined
something
to
or
Ethe
s ence.

3 CO

(CO

Neces arily joined,
or Property.

Every
either
Prmust
edexpress
icable
O( 8

Essence
whole
the
or
go-.3

Species,
or

(

Dif erentia.

formal
The

CO -3

part,
or

a
the
of
Part
Essence,
CO p

Thecomon
part,
or Genus.

co c33

34

ON THE SPECIES

SECTION VI.
Two kinds of

There are two kinds of genus ; viz. genus
minimum and genus subaltern.
Two kinds of There are also two kinds of species; viz.
species subaltern and species infima.
summum
Summum genus* cannot be the subject of any
genus.
cognate genus. It is the highest and most
extensive term that can be imagined, and there
is not any superior genus under which it may
be classed : it is, in short, the most abstract
notion that the human mind can conceive,
genus.

* k, Summum genus, in its strictest sense, is that all-extensive
term under which every object of whatever kind may be classed,
and of every one of which it may be affirmatively predicated :
the word which is generally used to denote such genus is subslance, or, as some call it, being. Such is summum genus in its
strict sense; but many other genera are frequently used as
summa genera, according as may be most suitable to any par
ticular science or system ; thus, by an ornithologist, bird would
be regarded as the summum genus under which he would ar
range the different subdivisions of birds : so fish would be re
garded as the summum genus most applicable to the study of
ichthyology ; and this is the case with various other sciences.
The general heads, or summa genera, to some of which we
may refer every term, are denominated the categories, or predi
caments ; the doctrine of which was first taught by Archytas :
they are generally considered as ten in number, viz. substance,
quantity, quality, relation, place, time, situation, possession,
action, suffering : the Greek terms which Aristotle has given
them are as follows, obaia., iroaov, iroiov, 7rpoc rt, irov, wort,
KtloQai, ixtivi irouiv, ■Kcusytiv. To some one of these heads
we may refer every term, according as may best suit our pur
pose, for the argument in which we may be engaged.

OF PREDICABLES.

35

and may be affirmatively predicated of every
idea and every object.
Infima species may be the subject of every infima
cognate genus. It is the first common nature
which is the result of any abstraction ; it can
not be considered as a genus with reference to
any thing, but is considered as composed of
individuals only.
Cognate
genera and species
are such as re- genera,
cognateand
00
■
suit from repeatedly abstracting the differences sve"awhich are perceived to exist in the same indi
viduals, and regarding those abstract notions
in which they agree : thus corporeal, animate,
sensitive, etc. are said to be cognate to man,
and inanimate, insensitive, etc. cognate to stones.
There is no actual difference between subal- subaltern
.
i
i . /r*
genera, and
tern genus and subaltern species; the differ- »peciei.
ence is only relative.: the former may be pre
dicated of a cognate species, and the latter
may be the subject of a cognate genus : they
are those intermediate genera and species
which are supposed to exist between summum
genus and any infima species; each of them
may be regarded as a genus with reference to
all the species below it, and as a species when
referred to the genera above it.
The following table may serve to represent,
at one view, what has before been said re
specting genus and species, with their sub
divisions :

36

ON THE SPECIES

Summum genus is that which can never be
regarded as a species ;
Infima species can never be regarded as a
genus ;
Subaltern genus may be considered as a
subaltern species;
Subaltern species may be considered as a
subaltern genus.
Two kinds of There are two kinds of difference, viz. gedifference :
.
_
' .
neric and specific.
Generic.

Generic differencei is that which constitutes
subaltern species. It is termed generic, because
that species which it constitutes may be consi
dered as a subaltern genus ; and consequently
the generic difference can be affirmatively pre
dicated of every species which is comprehended
under it : hence it is predicated of things which
i The difference and specific property are often difficult to
* distinguish from each other ; but it should be remembered, that
a property is only joined to an essence, and results therefore
from the difference ; whereas the difference is a constituting part
of the essence. If then a part of any essence be supposed to be
taken away, that essence can no longer remain as it was. The
* following test, therefore, which we may apply in order to find
the difference, will, I believe, in most cases succeed. Since the
genus and difference, united, form the species, it follows that, if
the difference be supposed to be taken away from any species,
that species must revert to its subaltern genus: in fact, the
species will not any longer exist ; but if a property be supposed
to be taken from it, the essence, i. e. the species, will not thereby
be injured : this test, however, is by no means unerring, but is
frequently applicable. Thus " a proposition" is said to be " a
sentence which asserts;" hence any sentence which does not
assert, (i. e. affirm, or deny,) is not a proposition.

OF PREDICABLES.

37

differ from each other in species ; e. g. sensitive
is a generic difference to man, and it may be
predicated of all animals as well as of man.
Specific difference is that which constitutes specific.
infima species; and it is this kind which is
generally meant by the logical difference: it
can be predicated of all the individuals con
tained under the species which it constitutes,
and is therefore said to be predicated of things
which differ in number, i. e. numerically. Thus
rational, which is the specific difference of man,
is predicable of every man, but not of any other
animal.
Property is divided into two kinds, viz. Property of
.
.
.
kinds :
generic
m and specific.
Generic
property is two
Generic
:
that which is necessarily joined to, or accom
panies the essence of the summum or subal
tern genus. Specific property is that which specific.
flows, of results from the essence of the infima
species, and is predicated of one species and
m Generic properties may be predicated of many more indi
viduals than specific properties, for the latter can be predicated
only of the different individuals contained under one species, but
generic properties may be predicated of different species, and
consequently of all the individuals contained under those species.
Thus the property, in triangles, that " the three angles are equal
together to two right angles," is a generic property, and may be
predicated of all triangles ; but the property that " all equilateral
triangles are also equiangular," is a specific property, and can
not be predicated of all triangles, but only of that species which
is termed " equilateral."
E

38

rourfoid
division of
property.

ON THE SPECIES

its different individuals, whereas generic property
is predicated
of different species.
Pror
J
r
r
perty has also been divided into four kinds :

1. That which is peculiar to one species, but
does not universally belong to its individuals.
2. That which is predicable of the whole
species, but not of that species alone.
3. That which may be predicated of all the
individuals of a species, and of that species
only, but not of it always.
4. That which may be predicated of one spe
cies only, of all its individuals and at all times.
Of these four classes, the second is the ge
neric property, and the last, the specific.
i
The first and third classes cannot strictly be
termed properties. Every property must be
universal, i. e. it must be applicable to all the
individuals of a species, and must belong to
that species necessarily, which in the instance
adduced by Aldrich, viz. the fact of a man's
being a grammarian, cannot be said to be the
case, for some men are not grammarians: the
third class, for the same reason, cannot be
termed a property, even admitting its existence.
Twokindjof
Accident" is also divided into two kinds,
accident :
viz. inseparable and separable.
° "Accidents," says Mr. Bentham, p. 72. ("that is, acci
dental properties,) are next divided into separable and insepar
able." Again, (speaking of Dr. Whately's examples, viz. " a

OF PREDICABLES.

39

The inseparable accidents are such as can- inseparable :
not be separated from the individual of whom
man walking," and " a man native of Paris,") Mr. Bentham ob
serves, " I cannot discover any difference in the respective
separability of the properties in question." He then asks this
question, " What does the property of a man toulking mean V
He answers thus, " That the man of whom it is affirmed was
■walking at such a time, in such a place." And this or any
other may be the answer ; for the question in itself implies an
absurdity, and therefore cannot admit of any true answer. The
property of a man walking is downright nonsense, and wholly
unintelligible : Mr. Bentham may well ask " what it means."
It would have saved his readers much trouble, if he would have
defined property, as he uses the word ; (which I cannot perceive
that he has done ;) for, to the mind of a logician, (who, by
property, means, " Pradicabile quod prtedicatur de pluribus specie
vel numero differentibus in quale, ut essentiajunctum necessario ;")
the term accidental property conveys a contradiction of ideas ;
for how can any thing be necessarily joined to an essence by
accident ? But the whole of this passage is so amusing, that
it is well worth transcribing. He observes, (alluding to Dr.
Whately's examples given above,) " I cannot discover any dif
ference in the respective separability of the properties in question.
What does the property of a man walking mean ? —That the
man of whom it is affirmed was walking at such a time, in
such a place.—And that of a man's being a native of a place 1—
That he was born at such a time, in such a place.—The man is
no longer walking in that place.—True ; but he is no longer being
born either.—You cannot, however, take away from him his pro
perty of having been born.—No ; nor can you take away that of
his having been walking. Where then is the distinction between
the separable property of having been walking, and the insepar
able property of having been born V The sophistry of such an
argument is palpable ; for Mr. Bentham has confounded the
fact of a " man's walking" with that of his " having been walk
ing." He sets out with saying, that he cannot discover the
difference in the separability of such accidents (or, as he terms
them, such accidental properties) as, "a man walking," and
E2

40

ON THE SPECIES OF PREDICABLES.

they are predicated: thus, if I predicate of -a
man that " he took a walk yesterday," his
having taken a walk would be what is termed
an inseparable accident ; for though now it
cannot be separated from his essence, yet it
was only contingently joined to it, and not
necessarily.
separable.

The separable accident is such as can be

separated from the individual ; e. g. if I pre
dicate of a man that he is standing, this is a
separable accident, for he may sit down.
" a man native of Paris.;" and this he endeavours to show by
the train of reasoning transcribed above : the conclusion at which
he arrives is, that he cannot discover the difference between the
separable property of having beenwalking, (instead of "walking,'")
and the inseparable property of having been born. And it would
truly have been a circumstance not a little astonishing, had he
been able to discover the difference: for the fact of a man's
having been walking is an accident, as inseparable, as that of his
having been born. Of such sophisms as the above, Aldrich ob
serves, (p. 69.) " Qui hoc, vel hujus simile attulerit (ut innumera afferri solent) docendus est congrue loqui." This fallacy
may be classed under what Mr. Bentham terms " Fallacy by
artful evasion," (p. 262.) which answers to Dr. Whately's Fal
lacy of Irrelevant Conclusion, commonly called " Ignoratio
Elenchi." (Vide Dr. Whately, Elements of Logic, p. 187.)
A separable accident is that which can actually be separated
from the individual ; thus, for a man to be walking, must be a
separable accident, for he may sit down; but the fact of his
having been walking is an inseparable accident ; and such an
accident differs from a property in this respect, that it was, when
it happened, a contingency, i. e. it was possible that it might not
have happened as it did ; but a property never is a contingency,
but results from the essence necessarily, and, as it were, natural In.

.

ON DIVISION.

41

It should be remembered, that an inseparable
accident is predicable only of individuals ; for
all accidents must be separable from the species,
or they would be properties.

SECTION VII.
Division" is " the distinct enumeration of Divi»ion.
the several things signified by a common noun."
For as in logic a singular noun is called in
divisible, so a common noun is called divisible,
because it admits of logical division.
There are two kinds of division, i. e. logical of two kinds.
and physical, and, although they are perfectly
distinct in their nature from each other, yet
logical division is analogous to physical.
Physical division n is the division of an indi- Physical
division.
° The word " division" literally signifies, " the separation of
the component parts of any thing ;" in which case each part is
absolutely less than the whole divided. But since in logical
division the dividing parts are each " in comprehension" greater
than the whole divided, hence the word " division," as thus
used, is obviously applied in a figurative or secondary sense.
P Physical division is the division of individuals, i. e. of ob
jects which have real existence : logical division is the division
of ideas: but since an idea itself has not any real existence,
logical division is used upon those words which are the signs of
ideas : and common nouns (as has been shown above, sec. 3.) are
representatives of ideas, and as such will be the only nouns
upon which logical division can operate. Any singular noun may

42

Logical
'tinsion.

ON DIVISION.

vidual into its component parts ; thus, " a book"
might be divided into its leaves, cover, back,
etc. ; and it is by this division that any indi
vidual object might be divided. Each of the
dividing parts in such division is therefore
absolutely less than the whole divided.
Logical division is the division of common
nouns, and the whole divided can be predi
cated of each of its dividing parts'1. Thus
" book" might be logically divided into folios,
quartos, octavos, etc. ; and it might be pre
dicated of all folios, that they were books,
and of all quartos, that they were books, etc.
Hence it is manifest, that if the whole divided
be a genus, the dividing members must be the
species comprehended under it; and if the
whole divided be a species, the dividing mem
bers must be the individuals contained-under
that species.
be physically divided, because it represents and stands for one
individual object, which may be divided into its component parts,
i There are frequently various modes of dividing a common
noun ; thus, " animals" might be divided into rutin, ml and irra
tional, into cold-blooded and warm-blooded, into winged and notwinged, or men, beasts, birds, fishes, insects, etc. and this is
the case with all other nouns : and of all these different modes
of division, one is not more right than another ; (for they all are
logical divisions,) though one may be more suitable to our pre
sent purpose than another ; hence we must remember what is our
end-in-view ; and adopt that mode of division, which may seem
most adapted to it.

'I

ON DIVISION.-

43

There are three rules for good logical di- Rules for
division.
vision.
1 . Let each of the dividing parts, or any of
them, contain less (i. e. have a more limited
signification) than the whole divided r.
The words minus contineant s, mean that each The divide
parts imply
of the dividing members must be less extensive t,,e wholethan the whole divided. For in logical divi
sion, each of the dividing parts or members is
always more comprehensive ', i. e. has a more
extensive signification, than the divided whole :
and each of them may thus be considered as

r Thus if the word hound were divided into greyhound, dog,
bloodhound, etc. such a division would err against the first rule,
for the word dog would be more extensive than the whole divided
or hound : so, if unimal were divided into quadruped and biped,
this division would err against the second rule, for the union of
these two parts would not be so extensive as animal, the whole
divided ; for there are many animals which are neither quad
rupeds nor bipeds.
* A perfect division may be formed by means of the definite
and indefinite nouns, e. g. men may be divided into those who are
Europeans and those who are not Europeans; animals, into ra
tional and irrational, bipeds or not bipeds. Such dichotomy,
thus produced, by what is called contradictory bifurcation, con
stitutes a perfect division, for the union of such two parts will
obviously be equivalent to the whole divided. If the parts of a
divided whole be many in number, such a division may possibly
be as complete and perfect as if it were a dichotomy ; but it
cannot easily be shown to be so, unless the contradictory bifur
cate division be applied to it. An instance of this case will be.
given in the next section.
1 Aldrich, chap. i. §. 7.

44

ON DIVISION.

more than the whole, inasmuch as they each
imply the whole u ; for every one of the dividing
parts may be regarded as a species, with re
ference to the whole divided as a genus : thus
each of them is a metaphysical whole, when
compared with the divided noun, which will
be a logical whole to all its dividing parts.
2. Let all the parts collectively be exactly
equal to the whole divided.
3. Let the divided parts be distinct, or op
posed to each other ; i. e. let not one part be
contained under another: e. g. if we were to
divide tree into forest tree, oak, elm, plum tree,
fruit tree, such parts would be contained in
each other, for a forest tree may be an oak or
an elm, and an elm or an oak is a forest tree.
™ Thus if we were to divide rectilineal figure, we should di
vide it into triangle, square, circle, etc. and each of these parts
would comprehend more than the whole ; for a triangle is not
only a rectilinealfigure, but it is a three-sided rectilineal figure.
The term triangle, therefore, represents a more complex idea
than the term rectilinealfigure. So the terms square, circle, etc.
are each more comprehensive than the term rectilineal figure,
because they each imply that 'term. Thus, also, if the whole
divided were a species, and its dividing parts were individuals,
each of these parts would be a more comprehensive term than
the whole : for every singular term, which represents an indi
vidual, is a more full and complete term than the species which
contains it ; and, since the species may be predicated of each of
the individuals under it, consequently each of these individuals
implies the species, and is therefore a more comprehensive term.

ON DEFINITION.

45

SECTION VIII.
Definition*, as used in logic, is " an explana- Definition.
tori/ sentence," i. e. " a sentence which explains
any term, so as to separate the idea represented
by that term from any other idea whatsoever."
A word may be unintelligible to a hearer, it» object.
either from his not at all understanding its
meaning, or from its conveying to his mind an
idea different to that which was intended : the
object of definition, therefore, is either to con
vey to the hearer's mind the idea which the
defined term is intended to represent, or else
to correct any indistinct notion which may er
roneously have been assigned to ity.
x Definition literally signifies *' the laying down the boun
dary of any thing :" but it is here used to signify " a sentence
which so explains a term, as to separate that term from any
other, and thus to lay down, as it were, the boundary or limit
of its signification." Since, therefore, it is here used in a pecu
liar and metaphorical sense, it must be a word of the second
intention.
» Words being the signs of ideas, it is manifest that a word
may frequently convey an idea, either wholly different from
that intended, or else indistinct ; in such cases the use of defi
nition is apparent, for it not only conveys the idea intended, but
serves to give the hearer a more distinct knowledge of the term
defined, by explaining what was before not clearly known to
him : hence it is essential to a good definition, that it be ex
planatory.

46

ON DEFINITION.

Definitions are divided into two classes, viz.
nominal and real.
Nominal
The nominal definition explains only the sig
definition.
nification of the term. Such definitions are
used when the term which has been uttered
does not convey any idea to the hearer's mind,
viz. when he does not understand the meaning
of the term, which is therefore explained by
making use of some equivalent expression
which may be more intelligible : thus you
might define emblem, that which is a sign of
any thing ; or essence, as universal nature ; or
approximation, as a near approach.
Real
The real definition2 is that which declares
definition.
or explains the nature of the term : which pro
fesses to explain not only the meaning of the
term, but the nature also of the thing signiof two kinds, fied. Of real definitions there are two species,
viz. the accidental and the essential.
Accidental
The accidental definition is that which de
definition.
fines a term, by describing or enumerating some
of its properties or accidents; such definitions
are also termed descriptions, arid are more
Classes of
definition.

1 In many cases the nominal and real essence of any thing
exactly coincide, viz. the idea conveyed by the word is exactly
the same as the nature of the thing : e. g. in mathematics and
many other sciences : (see Dr. Whately on this subject, p. 74.
232.) Thus a triangle, " that which has three angles," and
a right-angled triangle, " that which has one right angle," are
each both nominal and real definitions.

ON DEFINITION.

47

commonly to be met with than any others;
for, as we are frequently unable to ascertain
the natural, or component parts of any thing,
and more especially the metaphysical parts,
i. e. the genus and difference, description is
often the only method by which we are able
to define a term.
The essential definition is that which lays Essential
* definition.
down the constituting parts of the essence, and
it is of two kinds, viz. the metaphysical, or of two kinds.
logical, and the physical.
The metaphysical definition is that which Metaphysical
. "
definition.
lays down the ideal parts of an essence, viz.
the genus and differentia ; hence it is obvious,
that any term which will admit of being meta
physically defined, must be a species. No in
dividual", therefore, can be logically defined;
* An individual cannot be defined but by description, i. e. by
enumerating the accidents belonging to such individual, whereby
the differences existing between that and any other may be
shown. This kind of definition Mr. Bentham terms " individua
tion;" but observes, that " as time and place are constantly
varying, exposition by individuation alone can never enable the
learner to recognize the individual whose name is thus ex
pounded."— P. 80. The examples which he gives of" indivi
duation," are, "John is the man who is sitting in that chair;"
" Louis XVIII. is the man who was king of France at the time
you were at Paris."—I do not understand what Mr. Bentham
means when he says, that by such definitions " the learner
would not be able to recognise these individuals." Surely in
these examples both time and place are exhibited ; and of these
he says, " no other properties, nor yet one of these without the

48

Physical
definition.

ON DEFINITION.

neither can summum genus ; for it is the highest
of all genera, and cannot therefore be defined
by assigning its genus and difference, inas
much as it has not any superior genus : de
scription is the only mode of defining it, i. e.
by an enumeration of its properties.
The physical definition is that which lays
,
'
_
n .
.
down the real parts 01 the essence, i. e. those
parts which admit of actual separation ; thus
other, can ever distinguish an individual from all others which
may exist, or can be conceived to exist." Now when he as
serts, that no other properties (but those characteristic ones of
time and place) can distinguish an individual, he must imply,
that these properties (when exhibited) will distinguish an indi
vidual : and, if this be his meaning, he contradicts himself when
he says, that individuation alone will not enable us to recognize
an individual. However this may be, if a learner were to ask
who "John was?" and was to receive for answer, "John is
the man who is sitting in that chair;" if, I say, this learner
should not be able (by means of such a definition) to recognise
that "John" from any other individual whatsoever, the circum
stance would probably result not so much from the deficiency of
the definition, as of the learner's intellectual faculties ; in fact,
(to use language very similar to Mr. Bentham's elegant ex
pression, p. 233.) he would be a fool ; for, by the sentence,
" John is the man who is sitting in that chair," it is evident,
that the very individual John is visible, and therefore may be
seen by the learner, unless indeed the learner happen to be
blind, in which case the definition would not be defective, but
the circumstance would result from the deficiency of the learner's
sight. What is meant by the " characteristic properties of time
and place," I am at a loss to imagine ; but Mr. Bentham seems
to imply that the fact of an individual's " sitting in a chair, at
some particular time," is a characteristic property of that indivi
dual, which is curious enough.

•,<•

ON DEFINITION.

49

horse might be physically defined as being an
animal composed of head, body, mane, legs,
etc. and a book, as being composed of cover,
back, and leaves*.
There are three rules for good definition.
Rules iw
definition.
1. " Let the definition be adequate to the
term defined ;" i. e. the idea conveyed by the
definition must be exactly equal to that which
is meant to be conveyed by the definitum, or
term defined : consequently its signification
must not be too extensive, nor too confined. Thus if " a tree" were defined to be " a plant
having leaves," such a definition would be too
extensive, for many plants have leaves, which
are not trees : in this case the definition ex
plains a whole, when the term defined is but a
part. Again, if " a tree" were defined to be
" a plant which bears fruit ;" such a definition
would be too limited, for there are many trees
which do not bear fruit ; and in this case the
definition would have explained only a part,
when the term defined is a whole.
b The following table presents, at one view, the different
kinds of definition, according to Aldrich's Logic :
C Nominal,
Definition.<
C Accidental,
v. Real.
\
c Metaphysical,
Essential. <
t- Physical.
The four infimse species of definition are nominal, accidental,
F

i

50

ON DEFINITION.

2. " Let the definition be in itself clearer
and more plain than the term defined0 " i. e.
the definition must convey an idea which will
be clearer and better known to the generality
of persons to whom it is addressed, than the
idea which is conveyed by the term defined :
the words " per sed" are opposed to " per accidens :" because the term defined may by ac
cident be better understood than the words of
the definition6.
:
metaphysical, and physical. This division of definitions is an
example of dichotomy. [See the last section.]
c It has been frequently objected to metaphysical definition,
that it is not clearer (in most cases) than the term defined ; and
when the term, which is to be defined, is very familiar to the
hearer, this certainly is the fact : thus the word man is more
familiar to the ear, and is accidentally better known than the
term rational animal ; but yet the words rational animal are, in
their nature, more clear and better known than the word man,
inasmuch as they convey less complicated ideas ; and all words
which express less complicated ideas, are, in their nature, clearer
than those which convey more complex ideas. All definitions
of ideas purely simple, must of necessity be, at best, not clearer
than the terms defined; e. g. the definition of" colour," which
could hardly be defined so that the definition should be better
known than the term itself.
See Aldrich, chap. i. §. 8.
* Thus, if a triangle were defined to be, " a figure which has its
three interior angles together equal to two right angles," such a
definition would not be so clear as the word triangle, and would
err against the second rule : so, " Old age is the evening of life ;"
" A warrior is the thunderbolt of war;" would err against the
third rule, for the words which compose these definitions are
metaphorical : again, if we were to define a cascade by saying
that it was a waterfall, such a definition would be too short.

ON DEFINITION.

51

3. " Let the definition be included in a just
number ofproper words ,•" i. e. the words em
ployed must not be used in a metaphorical
sense, as such words would probably produce
indistinctness : so also the number of the words
must be suitable ; for too much brevity would
produce obscurity, and too great prolixity, con
fusion f.
#
Care, therefore, must be taken, that all definitions be exactly
equivalent or adequate to the terms defined, and that they be, in
all respects, more clear and intelligible ; for since the difference
or essence of a definition is that it be explanatory, it would cease
to be a good definition, if it did not render clear and intelli
gible those terms which before were not so.
f Mr. Bentham, in treating of definition, or (as he terms it)
exposition, has increased the species from four to twelve; the
merits of which need not now be discussed : with respect, how
ever, to that " mode of exposition"-which he has termed " in
dividual description," he has apparently fallen into error : he
defines " individual description" to be " description applied to
individuals;" viz. " a detailed exposition of the accidental pro
perties of an individual." This is (as he observes) the only
mode that can serve for the physical recognition of an indivi
dual. " Portraits," he says, " are examples of individual de
scription :" but can a portrait be said to be " a detailed exposi
tion of the accidental properties of an individual1!" putting aside
the absurdity of calling " a portrait" an example of any kind of
definition. But admitting all this, let us grant that a portrait is
one of the only ways. by which an individual can be physically
recognized ; and I appeal to common sense, and ask whether an
individual might not be as well (if not better) recognized by
being personally seen, as by a view of his portrait ? The answer
must surely be in the affirmative ; and yet Mr. Bentham has
implied in one of his examples of individuation, (which I have
spoken of in a former note,) that the reverse is the fact ; for, in
the instance alluded to, " John is the man who is sitting in that

f2

b%

ON DEFINITION.

chair ;" it is self-evident that such an expression would not be
used, unless that individual could at tliat time be personally seen;
and vet Mr. Bentham says, that in such a case, this individual
John could not be physically recognized; whereas by a sight of
his portrait he might ! This is strange, it must be confessed.
The chief merit of this chapter on exposition seems to consist in
a display of (what is there termed) " Onomatopoea," a faculty
which Mr. Bentham appears to possess in a high degree : for it
will be found, on the perusal of his work, that he has " enriched
his native tongue" with a considerable number of new words,
such as discoursual, non- discoursual, archetypation, individual
tion, anoopneumatology, etc.: which, however closely they mav
adhere to the poet's injunction of being " Grasco fonte parce
detorta," will probably produce no inconsiderable distortions in
the countenances of those who have the misfortune to be forced
to pronounce them.

ON PROPOSITIONS.

53

PART II. SECTION I.

The second part of logic treats ofproposition of proposi
tion.
or enunciation; i. e. those complex words which
are expressive of the second operation of the
mind, or judgement.
A proposition
is defined to be " oratio in- deBned.
Proposition
r r
dicativa, congrua et perfecta, verum velfalsum
significans, sine ambiguitate*." This definition
is of a compound nature ; for it is partly meta
physical, and partly accidental. A proposition
would be more accurately defined to be oratio
indicativa; i.e. an asserting sentence10. This
definition would comprehend the whole essence
of proposition; for "a sentence" is its genus,
and " asserting," i. e. affirming, or denying, its
difference. The other parts of the former de* Aldrieh, chap. ii. §. 1.
h A proposition being a sentence which asserts, viz. which
affirms or denies; it follows, that all exclamations, interroga
tions, commands, etc. are excluded, and are not regarded as
propositions : thus, " Do ye now believe V " 0 ! how amiable
are thy dwellings!" " He that made the round world so fast;"
are not propositions, since they do not contain any assertion ;
but " Truth lies in the bottom of a well;" " Tempus fugit;"
" Loquor ;" " He scattereth the proud in the imaginations of
their hearts;" are asserting sentences, and consequently are pro
positions.

f3

54

ON PROPOSITIONS.

finition are properties, etc. of proposition, and
ought not strictly to form a part of the defini
tion, but to be deduced from it.
iTuisitM^r
There are four requisites for constituting a
.plosion, legitimate proposition.
1. That as far as regards the words, it must
be a sentence which affirms or denies c .• which
is its whole essence.
2. That as to sense, it must signify some
thing true or false6;" i. e. it must declare that
which is the real fact, or that which is not the
fact ; and this is the property of a proposition.
c Judgement was defined (Part i. §. 1.) to be " the decision
upon the mutual agreement or disagreement of any two objects,
when compared with each other;" and the sentence which
declares this decision, and expresses judgement, is called " a pro
position:" now the agreement or disagreement of any two ob
jects cannot be expressed in words, except by affirmation or ne
gation; viz. by some assertion ; consequently it is necessary, in
order to constitute a proposition, that it must be a sentence which
affirms or denies: therefore its affirming or denying distinguishes
it from any other kind of sentence, and is its difference.
A Judgement is liable to the error of falsity, as has been
shown before, (Part i. §. 1.) for a decision may manifestly be
false, inasmuch as it may have been decided that two particular
objects agree when they do not, or vice versa, and in such a
case the decision or judgement would be false : hence a propo
sition which expresses such a decision must of necessity assert
that which is not really the fact; i. e. it must signify that which
is false: and since all propositions must either assert what is the
fact, or what is not, consequently they must all signify some
thing, either true or false; and this is called a specific property
of propositions, since it seems to result immediately from their
difference, i. e. from their affirming or denying.

ON PROPOSITIONS.

55

3. It must not be an ambiguous sentence;
viz. it must not admit of dubious construction,
for in tbis case it would be " orationes" ;" i. e.
it would be more than one sentence, because it
would admit of more constructions than one.
4. The sentence must not be ungrammatical, for such a sentence would be unintelli
gible, and consequently could not be " declara
tory f."

SECTION II.
Propositions are divided according to their Division of
propositions.
substance, their quality, and their quantity.
The substance* of a proposition is its genus substance.
e Aldrich, chap. ii. §. 1.
f These two last rules are self-evident ; for if a proposition
were ambiguous, viz. admitted of being construed in more ways
than one, it would be a sort of double sentence : and this ambi
guity may be produced by equivocal words, or by a dubious
form of expression ; e. g. " That is a bull ;" " Croesus Halyn
penetrans magnam pervertit opum vim ;" both these sentences
are ambiguous, and may each be considered in more than one
way ; consequently they may each be regarded as more than
one sentence. On this point, see Whately's Elements, ch. iii.
§. 10. p. 164. Again, if a proposition were ungrammatical or
mutilated, such a sentence might be unintelligible, and would
not therefore be a legitimate proposition : this may frequently
be observed to be the case in proverbs, and such sort of sen
tences, where, although the ellipsis is not such as to render the
meaning unintelligible, yet it cannot strictly be termed an ac
curate proposition ; for it might produce ambiguity.
b Should not the substance of a proposition be said to be its

,

56

ON THE SPECIES

or material part of its essence ; i. e. its being
"a sentence:" and propositions (as regards
their substance) are considered as of two kinds:
viz. " categorical" and " hypothetical" The
categorical categorical proposition is that which asserts
proposition.
!••»»»!
t»
absolutely, 1. e. " unconditionally : e. g. " Be
nevolence is not the whole of virtue ;" " No
Hypothetical man can live for ever." The hypothetical is
that which asserts under some condition or
whole essence, and not the genus? for every assertion can be ex
pressed either absolutely or conditionally ; hence by regarding
the substance of propositions, we divide them into categorical
and hypothetical, the former of which asserts absolutely, and the
latter asserts under some hypothesis, or condition. The substance
of a proposition is commonly said to be its genus, or the material
part of its essence, viz. that it is a sentence ; but if this were
the case, commands and questions might also be considered as
propositions, which is not the fact. Aldrich says, (chap. ii. §. 2.)
that to the question " Quit est proposition" the answer must be,
categorica vel hypothetica ; and this is not answering by consi
dering the genus, but the different species of propositions : and
Aldrich declares " haec divisio peti dicitur a substantia propositionis ;" the substance therefore of a proposition is the character
of its assertion ; i.e. whether the assertion be expressed abso
lutely or not absolutely, viz. conditionally; which are the only
ways in which any assertion can be expressed ; and in dividing
propositions in this manner we must regard their whole essence,
and not only the genus or material part of their essence ; for
sentences may be expressed in various ways, besides absolutely
and conditionally : for instance, commands and questions are sen
tences, but are not propositions. Dr. Whately, p. 76. considers
the substance as the genus or material part of the essence of pro
positions, and I consequently feel much diffidence in expressing
an opinion which is at variance with an author who has treated
the science of logic with such ability.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

57

hypothesis : e. g. " I will walk if it does not
rain ;" " You may either go or remain be
hind."
The categorical proposition is divided into Dwuion m
categorical*.
two kinds ; viz. the pure categorical and the
modal.
The pure categorical proposition is that Purr,
which asserts simply whether the subject does
or does not agree with the predicate; as " Nescit voxmissa reverti;" " George the Fourth is
the king of England."
The modal categorical h expresses in what M«iai.
mode or manner the subject does or does not
agree with the predicate : as, " Such a fact may
perhaps be true ;" " No man can be perfectly
righteous."
The only class of propositions which will be
treated of at present will be the pure cate
gorical.
The hypothetical proposition is divided into Division of
either conditional, as, " Riches, if badly ap- <**»•
h Modal propositions may he reduced to pure categoricals, by
either considering the word which expresses the mode as united
to the predicate, and thus forming a part of it ; or sometimes by
attaching it to the subject, which may be done when the mode
only expresses whether the matter of the extremes be necessary,
impossible, or contingent : e. g. " A fish necessarily lives in the
water;" which means, "All fish live in the water ;" " A pro
fligate man may possibly repent and be saved ;" viz. " The re
pentance and salvation of a profligate man is a thing that is

58

ON THE SPECIES

plied, are a curse, and not a blessing;" or
disjunctive; as, " Pleasure should either be
taken in moderation, or not at all." " This re
sult is the effect either of truth, which pro
duces consistency without the writer's thought
or care, or of a contexture of forgeries confirm
ing and falling in with one another by a spe
cies of fortuity, of which I know no example."
Horas Paulina?, c. viii. §. 4.
Quality.

Another division of propositions is by re

garding their quality, and of quality there may
or two kinds, be two sorts; viz. the quality of the expression,
essential and
accidental. or [fog essential quality ; which is the differentia;
and the quality of the matter, or the accidental
quality ; which is consequently the property.
Propositions are divided, according to their
essential quality, into affirmative and negative1.
' The definitions which Aldrich has given of an affirmative
proposition, viz. " that which has an affirmative copula;" and
of a negative, viz. " that which hits a negative copula," are
accidental ; for the having an affirmative or negative copula,
is not the differentia, but a property of such propositions ; meta
physically they may be defined thus : affirmative propositions
assert the agreement of their extremes, and negatives the dis
agreement: the copula serves to indicate this connexion. Care
must be taken not to be deceived by the copula ; for a proposi
tion may have a negative in it without being a negative propo
sition : e. g. " He who is not wicked deserves our love," which
is an affirmative proposition : the method of detecting this will
be, to consider the meaning of the propositions, and what asser
tion is made relative to the extremes ; if the proposition asserts
that its extremes agree, it is affirmative, for agreement must be

OF PROPOSITIONS.

59

An affirmative proposition is that which as- Affirmative
serts that its extremes agree with each other ; propos""jn
i. e. that the predicate may be asserted of the
subject : as, " Oxford is a city containing an
university ;" " An Englishman will fight in de
fence of his country."
A negative proposition is that which asserts Native
that its extremes disagree ; i. e. that the pre- propo"Uo'"i•
dicate cannot be asserted of the subject: as,
"No Christian fears the hour of death;"
" Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit."
Propositions are also divided according to
their accidental quality, or quality of the mat
ter, into true and fake ; and this is said to be
the property, inasmuch as it results'1 from the
essence of the proposition ; i. e. from the dif
ference or assertion, which must of necessity be
either true orfalse.
expressed by affirmation : but if it asserts that the extremes
*#«•, it is negative; for negation alone expresses disagree
ment.
The necessary consequence which results from any asserh°n is, that it must be either true or false, which is the acci
dental quality, or qualitas rei, as it is commonly termed : to
ascertain the truth or falsehood of any proposition is not the
office of logic ; but it must be proved by a consideration of that
science or art to which the subject matter of the proposition be'01>gs: consequently, as will be shown hereafter, the truth or
sehood °f every proposition will depend upon its matter, viz.
'he connexion which naturally exists between its extremes.
"■B. When we speak of the quality of a proposition, without
"eclating which kind, the essential quality or qualitas vocis, is
meant; viz. its being affirmative or negative.

GO
True prop**
sitimis,

False propo
sitions.

Quantity.

Universal
propositions.

ON THE SPECIES

A true proposition is that which asserts what
is the real fact ; as, " The object of logic is to
direct the mind in the acquisition of know
ledge :" " England is an island."
A false proposition is that which asserts
what is not the fact : as, " Logic is the art of
using the reason;" " A murderer is not de
serving of punishment."
Propositions may also be divided, by regard
ing their quantity, into universal, particular,
singular, and indefinite.
The quantity of a proposition means " the
extent" to which the predicate is asserted of
the subject.
An universal proposition is when the predi
cate is asserted of the whole of the subject ;
and since the subject is in this case taken in
its whole sense, i. e. " for every thing signified
by it;" it is said to be distributed}; and this
distribution is indicated by some sign of uni
versality, as " all," " none," " every one," etc.
e. g. " All bad passions are to be avoided ;"
" No virtuous act will lose its reward."
' A term is said to be distributed when it is taken in its fullest
extent, i. e. when it is intended to comprehend every thing to
which it is applicable. Thus, " All misers are discontented j"
the word " miser" is here distributed, for it is intended to com
prehend every miser; and the proposition is equivalent to " there
is not one miser who is not discontented :" but in the proposition,
" Some men are avaricious," the word " men" is not distributed,
because it is not intended to apply to every man ; for there may
be many men who are not avaricious.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

61

A particular proposition is that whose pre- Particular
propositions,
dicate is asserted of only apart of the subject;
and since, in this case, the subject is not taken
for every thing signified by it, hence it is not
distributed: and this is indicated by a sign of
particularity prefixed to it, as " some," "few,"
" many," etc. ; e. g. " Some men are possessed
of more judgement than others;" " Not every
one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven."
A singular proposition is that whose subject singular
,
propositions.
is a singular noun ; or a common noun with a
singular sign: [see Part i. §. 3.] e. g. " Dionysius was a tyrant;" "That man is a thief;"
but since in all cases of singular propositions
the predicate is asserted of the whole of the
subject, hence the subject is distributed; and
singular propositions are [see the next section]
considered as universals.
With respect to indefinite propositionsn1, they indefinite
propositions.

" Any proposition (except a singular) to whose subject there is
not affixed some sign, denoting whether that common noun is to
be taken for every thing signified by it, or not, must be regarded
as indefinite; because the extent in which that subject is taken
is not limited ; hut in order to ascertain this extent, we must
apply to our common sense, and also to a knowledge of that
particular science or art to which the proposition relates : in
other words, we must look to the matter, and by that we must
be guided : but indefinites need not be classed as a distinct spe
cies of propositions ; because they must be either universals or
particulars, since the predicate must be said either of the whott
or only of a part of the subject.
G

62

ON THE SPECIES OF PROPOSITIONS.

are such as have common terms for their sub
jects, but they have not any sign, either of
universality or particularity, whereby we may
know whether the subject is to be taken in its
fullest sense or not ; but inasmuch as it is evi
dent that the predicate must be asserted either
universally or partially of the subject, it is ob
vious that all indefinite propositions may be
classed under universals or particulars, accord
ing as their predicate is said of the whole or
only a part of the subject ; and this must be
ascertained from the natural connexion existing
between the subject and the predicate, which
is called the matter of the proposition ; and
which will be explained in the next section.
It is useless therefore to consider indefinites as
a separate class of propositions. Thus it ap
pears that, strictly speaking, propositions, di
vided by considering their quantity, are of two
kinds, viz. universal and particular.
In order to keep this in mind, the following
line was formed :
Quae i Ca. vel Hyp. Qualis i Ne. vel Aff. Quanta I Vol. Par. I nd . Sin g. 'l,
n The words of this line, when written at full length, are as
follows: "Quae? Categorica vel hypothetica. Qualis 7 Negativa vel affirmativa. Quanta? Universalis, particulars, indefinita, singularis." The meaning of it may be thus explained :
Propositions divided as to substance, (Quae ?) are categorical or
hypothetical : as to quality, (Qualis ?) they are negative or
affirmative : as to quantity, (Quanta ?) they are either univer
sal, particular, indefinite, or singular.

{the
view
division
Table
their
with
following
The
'sat
Ppresents
urbo
odone
piovsi itonosn.s,

g. re 3S
Quantity.

5
EC

c

5' 03 p

1—
1
CO

re Eh

Ptheir
according
divided
rto
opareositions
Es ential.

> 35 3

X

03 c*

<!(0
<re •

Quality,
v

Ac idental.

•sfl
p

re

HCyaptoetghoertical.

►3
Substance,
a.E

o

a p- r+

u "•■ 03

O

o

(a

<

64

ON THE DISTRIBUTION

SECTION III.
In every singular proposition, the predicate
is said of the whole of the subject, i. e. the
subject is taken for every thing signified by it,
or is distributed; e. g. " Dionysius was a ty
rant :" here the whole of Dionysius is meant ;
consequently, in a syllogism, singular propo
sitions are considered as equivalent to universals °.
matter.

The matter of a proposition is the " extent
of connexion which naturally exists between
the extremes ;" and it is of three kinds, ne
cessary, impossible, and contingent.

accessary.

Necessary matter is when the extremes of a
proposition essentially and invariably agree
with each other, as, " All islands are sur
rounded by water."
0 The quantity of propositions, as far as regards the words, is
fourfold, viz. universal, particular, singular, and indefinite ; but
as far as it affects syllogistic argument, and, consequently, re
gards the judgement, which is expressed by it, it may be con
sidered as of two kinds only, viz. universal and particular; for
the singular (as has been shown) is equivalent to the universal,
and the indefinite must be either universal or particular, ac
cording to the connexion which exists between its extremes,
and which is termed the matter of a proposition. The word
matter is an equivocal word, for it may signify either the com
ponent parts of a proposition, i. e. the subject, predicate, and
copula, or the agreement or disagreement naturally subsisting be
tween the subject and predicate, in which last sense it is here used.

OF TERMS.

65

Impossible matter is when the extremes of impossible.
a proposition differ from each other essentially
and invariably, as, " No human institution is
wholly without error."
Contingent matter is when the extremes of a Contingent.
proposition partly agree with each other, and
partly differ, as, " Some human inventions are
beneficial to mankind."
The quantity of indefinite propositions may indefinites.
be determined by these different kinds of mat
ter ; for in necessary and impossible matter, an
indefinite may be considered as an universal,
and the sign of universality may be prefixed ;
e. g. " Human inventions are liable to error ;"
in which case we may say, " All human inven
tions," etc. and, " Honourable men are not
willing to disgrace their characters;" that is,
" No honourable men," etc. ; but in contingent
matter, i. e. when the extremes only partially
agree, an indefinite proposition must be con
sidered as a particular ; e. g. " Victories have
been more destructive to the conquerors than
to the conquered ;" that is, " Some victories,"
etc. ; and, " Works of human invention are
steam engines ;" that is, " Some works," etc. .Four classe.
Pure categorical propositions p being re- Sons?i"'1'
P Propositions have been considered according to tlieir sub
stance, quality, and quantity ; we now wish to find out of how
many classes propositions may be considered to be, as far as may

o3

66

ON THE DISTRIBUTION

garded according to their quality and quan
tity, may be considered as of four kinds, viz.
" universal affirmative," " universal negative,"
" particular affirmative," and " particular ne
gative." And each of these classes is denoted
by a particular symbol ; thus, A stands for the
universal affirmative, E the universal negative,
I the particular affirmative, and O the parti
cular negative, which is expressed in the two
following verses :
Asserit A, negat E ; universaliter ambai ;
AsseritI, negat O; sed particulariter ambo.
Distribution
uf terms.

' .

Since in every universal proposition the pre
dicate is said of the whole of the subject, hence
the subject is distributed in every universal q:
serve for syllogistic reasoning. With respect to substance, we
shall consider only one class, viz. pure categoricals : and by
regarding the quality (viz. the essential quality) and the quan
tity, it has been shown that there are two classes of each ; i. e.
affirmative and negative, universal and particular ; hence it is
manifest that there cannot be more than these four classes :
universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative,
and particular negative.
i With respect to the subject of an universal proposition being
distributed, it is self-evident that this is the case, it being the
differentia of an universal proposition : the fact is equally clear
with respect to the distribution of the predicate in the universal
negative : but in the particular negative it is not so manifest
that this is the case: it may, however, be proved thus, " Some
men are not logicians." This proposition asserts, that there is a
certain class of men, no one of which is a logician, viz. there is
some limited number of individuals comprised in the subject,
from which every individual comprehended under the predicate is

OF TERMS.

67

but in negative propositions, the predicate
must be distributed, or the proposition could
not be true : thus, " No human institution is
perfect," would be false, if anypart even of the
term " perfect" agreed with the term " human
institution." The distribution, therefore, of
the terms of propositions depends upon their
universality and their negation ; hence this
rule may be formed,
" All universals distribute the subject, and General mie.
all negatives distribute the predicate."
It sometimes happens that the predicate of Predicate of
.
.1...
.
.
affirmative
an affirmative
is
distributed-. r ; but
since
this an
som«'ime;
distributed.

wholly excluded : or, in other words, the term logician, in its most
extensive signification, cannot be predicated of any individual
comprised under that class of men, which is the subject ; conse
quently it is evident that the term logician is here used in its
most universal sense, viz. it is distributed ; and unless it were
so distributed, the proposition, " Some men are not logicians,"
would not be true.
r The predicate of an affirmative proposition cannot, with ac
curacy, be ever said to be distributed ; for although it may acci
dentally happen that the predicate be of equal extent with the
subject, i. e. that the predicate in its fullest sense may be affirmed
of the subject, also distributed, yet this fact is by no means im
plied in the form of expression of the affirmative proposition: the
predicate, therefore, is not " actually distributed," (Whately,
p. 42.) "but is distributable ; and the point to be considered is,
not what might be said with truth, but what actually lias been said."
A case somewhat similar to the present occurs in the reduc
tion of one of the modes of syllogisms in Part iii. which will
be shown hereafter. It often happens that the predicate is
of equal extent with the subject of an affirmative proposition,

68

ON THE OPPOSITION

circumstance does not depend upon the form
of the expression, but is merely accidental, re
sulting (as Aldrich observes, chap. ii. §. 3.) " virtute significati, non virtute signi;" it is not to
be considered so as to affect any argument; nor
could any inference be drawn which depended
on such a circumstance ; for the form of the
expression alone is regarded in logic, the truth
or falsehood of a proposition depending upon
its subject matter.

SECTION IV.
opposition.

Two propositions are said to be opposed to
each other, when, the subject and predicate
being the same in each, they differ from each
other either in quantity or in quality, or in
both ; and since there are four different classes

and is therefore distributable, as is the case in most mathematical
definitions ; e. g. a " rectilineal triangle is a plane figure con
tained by three straight lines :" also in all metaphysical defi
nitions, as, " A proposition is an asserting sentence ;" or where
the predicate is any specific property of the subject, as, " A pro
position is a sentence signifying something true or false :" if,
then, any conclusion be deduced from such a case as this, such
a conclusion may materially be correct, but it must be inaccurate
according to the rules of logic, because it could not be deduced
from the form of the expression alone.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

69

of propositions which may be formed, each
having the same subject and predicate, viz.
A, E, I, and O ; any two of which are said to
be opposed3, consequently there are four dif
ferent kinds of opposition ; i. e. contrary, subeontrary, subaltern, and contradictory.
Contrary opposition ' is between two uni- contrary.
versal propositions, differing from each other
in quality only, viz. between A and E : e. g.
" All men are mortal;" " No men are mortal."
Subcontrary opposition is between two par- subcomraiy.

* Propositions, when opposed to each other, are said to have
the same subject and predicate ; and the points in which they
are to differ is in quality or in quantity, or in both ; but it must
be remembered, that when any propositions oppose each other,
they are not only to have the same subject and predicate, but
those terms are to be used with reference to each other in exactly
the same sense in both the propositions, or no opposition can sub
sist between them. This rule, which Aldrich has stated as ap
plying to contradictories alone, (see chap. ii. sec. 4.) is equally
applicable to all the other species of opposition ; and if this
were not observed, the four kinds of propositions might be all
true or all false together.
' The opposition which exists between two singular proposi
tions can only be contrary opposition, for the quantity of sin
gulars cannot be changed, (except by conversion ;) but since
the matter of a singular proposition cannot be contingent, hence
the contrary to a singular forms as perfect an opposition as con
tradiction ; for if a singular be true, its contrary must of ne
cessity be false, and vice versa; for it will be shown in this
section, that contraries cannot be both true or both false to
gether, either in necessary or impossible matter.

70

ON THE OPPOSITION

ticular propositions, which differ from each
other in quality only, viz. between I and O : e. g.
" Some men are logicians ;" " Some men are
not logicians."
Subaltern opposition is between two propo
sitions which differ from each other in quan
tity only; viz. between A and I, or between
E and O :
c All human institutions are imperfect ;
I Some human institutions are imperfect.
No equivocator is a person worthy of credit;
Some equivocator is not a person worthy of credit.

contradic-

Contradictory opposition is between two
pure categorical propositions, differing from
each other both in quantity and quality, viz.
between A and O, or E and I :
c
' ■»' (
(
I

All virtues grace those who possess them ;
Some virtues do not grace those who possess them.
No sophistical argument is to be relied on ;
Some sophistical argument is to be relied on.

N. B. In order that two propositions should
be contradictories, (and such cannot be both
true nor both false together,) care must be
taken that the terms of both the propositions
are to be used in exactly the same sense u with
respect to each other.
" Aldrich has given this rule in the following words: "Notandum est, ad contradictionem requiri quatuor : nempe loqui

OF PROPOSITIONS.

71

Of all these four kinds of opposition, the which kind
j.
f.
n
°f opposition
contradictory is the most perfect; for contra- '.mostcomdictories differ from each other in all points,
viz. not only in quality, (the one ,heing nega
tive and the other affirmative,) but in quantity
also, for the one is universal and the other
particular; therefore it is manifest, that when
any proposition is true, its contradictory must
of necessity he false; and, conversely, if any
proposition be false, the contradictory to it
must be true.
Since in every proposition the assertion is Truth and
.
-.
i»ii
falsehood derespectmg the relation which the extremes pend uP°n
0
the matter.
bear to each other, it is obvious that the truth
or falsehood of that assertion must depend

de eodem, 1. eodem modo ; 2. secundum idem; 3. ad idem;
4. in eodem tempore." (Vide chap. ii. §. 4.) All of these re
quisites may be comprehended in this one general rule, viz.
That the subject and predicate of the opposing propositions must
be employed in exactly the same sense with respect to each other :
and this rule applies (as has been shown above) to all the cases
of opposition, as well as to the particular one of contradic
tion. Contradictories are perfectly opposed to each other, e. g.
" All men are logicians ;" " Some men are not logicians :" what
the one proposition affirms universally, the other denies par
tially ; again, " No men are dogs ;" " Some men are dogs ;" in
this case, one of these propositions asserts the terms dogs and
men to disagree universally, and the other asserts the partial
agreement of these very same terms, employed in exactly the
same sense with regard to each, other : if therefore any one of
these propositions be true, its contradictory must be false ; and if
false, its contradictory must be true.

72

ON THE OPPOSITION

upon the relation which naturally does exist
between those extremes, viz. upon the matter.
The relation, which is expressed in a propo
sition, between its extremes, is that of their
agreement or disagreement with each other:
the rule, therefore, which may be formed with
respect to the truth or falsehood of proposi
tions in the different kinds of matter, is as fol
lows : whenever the assertion of a proposition,
respecting the mutual agreement or disagree
ment of its extremes, coincides with what is
knownx by the matter, respecting their real
connexion, then the proposition is a true one,
and vice versa : thus, in necessary matter, it is
known that the extremes invariably and essen
tially agree, consequently all affirmatives (which
assert the agreement of their extremes) will be
true : but negatives, which assert that they
disagree, are of course false : the case is the
same with respect to all the different kinds of
matter. Hence the following rules will be selfevident :
* To discover the matter of any proposition cannot be effected
by logic, but depends upon the science or system to which the
subject matter of the proposition belongs; thus, "The planets
are not stationary ;" the extremes of this proposition are asserted
to differ ; and this assertion will evidently be true, if these ex
tremes really do differ; this point, however, could not be disco
vered by logic ; but rather from a knowledge of astronomy, to
which science the subject matter belongs.

73

OF PROPOSITIONS.
T necessary matter, <(
In
I
T .
...
(
In impossible matter, <
t
t
»• _ .
..
$
In contingent matter, <
'.

Affirmatives,
Negatives,
Affirmatives,
Negatives,
Univeisals,
Particulars,

true.
false.
false.
tine.
false.
true.

The following scheme presents at one view scheme of
i
i./v*
.
n
'
opposition.
the different species of propositions, denoted
by their respective symbols, A, E, I, O ; the
different kinds of matter, by the initial letters
». t. c. ; and the truth or falsehood of the pro
positions in each matter by the letters t. andy.
viz. true or false.

74

ON THE OPPOSITION

By an inspection of this scheme it will be
manifest, that the contraries cannot be both
true together, nor the subcontraries ho\h false,
with many other observations : and if the matter
be known, the truth or falsehood of any pro
position may be easily discovered.
General rules. N. B. (1.) If an universal be truey, the par
ticular contained under it will also be true : for
if the predicate may be asserted of the whole
, of the subject, of course it may be asserted of
a part of it.
(2.) If a particular be false, the universal
which contains it will be false also : for if the
predicate cannot be asserted of a part of .the
subject, a fortiori it cannot be asserted of the
whole of it ; since the whole must contain that
part.
If the universal be false z, or the particular
J Thus if it be true that " All human institutions are liable to
imperfection," it necessarily must be true that " Some human
institutions are liable to imperfection." Again, if it be false
that " Some vicious habits are worthy of receiviag commenda
tion," it will evidently be false to predicate of all vicious habits,
that they are worthy of receiving commendation : for as the pre
dicate cannot be said of a part of the subject, of course it cannot
of the whole of it, since the term " Some vicious habits" is con
tained under " All vicious habits."
z Let the universal be false, e. g. " All men are acquainted
with the science of astronomy ;" although the predicate cannot
be asserted of the whole of the subject, it does not therefore
follow that it may not be asserted of a part of it ; as, '* Some
men are acquainted with the science of astronomy." In a simi-

OF PROPOSITIONS.

75

true, the particular to the one and universal to
the other may be either true or false ; and un
less the matter be known, it cannot be disco
vered which they are. It would be useless to
go through all the various proofs which Aldrich has given to show that A and E cannot
be true together, but may be both false ; that
I and O may be both true, but cannot be both
fake together, etc. ; for the conclusions are selfevident, and by a knowledge of the rules above
given, relative to the truth or falsehood of pro
positions in the different kinds of matter, these
deductions will be manifest.

SECTION V.
A proposition is said to be converted when conversion,
its extremes are transposed.
There are two kinds of conversion" gene- of two kinds.
lar manner it may be shown, that if the particular be true, it
does not therefore necessarily follow that the universal must be
so ; for though the predicate may be asserted of a part of the
subject, it does not necessarily follow that it may be asserted of
the whole of it : the example just given will serve as an illustra
tion.
1 There is also another kind of conversion, which is not men
tioned by Aldrich, but which is of use in logic ; this is called
conversion by contraposition: Dr. Whately calls it, conversion
by negation : it is effected by changing the quality of the propo
sition, viz. in the case of O, you may conceive the negative as a
part of the predicate; regarding the proposition as I, instead of

h2

76

ON THE CONVERSION

rally used in logic, viz. simple conversion and
conversion per accidens.
simple.

Simple conversion is the mere transposition
of the extremes of a proposition, without any
change of the quantity or quality ; e. g. " No
species of injustice is tolerable :" converted
thus, " Nothing tolerable is a species of in0 ; thus, though the terms are not strictly the same as before,
yet the meaning of the proposition will not be altered : e. g.
" Some men are not-logicians ;" here we may consider the pre
dicate as " not-logicians," instead of " logicians," and the pro
position will stand thus :
" Some men are not-logicians ;"
viz. " Some men are beings who are not-logicians."
And this proposition being I, may thus be simply converted ;
" Some beings who are not-logicians are men."
By this mode A may be simply converted, when reduced to the
form of E, by introducing a double negative in the place of the
affirmation ; the meaning of the proposition will not, of course,
be altered by such a circumstance : " for," says Dr. Whately,
" it is the same thing to affirm some attribute of the subject, or
to deny the absence of that attribute," p. 85. e. g.
" Every act of prudence is an act of virtue."
This is exactly equivalent to
" No act of prudence is not an act of virtue."
This being E, may consequently be simply converted ; therefore
" That which is not an act of virtue, is not an act of prudence ;"
or, " No act but a virtuous one can be an act of prudence :" i. e.
"A virtuous act alone can be an act of prudence."
Thus by some one of the three modes of conversion, any propo
sition may be converted ; viz. E, I may be converted simply,
E, A per accidens, and A, O by contraposition.
The following lines have been formed by logicians, in order
•to assist the mind in remembering these rules of conversion.
F E c I simpliciter convertitur, E v A per acci.
F A x O per contra : sic fit conversio tota.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

77

justice." " Some works of art are of human
invention," converted to " Some things of hu
man invention are works of art."
Conversion per accidens, or (as Dr. Whately Per »«iden.
more properly terms it) conversion by limita
tion, is when the extremes of the proposition
are transposed, and the quantity is changed
alsob; e. g. " All quadrupeds are animals,"
converted to, "Some animals are quadrupeds."
" No tyrant deserves the love and esteem of
his subjects," converted to, " Some person who
deserves the love and esteem of his subjects is
not a tyrant."
The truth of a proposition is not in any way
b Accidental conversion depends upon the laws of subaltern
opposition, in which it has before been shown, that if the uni
versal be true, the particular will also be so; but if the universal
hefalse, it does not necessarily follow that the particular must
be false : hence it is obvious, that if any universal be true, its
accidental converse wil^ also be true ; but if false, the accidental
converse may be true: e. g. if it be true that " No men are qua
drupeds," it will also be true that " Some quadrupeds are not
men ;" but if it be false that " No men are liable to death," it
is not necessarily false that " Some beings liable to death are
not men ;" for this assertion is manifestly true. Hence it may
be seen, that accidental conversion is not so complete an inference
as simple conversion ; for the simple converse of a proposition
always follows the accidental quality of the exposita, viz.- if the
exposita be true or false, its simple converse is the same, (pro
vided it be such a proposition as admits of being simply con
verted,) but the accidental converse of a proposition does not
follow the accidental quality of the exposita, unless the exposita
be true.

h3

78

Illative
conversion.

Kule for
illative
conversion.

Memorial
line.

ON THE CONVERSION

affected by logical conversion ; hence if a pro
position be true before conversion, it must be
so after, viz. its converse must also be true ; for
" conversio utrobique illativa estc." Illative
conversion is, when the truth of the converse
follows from that of the proposition which has
been converted, or exposita, as it is termed;
and all conversion, as used in logic, must be
illative.
Hence we may deduce the following general
rule : viz. No term must be distributed after
conversion which was not distributed before it ;
for in this case the term which was employed
only partially in the exposita, has been used
universally in the converse: and it has been
proved above, (see last section, p. 75.) that the
truth of an universal cannot be inferred from
that of its particular.
From a consideration of this rule it will ap
pear, that A and E may be converted per accidens, and E and I simply ; and such conver
sion will be in all cases illative.
The following memorial line was formed in
order to keep this circumstance in the student's
remembrance :
F E c I simpliciter convertitur, E v A per acci.

viz. E and I are simply converted, E and A
c Aldrich, chap. ii. j. 5.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

79

per accidens. In order that a proposition may e and i conbe capable of being simply converted, it is necessary that its extremes should be of equal
extent; i. e. that either they should be both
distributed, as is the case in the universal ne
gative, or neither distributed, as in the parti
cular affirmative d ; for, let E be true ; e. g.
" No vice is commendable:" in this case both
of the extremes differ essentially from each
other ; this proposition therefore denotes that
vice differs from any commendable thing ; con
sequently, any thing that is commendable must
differ from vice, or " No commendable thing
is vice:" again, let I be true; e. g. " Some
members of the university are good logicians."
This proposition denotes the partial agreement
of the two extremes ; and since the terms good
logicians, and members of the university agree,
it follows that we can predicate of some good
logicians, that they are members of the univer
sity : viz. " Some good logicians are members
of the university ;" or else the original proposi
tion could not be true'.
d If any proposition, in which one term only was distributed,
were simply converted, it is manifest that, after conversion, the
other term would be distributed ; and since, by the hypothesis,
this term could not have been distributed before, such conver
sion cannot be illative : hence it follows, that (unless under
some accidental circumstances) neither A nor 0 can be simply
converted.
• Aldrich proves the simple converse of I to be true in a dif-

80
widens per

ON THE CONVERSION
^et .^ ")e true, tnen I, its particular, must

be true, and consequently the simple converse
of I must be true ; but this is the accidental
converse of A : therefore A may be converted
per accidens. That E may also be converted
per accidens is self-evident ; for since the sim
ple converse of E is true, the particular con
tained under this converse, must be true also :
but this is the converse per accidens of the
original proposition E.
O cannot be converted either simply* or
ferent manner, [chap. ii. $. 5.] thus: if I be true, its contradic
tory (E) must be false ; therefore the simple converse of that
contradictory must also be false, consequently the contradictory
to that simple converse must be true ; but this is the simple
converse of the original proposition (I) e. g.
I. "Some members of the university are good logicians:"
(true.)
E. " No members of the university are good logicians:"
(false.)
E. " No good logicians are members of the university :"
(also false.)
therefore, (I) " Some good logicians are members of the uni
versity," must be true, and this is the simple converse of the
original proposition, " Some members of the university are good
logicians."
' " As it was remarked that, in some affirmatives, the whole
of the predicate does actually agree with the subject, so, when
this is the case, and is granted to be so, A may be illatively
converted simply ; but this is an accidental circumstance."
Elements of Logic, p. 85.
On similar grounds it may be shown, that in impossible mat
ter, O may be converted both simply and accidentally ; for since
the terms of the proposition must, by the matter, essentially and
invariably differ, the universal which contains this particular
must in such a case be true ; and it has been shown, (see note b,)

.

OF PROPOSITIONS.

81

per accidens ; for since only one term is dis- o not con
tributed, a term would necessarily be distri
buted after conversion, which was not so be
fore.
that the simple and accidental Converse of this proposition will
both be true ; and the simple and accidental converse of E will
thus become the same as the accidental and simple converse of
O: e.g. (let a case be taken in impossible matter;) let O be
true. " Some men are not dogs ;" then by the matter, " No
men are dogs," is true.
Therefore the simple $ " No dogs are men,"
} are also
and accidental converse f " Some dogs are not men," ' both true.
But the former of these is the accidental converse, and the latter
is the simple converse of the exposita ; viz. " Some men are not
dogs." Let the case be proved generally thus : let it be as
sumed that the matter is impossible, then " Some A is not B,"
is true ; but by the matter, " No A is B," is true : hence " No
B is A," and " Some B is not A," are also true. And these
two last propositions are the accidental and simple converse of
"Some A is not B."

ON SYLLOGISM.

PART III. SECTION I.
of argument.

The third part of logic treats of argument
or syllogism, which is the sign of the third
mental operation; for discursus, or reasoning
expressed in words, is argument.
Reasoning (or discourse) having been de
fined to be the progress of the mind from one
or more judgements to another resulting from
them, consequently every decomplex word
which expresses reasoning, must consist of two
parts; that which is proved, and that by means
i of which it is proved. That by means of which
i any thing is proved is generally called the anPrtmises. tecedent or premises*; and that which is proved
is called the inference or conclusion.
connexion
The premises must have a connexion with
between the
premises, each other ; for if this were not the case, no
conclusion could possibly result from them:
1 The principles, from the truth of which the conclusion is
drawn, are supposed to be known, " quasi sine discursu ;" as
Aldrich observes, (chap. iii. §. 1.) at least they must be laid
down as hypolhetically true ; i. e. they must " antecedere" or
" pramitti ;" for which reason they are termed the antecedent,
or the premises.
The inference follows from the force of the premises ; hence
it is said to be concluded, inferred, collected, or deduced from
them.

ON SYLLOGISM.

83

e. g. " Jupiter was * the king of the heathen
gods ;" " England is the mistress of the sea ;" from two such judgements nothing could be
inferred, for there is no connexion existing be
tween them, and they do not in any way de
pend upon each other: also there must be
such a relation between the two premises and and between
the premises
the conclusion, that, from a knowledge of the *£nConclut
former, the mind must be irresistibly led to the
latter.
Consequence, as employed in logic, is the consequence,
mode of showing the dependence which exists
between the antecedent and the consequent;
i. e. between the premises and the conclusion :
there are two kinds of consequence, the mate
rial and the formal.
The material consequence b is when the con- Material
consequence.
b Every material argument may be reduced to a regular syllo
gism by supplying the proposition which is omitted ; e. g. (to
take the example given below,) " Diamonds are jewels;" " they
are therefore valuable :" in this case a proposition is omitted, '
the truth of which is so manifest, that it would, in common dis
course, be very allowable to leave it to the hearer's judgement ;
viz. " All jewels are valuable ;" the argument, when put into a
syllogism, i. e. when reduced to its regular logical form, will
stand thus :
" All jewels are valuable;"
" All diamonds are jewels :"
therefore, " All diamonds are valuable."
This reduction may seem unnecessary, because it may be urged,
that under its other form the inference was sufficiently obvious ;
but yet it will be of advantage to reduce any material argument

84

ON SYLLOGISM.

sequent is inferred from the antecedent solely
by the matter of the argument; i. e. by the
force or meaning attached to the terms : e. g.
" Diamonds are jewels ; they are therefore va
luable." " No brutes are human ; consequently
they are not rational." " Some pleasures are
allowable, for they are innocent."
Formal
The formal consequence is when the conseconsequence.
quent is inferred from the antecedent, from the
form only of the expression ; viz. from the dis
position of the terms with respect to each
other: e. g.
" All virtue is commendable."
" Temperance is a virtue ;"
therefore, " Temperance is commendable."
" All innocent things are allowable:"
" Some pleasures are innocent :"
therefore, " Some pleasures are allowable."

The formal consequence alone is regarded in
logic ; for since it depends solely on the dispo
sition of the terms with each other, it cannot
ever fail; but the material, which depends
only on the meaning of the terms, may fre
quently lead into error0.
to a syllogistic form, because any error may then be more
easily detected ; for an argument which cannot be reduced to
the above regular and logical form, cannot be legitimate. Just
in the same way it is often of use to (ill up the ellipses in a sen
tence, in order to see whether that sentence be grammatical.
c For, as Aldrich observes, (chap. iii. <S. 1.) " Mutatis termini*.
et servata eorum dispositione, Materialis plerumque fallit, For-

ON SYLLOGISM.

85

A syllogism is an argument in which the Syllogism,
terms are so placed with respect to each other,
that the conclusion results necessarily from the
premises, from the mere force of the expres
sion, and without any consideration of the
meaning of the terms themselves.
Aldrich d has defined a syllogism to be, syjioSum
defined.

" oratio, in qua positis quibusdam atque concessis, necesse est allied evenire, prceter et prop
ter" ea, quce posita sunt atque concessa." In
a syllogism, the truth of the premises being
admitted, it will be impossible to deny the con
clusion : and even if the terms be changed, the
inference will still hold good ; e. g.
" All islands are surrounded by water ;"
" England is an island:"
therefore, " England is surrounded by water."

The truth of this conclusion is so apparent,
that it needs not a proof; for the mind, when
malis semper obtinet." Since the material consequence de
pends entirely upon the power or meaning of the terms, if these
terms be changed, the consequence will not hold good, at least
it will not result necessarily ; but in the formal consequence the
inference does result necessarily ; and this will stand good, even
though the terms be changed, if their order be preserved ; and '
although a conclusion may be false, if the terms be changed,
yet this circumstance will arise from the falsity of one of the
premises, and not from the mode of inference ; i. e. not from the
force of expression, which alone is regarded in logic.
i See Aldrich, chap. iii. §. I.
*.
' " Prater" means that the conclusion must be distinct from
'he premises, and the word " propter" signifies that the con
clusion necessarily results by the force of those premises.
t

8G

ON SYLLOGISM.

once convinced of the truth of the two pre
mises, cannot but admit that of the conclusion
also ; and this inference would be equally ap
parent, even if the terras were changed, and
any symbols were substituted in their place,
provided that the arrangement of the terms be
preserved; e. g.
Every B is A.
Every CUB.
therefore. Every C is A.

This inference is inevitable f, whatever terms
be substituted for the letters A, B, C ; and it
is to this form that all real arguments may be
ultimately reduced, and on their conformity or
non-conformity to it their validity will inva
riably depend.

SECTION II.
of the Mmpie There are many kinds of syllogism ; but, at
•yiiogi.m. present, the simple categorical will be the only
one treated of: the simple categorical syllogism
' The premises must either be known to be true, or be proved
to be so, before any inference can be drawn from them. Logic
undertakes to ascertain the validity of an argument, only so far
as the form of eipression is concerned. The premises, therefore,
(in all the examples which may be adduced in this treatise,)
will be considered as hypothetically true, unless where the con
trary is particularly specified.

SYLLOGISTIC CANONS.

87

is that which consists of three pure categorical
propositions : the two first of which are termed
the premises, or antecedent, and the third is
called the conclusion, or consequent*. The
conclusion, before it forms a part of the syllo
gism, and therefore has not been proved, is
called the question or problem, because its
truth is as yet uncertain ; but after it has been
proved, and forms a part of the syllogism, it is
no longer uncertain, and is then termed the
conclusion : e. s.
Question
or
<
-£ " Is «George the Fourth to be obeyed 1"
Problem.
* The conclusion or consequent is frequently, in common conversation, stated before the premises ; this may also be observed
in most authors : in such a case the antecedent is connected
to the consequent by some causal conjunction, as, because, for,
since, etc. : e. g. " Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven." " The proof which arises from
this perception is not to be deemed occult or imaginary, because
it is incapable of being drawn out in words, or of being con
veyed to the apprehension of the reader in any other way than
by sending him to the books themselves." [Hora? Paulina-, ch.
xvi. §. 5.] This sentence may thus be reduced to a regular
syllogistic form :
" A proof which is not capable of being drawn out in words,
or of being conveyed to the apprehension of the reader in any
other way than by sending him to the books themselves, is not
to be deemed occult or imaginary :"
" The proof which arises from this perception is a proof of
this kind : "
Therefore, ' ' The proof which arises from this perception, is
not to be deemed occult or imaginary."

i2

88

SYLLOGISTIC CANOttS.

Antecedent I '* All good kings are to be obeyed."
'"
"\ " George the Fourth is a good king.'
Premises. '
Conclusion. J " George the Fourth is to be obeyed."

object of a

syllogistic
canons.

The object of a syllogism is, to prove whe
ther the two extremes of the question agree or
disagree with each other ; and this cannot be
done, but by comparing each of them with
some one and the same third term. The fol
lowing rules are those which are laid down in
Aldrich's Logic h as the syllogistic canons ; viz.
those canons on which the whole force of syllo
gistic reasoning is founded.
1. Quae conveniunt in uno aliquo
eodemque
x
2
tertip, ea conveniunt1 inter se.
2. Quorum unum convenit, alterum differt inn
et eidem tertio, ea differunt inter se :
e. g. " All men are liable to do wrong."
(1.) " I am a man ;"
therefore, " I am liable to do wrong."
Again, *' No science can be learned without application."
(2.) " Logic is a science ;"
therefore, " Logic cannot be learned without application."
h Chap. iii. §. 2.
' Two terms are said to agree with each other, when nothing
exists in the one that does not also exist in the other, regard, of
course, being paid to the extent in which the terms are used :
the agreement or disagreement of terms, when expressed in
logical propositions, is not contingent, but absolute : the different
degrees of their agreement or disagreement not being regarded in
syllogism : thus, " Some men are philosophers." Although
both these terms are undistributed, yet their agreement is as
serted absolutely in the proposition, and not contingently.

SYLLOGISTIC CANONS.

89

3. Quae non conveniunt in uno aliquo eodemque tertio, ea non conveniunt inter se.
If there be two terms, such that no third
term can be brought forward which may agree
with both of them, they evidently cannot have
any thing in common with each other ; it will
therefore be impossible to prove that they
agree k.
4. Quorum neutri inest quod non sit in alio,
ea non differunt inter se.
If there be any two terms which so exactly
agree with each other, that there is not any
idea comprised in the one which is not also
comprised in the other, it will be impossible to
prove that these two terms differ from each
other; for manifestly no third term could be
adduced with which one of these terms would
agree, and from which the other could differ '.
5. Quce non probantur convenire in uno aliquo
eodemque tertio, ea non probantur convenire
k Thus, let there be two terms, " men" and " plants ;" and
since no third term can be adduced which will agree with both
these terms, it will consequently be impossible to prove their
"agreement ; i. e. to prove that " Men are plants,"
i Again, let there be the two terms, " animal," and " sensitive
being :" there is not any idea comprised in the one which is not
also comprised in the other ; therefore they must entirely agree
with each other, for in this case no third term could be adduced
with which one of these terms would agree, and from which the
other could differ.

i3

90

SYLLOGISTIC CANONS.

inter se. Dubitari enim potest utrum detur
ejusmodi tertium, et dubitatio ista non toilitur.
6. De quibus non probatur, convenire unum
eidem alicui tertio, cut alteram differt, ea non
probantur differre inter se. Dubitari enim
potest, utrum detur ejusmodi tertium, h. e. utrum
alterutri insit quod non est in reliquo ; et dubi
tatio ista non tollitur.
No two terms can be proved to agree or
differ, unless by comparing them with some
one and the same third term : if, therefore, no
third term be adduced with which they are
proved either both to agree, or one to agree
with and the other to differ from, it is not
proved whether they agree with or differ from
each other : for since no third term has been
used to compare them with, there remains a
doubt whether any such term can possibly be
adduced"; and until this doubt be removed,
their agreement or disagreement with each
other cannot possibly be inferred.
m The categories which have been mentioned above, (see
p. 34. note k,) will assist us much in our endeavours to find out
middle terms, with which we may compare the extremes of any
proposed question : for the categories are those heads to which
we may refer every term according as may best suit our pur
pose. On this point the reader may consult Dr. Whately, Ele
ments of Logic, p. 218.

SYLLOGISTIC CANONS.

91

It is upon the two first of these rules that
the validity of all simple categorical syllogisms
depends : they may thus he rendered in Eng
lish:
1 . If
ami
two terms agree
with one and the th*
,w0 cl»ef
K
<r
o
canons.
same third term, they agree with each other.
2. If of two terms one agrees with tlte same
one third term from which the other differs,
these two terms differfrom each other.
It is upon the former of these that the va
lidity of all affirmative conclusions depends,
and on the latter, of all negative: of these
rules Dr. Whately speaks thus : " No catego
rical syllogism can be faulty which does not
violate these canons; none correct which does":
■ On this passage of Dr. Whately, Mr. Bentham makes the
following observation: "These two axioms, thus expressed,
are only applicable to those syllogisms in which the mean term
is universal in both premises ; for it is then only that the two
extremes are precisely equal to the same mean. Take, for in
stance, the syllogism ' Every X is a Y, every Y is a Z, there
fore every X is Z.' If we prove it by the first of the above
axioms, and say, that the two terms X and Z agree both with
the term Y, therefore they agree with one another, and do not
take into account the signs of extent, we should then be obliged
lo admit the truth of the syllogism.—An X is a Y, a Z is a Y,
therefore an X is a Z, which is evidently false, though strictly
conformable to Dr. Whately 's canons, of which he says ' No
categorical syllogism can be faulty, which does not violate these
canons.'"—(Outline ofa New System of Logic, p. 156.) Now,
putting aside the objection that might be raised at calling the
sentence " an X is a Y, a Z is a Y, therefore an X is a Z ;" a
syllogism, when in reality it is not a syllogism at all : yet so far

92

SYLLOGISTIC CANONS.

hence on these two canons are built the rules
or cautions which are to be observed with re
spect to syllogisms, for the purpose of ascerfrom that sentence being " strictly conformable to Dr. Whately's
canons," it, in fact, is not conformable to them in any point of
view : for in the sentence above there is no reason given which
may lead to a knowledge that the same part of Y is referred to
in the two first propositions : Dr. Whately's first canon says,
that, " if two terms agree with one and the same third, they
agree with one another." Now, as it has been shown, nothing
proves that this Y is one and ,the same in both propositions ;
hence it is manifest, that the sentence which Mr. Bentham has
adduced, (and which he terms " a syllogism,") instead of being
strictly conformable to the above canon, is not conformable to it
at all : in short, the very fact of its not being conformable to that
canon, is the only reason why it is (as Mr. Bentham says)
" evidently false." It may perhaps be imagined, that Mr.
Bentham was not aware that " this Y could not be shown to be
one and the same term in both propositions ;" but let us turn to
his " Outline," (p. 123. note,) where the following observation
may be found :
" Every X is Y,
and again, " Every X is Y,
Some Y is A,
Some Y is B,
therefore
therefore
Some A is X."
Some B is X."
" Here it may be seen, that no such conclusion can possibly
be drawn from the premises, as nothing shows that it is the same
part of Y that is referred to in both premises." This needs no
comment : it will be difficult to know under what head of falla
cies the above of Mr. Bentham's should be classed ; it seems,
however, to be most nearly allied to that of" error of expres
sion," of which he has treated, p. 233 ; in which he says, " a
man may err either from ignorance, or wilfully:" the very
elegant compliments which he has applied to those who do err
in either of the above ways, need not be transcribed hepe, as
they can only be duly appreciated by those who read his Out
line.

OF SYLLOGISM.

taining whether those canons have been strictly
observed, or not," p. 90.

SECTION III.
Rule 1 . In every syllogism there are three Three termi
terms, and three only.
&°"•
For every syllogism proves some conclusion,
viz. proves the agreement or disagreement of
two terms ; and these two terms are not proved
to agree or differ, unless by comparing them
with some one and the same third term : the two
terms, therefore, and the third, make three;
hence no syllogism can have more than three
terms. The following sentence, therefore, is
not a syllogism :
" Hector slew Patroclus;"
" Achilles slew Hector;"
" Achilles slew Patroclus."

In this apparent syllogism there are four
terms0; which are as follows, " Hector," "the
• If the terms of these propositions were written at full length,
the utter want of connexion between the two premises would be
more apparent :
" Hector was the person who slew Patroclus :"
" Achilles was the person who slew Hector."
These two propositions have no connexion with each other,
but are two distinct and wholly unconnected assertions ; conse
quently no inference could be deduced from them.

94

GENERAL RULES

person who slew Patroclus." " Achilles," and
" the person who slew Hector."
Major, miN. B. Of these three terms, the predicate
nor, and mid'
*
aieterms. 0f the conclusion is called the major term ; and
the subject of the conclusion is called the minor
term; the third term, with which the major and
minor terms are each separately compared, is
called the middle: this term is called by Aristo
tle the argument. These names were assigned,
because in an universal affirmative proposition,
the predicate is commonly a more extensive
term than the subject : whence arose the names
of major and minor ; so also the middle term is
commonly in direct syllogisms (as will be seen
hereafter) more extensive than the minor, but
not so extensive as the major : whence it re
ceived the name of middle.
Three propoRule 2. In every syllogism there are three
sitions in a
t
syllogism, propositions, and only three?.
For there are two premises in which the ma
jor and minor terms are each separately com
pared with the middle, and there is the con
clusion, in which the major and minor terms
P As there are but three terms which are to be compared to
gether, i. e. the major, minor, and middle, it is manifest, that
only three comparative combinations can be made of three terms
taken two and two together ; viz. the major with the middle, the
minor with the middle, and the minor with the major : and
since no two terms can be compared but by a proposition, hence
there cannot be more than three propositions in a syllogism.

OF SYLLOGISM.

95

are compared with each other : and the two
premises with the conclusion make three pro
positions.
N. B. That premiss in which the major
term is compared with the middle, is called the
major premiss ; and that in which the minor is
compared with the middle, is called the minor
premiss.

N. B. (1.) The major premiss is sometimes The proposi
tion and
termed "the proposition"i," and the minor assumption.
is called " the assumption."
(2.) The middle term must not enter the con
clusion, for, in" such a case, there would not be
any inferende drawn, since the two extremes
of the question would not have been compared
i The major premiss is called " the proposition," by way of
eminence, because when a syllogism is in its most perfect form,
the major premiss is generally some well-known and universal
principle which is not likely to be disputed ; it is the minor pre
miss that is most liable to objection, because, generally speak
ing, it is an assertion, the truth of which is assumed, with parti
cular reference to the question which is to be proved, hence the
name " assumption ;" e. g.
" All islands are surrounded by water ;"
" England is an island:"
therefore, " England is surrounded by water."
In this example, the major premiss, "All islands are sur
rounded by water," is a well-known general truth ; whereas
" England is an island" is not a universal principle, as the
major is, though accidentally it may be as well known ; but
yet, in order to prove that " England is surrounded by water,"
it must be assumed that " it is an island."

96

GENERAL RULES

together; in fact, the last proposition would
he but a conversion of one of the others ; e. g.
" No good logicians resort to sophistical arguments ;"
'* All who are acquainted with the science of reasoning ac
curately are good logicians :"
therefore, " None who resort to sophistical arguments are good
logicians."

This is not a syllogism, for no inference is
made; the conclusion being but the simple
converse of the first proposition, the truth of
which in no way depends upon that proposi
tion which apparently is the minor premiss r.
Ambitious
middle.

Rule. 3. The middle term must not be ambiguous.
The middle term being ambiguous, means
that it must not be an equivocal term, which
would admit of two meanings ; for since in such
a case the term would be employed in two dif
ferent senses in the premises, the extremes of
the question would not be really compared
with one and the same third term; jhere would,
in fact, be two distinct middle terms, viz. there
would hefour terms' employed : e. g.
r Aldrich observes, (chap. iii. $. 3.) " Medium non ingreditur conclusionem, alias idem per idem probaretur ; adeoqus mm
etsent tres termini." I cannot see how the fact of the middle
term being in the conclusion can affect the number of the terms,
for surely in the tiro premises alone there are always three terms.
There would be what is commonly termed " argumentum in
circulo ;" but would this have any influence on the number of
the terms?
' This rule is evidently but a branch of the first, for an ambi-

OF SYLLOGISM.

97

" All spirits are inflammable ;"
" A ghost is a spirit :"
therefore, " A ghost is inflammable."
i

The word " spirit" is here evidently used in
a different sense in each proposition, conse
quently the two extremes of the conclusion are
not compared with the same third term.
Rule 4. The middle term must be distri
buted :
For if the middle term he not distributed Middle not
«
•
p 1
distributed.
in either of the premises, the extremes of the
conclusion will be compared with it, when em
ployed only in a part of its signification ; con
sequently, since the two terms are each com
pared with a part of the middle, there is no
reason for knowing that they have been each
guity of the middle will, in all cases, be equivalent to employing
two middle terms ; and thus the extremes would not be com
pared with one and the same third, which, as was before shown,
is necessary to be done : all equivocal words will produce this
kind of ambiguity ; e. g.
" A club is a society of men ;"
" A thick stick is a club :"
therefore, " A thick stick is. a society of men."— Again :
The following apparent argument contains four terms, because
of the ambiguity of the middle.
" That which peculiarly characterizes man from any other
animal, is the faculty which he possesses of roasting eggs; for
the peculiar characteristic of man is reason, and there is reason
in roasting eggs."
K

\

98

GENERAL RULES

compared with the same1 part; hence one of
the extremes may have been compared with
1 An instance of this fundamental error may be found in Mr.
Bentham's " Outline of a New System of Logic," in which he
objects to Dr. Whately's mode of treating modal propositions
and hypothetical:;, in the following words :
" With regard to hypotheticals, propositions and syllogisms
are also, in some measure, confounded together in the Elements.
A hypothetical proposition is there defined ' two or more categoricals united by a copula (or conjunction).' Amongst these
conjunctions are the causal. In page 86, we learn that a syllo
gism consists of three categorical propositions, united by a
causal conjunction. Might we not, from these premises, draw
the conclusion, that a syllogism is a hypothetical proposition?"
(p. 166.)
Now, so far from being able to draw such a conclusion, the
real fact is, that from such premises no conclusion whatsoever
can possibly be drawn. Mr. Bentham does not seem to have
been aware that the form of such an argument was faulty, or
surely he would not have asked such a question as the above:
let us place the propositions of this apparent syllogism in their
clearest light, and afterwards substitute for the terms some
symbols ; the error will then be obvious :
The argument stands thus,
" A hypothetical proposition is two or more categoricals
united by a causal conjunction;"
" A syllogism consists of three categorical propositions united
by a causal conjunction :"
therefore, " A syllogism is a hypothetical proposition." This
may be expressed in general terms thus :
" an X is a Y,"
" a Z is a Y,*'
therefore, " a Z is an X."
Mr. Bentham, speaking of this very form of argument, (which
he terms a syllogism,) observes, p. 157, that " it is evidently
false:" but T must again quote his own words, by which it will
appear, that although Mr. Bentham sometimes makes use of a

OF SYLLOGISM.

99

one part of the middle, and the other with an
other part of it ; e. g.
" Lead is a metal ;"
" Gold is a metal :"
therefore, " Gold is lead."—Again;
" Some quadrupeds are winged;"
" A horse is a quadruped:"
therefore, " A horse is winged."

In these examples the middle term is not
distributed, and there are therefore, in reality,
four terms.
Rule 5. If the middle term be once distri- one dutriou"
tion of the
buted, it will be sufficient.
JUSScm.
For if one extreme has been compared with
the whole of the middle, and the other with a
part of it, they will, in reality, have been com
pared with the same termu; e. g.

sophistical argument, he is not ignorant of the rules of logic :
speaking of a similar form of argument to the preceding, he
says, " Here it may be seen that no such conclusion can possibly
be drawn from the premises, as nothing shows that it is the same
part of Y that is referred to in both premises," [p. 123, note.]
One question naturally arises from this; Why did Mr. Bentham ask " whether such a conclusion might not be drawn from
such premises," when he must have known that no such con
clusion could possibly be drawn 1
■ The first canon is, that when two terms both agree with
one and the same third term, they agree with each other : now
this cannot be shown to be the case, unless that third term be
once taken in its most extensive signification ; for if one extreme
agrees with all the middle, and the other with a. part of it, they
do in fact agree with the same term, and therefore agree with

k2

100

GENERAL RULES

"All valuable knowledge is worth obtaining ;"
" A correct knowledge of logic is valuable knowledge:"
therefore, " A correct knowledge of logic is worth obtaining."

In this case, since one of the extremes agrees
with the whole of the middle, and the other
with a part of it, they both must entirely agree
with that part of the middle ; and they thereeach other : and this may be shown by the following argument,
which will be true, provided it be admitted that the same par! of
the middle is compared with both extremes; e. g.
" All metals are fusible ;"
" Lead is fusible :"
therefore, ' ' Lead is a metal."
Now if it be granted, that the two extremes, " metals," and
" lead," are compared to the third term " fusible," and to the
same part of it, then this consequence may be materially in
ferred ; but this cannot be proved, unless the middle be ones
taken in its most extensive sense, in which case it will be mani
fest, that the same part will have been compared with both of
the extremes, and this part of the middle may be considered as
one single term, with which both the extremes have been com
pared ; the case is similar where one extreme agrees with the
same part of the middle from which the other differs ; e. g.
" Some men are not sophists ;"
" Some men are good logicians :"
therefore, " Some good logicians are not sophists."
In this case the inference will be materially true, if it be ad
mitted that the same class of men is meant in both premises;
but, as before, this cannot be proved, unless the middle term be
once distributed: hence the above arguments are incorrect in
form, though true in sense, i. e. materially. It was from not
considering this fact, that Mr. Bentham so much objects to Dr.
Whately's mode of proving this rule, (Outline, p. 157.) There
may be some slight ambiguity in Dr. Whately's mode of expres
sion, but his meaning is sufficiently manifest and clear.

OF SYLLOGISM.

101

fore do, in reality, both agree with one and the
same third term".
Rule 6. A term must not be distributed in
the conclusion which has not been distributed in
the premises.
This is termed an illicit process of the major inicuprocess.
or minor term : arid to employ a term univer
sally in the conclusion, which was only par
tially employed in the premiss, must, of course,
be erroneous ; for the universal cannot be in
ferred from the particular : in fact, (as Dr.
Whately observes, p. 92.) there would be four
terms ; e. g.
" Every virtuous act is worthy of commendation ;"
" Profane swearing is not a virtuous act :"
therefore, " Profane swearing is not worthy of commendation."

This conclusion could not be inferred from
such premises, for the major term is illicitly
distributed ; and though the proposition may
be true, yet its truth cannot be inferred from
the premises : there are, in fact, two major
terms* instead of one ; viz. " Some acts worthy
x In all perfect arguments, the middle term ought not to be
more than once distributed ; this will appear more evidently
hereafter.
J This rule, as well as the two preceding, may be considered
as branches of the first ; viz. that in every syllogism there
must not be more than three terms: for an undistributed term ,
and the same distributed, cannot be called one term : be
sides, to draw an inference from any term partially employed
to the same term employed universally, is the same thing as in-

k3

.

10^

GENERAL RULES

of commendation," and " All acts worthy of
commendation."
Again :
" AH countries surrounded by sea are insular ;"
" Some barren lands are countries surrounded by sea :'.'
tlierefore," All barren lands are insular."

Here is an illicit process of the minor ; the
argument is therefore false, for the same rea
sons as the preceding.
' Negative pre- Rule 7. No inference can be drawn from
mises.
negative premises.
For in this case a middle term is brought
forward, from which both extremes differ; and
this fact does not afford any grounds for in
ferring that these two terms either agree with,
or differ from each other"; e. g.
" No real Christians are hateful-to God ;"
" A Mahometan is not a real Christian."

No conclusion can be drawn from such pre
mises ; the extremes may either agree or differ,
but these premises will not prove their agree
ment or disagreement.
ferring the universal from the truth of the particular, which is
illicit, as has been shown above, (Partii. $. 4;) for a distri
buted term bears the same proportion to the same undistributed,
as the universal to its particular.
1 Let any two terms both differ from another third, these
terms cannot be said to agree together ; for, if so, they would
both agree with the third : neither can it be inferred that they
differ from each other, for in such a case, one would agree with
the third term, and the other differ from it; and both these
cases are contrary to the hypothesis.

OF SYLLOGISM.

103

Rule 8. If one premiss
be negative,
the con- De
ifonepremi.i
.
k
negative,
elusion must be negative.
tne conciu~
sion must be
For since one premiss be negative, the other ne8at""i•
must (by the last rule) be affirmative ; conse
quently one of the extremes agrees with the
middle, and the other disagrees with it : hence
it must be inferred that they differ from each
other, and this disagreement cannot be ex
pressed but by negation ; i. e. the conclusion
must be negative''; e. g.
" No species of injustice is tolerable ;"
" An unjust law is a species of injustice :"
therefore, " An unjust law is not tolerable."

Rule 9. If
J the conclusion be negative,
O
' one o/iftheconciuT sion be nega
te premises must be negative.
jjjj ^mbe"
Since the conclusion is negative, the ex se.
tremes differ from each other; consequently
one of them must have differed from the mid
dle, and this disagreement must have been ex
pressed by a negative premiss b; e. g.
1 It should be remembeved, that affirmative propositions assert
the agreement, and negatives the disagreement, of their ex
tremes : and since, in this case, one of the premises is negative
and the other affirmative, one of the extremes is asserted to
agree with the middle, and the other to differ from it ; conse
quently it must be inferred that they differ from each, and this,
cannot be expressed but by a negative conclusion.
b It was before observed, (Part ii. §. 2.) that many proposi
tions were apparently negative when they were not so ; this is
the case when the negative does not really apply to the copula,
but is, in fact, a part of one of the extremes : with such propo

104

GENERAL RULES

" No men of generous hearts remember injuries;"
" Englishmen are men of generous hearts :"
therefore, " Englishmen do not remember injuries."

Particular
premises.

Rule 10. No inference can be drawn from
t
"
particular premises.
For one of the premises must be negative, in
order that the middle may be distributed ; con
sequently the other premiss must (by Rule 7.)
be affirmative: in these premises, therefore,
only one term is distributed, which must be
the middle : but since (owing to the negative
premiss) the conclusion must be negative, the
major term will be distributed in the conclu
sion, which was not distributed in the premises;
sitions a syllogism may seem to err against these three last rules,
though in reality it will be correct ; e. g.
" Those who are not dishonest deserve our esteem;"
" The virtuous man is not dishonest :"
therefore, " The virtuous man deserves our esteem."
Here one of the premises may seem to be negative; whereas
they are, in fact, both affirmatives, and the syllogism is perfectly
correct. Again,
" He who does not understand optics is not a complete ma
thematician ;"
" Many who read mathematics do not understand optics :"
. therefore, " Many who read mathematics are not complete ma
thematicians."
In this case, as before, the minor premiss appears to be negative,
though in reality it is affirmative ; hence, in looking for nega
tive premises, we must see whether the premises are really ne
gative, or only apparently such ; in which latter case they may
be likely to lead into error.

OF SYLLOGISM.

105

consequently there will be an illicit process of
the major0; e. g.
" Some brave men are not good officers;"
" Some Englishmen are good officers :"
therefore, " Some Englishmen are not brave men."

In this example there is an illicit process of
the major term.
Rule 11. If one of the premises be parti- ifonepremi»s
.
.
be particular,
cular, the conclusion must be particular.
the concini*
8ion must be
The fault of drawing an universal conclu-'so.
sion, when one of the premises is particular,
will be an illicit process of the minor term, as
will be evident from the three following exam
ples'3:
c This rule, with respect to particular premises, is only a
branch of some preceding ones : thus, if the premises were
both ■particular affirmative, they would err against the fourth
rule, for the middle term would not be distributed ; e. g.
" Some sciences are worth knowing ;"
" Some arts are worth knowing:".
therefore, " Some arts are sciences."
Here the middle being undistributed, no conclusion can cor
rectly be drawn. Again,
" Some men are not good logicians;"
" Some sophists are not good logicians."
From such premises no inference can be drawn, (by Rule 7.)
for they are both negative :—again, if these premises be taken,
one negative and the other affirmative, there would be an illicit
process of the major, as is shown in the text : hence, in all cases
of particular premises, there must be a violation of either Rules
4, 6, or 7.
d Three classes of premises may be formed, of which one is
particular, viz. AI, EI, and AO, (for EO cannot be correct by

106

GENERAL RULES

" All useful learning is praiseworthy ;"
" Some poetry is not praiseworthy :"
therefore, " No poetry is useful learning.'.'—Again ;
" All meteors are vapours ;"
" Some luminous bodies are vapours:"
therefore, " All luminous bodies are meteors."—Again;
" No works of human invention are perfect ;"
" Some machines are works of human invention :"
therefore, " No machines are perfect."
A particular
conclusion
from uni
versal pre
mises*

Rule 12. A particular conclusion may be
drawnfrom universal premises.
Whenever an universal conclusion can be
drawn from universal premises, it will of course
be allowable to infer a particular; for the truth
of the particular may be inferred from that of
the universal : but it will not, in all cases, be
possible to infer an universal conclusion from
two universal premises, and in such a case the
conclusion must be particular ; e. g.
Rule 7.) In the first case, it is manifest, that only one term will
be distributed, which must be the middle : hence no term must
be distributed in the conclusion ; therefore the conclusion must
be particular affirmative. Again, in the second case (vii. EI)
two terms are distributed, whereof one must be the middle;
therefore one only must be distributed in the conclusion : but the
conclusion must be negative, (because of the negative premiss,)
and, in order to distribute but one term, it must be particular
negative. The last case (viz. AO) may be proved exactly in the
same way as the second, and the conclusion in this case also
must be a particular negative. This eleventh rule, therefore, is
but a branch of the sixth : for if an universal conclusion be
drawn from one particular premiss, there will be an illicit process
of the minor.

OF SYLLOGISM.

107

" No branch of useful knowledge is attainable without some
labour;"
" Every branch of useful knowledge is worthy of being at
tained :"
therefore, " Something which is worthy of being attained is not
attainable without some labour."

In this instance, if the conclusion were in
ferred universally, it is manifest that there
■would be an illicit process of the minor term e.
An universal conclusion should always be on the name
less moods.

inferred from universal premises, provided it
be possible, without an illicit process; for
although the particular conclusion must be
true, if the universal is, yet the truth of the
particular does not immediately result from the
force of the premises, but rather from the
truth of the universal : hence such form of in
ference is inaccurate, though not false f.
e These twelve rules are wholly founded upon the two first
syllogistic canons ; consequently recourse must be had to these
canons, in order to prove any one of them ; and when any viola
tion of these rules takes place, there is not, in reality, any com
parison made of the two extremes with one and the same third
terra, with which they both agree, or with which one agrees,
and from which the other differs.
' The following syllogisms are therefore inaccurate, though
not strictly incorrect :
" All works of art are of human invention ;"
" All machines are works of art :"
therefore, " Some machines are of human invention."—Again ;
" All crocodiles are amphibious animals;"
" No horses are amphibious animals :"
therefore, " Some horses are not crocodiles."—Again;

108

' GENERAL RULES OF SYLLOGISM.

The above twelve rules are comprised in the
following four lines, in order to assist the me
mory :
" Distribuas medium ; nee quartus terminus adsit :"
" Utraque nee praemissa negans, nee particularis:"
" Sectetur partem conclusio deteriorem :"
" Et non distribuat, nisi cum praemissa, negettes."

It is obvious that the number of these rules
may be very much lessened ; e. g. the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth, are contained under
the first: so that these rules may all be com
prised under the five following :
1. There must not be more than three terms
in any syllogism. This rule includes Rules 1,
3, 4, 5, 6, 10, and 11.
2. In every syllogism there are but three
propositions.
3. The premises must not be both negative.
4. If one premiss be negative, the conclu
sion must be so, and vice versa. This includes
Rules 8 and 9.
5. A particular conclusion may be deduced
from universal premises h.
" All virtuous acts are the deeds of good men ;"
" The deeds of good men are not wicked deeds :"
therefore, " Some wicked deeds are not virtuous acts."
In the above syllogisms the conclusions ought to be universally
drawn; the particular conclusions are therefore inaccurate,
though not faulty.
< See Aldrich, chap. iii. §. 3.
h In examining a syllogism, in order to see whether it be

ON THE MOODS.

109

SECTION IV.
By the above-mentioned rules, it may be de
termined how many moods may be formed by
means of the four propositions A, E, I, O, so
as to be useful for syllogism.
A mood is defined to be " legitima determinatio propositionum secundum quantitatem et
qualitatem'." When the three propositions of
a syllogism are designated in their proper
order, according to their quantity and quality,
this is declaring the mood of the syllogism; e. g.
" Every bad habit should be avoided ;"
" Nothing that should be avoided is commendable :"
therefore, " No commendable thing is a bad habit."

This syllogism is said to be in the mood
AEE.
As there are four propositions which are The number
of moods.
used in syllogism, viz. A, E, I, O, and as any

correct or not, we mast apply to these twelve rules, for no syllo
gism can, inform, be incorrect, which does not violate any one
of these. The following order will perhaps be found to be the
most convenient for applying them. (1.) Count the terms and
propositions. (2.) Look to the distribution of the middle. (3.)
Illicit processes. (4.) Apply the three rules concerning nega
tives, viz. Rules 7, 8, and 9. Lastly, see whether the conclusion
is particular, when the universal might have been inferred ac
cording to Rule 12.
' See Aldrich, chap. iii. §. 4.
L

1 10

ON THE MOODS.
i

three of these, when combined, form a mood,
it may thus be proved, that the whole number
of permutations, which can possibly be formed,
will be sixty-fourv : for each of these four pro
positions may be used as a major premiss, and
each of these major premises will admit of four
different minors, (viz. A, E, I, or O,) therefore
there may be formed four times four, or six
teen pairs of premises : so also every pair of
premises may have four different conclusions,
(viz. A, E, I, or O,) therefore the number of
moods which can possibly be formed from the
four different propositions, will be four times
sixteen, or sixty-four.
how many . Of all these sixty-four moods, it is manifest
useful for «ylm
.__
logism.
that many, in fact the greater part, will err
against some one or more of the above-men-

k This is nothing more than a mere arithmetical calculation;
for the number of permutations which can be formed of any four
things taken three and three together, is 4+4-^-4=64. The
following is a list of all the moods :
AAA*, AAE, AAI*. AAO. AEA, AEE*, AEI, AEO«.
A1A. AIE, All*, AIO. AOA, AOE, AOI, AOO*.
EAA, EAE*, EAI, EAO*. EEA, EEE, EEI, EEO. EIA,
EIE, EII, EIO*. EOA, EOE, EOI, EOO.
IAA, IAE, IAI*, IAO. IEA, IEE, IEI, IEO. IIA, HE,
III, IIO. 10A, IOE, IOI, 100.
OAA, OAE, OAI, OAO*. OEA, OEE, OEI, OEO. OIA,
OIE, Oil, 010. OOA, OOE, 001, OOO. Those moods
which do not violate any of the twelve rules, and which conse
quently are useful for syllogism, are marked with an asterisk.

ON THE MOODS.

Ill

tioned rules'; e. g. AAO, which errs against
the ninth, and OOE, which violates the sixth,
seventh, tenth, and eleventh ; and by an exa
mination of all the moods, it will be found that
out of the sixty-four, there will remain but
eleven which will be useful for syllogism, viz.
AAA, AAI, AEE, AEO, All, AOO, EAE,
EAO, EIO, IAI, OAO. Aldrich has given
IEO, as one of the moods, " ad syllogismum
utiles™:" Dr. Whately has also given it as one of
the moods " which can be used in a legitimate
syllogism":" but this mood must be necessarily
and essentially faulty, and never can be used
in any legitimate syllogism ; for the major term
will be distributed in the negative conclusion,
which was not distributed in the major premiss,
which is a particular affirmative, and does not
1 By Rule 7. Sixteen are excluded, for having both premises
negative.
By Rule 8. Twelve are excluded, for having affirmative con
clusions, with a negative premiss.
By Rule 9. Four are excluded, for having negative conclu
sions, without any negative premiss.
By Rule 10. Twelve are excluded, for having both premises
particular.
By Rule 11. Eight are excluded, for having universal conclu
sions, with a particular premiss.
There is also one excluded by the sixth rule, for having an
illicit process of the major term, viz. IEO. [See the end of this
section.]
m See Aldrich, chap. iii. §. 4.
■ Elements of Logic, p. 95.

l2

112

ON THE FIGURES.

distribute any term ; consequently, with such a
mood as IEO, there must in all cases be an illi
cit process of the major".

SECTION V.
Theatre of

The figure of a syllogism depends upon the
situation of the middle term, with reference to
the extremes of the question ; (i. e. the major
and the minor terms.)
Four figure,.
There are only four figures; for since there
are but three terms to be compared together in
a syllogism, and the middle term is confined to
the premises, it is manifest, that the middle
could not be placed in more thanfour different
situations with respect to the major and minor
terms.
Km figure.
In the first figure, the middle term is the
subject of the major premiss, and the predicate
of the minor.
° Thus the following argument is incorrect :
" Some learned men are much addicted to prejudice ;"
" None who are much addicted to prejudice are men of power
ful minds :"
therefore, " Some men of powerful minds are not learned."
For in this apparent syllogism, there is an illicit process of
the major term, " learned :" and this must be the case, however
the order of the terms of the argument be changed, viz. in every
figure : hence this mood is necessarily and essentially incorrect.

ON THE FIGURES.

113

In the seeond figure, the middle term is the second figure.
predicate of both premises.
In the third figure, the middle term is the Third figure.
subject of both premises.
In the fourth figure, the middle term is the Fourth figure.
predicate of the major premiss, and the subject
of the minor p.
It is to be remembered, that, of the pre- order of the
premises.

raises, the major premiss ought properly to be
placed first, and the minor second; for other
wise the first figure might appear to be the
fourth, and the fourth might be taken for the
first. The major premiss is that in which the
major term is compared with the middle,
wherever it happens to be placed ; so the

P For the sake of illustrating the different positions of the
middle term, with respect to the extremes, the following syllo
gism is given with its terms disposed according to all the figures.
1st Fig. " No sophists are logicians;"
" Some men are sophists ;"
" Some men are not logicians."
2nd Fig. " No logicians are sophists ;"
" Some men are sophists ;"
" Some men are not logicians."
3rd Fig. " No sophists are logicians;"
" Some sophists are men ;"
" Some men are not logicians."
4th Fig. *' No logicians are sophists ;"
" Some sophists are men ;"
" Some men are not logicians."

l3

114

Stiieme of
the figures.

ON THE FIGURES.

minor is that which contains the minor term,
whether it comes first or second.
The following scheme presents, at one view,
the four different figures; in which A repre
sents the major term, C the minor, and B the
middle :
1st Fig.
B, A.
C, B.
C, A.

Each figure
contains six
moods.

2nd Fig.
A,B.
C, B.
C,A.

3rd Fig.
B, A.
B, C.
C, A.

4th Fig
A, B.
B.C.
C, A.

In this scheme, the terms of the propositions
are only denoted, without stating their quan
tity or quality'1.
Of these figures, each contains six moods,
which will not violate any of the twelve rules
given above : it is obvious, therefore, that the
same mood must be allowable in different
figures ; e. g. IAI, and AAJ, in the third and
fourth figures, and EAE, EIO, in the first and
second, with many others, so also it may be
found, by examination, that a mood, which will
be allowable in one figure, will violate some
rule if used in another ; thus AAA is allow
able in the first figure, but if it were used in
i By means of this scheme, it will be easy to discover in what
figure any syllogism may be, as well as to make a syllogism in
any particular figure, by determining the quantity and quality
of the different propositions, and by taking care not to violate
any one of the twelve rules given in the last section.

ON THE FIGURES.

115

the third or fourth, the result would be an illi
cit process of the minor r. Although each Nameless
.

.

figure admits of six moods, yet several of these
are useless, inasmuch as their conclusions are
particular, when the universal might have been
inferred : e. g. EAO, in the first figure.
(K

" Nothing which belongs to man is perfect ;"
" Every art is that which belongs to man :"
hence, " Some art is not perfect."

Here an universal conclusion might have
been inferred ; therefore the particular (though
valid) is useless and inaccurate. Of these
moods there are' five in number, out of the
twenty-four, which may be used in all the
figures; for the nineteen, which remain, (ex
cluding these five,) certain names have been
formed by logicians, which serve to denote the
mood and figure; for, as it was before ob
served, the same mood (without regarding the
figures) is used in different figures, hence the
' Thus, in the third figure,
" All felons are thieves ;"
" All felons are amenable to the law :"
therefore, " All who are amenable to the law are thieves."
Again, in the fourth figure,
'* All thieves are felons ;"
" All felons are amenable to the law :"
therefore, " All who are amenable to the law are thieves."
In both these examples, it will be seen that there is an illicit
process of the minor term.
* Thus, AAI, IAI, and EAO, are allowable in the third and

moods.

116

ON THE FIGURES.

vowels, which denote the mood, would not
alone point out the figure. The following
lines denote the moods which are used in
the four figures, signified by their respective
names :
Name« of all
the moods.

(Fig. 1,) BArbArA, CElArEnt, DArll, FErlO que prioris :
(Fig, 2-) CEsArE, CAmEstrEs, FEstlnO, BArOkO, secundae ;
( Fig. 3.) Tertia DArAptT, DIsAmls, DAtlsI, FElAptOn,
BOkArdO, FErlsOn habet : quarta insuper addit,
(Fig. 4.) BrAmAntlp, CAmEnEs, DImArls, FEsApO,
FrEsIsOn.

In the above lines, the three vowels denote
the mood ; i. e. the propositions of which the
syllogism consists : the other letters serve to
show the figure, as well as being of other uses,
as will be shown hereafter. The five' moods,
whose conclusions are particular, when they
might have been universal, have not any names
affixed to them ; for, in a strict argument, they
fourth, and EIO iu all the figures ; hence it would be impossible
to designate the particular figure by mentioning the vowels only,
which constitute the mood ; besides, these names are of great
use in reduction, as will be seen hereafter.
' Whatever mood has an universal conclusion, must of course
contain a nameless mood under it ; and since there cannot be
more x\\a.nfive moods, in which an universal conclusion can be
inferred from universal premises ; (viz. Barbara, Celarent, Cesare, Camestres, and Camenes,) hence it is obvious, that there
cannot be more than/ue nameless moods; viz. one under each,
AAI and EAO in the first figure, EAO and AEO in the se
cond, and AEO in the fourth.

ON REDUCTION.

117

are not considered as accurate,, and they are
certainly of no practical use.

SECTION VI.
From the first and second of the syllogistic The nrst
canons, it follows that these twenty-four moods <.-£re»t.e
are conclusive ; but of all the four figures the
first is the most evident ; for it is the clearest
and most natural, and to it Aristotle's " Dic
tum de Omni et Nullo," is immediately appli
cable.
The axiom which the schoolmen term the The mnam
" Dictum de Omni et Nullo," is that test which Nuiio?"'"
may ultimately be applied to all legitimate
arguments; and by their conformity or non
conformity to it, their validity will in all cases
depend. It is thus explained by Aldrich".
" Quod prcedicatur universaUter de alio, (i. e.
de termino distributor sive affirmative, sive ne
gative, prcedicatur similiter de omnibus sub eo
contentis" viz. " That which is predicated of
a term distributed, whether affirmatively. or ne
gatively, may, in like manner, be predicated of
every thing contained under it" There needs An axiom.
no proof to establish the truth of this rule, for
" Chap. iii. §. 6.

118

ON REDUCTION.

it is self-evident, and may therefore be justly
termed an axiom.
The four moods of the first figure, viz. Bar
bara, Celarent, Darii, and Ferio, are, under
their present form, immediately applicable to
this dictum; e. g.
" A good king should be obeyed by his subjects ;"
" George the Fourth is a good king :"
therefore, " George the Fourth should be obeyed by his subjects."

In this syllogism *, the major term is predi
cated of the middle distributed, consequently
(by the above axiom) the major can be predi
cated of any term which the middle contains ;
(i. e. of which the middle can be predicated ;)
but in the minor premiss, the middle term is
predicated of the minor, consequently the
major may be predicated of the minor : thus
the dictum of Aristotle is immediately appli
cable to all the four moods of the first figure ;
and this circumstance depends solely on the
* The case is exactly similar where the conclusion is nega
tive ; e. g.
" No mau can serve two masters;"
" You are a man :"
therefore, " You cannot serve two masters."
Here the major term is negatively predicated of the middle
distributed; therefore it can be negatively predicated of any
term comprehended by that middle ; but in the minor premiss
it is asserted, that the minor is comprehended under the middle;
hence the major can be negatively predicated of the minor.

ON REDUCTION.

119

position of the middle term, with respect to the
major and minor; in other words, upon the
figure, whence the moods of this figure were
termed by Aristotle, " the perfect moods;" be- The perfect
.
.
moods.
cause they do not require any change in order
to make their conclusions more evident y: the
schoolmen called them, " the direct moods;"
because their conclusions can be directly in
ferred from the premises.
The moods of the second, third, and fourth
figures, are, (owing to the position of the middle
term,) not so evident as those of the first ; for
Aristotle's dictum cannot be immediately ap
plied ; though ultimately this may be effected ;
and when this is done, the syllogism is said to
be reduced, i. e. brought into the form of the
first figure. It is on this account that these
moods were termed "imperfect" and " in- The imperfect
_
moods,
direct ;" for the dictum cannot be immediately
applied to them without their undergoing some
change in the order of their terms ; i. e. with
out arranging those terms in such a manner
that the moods, instead of being in the second,
third, or fourth figures, are changed into the
first; and when this is effected, these moods
I They are also called " perfect," because nothing more is im
plied in the premises, than is necessary to prove the conclusion,
which is not the case with the other moods, which are therefore
termed " imperfect."

120

ON REDUCTION.

\
are said to be " perfici," " revocare," or " reduci\"
Heducticn
Reduction may therefore be defined, " the
changing of any imperfect mood, and bringing
it into the more perfect form of the first figure:"
so that the necessity of the inference may be
come more apparent.
of two kinds.
There are two kinds of reduction; viz. ostensive reduction, and reductio ad impossibile.
extensive

Ostensive reduction is the direct mode* of

reduction.

proof; viz. it shows that the conclusion is true,
by changing the order of the terms of the re
duced syllogism, and drawing from them either
1 See Aldrich, chap. iii. §. 6.
a There are two modes by which all conclusions may be
proved, vii. the direct and the indirect. The direct mode is
where the original conclusion is shown to be true, by placing
those principles (from which it is deduced) in such a manner
that the conclusion results from them necessarily ; so that the
mind cannot but immediately admit the truth of the conclusion,
after having admitted the truth of the premises. The indirect
mode is that in which the conclusion is assumed to befalse, and
then showing that from this assumption some palpable absurdity
must result; the necessary consequence of. this is, that the as
sumption must be false: hence the conclusion (which was pro
forma assumed false) must in reality be true. The latter of
these modes generally strikes the student's mind most forcibly,
and is in most cases the easiest. Thus, in order to prove any
rule, the best way is to violate the rule, and trace the conse
quences of such violation to their source : the result will then
become apparent, and the validity of the rule will be esta
blished.

ON REDUCTION.

121

the same conclusion as before, or the converse
of it.
It is obvious, that in ostensiveh/ reducing a
syllogism we must not introduce any terms dif
ferent from those in the reduced syllogism, nor
any new proposition : all that we have granted
to us is, that the premises of the syllogism, which
we wish to reduce, are true ; hence we may, of
course, transpose them, or convert them illatively;
(for if any proposition be granted true, it is allow
able [see Part ii. §. 5.] to infer the truth of its
converse :) and it is by making use of this liberty,
when necessary, that all imperfect syllogisms
may be ostensively reduced b. It was principally use of tue
nii

ii

.

names of the

for this purpose that the names were invented moods.
b Although reductio ad impossibile is most commonly em
ployed for the two moods Baroko and Bokardo; yet both of these
moods may be reduced ostensively, by making use of conversion
by contraposition ; in which case Baroko will be reduced to
Ferio, and Bokardo to Darii. (See Part ii. §. 5.) thus, let an
example be taken in Baroko :
" Every virtuous act is worthy of commendation ;"
" Some human acts are not worthy of commendation :
" Some human acts are not virtuous."
This syllogism may be reduced to Ferio, by converting the major
premiss, by contraposition, thus :
" An-act-which-is-not-worthy-of-commendation is not a vir
tuous act;"
" Some human acts are not-worthy-of-commendation :"
" Some human acts are not virtuous."
Thus also Bokardo may be reduced to Dorii, by transposing the
premises and employing conversion by contraposition.
M

122

ON REDUCTION.

to all the different moods ; and in each of those
names it must be remembered, that the three
vowels denote (as was before remarked) the
mood : the initial consonants, viz. B, C, D, F,
,
show to what mood in the first figure the syllo
gism is to be reduced ; i. e. that mood whose
initial consonant is the same. The letters S
and P denote that tkose propositions to which
they are affixed must be converted either sim
ply (S) or per accidens (P): M denotes that
the premises must be transposed, and K shows
that the syllogism must be reduced by reductio
ad impossibile, which will be explained hereExampiesof after. These rules being borne in mind, the
reduction.
^
°
reduction of a syllogism is a mere mechanical
operation c; e. g.
CAm " Every man of sense is anxious to gain useful informa
tion;"
Es
" No idle man is anxious to gain useful information :"
trEs " No idle man is a man of sense."

In this syllogism, m shows that we must trans
pose the premises, and * denotes the simple
conversion of both the minor premiss and the
conclusion; and if these things be done, the
c It must be remembered that these letters are intended to
apply to the vowels which precede, and not to those which follow
them : thus, in Datisi the minor premiss is to be simply con
verted, and not the conclusion; and in like manner with all the
other moods : so also the letter k applies to the preceding vowel
in Baroko and Bokardo, and not to the vowel that follows it.

ON REDUCTION.

123

syllogism will be found to be in the first figure,
and in the mood Celarent, as the letter c in Camestres denotes*'.
CE

" No person who is anxious to gain useful informa
tion is an idle man ;"
IA
" Every man of sense is anxious to gain useful in
formation :"
rEnt " No man of sense is an idle man."

Again, Disarms may be reduced to Darii, thus :
DIs
Am
Is
DA
rl
I

" Some musicians are mad;"
" All musicians are men :"
" Some men are mad."
" All musicians are men ;" '
" Some mad beings are musicians :"
" Some mad beings are men."

In these two examples, the simple converse
of the original conclusion is shown to be true
d All imperfect moods, although their conclusions are true,
are forced to imply more than they express in their premises, in
order to prove the necessity of their conclusions : thus, in Ferison, e. g.
" No Mahometans are Christians ;"
" Some Mahometans are men of good understanding :"
therefore, " Some men of good understanding are not Chris
tians."
In order to prove this conclusion true, it will be necessary to
convert the minor premiss simply, thus :
" No Mahometans are Christians ;"
" Some men of good understanding are Mahometans :"
therefore, " Some men of good understanding are not Christians."
This syllogism, which is in the first figure, viz. Ferio, may be
immediately applied to the " dictum de omni et nullo," and its
conclusion is therefore correctly inferred ; but the simple con
verse of the minor was implied (though not eipressed) in the ori
ginal syllogism.

m2

124

ON REDUCTION.

by applying it to the dictum of Aristotle, viz.
by reducing the original syllogism to the first
figure ; and since the converse of its conclusion
is shown to be true, the truth of the original
conclusion itself may be implied*.
Reductioad
The process
ofreductio ad impossibile
is as
impossilmt.
*
M
follows: in the two moods, to which it is usually
applied, (viz. Baroko and Bokardo,) substitute
the contradictory of the conclusion for the par
ticular negative premiss : and from the two
universal affirmative premises thus formed,
draw a conclusion in Barbara. This conclu
sion will be false, because it will contradict a
premiss which was hypothetically true, conse
quently it may be inferred that the contradic
tory of the original conclusion must be false,
and therefore the conclusion itself must have
been true : this will be more fully treated of in
the next section.

,

c Again, Camenes maybe reduced to Celarent, by transposing
the premises, and simply converting the conclusion, thus, e. g.
" All useful arts are worth learning ;"
" Nothing that is worth learning is of no value :"
therefore, " That which is of no value is not a useful art :"
reduced thus to Celarent :
" Nothing that is worth learning is of no value ;"
" All useful arts are worth learning :"
therefore, " No useful arts are of no value."
And, note, that whenever the premises of any syllogism are
transposed in its reduction, the conclusion must necessarily be
converted; for since the major premiss is made the minor, so
also the major term must be made the minor.

ON THE VALIDITY OF REDUCTION.

125

SECTION VII.
Gt
The validity of ostensive reduction is mani- ™Jy
extensive
reduction.
fest ; for the premises of the syllogism being
hypothetically true, they must be equally true
when either transposed or illatively converted';

' In order to reduce Bramantip ostensively it is necessary to
convert the conclusion accidentally, e. g.
" All true patriots have their country's welfare at heart;"
" All who have their country's welfare at heart are friends
to religion :"
therefore, " Some friends to religion are true patriots."
This syllogism, which is Bramantip, may thus be reduced to
Barbara :
" All who have their country's welfare at heart are friends
to religion ;"
" All true patriots have their country's welfare at heart :"
therefore, " All true patriots are friends to religion."
The reason why in this mood the conclusion (I) may be acci
dentally converted is, that the major term has been distributed in
the major premiss, and therefore is distributable in the conclusion :
although, owing to the figure, it cannot be distributed. It has
been laid down, (in Rule 6, §. 3. of this Part,) that " a term must
not be distributed in the conclusion, if it has not been distributed
in its premiss;" and it should be remembered also, that " a term
ought not to be undistributed in the conclusion, if it has been dis
tributed in its premiss :" not that there will be any incorrectness
in the syllogism, if the term be undistributed in the conclusion ;
but such a mode of argument is very inaccurate and unscientific ;
for (in the case of Bramantip) more is assumed with respect to
the major term in the premises than can possibly be inferred in
the conclusion ; consequently this mood is the worst of all the
moods, it being the only one in which this inaccuracy occurs.
It may be observed, that w lieu, from accidental circumstances, it

M3

12G

ON THE VALIDITY

and the conclusion of the syllogism, when re
duced, is either the same as the original one,
or is only its illative converse ; and in the latter
case it is obvious that the truth of the original
conclusion may be inferred from the truth of
its converse, which is the conclusion of the
syllogism when reduced : hence this reduction
is termed " ostensive," because it shows directly
that the original conclusion is true ; e. g.
CA " All men are liable to err ;"
mE " No being who is liable to err is perfect :"
nEs " No perfect being is a man."

This syllogism, which is in the fourth figure,
may be reduced to the first, by transposing the
premises, and simply converting the conclusion,
thus:
CE " No being who is liable to err is perfect ;"
1A " All men are liable to err :"
rEnt " No man is perfect."
is known that the predicate of I is distributable, it follows that
the matter of the proposition must be necessary: hence, in all
such cases, I may be converted both simply and per accident;
and such conversion will, under these circumstances, be illative.
In' the same manner it has been shown (p. HO. note f,) that in
impossible matter, 0 may be converted both simply and per accidens. It must not, however, be supposed that the conclusion,
which is drawn from two universal affirmative propositions, will
in all cases be in necessary matter, because it is so in Bramantip ;
for in Darapti the matter of the conclusion is generally contin
gent, though in Bramantip it is invariably necessary ; but this
depends, as was shown before, on the distribution of the major
term in its premiss, and not because both the premises are uni
versal affirmative.

OF REDUCTION.

127

In the first figure, the simple converse of the
original conclusion is shown to be true ; hence
it may be inferred that the original conclusion
itself must likewise be true.
Reductio ad impossibile is the indirect mode of reductio
ad impossiof proof; which is, to admit the falsity of a bile- *
conclusion, and show that by arguing from
such falsity, an absurdity or impossibility will
result: this mode of reduction is not usually
applied to any moods, except Baroko and Bokardo, but it must not therefore be supposed
that it is not equally applicable to any others;
foe, in
fact, all moods may be reduced byJ re- may
AU moods
.
be thus
ductio ad impossibile, as well as ostensively g. reducedS Since there are two modes of reduction, viz. ostensive and
ad impossibile, and as it has been shown that every mood may be
reduced by ostensive reduction, it may not perhaps be uninterest
ing to observe, how the reductio ad impossibile may also be ap
plied to all the moods, although it is generally employed for
Baroko and Bokardo only : the process of reductio ad impossibile
is to assume the conclusion to be false, and then trace the con
sequence of this assumption; which will, in all cases, be some
palpable absurdity. Thus let a case be taken in Ferison :
"No men of bad principles are to be trusted ;"
" Some men of bad principles are pleasant companions :"
therefore, " Some pleasant companions are not to be trusted."
This syllogism may thus be reduced to Darii, by employing
reduetio ad impossibile :
" All pleasant companions are to be trusted ;"
" Some men of bad principles are pleasant companions:"
therefore, •' Some men of bad principles are to be trusted."
In this reduction the conclusion was assumed to be false, and
its contradictory was therefore assumed to be true ; and from this

128

its validity.

ON THE VALIDITY

The validity of reductio ad impossibile may
be shown thus: Every conclusion must be
contradictory, united to the original minor premiss, a new con
clusion was drawn in Darii : this conclusion is manifestlyfalse,
because it contradicts the original major premiss, consequently
(as is the case in Baroko or Bokardo) it must necessarily follow
that the contradictory of the original conclusion (which was as
sumed true) is in reality false; hence the original conclusion it
self must be true.
If reductio ad impossibile be employed for all the different
moods, it will be found that in this manner all their conclusions
may be shown to be true ; for the new conclusion will either con
tradict an original premiss, or else some proposition, the truth of
which is deducible from that premiss ; such as the particular
contained by it, or its simple or accidental converse ; thus in Fesapo,
" No unjust act is commendable;"
" Every commendable act deserves reward :"
therefore, " Some act deserving of reward is not an unjust act."
h. may be shown that this conclusion cannot befalse, by re
ducing it to Barbara, thus :
" Every act deserving of reward is an unjust act ;"
" Every commendable act deserves reward :"
therefore, " Every commendable act is an unjust act."
This conclusion contradicts the accidental converse of the ori
ginal major premiss, and must therefore be false; for since the
major premiss is hypothetically true, hence it follows, by the
laws of conversion, that its accidental converse must also be
trite, therefore the contradictory of this accidental converse
must befalse : from this fact, it may, as before, be inferred that
the original conclusion cannot befalse, i. e. it must be true.
By adopting some measures similar to the above, it may be
shown that every mood may be reduced by reductio ad impossi
bile ; and although this is of no practical use, yet it may be bene
ficial to the student in logic to practise himself in employing
this kind of reduction to the different moods, whereby he will

-

OF REDUCTION.

129

either true or false: let it be assumed to
be false, then its contradictory must be true ;
let, therefore, its contradictory be taken as a
new premiss, and to it let one of the original
premises be joined ; place these premises in
such a manner that the middle term may stand
as in the first figure ; then draw the conclusion
from them ; and it will be found that this new
conclusion will contradict an original premiss h,
make himself perfectly acquainted with the different figures, and
the manner of proving a conclusion true, by reducing it to the
first figure, at the same time applying the rules of contradictory
opposition. In order to render this easy, the names of the moods
have been altered in the following lines, in which the letter k
(as before) denotes that the contradictory of the conclusion must
he substituted for that premiss which precedes it ; the initial
letter showing to what mood in the first figure the syllogism
roust be reduced :
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prions ;
Ferake, Dathleke, Celiko, Baroko secundae ;
Tertia Cankari, Cikali, Fakiri, Beckaro,
Bokardo, Dekilon habet ; quarta insuper addit
Clakanti, Daleke, Cilkari, Belkaro, Dekiron.
It is not intended that reductio ad impossibile should, in
practice, be ever employed for the reduction of moods, but
merely to show that every mood may be reduced both osten
sibly and by reductio ad impossibile ; viz. that both the direct
and indirect mode of proof may be applied to every syllogism.
' In the two moods, Baroko and Bokardo, for which reductio
ad impossibile is usually employed, the new conclusion contra
dicts an original premiss, but if this reduction be used for any
of the other moods, it will be found, as was observed in the last
Qote, that the new conclusion will not always contradict an ori
ginal premiss, but sometimes a proposition, the truth of which is

130

ON THE VALIDITY

which was granted true ; consequently the new
conclusion must be false ; now, as the form of
the argument is correct, the error must lie in
one of the premises ; and it is manifest which
one of the premises it must be, for one of them
is an original one, which was hypothetically
true, therefore the new premiss, which was
assumed to be true, must, in reality, he false:
viz. the contradictory of the original conclusion
has been proved to be false, therefore the ori
ginal conclusion itself must be true; e. g.
BAr " Every wise man is contented ;"
Ok " Some men are not contented :"
0 " Some men are not wise."

This syllogism may thus be reduced to Bar
bara:
" Every wise man is contented ;" {granted true.)
" Every man is wise :" (assumed true.)
therefore, " Every man is contented."

This conclusion is manifestly false, because
it is the contradictory of the original minor1
deducible from an original premiss ; such as the particular con
tained under it, or its simple or accidental converse ; which will
be equally efficacious towards proving that the original conclu
sion cannot be false.
1 In the two moods, Baroko and Bokardo, the contradictory of
the conclusion must be substituted for the particular negative
premiss, keeping the universal premiss in its original situation ;
with respect to the other moods which may be reduced by this
mode, the contradictory of the conclusion must be made the
major or minor premiss, according as may be necessary for form
ing the syllogism in the first figure ; by referring, however, to

OF REDUCTION.

131

premiss ; (which is hypothetically true ;) and
since the form is correct, one of the premises
must hefalse : this cannot be the major, for it
was granted true in the original syllogism;
therefore the minor premiss, viz. " Every man
is wise," (which was assumed to be true,) must
in reality be false ; consequently the contra
dictory to this minor premiss must be true;
but the contradictory to
" Every man is wise," is,
" Some men are not wise :"

and this is the original conclusion, which has
thus been proved to be truek.
the memorial lines given in note g, p. 127. no mistake can possibly
arise from this circumstance ; for the contradictory of the con
clusion must be substituted for that premiss which next precedes
the letter k, keeping the other premiss in its original situation.
k Again, to give another example in Bokardo,
" Some good acts are not duly rewarded ;"
**
" All good acts deserve to be rewarded :"
therefore, " Some acts which deserve to be rewarded are not
duly rewarded :"
reduced to Barbara thus,
" All acts which deserve reward are duly rewarded ;"
" All good acts deserve reward :"
therefore, " All good acts are duly rewarded."
This new conclusion must be false, because it contradicts the
original major premiss; therefore the major premiss, from which
it was drawn, must be fake ; therefore its contradictory (which
is the original conclusion) must be true.

132

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

SECTION VIII.
It has already been shown, that syllogisms
may be formed in twenty-four moods ; viz. six
in each figure: and in some one of these moods
any conclusion may be inferred whicb can be
drawn from a simple categorical syllogism '.
The special
The same mood cannot always be used in
rules.
every figure, see p. 1 14. without violating some
one of the twelve rules given in Part iii. §. 3 ;
hence certain special rules, or rather cautions,
have been laid down with respect to all the
figures, by a due observance of which a syllo
gism may be made in each figure without vio
lating any rule.

Minor memiss arhrma
tive.

Special Rules of the First Figure.
Rule 1 . The minor premiss must be affrmafive.
1 The number of moods in which any conclusion may be
drawn are as follows :
A may be proved in one mood only, viz. Barbara.
E may be proved in four moods, viz. Celarent, Cesare, Cflmestres, and Camenes.
I may be proved in seven moods, viz. Darii and All in the
first figure, in Varapti, Disamis, Dathi, Bramantip and Dimaris.
0 may be proved in twelve moods, viz. Ferio and EAO in
the first figure; in Festino, Baroko, and EAO, AEO in the
second ; in Felapton, Bokardo, and Ferison in the third ; and
in Fesapo, Fresison, and AEO in the fourth figure.

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

133

For, ifnot, let it be negative, then the major
premiss must (by Rule 7 m.) be affirmative, and
will not distribute the major term; (because
the major in this figure is the predicate of its
premiss ;) but the conclusion must (by Rule 8.)
be negative, and will distribute its predicate,
viz. the major term: and this term was shown
not to have been distributed before; hence
there will be an illicit process of the major :
consequently the minor premiss must not be ne
gative, i. e. it must be affirmativen. Q. e. d.
Rule 2.

The major xpremiss must be uni- universal.
MajorPremi3«

versal.
For, let it be particular, then its subject,
which is the middle term, is not distributed ;
and by the last rule the minor premiss must be
affirmative, consequently its predicate (which
is the middle term) is not distributed; and it
was shown not to be distributed in the major
premiss : therefore the middle is undistributed.

m The rules which are here alluded to are the twelve rules
laid down in the third section of this Part.
n Thus, for example,
>
" Every true Christian is a lover of his God ;"
" No atheist is a true Christian:"
therefore, " No atheist is a lover of his God."
This conclusion, although apparently correct, cannot be de
duced from such premises ; for the major term is distributed in
the conclusion, which was not distributed in its premiss.
N

134

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

Therefore the major premiss must not be par
ticular, i. e. it must be universal", q. e. d.
Rules of the Second Figure.
One premi«s
Rule 1 . One premiss must be negative.
negative.
*
°
For in the second figure the middle term is
the predicate of both premises ; consequently,
if both were affirmative, the middle would not
be distributed : therefore they must not be
both affirmative, i. e. one premiss must be ne
gative11. Q. E. D.
Conclusion
Rule 2. T/ie conclusion must be negative.
negative.

°

Since one of the premises must, by the last
Rule, be negative ; hence (by Rule 8.) the con
clusion also must be negative q. q. e. d.
° Consequently the following argument is incorrect, because
the middle term is not distributed:
" Some high-bred horses are not fleet;''
" All racers are high-bred :"
therefore, " Some racers are not fleet."
p Thus, e. g.
" Every mail coach runs on four wheels ;"
" Every barouche runs on four wheels :"
therefore, " Every barouche is a mail coach."
This conclusion is manifestly false; for the middle term, being
the predicate of two affirmative premises, is not distributed.
i Thus the following form of argument is incorrect, (by the
8th Rule of §. 3.) because the conclusion is affirmative, one of
the premises being negative :
" Every true patriot loves his country's welfare ;"
" Some great statesmen do not love their country's
welfare :"
therefore, " Some great statesmen are true patriots."

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

135

Rule 3. The major premiss must be uni- Majorpremiu
_
'
universal.
versal.
The conclusion, as has before been shown,
must be negative; therefore the major term
will be distributed in the conclusion ; therefore
it must also be distributed in the major pre
miss : but since in this figure it is the subject of
its premiss, hence this premiss must not be par
ticular, or the major term would not be distri
buted, and there would be an illicit process of
the major ; therefore the major premiss must
be universal1, q. e. d.
Rules of the Third Figure.
Rule 1. The minor premiss must be affirma- Minor PremUs ■illiiiii.i five.
tive'
For, if not, let it be negative, then the con
clusion must (by Rule 8.) be negative, and in it
the major term will be distributed; but since
the major premiss (by Rule 7.) must be affirma
tive, and the major term is the predicate of
its premiss, therefore it is not distributed; con
sequently there is an illicit process of the mar Hence the following apparent syllogism is incorrect, for
there is an illicit process of the major :
" Some pretenders to religion are deceitful ;"
" No virtuous persons are deceitful :"
therefore, " Some virtuous persons are not pretenders to reli
gion."

N 2

136

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

jor : therefore the minor premiss must not be
negative, i. e. it must be affirmative', q. e. d.
Cnnciuiion
Rule 2. The conclusion must be particular.
particular.
*
For since, by the last rule, the minor premiss
must be affirmative, therefore the minor term
(which in this figure is the predicate of its pre
miss) will not be distributed; consequently it
must not be distributed in the conclusion : but
if the conclusion were universal, the minor
would be distributed ; therefore the conclusion
must not be universal ; i. e. it must be parti
cular*. Q. E. D.

Majorpremiu

Rules of the Fourth Figure.
Rule 1. The major premiss must not be O.
For, if otherwise, let the major premiss be O,
• This case is similar to the first special rule of the first
figure ; e. g.
" Every religious man is to be trusted ;"
" No religious man is a hypocrite :"
therefore, " No hypocrite is to be trusted."
This form of argument is incorrect, for there is an illicit pro
cess of the major term.
' Thus, e. g. " Every good deed is commendable ;"
" Every good deed is a virtuous act :"
therefore, " Every virtuous act is commendable."
In this apparent syllogism the minor term, " virtuous act,"
is distributed in the conclusion, and not in the premises ; conse
quently there is an illicit process of the minor : and it may be
observed, that since the minor premiss is affirmative, the, minor
term cannot be distributed in its premiss in any mood in the
third figure ; hence the conclusion must be particular.

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

137

then the major term will not be distributed in its
premiss ; but (by Rule 8.) the conclusion must
be negative, and the major term will be distri
buted ; therefore there will be an illicit process
of the major: therefore the major premiss must
not be O". q. e. d.
Rule 2. The minor premiss must not be O. Minor Pre-*
miss not O.
For, if otherwise, let the minor premiss be O,
then (by Rules 7 and 10) the major premiss
must be A, and the middle term (which is the
predicate of the major and subject of the minor
premiss) will not be distributed ; therefore the
minor premiss must not be Ox. q. e. d.
Rule S. Tfie conclusion must not be A.
concision
not A.
For, ifotherwise, let the conclusion be A ; then
(by Rules 8 and 1 1) the premises must both be
i1 Hence the following form of argument is not correct :
" Some men of good understanding are not led astray
by prejudice ;"
" All who are led astray by prejudice are liable to
commit frequent mistakes :"
therefore," Some who are liable to commit frequent mistakes
are not men of good understanding."
In this case it is manifest that there is an illicit process of the
major term.
x Thus, e. g.
" Every just man is a subject worthy of admiration ;"
" Some who are subjects worthy of admiration are not
to be despised : ' '
therefore, " Some who are to be despised are not just men."
In this case the middle is not distributed; consequently such
a form of argument is not admissible."

n3

138

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

A ; but in the conclusion, the minor term will
be distributed, which was not distributed in its
premiss : therefore there will be an illicit pro
cess of the minor : therefore the conclusion
must not be A s. q. e. d.
«
> In order to draw an universal affirmative conclusion, the
premises must both be universal affirmative, tbus :
" Every good razor is sharp ;"
" Every sharp instrument is a dangerous weapon in
unskilful hands:"
therefore, " Every dangerous weapon in unskilful hands is a
razor."
This apparent syllogism is manifestly incorrect, for there is
an illicit process of the minor term.

Table,
all
view,
their
following
the
with
rules,
proofs.
The
special
presents,
at
one

negative
Cpremiss.
the
of
Because
onclusion
aof
illicit
Or,
premiss
Mmajor.
the
1
f inor
iprocess
rmative

uof
illicit
Or,
premiss
Major
major.
the
nivprocess
ersal
udOr,
middle
premiss
Major
nisnot
itvreibrustaedl.

Rules.
Proofs.
Figure.

\

middle
Or,
dpremiss
O2
negative
isnot
trneibuted.

aMmajor.
premiss
illicit
Or,
the
of
3
finor
iprocess
rmative particular
Or,
Cminor.
illicit
the
of
oncprocess
lusion

Mof
Opremiss
O
illicit
4
major.
the
not
ajor
process
r,

OCof
A
illicit
minor.
the
onot
ncprocess
r,
lusion
OO
dmiddle
premiss
Minor
isnot
trr,
ibuted.

I'M)

To find a mu.
die term.

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

Hence it is manifest with what middle term
any conclusion may be proved ; e. g. To
prove a particular affirmative conclusion, a
middle must be brought forward, which is
wholly contained by one extreme, and which
itself contains a part of the other, (as in the
first figure,) or, by a middle term which repre
sents that of which both the extremes are
qualities, (as in the third figure,) or, lastly, by
a middle which comprehends one extreme,
and is itself comprehended under that class
of which the other extreme is a part, (as in the
fourth figure*.)
■ Caue should be taken that more be not laid down in the
premises, than is abstdutely necessary to prove the conclusion ;
for this would give an opponent an opportunity of raising an ob
jection, when it might easily be avoided, e. g.
" All planets are more distant than the moon ;"
" All planets can be seen from the earth :"
therefore, " Some bodies which can be seen from the earth are
more distant than the mopn;"
In this syllogism, an objection might be raised against the mi
nor premiss, because it might be argued, that possibly " some
planets could not be seen from the earth ;" and this objection
might be obviated by making the minor premiss particular,
without any detriment to the syllogism ; hence, in this argument,
more is laid down in the premises than is necessary for proving
the conclusion ; it is on this account that Darapti and Felaptoa
are not so accuraie as either Disamis, Datisi, Bokardo, or Ferison ; so in the fourth figure, Bramantip and Fesapo are less accu
rate than Dimaris and Fresison; because the premises need not
be both universal, in order to prove a particular conclusion.

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

141

N. B. (1.) A nameless mood ought not to
be brought forward to prove a conclusion ; for,
since the conclusion is particular, when it ought
to have been universal, hence more has been
laid down in the premises than was necessary
for proving the conclusion.
(2.) Of all the four figures, the fourth is the
worst*, for it is the most unnatural of all, and
* Mr. Bentham, in one sentence, consigns to oblivion the
whole Aristotelian system of moods, figures, etc. It will be en
tertaining enough to read this sweeping sentence ; I think, there
fore, that it is worth transcribing. He observes, " As to the
six or seven rules for trying syllogisms, the theory of moods
and figures, the ostensive reduction, the reductio ad impossibile,
and tbe indications conveyed by the consonants employed in the
' Barbara' verses, contained in sections 2 to 7, of this part of
Dr. Whately's Elements, as well as the theory of opposition, ex
plained in $. 3. of Part ii ; all these are, no doubt, very ingenious
contrivances, and indicate great powers of mind on the part of
the Grecian philosopher who invented them. But, if mere re
duction, with the help of the above four axioms," (viz. my
axioms, Mr. Bentham means to say,) "be found to answer the pur
pose, and to be sufficiently clear and comprehensible, this whole
Aristotelian system might henceforth be very properly consigned
to oblivion, as tending rather to conceal than to expose fallacies,
to impede, rather than to assist, fair intellectual argument."
(Outline, p. 162.) Again, he says, " If my reduction of propo
sitions to the above-mentioned five formulae, be adopted, the se
veral rules of distribution, given in p. 80. of the ' Elements,'
become useless." (Outline, p. 140.) It is surely very proper
that every author should have a good opinion of himself, and of
the dignity which should be attached to his own lucubrations; and
it is on this account that I have transcribed the above sentences,
as tending to show the dignity which ought to be attached to
the Benthamian system of logic, and as containing a better spe-

142

ON THE SPECIAL RULES.

in it the middle is (by implication) predicated
of itself, thus b :

therefore,

" Every wise man is contented;"
" Every contented man is happy :"
" Some happy men are wise."

In this syllogism, the middle term contented,
is predicated of every wise man; this, in the
conclusion, is predicated of the minor, happy
man ; and this minor, happy man, is predicated
in the minor premiss of the middle contented:
consequently the middle is, by implication, pre
dicated of itself0.
cimen of self-complacency comprised in so few words, than I
ever remember to have met with in any other author.
6 Dr. Whately has shown, p. 100. that, beginning at the con
clusion, it will appear that the major term seems to be predi
cated of itself: thus, the major is predicated of the minor, the
minor of the middle, and the middle of the major, i. e. appa
rently the major is predicated of itself.
c This will be more manifest if expressed thus shortly : the
middle is predicated of the major, the major of the minor, and the
minor of the middle ; thus it is implied, that the middle is predi
cated of the middle : this must of course be superfluous, and it is
principally on this account that the fourth figure appears so un
natural ; for the conclusion does not seem to result necessarily
from the premises; hence it is scarcely ever used in argument :
in fact, it is of no practical use whatsoever.

ON THE ENTHYMEME.

143

SECTION IX.
There are many other kinds of arguments, Different
°
kinds of arwhich are not correct syllogisms, yet may easily Kumentsbe brought into the regular form, such as the
following :
(1.) The enthymeme is a defective syllo- of enthygism, which consists of one premiss and a con
clusion; e. g.
" Diamonds are jewels ; they are therefore valuable. "
" God is a spirit ; therefore he is eternal."

An enthymeme may easily be reduced to a
regular syllogistic form; for since the conclu
sion and one premiss are given, the three
terms may be known, and the omitted premiss
may be supplied : thus, in the above example,
the major, " All jewels are valuable," is omit
ted, (see p. 83, note b.) and, if supplied, the
syllogism will be regular d, thus :

d In common discourse the usual mode of expressing an argu
ment is by means of the enthymeme ; it being unnecessary to
adduce both the premises, when one is so evident that it may
very fairly be left to the hearer's judgement ; e. g.
" When we find a book quoted, or referred to by an ancient au
thor, we are entitled to conclude that it was read and received
in the age and country in which that author lived." This
sentence is an enthymeme, in which the major premiss is sup
pressed, but which may easily be supplied as follows : " Every

144

therefore,

therefore,

ON THE ENTHYMEME.
" All jewels are valuable ;"
" Diamonds are jewels :"
" Diamonds are valuable."—Again ;
" Every spirit is eternal ;"
'* God is a spirit:"
" God is eternal."

In both these examples, the major premiss
is suppressed ; for, as was before observed,
the major premiss is, generally speaking, some
universal and incontrovertible principle, which
is so evident that it is left to the hearer's
judgement; but the minor premiss is most com
monly expressed, because it has more particu
lar reference to the question which is to be
proved ' ; (see p. 95. note q.)
An enthymeme is sometimes condensed into
one sentence, which is called an enthymematic
book quoted, or referred to by an ancient author, must have
been read and received iu the age and country in which that
author lived." The sentence may thus be reduced to a regular
syllogism in Barbara : this may be effected in most enthymemes
without much difficulty, whether their conclusions be negative
or affirmative.
" Although the major premiss is generally suppressed in most
enthymemes, yet there are some enthymemes in which the
minor premiss is found to be omitted ; this may happen when the
minor premiss is very evident, or when much stress is meant to
be laid upon the major ; e. g. " Every tyrannical king deserves
to be deposed by his subjects ; therefore Nero deserved to be
deposed by the Romans." The minor premiss, which is sup
pressed, may be thus supplied :
" Nero was a tyrannical king;"
and thus the argument is 1 educed to the regular syllogistic form.

ON INDUCTION.

145

sentence; viz. when the premiss is united in
one proposition with the conclusion ; e. g. " All
machines, being of human manufacture, are
liable to imperfections." This argument may
be thus expanded into a regular syllogism :
" All things of human manufacture are liable to im
perfections;"
" All machines are of human manufacture :"
therefore, " They are liable to imperfections (."

(2.) Induction is the inferring an universal induction.
conclusion from a great number of particular
facts; i. e. when any fact has been ascer
tained with respect to a great many individuals
of a class, by induction, we infer that the same
fact is predicable of all that class g.

f The following are some examples of enthymematic sen
tences: " Is an enterprise fraught with evil, such as the present,
likely to prosper^" This question may thus be reduced to a
syllogistic form :
"An evil enterprise is not likely to prosper;"
" The present enterprise is evil :"
therefore, " The present enterprise is not likely to prosper."
Again ; " Useful knowledge is too difficult of attainment to be
within the reach of the idle."
This sentence may be thus syllogistically expressed :
" Nothing which is difficult of attainment is within
the reach of the idle ;"
" All useful knowledge is difficult of attainment :"
therefore, " Useful knowledge is not within the reach of the
idle."
This is a regular syllogism in Celarent.
B Since, in induction, an universal conclusion is drawn from
O

146

ON INDUCTION.

Thus by induction we may infer that all
bodies are liable to fall towards the centre of
the earth, because we perceive this fact to
exist the same, under similar circumstances, in
all bodies upon which we make the experi
ment. This inference is, as Dr. Whately very
justly observes, " a syllogism in Barbara, with
the major suppressed ; that being always sub
stantially the same, as it asserts, that ' what
belongs to the individual or individuals we
have examined, belongs to the whole class un
der which they comeh.' " The above example
may thus be reduced to a syllogistic form, in
Barbara :
Example of
" That quality which is perceived to exist in many bodies, is
induction. ...
• to
. exist
... .in all
•■ ; „
likely
" The liability to fall towards the centre of the earth, is a
quality which is perceived to exist in many bodies :"
Therefore, " The liability to fall towards the centre of the
earth, is a quality which is likely to exist in all bodies'."

particular facts, care must be taken that these facts are suffi
ciently numerous to authorize such an inference ; for one fact,
brought forward against the conclusion, destroys the induction,
whereas, in the example, which is spoken of below, (see p. 147.)
a number of facts brought against the conclusion, would not
destroy the argument, though they would tend to diminish the
probability of occurrence contained in that conclusion. An in
ductive argument, therefore, (unless the induction be perfect,) U
more easily subverted than the example ; but, when perfect, it
is the most decisive argument that can be adduced.
n See Dr. Whately's Elements of Logic, p. 209.
' The great error into which induction is likely to lead us, is a

ON THE EXAMPLE.

147

It is by induction that almost all elemen
tary principles are proved: indeed, they do
not admit of any other mode of proof; and
a perfect induction is as decisive an argument
as even demonstrable evidence : thus, when a
stone is thrown into the air, I am as convinced
that it will fall to the ground, (even though I
should not see it,) as if it were demonstrated
to me by the most incontrovertible evidence11.
(3.) The example is, when from a knowledge Example.
that any fact has occurred, we infer that the
same event will take place with respect to some
other unknown fact.
There are two points in which the example Difference
between exdiffers from induction.
ample and
induction.
• (1.) With respect to the premises; for in
too great haste in drawing the conclusion ; viz. the inferring an
universal conclusion, when the facts enumerated are not suffi
cient in number to authorise such an inference : in order to
make a correct induction, the number of facts must be very
great ; and the greater the number, the more perfect will be the
induction.
k It is by induction that all axioms are known, such as
" Things that are equal to the same are equal to each other;"
" A whole is greater than its parts ;" and all other mathematical
axioms: whence it may be observed, that induction is that
mode of argument which is adapted to the discovery of any prin
ciples or facts which are not previously known. Thus, Aristo
tle, in his Ethics, proves by induction that all virtue consists in a
mean ; for he shows that this is the fact with respect to each of
the virtues, which he enumerates, and consequently infers the
universal conclusion with respect to them all.

o2

148

ON THE EXAMPLE.

induction the facts from which we draw the
universal conclusion must be very many m
number; whereas in example, we may draw
our conclusion from one single fact.
(2.) With respect to the conclusion; for m
induction the conclusion is universal, and the
inference drawn is, that the same fact will always
happen the same under similar circumstances;
but in example this is by no means the case,
for the conclusion does not infer the certainty
of any fact occurring in the same manner as
the one similar fact from which we draw our
conclusion, but merely the probability of such
an occurrence'; and the degree of this probabi
lity will of course depend on the number of

' The inference drawn by example sometimes is such as pro
duces but a small degree of probability ; for fables, similes, and
allegories, are comprehended under it. It is called by Aristotle,
" oratorial induction." Artabanus makes use of this kind of
argument when endeavouring to dissuade Xerxes from invading
Greece, saying, that Darius had failed in his expedition against
the Scythians, and that the Grecians weie more warlike men
than the Scythians, consequently that his expedition would pro
bably be attended with more dangerous consequences than the
expedition of Darius.
This mode of argument is very frequently employed ; indeed
it is almost the only mode which, under many circumstances, it
is possible to adopt, such as in contingencies, which might not
admit of any positive proof: in such cases, it should be remem
bered, that the greater the number of facts is, which are adduced
in support of the subject in question, the greater will be the de
gree of probability of its occurrence.

ON THE SORITES.

149

similar facts which are adduced, in order to
show that the particular fact in question will
probably occur. The more facts that we can
adduce, the more does the example approach
the induction, and the greater degree of pro
bability will its conclusion possess.
(4.) The sorites is a number of syllogisms, in sorites.
which the conclusion of each is made a premiss
of the next, and so on, till we arrive at the
last; but in the sorites these syllogisms are
not given at full length, for the conclusion of
each syllogism is suppressed ; so that the form
of the sorites becomes a number of proposi
tions, in which the predicate of each becomes
the subject of that which follows: thus, e. g.
" Every good man lives in the fear of God;"
" Every man who lives in the fear of God
is virtuous ;" " Every virtuous man is con
tented;" " Every contented man is happy:"
therefore, " Every good man is happy m."

m A sorites is nothing more than a number of condensed syllo
gisms, which may easily be expanded, so as to be in the regular
form : it does not require any reduction, for it is already in the
first figure, although it may appear to be in the fourth, because
the premises are transposed ; thus it appears that the sorites
is really a syllogistic mode of argument : whereas the enthymeme is what is called a material argument ; i. e. the conse
quence depends entirely upon the power or meaning of the
terms, and may frequently lead into error. See above, p. 84.
note c; and Aldrich, chap. iii. $,1.

o3

150

ON THE SORITES.

This sorites may thus be placed in a regular
syllogistic form :
( I .) " Every man who lives in the fear of God is virtuous ;"
'" Every good man lives in the fear of G od : "
therefore, " Every good man is virtuous."
(2.) " Every virtuous man is contented ;"
" Every good man is virtuous :"
therefore, " Every good man is contented."
(3.) " Every contented man is happy ;"
*' Every good man is contented :"
therefore, " Every good man is happy."

Thus it may be observed, that the sorites is
a series of syllogisms in the first figure, in which
the premises are transposed.
only one pre- Hence it follows, that in a sorites only one pre
miss negative
?£uianepar" miss can be negative"; for in this case one of its
syllogisms would have both of its premises ne
gative ; neither can any more premises than
one be particular ; for then, as before, one of
its syllogisms would have both its premises
particular.
Prwyiiogism. (5.) The prosyllogism is a proposition which

° Thus the following sorites is incorrect :
" Every man is endued with the faculty of reasoning; No
animal endued with this faculty is a brute ; No brute has the
power of speaking ; Every being who has the power of speaking
lias also the power of communicating to others his ideas : there
fore, Every man has the power of communicating to others his
ideas." It will also be easy to show that the negative premiss,
which is allowable in a sorites, must be the last premiss; and
the particular premiss (if there be one) must be the^irst : these
rules will be manifest by trying examples.

ON THE PKOSYLLOGISM.

131

is attached to one of the premises, as it were
incidentally to confirm the strength of that
premiss ; in fact, the premiss, to which the prosyllogism is attached, is the conclusion of an
enthymeme, of which the prosyllogism itself is
the premiss; e. g.
" Every virtuous act is worthy of commendation ;"
•' Every act of charity, (if it proceeds from a mind ac
tuated by proper principles,) is a virtuous act:"
therefore, " Such acts of charity are worthy of commendation."

The prosyllogism is not uncommonly used sometima
used as a preinstead 'of that premiss of which it is the
proof; and from this circumstance the syllo-

° This is frequently put into practice, in order to condense
the argument ; the same circumstance may be frequently ob
served in the sorites, where two or three prosyllogisms are some
times employed instead of their premises ; e. g. " The sun is a
created thing; those who worship a created thing are guilty of
idolatry ; those who are guilty of idolatry act under mistaken
notions: therejore, those who worship the sun act under mis
taken notions." This sorites may easily be brought into an ac
curate syllogistic form, (though its present form is not strictly
regular,) as follows :
" Those who worship a created thing are guilty of
idolatry;"
'* Those who worship the sun worship a created thing,
(for the sun is a created thing :)"
therefore, " Those who worship the sun are guilty of idolatry."
" Those who are guilty of idolatry act under mistaken
notions ;"
" Those who worship the sun are guilty of idolatry :"
therefore, " Those who worship the sun act under mistaken no
tions."

152

ON THE PROSYLLOGJSM.

gism, though correct, would seem to have too
many terms: thus, in the following example,
*' Charity covereth a multitude of sins ;"
" A multitude of sins is a load of evil :"
therefore, " Charity covereth a load of evil."

This syllogism may, at first sight, appear to
be faulty, because there are apparently five
terms; but it may be shown to be correct, thus:
" That which covereth a multitude of sins, covereth
a load of evil : (for a multitude of sins is a load of
evil;)"
" Charity covereth a multitude of sins :"
therefore, " Charity covereth a load of evil."

sipprened
conclusion.

Thus the prosyllogism, " a multitude of sins
is a load of evil," is substituted for the major
premiss, the truth of which it was intended
to confirm.
(6.) It is a common practice to suppress the
conclusion? at the end of any argument; and
this is very frequently done in common con
versation, as well as in argumentative writings ;
for the conclusion being known from the ques
tion, it would be useless to express it at the
close of every argument. This practice is not
confined to opponents^ only) but is done by all
who are engaged in discussing any subject.
P The conclusion of an argument is supposed to be known by
means of the question, or problem, which is to be proved ; hence
formally to state the conclusion at the close of an argument,
would be of no use, and would only produce tautology.
i See Aldrich, ch. iii. §. 9.

ERRORS IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

153

The following arguments are given by way
of practising the student in detecting the errors
which may be found in apparent syllogisms :
those which are correct may be reduced, if ne
cessary :
1.
Some good men are happy ;
All virtuous men are good ;
Some virtuous men are happy.
2.
Every mail coach keeps good time ;
Every good musician keeps good time ;
Every good musician is a mail coach.

a
No human being is perfectly happy ;
No horse is a human being ;
No horse is perfectly happy.

4.
No man can serve two masters ;
I am a man ;
I cannot serve two masters.
5.
Many men have many minds ;
You are a man ;
You have many minds.
6.
reason is the peculiar characteristic of man ;
There is reason in roasting eggs ;

154 ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS
The peculiar characteristic of man consists in the
faculty which he possesses of roasting eggs.

7A true friend is not often to be met with ;
That which is not often met with is generally va
luable ;
A valuable thing is a true friend.

8.
Nothing is more rare than disinterested friendship ;
That which is more rare than disinterested friend
ship is precious ;
Nothing is precious.
9.
Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit ;
Ego sum mortalis ;
Non omnibus horis sapio.
10.
Qui sapit pauca loquitur ;
Pauca loquor ;
Sapio.
11.
No profane swearers are to be believed on their oath ;
All men who are to be believed on their oath are
worthy of being received as witnesses ;
No men who are worthy of being received as wit
nesses are profane swearers.
12.
All tulips are beautiful flowers ;
No thistles are tulips ;
No thistles are beautiful flowers.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

155

13.
No liar is worthy of credit ;
All liars are dishonourable ;
No dishonourable man is worthy of credit.
14.
Three and two are five ;
Three and two are odd and even ;
Five is odd and even.
15.
All men are animals ;
I am an animal ;
I am a man.

,
16.

All astronomers are men ;
Some philosophers are astronomers ;
All philosophers are men.

17Some men are wise ;
All men are animals ;
Some animals are wise.
18.
Some quadrupeds cannot fly ;
I cannot fly ;
I am not a quadruped.
19.
No brute is a man ;
No dog is a man ;
Every dog is a brute.

156

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

20.
Omnis equus est bestia ;
Omnis Justus est acquus ;
Omnis Justus est bestia.
21.
Nothing mortal is incorruptible ;
The soul of man is incorruptible ;
The soul of man is immortal.
22.
Dionysius was a tyrant ;
Buonaparte was a Dionysius ;
Buonaparte was a tyrant.
23.
Six and five are even and uneven ;
Eleven are six and five ;
Eleven are even and uneven.
24.
Every sword is an instrument of war ;
No ploughshare is a sword ;
No ploughshare is an instrument of war.
25.
Some countries are hot ;
Some countries are cold;
Some cold countries are also hot.
26.
No quadrupeds are bipeds ;
A man is not a quadruped ;
A man is not a biped.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

27Finis rei est illius perfectio ;
Mors est finis vitse ;
Mors est vitae perfectio.

2a
To kill a man is a sin ;
To hang a murderer is to kill a man ;
To hang a murderer is a sin.
29.
Whatever is immaterial is incorruptible ;
An angel is immaterial ;
An angel is not corruptible.
30.
Some razors are not sharp ;
All sharp things are apt to cut ;
Some things apt to cut are not razors.
31.
All philosophers are men ;
All philosophers are rational ;
AH rational beings are men.
32.
Some men are astronomers ;
No astronomers are fools ;
Some fools are not men.
•
All men are corporeal ;
No angels are men ;
No angels are corporeal.

33.

157

158

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

34.
All men breathe ;
I breathe;
I am a man.
35.
Some Christians are pious ;
All pious men are good ;
All good men are Christians.
36.

•

All created things are corruptible ;
The Deity is uncreated ;
The Deity is incorruptible.
37Some cities are fortified ;
Oxford is a city ;
Oxford is fortified.

3a
All true Christians are lovers of God ;
Some lovers of God are Englishmen ;
Some Englishmen are true Christians.
39.
Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit ;
Ego nunquam sapio ;
Ego non sum mortalis.
40.
Sophocles was a Greek tragedian ;
Euripides was not Sophocles ;
Euripides was not a Greek tragedian.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

159

41.
All statesmen are men of learning ;
All men of learning are wise ;
All wise men are statesmen.
42.
Charity covereth a multitude of sins ;
A multitude of sins is a load of evil ;
Charity covereth a load of evil.
43.
Every good man is a worthy character ;
Every good man is a religious man ;
Every religious man is a worthy character.
44.
Humanum est odisse quern lseseris ;
Irasci est humanum ;
Irasci est odisse quern laeseris.
45.
Every turbulent demagogue is to be feared ;
Every turbulent demagogue should be kept in order
by the force of the law ;
All who are to be feared should be kept in order by
the force of the law.
46.
Every art is useful ;
Logic is an art ;
Logic is not useful.
47That which is not true relates what is not the fact ;
p2

160

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

A falsehood does not relate what is the fact ;
A falsehood is not true.
48.
He that calls you an animal speaks the truth ;
He that calls you a goose calls you an animal ;
He that calls you a goose speaks the truth.
49.
Some penknives are sharp ;
Some razors are not sharp ;
Some razors are not penknives.
50.
A watch is a machine intended for showing the time;
A sentinel is a watch;
A sentinel is a machine intended for showing the
time.
51.
That which is worth gaining cannot be attained
without labour ;
All useful knowledge is worth gaining ;
No useful knowledge can be attained without labour.
52.
The thoughts of men are unfathomable ;
The depth of the sea is unfathomable ;
The depth of- the sea is the same as the thoughts of

53.
A tree is not a sentient being :
No man is a tree ;

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

A man is a sentient being.
54.
A tale is a short history ;
The limb of some animal is a tail ;
The limb of some animal is a short history.
55.
All fire burns ;
Ice is not fire ;
Ice does not burn.
56.
Some cities are not fortified ;
All fortified places are fortresses ;
Some fortresses are not cities.
57.
All papists believe the pope to be infallible ;
The pope is a man ;
All papists believe a certain man to be infallible.
58.
No man is infallible ;
The pope is a man ;
The pope is not infallible.
59.
Love is a species of madness ;
You are in love ;
You are mad.
60.
Every beautiful object is worth beholding ;
p3

161

162

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

A fine view is worth beholding ;
A fine view is a beautiful object.
61.
Gallus est homo ;
Volucris quidam est Gallus ;
Volucris quidem est homo.
62.
Every Englishman will fight for his country ;
All those who will fight for their country are brave
men ;
All brave men are Englishmen.
63.
An art is a collection of rules leading to some certain
end;
Logic is a collection of rules leading to some certain
end;
Logic is an art.
64.
Emulation deserves to be promoted ;
Emulation may lead to the production of evil passions :
Every thing which may lead to the prodution of evil
passions deserves to be promoted.
65.
He that spareth the rod hateth his child ;
An affectionate parent does not hate his child ;
An affectionate parent does not spare the rod.

Every book is liable to error ;

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

163

Every book is a human production ;
All human productions are liable to error.
67Some detestable vices are not abhorred as they de
serve ;
i
Malice is a detestable vice ;
Malice is not abhorred as it deserves.

68.
He that has a good understanding leads a truly
Christian life ;
All who lead a truly Christian life may be deemed
really wise ;
All who may be deemed really wise are men of good
understanding.
83.
Virtue graces those who possess it ;
Those who possess it are to be envied ;
Virtue graces those who are to be envied. *

70.
Every amiable person gains the affections of his
neighbours ;
Those gain the affections of their neighbours who are
charitable ;
Every charitable person is amiable.
71Six and two are eight ;
Five and three are eight ;
Five and three are six and two.

1G4

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

72.
Some animals are birds ;
All winged beings are animals ;
Some winged beings are birds.
73.
Those who are apparently religious, and really are
not so, are not to be trusted ;
Hypocrites are not to be trusted ;
Hypocrites are those who are apparently religious,
and really are not so.
74.
No spirits are mortal beings ;
All immortal beings are incorruptible ;
No mortal beings are spirits.
75.
Every wise man bridles his tongue ;
Those who do not bridle their tongue are liable to be
involved in quarrels ;
Those who are liable to be involved in quarrels are
not wise.
76.
Every innocent thing is allowable ;
Some pleasures are allowable ;
Some pleasures are innocent.
77Every innocent thing is allowable ;
Some pleasures are not innocent ;
Some pleasures are not allowable.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

165

78.
Nothing is more to be dreaded than a false friend;
Many false friends are pleasant companions ;
Many pleasant companions are to be dreaded.
79.
Those who are not acquainted with the rules of logic
are not good logicians ;
Schoolboys are not acquainted with the rules of
logic ;
Schoolboys are not good logicians.
80.
Every conceited man is vain ;
Every vain man is a fool;
All fools are conceited.
81.
A definition is intended to explain ;
An illustration is intended to explain ;
An illustration is a definition.
82.
No man can serve two masters ;
A dog is not a man ;
A dog can serve two masters.
83.
Water is ornamental ;
Rain is water ;
Rain is ornamental.
84.
No quadruped has the power of flying ;

166

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

A man is not a quadruped ;
A man has not the power of flying.
85.

Some species of gases are inflammable ;
Balloons are filled with gas ;
Balloons are inflammable.
86.
Every good king deserves the love of his subjects ;
George the Fourth is a good king ;
George the Fourth deserves the love of his sub
jects.

87No brute degrades itself by eating or drinking to
excess;
Some men do thus degrade themselves ;
Some men are not brutes.

Idleness generally leads to a bad end ;
Hard labour is not idleness ;
Hard labour does not lead to a bad end.

Those who work hard deserve reward ;
Those who work on the treadmill work hard ;
Those who work on the treadmill deserve reward.
90.
All meteors are vapours ;
Some vapours are luminous;
Some luminous bodies are meteors.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

167

91.
A dutiful son loves his parents ;
A spendthrift is not a dutiful son ;
A spendthrift does not love his parents.
92.
He who lives beyond his income is thoughtless ;
Many men at Oxford live beyond their income ;
Many men at Oxford are thoughtless.
93.
A brute is not an immortal being ;
All immortal beings are incorporeal ;
No incorporeal beings are brutes.
94.
That which is naturally an inherent quality cannot
be changed by the power of art ;
It is a natural quality inherent in animals to love
themselves ;
This quality cannot be changed by the power of art.
95.
He who is worthy of confidence ought to be possessed
of prudence ;
He who is possessed of prudence is also possessed of
every virtue ;
He who is possessed of every virtue is worthy of
confidence.
96.
So man of honour is addicted to equivocation ;
He who is guilty of equivocation is not to be trusted ;
He who is not to be trusted is not a man of honour.

168

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

97Many languages are difficult to learn ;
Greek is a language ;
It is difficult to learn.
98.
A sorrowful countenance is by no means the charac
teristic of a religious man ;
A sorrowful countenance indicates a heart not at ease ;
That which indicates a heart not at ease is not the
characteristic of a religious man.
99.
Those who are inexperienced in the ways of life, and
are under the influence of their passions, are not fit
to study moral philosophy ;
Such are all young men ;
They, therefore, are not fit to study moral philosophy.
100.
Every prudent parent governs his family properly,
and is anxious for the welfare of its members ;
Many parents do not act thus ;
Many parents are not prudent.
101.
All human institutions are imperfect ;
The laws of England are a human institution ;
The laws of England are not perfect.
102.
A mean artifice is beneath the notice of a man of
strict honour ;

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

169

Calumny is beneath the notice of a man of hon
our;
Calumny is a mean artifice.
103.
The characters of some men, though of the most de
testable description, are unknown to the rest of
the world ;
Many things which ought to be revealed are un
known to the rest of the world ;
Some things which ought to be revealed are the cha
racters of some men.
104.
Many men have common sense ;
Some men have uncommon sense ;
Some who have uncommon sense have also common
sense.
105.
No man can have two opinions on the same sub
ject ;
Some men are not very wise ;
~ Some who are not very wise, have not two opinions
on the same subject.
106.
Some persons, although men of the greatest learn
ing, have committed errors ;
All persons, who are men of sense, are not so liable
to err as those who are foolish ;
Some who are not so liable to err as those who are
foolish, have nevertheless committed great errors.
Q

170

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

'
107.
Some animals live upon the blood which they obtain
from others;
All animals are sensitive beings ;
Some sensitive beings live upon the blood which
they obtain from others.
108.
m
All men are bound to act according to the strictest
rules of virtue ;
No brutes are men ;
No brutes are bound to act according to the strictest
rules of virtue.
109.
All minerals are produced under ground ;
Potatoes are produced under ground ;
Potatoes are minerals.
110.
All vices ought to raise the indignation of every good
man;
A praiseworthy act is not a vice ;
A praiseworthy act ought not to raise the indigna
tion of any good man.
111.
No human virtue is wholly free from imperfec
tions ;
Many benefits have accrued to mankind by means of
human, virtues;
Many benefits have accrued to mankind by means of
things not wholly free from imperfections.

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

171

112.
He that is placed in the highest sphere of life is not
more exempt from death than he that is placed
in the lowest ;
Not even the lowest man should forget that he is
mortal ; therefore,
He that is placed in the highest sphere ought not to
forget that he is mortal.
113.
John is taller than Richard ;
Richard is taller than Thomas ;
John is taller than Thomas.
114.
An unintentional insult should be immediately for
given ;
An act which demands immediate forgiveness is
sometimes a good act ;
Some good act is an unintentional insult.
115.
He who wastes his time is ignorant of its value ;
No man who employs himself in the acquisition of
useful knowledge, wastes his time ;
Such a man, therefore, is not ignorant of its value.
116.
He who is wise in his own conceit is generally a
fool j
A fool is most commonly troublesome ;
Some troublesome people are wise in their own con
ceit.

1 72

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS

117Those who suspect others without just reason are
liable to suspicion themselves ;
Those who are liable to suspicion are frequently no
better than they should be ;
Those who suspect others are frequently no better
than they should be.
118.
Some good intentions are not strictly consistent with
prudence ;
Every good intention is worthy of commendation ;
Some acts which are worthy of commendation, are
not strictly consistent with prudence.
119.
No vegetable is a mineral ;
All minerals are subterraneous productions ;
Xo subterraneous productions are vegetable.
120.
A true friend is an honest man ;
An honest man is an estimable character ;
Some honest man is a true friend.
121.
Every wilful transgression of the laws deserves proper
punishment ;
Proper punishment has generally a good effect ;
Every wilful transgression of the laws has generally
a good effect.
122.
Nothing is more disagreeable than the selfishness

IN APPARENT SYLLOGISMS.

173

discernible in some persons ; for the selfish man is
so wholly taken up with himself, that he cares but
little for the inconvenience to which he exposes
others.
123.
Haste makes waste, waste makes want, want
makes a rich man poor ; therefore, Haste makes a
rich man poor.
_.

124.

Friends should not be purchased by presents ; for a
friendship established on such a foundation will most
commonly end when the power of making those
presents shall cease.
125.
What being can be more wretched than the miser ?
he is always in want and is never satisfied.
126.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.
127.
George the Fourth is a good king, a good king is
deserving of esteem, (for good kings are scarce,)
those who deserve esteem are worthy of our love ;
therefore, George the Fourth is worthy of our love.
128.
The ascent in a balloon is not attended with any
very considerable danger or difficulty, for Mr. Green
has, within a few years, made upwards of sixty

'<&

174

ARGUMENTS FOR DETECTING ERRORS.

ascents, and has, on all occasions, landed without
serious injury129.
" Now controversy being almost always either the
offspring or the parent of party, it is not wonderful
that a love of disputation should almost always either
give occasion to, or exasperate, party spirit." (Dr.
Whately's Bampton Lectures, p. 48.)

t

130.
•

*■!

" That there are subjects connected with reli
gion, which it is unprofitable or worse than unpro
fitable to discuss, no one would venture to deny;
and it is no less undeniable/ that, among these are to
be reckoned such as are ^either laid open to us by
revelation, nor are comprehensible by our reason.
but men are, in general, far less ready practically to
conform to this maxim, than to admit its truths."
(Ibid. p. 177.)

PRINTED BV q. A. TALBOYS, OXFORD.

A, s

•

^AMU

1.

J

