AN ESSAY 

ON THE 

NATURE AND OBJECTS 

OF THE 

COURSE OF STUDY, 

IN THE CLASS OF THE 

PHILOSOPHY OF THE HUMAN MIND 

AND LOGIC, 

IN THE 

UNIVERSITY OF LONDON. 

BY THE REV. JOHN HOPPUS, A.M. 



“ Sure I am, that all the light we can let in upon our own minds, all the 
acquaintance we can make with our own understandings, will not only be very 
pleasant, but bring us great advantage, in directing our thoughts in the search 
of other things.”—L ocke. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR JOHN TAYLOR, 

BOOKSELLER AND PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY, 
UPPER GOWER-STREET. 


1830 



I 




9 








LONDON: 

PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS 




AN ESSAY, 

ETC. 


It is the design of the following pages to explain, gene¬ 
rally and in brief, the nature of those studies to which the 
attention of the Students will be directed in the Class of 
Mental Philosophy and Logic ; and to point out some 
of the 'practical advantages which must result from these 
pursuits, if rightly conducted, as a prominent and essential 
branch of an enlightened and liberal education. 

In the boundless field of knowledge which lies open to 
human research, there are some objects which are evidently 
adapted to gain more immediate attention than others, either 
by the direct appeal they make to the senses, or their ob¬ 
vious connexion with the necessities of mankind. It is with 
the world itself, intellectually considered, as with the infant: 
the latter is chiefly the creature of sensation, and time must 
elapse ere the enlargement of its experience has brought 
into exercise faculties of a different and more exquisite order. 
Antiquity was the infancy of the world; and it was natural 
that the sensible properties of things should first attract 
notice, and become the elements of the first rude attempts in 
science. 

Hence the splendour, the beauty, and the motions of the 
heavenly bodies; the overflow of rivers; thunder and light¬ 
ning ; the changes of the seasons; together with the forms 
and qualities of plants and animals, the diseases of the hu¬ 
man frame, the decomposition of animal and vegetable sub¬ 
stances, the various agencies of fire, air, and water; and, in 


i} 



4 


short, all the more striking aspects of nature, were the facts 
which in the early ages of the world awakened the curiosity 
of man, and formed the basis of Astronomy, Chymistry, 
Medicine, and other sciences. 

These branches of knowledge, and all those which re¬ 
semble them in being derived from similar sources, have, in 
a general sense, been denominated the philosophy of nature . 
This expression however, even in the most extensive accept¬ 
ation in which it has usually been employed in modern 
times, by no means includes all the objects of scientific in¬ 
quiry. There is another sphere of investigation, which, 
though less obtrusive to common observation, and to the 
superficial eye almost shrouded from view, is by no means 
less interesting, or less worthy to be explored. The most 
indisputable of all evidence, the evidence of our conscious¬ 
ness, assures us of the existence of certain powers and sus¬ 
ceptibilities, or faculties, totally different from any which 
are exhibited by the mass of objects that surround us; and 
we feel that these faculties are peculiarly our own. 

From this source, therefore, arises a new and separate 
department of knowledge, quite distinct from that which is 
derived from the wonders of mere sensible nature, comprising 
whatever relates to the operations of that still more wonder¬ 
ful instrument by which these wonders are surveyed; namely, 
that which thinks , or what we denominate mind. 

It requires nothing more than due reflection on that end¬ 
less succession of thoughts and feelings, and their infinitely 
diversified combinations, which form the conscious existence 
of every day, to convince us that these mental phenomena 
are not less curious, or less determinate, than those of ex¬ 
ternal nature, to which indeed they have a more intimate 
relation than we might in the first instance be ready to ima¬ 
gine. This self-inspection will not fail soon to reveal to the 
attentive inquirer some of the arcana of that world within, 
which, though on a cursory glance it appears so dim and 
shadowy, and will never cease, in common with all the other 
spheres of knowledge, to have its regions of mystery and 


darkness, demands only to be patiently and carefully sur¬ 
veyed, in order to manifest that it is as truly subjected by 
its great Author to general and fixed laws as the material 
universe itself. 

The consideration of these various facts in our sentient 
and intellectual nature; this survey of the mechanism, so 
to speak, of the inner man; this introversion, as it were, 
of the intellectual eye, with a view to the analysis of the 
mental operations, their arrangement, the order of their suc¬ 
cession, and a variety of collateral topics, which it is at pre¬ 
sent unnecessary to detail, is what we mean by the Philo¬ 
sophy of the Human Mind, of which Logic may be 
considered as a part. 

The view it is proposed to take of this branch of education 
in the Class, regards chiefly the mental powers and suscep¬ 
tibilities considered in themselves; or in other words, the 
various states of sensation, idea, or emotion, in which the 
mind, under the changing circumstances in which it is con¬ 
stantly placed, is found to exist. The rectitude of any of 
these states, as determined by the will of God, and right 
reason, or the nature and rule of moral excellence, constitutes 
a distinct branch of science, under the name of Ethics , or 
Moral and Political Philosophy; including whatever im¬ 
mediately relates to the philosophy of private, social, and 
public virtue. 

The above aspect of the Philosophy of Mind, in which it 
is viewed principally as to its mere faculties or various ac¬ 
tual states, has sometimes been termed its physiology; im¬ 
plying the doctrine of its functions simply, in allusion to 
that part of medical science which treats of the function of 
the animal frame. It has also been called the physics of 
the mind; its mere properties and laws, apart from their 
moral relations, being viewed as an object of natural science. 
With what propriety these terms, which general custom has 
appropriated to other uses, may be applied to mind, is, in 
part at least, a question of nomenclature only; nor is it ne- 

b 2 


G 


cessary that this question should now be entertained. Still 
more foreign to the present purpose would it be to hazard 
any remarks on the subject of the most philosophical divi¬ 
sion of which science in general may be deemed susceptible. 

Though the appearances of external nature, from the 
strong and incessant appeal they make to the senses, were 
so much calculated, as above remarked, to become the 
earliest objects of scientific inquiry, it was nevertheless im¬ 
possible that some of the more obvious attributes of mind 
itself could remain unnoticed, even in the utmost infancy of 
the history of man. Accordingly all languages are found to 
be furnished with words, or names, which designate the 
faculties of viemory , imagination , reason , and the like, how¬ 
ever little the possible analysis of these mental functions was 
regarded as an object of philosophical discussion. The lite¬ 
rature of the earliest nations indeed, with the exception of 
the Hebrews, was so blended with the fictions of a poetical 
theogony, that little can be certified respecting any opinions 
that were entertained among them as to the analysis of the 
operations of the human mind; or rather it is sufficiently 
evident that this field of inquiry was almost entirely un¬ 
known as an object of science. 

Till the time of Plato and Aristotle, scarcely any thing, 
we apprehend, that is definite can be gathered on this sub¬ 
ject from the philosophical speculations that were current 
even among the Greeks, imbued and mystified as they were 
with the high colouring of the eastern polytheism. The 
philosophy that predominated previously to the rise of these 
brilliant luminaries of the ancient world was the Pytha¬ 
gorean ; and though some of its principles, more immediately 
regarding the Deity, were more rational and consistent than 
those entertained by some of the schools that arose in sub¬ 
sequent ages, the chief philosophy relating to the human 
mind seems to have consisted in the favourite tenet of the 
transmigration of souls, of which the alleged metempsychosis 
of Pythagoras himself was accounted an example: 


7 


Ipse ego, nam mem ini, Trojani tempore belli, 

Panthoides Euphorbias eram. 

Quoslibet occupat artus 

Spiritus; eque feris humana in corpora transit, 

Inque feras noster.—Gv. Metam. xv. 

The succeeding period in the history of Grecian philo¬ 
sophy, distinguished as it is by the genius of Plato and 
Aristotle, and by the schools that adorned the groves of 
Acad emus and the banks of the Ilissus, of which they 
were the founders, is universally allowed to have been 
its most illustrious sera. The time, however, was even yet 
far distant when the human mind, emancipated from the 
despotism of its own fancies, and the authority of names, 
was to acquire that high discipline in the pursuit of truth 
which was necessary to enable it to form a just and sober 
estimate of itself; and when it was to arrive at an intel¬ 
lectual self-command which should restrain it from that 
Daedalian flight, to which it was ever prone,into aerial regions 
of speculation, where its powers were consumed in an element 
unsuited to their weakness, as the fabled wings of Icarus were 
melted in the attempt to approach too near the sun. 

Were we not aware how late it was in the history of the 
world before the true inductive philosophy—the philosophy 
of fact and reason—broke the spells of imagination and ro¬ 
mance, and decidedly obtained that dominion which it now 
possesses over the whole empire of natural science, it might 
appear surprising that whatever related to the mind and its 
faculties should so long have presented to view nothing but a 
rude and indigested series of wild and visionary speculations. 
What is more familiar among the phenomena of mind 
than that under certain circumstances that condition of it 
which is termed sensation is produced ; and that under 
other circumstances another state of consciousness arises, 
which we term having an idea? The moon is in the sky; 
our eyes are open, and are directed to that part of the 
heavens in which she is shining : we have a sensation of 


8 


sight; we see the moon. She lias now run her course, and 
is no longer visible in our hemisphere; but the word moon , 
if it even accidentally reach our ear, is sufficient to call up 
the moon's spectre, so to speak, in the mind ; and we are 
conscious of having an idea of the moon, which, though less 
vivid than the previous sensation, is still perfect in its kind, 
and which we feel to be as truly a part of our consciousness 
as the sensation itself. It was some two thousand years, 
however, from the time that these facts seem to have en¬ 
gaged the attention of philosophers, before it was conceived 
they might probably be ultimate elements in man's sentient 
and intellectual nature; that is, facts of which no explanation 
can be given. 

It was always supposed that the mind did not perceive 
the objects of sense directly and immediately; but that 
some kind of filmy and etherial representations of them 
must intervene, which were termed phantasms , shadows , 
forms , or images of the real objects. In conformity with 
this ideal philosophy, Plato, in the seventh book of his 
64 Republic," compares the mind to a person in a dark cave, 
and so situated as to perceive the shadows only, and not the 
realities, of the objects that are passing without. These 
shadows or 44 ideas’" were said to be but copies of their true 
antitypes and originals, which were affirmed to exist in the 
Divine Mind as the only real essences. 

Aristotle, though he is immortalised by his Science of 
Logic, if more minute on the subject of perception than his 
scarcely less renowned preceptor, -was by no means more 
happy, or more satisfactory, in his speculations. He, and his 
followers, maintained that these images, or forms, were im¬ 
pressed on the organs of sense ; and in this stage of their pro¬ 
gress they were termed sensible species: by some refinement, 
which they subsequently underwent, they became objects of 
memory, and were now called phantasms; by a still more 
subtile and refining process, they were fitted to be objects of 
knowledge; having at length arrived at a rank, which it is 


9 


presumed will not now be very readily conceded to them, 
namely, that of intelligible species. 

The long reign of Aristotle and his commentators in 
the schools, was equally unfavourable both to natural and 
mental science. It was a millennium of slumber to the hu¬ 
man intellect, during which the fantastic dreams of ima¬ 
gination usurped the province of reason; and notwithstanding 
all the warfare of disputation, in which a claim was laid to 
the universal domain of truth, the faculties of the mind, so 
far as all useful purposes were concerned, made but feeble 
achievements, and laboured under a kind of paralysis. The 
scholastic sect of philosophers, which arose principally from 
the prevailing fashion of commenting on Aristotle, rendered 
Logic ridiculous by perverting it to the support of the most 
absurd quibbles and the most unfounded hypotheses, and 
left on the very name of 66 Metaphysics*” a lasting odium. 

Ludovicus Vives describes these philosophers of the 
middle ages in terms which claim for them at least some of 
those imposing titles that were conferred on them by their 
admiring disciples. Of these doctors, who, if not “ seraphic” 
or 44 perspicuous,” were, it must be allowed, not unfrequently 
44 most resolute ” and invincible ,” he thus speaks: 44 I have 
seen the combatants, after having exhausted their stock of 
verbal abuse, proceed to blows ; nor was it uncommon, in 
th ese quarrels about metaphysical terms and ideas, which 
neither party understood, to witness the combatants first 
employing their fists, then their clubs, and finally their swords, 
by which many were wounded, and some killed.*” It was 
unfortunate for mental philosophy that, by being associated 
with the pursuits of the scholastics, it should have been 
identified with so much that was absurd, unintelligible, and 
useless ; and thus have been exposed to the neglect or con¬ 
tempt of those who find it easy to depreciate what they do 
not understand, and who are either unable or unwilling to 
distinguish the ontology and dialectic folly of the schools, 
from the Inductive Philosophy of the Human Mind, and the 
practical Logic of the Novum Organum of Bacon. 


10 


The last named illustrious reformer of science, meriting, 
as he is generally allowed to do, the honourable appellation 
of Father of the Experimental Philosophy of Nature, was 
fitted to give that impulse and direction which he did to the 
labours of his successors, principally by the genius he pos¬ 
sessed for rightly estimating both the powers and the limits 
of the human mind. His philosophical writings in general, 
and especially his work De Dignitate et Augmentis Scien- 
tiarum, abound in trains of thought which are admirably 
calculated to lead to more proper views than any that had 
previously been entertained of the scope and aim of intel¬ 
lectual science. Notwithstanding the tincture that is to be 
found in his works of ancient hypotheses and habits of 
thinking, from which indeed it was too much to expect that 
he should at once practically deliver himself, his accurate 
delineation of the chief erroneous associations of ideas, or 
prejudices, under which the human mind is wont to labour, 
the innumerable important hints he has thrown out on some 
of its operations, and the perpetual demand he enforces to 
have every subject of inquiry submitted to the test of the 
inductive logic, entitle him to the highest rank among the 
contributors to a just intellectual philosophy. His genius 
resembled the morning sun, which, though many shadows 
of the night may cling around his orb, has power to dart his 
rays through them all to the remotest objects, and holds 
forth, at his rising, the pledge and promise of a brighter 
day. 

Descartes, who flourished at the beginning of the 17th 
century, and was contemporary with Bacon, has the praise of 
more clearly stating, probably, than any one of his prede¬ 
cessors, the necessity of studying the human mind simply 
on the evidence of its own consciousness , and of avoiding, 
as much as possible,being misled by those analogies, borrowed 
from the properties of matter, which are liable to prove so 
great a source of error when applied to phenomena which 
are of a nature so totally unlike any of those we witness in 
the material world. “ What am I asks Descartes. “ I 


11 


am a being susceptible of thought—but what is this being ? 
a being that doubts, understands, affirms, denies; that is 
willing and unwilling, etc. I am convinced, therefore, that 
none of the things that are comprehensible by the ima¬ 
gination, things corporeal, can give me the knowledge of 
myself; and the mind should be carefully abstracted from 
these, that it may have a distinct conception of its own 
nature.” The victory which these and similar passages 
seem to indicate their author to have gained over the 
strongest prejudices of sense, at a time when the light of the 
new philosophy had only begun to dawn on the idealism of 
the schools, has induced Mr. Stewart to pronounce that these 
views, “ when first given to the world, formed the greatest 
step in the science of mind ever made by a single individual; 
and when Descartes,” adds this distinguished writer, “ esta¬ 
blished it as a general principle, that nothing conceivable 
by the power of imagination could throw any light on the 
operations of thought, he laid the foundation-stone of the 
Experimental Philosophy of the Human Mind.” 

It is a remarkable illustration of the slow progress of the 
human faculties in the practical attainment and use of truth, 
that Descartes, though meriting such an encomium as the 
above, should have so completely abandoned, as he did, his 
own fundamental principle, in his theories respecting the 
connexion and communication between the body and the 
mind. The soul, he affirms, has its seat in that part of the 
brain called the pineal gland, or conarion ; and he details, 
as if stating an indisputable fact, the process by which the 
“ animal spirits ,” by progressive and retrograde motions, keep 
up a perpetual communication between the mind and every 
part of the body; a doctrine which contributed to furnish 
the muse of Prior with materials for one of its happiest efforts: 

“ Alma, they strenuously maintain. 

Sits cock-horse on her throne, the brain. 

And from the seat of thought dispenses 
Her sovereign pleasure to the senses.” 


Prior’s Alma. 


The publication of Locke's Essay on Human Under¬ 
standing , and its rapid and extensive circulation, maybe re¬ 
garded as constituting a new sera in the history of mental 
science. D uring fourteen years, its author lived to see it 
pass through seven editions; and though, like every other 
effort to benefit mankind, by holding up to them the torch 
of truth, and teaching them to rejoice in the light for its 
own sake, this great work excited the alarm and the opposition 
of those who were interested in preventing the intellectual 
and moral progress of the human race—nevertheless the 
philosophy of Locke speedily gained ground, not only in 
England and Scotland, but also in several parts of the con¬ 
tinent of Europe ; and, within half a century, it had even 
found its way into the fashionable coteries of the French 
metropolis. Whatever defects in the precise use of lan¬ 
guage, or other errors, the researches of subsequent labourers 
in the same field may have brought to light in this cele¬ 
brated Essay, certain it is, that the sincere and ardent 
pursuit of truth, the originality of thought, and the constant 
appeal to reason, which characterize it, not to add the sim¬ 
plicity and energy of its style, were eminently calculated to 
impart a sympathetic tone to future inquiring minds, and 
to effect that salutary change in the general habits of 
thinking on the topics it treats of, which has followed in its 
train. It was, in short, the first grand, systematic ex¬ 
hibition of the spirit of the Baconian philosophy applying 
itself to the investigation of mind; and instead of being 
surprised that one individual should not have achieved every 
thing, we may rather admire the genius that had power, 
under the existing circumstances, to accomplish so much. 

As it is by no means the intention of the present pages to 
detail the history of the Philosophy of Mind, or to dwell 
minutely on the respective merits of those who have written 
on it, but chiefly to give some general idea of its nature and 
objects to those to whom the subject may be new, and to 
glance hastily at the manner in which it has gradually as¬ 
sumed the form and consistency of a science, few only, even 


13 


of the names of those can be mentioned, who have con¬ 
tributed, each his portion, either toward clearing away the 
fabrics of error, or laying the foundations of truth. In 
this, as in every other branch of human knowledge, one 
philosopher has stood, as it were, on the pedestal reared by 
another ; one has proceeded to fill up the outline, which was 
already sketched by a former hand; and each one has been 
more or less indebted for some new train of thought to the 
unwrought materials bequeathed to him by his less advan¬ 
tageously situated predecessor. Nor is it a fact peculiar to 
the history of this science, that some who have most suc¬ 
cessfully pursued certain topics of inquiry, have' on 
others been the most completely led astray by the ignis 
fatuus of an undisciplined imagination. Kepler, who en¬ 
riched astronomy with the admirable discovery of the laws 
of the planetary motions, was persuaded, from certain fan¬ 
cied analogies, that the planets must be precisely six in 
number; and he acknowledged that his first concern, on 
hearing of the discovery of the four satellites of Jupiter by 
Galileo, was, how he could save his favourite scheme, which 
was in jeopardy from this increase in the number of the planets! 

In addition to the writers already noticed, who have con¬ 
tributed to intellectual science, the names of Hobbes, Berke¬ 
ley, Hartley, and Hume, not to mention others, are among 
the most conspicuous; each of which philosophers may be 
regarded as, at the same time, a specimen both of the strength 
and the weakness of the human mind—as exhibiting the 
combination of that acute and patient research which has 
added many valuable facts and illustrations to the stock of 
our knowledge, with a devotedness to the most gratuitous 
or fanciful hypotheses, and in some instances, with worse 
than merely intellectual errors. Hartley’s attempt to ac¬ 
count for our sensations, ideas, and emotions, by mechanical 
vibrations in the nerves and brain, or Berkeley’s argument 
against the existence of matter, is not necessarily connected 
with ill moral consequences; but Hobbes’s denial of any 
other distinction between right and wrong than what de- 


14 


pends on the mere arbitrary will of the civil magistrate, 
and Hume’s universal scepticism, are at variance with the 
happiness of mankind. 

It is thus, however, that the Philosophy of Mind has gra¬ 
dually derived accessions from various sources, and, by the 
perpetual collisions of truth and error, has assumed the im¬ 
proved form which it exhibits in the hands of its more modern 
cultivators, especially in Scotland ; a country in which, for 
nearly a century past, it may be affirmed to have met with 
more successful attention than in any other, and where it has 
had the good fortune to escape being identified with that 
mysticism and romance which have too much characterized 
it in some parts of the Continent. 

Lord Bacon has remarked, that one source of error to the 
human mind is the tendency it often exhibits to imagine a 
greater uniformity in nature than actually exists; and the 
passion for systems , which has misled so many powerful 
minds, is nearly allied to such a bias. Little doubt can be 
entertained that to this cause may be traced much of the 
supposed uncertainty of speculations on mind. The fate, 
however, of successive systems, one perishing and another 
rising on its ruins, from which the argument of uncertainty 
is usually derived, militates nut against the subject, but 
against the method of philosophy. When the phenomena 
of nature in general began to be studied simply by the 
light of observation and experiment, and the facts, what¬ 
ever they might be, were carefully registered and compared, 
the whole aspect of physical science began to change, and 
to assume a definite and certain form; and the order and 
beauty of truth arose out of the chaos and darkness of the scho¬ 
lastic ages. This inductive method may safely be pronounced 
the only one that is suited to the weakness and limitation of 
the human faculties—the only sure guide out of the labyrinth 
of error; and in proportion as it is applied to the investi¬ 
gation of the laws of mind, will those laws, like any other 
facts in nature, become truly ascertained. It is, if we mis- 
take not, principally to the circumstance of the spirit of the 


15 


inductive philosophy having more deeply imbued the minds 
of the Scottish writers than those of some of their cotempo- 
raries in Germany, that the superiority of the Northern 
school is to be traced ; and that under such auspices as those 
of Reid, Stewart, and Brown, the genius of intellectual in¬ 
quiry presents the aspect of a traveller, not arrayed indeed in 
the splendid attire of the 66 Transcendental Philosophy* ,” but 
patiently toiling onward in the path which must ultimately 
lead to the temple of Truth, and claiming for his labours the 
name and dignity of Science. 

In the Universities of Scotland, it is well known that Men¬ 
tal Philosophy and Logic form constituent parts of the general 
instruction of youth ; and in the course of education published 
by the Council of the University of London, to be pursued 
by the Students, it is made to occupy the same prominent 
and important place. In this Class their attention will be 
directed to every topic that can properly come under the 
denomination of the Philosophy of Mind, from its most 
simple and familiar states of sensation, in smell , taste , hear¬ 
ing, sight , and touch , to its most complex phenomena of 
thought and emotion. Hence the various orders of ideas, 
simple and complex; the association of ideas; memory; 
imagination; attention; habit; the artifices the mind em¬ 
ploys to facilitate and abbreviate its operations in abstraction 
and generalisation, together with other uses of language; 
evidence; reasoning; belief; the will; the passions, or emo¬ 
tions, viewed as states of the mind ; and a variety of other 
inquiries, both immediate and collateral, and too numerous 
now to be mentioned, will form the elements on which the 
student will be taught to exercise and discipline his faculties 
in the pursuit of truth: and this object will be promoted 
not merely by oral communication, but also by perpetual 
and various themes, exercises, and examinations. 

Of the Philosophy of Mind, Logic, as before intimated, is 
properly a branch, since it has a direct reference to one of 
the most important of the mental operations. It may be 


* Vid. Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, 


16 


viewed either as the science or the art of reasoning. In its 
stricter acceptation, as a science, it consists of the analysis of 
that process of the mind ; while in its wider sense, as an art, 
it includes the practical rules on which all ratiocination is to 
be conducted, for the avoidance of error and the attainment of 
truth. Its principles are completely developed in the Orga¬ 
non of Aristotle ; and, so far as relates to induction, its ma¬ 
terials may be found, to a considerable extent, in the Novum 
Organum of Bacon, which embodies the spirit of that method 
of pursuing philosophical inquiries to which mainly is owing 
the rapid advancement of science in modern times. 

Jn conducting his pupils through the fertile field of the 
Intellectual and Logical Philosophy, it will be the aim of the 
Professor to make their studies not only useful, but also inte¬ 
resting; in materials for doing which, if he mistakes not, 
many of the topics that will present themselves to their 
notice will by no means be wanting. The great object will 
be, to cause them to think for themselves; and the idea of 
teaching , rather than of merely lecturing, will constantly be 
kept in view. This, at all events, must be the case, in pro¬ 
portion as the Class shall be found to require elementary 
instruction, and to be formed to that close reflection on what 
passes within their own minds, and to those habits of mental 
analysis, which are rarely possessed by very young persons, 
and are never acquired without continuous and diligent 
efforts. In whatever manner circumstances, as they arise, 
may dictate any modification of the plan of teaching, the 
important object will invariably be aimed at, of rendering 
the course of instruction as efficient as possible, in promoting 
the practical ends of a liberal and useful education. 

The extensive advantages resulting from the cultivation 
of mental and logical science in general, and the practical 
utility of devoting to it a portion of that valuable period of 
life which is allotted to the great purpose of acquiring 
elementary education, are too obvious to those who have paid 
any attention to this branch of knowledge to require the 
support of argument. Since it must be confessed, however, 
that this department of learning has not hitherto constituted 


17 


so prominent an ingredient as it merits, in the systems of edu¬ 
cation pursued in the southern part of Britain, though it has 
long held so distinguished a rank in the Scottish Universities, 
itmaybe proper to dwell somewhat at large on the advantages 
which attach to its pursuit. Preliminary to this, it will not 
be irrelevant to our purpose to glance at one or two of those 
erroneous notions which have existed with regard to the 
nature of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, and which, 
even in the present age, have not entirely subsided. 

One of these, and to which allusion has already been made, 
is, that an uncertainty attaches to it, in consequence of its 
being supposed to rest on a footing totally different , with 
regard to our knowledge, from that of those sciences which 
have matter for their immediate object; whereas, in reality, 
the situation of both these general branches of knowledge 
is in this respect the very same. Nothing, indeed, can be 
more different than the two classes of phenomena which 
matter and mind exhibit to our observation ; the one being 
known to us by its colour, extension, solidity, and other 
familiar sensible properties; the other, by sensations, ideas, 
volitions, and a whole train of feelings equally peculiar, 
every one of which is totally unlike any of the qualities we 
assign to matter: yet a little reflection is sufficient to con¬ 
vince us that our notions, both of matter and of mind, agree 
in this, namely, that they are not direct, but only relative. 
All we know of matter is, the properties that belong to it; 
and precisely the same is the case with mind itself. What¬ 
ever, therefore, can be truly ascertained as a fact or event, 
with regard to the affections of either, becomes as truly a 
part of our knowledge in the one case as in the other. What 
we ourselves are conscious of in the laws of mind, and 
what we witness of the operation of similar laws in the minds 
of others, we know as really as what we perceive in the laws 
of matter; both are alike known only by observation and 
induction. Any uncertainty that may attach to our con¬ 
clusions in either case in any given instance, arises either 
from the difficulty of procuring sufficient data , or from our 


18 


deriving wrong inferences from the existing premises ; to 
both which evils some of the more complex mental pheno¬ 
mena, it must be allowed, are peculiarly liable. Neither 
of these sources of error, however, is confined to the science 
of mind. 

It has also been contended, by way of objection to the 
Intellectual Philosophy, that as the inquiries connected with 
it are ££ not of the nature of experiment , but of observation 
merely, 1 ’ the laws which Bacon has sketched out for the 
regulation of experimental induction are in this department 
££ without authority- 11 It must indeed be acknowledged that 
mind cannot, like matter, be subjected to the crucible; nor 
can its various states of * sensation, thought, and emotion, 
be actually dissevered, and separately exhibited to view, like 
the rays of the prismatic spectrum : we have not here, in 
short, the same kind of command over the objects to be in¬ 
vestigated, which matter often enables us, by its inertia 
and its divisibility, to acquire. The discoveries, however, 
which are brought to light by observation and by experL 
ment, are precisely of the same kind; both rest on the same 
ultimate basis, since experiment is nothing more than one 
form of the observation of nature. This objection, moreover, 
evidently tends to depreciate one highly important branch 
even of physical science, and one which is now considered as 
not yielding in the certainty of its conclusions to any part of 
human knowledge; namely, astronomy. Surely Bacon never 
anticipated that this most exact of sciences would ever be 
regarded as less within the sphere of the inductive philosophy 
than any other ! It scarcely needs to be added, that the 
effects which astronomy has produced in navigation, geo¬ 
graphy, and chronology, sufficiently prove that observation , 
as well as direct manual experiment, may issue in an ££ in¬ 
crease of power,” and that it does not of necessity become 
a mere ££ gratification of curiosity.” 

A prejudice, moreover, has not been wanting against 
Mental Philosophy, arising from its association with the term 
<£ metaphysics This word appears to have originated 


19 


with Andronicus of Rhodes, who was employed in editing 
the writings of Aristotle, when the manuscripts were brought 
to Rome by Sylla, after his conquest of Athens. Androni¬ 
cus is said to have prefixed to certain books the title, Ta 
[jjzra ra <pvc>ixa, or 66 what immediately follows after the 
physics,” in reference either to the place which these books 
held in Aristotle’s original arrangement, or to that which it 
appeared to Andronicus they should occupy in the proper 
order of subjects. 

In regard to the prejudice derived from this source, the 
following appropriate remarks occur in the Essays of Mr. 
Stewart, whose writings, almost unrivalled in the elegance 
of their style, have greatly contributed, during many years, 
to promote a more general attention in the reading world to 
the study of the philosophy of mind. Alluding to the 
fourteen books of Aristotle, to which Andronicus gave the 
name of 66 metaphysics,” this eminent author thus observes: 
64 Notwithstanding the miscellaneous nature of these books, 
the Peripatetics seem to have considered them as all be¬ 
longing to one science; the great object of which they con¬ 
ceived to be, first , to treat of those attributes which are 
common to matter and mind; secondly , of those things 
separate from matter. A notion of metaphysics nearly 
the same was adopted by the Peripatetics of the Christian 
church. They distinguished its two branches by the titles 
of ontology and natural theology. To these branches the 
schoolmen added the philosophy of the human mind, as re¬ 
lating to an immaterial substance; distinguishing this last 
science by the title of pneumatology. 

“ From this arrangement of natural theology and of the 
philosophy of the human mind, they were not very likely to 
prosper, as they gradually came to be studied with the same 
spirit as ontology) which may safely be pronounced to be 
the most idle and absurd speculation that ever employed 
the human faculties. Nor has the evil been remedied by 
the contempt into which the schoolmen have fallen in more 
modern times. On the contrary, as their arrangement of 

c 


20 


the objects of metaphysics is still very generally retained, the 
philosophy of the mind is not unfrequently understood as a 
speculation much more analogous to ontology than to physics; 
while, notwithstanding the new aspect it begins to assume 
in consequence of the lights struck out by Bacon, Locke, 
and their followers, it continues to share largely in that dis¬ 
credit which has been justly incurred by the greater part of 
those discussions to which, in common with it, the epithet 
metaphysics is indiscriminately applied by the multitude/" 

Similar is the prejudice which has also been entertained 
against Logic , in consequence of its perversion, already no¬ 
ticed, to the purposes of scholastic disputation, during the 
reign of Aristotle in the schools. The science and art of 
Reasoning has, in the minds of the ignorant and the half- 
taught, unjustly shared in the discredit which is now most 
deservedly cast on the pedantry and jargon of the middle 
ages. 

Were we to limit the motives for inquiry into the intel¬ 
lectual part of human nature to those of rational curiosity 
and devout admiration, even these could not fail to prove 
highly advantageous, and would present the study of the 
philosophy of the mind as invested with attractions of no 
common order; for it must be acknowledged that, of all the 
familiar objects which display the power and skill of the 
Creator, the human mind, in many respects, stands the most 
conspicuous. Amidst all that is humiliating in the history 
of man, there exist in his intellectual nature sublime traces 
of his real greatness. This nature is the only object, in 
that part of the creation with which we are conversant, that 
bears even the faintest image of its Maker; and it is a 
monument of far more exquisite and costly workmanship 
than the whole material universe. By means of the intel¬ 
lectual endowments it is given him to possess, man is enabled 
in some measure to subordinate all visible nature to his con¬ 
venience and enjoyment. The earth, his dwelling-place, 
assumes new forms and is clothed with new beauties at his 
bidding; and, under the guidance of his plastic genius, di- 


01 

rv 1 

reeling his manual labour, the wilderness becomes a second 
Eden ; and the creations of his fancy rise up to embellish it, 
like visions of enchantment, in the forms of 44 solemn temples,” 

44 gorgeous palaces,” or 44 cloud-capt towers.” The elements 
also are, to a considerable degree, brought under his con¬ 
trol, and made to administer to his desires; and both the 
winds and the waves have become his servants. In vessels 
of huge bulk, and of the most surprising mechanism, he 
rides upon the storms of the ocean ; and guided by that 
compass which he has invented, and which points out his 
course though sun and stars should be invisible, he is borne 
along even to the extent of the circumference of the globe. 

Nor have the heavens above escaped the scrutiny of his 
research, nor the powers of his arithmetic. Confined as he 
is to this earthly clod, his genius has taught him to invent 
instruments for the gratification of his curiosity and the 
advancement of his knowledge, which have the same effect 
as though his locomotive faculties were extended to a wider 
sphere. The heavenly bodies, which appear situated at so 
hopeless a distance away from him, and of which some are 
invisible to the naked eye, he has viewed with all the ad¬ 
vantage of a nearer post of observation: he has traced the 
planets in their wanderings through the mazes of the starry 
firmament; and stretching, as it were, his line and his com¬ 
passes over the mighty void of millions and millions of miles, 
he has determined their times and motions, their distances, 
their magnitudes and densities, their mutual attractions, and 
their various irregularities : he has even extended his curi¬ 
osity beyond the sphere that encloses the solar system, and 
penetrated into the immeasurable regions of the fixed stars; 
and by the new optics with which his ingenuity has furnished 
him, he has brought to light unknown strata of the universe, 
and new wonders of the power of the Eternal, which had 
been hidden from view in the abysses of the creation ever 
since their existence. 

The human mind has sometimes, after seeming to lie for 
ages entranced in a dead sleep of inactivity, roused itself 

V./ 4^0 


22 


afresh, re-asserted its claim to unlimited advancement in 
knowledge, and entered on a bolder and more excursive 
flight. It was thus that Bacon’s genius emerged from the 
darkness by which it was surrounded, and taught his suc¬ 
cessors to remodel all philosophy; and it was thus that 
Newton regenerated astronomy, and with his contemporary, 
Leibnitz, bequeathed to succeeding philosophers a new, and 
a more sublime analysis than any before known, and by 
which the abstractions of infinity itself are submitted to 
mathematical calculation. 

Nor do the various emotions and passions of which man 
is capable present a less interesting field of inquiry than the 
achievements of his intellect. These are the phases of the 
human mind, which have a more immediate aspect towards- 
happiness, and which, according to their character and 
complexion, either shed the light of peace and joy on every 
object within their sphere, or cast a malign and disastrous 
influence over all that is around them, and produce the 
storms and desolations of the moral and political world. Such 
are the visions of hope ; the terrors of fear; the workings 
of benevolence ; the selfishness of ambition ; the softenings 
of pity, and the complacencies of affection ; or the contrary 
ebullitions of wrath and revenge. More than all—the in¬ 
satiable thirst for happiness, of which man’s intellectual 
nature is susceptible; the lofty conceptions of ideal excel¬ 
lence ; the visions of perfection and of beauty, not to be 
realised in its present abode, and made up of the scattered 
fragments of all that is fair and all that is good, on which 
it is fain to linger; while they most exquisitely harmonize 
with that future destination which reason and religion con¬ 
spire to pronounce the only object worthy of a lasting 
ambition, exhibit the human mind, not only as the most 
curious, but also as the most sublime of contemplations. 

If we descend to the more immediate bearings of the In¬ 
tellectual Philosophy, it is obvious that, considered as the 
great instrument of all our knowledge, mind becomes an 
object of general interest to all who are engaged in the pur- 


23 


suit of Truth, under every diversity of form which it can 
present. If it be important that the astronomer should be 
well acquainted with the construction and the uses, the 
powers and the defects, of those instruments on which the 
accuracy of his observations so much depends ; or that the 
mechanician should rightly appreciate the strength of those 
materials of which his machinery consists, and be familiar 
with its adaptation to the ends which he proposes in em¬ 
ploying it, surely mind, which is at once the universal engine, 
and the receptacle of all science, demands from us the effort, 
which cannot fail to repay itself, to ascertain, as far as pos¬ 
sible, the laws which govern it, the extent and limitation 
of its powers, and the purposes to which they may be le¬ 
gitimately applied; in order that its energies may not, on 
the one hand, be wasted on objects beyond their reach, nor, 
on the other, be paralysed, by the despair of attaining what 
persevering labour, and a well-regulated conduct of the 
faculties, might enable them to achieve. 66 It is of great 
use to the sailor,” says Locke, 6i to know the length of his 
line, though he cannot with it fathom all the depths of the 
oceana remark which may evidently be applied to the 
capacities of the mind. 

As mind is the grand instrument we have to employ in 
acquiring knowledge, its philosophy is obviously related to 
every other branch of literature and science. It may be 
regarded as the focus in which they all centre; or rather as 
the diffused and pervading light in which they all stand 
forth to view, in their various relative connexions, harmonies, 
and proportions. Science can exist only in the mind; and 
it is nothing more than a certain modification and arrange¬ 
ment of the ideas derived from the given objects in each 
particular branch. It consists of those series of abstractions 
and classifications to which we subject the different states 
of consciousness which are produced in us by the presence 
of these objects, in order to systematize our knowledge, and 
throw it into parcels that will be more easily remembered, 
and will present more ready means of pursuing the invest!- 


gation farther in any given direction. Natural science, it is 
evident, is not the mass of external objects that surround us, 
which we may conceive as still existing, and as having the 
same changes which they now exhibit, even if no minds 
were employed in contemplating them. It is a registry 
and a comparison and arrangement of those mental affections 
and changes to which these objects give rise, and of which 
the latter are simply the occasions. Medical science, for 
example, does not consist in the mere parts and functions of 
the corporeal frame, either healthy or morbid ; nor in the 
qualities of certain mineral, vegetable, or animal bodies, that 
may be employed as remedies in disease; for these all exist 
independently of our knowledge. Nor does Botany consist 
in the peculiar conformation and fructification of plants, or 
the various forms of their leaves and roots, and their diversi¬ 
fied habits and local situations; for these all existed long 
before the science of botany was known. These, and all 
the other physical sciences, are nothing more than phenomena 
of the mind—certain changes within us, which, by the con¬ 
stitution of our own nature, we are led immediately to refer 
to those external things, which are therefore named the ob¬ 
jects of each particular science. 

The actual effects produced by the state of intellectual 
philosophy on physical inquiries in general, are, it is well 
known, abundantly exemplified in the history of the world. 
The resuscitation of science was coeval with the progress of 
more correct views than had formerly prevailed, respecting 
the laws and operations of the human mind. If it be asked, 
why did so many ages pass away before this improvement 
took place ? was it that there was a dearth of genius, or a 
want of industry, and ardour of pursuit, among those to 
whom mankind looked up as the oracles of nature’s mysteries, 
and as possessing the key to her hidden treasures; and who 
were dignified with the name of philosophers ? were Plato 
and Aristotle, for example, men of inferior intellectual stature 
to many who have succeeded them, at the remote distance 
of modern times?—this cannot be supposed. If these ex- 


traordinary men did not attain to a true philosophy, or per¬ 
ceived truth only in the disguise of monstrous shapes and 
distorted images, it was not that their visual faculty was less 
acute than that of their successors, but that the atmosphere 
that surrounded them was misty and impure. That intel¬ 
lectual medium, through which all the objects of science 
must become known, required to be freed from its prejudices, 
and exorcised of its airy phantoms and chimeras. It was an 
essential preliminary to the regeneration of human learning, 
that the defective use which had previously been made of 
the very instrument that must incessantly be applied to it, 
should be clearly made known, and that this instrument 
should be cleansed from the rust of antiquity, and po¬ 
lished anew. “ When we think/’ remarks Dr. Thomas 
Brown, of the great genius of Lord Bacon, and of the in¬ 
fluence of his admirable works, we are too apt to look back 
to his rules of philosophizing as a sort of ultimate truths, 
without referring them to those simpler views of nature, in 
relation to our faculties of discovery, from which they were 
derived, and without paying sufficient attention to the false 
theories of intellect which had led to these physical absurdi¬ 
ties. But we must not forget that the temple which he puri¬ 
fied was not the temple of external nature, but the temple of 
the mind; that in its inmost sanctuaries were all the idols which 
he overthrew; and that it was not till these were removed, 
and the intellect prepared for the presence of a nobler divinity, 
that truth would deign to unveil herself to adoration 

It is not however in physical science alone that the induc¬ 
tive philosophy of the human mind is adapted to exercise a 
salutary and guiding influence. Its effects may be equally 
traced in many of those branches of learning which are 
usually referred to literature , or which are of the nature of 
literary arts. Among these, education , beyond dispute, 
holds a foremost and distinguished rank: and here the in. 
fluence of the Intellectual Philosophy is all-pervading; for 
what is education, it may be asked, or rather what ought 
education to be, but this philosophy reduced to practice ? 


All education may be divided into three parts; namely* 
physical, intellectual, and moral. The first of these includes 
the discipline which relates to the health and vigour of the 
body merely ; as temperance, cleanliness, and gymnastic 
exercises : the two last comprise the gymnastics, so to speak, 
of the mind, or the art of training it to knowledge and 
to virtue. Education, in this sense, as vulgarly understood, 
is supposed to consist chiefly in the mere imparting of ele¬ 
mentary instruction, together with the use of praise and 
blame, reward and punishment; but the true science of 
education may aspire to the accomplishment of much more. 
It is the province of intellectual discipline not merely to in¬ 
scribe, as it were, certain characters on the blank tablet of 
the mind ; not merely to inform its native ignorance, and 
to task it to the daily performance of some mechanical 
routine: its grand general object is to train the mind to the 
most efficient use of its own faculties, and to bring them to 
the highest degree of perfection of which they are susceptible ; 
producing such a balance of all its powers, and such vigour 
in their exercise, that they may be directed to any given 
pursuit with the greatest possible advantage. 

The intellectual varieties we often witness in children of 
the same family, and who have been subjected to the same 
circumstances of ordinary association, present indubitable 
evidence for the belief that there is a real difference in the 
susceptibilities of mind; a radical and original diversity of 
mental organization. Such a characteristic peculiarity, 
however, in each individual mind, it is obvious, by no 
means renders that kind of education unnecessary which is 
founded on a philosophical estimate of the human intellect, 
an analysis of its faculties, and an inquiry into the grand 
laws of their operation. Education, indeed, is rarely con¬ 
ducted with this constant reference to the leading elements 
of human nature; which principle can receive full justice 
only from parents themselves, under whose eye the first years 
of life are passed, and the earliest and most tenacious of the 
mental associations are formed. Nevertheless, imperfect as 


27 


education, thus considered, still is, it has often both supplied, 
in a great measure, the absence of superior natural endow¬ 
ments, and brought out into bold and prominent relief latent 
talents, which might otherwise have remained undeveloped, 
and unknown even to their possessor. Hence the lines of 
Gray are not more beautiful in imagery than true to philo¬ 
sophy, which speak of the “ celestial fire” of genius, or of 
moral greatness, lying buried with some 66 mute inglorious 
Milton,” who might have proved a master of the lyre; or 
66 some village Hampden,” who resisted the despotism of 
some petty rural tyrant, and thus indicated that, supposing 
him to have retained his love of freedom incorrupt, he 
might, under other circumstances, and with the advantages 
of education, have become a patriot, and resisted the misrule 
of an oppressed nation. 

But knowledge to their eyes her ample page, 

Rich with the spoils of time, did ne’er unroll; 

Chill penury repress’d their noble rage. 

And froze the genial current of the soul. 

Full many a gem of purest ray serene 

The dark, unfathom’d caves of ocean bear; 

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen. 

And waste its sweetness in the desert air. 

The still more important objects of moral and religious 
education are equally capable with that which is more im¬ 
mediately intellectual, of being assisted by the principles of 
the Mental Philosophy. If, in the conduct of intellectual 
education, the object be to generate and confirm habits of 
attention and activity, to rouse and to direct curiosity, to 
inspire a taste for knowledge, to cultivate memory, ima¬ 
gination, invention, and also to invigorate the faculty of 
reason; these, and all other intellectual exercises, may be 
rendered subservient to the higher purposes of morality, and of 
religion; apart from the prospects of which, education is 
destitute of every noble aim ; and, indeed, all human pursuits, 
with whatever charm they may seem arrayed, become as insigni- 


28 


ficant and unmeaning as the fluttering of an ephemeral insect 
in the sunbeam. In this department of education, which 
should also, it is obvious, be instituted in the earliest years of 
childhood, a just acquaintance with the mental phaen omen a, 
and, especially, a careful attention to the associating principle, 
which exercises so wide an influence over all the operations 
of mind, cannot fail to be of the highest moment. To form 
strong associations between virtue and happiness, vice and 
misery ; to guard the avenues of evil; to cultivate the heart, 
by regulating the domestic and social affections; to inspire 
the universal love of truth and duty, though opposed to 
present gratification ; to allure the mind towards rectitude, 
by endeavouring always to present it in attractive colours • 
above all, to adopt the best means of conveying just ideas of 
the relations, both natural and revealed, subsisting between 
God and the creatures he has made, and to lead the plastic 
mind to form such associations in connexion with the beauties 
of nature and the works of genius, as may tend to illustrate the 
divine perfections by pleasing images; — these, which are some 
of the most important arts to be aspired to in moral and reli¬ 
gious education, are, it is evident, of a nature to derive much 
advantage from their being attempted in connexion with en¬ 
lightened views of the principles of man’s intellectual nature. 

While the philosophy of mind thus extends itself over 
every part of elementary education, its bearing on other 
literary arts is not less obvious. In eloquence and poetry , 
for example, the object in view is, to inform, to persuade, 
to convince; to originate certain trains of thought; to act 
on imagination; to kindle a variety of emotions—as to 
awaken sympathy, to produce indignation or alarm, to 
inspire hope, and to convert all into the materials of plea¬ 
surable excitement, and of a certain course of action. All 
this is the contact of mind with mind ; and, supposing the 
natural endowments of genius to be the same, a circumstance, 
it must be allowed, not very easy to be estimated, it will be 
no small advantage surely, to the orator at least, to know 
somewhat intimately the powers and susceptibilities of that 





29 


which is at once the instrument and the object, the agent 
and the materials, which he is to employ. 

The true art of literary criticism also is nothing more 
than the art of discovering the correspondences, or the un¬ 
likeness, which may exist between the delineations of truth 
and truth itself. The excellence of works of literary genius 
may be said chiefly to consist in their powerfully exemplify¬ 
ing the most natural successions of human consciousness? 
and in preserving unimpaired all the accordance of these 
successions with certain general and fixed laws which truly 
exists in nature, even in the most latent development of the 
principle of association, or the wildest and most abrupt 
bursts of passion. He who aspires to be more than a verbal 
critic must have a philosophical acquaintance with the hu¬ 
man mind. 

On the tendencies of intellectual science with regard to 
other important pursuits, the following observations of Mr. 
Stewart are too appropriate to be omitted. 44 It will be 
found, on a review of the history of the moral sciences, that 
the most important steps which have been made in some of 
them, even the most remote from metaphysical pursuits, 
have been made by men trained to the exercise of their in¬ 
tellectual powers by early habits of abstract meditation. 
To this fact Burke probably alluded when he remarked, 
that 44 by turning the soul inward on itself, its forces are 
concentred, and are fitted for stronger and bolder flights of 
science; and in such pursuits, whether we take or whether 
we lose the game, the chase is certainly of service.” 

Adverting to the use of the term metaphysical, which has 
not unfrequently proved a bugbear to ignorance, and a con¬ 
venient tocsin of alarm to selfishness and party feeling, 
Mr. Stewart proceeds: 44 But a few years have elapsed 
since this epithet, metaphysical, accompanied with the still 
more opprobrious terms of atheistical and democratical, 
was applied to the argument then urged against the morality 
and policy of the slave trade , and in general to any appeal 
that was made to the beneficent arrangements of nature, or 


30 


to the progressive improvement of the human race. Absurd 
as this language was, it could not, for a moment, have ob¬ 
tained any currency with the multitude, had there not been 
an obvious connexion between these liberal doctrines and the 
well-known habits of logical thinking which so eminently 
distinguished their authors and advocates. Whatever praise, 
therefore, may be due to the modern fathers of political 
economy” (alluding particularly to Adam Smith), “ belongs, 
at least in part, to those abstract studies by which they were 
prepared for an analytical investigation of its first and fun¬ 
damental principles. 

“ The influence of these studies may be also perceived in 
the philosophical spirit so largely infused into the best hi¬ 
storical compositions of the last century. This spirit has, 
indeed, been often perverted to pernicious purposes; but 
who can doubt that on the whole both history and philo¬ 
sophy have gained infinitely by the alliance ? 

“ Another instance of the practical influence of meta¬ 
physical science is the improvement which since the time of 
Locke has become general in the conduct of education both 
private and public. In our universities the studies of 
ontology, pneumatology, and dialectics have been sup¬ 
planted by that of the human mind, conducted with more 
or less success on the plan of Locke's Essay, and in a few 
seats of learning by the study of Bacon's Method of In¬ 
quiry. In all this an approach has been made or attempted 
to what Locke so earnestly recommended to parents, 4 that 
their children’s time should be spent in acquiring what may 
be useful to them when they come to be men.’ Many other 
circumstances, no doubt, have contributed their share in 
producing this revolution ; but what individual can be com¬ 
pared to Locke in giving the first impulse to that spirit of 
reform by which it has been established P 

“ In consequence of the operation of these causes a sen¬ 
sible change has taken place in the style of English com¬ 
position. The number of idiomatical phrases has been 
abridged; and the language has assumed a form more sy- 


31 


siematic, precise, and luminous. The transitions too in our 
best authors have become more logical, and less dependent 
on fanciful or verbal associations. If by these means our 
native tongue has been rendered more unfit for some of the 
lighter species of writing, it has certainly gained immensely 
as an instrument of thought and as a vehicle of knowledge."’ 

After what has already been advanced, it is unnecessary 
to dwell at any length on the actual benefits to be derived 
by the student of the Philosophy of Mind, from the direct 
tendency which it possesses to discipline and invigorate the 
mind itself. Whether his attention be turned immediately 
to the mental changes and sequences themselves, or to those 
external qualities of nature which are so perpetually origin¬ 
ating new trains of these ever-flowing series, as colour, so¬ 
norous vibrations, figure, extension, hardness, motion; it 
will be at all times necessary for him to draw the materials 
of his reasoning from his own internal resources; that is, 
from his consciousness. It may reasonably be supposed that 
this habit of reflection, if once it become fixed, will be at¬ 
tended with a facility of withdrawing at pleasure from the 
world that is without to that which is within; and that an 
inexhaustible fund of intellectual amusement and benefit 
will be found, in carrying on those trains of thought to 
which the topics of the Intellectual Philosophy will 
give rise, even during those otherwise vacant remnants 
of time, which occur to every individual, apart from 
the apparatus of books, or the intercourse of society. 
Nor is this kind of contemplation a mere luxury of the mind, 
or even a source of intellectual improvement only, to the 
aspirant after learning: if self-knowledge be so important in 
its moral tendencies, that the exhortation of the Grecian 
sage, 44 Know thyself,” was deserving of the encomium of 
the Roman poet, who pronounced it to be a celestial inspi¬ 
ration *, surely those mental inquiries may justly be regarded 
as friendly to virtue, which tend to cherish an intimate ae- 


* E ccelo descendit yvuQt —Juv. 


32 


quaintance with the various sources of human thought and 
feeling, and the various springs of human action. 

It is equally unnecessary, after what has already been 
said on the subject of education in general, to enlarge on 
the bearing of intellectual studies on those departments of it 
which are professional . The elementary parts of a complete 
education, as recommended in the Statement above alluded 
to, published by the founders of the University, must evi¬ 
dently be the same in all cases; and the third year has been 
considered as a suitable period for attending the Class of 
Mental Philosophy and Logic. Some, however, it may be 
presumed, who may have received elsewhere their earlier 
institution, and who are designed either for the professions 
or for general life, may be inclined to avail themselves of 
the opportunity which is presented to them of being trained 
to an acquaintance with a branch of knowledge which is 
not to be regarded merely in the light of an elegant ac¬ 
complishment, but as a diffusive principle, which may, most 
advantageously, exercise a presiding influence over all the 
active employments of human life. 

It is probable that, in the course of time, not a few persons 
who are students of Theology in other Colleges of Learning, 
will be found availing themselves of some of the secular ad¬ 
vantages afforded by an Institution which, while its prospe¬ 
rity rests on the basis of enlightened public opinion, is of 
no party ; which is founded with a view of promoting every 
species of human learning, on the rational and equitable 
principle of declining all claim to a control over that sacred 
and inalienable right of private judgment in regard to Re¬ 
ligion, for the exercise of which man can only be amenable 
to a higher than human tribunal; and which, even granting 
that it be perverted and abused to error, is incapable, from 
the very nature of the human will, of being restored to its pro¬ 
per use, by any civil privations or penal inflictions, which are 
alone the appropriate antagonists of whatever immediately 
tends to the disturbance of public security and social order. 

The influence of the Philosophy of Mind on the sacred 


avocations to which students in Theology are looking forward 
is peculiarly great and obvious. It is incumbent on them not 
to be satisfied with being the mere superficial organs of a po¬ 
pular and showy declamation, but to be intimately acquainted 
with human nature under its various diversified aspects. As 
their appeal to mankind, moreover, must constantly pro¬ 
ceed on the validity of the claims of the Jewish and Christian 
Scriptures to our belief, as invested with the authority of 
God, whatever relates to evidence and reasoning is an 
indispensable part of their mental furniture. It pecu¬ 
liarly belongs to those who are the professed votaries 
of truth for its own sake , to acquire the habit of close and 
patient thinking, to obtain an intellectual independence of 
character, which resists every thing that is merely of the 
nature of hypothesis, yielding at the same time a manly and 
implicit deference to the authority of fact, and adequate tes¬ 
timony, though this may not ^infrequently involve conse¬ 
quences, which, in some of their bearings, may transcend the 
limits of the human understanding, and may not be the 
proper objects of its powers of comprehension. 

Much of the intellectual discipline which has been referred 
to, may to some extent, be applied also to the professions 
both of medicine and law. In each of these, great accuracy 
of discrimination and patience of research are frequently de¬ 
manded ; and the most momentous conclusions often depend 
on a balance of probabilities, which it may require extreme 
, attention and caution to view in their proper light and 
bearings. Hence the importance of that general preparatory 
discipline which the topics of the Intellectual Philosophy and 
Logic are fitted to afford: the nature, for example, of the 
different kinds of evidence; the subjects to which they are 
applicable, especially moral evidence, and its degrees; the 
proper limits both of doubt and of belief, together with the 
various circumstances by which they may be influenced ; and 
other similar inquiries.—To the medical practitioner it is 
highly desirable, to say the least, that he should be a 
mental philosopher, when we consider the very intimate 


34 


though inexplicable union which subsists between body and 
mind, the aberrations incident to the latter, and their con¬ 
stant reciprocal effects and reactions, as often witnessed in 
disease ; not to mention the frequent importance of a certain 
tact, in manners and behaviour, tending to obviate excite¬ 
ment, and dependent, in a great measure, on the skilful 
avoidance of unnecessary painful associations ; in which, by 
the way, politeness in general, may be said chiefly to consist. 

Finally, if general business be the object in which edu¬ 
cation is designed to terminate, it is needless to insist on the 
utility of that acquaintance with human nature, and that 
intellectual discipline, which are so well calculated to aid 
in the formation of those practical habits which are essential 
to the active pursuits of life. 

In bringing these remarks to a conclusion, deferring a 
more detailed view of the Course till the meeting of the Class 
shall take place, the writer cannot refrain from stating, that, 
although he is not unaware of the arduous nature of those 
duties which will devolve on him as Professor of the Phi¬ 
losophy of Mind and Logic, he cannot but feel encouraged 
in reflecting on the success with which a similar field of 
labour was cultivated in the University of Glasgow, by the 
late venerable Professor Jardine ; many of whose students 
have been known to ascribe their progress in future life, in 
their several professions and avocations, in a great degree, 
to the early and effective discipline of their intellectual fa¬ 
culties, in the Class over which he presided, with so much 
popularity and usefulness, for more than half a century. If 
it be too much for those who tread in the steps of this di¬ 
stinguished Teacher to hope for all his success, it is at least 
competent to them in some measure to emulate his zeal. 