This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



^H 



ai2.- to ' S 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 




TBB 

CABINET CYCLOPEDIA. 



** HOMO, NATURiB llINUTfA KT IVTC&rKSS^ TAMTUM FACIT IT 
** INTKLLIGIT QUAHTUM DB VATOKM OEDIMX ES VSL MXlfTX OB> 
<< SERVAVSRIT ; NSC AUTUVSttn ATJT POmT." 

Ba<^k, Noyttm Oroakum, Apbor. 1. 

man, as thx mxnistbr and intxrr&bne of naturi, ii 
limitid in act and undkrstandino bt bj8 observation of 
the order of nature! neithee bib enowledoe nor his 
fowbr extends faethee. 



Lohdoh; 
FMnltd bj A. tc tL ^po W iwoodCg 



o 



CABINET CYCLOPiEDIA. 

CONDUCTED BT THE 

REV. DIONTSIUS LARDNEB, LL.D. F.R.a L.&E. 
HILLA. F.&a Ast F.I.a F.Z.& Hoa F.CP.& te ttc 

A88ISTBD XT 

EMINENT LITERART AND SCIENTIFIC MSN 



^ 



Natural pBtlotfoiiBp^ 

^i 

A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE 
OK 

THE STUDY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 



J. F. W. HERSCHEL^ ESQ. M.A. 

or n*. J0HIf*8 COUBGI, CAMBUOOI. 







LONDO 



LOHOMAN, REE9, ORME, BROWN, AND tissiEir • 



PATSBIf OnBI-BOW ; 

AND JOHN TAYLOR, 

DPFBR CM>WBB RRBBT. 

1831. 



^Wa3::i.L.S' 



^RD COl_,r^ 





^Bn^^H, 









-D V 



¦." -> 



, J'io-:i.i.yf.>:iiti nisroiii.st: 

JOH5 FHEDEBICK WIU-IA5I ri;:RSrlIEL.ESQ..\J!. 




CONTENTS. 



PART L 
or «HS onrxBAi KATumz avb adtavtaom or tbx itvst or 

THX rHTSICAL SCIXNCX8. 

CHAP. I. 

Of Mm regarded as a Greature of Instmct, of Reason, and 
Speculation.— General Influence of Scientific Punuits on 
the Hind. .... Pagel 

CHAP. 11. 



Of abstract Science as a Pieparadon for the Study of Physics. 
--• A profound Acquaintance with it not indispensable for a 
clear Undertfaniffng of Physical Laws.—- How a CouTiction 
of their IVuth may be obtained without it.— Instances. — 
Further Division of the Subject . . 18 

CHAP. IIL 

Of the Nature and Otjects^ iimnpdiate and collateral, of Phy- 
sical Science, as regarded in itself and in its Application to 
the practical Purposes of life, and its Influence on the Well- 
bsbg and Progress of Society. . . 85 






VI CONTENTS. 



PART n. 

OF THE PUKCIPLX8 OK WHICH FHTSICAL SCaNOX WKUMS ffOE 
ITS SUCCXSSrUL PK08XCUTI0K, AND THI KULX8 BY WHICH ? 
STSTXMATIC XXAMINATION OF KATD&X SHOULD BX OOXDUCXXDi 
WITH ILLUSTXATIONS OF THXIX IMFLUXVCX AS XXXKFUFIXS 
IK THX HI8T0XY OF ITS PXOORXSS. 

CHAP. I. 

Of Experience as the Source of our Knowledge.— Of the Dii* 
nussal of Fftjudices.^ Of the Evidence of our Senses. 

Page 75 

CHAP. II. 
Of the Analysis of Phenomena. « - 85 

CHAP. III. 

Of the State of Phyncal Science in General^ prarious to the 
Age of Galileo and Bacon. - - 10* 

CHAP. IV. 

Of the Observation of Facts and the Collection of Instances. 

118 

CHAP. V. 

Of the Clasnfication of Natural Objects and Phenomena, and 
of Nomenclature. - - - 135 

CHAP. VI.* 

Of the First Stage of Induction. — Tlie Discovery of Proxi- 
mate Causes, and Laws of the lowest Degree of Generality, 
and their Verification. ... 144 

CHAP. VIL 

Of the higher Degrees of Inductive Generalixation, and of the 
Formatioii and Verification of Theories. - 190 



CONTENTS. TU 



PART m. 

or THS BUBDTmioir or thtsxcs ikto DinzKcx nAVcmSy 

?KB TBXa. XUTUAI. KELATIOITS. 

CHAP. I. 

Of the Ffaenomeiia of Force, and of the Conidtution of 
Natural Bodies. . . ^ ¦ Page 221 

CHAP. II. 

Of the Commuiiication of Motion through Bodies. — Of 
Sound and light. .... 24G 

CHAP. III. 
Of Cosmical Phenomena. ... 265 

CHAP. IV. 

Of the Examination of the material Conatitnents of the 
World. ..... 290 

CHAP. V. 
Of the Imponderable Forms of Matter. * 310 

CHAP. VI. 

Of the Causes of the actual rapid Advance of the Physical 
Sciences compared with their Progress at an earlier P^od. 

847 



THE 

CABINET CYCLOPiEDIA. 



^ DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

state of absolute helplessness, or &lis in old age into 
such protracted and lamentable imbecility. To no 
other warm-blooded animal has nature demed that 
indispensable covering without which the vicissitudes 
of a temperate and the rigours of a cold climate are 
equally insupportable ; and to scarcely any has she 
been so sparing in external weapons, whether for 
attack or defence. Destitute alike of speed to avoid 
and of arms to repel the aggressions of his vora- 
cious foes; tenderly susceptible of atmospheric in- 
fluences ; and unfitted for the coarse aliments which 
the earth affords spontaneously during at least two 
thirds of tlie year, even in temperate climates, — 
man, if abandoned to mere instinct, would be of all 
creatures the most destitute and miserable. Dis- 
tracted by terror and goaded by famine ; driven to 
the most abject expedients for concealment from his 
enemies, and to the most cowardly devices for the 
seizure and destruction of his nobler prey, his exist- 
ence would be one continued subterfuge or stratagem; 
— his dwelling would be in dens of the earth, in clefts 
of rocks, or in the hollows of trees ; his food worms, 
and the lower reptilei^ or such few and crude pro- 
ductions of the soil as his organs could be brought 
to assimilate, varied with occasional relics, mangled 
by more powerful beasts of prey, or contemned by 
their more pdtapered choice. Remarkable only 
for the absence of those powers and qualities 
which obtain for other animals a degree of security 
and respect, he would be disregarded by some, and 
hunted down by others, till afler a few generations 
his species would become altogether extinct, or, at 
best, would be restricted to ^ few islands in tropical 



OF NATURAL PfllLOflOPHT. 



regions, where the warmth of the diinate»the paucitj 
of enemies, and the abuncbmce of vegetable food, 
might permit it to linger. 

(2.) Yet man is the midisputed lord of the crea- 
tion. The strongest and fiercest of his fellow- 
creatm'es, — the whale, the elephant, the eagle, and 
the tiger, — are slaughtered by him to supply his most 
capricious wants, or tamed to do him senrice, or im- 
prisoned to make him sport. The spoils of all nature 
are in daily requisition for his most common uses, 
yielded with more or less readiness, or wrested 
with reluctance, from the mine, the forest, the 
ocean, and the air. Such are the first fruits of 
reason. Were they the only or the principal ones, 
were the mere acquisition of power over the ma- 
terials, and the less gifted animals which surround 
us, and the consequent increase of our external 
comforts, and our means of preservation and sensual 
enjo3rment, the sum of the privileges which the pos- 
session of this faculty conferred, we should afler all 
have little to plume ourselves upon. But this is so far 
from being the case, that every one who passes his life 
intolerable ease and comfort, or rather whose whole 
time is not anxiously consumed in providing the ab- 
solute necessaries of existence, is conscious of wants 
and cravings in which the senses have no part, of a 
series of pains and pleasures totally distinct in kind 
from any which the infliction of bodOy misery or the 
gratification of bodily appetites has ever afforded him ; 
and if he has experienced these pleasures and these 
pains in any degree of intensity, he wUl readily admit 
them to hold a much higher rank, and to deserve much 
more attention, than the former class. Independent dt 

B 2 



/ 



,v 



4 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

the pleasures of fimcyand imagination^ and social con- 
T- verse, man is constituted a speculative being ; he con- 
\ templates the world, and the objects around him, not 
with a passive, indifferent gaze, as a set of pheno- 
mena in which he has no further interest than as 
they affect his immediate situation, and can be ren- 
dered subservient to his comfort, but as a system 
disposed with order and design. He approves and 
feels the highest admiration for the harmony of its 
parts, the skill and efficiency of its contrivances. 
Some of these which he can best trace and under- 
stand he attempts to imitate, and finds that to a 
certain extent, though rudely and imperfectly, he 
can succeed, — in oUiers, that although he can com- 
prehend the nature of the contrivance, he is totally 
destitute of all means of imitation; — while in others, 
again, and those evidently the most important, though 
he sees the effect produced, yet the means by which 
it is done are alike beyond his knowledge and his 
control. Thus he is led to the conception of a 
Power and an Intelligence superior to his own, and 
adequate to the production and maintenance of all 
that he sees in nature, — a Power and Intelligence 
to which he may well apply the term infinite, since 
he not only sees no actual limit to the instances in 
which tliey are manifested, but finds, on the con- 
trary, that the &rther he enquires^ and the wider 
his sphere of observation extends, they continually 
open upon him in increasing abundance ; and that 
as the study of one prepares him to understand 
and appreciate another, refinement follows on re- 
finement, wonder on wonder, till his faculties 
become bewildered in admiration, and his intellect 



OV NAT0BAL PHILOSOPHT. 5 

&ll8 back on itself in utter hopelessness of arriving \ 
at an end. 

(3.) When from external olijects he turns his view 
upon himself, on his own vital and intellectual &cul- 
tiesy he finds that he possesses a power of ex« 
amining and analysing his own nature to a certain 
extent, but no fiirther. In his corporeal firame he is 
sensible of a power to communicate a certain mode- 
rate amount of motion to himself and other objects ; 
that this power depends on his will, and that its ex- 
ertion can be suspended or increased at pleasure 
within certun limits ; but how his will acts on his 
limbs he has no consciousness : and whence he de- 
rives the power he thus exercises, there is nothing to 
assure him, however he may long to know. His 
senses, too, inform him of a multitude of particulars 
respecting the external world, and he perceives an 
apparatus by which impressions from without maybe 
transmitted, as a sort of signals to the interior of his 
person, and ultimately to his brain, wherein he is 
obscurely sensible that the thinking, feeling, reason- 
ing being he caQs himseify more especially resides ; 
but by what means he becomes conscious of these 
impressions, and what is the nature of the immediate 
communication between that inward sentient being, 
and that machineiy, his outward man, he has not 
the slightest conception, 

(4.) Again, when he contemplates still more 
attentively the thoughts, acts, and passions of this 
his sentient intelligent self, he finds, indeed, that 
he can remember, and by the aid of memory can 
compare and discriminate, can judge and resolve, 
and, above all, that he is irresistibly impelled, firom 

B 3 



6 DI8COUE8E OX THS STUDY , 

the perception of any phenomenon widiout or within 
him, to infer the existence of something prior which 
stands to it in the relation of a cause, without which 
it would not be, and that this knowledge of causes 
and their consequences is what, in almost every in- 
stance, determines his choice and will, incases where 
he is nevertheless conscious of perfect freedom to 
act or not to act He finds, too, that it is in his 
power to acquire more or less knowledge of causes 
and effects according to the degree of attention he 
bestows upon them, which attention is again in great 
measure a voluntary act ; and often when his choice 
has been decided on imperfect knowledge or insuffi- 
cient attention, he finds reason to correct his judg- 
ment, though perhaps too late to influence his deci- 
I sion by after consideration. A world within him is 
thus opened to his intellectual view, abounding with 
phenomena and relations, and of the highest imme- 
diate interest But while he cannot help perceiving 
that tlie msight he is enabled to obtain into this mtemal 
sphere of thought and feeling is in reality the source 
of all his power, the very fountain of his predominance 
over external nature, he yet feels himself capable of 
entering only very imperfectly into these recesses of 
his own bosom, and analysing the operations of his 
mind, — in this as in all other things, in short, ^< a being 
darkly ttnse;** seeing that all the longest life and most 
vigorous intellect can give him power to discover by 
his own research, or time to know by availing him- 
self of that of others, serves only to place him on 
the very frontier of knowledge, and afford a distant 
glimpse of boundless realms beyond, where no human 
thought has penetrated, but which yet he is sure 



or HATint^L. PBnLoaoPHT. t 

must be no less fimuUnrly known to that Inldligeace 
which he truces throughout creation than the moat 
obyious trnths which he hipMolf daily apfdies to his 
most trifling purposes. <Is it wonderful that a being 
so constituted should first encourage a hope, and by 
degrees acknowledge an assurance^ that his ini 
tellectual existence will not terminate with the * 
dissolution of his corporeal firame> but rather that in 
a future state of beings disencumbered of a thousand 
obstructions which his present situation throws in 
his wayi endowed with acuter senses, and higher fii- 
culdeSft he shall drink deep at that fountain of bene- 
fio^t wisdom for which the slight taste. obtained on 

earth has giv^n him so keen a relish ? > y c -t 

(5») Nothing, then, can be more ur^ounded than I 
the olgection which has been taken, tn Unwmtt 
by persons, well meaning perhaps, certainly nar- 
vow-minded, against the study of natural philosophy, 
and indeed against all science, — - that it fosters in its 
cultivators an undue and overweening self-conceit, 
leads them to doubt the immortality of the soul, and 
to scoff at revealed religion. Its natural effect, we 
may confidently assert, on every well constituted 
mind is and must be the direct contrary. No doubt, 
the testimony of natural reason, on whatever exer- 
cised, mu3t of necessity stop short of those truths 
which it is the olyect of revelation to make known ; 
but, while it places the existence and principal attri- 
butes of a Deity on such grounds as to render doubt 
absurd and atheism ridiculous, it unquestionably op- 
poses no natural or necessary obstacle to further pro- 
gress : on the contrary, by cherishing as a vital prin- 
pi^ an unbounded spirit of enquiry, and ardency of 

B 4 



8 DISCOURSE ON tHE STUDY 

expectation, it unfetters the mind from prejudices of 
every kind, and leaves it open and free to every 
impression of a higher nature which it is susceptible 
of receiving, guarding only against enthusiasm and 
self-deception by a habit of strict investigation, but 
encouraging, rather than suppressing, every thing 
' that can offer a prospect or a hope beyond the present 
• obscure and unsatisfactory state. The character of 
the true philosopher is to hope all things not impos- 
sible, and to believe all things not unreasonable. He 
who has seen obscurities which appeared impenetra* 
ble in physical and mathematical science suddenly 
dispelled, and the most barren and unpromising 
fields of enquiry converted, as if by inspiration, 
into rich and inexhaustible springs of knowledge 
and power on a simple change of our point of view, 
or by merely bringing to bear on them some prin- 
ciple which it never occurred before to try, will 
surely be the very last to acquiesce in any dispirit- 
ing prospects of either the present or future des- 
tinies of mankind ; while, on the other hand, the 
boundless views of intellectual and moral as well as 
material relations which open on him on all hands 
in the course of these pursuits, the knowledge of 
the trivial place he occupies in the scale of creation, 
and the sense continually pressed upon him of his 
own weakness and incapacity to suspend or modify 
the slightest movement of the vast machinery he 
sees in action around him, must effectually convince 
him that humility of pretension, no less than confi- 
dence of hope, is what best becomes his character. 

(6.) But while we thus vindicate the study of 
natural phDosophy from a charge at one time for- 



or NATURAL VHU.080PHT. 9 

midable from the perdnacity and acrimony with 
which it was urged, and still occasionally brought 
forward to the distress and disgust of every well 
constituted mind, we must take care that the testi- 
mony afforded by science to religion, be its extent or 
value what it may, shall be at least independent, 
unbiassed, and spontaneous. We do not here allude 
to such reasoners as would make all nature bend to 
their narrow interpretations of obscure and difficult 
passages in the sacred writings : such a course might 
well become the persecutors of Galileo and the other 
bigots of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, but 
can only be adopted by dreamers in the present age* 
But, without going these lengths, it is no uncommon 
^ling to find persons, earnestly attached to science 
and anxious for its promotion, who yet manifest a mor- 
bid sensibility on points of this kind, — who exult and 
applaud when any &ct starts up explanatory (as they 
suppose) of some scriptural allusion, and who feel 
pained and disappointed when the general course 
of discovery in any department of science runs wide 
of the notions with which particular passages in the 
Bible may have impressed themselves. To persons 
of such a frame of mind it ought to suffice to remarl^ 
on the one hand, that truth can never be opposed to 
truth, and, on the other, that error is only to be 
effectually confounded by searching deep and tracing 
it to its source. Nevertheless, it were much to be 
wished that such persons, estimable and excellent 
as they for the most part are, before they throw 
the weight of their applause or discredit into 
the scale of scientific opinion on such grounds, 
would reflect, first, that the credit and respect- 



r 



10 j^iscouRas oir thb study 

ability of amy eyidenee may be destroyed by 

tampering with its honesty ; and^ secondly, that this 

very disposition of mind implies a lurking mistrust 

in its own principles^ since the grand and indeed 

I j imly character of truth is its capability of enduring 

\\ the test of universal experience, and coming ua- 

^ changed out of every possible form oi fair dis- 

H cnssion. 

(7*) But if sci^ice may be vilified by representing 
it as opposed to religion, or trammelled by mis- 
taken notions of the danger ci free enquiry, there 
is yet another mode by which it may be degraded 
from its native dignity, and that is by placing it in 
the light of a mere appendage to and caterer for our 
I pampered appetites. The question ^*c%d bono" to 
I what practical end and advantage do your researches 
i tend ? is cme which the speculative philosopher who 
loves knowledge for its own sake, and enjoys, as a 
rational being should enjoy, the mere contemplation 
of harmonious and mutually dependent truths, can 
seldom hear without a sense of humiliation. He 
1 feels that there is a lofty and disinterested pleasure 
I hi his speculations which ought to exempt them 
I from such questioning ; communicating as they do 
\ to his own mind the purest happiness (after the 
Exercise of the benevolent and moral feelings) of 
which human nature is susceptible, and tending to 
the injury of no one, he might surely allege (Ms as 
a sufficient and direct reply to those who, having 
themselves little capacity, and less relish for intel- 
lectud pursuits, are constantly repeating upon him 
thb enquiry. But if he can bring himself to 
descend from this high but faax ground, and justifV 



\ 



OF KATURAL PHXLOaOFHY* 11 

Umselfy his ponoitsy and his pleasorea in the ejes 
of those around him, he has only to point to the 
histmy of aU science, where specirfatinna appar* 
c»tly the most unprofitable have ahnost inrari^blj 
been those firom whieh the greatest practical appli- 
cations have emanated. What, for instance, could 
be i^yparendy more unprofitable than the dry spe- 
culations of the ancient geometers on the proper- 
ties of the conic sections, or than the dreams of 
Kqpiler (as they would naturally appear to his 
(xmtemporaries) about the numerical harmonies of 
the uniyerse? Yet these are the steps by which we 
have risen to a Imewledge of the elliptic motions of 
the i^anets and the law of gravitation, with all its 
splendid theoretical consequences, and its inestima- 
ble practical results. The ridicule attached to 
** Swrng'Swaings^ in Ho<Ae's time * did not prevent 
him from reviving the proposal of the pendnkan as 
a standard of measure, since so effectually wrought 
into practiee by the genius and perseverance of 
C2^tain Kater;— 'Uor did that which Boyle en- 
countered in his researches on the elasticity and 
pressure of the air act as any obstacle to tiie train i \ 
of discovery which terminated in the steam-engine. 1 
The dreams of the alchemists led them on in the path 
of experiment, and drew attention to the wonders of 
chemistry, while tiiey brought their advocates (it 
must be admitted) to. merited contempt and ruin. 
But in this case it was moral dereliction which gave 
to ridicule a weight and power not necessarily or 
naturally beloi^ing to it : but among the alchemists 

• HcKike's PocOmmous Woilu. Loud. 1705.— p. 478. 
and ^, 458. 



12 DISCOURSX ON THE STUDT 

were men of superior minds, who reasoned while they 
worked, and who, not content to grope always in the 
dark, and blunder on their object, sought carefully * 
in the observed nature of their agents for guides in 
their pursuits ; — to these we owe the creation of ex* 
perimental philosophy. 

(8.) Not that it is meant, by any thing above 
said, to assert that there is no such thing as a great 
or a little in speculative philosophy, or to place the 
solution of an enigma on a level with the develope- 
ment of a law of nature, still less to adopt the 
homely definition of Smith *, that a philosopher is 
a person whose trade it is to do nothing, and specu- 
late on every thing. The speculations of the na- 
tural phUosopher, however remote they may for a 
time lead him from beaten tracks and every-day 
uses, being grounded in the realities of nature, have 
all, of necessity, a practical application, — nay more, 
such applications form the very criterions of their 
truth, they afford the readiest and completest veri- 
fications of his theories ; — verifications which he 
will no more neglect to test them by than an arith- 
metician would omit to prove his sums, or a cautious 
geometer to try his general theorem^ by particular 
cases, f •: 

*, Wealth of Nations, book L cfaap. L p. 15. 
I i* On this subject, we cannot foibear citing a passage firom 
<jone of the most inxifound but at the same time pqpular writers 
of our dme^ on a subject unconnected it is true with our own, 
but bearing strongly on the point before us. " But, if science 
be manifestl/ incomplete, and yet of the highest importance, 
it would surely be most unwise to restrain enquiry, conducted 
on just principles, even where the immediate practical utility 
.of it was not visible. In mathematics, chemistry, and every 
branch of natural philosophy, how many an the enquiries 



OV HATUaAL PBIX.OSOPHT. 13 

- (9.) After aU, howcTer, it must be confessed^ 
tiiat to mrnds unacquainted with science, and unused 
to consider the mutual dependencies of its various 
branches, there is something neither unnatural nor 
altogether blamable in the ready occurrence of this 
question of direct advantage. It requires some 
habit of abstraction, some penetration of the mind 
with a tincture of scientific enquiry, some con- 
viction of the value of those estimable and trea- 
sured principles which lie concealed in the most 
common and homely facts, — some experience, in 
fine, of success in developing and placing them in 
evidence, announcing them in precise terms, and 
ai^lying them to the explanation of other fiicts of a 
les& familiar character, or to the accomplishment of 
some obviously useful purpose : — to cure the mind 
of this tendency to rush at once upon its object, 
to undervalue iixe means in over-estimation of the 
end, and while gazing too intently at the goal which 
alone it has been accustomed to desire, to lose sight 
of the richness and variety of the prospects that 
offer themselves on either hand on the road. 

(10.) We must never forget that it is principles, 
not phenomena, — laws, not insulated independent 



necessary for their improvement and completion, wlddiy takea 
.separately, do not appear to lead to any speciBcally adyaa- 
tageous purpose ! how many useful inventious, and how much 
valuable and improving knowledge, would have been lost, if a 
rational curiosity, and a mere love of information, had not 
generally been allowed to be a sufficient motive for the search 
after truth !" — Malthus's Principles of Political Economy^ 
p. 16* 



14« DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

facts,— -which are the objects of enquiry to the na- 
tural philosopher. As truth is single, and consistent' 
with itself, a principle maj be as completely and as 
plainly elucidated by the most familiar and simple 
fact, as by the most imposing and uncommon phe- 
nomenon. The colours which glitter on a soap- 
bubble are the immediate consequence of a principle 
the most important from the variety of phenomena 
it explains, and the most beautiful, irom its simpli- 
city and compendious neatness, in the whole science 
of optics. If the nature of periodical colours can be 
made intelligible by the contemplation of such a 
trivial object, from that moment it becomes a noble 
instrument in the eye of correct judgment; and to 
blow a large, regular, and durable soap-bubble may 
become the serious and praiseworthy endeavour of 
a sage, while children stand round and scoff, or 
children of a larger growth hold up their hands in 
astonishment at such waste of time and trouble* 
To the natural philosopher there is no natural 
object unimportant or trifling. From the least of 
nature's works he may learn the greatest lessons. 
The fall of an apple to the ground may raise his 
thoughts to the laws which govern the revolutions 
of the planets in their orbits ; or the situation of a 
pebble may afford him evidence of the state of the 
globe he inhabits, mpiads of ages ago, before his 
species became its denizens. 

(11.) And this is, in fact, one of the great sources 
of delight which the study of natural science imparts 
to its votaries. A mind which has once imbibed a 
taste for scientific enquiry, and has learnt the habit 



OF KATT7RAL PHILOSOPHY. IS 

at appljring its principles readily lo the cases which 
occur, has within itself an inexhaustible soiiroe of 
pure and exciting contemplations : — one would 
think that Shakspeare had such a mind in view when 
he describes a contemplative man as finding 

« Tongues in trees — books in tbe ninning broc^— 
Sennons in stones— and good in every thing." 

Accustomed to trace the opemtion of general 
causes, and the exemplification of general laws, in 
circumstances where the uninformed and unenquir- 
ing eye perceives neither novelty nor beauty, he 
walks in the midst of wonders : every object which ? 
Mh in his way elucidates some principle, affords I 
some instruction, and impresses him with a sense of | . 
harmony and order. Nor is it a mere passive plea- 
sure which is &US communicated. A thousand 
questions are continuaUy arising in his mind, a 
thousand subjects of enquiry presenting themselves, 
winch keep his Acuities in constant exercise, and 
bis thoughts perpetually on the wing, so that lassi- 
tude is excluded from his life, and that craving 
after artificial excitement and dissipation of mind, 
. which leads so many into frivolous, unworthy, and 
destructive pursuits, is altogether eradicated from 
his bosom. 

(12.) It is not one of the least advantages of these 

A pursuits^ which, however, they possess in c ommon 

' .^Vitii every class oflntellectual yrfeasures ^ that' ^ey 

' are altogether ind ependent of cis ternal circ 

' stsjicesj and are to be enjoyed in every situation in 

wKch a man -ean be placed in life. The liighest 

degrees of worldly prosperity are so iar from being 






f ,/ 



16 PISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

incompatible with them, that they supply additional 
advantages for their pursuit, and that sort of fresh 
and renewed relish which arises partly from the 
sense of contrast, partly from experience of the 
peculiar pre-eminence they possess over the plea- 
sures of sense in their capability of unlimited in- 
crease and continual repetition without satiety or 
distaste. They may be enjoyed, too, in the in- 
tervals of the most active business ; and the calm 
and dispassionate interest with which they fill the 
mind renders them a most delightful retreat from 
the agitations and dissensions of the world, and 
from the conflict of passions, prejudices, and in- 
terests in which the man of business finds himself 
continually involved. There is something in the 
contemplation of general laws which powerfully per- 
il suades us to jnerg e individual feeling, and to commit 
ourselves imreservedly to their disposal ; while the 
observation of the calm, energetic regularity of na- 
ture, the immense scale of her operations, and the 
certainty with which her ends are attained, tends, 
irresistibly, to tranquillize and re-assure the mind, 
and render it less accessible to repining, selfish, and 
turbulent emotions. And this it does, not by debas- 
ing our nature into weak compliances and abject 
submission to circumstances, but by filling us, as 
from an inward spring, with a sense of nobleness 
and power which enables us to rise superior to them; 
by showing us our strength and innate dignity, and 
by calling upon us for the exercise of those powers 
and faculties by which we are susceptible of the 
comprehension of so much greatness, and which 
form, as it were, a link between ourselves and the 



I 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 17 

best and noblest bene&ctors of our species^ with 
whom we hold conmninion in thoughts and partici- 
pate in discoveries which have raised them above 
their fellow-mortals, and brought them nearer to 
their Creator. 



c 



/" 



IS mSCOUBSE ON THB STUDY 



CHAP. n. 

OF ABSTRACT SCIENCE AS A PREPARATION FOR THB 
STUDY OF PHYSICS. — A PROFOUND ACQUAINTANCE 
WITH IT NOT INDISPENSABLE FOR A CLEAR UNDER- 
STANDING OF PHYSICAL LAWS. — HOW A CONVICTION 
OF THEIR TRUTH HAY BE OBTAINED WITHOUT IT. — 
INSTANCES. — FURTHER DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT. 

(13.) Science is the knowledge of many, orderly 
and methodically digested and arranged, so as to 
become attainable by one. The knowledge of reasons 
and their conclusions constitutes abstracty that of 
causes and their effects, and of the laws of nature, 
natural science. 

(14.) Abstract science is independent of a system 
of nature, — of a creation, — of every thing, in short, 
except memory, thought, and reason. Its objects 
are, first, those primary existences and relations 
which we cannot even conceive not to 6e, such as 
space, time, number, order, &c.; and, secondly, 
those artificial forms, or sjrmbols, which- thought 
has the power of creating for itself at pleasure, 
and substitutmg as representatives, by the aid of 
memory, for combinations of those primary objects 
and of its own conceptions, — either to fiicilitate the 
act of reasoning respecting them, or as convenient 
deposits of its own conclusions, or for their com- 
munication to others. Such are, first, languagey 
oral or written ; its conventional forms, which con- 
stitute grammar, and the rules for its use in argument. 



07 NATUmAL PHILOSOVHT. 19 

in which cxinsists the logic of the schools ; secondlj, 
fttibOiony which, applied to mmAer^ is onfftmc^,*- 
and, to the more general reladons of abstract qium- 
tity or order, is algebra; and^ thirdly, that higher 
kind of logic, which teaches us to use our reason in 
the most advanti^eous manner for the discovery isi 
truth ; whftch points out the criterions by which we 
may be sure we have attained it; and which, by 
detecting the sources* of error, and exposing the 
haunts where fallacies are apt to lurk, at once warns 
us of their danger, and shows us how to avoid them. 
This greats logic may be termed raHonai*; while, 
to that inferiOT department which is conversant with 
wmrds alone, the epithet verMf may, for distmc- 
don, be affiled. 

(15.) A certain moderate d^ee of aequiuntance 
with abstract science is highly desirable to every 
one who would make any considerable progress in 
^ysics« As the universe exists in time and place ; 
and as motion^ velocity, quantity, number, and 
order, are mam elements of our knowledge of ex- 
ternal things and their changes^ an acquaintance 
with these, abstractedly considered, (that is to say, 
independent of any consideration of the particular 
things moved, measured, counted, or arranged,) 
must evidently be a useftil preparation for the more 
complex study of nature. But there is yet another 
recommendation of such sciences as a preparation 
for the study of natural philosophy. Their objects 
are so definite, and our notions of them so distinct, 
that we can reason about them with an assurance, 

* AoyoSt ratiof reason* f Aayost verhum, a word. 

C 2 



20 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

that the words and signs used in our reasonings 
are full and true representatives of the things sig- 
nified; and, consequently^ that when we use lan- 
guage or signs in argument, we neither, by their 
use, introduce extraneous nations, nor exclude any 
part of the case before us friom consideration. For 
example : the words space, square, circle, a hundred, 
&c., convey to the mind notions so complete in 
themselves, and so distinct from every thing else, 
that we are sure when we use them we know and 
have in view the whole of our own meaning. It is 
widely different with words expressing natural ob- 
jects and mixed relations. Take, for instance, iron. 
Different persons attach very different ideas to this 
word. One who has never heard of ma^etism has 
a widely different notion of iron from one in the 
contrary predicament. The vulgar, who regard this 
metal as incombustible, and the chemist, who sees 
it bum with the utmost fury, and who has other 
reasons for regarding it as one of the most com- 
bustible bodies in nature ; — the poet, who uses it as 
an emblem of rigidity ; and the smith and engineer, 
in whose hands it is plastic, and moulded like wax 
into every form ; — the jailer, who prizes it as an 
obstruction, and the electrician, who sees in it only a 
channel of open communication by which that most 
impassable of obstacles, the air, may be traversed 
by his imprisoned fluid, have ail different, and all 
imperfect, notions of the same word. The meaning 
of such a term is like a rainbow — every body sees a 
different one, and all maintain it to be the same. 
So it is with nearly all our terms of sense. Some 
lire indefinite, as hard or soft, light or heavy (terms 



OF NATURAL FHIL080PHT. 21 

which were at one time the sources of innumerable 
mistakes and controversies) ; some excessively com- 
plex, as man, life, instinct. But, what is worst of 
all, some, nay most, have two or three meanings; 
sufficiently distinct from each other to make a pro- 
position true in one sense and false in another, or 
even false altogether; yet not distinct enough to 
keep us from confounding them in the process by 
which we*anrived at it, or to enable us immediately 
to recognise the fallacy when led to it by a train of 
reasoning, each step of which we lAtnA we have 
examined and approved. Surely those who thus 
attach two senses to one word, or superadd a new 
meaning to an old one, act as absurdly as colonists 
who distribute themselves over the world, naming 
every place they come to by the names of those 
they have left, till ail distinctions of geographical 
nomenclature are confounded, and till we are unable 
to decide whether an occurrence stated to have 
happened at Windsor took place in Europe, Ame- 
rica, or Australia.* 

(16.) It is, in &ct,in this double or incomplete sense 
of words that we must look for the origin of a very 
lai^ portion of the errors into which we &I1. Now, 
the study of the abstract sciences, such as arithmetic, 
geometry, algebra, &c., while they afford scope for 
the exercise of reasoning about objects that are, or, 
at least, may be conceived to be, external to us ; 



* It were mudh to be wished tbat navigators would be more 
cautious in laying themselves open to a similar censure. On 
looking hastily over a map of the world we see three Melville 
Tf1<^«i«j two King George's Sounds, and Cape Blancos innu- 
menble. 

C 3 



^ BIfiOOURSS ON THE STUDY 

yet, being free from these sources of error and mis- 
take, aocustom us to the strict use of language as an 
instrument of reason, and by familiarising us in our 
progress towards truth to walk uprighlijand iMraigbt- 
forward oa firm ground, give us tiiat proper and 
dignified carriage of mind which could never he 
acquired by having always to pick our steps among 
obstructions and loose fragments, or to steady them 
m the reeling tempest of oonfiicting mfamings. 

(17.) But there is yet another point of view under 
which some acquaintance with abstcact science may 
be regarded as highly desirable in genend edn- 
nation, if not indispeiaaably necessary, to impress 
on us the distinction between strict and vague 
reasoning, to diow us what demonstration redly 
if, and to give us thereby a full and intimate sense 
1^ the nature and strragth of the evidence en 
which our knowledge of the actual system oi nature* 
and the laws of natural phenomena, rests. For this 
purpose^ however, a very moderate acquaintance 
with the more elementary branches of mathematics 
may suffice. The chain is laid before us, and every 
link is submitted to our unreserved examination, if 
we have patience and inclination to enter on sudb 
detail. Hundreds have gone (hrou^ it, and will 
continue to do so ; but, for the generality of man- 
kind, it is enough to satisfy themselves of the so* 
lidity and adamantine texture of its materials, and 
the unreserved exposure of its weakest, as well as 
its strongest, parts. If, howev^, we content our- 
selves with this general view of the matter, we 
must be c<mtent also to take on trust, that is, on 
the authority of those who have examined deeper. 



Ot NATURAL PHIL08OPHT. IBS 

«¥€iy oondofflon which cannot be made apparent to 
<Nir senses. Now, among these there are many so 
^mry siHpnsBig, mdeed apparently so extravagant, 
4kstt it is (|uite impossftle for any enquiring mind 
to rest contented with a mere hearsay statement of 
ttaem, — we feel iiresistibly impelled to enquire fnr- 
Iher mto their truth. What mere assertion wffl 
make any man beliere, that in one second of time, 
in one beat of the pendulum of a c^k, a ray of 
fight trails over 192,000 miles, and would ttore- 
fbre pet^irm the tour of the world in i^ut the 
same time that it requires to wink with our e3relid8, 
and in much less than a swift runner occupies in 
taimig a single stride ? What mortal can be made 
to believe, widiout demonstration, that the sun is 
afaaost a mffiion times larger than the earfh ? and 
tiiat, although so remote from us, that a cannon bdl 
shot directly txywardis it, and maintaining its fiiSi 
speed, would be twenty years in reaching it, it yet 
afects the earth by its attraction in an inappreciable 
ktftant of time? — a closeness of union of whidi 
we can form but a feeble, and totally inadequate, 
idea, by comparing it to any material connec- 
tuBk; since the communication of an impulse to 
goch a distance, by any solid intermedium we are 
acquainted with, would require, not moments, but 
whole years. And when, with pain and difficulty 
we have stramed our imagination to conceive a dis- 
tance so vast, a force so intense and penetrating, if 
we are told that the one dwindles to an inseni^ble 
point, and the other is unfelt at the nearest of the 
fixed stars, from the mere effect of their remoteness, 
while among those very stars are some whose actual 

c 4< 



24 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDT 

splendour exceeds by many hundred times that of thQ 
sun itself, although we may not deny the truth of 
the assertion, we cannot but feel the keenest cu- 
riosity to Isnowhaw such things were ever made out» 
(18.) The foregoing are among those results of 
scientific research which, by their m'agnitude, seem 
to transcend our powers of conception. There are 
others, again, which, from their minuteness, would 
appear to elude the grasp of thought, much more of 
distinct and accurate measurement. Wlio would not 
ask for demonstration, when told that a gnat's wing,, 
in its ordinary flight, beats many hundred times in a 
second ? or that there exist animated and regularly 
organised beings, many thousands of whose bodies 
laid close together would not extend an indi ? But 
what are these to the astonishing truths which, 
modem optical enquiries have disclosed, which teach* 
us that every point of a medium through which a ray 
of light passes is affected with a succession of periodi- 
cal movements, regularly recurring at equal intervals^ 
no less than five hundred miUions of millions of timei 
in a single second ! that it is by such movements, 
communicated to the nerves of our eyes, that we -see 
— nay more, that it is the difference in the frequency 
of their recurrence which affects us with the sense 
of the diversity of colour ; that, for instance, in 
acquiring the sensation of redness our eyes are af- 
fected four hundred and eighty-two millions of 
miUions of times ; of yellowness, five hundred and 
forty-two millions of miUions of times ; and of violet, 
seven hundred and seven millions of millions of times 
per second.* Do not such things sound more like 

* Young. Lectures on Nat FbiL ii. 6S7. See alio FfaiL 
Trans. 1801-2. 



OW NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 25 

the rayings of madmen, than the sober conclusions of 
people in their waking senses ? 

(19.) They are, nevertheless, conclusions to which 
any one may most certainly arrive, who will only 
be at the trouble of examining the chain of reasoning 
by which they have been deduced ; but, in order to 
do this, something beyond the mere elements of ab- 
stract science is required. Waving, however, such 
instances as these, which, after all, are rather calcu- 
lated to surprise and astound than for any other pur- 
pose, it must be observed that it is not possible to 
satisfy ourselves completely that we have arrived at 
a true statement of any law of nature, until, setting 
out from such statement, and making it a foundation 
of reasoning, we can show, by strict argument, that 
the facts observed must follow fi'om it as necessary 
logical consequences, and M», not vaguely and gene- 
rally, but with all possible precision in time, place, 
weight, and measure. 

(20.) To do this, however, as we shall presently 
see, requires in many cases a degree of knowledge of 
mathematics and geometry altogether unattainable by 
the generality of mankind, who have not the leisure, 
even if they all had the capacity, to enter into such 
enquiries, some of which are indeed of that degree of 
difficulty that they can be only successfully pro- 
secuted by persons who devote to them their whole 
attention, and make them the serious busmess of 
their lives. But there is scarcely any person of 
good ordinary understanding, however little exer- 
cised in abstract enquiries, who may not be readily 
made to comprehend at least the general train of 
reasoning by which any of the great truths of physics 



^ DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

are deduced, and the essential bearings and con- 
nections of the seveiai parts of natural philosophy. 
There are whole branches too and very extensive 
and important ones, to which mathematical reasoning 
iias never been at all applied ; such as chemistry^ 
geology, and natural history in general, and many 
others, in which it plays a very subordinate part, and 
of which the essential principles, and die grounds of 
application to useful purposes, may be perfectly well 
understood by a student who possesses no more 
mathematical knowledge than the rides of arith- 
metic ; so that no one need be deterred from lihe 
acquisition of knowledge, or even from active origi- 
nal research in such subjects, by a want of mathe- 
matical information. Even in those brandies which, 
like astronomy, optics, and dynamics, are almost ex- 
dusiveiy under the dominion of mathematics, and in 
which no efiSsctual progress am be made without 
wme acquaintance with geometry, the prindpal 
TuuU» may be perfectly understood without it. To 
one incapable of following out the intricades of 
mathematical demonstration, die conviction affi>ided 
by verified predictions must stand in the place of 
that purer and m(M% satisfactory reliance which a 
verification of every step in the process of reasoning 
can done afford, since every one will acknowledge 
the validity of pretensions which he is in the daily 
habit of seeing brought to the test of practice. 

(21.) Among the verifications of this practied 
kind which abound in every department of physiciy 
there are none more imposing than the precise pre- 
diction of the greater phenomena of astronomy; 
none» certainly, which carry a broader conviction 



\ 



DV HATUmAL PHILOSOPUi; 27 

Immw to every miod from their aotorieCy and iine- 
qnivocal character. The prediction of ecUpBes has 
accordingly from the earliest ages excited the admir- 
ation of mankind, and been one grand instrament 
by which their allegiance (so to ^peak) to natnral 
science, and their respect for its profesaora, has been 
laaintained; and tiioii^ straiigeiy abused in unen- 
lightened ages bj the supernatiuid prelensimn of 
astrologers, the credence given even to their idbauil- 
ities shows the force of this kind of evidence on 
men's ounds* The predictions of astronomers are, 
however, now ftr too familiar to endanger die just 
equipoise of our judgment, since even the return of 
comets, true to their paths and exact to the hour 
of thdr af^pointment, has ceased to amaze, thoogli 
it must ever delight all who have souls capable of 
being pen^rated by such beautiful instances of ac- 
cordance between theory and hcts. But the age of 
mere wonder in such things is past, and men prefer 
being guided and enlightened, to being astonished 
and dazzled, Ed^Mses, comets, and the like, afford 
but lare and transient duplays of the powers of cal- 
culation, and of the certainty of the principles on 
which it is grounded. A page of '< lunar distances" 
from the Nautical Almanack is worth all the eclipses 
tiiat have ever happened for inspiring diis necessary 
confidence in the conclusions of science. That a 
man, by merely measuring the moon's apparent dis- 
tance frt)m a star with a little portable instrument 
held in his hand, and applied to his eye, even with 
so unstable a footing as the deck of a ^ip, shall say 
positively, within five miles, where he is, on a bound- 
less ocean, cannot but appear to persons ignorant of 



28 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

physical astronomy an approach to the miraculous. 
Yet, the alternatives of life and death, wealth and 
ruin, are daily and hourly staked with perfect con- 
fidence on these marvellous computations, which 
might almost seem to have been devised on purpose 
to show how closely the extremes of speculative 
refinement and practical utility can be brought to 
approximate. We have before us an anecdote com- 
municated to us by a naval officer*, distinguished for 
the extent and variety of his attainments, which 
shows how impressive such results may become in 
practice. He sailed from San Bias on the west 
coast of Mexico, and after a voyage of 8000 miles, 
occupying 89 days, arrived ofF Rio de Janeiro, hav- 
ing, in this interval, passed through the Pacific 
Ocean, rounded Cape Horn, and crossed the South 
Atlantic, without making any land, or even seeing a 
single sail, with the exception of an American whaler 
off Cape Horn. Arrived within a week's sail of Rio, 
he set seriously about determining, by lunar observ- 
ations, the precise line of the ship's course and its 
situation in it at a determinate moment, and having 
ascertained this within from five to ten miles, ran the 
rest of the way by those more ready and compen- 
dious methods, known to navigators, which can be 
safely employed for short trips between one known 
point and another, but which cannot be trusted in 
long voyages, where the moon is the only sure guide. 
The rest of the tale we are enabled by his kindness 
to state in his own words : — ** We steered towards 
Rio de Janeiro for some days after taking the lunars 

• Captain BasQ Hall, R. N. 



% 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY* 29 

above describedy and having arrived within fifteen at 
twenty miles of the coast, I hove to at four in the 
morning till the day should break, and then bore up ; 
for although it was very hazy, we could see before 
us a couple of miles or so. About eight o'clock it 
became so foggy that I did not like to stand in far- 
ther, and was just bringing the ship to the wind 
again before sending the people to breakfiuBt, when 
it suddenly cleared off, and I had the satisfiiction of 
seeing the great Sugar Loaf Rock, which stands on 
one side of the harbour's mouth, so nearly right 
ahead that we had not to alter our course above a 
point in order to hit the entrance of Rio. This was 
the first land we had seen for three months, after 
crossing so many seas and being set backwards and 
forwards by innumerable currents and foul wind..- 
The effect on all on board might well be conceived 
to have been electric ; and it is needless to remark 
how essentially the authority of a conunanding 
officer over his crew may be strengthened by the 
occurrence of such incidents, indicative of a degree 
of knowledge and consequent power beyond tJieir 
reach. 

(22.) But even such results as these, striking as 
they are, yet fall short of the force with which con- 
viction is urged upon us when, through the medium 
of reasoning too abstract for common apprehension, 
we arrive at conclusions which outrun experience, 
and describe beforehand what will happen under 
new combinations, or even correct imperfect experi- 
ments, and lead us to a knowledge of facts contrary 
to received analogies drawn from an experience 
wrongly interpreted or overhastily generalised. To 



30 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

gire an example : — ever j body knows that objects 
viewed through a transparent medium, such as water 
or glass, appear distorted or displaced. Thus^^a stick 
in water appears bent, and an object seen thvough a 
prism or wedge of glass seems Co be thrown aside 
from its true place. This effect is owing to what is 
called the refreteHan of Hght ; and a simple rule dis- 
covered by Willebrod Snell enables any one to say 
exactly how miteh the stick will be bent, and kow 
far, and in what direcfiony the apparent situation of 
an object seen through the glass will deviate firom the 
real one. If a shilling be laid at the bottom of a 
basin of water and viewed obliquely, it wiU j^pear 
to be raised by the water ; if instead of water spirits 
of wine be used it will appear more raised ; if oil, still 
more : — but in none of these cases will it appear to 
be thrown etsuk to the right or lefi of its true place, 
however the eye be situated. The piane^ in which 
are contained the eye, the object, and the point in 
the surface of the liquid at which the object is seen, 
is an upright or vertical plane ; and this is one of the 
principal characters in the onHnart^refiraeHen of %hty 
viz. that the ray by which we see an object through a 
refracting surface, although it undergoes a bending, 
and is, as it were, broken at the surface, yet, in pur- 
suing its course to the eye, does not quit a pkme 
perpendicular to <Ae rrfraeting surface. But there 
are again other sub8tances> such as rock-crystal, and 
especially Iceland spar, which possess the singular 
property of doubRng the image or appearance of an 
object seen througlk them> in certain directions ; so 
that mstead of seemg one object we see two, side by 
side, when snch a crystal or spar is intetposed be- 



OF KATUBAL FHIL080FHT* SI 



treen the object and the eye ; and if a ray or 
timbeam be tlirown i^n a surfiice of either of Aese 
mbBtaneeSy it will be split into two^ makiDg «a angle 
with each other, and each pnrsning ita own icpante 
course, — this is called doMe v^m O knL. Now, of 
these imagea or doubly refracted rays, cm ahraya 
follows the same rule as if the substance were glass 
or water : its deviation can be correctly cakndated 
by Snell's law above mentioned, and it does net quit 
the plane perpendicular to the refracting surfiux. 
The other ray, on the contrary, (which is therefore 
said to have undergone exiraardimmy refinution) doa 
quit that plane, and the amount of its deviation from 
ita forsaer course requires for its determination a 
much more complicated rule, which cannot be un- 
derstood or even stated without a pretty intimate 
knowledge of geometry. Now, rock-crystal and 
Iceland spar differ from glass in a very remarkable 
circumstance. They affiect naturally certain regular 
figures, not being found in shapeless lumps, but in 
determinate geometrical forms; and they are sus- 
ceptible of being cleft or sp^ much easier m certain 
directions than in others — they have a gram which 
glass has no<^ When other substances having this 
pecufiarity (and which are called eryttaSHiaid sub- 
stances) were examined, they were aD, or by &r the 
greater part, found to possess this singular pn^r^ 
of dbu6/lf T^adioni and itwas very natural to con^ 
chide, therefore, that the same diing took place in 
all of them, viz. that of the two rays, into which any 
beam of ligbt faUing on the sur&ce of such a sub- 
stance was split, or of the two images of an object 
seen through k, one only was turned aside out of ita 



32 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

'f^ne and extraordinarily refracted, while the other 
followed the ordinary rule. Accordingly this was 
supposed to be the case ; and not only so, but from 
some trials and measurements purposely made by a 
philosopher of great eminence, it was considered to 
be a &ct sufficiently established by experiment. 

(23.) Perhaps we might have remained long un- 
der this impression, for the measurements are deli- 
cate, and the subject very difficult. But it has lately 
been demonstrated by an eminent French philosopher 
and mathematician, M. Fresnel, that, granting certain 
principles or postulates, all the phenomena of double 
refraction, including perhaps the greatest variety of 
&cts that have ever yet been arranged under one 
general head, may be satisfactorily explained and 
deduced from them by strict mathematical calcula- 
tion ; and thatf when applied to the cases first men- 
tioned, these principles give a satisfactory account 
of the want of the extraordinary image ; ^at when 
applied to such cases as those of rock-crystal or Ice- 
land spar, they also give a correct account of both 
the images, and agree in their conclusions with the 
rules before ascertamed for them : but so far from 
coinciding with that part of the previous statement, 
which would make lliese conclusions extend to all 
crystallised substances, M. Fresnel's principles lead 
to a conclusion quite opposite, and point to a fad 
which had never been observed, viz. that in by ftr 
the greater number of crystallized substances which 
possess the property of double refraction, neiiher of 
the images follows the ordinary law, but both un- 
dergo a. deviation from their original plane. Now 
this had never been observed to be the case in any 



W VAXV»M^ PHU.080PH7. 8S 

previous trials and all opinion was against it. B«t 
when put U> the test of exp^iment in a great variety 
of new and ingenious methods, it was found to be 
ibllj ver^ied ; and to complete the evidence, the sub- 
stances on whose imperfect examination the first 
erroneous conclusion was founded, having been 
latdy subjected to a fresh and more acrupulous 
examination, the result has shown the insufficiency 
of the former measurements, and proved in perfect 
accordance with the newly discovered laws. Now 
it will be observed in this case, first, that, so far firom 
the principles assumed by M. Fresnel being at all 
obvious, they are extremely remote from ordinary 
observation ; and, secondly, that the cluun of rea- 
soning by which they are brought to the test is one 
of such length and complexity, and the purely ma- 
thematical difficulty of their application so great, that 
no mere good common sense, no general tact or or- 
dinary practical reasoning, would afford the slightest 
chance of threading their mazes. Cases like this 
are the triumph of theories. They show at once 
how large a part pure reason has to perform in our 
examination of nature, and how implicit our reliance 
ought to be on that powerful and methodical system 
of ndes and processes which constitute the modem 
mathematical analysis, in all the more difficult i^ 
pHcations of exact calculation to her phenomena. 

' (24.) To take an instance more witliin ordinary ap- 
preliension. An eminent living geometer had proved 
by calculations, founded on strict optical principles, 
that in the centre of the shadow of a small circular 
plate of metal, exposed in a dark room to a beam of 
light emanating from a very smaU brUHani pointy 

D 



S4« Discourse on the studt 

thiere ought to be no darkness, — in fact, no shadow 
at that place ; but, on the contrary, a degree of iUu- 
mination precisely as bright as if the metal plate 
were away. Strange and even impossible as tliis 
conclusion may seem, it has been put to the trial, 
and found perfectly correct * 

(25.) We shall now proceed to consider more 
particularly, and in detail, — 

I. The nature and objects immediate and colla- 

teral of physical science, as regarded in 
itself, and in its application to the practical 
purposes of life, and its influence on the 
well-being and progress of society. 

II. The principles on which it relies for its suc- 

cessful prosecution, and the rules by which 
a systematic examination of nature should 
be conducted, with examples illustrative of 
their influence. 
III. The subdivision of physical science into distinct 
branches, and their mutual relations. 

* We must caution our readers who would assure themselvea 
of it by trial, that it is an experiment of some delicacy, and not 
to be made without several precautions to ensure success. For 
these we must refer to our original authority ( FVesnel. M^oire 
sur la Difl&action de la Lumiere, p. 124.) > Bnd the principleB 
on which they depend will of course be detailed in that 
volume of the Cabinet Cyclopaedia which is devoted to the 
subject of LioBT. 



or NATUBAL PHILOSOPHT. 55 



CHAP. m. 



OF THE NATURE AND OBJECTS, IMMEDIATE AND COL- 
LATERAL, OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE, AS REGARDED IN 
ITSELF, AND IN ITS APPLICATION TO THE PRACTICAL 
PURPOSES OF LIFE, AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE WELL- 
BEING AND PROGRESS OF SOCIETY. 



(26.) The first thing impressed on us from our 
earliest infancy is, that events, do not succeed one 
another at random, but with a certain degree of order, 
regularity, and connection ; — some constantly, and, 
as we are apt to think, immutably, — as the alter- 
nation of day and night, summer and winter, — others 
contingently, as the motion of a body from its place, 
if pushed, or the. burning of a stick if thrust into the 
fire. : The knowledge that the former class of events 
hoi gone on, liniiiterruptedly, for ages beyond all 
memory, ilQpresses us with a strong expectation that 
it will continue, to do so in the same manner ; and 
thus our notion of an order of nature is originated 
and confirmed. If every thing were equally regular 
and periodical, and the succession of events liable to 
no change depending on our own will, it may be 
doubted wheUier we should ever think of looking for 
causes. No one regards the night as the cause of the 
day, or the day of night. They are alternate efiects 
of a common cause, which their regular succession 
alone gives us no sufficient due for determining. It 

D 2 



56 mscomtsB on rm ^vhy 

is chiefly, perhaps entirely, from the other or con- 
tingent class of events that we gain our notions of 
cause and effect From them alone we gather that 
there are such things as laws of nature. The very 
idea of a law includes that of contingency. *' Si 
quia nuda carmina condidissety fuate feriio ; '* if such 
a case arise, such a course shall be followed, — - if the 
match be applied to the gunpowder, it will explode. 
Every law is a provision for cases which may occur, 
and has relation to an infinite number of cases that 
never have occurred, and never will. Now, it is 
this provision, d priori^ for contingencies, this con- 
templation of possible occurrences, and predis-* 
posal of what ^ail haj^n, thdt impresses us with 
the notion of a hiw and a oanwe* Among all the 
possible combinations of the fifty or sixty diements 
which chemistry shows to exist on the earth, it » 
likely, nay almost certain, that wme have never been 
fi>rmed ; that some elements, in some proportions, 
and under some circumstances, have never yet been 
placed in relation with one another. Yet no chemist 
can doubt that it is already jkM what they will do 
when the case does occur. They will obey certain 
laws, of which we know liothing at present, but 
¦which must he already fixed, er they could not be 
laws. It is not by habit, or by trial and fiuilure, 
• that they will learn what to do* When the > contin- 
gency occurs, there will be no hesitation, no consult- 
ation ; — their course will at onee be decided, and 
win always be llie same if it occur ever so often in 
succession, or in ever so many places at one and Ubi^ 
same instant This is the perfection of a law, that 
it includes all possible contingencies, and engUMB 



OB KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 37 

implioit obedience, —-and of this kind are the laws 
of nature* 

(27.) This use of the word laWf however, our 
readers will of course perceive has relation to us as 
understanding, rather than to the materials of which 
the universe consists as obe3ring, certain rules* To 
iAey a law, to act in oompUanee with a rule, suj^poses 
an understanding and a will> a power of complying 
or not, in the being who obejrs and complies, which 
we do not admit as belonging to mere matter* The 
Divine Author of Ae univeme cannot be supposed 
to have laid down particular laws, enumerating all 
imSvidual ccmtingencies,. which his materials have 
understood and obey, *^ this would be to attribute 
to him the inpenfections of hmnan legislation;-^ 
but rather, by cveating them, endued with certain 
fixed qualities and powers, he has impressed them 
in their origin; wi^ tile spirt^ not the letter^ of his 
law, and made all their subsequent combinations and 
rekitions inevitable consequences ai this first im- 
pression, by which, however, we would no way be 
imderstood to doay the constant exercise of his 
direct pow^ in maintaining t^e system of nature, or 
the ultimate emanation, of every energy which ma« 
terial agents ^[^est &om his immediate wiU> acting in . 
conftrmity with his own laws* 

(28.) 1^ dtscoveeies oi modern chemistry have 
grae ftr to estabBsb the trulb of an^ opinion enter* 
tatned by some of the. ancient that the universe 
consists of distinct,^ separate, indivisible aixmst. or 
individual brilig^ so. minute as to escape our sensesi 
except when united by millions, and by this aggre- 
gation maklag up bod^ of even the smallest visible 

D S 



S8 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

bulk ; and we have the strongest evidence that, al- 
though there exist great and essential differences in 
individuals among these atoms, they may yet all be 
arranged in a very limited number of groups or 
classes, all the individuals of each of which are, to 
all intents and purposes, exactty alike in all their 
properties. Now, when we see a great number of 
things precisely alike, we do not believe this simi- 
larity to have originated except from a common 
principle independent of them ; and that we recog- 
nise this likeness, chiefly by the identity of their de- 
portment under similar circumstances, strengthens' 
rather than weakens the conclusion. '"A line of spin- 
ning-jennies *, or a regiment of soldiers dressed 
exactly alik^ and going through precisely the same 
evolutions, gives us no idea of independent exist- 
ence : we must see them act out of concert before 
we can believe them to have independent wills and 
properties, not impressed on them from' without.^ 
And this conclusion, which would be strong even 
were there only two individuals precisely alike in 
(ill respects and for ever, acquires irresistible force 
when their number is multiplied beyond the power 
of imagination to conceive. If we mistake not, then* 
the discoveries alluded to effectually destroy the 
idea of an etemai sdf-exisieni maJUer, by giving to 
each of its atoms the essential characters, at once» 
of a moLwiifiuilwred artide, and a subordmaie agent 

(29.) But to ascend to the origin of things, and 
speculate on the creation, is not the business of the 
natural philosopher. An humbler field is sufficient 

* Uttle reds med in cotton auUi to twiit tiM timad. 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. S9 

for him in the endeavour to discoTer, as ftr as our 
Acuities will permit, what art th^ primary qualitiea 
onginaliy and unalterably impressed on matter, and 
to discover the tpimt of the laws of nature, which 
includes groups and classes of relations and fiicts 
from the Utter which, as before observed, is pre 
sented to us by single phenomena: or if, after all, 
this should prove impossible; if such a step be 
beyond our faculties; and the essential qualities of 
material agents be really oeeuk^ or incapable of 
being expressed in any form intelligible to our un- 
derstandings, at least to approach as near to their 
comprehension as the nature of the case will allow ; 
and devise such forms of words as shall include and 
T^pTtfent the greatest possible multitude and variety 
of phenomena. 

(30.) Now, in this research there would seem one 
great question to be disposed of before our enquiries 
can even be commenced with any thing like a pros- 
pect of success, which is, whether the laws of nature, 
themselves haxt that degree oi permanence and 
fixi^ which can render them subjects of systematic 
discussion ; or whether, on the other hand, the qua- 
lities of natural agents are subject to mutation from 
the liqpse of time. To the ancients, who lived in 
the infancy of the world, or rather, in the infancy 
Ionian's experience, this was a very rational subject 
of question, and hence their distinctions between 
corruptible and incorruptible matter. Thus, accord- 
mg to some among them, the matter only of the 
o#estial spaces is pure, immutably and incorrupt- 
ible, while all sublunary things are in a constant state 
of lapse and change ; the world becoming paralysed 

D 4 



45 XMSCOURSS ON' THB STUmt 

dttd effete with age, and nuin himself deteriorating 
in character, and dimitiisbiog at once in intellectual 
and bodily stature. But to us, who hare the ex» 
perience of some additional thousands of years, the 
^estion of permanence is already, in a greatmeasurey 
decided in the affirmaitive. The refined i^culatioDS 
of modern astronomy, gvounding their conclusioiie 
on observations made at very remote periods, have 
proved to demonstration, that one at least of the 
great powers of nature, the force of gravitatioDy 
the mam bond and support of the material imiverse^ 
has undergone no change in intensity from a higlft 
antiquity. The stature of mankind is just what it 
was three thousand years ago, as the specimens of 
mummies whieh- have been exaaabied at various 
times sufficiently'-show. The intellect of Newto% 
Laplace, or La Grange, may stand in &ir competition 
#itili that of Archimedes, Aristotle, or Plato; and 
the virtues and patriotism of Washington with dw 
brightest examples of ancient history. 

(SL) Again, the researches of chemists hme 
shown that what the vulgar call corruption, destmo* 
tion, &c^ k nothing but a change of arrangement of 
l9ie same ingredient elements, the dispositton of the 
teme materials into other forms, without the loaa 
or actual destruction of a single atom ; and thns any 
doubts of the permanence of natural laws are dis* 
countenanced, and the whole we%ht of ^fpearancei 
dirowtt into the opposite scale. One of the most 
Obvious cases of apparent destruction is, when any 
tiling is ground to dust and scattered to the wuids. 
But it is one tiling to grind a fabric to powder, and 
another to annihflateits materials ; scattered as fhey 



may be, iHnj flMitC U lonewliere, and contihiiey 
if only 89 ingredientt- iii tiie toil, to perfivm dieir 
humble but useful port ia the coonoiny of nature. 
Hie destruction proikwed by fire ia more striking: 
in nisny eases^ as n the bumiag of a piece of 
charcodi or a taper, there is no saaoke, nodihig 
Tfsiblj dissipated and carried away; the burning 
body wastes and disappears, whfle nodiing menu to 
be producisd but wurmth and light, which we are 
not in the habit of considering as substances; and 
when tS has disappeared^ except perhi^ some 
trifling ashes, we naturally enough suppose it is 
gone, lost, destroyed. But wbe» the question is 
examined more exactly, we detect, m the inyisiUe 
stream of heated air which ascends firom die glow- 
ing coal or ftaning wax, the u^ek pondenble nuitter, 
only united in a new combination with the air, 
ODd HsBotved m iu Yet, so far fhrai being diereby 
dbstreyed, it is only become again what it was 
before it existed in the fynn of dtercoal or wax, an 
actrre agent in the busmess of the worlc^ and a 
main support of vegetable and animal life, and is 
stiff susceptible of running agam and again die same 
round, as drcmnstances may determine; so that, 
for aught we can see to the contrary, the saare 
identical atom may lie concealed lor diouiands of 
centuries in a limestone rock; may at length be 
^parried, set free in the limekSn, mix widk the air, 
be absorbed fit)m it by plants, and, in succession^ 
become a part of the frames of myriadii oi livmg 
beings, till some concurrence of events consigns k 
once more to a long repose, which^ however, no way 
imfita it fhmi again resuming ita former activity* 



'^^mmr 



1 



42 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(32.) Now, this absolute indestructibility of the 
ultimate materials of the world, in periods commen- 
surate to our experience, and their obstinate reten- 
tion of the same properties, under wliatever variety 
of circumstances we choose to place them, however 
violent and seemingly contradictory to their natures, 
is, of itself, enough to render it highly improbable 
that time alone should have any influence over 
them. All that age or decay can do seems to be 
included in a wasting of parts which are only dissi- 
pated, not destroyed, or in a change of sensible pro- 
perties, which chemistry demonstrates to arise only 
from new combinations of the same ingredients. 
But, after all, the question is one entirely of expe- 
rience : we cannot be sure, d priori, that the laws 
of nature are immuiable; but we can ascertain, by 
enquiry, whether they change or not; and to this 
enquiry all experience answers in the negative. It 
is not, of course, intended here to deny that great, 
operations, productive of extensive changes in the 
visible state of nature, — such as, for instance, those 
contemplated by the geologists, and embracing for 
their completion vast periods of time, — are con- 
stantly going on ; but these are consequences and 
fulfihnents of the laws of nature, not contradictions 
•r exceptions to them. No theorist regards sudi 
ch&nges as alterations in the fundamental principles 
of nature; he only endeavours to reconcile them, 
and show how they result from laws already known, 
and judges of the correctness of his theory by 
their ultimate agreement 

(SS.) But the laws of nature are not .Qnly^ per- 
numentybut consistent, intelligible, and discoy^aU*- 



OF NATURAL FHIL080PHT. 4S 

with such a moderate degree of res girch. as^ isjcal- 
ciilated rather to stimulate than to weaiy cudoti^ 
"it we were set' down, an creatures of another world, 
in anj~~eXiBtujg aouiel^ ofnoarilundy and b^an to 
q ie culat e- on their a ctj ong , we sho irid &d it diflicult 
~at ^rstlo ascertam'wliether thej were subject to 
any laws at all: but when^ bj..degree8} we had 
found out that thejr did consider themselves to be 
so ; andwoiild the^ procee d to asc^rtain^ from their 
condu£tiuid it9 consequfiDces, what these laws were^ 
and in what spirit conceiyed; though we might not 
perhaps have much difficult in discovering single 
rdesjpplicabTe to particular caft^ yet, the moment 
w^^came to generalize, and endeavour from Uiese .to 
ascend, ^tep by 8^p^_aDdjdiasoyer any_ stead y par- 
v^ding principle, the mass of incongruities, ab s urd * 
ities, and ^n"tTflflirtjiTnB» vp shnuld ^f^^^^^^*f*, ^^«*M 
^ther iT'fhpflrtfn ivi frnm further f nqujryi frr ffntrtffy 
us thafwhat we wei:e.m searcho f did ja ot ex ist> 
It is quite the contrary in naturej_^fiie.JEe find 
no contradiciionB, no IncoiigruiBes, bu t^all 
m ony. ^SWiat oncenuTTearnt we never have to 
unlearn. As rules advance in generali^ apparent 
exceptions become regular flmd equi voque ; in her 
sublime legislatioi^ Is as unheard of asjmajadniiniS" 
toition. 

(34.) Living, then, in a world where such laws 
obtain, and under their immediate dominion, it is 
manifestly of the utmost importance to know them, 
were it for no other reason than to be sure, in all we 
undertake, to have, at least, the law on our side^ 
so as not. to stru^le in. vain against some insuper* 
aUe difficulty opposed to us by natural causes. 



44* mSCQUBSE ON. THE STUDY 

What painft and; expense would not the alchemists^ 
for instance, have been spared by a knowledge o£ 
those simple laws of composition and decomposition, 
which now preclude ail idea of the attainment of 
their declared object ! what an amount of ingenuity^ 
thrown away on the pursuit of the perpetual motion, 
might have been turned to better use, if the simplest 
laws of mechanics had been known and attended 
to by the inventors of innumerable contrivances 
destined to that end ! What tortures, inflicted on 
patients by imaginary cures of incurable diseases, 
might have been dispensed with, had a few simple 
principles of physiology been earlier recognised ! 

(35.): But iEihe kws of nature,^ on the one hanc^ 
are invincible opponmits, on the other, they are 
irresistible auadliaries ; and it will not be amiss if 
we regand them in each of those chai^ters, and con- 
sider die great importance of a knowledge of them 
to mankind,— 

I. In showing tur haw to onM aUen^piing tm^ 

possibilities^ 
IL In securing us. from important mistakes in o^ 

tempting what w, in itse^, possible^ by means 

either inadequate^ or atinaUy apposed^ to the 

end in view, 

III. In enabling us to aeoomplish our ends in the 

eaeisst, shortest most eeononUoaiy and mo§/t 
effeetuid manner. 

IV. In indueing us to attempt and emAUng ue to 

aecompU^ objects whiehy but for suck know* 
ledger ws shomld rnoer have thought of under^ 



OF NATURAL PHIL0807RT. 45 

We tifaall therefore proceed to illiBtrate by examples 
the effect of physical knowledge under each of these 
heads: — 

(36.) Ex. 1. (S5.) I. It is not many years smoe 
an attempt was made to establish a colliery at 
Bexhilly in Sussex. The appearance of thin seams 
and sheets of fossil-wood and wood-coal, widi some 
other indications similar to what occur in die neigh- 
bourhood of the great coal*beds in the nordi of 
England, having led to the sinking of a shaft, and 
the erection of machinery on a scale of vast expense, 
not less than eighty thousand pounds are said to 
have been laid out on this project, which, it is almost 
needless to add, proved completely abortive, as every 
geologist would have at once declared it must, the 
whole assemblage of geological fiu;ts being adverse 
to the existence of a r^ular coal-bed m the 
Hastings' sand; while this, on which Bexhill is 
situated, is separated from the eoal^intla by a 
series of interposed beds of such enormous thidc- 
ness as to render all idea of penetrating trough 
them absurd. The history of mining operations n 
full of similar cases, where a very moderate ac- 
quaintance with the usual order of nature^ to say 
nothing of theoretical views, would have saved 
many a sanguine adventurer from utter ruin. 

(37.) Ex. 2. (35.) II. The smelting of iron rs- 
quires the application of the most violent heat that 
can be raised, and is commonly performed in tall fux^ 
naces, urged by great iron bellows driven by steam- 
engines. Instead of employing this power to force 
air into the furnace through the intervention of 



46 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

bellows, it was, on one occasion, attempted to em- 
ploy the steam itself in, apparently, a much less 
circuitous manner ; viz. by directing the current of 
steam in a violent blast, from the boiler at once into 
the fire. From one of the known ingredients of steam 
being a highly inflammable body, and the other that 
essential part of the air which supports combustion, 
it was imagined that this would have die effect of 
increasing the fire to tenfold fury, whereas it sim- 
ply blew it out; a result which a slight consider- 
ation of the laws of chemical combination, and the 
state in which the ingredient elements exist in 
steam, would have enabled any one to predict 
without a trial. 

(38.) Ex. 3. (35.) II. After the invention of 
the diving-bell, and its success in subaqueous pro- 
cesses, it was considered highly desirable to devise 
some means of remaining for any length of time 
under water, and rising at pleasure without assist- 
ance, so as either to examine, at leisure, the bottom, 
or perform, at ease, any work that might be required. 
Some years ago, an ingenious individual proposed a 
project by which this end was to be accomplished. 
It consisted in sinking the hull of a ship made quite 
water-tight, with the decks and sides strongly sup- 
ported by shores, and the only entry secured by a 
stout trap-door, in such a manner, that by disengag- 
ing, from within, the weights employed to sink it, 
it might rise of itself to the surface. To render the 
trial more satisfactory, and the result more striking, 
the projector himself made the first essay. It was 
agreed that he should sink in twenty fathoms water, 
and rise again without assistance at the expiration of 



OF NATURAL FHiLOSOPHT. 47 

• 

twenty-four hours. Accordingly, making all secure, 
&stening down his trap -door, and provided with all 
necessaries, as well as with the means of making 
signals to indicate his situation, this unhappy victim 
of his own ingenuity entered and was sunk. No 
signal was made, and the time appointed elapsed. 
An immense concourse of people had assembled to 
witness his rising, but in vain ; for the vessel was 
never seen more. The pressure of the water at so 
great a depth had, no doubt, been completely under- 
estimated, and the sides of the vessel being at once 
crushed in, the unfortunate projector perished before 
he could even make the signal concerted to indicate 
his distress. 

(39.) Ex. 4. (35.) lU. ' In the granite quarries 
near Seringapatam the most enormous blocks are 
separated from the solid rock by the following neat 
and simple process. The workman having found a 
portion of the rock sufficiently extensive, and situ- 
ated near the edge of the part already quarried, lays 
bare the upper sur&ce, and marks on it a line in the 
direction of the intended separation, along which a 
groove is cut with a chisel about a couple of inches 
in depth. Above this groove a narrow line of fire 
is then kindled, and maintained till the rock below is 
thoroughly heated, immediately on which a line of 
men and women, each provided with a pot full of 
cold water, suddenly sweep off the ashes, and pour 
the water into the heated groove, when the rock at 
once splits with a dean fracture. Square blocks of 
six feet in the side, and upwards of eighty feet in 
length, are sometimes detached by this method, or 
by another equally simple and efficacious, but not 



46 DlfiOfillBSX OV THS BTUUY 

easily explamed witiiout entering iaio particularfl of 
•mineralogical detail.* 

(40.) Ex. 5. {S5.) HI. Hardly less simple and 
efficacious is the process used in some parts of France^ 
where mill-stones are made. When a mass of stone 
sufficiently Jarge is found, it is cut into a cylinder 
several feet high, and the question then arises how 
to subdivide this into horizontal pieces so as to make 
as many mill-stones. For this purpose horizontal 
indentations or grooves are chiselled out quite round 
the cylinder, at distances corresponding to the thick- 
ness intended to be given to the miU-stones^ into 
•which wedges of dried wood are driven. These are 
then wetted, or exposed to the night dew, and next 
morning the different pieces are found separated 
from each other by the expansion of the wood, con^ 
sequent on its absorption of moisture ; an irresistible 
natural power thus accomplisliing, almost without 
any trouble, and at no expense, an operation which, 
from the peculiar hardness and texture of the fitone, 
would otherwise be impracticable but by the most 
powerful machinery or the most persevering labour. 

(41.) Ex. 6. (d5.) m. To accomplish our ends 
quickly is often of, at least, as much importance aa 
to accomplish them with little labour and expense. 
There are innumerable processes which, if left to 
themselves, t . 6. to the ordinary operation of natural 
causes, are done, and well done, but with extreme 

* Such a block would weigh between four and five hundred 
thousand pounds. See Dr. Kennedy's « Account of the 
Erection of a Granite Obelisk of a l^ngle Stone about Se- 
vantj Feet high, at Seri]igspatam.'*—JEtf. PhiL Jhmt* ToLiz, 
p, SIS. 



JOW KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY, 49 

slowness, and in such cases it is often of the highest 
practical importance to accelerate them. The 
bleaching of linen, for instance^ performed in the 
natural way by exposure to sun, rain, and wind 
requires many weeks or even months for its com* 
pletion ; whereas, by the simple immersion of the 
cloth in a liquid, chemically prepared, the same 
effect is produced in a few hours. The whole circle 
of the arts, indeed, is nothing but one continued 
comment upon this head of our subject. The 
instances above given are selected, not on account 
of their superior importance, but for the simplicity 
and directness of application of the principles on 
which they depend, to the objects intended to be 
attained. 

(4>2.) But so constituted is the nund of man, that 
his views enlarge, and his desires and wants in* 
crease, in the full proportion of the ftcilities afforded 
to their gratification, and, indeed, with augmented 
vapidity, so that no sooner has the successful exer- 
cise of his powers., accomplished any considerable 
aimplification or improvement of processes subser« 
vient to his use or comfort^ than his &culties are 
again on the stretch to extend the limits of his 
newly acquired power ; and having once experienced 
the advantages which are to be gathered by availing 
himsdf of some of the powers of nature to accom- 
plish his ends, he is led thenceforward to regard 
them all as a treasure placed at his disposal, if he 
have only the art, the industry, or the good fortune, 
to penetrate those recesses which conceal them firom 
immediate view. Having once learned to look on 
. knowledge as power, and to avail himself of it a» * 

8 



50 DISCOURSE OK THE STT7D\ 

such, he is no longer content to limit his enterprises 
to the beaten track of former usage, but is constantly 
led onwards to contemplate objects which, in a pre- 
vious stage of his progress, he would have regarded 
as unattainable and visionary, had he even thought 
of them at all. It is here that the investigation of 
the hidden powers of nature becomes a mine, every 
vein of which is pregnant with inexhaustible wealth, 
and whose ramifications appear to extend in all di- 
rections wherever human wants or curiosity may lead 
us to explore. 

(4>3.) Between the physical sciences and the arts of 
life there subsists a constant mutual interchange of 
good offices, and no considerable progress can be 
made in the one without of necessity giving rbe to 
corresponding steps in the other. On the one hand, 
every art is in some measure, and many entirely, 
dependent on those very powers and qualities of the 
material world which it is the object of physical 
enquiry to investigate and explain ; and, accordingly, 
abundant examples might be cited of cases where 
the remarks of experienced artists, or even ordinary 
workmen, have led to the discovery of natural quali- 
ties, elements, or combinations which have proved 
of the highest importance in physics. Thus (to give 
an instance), a soap-manufacturer remarks that the 
residuum of his ley, when exhausted of the alkali for 
which he employs it, produces a corrosion of his 
copper boiler for which he cannot account. He 
puts it into the hands of a scientific chemist for 
analysis, and the result is the discovery of one of the 
most singular and important chemical elementiy 
iodine. The properties of this, being studied, are 



OV NATURAL PHILOSOPRT. 51 

found to occur most appositely in illustration and 
8U|^rt of a variety of new, curious, and instructiye 
?lews then gaining ground in chemistry, and thus 
exercise a raariEcd influence over the whole body of 
that science. Curiosity is excited : the origin of the 
new substance is traced to the sea-plants from whose 
ashes the principal ingredient of soap is obtained, 
and ultimately to the sea-water itself. It is thence 
hunted through nature, discovered in salt mines and 
springs, and pursued into all bodies which have a 
marine origin; among the rest, into sponge. A 
medical practitioner * then calls to mind a reputed 
remedy for the cure of one of the most grievous and 
unsightly disorders to which the human species is 
subject — the goUre — which infests the inhabitants 
of mountainous districts to an extent that in this 
i&voured land we have happily no experience of, 
and whidi was said to have been originally cured by 
ihe ashes of burnt sponge. Led by this indication 
he tries the effect of iodine on that complaint, and 
the result establishes the extraordinary fact that 
ihis singular substance, taken as a medicine, acts 
with the utmost promptitude and energy on goUre^ 
dissipating the largest and most inveterate in a short 
time, and acting (of course, like all medicines, even 
the most approved, with occasional failures,) as a 
i^^edfic, or natural antagonist, against that odious 
deformity. It is thus that any accession to our know- 
ledge of nature is sure, sooner or later, to make itself 
fdt in some practical application, and that a benefit 
oonferred on science by the casual observation or 
ihrewdremark, of even an unscientific or illiterate 

^ Br. Coindet of Geneva. 
B 2 



^^ 



1'^ 



52 BiSCOURSE ON THS STUDY 

person infallibly repays itsdf with interest, though 
often in a way that could never have been at first 
contemplated. 

(44.) It is to such observation, reflected upon, how- 
ever, and matured into a rational and scientific form 
by a riiindideeply^jmt^ued'Wilii the best jiriiiiCiples at 
sound philoBcpiy, that we owe the pracS ce of v accipr 
ation ;J^ practice which has effectually subdued, in 
every country where it has been introduced, one of 
the most frightful scourges of the human race, and 
in some extirpated it altogether. Happily for us 
/ > ^ we know only by tradition the ravages of the small- 

y ^ po^ ^ ^^ existed among us hardly more than a cen- 
tury ago, and as it would in a few years infallibly 
exist again, were the barriers which this practioey 
/ and that of inoculation, oppose to its progress 

"^ y '^ abandoned. Hardly inferior to this terrible scourge 
on land was, within the last seventy or eighty years, 
the scurvy at sea. The sufferings and destruction 
produced by this horrid disorder on board our ships 
when, as a matter of course, it broke out after a few 
months' voyage, seem now almost incredible. Deaths 
to the amount of eight or ten a day in a moderate 
ship's company ; bodies sewn up in hammocks and 
washing about the decks for want of strength and 
spirits on the part of the miserable survivors to cast 
them overboard; and every form of loathsome and 
excruciating misery of which the human firame is 
susceptible : — such are the pictures which the nar- 
ratives of nautical adventure in those days con- 
tinually offer.* At present the scurvy is almost 

* Journal of a Voyage to the South Seaa, &c. ftc, under llw 
Conmiand of Commodore George Anaon ia 1 740^-1 744» by 



> 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. SS 

tOBoplet/dy eFadicated in the navy, partly, no doobty 
firom increased and increasing attention to general 
cleanliness^ comfort, and diet \ but mainly from the 
eoQstant use of a simple and palatable [nreventivey 
the add of the lemon, served out in daily rations. 
If the gratitode of mankind be allowed on all hands 
to be the just meed of the {^ilosoj^c physician, to 
whose dbcerament in seizing, and perseverance in 
forcing it on public notice we owe the great safe- 
guard of mftnt life, it ought not to be denied to 
those* whose skill and Hisrriminatian have thus 



Tucoe ThatnaB, Lond. 1 745i So tremendous were the nTages 
of scuryy, that, in the year 17S6, admual Hosier Miled with 
seren ships of the line to the West Indies, and buried his ships* 
oompsnies twic^ and died himself in consequence of a broken 
heart. Dr. Johnson, in the year 1778, could describe a sea-lilb 
in such terms as these : — << As to the sailor, when yon look 
down from the quarter deck to the space below, you see the 
Qtmost extremity of human misery, such crowding, such filth, 
such stench !** — ** A ship is a prison with the chance of being 
drowned-*- it is wone — worse in every respect-^ worse room, 
worse air, worse food — worse company !" SmoUet, who had 
I»er8onal experience of the horrors of a seafaring life in those 
^ys, gives a livdy picture of them in his Roderick Bandom. 

* Lonon juice was known to be a remedy for scuryy far 
superior to all others 200 years ago» as i^pears by the 
writings of WoodalL His work is entitled « The Surgeon's 
Mate, or Military andl Domestic Medicine. By John Woodall, 
Master in Surgery London, 1636,** p. 165. In 1600, Com* 
modore Lancaster sailed from England with three other ships 
for the Cape of Grood Hope, on the 2d of April, and arrived 
in Saldanha Bay on the 1st of August, the commodore's own 
ship being in perfect health, from the administration of three 
table-spoonsfuU of lemon juice every morning to each of hia 
•mea, whersas the other ships were so siddy aa to be im- 

E S 



54 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

Strengthened the sinews of our most powerful arm^ 
and obliterated one of the darkest features in the 
most glorious of all professions. 

(45.) These last, however, are instances of simple 
observation, limited to the point immediately in view, 
and assuming only so far the character of science a^ 
a systematic adoption of good and rejection of evil» 
when grounded on experience carefully weighed^ 
justly entitle it to do. They are not on that account 
less appositely cited as instanees-ef thBimportaoee 
,,^,„,^_^__^_^____^__^_^,^_^^^;^_____^______^^^_^_^_^^___^^__^^,^_^^_^,^_^,^,^^ 

manageable for want of hands, and the commander was obliged 
to send men on board to take in their sails and hoist out their 
boats. (Purchas's Pilgrim, toL i. p. 149.) A Fellow of the 
college, and an eminent practitioner, in 1753 published a tract 
on se^ scurry, in which he adverts to the superior virtue of this 
medicine ; and Mr. A. fioird, surgeon of the Hector sloop of 
war, states, that from what he had seen of its effects on 
board of that ship, he ** thinks he shall not be accused of 
presumption in pronouncing it, if properly administered, a 
most infallible remecfy, both in the cure and prevention of 
scurvy." (^de Trotter's Medidna Nautica.) The precautions 
adopted by captain Cook in his celebrated voyages, hod fully 
demonstrated by their complete success the practicability cf 
keeping scurvy under in the longest voyages, but a uniform 
system of prevention throughout the service was still deficient. 
It is to the representations of Dr. Blair and sir Gilbert 
Blane, in their capacity of commissioners of the board for sick 
and wounded seamen, in 1795, we believe, that its tifstematic 
introduciion into nautical diett by a general order of the admi- 
ralty, is owing. The effect of this wise measure (taken, of 
course, in conjunction with the general causes of improved 
health,) may be estimated from the following facts : — In 
1780, the number of cases of scurvy received into Haslar 
hospital was 1457 ; in 1806 one only, and in 1807 one. There 
are now many surgeons in the navy who have never seen tfat 



OF KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. SA 

of ' a knowl^e of nature and its laws to our weD* 
lieii^; though, like tbe great inyentions of the ma^ 
riner's compa ss and of gunpowder,""lhey may hare 
stood,^ in their origin, unconne'^t^Kl with mu^e gene- 
ISl views. They are rather to he looked~upon as 
the spontaneous produce of a territory essentially 
fertile, than as forming part of the succession of 
harvests which the same hountifiil soil, diligently 
cultivated, is amiable of yielding. The history of 
iodine above related affords, howevec».jL.4ieifed;~"^ ' 
yecime n of the manner in which a knowledge of j 
nat ural properties and laws, collected fro m facts ^ 
Ea^ng no reference to the object to which they 
have been subsequently applied, enables us to set in 
array the resources of nature against herself; and 
deliberately, of afore-thought, to devise remedies 
against the dangers and inconveniences which beset 
us. In this view we might instance, too, the eon* 
dudor^ which, in countries where thunder-stormf 
are more frequent and violent than in our own, 
and at sea (where they are attended with peculiar 
danger, both from the greater probabili^ of ac- 
cident, and its more terrible consequences when it 
does occur,) forms a most real and efficient preserv- 
ative against the effects of lightning * : — the srfety* 
lampy whidi enables us to walk with light and 

* Throughout Fxanee the conductor 18 recognised as a most 
valuable and useful instrument ; and in those parts of Gennany 
where thunder-storms are still more common and tremendous 
thej are become nearly universal. In Munich there is hardly 
a modem house unprovided with them, and of a much better 
construction than ours— several copper vrirea twisted into a 
rope. 

B 4 



56 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

security while surrounded with an atmosphere more 
explosive than gunpowder : — the UJe4foati which 
cannot be sunk^ and which offers relief in c'lrcum- 
stances of all others the most distressing to human- 
ity, and of which a recent invention promises to 
extend the principle to ships of the largest dass : — 
the Ughihouiey with the capital improvements whidi 
the lenses of Brewster and Fresnel, and the elegant 
lamp of lieutenant Drummond, have conferred^ and 
promise yet to confer by their wonderful powers, 
the one of producing the most intense li^t yet 
known, the others of convejring it undispersed to 
great distances : — the discovery of the disinfbctant 
powers of chlorine, and its application to the de« 
struction of miashia and contagion:— that of futntM^ 
€Ae essential principle in which reside the febrifuge 
qualities of the Peruvian bark, a discovery by whidi 
posterity is yet to benefit in its full extent, bnt 
which has already begun to diffuse eomparaiwe conn 
fort and health through regions almost desdated by 
pestiferous exhalations * ; — and, if we desist, it is 
not because the list is exhausted, but because a 
sample, not a catalogue, is intended* 

(46.) One instance more, however, we will add, to 
illustrate the manner in which a most ftmiliar effect, 
which seemed destined only to amuse diildrea, or, 
at best, to finmish a philosophic toy, may become a 
safeguard of human life, and a remedy for a most 

* We have been informed by an eminent phynden hi Bomi^ 
(Dr. Morichini] that a vast quantity of the rolphate of quiniBS 
U manufactured there and consumed in the CttDpagna, with 
an evident effect in mitigating the eererity of the mbrioos 
complaints which aflfoct its inhabitants. 



OT KATUBAL rHltOBOFHT. SJ 

serious and distressing evil* In needle nuuiii* 
&ctories the workmen who point the needles we0 
constantly exposed to excessivelj minute parlides 
of steel which fly from the grindstonesi and ml^y 
though imperceptible to the eye, as the finest dusl 
ID the air, and are inhaled wiUi their breath. The 
effect, though imperceptible on a diort exposure^ 
yet, being constantly repeated from day to dayf 
produces a constitutional irritation dependent on 
the tome properties of the steel, which is sure to 
terminate in pulmonary consumption; msomudv 
that persons employed in this kind of work used 
scarcely ever to attain the age of forty years. * In 
vain was it attempted to purify the air before its 
entry into the lungs by gauzes or linen guards ; the 
dust was too fine and penetrating to be obstructed 
by such coarse expedients, till some ingenious per« 
son bethought him of that wonderfrd power which 
every child who searches for its mother's needle 
with a magnet, or admires the motions and arrange- 
ment of a few steel filings on a sheet of paper held 
above it, sees in exercise. Masks of magnetized 
steel wire are now constructed and adapted to the 
feces of the workmen. By these the air is not 
merely strained but searched in its passage throu^ 
them, and each obnoxious atom arrested and re- 
moved. 

(47.) Perhaps there is no result which places in 
a stronger light the advantages which are to be 
derived from a mere knowledge of the usuai order 
tfnature^ without any attempt on our part to modify 
\t, and apart from all consideration of its causesy 

* Dr. Johnson, Memoirs of the Medical Society, vol. ?• 



46 DISG<H2ffi»E DN THE fiTODT 

easily explained witiiout entering into particidare of 
minaralogical detail.* 

(40.) £x« B. {^5.) UL Hardly less simple and 
efficacious is the process used in some parts of France^ 
where mill-stones are made. When a mass of stone 
sufficiently Jarge is found, it is cut into a cylinder 
several feet high, and the question then arises how 
to subdivide this into horizontal pieces so as to make 
as many mill-stones. For this purpose horizontal 
indentations or grooves are chiselled out quite round 
the cylinder, at distances correspondmg to the thick- 
ness intended to be given to the mill-stones^ into 
which wedges of dried wood are driven. These are 
then wetted, or exposed to the night dew, and next 
morning the different pieces are found separated 
from each other by the expansion of the wood, con*- 
sequent on its absorption of moisture ; an irresistible 
natural power thus acoomplisliing, almost without 
any trouble, and at no expense, an operation which, 
from the peculiar hardness and texture of the fitone, 
would otherwise be impracticable but by the most 
powerful machinery or the most persevering labour* 

(41.) Ex. 6. (S5.) III. To accomplish our ends 
quickly is often of, at least, as much importance at 
to accomplish them with little labour and expense. 
There are innumerable processes which, if left to 
themselves, t. e. to the ordinary operation of natural 
causes, are done, and well done, but with extreme 

* Such a block would weigh between four and five hundred 
ibousand pounds. See Dr. Kennedy's ** Account of the 
Braetion of a Onnite- Obelisk of a (Kngle Stone about S»« 
voity Ftethigfa, at 8efitig»iMtMiu'*-»£tf. FhO, Tmu* toLiz* 
p. SIS. 



jOr KATUBAI. PHII.080PHT, 49 

slowness, and in such cases it is often of the highest 
practical importance to accelerate them. The 
bleaching of linen, for instance^ performed in the 
natural way by exposure to sun, rain, and wind 
requires many weeks or even months for its com- 
pletion ; whereas, by the simple immersion of the 
cloth in a liquid, diemically prepared, the same 
effect is produced m a few hours. The whole circle 
of the arts, indeed, is nothing but one continued 
comment upon this head of our subject The 
instances above given are selected, not on account 
of their superior importance, but for the simplicity 
and directness of application of the principles on 
which they depend, to the objects intended to be 
attained. 

(4>2.) But so constituted is the mind of man, that 
his views enlarge, and his desires and wants in* 
crease, in the full proportion of the fiuulides afforded 
to their gratification, and, indeed, with augmented 
Mipidity, so that no sooner has the successful exer- 
cise of his powers., accomplished any considerable 
simplification or improvement of processes subser« 
vient to his use or comfort^ than his &culties are 
again on the stretch to extend the limits of his 
newly acquired power ; and having once experienced 
the advantages which are to be gathered by availing 
himself of some of the powers of nature to accom- 
plish his ends, he is led thenceforward to regard 
them all as a treasure placed at his disposal, if he 
have only the art, the industry, or the good fortune, 
to penetrate those recesses which conceal them from 
immediate view. Having once learned to look on 
knowledge as power, and to avail himself of it as * 



50 DISCOURSE ON THB STUSV 

such, he is no longer content to limit his enterprises 
to the beaten track of former usage, but is constantly 
led onwards to contemplate objects which, in a pre- 
vious stage of his progress, he would have regarded 
as unattainable and visionary, had he even thought 
of them at all. It is here that the investigation of 
the hidden powers of nature becomes a mine, every 
vein of which is pregnant with inexhaustible wealth, 
and whose ramifications appear to extend in all di- 
rections wherever human wants or curiosity may lead 
lis to explore. 

(4*3.) Between the physical sciences and the arts of 
life there subsists a constant mutual interchange of 
good offices, and no considerable progress can be 
made in the one without of necessity giving rise to 
corresponding steps in the other. On the one hand, 
every art is in some measure, and many entirely, 
dependent on those very powers and qualities of the 
material world which it is the object of physical 
enquiry to investigate and explain ; and, accordingly, 
abundant examples might be cited of cases where 
the remarks of experienced artists, or even ordinary 
workmen, have led to the discovery of natural quali- 
ties, elements, or combinations which have proved 
of the highest importance in physics. Thus (to give 
an instance), a soap-manufacturer remarks tibat the 
residuum of his ley, when exhausted of the alkali for 
which he employs it, produces a corrosion of his 
copper boiler for which he cannot account. He 
puts it into the hands of a scientific chemist for 
analysis, and the result is the discovery of one of the 
most singular and important chemical elementi» 
iodine. The properties of this, being studied. 



OF VATimAL PHIL080PHT. 51 

found to occur most ajppOBitely in illustration and 
suj^rt of a variety of new, curious, and instructive 
Tiews then gaining ground in chemistry, and thus 
exercise a marked influence over the whole body of 
that science. Curiosity is excited : the origin of the 
new substance is traced to the sea-plants from whose 
ashes the principal ingredient of soap is obtained, 
and ultimately to the sea-water itself. It is thence 
hunted through nature, discovered in salt mines and 
springs, and pursued into all bodies which have a 
marine origin; among the rest, into sponge. A 
medical practitioner * then calls to mind a reputed 
remedy for the cure of one of the most grievous and 
unsightly disorders to which the human species is 
subject — the ffotire — which infests the inhabitants 
of mountainous districts to an extent that in this 
favoured land we have happily no experience of, 
and which was sfdd to have been originally cured by 
the ashes of burnt sponge. Led by this indication 
he tries the effect of iodine on that complaint, and 
the result establishes the extraordinary fact that 
this singular substance, taken as a medicine, acts 
with the utmost promptitude and energy on goUre^ 
dissipating the largest and most inveterate in a short 
time, and acting (of course, like all medicines, even 
the most approved, with occasional failures,) as a 
q>ecific, or natural antagonist, agiunst that odious 
deformity. It is thus that any accession to our know- 
ledge of nature is sure, sooner or later, to make itself 
Mt in some practical application, and that a benefit 
conferred on science by the casual observation or 
duewdremark. of even an unscientific or illiterate 

*¦ Br. Coiiidet of Genera. 



52 BiSCOURSE ON THE 6TU0Y 

person infallibly repays itself with interest, though 
often m a way that could nev^r lia^e been at first 
contemplated. 

(44.) It is to such observation, reflected upon, how- 
ever, and matured into a rational and scientific form 
by a inlnd'deeplylmMed^witii the bea tprificlple s of 
" 8oun3 philosophy, that we owe the practic e of va ccinr 
ation r^a practice which has effectually subdued, in 
every country where it has been introduced, one of 
the most frightful scourges of the human race, and 
J in some extirpated it altogether. Happily for us 
** ^ we know only by tradition the ravages of the small- 
y ,4 P^^> ^ ^^ existed among us hardly more than a cen- 
^^ ^^ tury ago, and as it would in a few years infiillibly 
^ '^ exist again, were the barriers which this practice^ 
y / and that of inoculation, oppose to its pr<^e8S 
"" ' ' abandoned. Hardly inferior to this terrible scourge 
on land was, within the last seventy or eighty years, 
the scurvy at sea. The sufferings and destruction 
produced by this horrid disorder on board our ships 
when, as a matter of course, it broke out after a few 
months' voyage, seem now almost incredible. Deaths 
to the amount of eight or ten a day in a moderate 
ship's company ; bodies sewn up in hammocks and 
washing about the decks for want of strength and 
spirits on the part of the miserable survivors to cast 
them overboard ; and every form of loathsome and 
excruciating misery of which the human firame is 
susceptible : — such are the pictures which the nar- 
ratives of nautical adventure in those days con- 
tinually offer.* At present the scurvy is almost 

* Joumal of a Voyage to the Soudi Seas, &c. ftc, under the 
Command of Commodore George Anaoii in 1740—1744^ by 






ev NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 5S 

ccHi^etdy enulicsled in the navy, partly, no doubt, 
from increased and increasing attention to general 
cleanliness, comfort, and diet ; but mainly from the 
constant use of a simple and palatable preventivey 
the acid of the kmon, served out in daily rations. 
If the gratitude (tf mankind be allowed on all hands 
to be the just meed of the philosqahic physician, to 
whose discenmient in seizing, and persererance in 
fiiremg it on public notice we owe the great safe- 
guard of mftnt life, it ought not to be denied to 
those* whose skill and digrriminatinn have thus 



Taacoe Thanaa, Lond. I745t So tremendoos were theniTagei 
of acurvy, that, in the year 17S6, admiral Honer lailed with 
wren ships of the line to the West Indies, and buried his ships* 
companies twice» and died himself in consequence of a broken 
heart. I>r. Johnson, in the year 1778, could describe a sea-lift 
in such terms as these : -»" As to the sailor, when you look 
down from the quarter deck to the space below, you see the 
utmost extremity of human misery, such crowding, such Slth, 
anch stench !**>—« A ship is a prison with the chance of being 
drowned— > it is woiie— worse in every reqpect—. worse room, 
wane air, worse food — worse company ?" SmoUet, who had 
peraonal experience of the honors of a seafiuing fife in those 
days^ gives a lively picture of them in his Roderick Random. 

* Lemon juice was known to be a remedy for scurvy far 
snperior to all others 200 years ago^ as appears by the 
writings of WoodalL His work is entitled ** The Surgeon's 
Hat^ or Military and! Domestic Medicine. By John Woodall, 
Master in Surgery London, 1636," p. 165« In 1600, Com* 
modore Lancaster sailed from England with three other ships 
for the Cape of Good Hope, on the Sd of April, and arrived 
m SaJdanha Bay on the 1st of August, the commodore's own 
ship being in perfect health, from the administration of three 
tai>le.spoonsfull of kmon juice every morning to each of hia 
whereas the other ships were so sickly aa to be tm- 

B 3 



^^^^ 



54 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

Strengthened the sinews of our most powerful arm^ 
and obliterated one of the darkest features in the 
most glorious of all professions. 

(45.) These last, however, are instances of simple 
observation, limited to the point immediately in view, 
and assuming only so far the character of science ag 
a systematic adoption of good and rejection of evil, 
when groimded on experience carefully weighed, 
justly entitle it to do. They are not on that account 
less appositely cited as instanees-ef the importanee 



manageable for want of hands, and the commander was obliged 
to send men on board to take in their sails and hoist out thdr 
boats. (Purchas*s Pilgrim, vol. i. p. 149.) A Fellow of the 
college, and an eminent practitioner, in 1753 published a tract 
on se^ scurvy, in which he adverts to the superior virtue of this 
medicine ; and Mr. A. Boird, surgeon of the Hector sloop of 
war, states, that from what he had seen of its effects on 
board of that ship, he ** thinks he shall not be accused of 
presumption in pronouncing it, if properly administered, a 
most infallible remetbf, both in the cure and prevention of 
scurvy.'* (Vide Trotter's Medicina Nautica.) The precautions 
adopted by captain Cook in his celebrated vojrages, had fully 
demonstrated by their complete success the practicability of 
keeping scurvy under in the longest voyages, but a uniform 
system of prevmtion throughout the service was still deficient. 
It is to the representations of Dr. Blair and sir Gilbert 
Blane, in their capacity of commissioners of the board for sick 
and wounded seamen, in 1795, we believe, that its tystematic 
introduction into tunUical diet, by a general order of the admi* 
ralty, is owing. The effect of this wise measure (taken, of 
course, in conjunction with the general causes of improved 
health,) may be estimated from the following facts: — In 
1780, the number of cases of scurvy received into Haslar 
hospital was 1457 ; in 1806 one only, and in 1807 one. Thei« 
are now many surgeons in the navy who have never seen te 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. SS 

€/t' a ioioirlege of nature and iu laws to our well* 
ben^ dioogh, like tbe great inveniions o^' cne m^ 
riner's compas s and of gunpowder, ~l&ey may have 
stood^ in their origm, unconnecU^ with uiu^re gene- 
^ views. They are rather to beHboked upon as 
^e spontaneous produce of a territory essentially 
fotile» than as forming part of the succession of 
harvests which the same bountifiil soil, diligently 
cultivated, is capable of yielding* The history of 
iodine above related affords, howevei:».jL4iecfiect~ *^ 
yecJmen jof the maimer in which a knowledge of ' 
natu ral properties and laws, collected from facts ^ 
Having no reference to the object to which they 
have been subsequently applied, enables us to set in 
array the resources of nature against herself; and 
deliberatdy, of afore-thought, to devise remedies 
against the dangers and inconveniences which beset 
us. lb this view we might instance, too, the aw- 
ductoTy which, in countries where thunder-storms 
are more frequent and violent than in our own, 
and at sea (where they are attended with peculiar 
danger, boUi from the greater probability of ac- 
cident, and its more terrible consequences when it 
does occur,) forms a most real and efficient preserv- 
ative against the effects of lightning * : — the sc^efy* 
hmp^ whidi enables us to walk with light and 

* Unoughoot Fnmoe the ocmduetor is reeogniaed at a most 
Tiliiable aod useful iostmnieiit ; and in those parts of Gennany 
where thunder-storms are still more common and tremendous 
they are become nearly umyersal. In Munich there is hardlf 
a modem house unprovided with them, and of a much better 
constniction than ours— several copper wires twisted into a 
rape* 

B 4 



•\ 



56 DISCOUBSS ON THE STUDY 

security while surrounded with an atmosphere more 
explosive than gunpowder : — the lifh-bocU, which 
cannot be sunk, and which offers relief in circum- 
stances of all others the most distressing to human- 
ity, and of which a recent invention promises to 
extend the principle to ships of the largest dass : — - 
the liffhthausey with the capital improvements whidi 
the lenses of Brewster and Fresnel, and the elegan€ 
lamp of lieutenant Drummond, have conferred, and 
promise yet to confer by their wonderful powersy 
the one of producing the most intense light yet 
known, the others of conve3ring it undispersed to 
great distances : — the discovery of the disinfectant 
powers of dilorine, and its application to the de* 
struction of miastna and contagion:— that c/£qumhief 
the essential principle in which reside the febrifiige 
qualities of the Peruvian bark, a discovery by wfaidl 
posterity is yet to benefit in its full extent, but 
which has already begun to di£fuse eomparaiive com- 
fort and health through regions almost desolated by 
pestiferous exhalations * ; — and, if we desist, it is 
not because the list is exhausted, but because a 
sample, not a catalogue, is intended. 

(46.) One instance more, however, we will add, to 
illustrate the manner in which a most fitoiiliar effect, 
which seemed destined only to amuse children, or, 
at best, to ftumish a philosophic toy, may become a 
safeguard of human life, and a remedy for a most 

* We have been informed hj an endnent phyridan In Boom^ 
(Dr. Morichini] that a vast quantity of the tnlpfaate of qniniiw 
U manufactured there and coniumed in the CtmpagM^ with 
an evident effect in mitigating the iemity of the mahrioiM 
complaints which affect its inhabitants 



07 NATURAL 7H1L0807HT. St 

serious and distressing eriL In needle mamn 
&ctories the workmen who point the needles are 
constantly exposed to excessively minute particle* 
of steel which fly from the grindstonesy ttid mis, 
though imperceptible to the eye, as the finest dust 
in the ur, and are inhaled with their breath* The 
effect, though imperceptible on a short exposure, 
yet, being constantly repeated from day to day^ 
produces a constitutional irritation dependent on 
the tonic properties of the steel, which is sure to 
terminate in pulmonary consumption; insomuch^ 
that persons employed in this kind of work used 
scarcely ever to attain the age of forty years. * In 
vain was it attempted to purify the air before ita 
entry into the lungs by gauzes or linen guards ; the 
dust was too fine and penetrating to be obstructed 
by such coarse expedients, till some ingenious per* 
son bethought him of that wonderful power which 
every child who searches for its mother's needle 
with a magnet, or admires the motions and arrange- 
ment of a few steel filings on a sheet of paper held 
above It, sees in exercise. Masks of magnetized 
steel wire are now constructed and adapted to the 
&ces of the workmen. By these the air is not 
merely strained but searched in its passage through 
them, and each obnoxious atom arrested and re- 
moved. 

(47.) Peihaps there is no result which places in 
a stronger li^t the advantages which are to be 
derived from a mere knowledge of the ttsual &rdtr 
tfnatuftf without any attempt on our part to modify 
It, and apart f^om all consideration of its causesi 

* Dr. Johnson, Memoirs of the Medical Society, toI. t. 



58 BiscouasE on the study 

than the mstitution of life-assurances. Nothing is 
more uncertain than the life of a single individual ; 
and it is the sense of this insecurity which has given 
rise to such institutions. Thej are, in their nature 
and objects, the precise reverse of gambling specu- 
lations» their object being to equalize vicissitude, 
and to place the pecuniary relations of numerous 
masses of mankind, in so far as they extend, on a 
footing independent of individual casualty. To do 
this with the greatest possible advantage, or indeed 
with any advantage at all, it is necessary to know the 
laws of moftalxbyy or the average numbers of indivi- 
duals, out of a great multitude, who die at every 
period of life from infancy to extreme old age. At 
first sight this would seem a hopeless enquiry ; to 
some, perhaps, a presumptuous one. But it has been 
made ; and the result is, that, abating extraordinary 
causes, such as wars, pestilence, and the like, a re* 
markable regularity does obtain, quite sufficient 
to afford grounds not only for general estimations, 
but for nice calculations of risk and adventure, such 
as infallibly to insure the success of any such insti- 
tution founded on good computations ; and thus to 
confer such stability on the fortunes of families de- 
pendent on the exertions of one individual as to con- 
stitute an important feature in modem civilization. 
The only thing to be feared in such institutions is 
their too great multiplication and consequent com- 
petition, by which a spirit of gambling and under- 
bidding is liable to be generated among their con- 
ductors, and the very mischief may be produced^ 
on a scale of frightful extent, which they are 
especially intended to prevent. 



OP NATURAL PHIIX>80PHT. 59 

. (48.) We have hitherto considered only cases m 
which a knowledge of natural laws enables us to inp< 
prove our condition, by counteracting evils of which, 
but for its possession^ we must have remained forever 
the helpless victims* Let us now take a similar view 
of those in which we are enabled to call in nature 
as an auxiliary to augment our actual power, and 
t»pacitate us for undertakings, which without such 
aid might seem to be hopeless. Now, to this end, it 
is necessary that we should form a just conception 
of what those hidden powers of nature ofVi which 
we can at pleasure call into action ; — how &r they 
transcend the measure of human force, and set at 
naught the efforts not only of individuals but of 
whole nations of men. 

(49.) It is well known to modem engineers, that 
^ere is virtue in a bushel of coals properly CKmr* 
sumed, to raise seventy millions of pounds weight a 
foot high. This is actually the enjera^ effect of an 
engine at this moment working in ComwalL* Let 
us pause a moment, and consider what this is 
equivalent to in matters of practice. 

(50.) The ascent of Mont Blanc from the valley of 
Chamouni is considered, and with justice^ as the 
most toilsome feat that a strong man can execute in 
two days. The combustion of two pounds of coal 
would place him on the flummitf 

* The engine at Huel Towan. See Mr. Henwood*8 State- 
ment *^ of the perfonnance of steam-engines in Cornwall for 
April, May, and June, 1829.** Brew8ter*8 Journal, Oct. 1 889.^ 
— The highest monthly average of this engine extends to 79 
millions of pounds. 

f However, this is not ^te a fair statement \ a man** dail) 



60 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(51.) The Menai Bridge, one of the most stu- 
pendous works of art that has been raised by man in 
modem ages, consists of a mass of iron, not less than 
four millions of pounds in weight, suspended at a 
medium height of about 120 feet above the sea. 
The consumption of seven bushels of coal would 
suffice to raise it to the place where it hangs. 

(52.) Tlie great pyramid of Egypt is composed of 
granite. It is 700 feet in the side of its base, and 500 
in perpendicular height, and stands on eleven acres 
of ground. Its weight is, therefore, 12,760 millions 
of pounds, at a medium height of 125 feet ; conse- 
quently it would be raised by the effort of about 
630 chaldrons of coal, a quantity consumed in some 
founderies in a week. 

(53.) Tlie annual consumption of coal in London 
is estimated at 1,500,000 chaldrons. The effort of 
this quantity would suffice to raise a cubical block of 
marble, 2200 feet in the side, through a space equal 
to its own height, or to pile one such mountain upon 
another. The Monte Nuovo, near Pozzuoll, (which 
was erupted in a single night by volcanic fire,) 
might have been raised by such an effort, from a 
depth of 40,000 feet, or about eight miles. 

(54.) It will be observed, that, in the above state- 
ment, the mherent power of fuel is, of necessity, 
greatly under-rated. It is not pretended by engineers 
that the economy of fuel is yet pushed to its utmost 
limit, or that the whole effective power is obtained 
is any application of fire yet devised ; so that were 

labourif about 4 Ibi. of cools. The extreme ton of tliit aicent 
arises firom other obvious causes than the mere height. 



OJ VATUBAI. FHULOSOPHT* 61 

we to say 100 mfllkMu instead of 70^ we ihoaldpro- 
liahly be nearer the tntth. 

(55.) The powers of wind and water, which we are 
coDstantlj ino^reasing into our serrice^ can tcarcely 
be called latent or hidden, jret it is not fully con- 
sidered, in general, what they do effect for us. 
Those who would judge of what advanti^e nuty be 
taken of the wind, for example, even on land (not 
to speak of navigation), may turn their eyes on Hol- 
land. A great portion of the most valuable and 
populous tract of this country lies much below the 
level of the sea, and is only preserved from inun- 
undation by the muntenance of embankments. 
Thougjh these suffice to keep out the abrupt in- 
flux of the ocean, they cannot oppose that law 
of nature, by which fluids, in seeking their level, 
insinuate themselves through the pores and subter- 
raneous channels of a loose sandy soil, and keep 
the country in a constant state of infiltration 
from below upwards. To counteract this tendency, 
as well as to get rid of the rain water, which has no 
natural outlet, pumps worked by windmills are estab* 
lished in great numbers, on the dams and embank- 
ments, which pour out the water,as from aleaky ship, 
and in effect preserve the country firom submersion, 
by taking advantage of every wind that blows. To 
drain the Haarlem lake * would seem a hopeless 
project to any speculators but those who had the 
steam-engine at. their command, or had learnt ic 

* Its surface is about 4(^000 acres, and medium depth 
about 20 feet. It was proposed to drain it by rumdng emF> 
bankmeuts across it, and thus cutting it up into more manage- 
able portions to be drained by windmills. 



^^ 



52 mSCOVRSE ON ifflB 6TU0Y 

person infallibly repays itself with interest, though 
often m a way that could never have been at first 
contemplated. 

(44.) It is to such observation, reflected upon, how- 
ever, and matured into a rational and scientific form 
by a mhidileeFfly^ im15iied"witfa the bes tprlBClples of 
soiind philoBC^^, that we owe the practi ce of v accio' 
ation ; X practice wliich has effectually subdued, in 
every country where it has been introduced, one of 
the most frightful scourges of the human race, and 
in some extirpated it altogether. Happily for ua 
,*" ^ we know only by tradition the ravages of the small- 

y ^ pox, as it existed among us hardly more than a cen- 
tury ago, and as it would in a few years in&llibly 
^ -'^ . exist again, were the barriers which this practice^ 
^' / and that of inoculation, of^ose to its progress 

\ y . abandoned. Hardly inferior to this terrible scourge 
on land was, within the last seventy or eighty years, 
the scurvy at sea. The sufferings and destruction 
produced by this horrid disorder on board our ships 
when, as a matter of course, it broke out after a few 
months' voyage, seem now almost incredible. Deaths 
to the amount of eight or ten a day in a moderate 
ship's company ; bodies sewn up in hammocks and 
washing about the decks for want of strength and 
spirits on the part of the miserable survivors to cast 
them overboard ; and every fcnrm of loathsome and 
excruciating misery of which the human firame is 
susceptible : — such are the pictures which the nar- 
ratives of nautical adventure in those days con- 
tinually offer.* At present the scurvy is almost 

* Journal of a Voyigetofhe South Seas, &c. ftc, tmdertbtf 
Command of Commodore George Anson in 1740—1744^ by 






OF NATVBAL PHILOSOPHY. 5S 

tomfietdy eradtcated in the navy, partly, no doubt» 
from increased and increasing attention to general 
cleanliness, comfort, and diet \ but mainly from the 
constant use of a simple and palatable preyentiycy 
the acid of dke lemon, served out in daily rations. 
If the gradtade (^mankind be allowed on all hands 
to be the just meed of the philosophic physician, to 
whose discenunent in seizing, and persererance in 
Ibremg it on public notice we owe the great safe* 
guard of inftnt life, it ought not to be denied to 
those* whose skill and disrrimination have thua 



PiMooe Tliomaa, LoEidi 1745fl So tremendous were the imTaget 
flf acurvy, that, in the year 1736, adminl Hoaier sailed with 
fleren ships of the line to the West Indies, and buried his ships* 
companies twice, and died himself in consequence of a broken 
heart. Dr. Johnson, in the year 1778, could describe a sei^life 
in such terms as these : -^'^ As to the sailor, when you look 
down from the quarter deck to the space below, you see the 
utmost extremity of human misery, such crowding, such filth, 
such stench !**— « A ship is a prison with the chance of being 
drowned «- it is worse —worse in erery respect— « worse room, 
worse air, worse food — worse company ! ** SmoUet, who had 
personal experience of the horrors of a seaftring life in those 
days, giTes a lively picture of them in his Roderick Random. 

* Lemon juice was known to be a remedy for scurry fisr 
superior to all others 200 years ago^ as appears by the 
writings of WoodalL His woA is entitled " The Surgeon's 
Vat^ or Iditary andl Domestic Medicine. By John Woodall, 
master in Surgery London, 1636," p. 165. In 1600, Com- 
modore Lancaster sailed from England with three other ships 
for the Cape of Good Hope, on the 2d of April, and arrived 
in Saldanha Bay on the 1st of August, the commodore's own 
ship being in perfect health, from the administration of three 
table-spoonsfull of lemon juice every morning to each of hit 
whereas the other ships were so rickly as to be im- 

E S 



54l DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

Strengthened the sinews of our most powerful arm^ 
and obliterated one of the darkest features in the 
most glorious of all professions. 

(45.) These last, however, are instances of simple 
observation, limited to the point inunediately in view, 
and assuming only so &r the character of science as 
a systematic adoption of good and rejection of evil, 
when grounded on experience carefully weighed^ 
justly entitle it to do. They are not on that account 
less appositely cited as instances -«f thenmportanee 

M» I I I !¦ ¦ — ^^IM^^I^I^m " ^^— iM^h^l^^— ^m^^m^i— ^^^P^^^ 

manageable for want of hands, and the commander was obliged 
to send men on board to take in their sails and hoist out their 
boats. (Purchas's Pilgrim, vol. i. p. 149.) A Fellow of the 
college, and an eminent practitioner, in 175S published a tract 
on sea scurry, in which he adverts to the supoior virtue of this 
medicine ; and Mr. A. Baird, surgeon of the Hector sloop of 
war, states, that from what he had seen of its effects on 
board of that ship, he " thinks he shall not be accused of 
presumption in pronouncing it, if properly administered, a 
most if^aUible reme^, both in the cure and prevention of 
scurvy.** (Vide Trotter's Medicina Nautica.) The precautions 
adopted by captain Code in his celebrated voyages, hod fully 
demonstrated by their complete success the practicability of 
keeping scurvy under in the longest voyages, but a uniform 
system of prevention throughout the service was still deficient. 
It 11 to the representations of Dr. Blair and sir Gilbert 
Blane, in their capacity of commissioners of the board for sick 
and wounded seamen, in 1795, we believe, that its tyOematic 
introduction into nautical diet, by a general order of the admi- 
ralty, is owing. The effect of this wise measure (taken, of 
course, in conjunction with the general causes of improved 
health,) may be estimated from the following facts : — In 
1780, the number of cases of scurvy received into Haslor 
hospital was 1457 ; in 1806 one only, and in 1807 one. There 
ore now many surgeons in the navy who have never seen tfai 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPRT* SA 

ci' a koawleg^ of nature and its laws to our well* 
bemg't though, like tbe great inyentions ot' theloft^ 
nner^g compa sa and of gunpowder, ~fhey may have 
stood, in dieir orj^n, unconueOted wiUi uiufe gene* 
fsa views. They are rather to be ]ooked~upon as 
the spontaneous produce of a territory essentially 
fotQe, than as forming part of the successi<m of 
harvests which the same bountiful soil, diligently 
cultivated, is ciqpable of 3rielding. Tlie history of 
iodine above related affords, howevei:».jL4iecfiect"^ 
gpecime n of the manner in which a knowledge of^ 
natu ral properties and lawsy collected fro m facts 
Having no reference to the object to which they 
have been subsequently applied, enables us to set in 
array the resources of nature against herself; and 
deliberately, of afore-thought, to devise remedies 
against the dangers and inconveniences which beset 
H8. In this view we might instance, too, the cofi- 
ductoTy which, in countries where thunder-storms 
are more frequent and violent than in our own, 
and at sea (where they are attended with peculiar 
danger, hoih from the greater probability of ac- 
cident, and its more terrible consequences when it 
does occur,) forms a most real and efficient preserv- 
ative against the effects of lightning * : — the 9c^ety* 
lamp^ which enables us to walk with light and 

* Tlnoughout France the conductor is reoognued as a most 
valuable and useful instmment ; and in those parts of Germany 
iHiere tfaunder-stonns are still more common and tremendous 
tfaey are become nearly universal. In Munich there is hardljf 
a modem house unprovided with them, and of a much better 
construction than ours— several copper vdres twisted into a 
rope* 

E 4 



-^ • 



56 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

security while surrounded with an atmosphere more 
eitplosive than gunpowder: — the life^boat^ which 
cannot be sunk, and which offers relief in circum- 
stances of all others the most distressing to human- 
ity, and of which a recent invention promises to 
extend the principle to ships of the largest dass : -^ 
the Ughthmucy with the capital improvements which 
the lenses of Brewster and Fresnel, and the el^ant 
lamp of lieutenant Drummond, have conferred, and 
promise yet to confer by their wonderful powersp 
the one of producing the most intense light yet 
known, the others of conve3ring it undispersed to 
great distances : — the discovery of the disinfectant 
powers of chlorine, and its application to the de-* 
struction of miasma and contagion: — that cSqmmfiBf 
the essential principle in which reside the febrifuge 
qualities of the Peruvian bark, a discovery by which 
posterity is yet to benefit in its ftill extent, but 
which has already begun to diffuse comparalxve com- 
fort and health through regions almost desdated by 
pestiferous exhalations * ; — and, if we desist, it it 
not because the list is exhausted, but because a 
sample, not a catalogue, is intended. 

(46.) One instance more, however, we will add, to 
illustrate the manner in which a most familiar effect, 
which seemed destined only to amuse diildrea, or, 
at best, to furnish a philosophic toy, may become a 
safeguard of human life, and a remedy fbr a most 

* We have been infonned by an endnent phyric&n In Boms^ 
P>r. Moriduni) that a vast quantity of the sulphate of quiniBe 
ik manufactured there and consumed in the CtaaptagOM, with 
an evident effect in mitigating the severity of the nahtfioys 
complaints which affbct its inhabitsntB. 



or KATtTHAL PHIL080PHT. SJ 

serious and distressing erO. In needle mino* 
&ctories the workmen who point the needles are 
constantly exposed to excessively minute particle* 
of steel which fly from the grindstones^ ttid mix, 
though imperceptible to the eye, as the finest dust 
in the mr, and are inhaled wiUi their breath. The 
effect, though imperceptible on a diort exposure^ 
yet, being constantly repeated from day to day^ 
produces a constitutional irritation dependent ca 
the tonic properties of the steel, which b sure to 
terminate in pulmonary consumption; insomucfa, 
that persons employed in this khid of work nsed 
scarcely ever to attain the age of forty years. * In 
vain was it attempted to purify the lur before ita 
entry into the lungs by gauzes or linen guards; the 
dust was too fine and penetrating to be obstructed 
by such coarse expedients, till some ingenious per« 
son bethought him of that wonderful power which 
every child who searches for its mother's needle 
with a magnet, or admires the motions and arrange- 
ment of a few steel filings on a sheet of paper held 
above it, sees in exercise. Masks of magnetized 
steel wire are now constructed and adapted to the 
&ces of the workmen. By these the air is not 
merely strained but searched in its passage through 
them, and each obnoxious atom arrested and re- 
moved. 

(47.) Peihaps there is no result which places in 
a stronger light the advantages which are to be 
derived from a mere knowledge of the vsuai order 
tfwOwrt, without any attempt on our part to modify 
\t, and apart from all consideration of its causesy 

* Dr. Johnson, Memoirs of the Medical Society, vol. v. 



/ 



68 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

hibits, and which, in an estimate of averages, gives 
an immense preponderance to the present over 
every former condition of mankind, and, for aught 
we can see to the contrary, will place succeeding 
generations in the same degree of superior relation 
to the present that this holds to those passed away.^ 
Or we may put the same proposition in other words, 
and, admitting the existence of every inferior grade 
of advantage in a higher state of civilization which 
subsisted in the preceding, we shall find, first, that, 
taking state for state, the proportional numbers of 
those who enjoy the higher degrees of advantage 
increases with a constantly accelerated rapidity as 
society advances ; and, secondly, that the superior 
extremity of the scale is constantly enlarging by 
the addition of new degrees. The condition of a 
European prince is now as far superior, in the com- 
mand of real comforts and conveniences, to that of 
one in the middle ages, as that to the condition of 
one of his own dependants. 
I (62.) The advantages_cqn|e£ied..by the-angment- 
I ation of our physical resources through thejnedium 
of increased TmnwIpHgA^fiT^d '"^prov ed art h^y ** ^hlp 
^culiar and remarkable property, — that thev: ar e 
in their nature diffusive, and cannot J^e^enjeyed m 
any exclusive manner by a few. An eastern despot 
may extort" the" Tidies and monopolize the art of 
his subjects for his own personal use; he may 
spread around him an unnatural splendour and 
luxury, and stand in strange and preposterous con- 
trast with the general penury and discomfort of 
his people; he may glitter in jewels of gold and 
raiment of needlework; but the wonders of weU 



07 NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 69 

contrived and executed manufiicture which we use 
daily, and the comforts which have been invented, 
tried, and improved upon by thousands, in every 
form of domestic convenience, and for every ordi- 
nary purpose of life, can never be enjoyed by him. 
To produce a state of things in which the physical 
advantages of civilized life can exist in a high de- 
gree, the stimulus of increasing comforts and con- 
stantly elevated desires, must have been felt by 
millions; since it is not in the power of a fe« 
individuals to create that wide demand for usefil 
and ingenious applications, which alone can lead to 
great and rapid improvements, unless backed by 
that a^ing from the speedy diffusion o f the wune 
advantages amoDg_the mass of mankind.. . 

(63.) If this, be true of physical advantages, it 
applies with stingreater force to intellectuaL Know- 
led^e (an neith fiE— be, adequately cidtivated nor 
adequately enjoyed by a few; and although the 
conditions of ouFlBAisleucv 61i earth maybe such as 
to predulie an libundfflit supply of the physical ne- 
cessities^-atflfhb may be bom, there is no such 
law of nature in force against that of our Intellectual 
and mon^vrcmts. JKnnwlfdgf in noti Vihv fftni^rtir- 
stroyed by use, but rather augmented an j^4]£jr- 
lected. "" It acquires no^ perliaps, a greater certainty, 
but at lea st a confirmed a 'Hhftrity *'"'^ " pr^hnKio 
duration, by i|Suvers^>ssent ; and there is no body 
of knowledge' so' complete, but that it may acquire 
accession, or so free from -error but that it may 
receive correction in passing through the minds of 
minions. Those who admire and love knowledge for 
its own sake~oughtTdlvlHli lu wx iu denieuls nntde 



70 



DISCOURSE ON THE STUDT 



/• 



accessible to all, were it onlj.tliat.the^ may be the 
more thoroughly examined intaga d more effectu ally 
UeveTopel in" their_ consequences, a nd receive t hat 
ductility and plastic quality which tKe press ure of 
minds of al^itescrip^ohsT^consta^^ 
to their purposes^ can alone bestow. But to this 
end it is necessary that it should be divested, as far 
^ possible, of artificial difficulties, and stripped of 
all such technicalities as tend to place it in the light 
of a craft and a mystery, inaccessible without a 
kind of apprenticeship* Science, of course, like 
every thing else, has its own peculiar terms, and^ 
so to speak, its idioms of language ; and these it 
would be unwise, were it even possible, to relinquish : 
but every thing that tends to clothe it in jjitrange 
and repuliive garb, and especFally every thing thaty 
to keep up an appearance of superiorit]^ In Ij&profea-^ 
sors over the rest of mankind^ assumes an unnecessary 
guise o7pf(^n£ty and obscurityiTsEbuU be^iacri- 
ficed without mercy. ^Rot to do this, is to deliber«i 
ately reject the light which the natural unencumbered 
good sense of mankind is capable of throwing on 
every subject, even in the elucidation of principles : 
but where principles are to be applied to practical 
uses it becomes absolutely necessary ; as^aUjiiaiw 
kind have then an interest in ^eir bem g so fami«^ 
li^ly understood, ^at no 'mistiakeg shsU arise .,ia 
their a|>plication« 

(64.) Tlie same remark f^pUes to arts. They cannot 
be perfected till their whole processes are laid open^ 
and their languflge.agnplified . apd ren3ere3"'univer«» 
sally mteUigiUe. Art is the applica tion of kn owledfe 
to a practical end. If the knowledge be merely 



OT NATUKAL PHIL080PHT. 71 

aocumiilated experienoe, the art is empmeai; bat * 
if it be experience reasoned upon and brought un • 
der general principles, it assumes a higher chancter, 
and becomes a adenine art In the progress ol 
mankind from barbarism to civilised life, the arts 
necessarily precede science* The wants and cnnr- 
ings of our animal constitution must be satisfied; 
the commits, and some of the luxuries, of life must 
exist* Something must be giren to the vanity or 
show, and more to the pride of power : the round 
of baser pleasures must have been tried and found 
insi^dent, before mtdlectual ones can gain a foot- 
ing; and when they have obtained it, the delights 
of poetry and its sister arts stUl take precedence of 
contemplative eijoyments, and the severer pursuits 
of thought ; and when these in time begin to chartn 
from their novelty, and sciences begin to arise^ they 
will at first be those oi pure ^culation* The mind 
delights to escape from the trammels which had 
bound it to earth, and luxuriates in its newly finmd 
powers* Hence, the abstractions of geometry-^ 
the properties of numbers-^ the movements of the 
celestial spheres —whatever is abstruse, remote, and 
extramundane •— become the first objects of infimt 
science* Applications come late: the arts continue 
stowly progressive, but their realm remains sefiarated 
frnn that of science by a wide gulf which can only 
be passed by a powerfid spring. They form their own 
language and their own conventions, which none but 
artists can understand* The whole tendency of 
empirical art, is to bury itself in technicalities, and 
to place its pride in particular short cuts and mys* 
teries known only to adepts ; to surprise and astonish 

V 4 



7^ DISCOUKSE ON THE STUDY 

by results, but conceal processes. Tlie character 
a£ science is the direct contrary. It delights to 
lay itself open to enquiry; and is not satisfied 
with its conclusions, till it can make the road to 
them broad and beaten: and in its applications it 
preserves the same character; ita.Khole.aim being 
to strip, away .All technical mystery, to iUunSlimte 
every dark recess, and to gain free ac eooo to 4 dl 
pcocessies^. with j^ vii^w to improve them iSHTBtional 
prinriplftr It would seem that a union of two quali- 
ties almost opposite to each other — a going forth of 
the thoughts in two directions, and a sadden transfer 
of ideas from a remote station in one to an equally 
distant one in the other — is required to start the first 
idea of applying sdenee. Among the Greeks, this 
point was attained by Archimedes, but attained too 
late, on the eve of that great edipse of science 
which was destined to continue for nearly eighteen 
centuries, till Galileo in Italy, and Bacon in Eng- 
land, at once dispelled the darkness : the one, by 
his inventions and discoveries; the other, by the 
irresistible force of his arguments and eloquence. 

{^^ Finally, the improvement effected in the con- 
dition of mankind by advances in physical science 
as applied to the useful purposes of life, is very fiir 
fi*om being limited to their direct consequences in 
the more abundant supply of our physical wants, and 
the increase of our comforts. Great as these benefits 
are, they are yet but steps to others of a stiU higher 
kind. The successful results of our experiments 
and reasonings in natural philosophy^ and the meal* 
cuJable advantages which experience, s yst e mat ically 
consulted and dispassionately reasoned on, has con« 



09 NATURAL PHILOSOPHY* 7S 

ferred m matters purely physical, tend of necessity 
to impress something of the well weighed and [»o- 
gresBire eharoetcr ^of science on the more compli- 
cated conduct of our lociid imd mor^ relations. It 
is thus that TegmlatiDh fund politics become gradually 
regarded as experimental sciences; and history, not, 
as formerly, the mere record of tyrannies and daugh- 
ters, whidi, by immortalising the execrable actions 
of one age, perpetuates the ambition of committing 
them in every succeeding one, but as the archive 
of experiments, successful and unsuccessful, gra- 
dually accumulating towards the solution of the 
grand problem — how the advantages of government 
are to be secured with the least possible inconveni- 
ence to the governed. The celebrated apophthegm, 
tiiat nations never profit by experience becomes 
yearly more and more untrue. Political economy, 
at least, is found to have sound principles, founded 
in the moral and physical nature of man, which, 
however lost sight of in particular measures — how- 
ever even temporarily controverted and borne down 
by clamour — have yet a stronger and stronger testi- 
mony borne to them in each succeeding generation, 
by which they must, sooner or later, prevail. The 
idea once conceived and verified, that great and 
noble ends are to be achieved, by which the condi- 
tion of the whole human species shall be permanently 
bettered, by bringing into exercise a sufficient quan- 
tity of sober thought, and by a proper adaptation of . 
means, is of itself sufficient to set us earnestly on 
reflecting what ends are truly great and noble, either 
in themselves, or as conducive to others of a still 
lofHer character ; because we are not now, as hereto- 



74 PISCOURSS ON THE STUDY 

fore, hopeless of attaining them. It is not noir 
equally hannless and insignificant, whether we are 
right or wrong ; since we are no longer supinely and 
helplessly carried down the stream of events, but 
feel ourselves capable of bufietting at least with itd 
waves, and perhaps of riding triumphantly over 
them: for why should we despair that the reason 
which has enabled us to subdue all nature to our 
purposes, should (if permitted and assisted by the 
providence of God) achieve a far more difficult con- 
quest; and ultimately find some means of enabling 
the collective wisdom of mankind to bear down 
those obstacles which individual short-sightedness^ 
selfishness^ and passion, oppose to all improvements* 
and by which the highest hopes are continually 
blighted^ and the fiurest prospects marred. 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOVBT. 75 



PART 11. 

Of THB JPRINCIPLU OK WHICH PHTSICAI. tCISKCB 
RSLIX8 FOR ITS SDCCKBSFVL FROSICUTIOy, AWD 
THE RULES BT WHICH A SYSTEMATIC SZAMI- 
HATION OF NATURE SHOULD BE COHDUCTED9 
WITH ILLU8TRATIOV8 OF THEIR INFLUEMCB 
AS EXBMFLIFIED IN THE HISTOBT OF ITS FBO* 
CBBSS. 

CHAPTER L 

OF EBFBEUfNCB AS TBB 80UBCB OF OUB KNOWLBDQB. 
— OF THE DISMISSAL OF PBBIUDICBS. -^ OF THE BTI- 
DBNCB OF OUR SENSES. 

(66.) Into abstract sdaMs^ as we hBFe before ob* 
served, the notion of cause does not enter. The 
truths it is conversant with are iMOBMory ones, and 
exist independent of cause* There may be 
no such real Mng as a right*lined triangle 
marked out in space ; but the moment we conceive 
one in our minds, we cannot refuse to admit the 
sum of its three angles to be equal to two right 
angles; and if in addition we conceive one of its 
angles to-be a right wigle, we cannot thenceforth 
refuse to admit that the sum of the squares on the 
two sides, including the rig^t angle, is equal to 
the square on the side subtending it To maintain 
the contrary, would be^ in effect, to deny Its 
being r%ht angled. No one wmm$ or mahM aD 
the diameters of an ellipse to be Ixbected in its 



-_ . *.-^ 



76 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

centre. To assert the contrary, would not be to 
rebel against a power, but to deny our own words. 
But in natural science cause and effe(^ are the ulti- 
mate relations we contemplate ; and laws, whether 
imposed or maintained, which, for aught we can per- 
ceive, might have been other than they are. This 
distinction is very important. A clever man, shut 
up alone and allowed unlimited time, might reason 
out for himself all the truths of mathematics, by 
proceeding from those simple notions of space and 
number of which he cannot divest himself without 
ceasing to think But he could never tell, by any 
effort of reasoning, what would become of a lump 
of sugar if immersed in water, or what impression 
would be produced on, his eye by mixing the colours 
yellow and blue. 

(67.) We have thus pointed out to us, as the great, 
and indeed only ultimate source of our knowledge of 
nature and its laws, experience; by which we 
mean, not the experience of one man only, or ci 
one generation, but the accumulated experience of 
all mankind in all ages, registered in books or re* 
corded by tradition. But experience may be ac- 
quired in two ways : either, first, by noticing fiicts as 
ihej occur, without any attempt to influence the 
frequency of their occurrence, or to vary the cir- 
cumstances under which they occur ; this is observ- 
ation : or, secondly, by putting in action causeB 
and agents over which we have control, and pur- 
posely varying their combinations, and notidng 
what effects take place ; this is experiment. To 
these two sources we must look as the fountuns cxf 
all natural science. It is not intended, however, by 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 77 

thus distingniahing observation firom ezperimenty 
to place them in an j kind of contrast Essential] j 
they are much alike, and differ rather in d^ee 
than in kind ; so that, perhiqps, the terms pasdve 
Ind attioe ofnervaium mi^t better express their 
distinction; but it is, nerertheless, highly im- 
portant to mark the different states of mind in 
inquiries carried on by their respective aids, as 
well as their different effects in promoting the 
progress of science. In the former, we sit still 
and listen to a tale, told us, perhaps obscurely, 
piecemeal, and at long intervals of time, with 
our attention more or less awake. It is only by 
afier-rumination that we gather its fiill import; 
and often, when the opportunity is gone by, we 
have to regret that our attention was not more 
particularly directed to some point which, at the 
time, appeared of little moment,. but of which we 
at length appretiate the importance. In the latter, 
on the other hand, we cross-examine our witness, 
and by comparing one part of his evidence with 
the other, while he is yet before us, and reasoning 
upon it in his presence, are enabled to put pointed 
and searcUng questions, the answer to which may 
at once enable us to make up our minds. Accord- 
ingly it has been found invariably, that in those 
d^artments of physics where the phenomena are 
beyond our control, or into which experimental 
enquiry, from other causes, has not been carried, 
the progress of knowledge has been slow, uncertain, 
and irregular; while in such as admit of expe- 
riment, and in which mankind have agreed to its 
adoption, it has been rapid, sure, and steady. For 



78 BISCOURSB ON THE 8TUDT 

example^ in our knowledge of the nature and causes 
of volcanoes, earthquakes, the &11 of stones from 
the sky, the appearance of new stars and dis- 
appearance of old ones, and other of those ^eat 
phenomena of nature which are altogether beyond 
our command, and at the same time are of too rare 
occurrence to permit any one to repeat and rectify 
his impressions respecting them, we know little 
more now than in the earliest times. Here our 
tale is told us slowly, and in broken sentences. In 
astronomy, again, we have at least an uninterrupted 
narrative; the opportunity of observation is con- 
stantly present, and makes up in some measure 
for the impossibility of varying our point of view, 
and calling for information at the precise moment 
it is wanted. Accordin^y, astronomy, regarded 
as a science of mere observation, arrived, thou^ 
by very slow degrees, to a state of considerable 
maturity. But the moment that it became a 
branch of mechanics, a science essentially ex- 
perimental, (that is to say, one in which any 
principle laid down can be subjected to imme- 
diate and decisive trialy and where experience does 
not require to be waited for,) its progress suddenly 
acquired a tenfold acceleration; nay, to such a 
degree, that it has been asserted, and we believe 
with truth, that were the records of all observ- 
ations from the earliest ages annihilated, leaving 
only those made in a single observatory*, during 
a single lifetimef , the whole of this most perfect 
of sciences might, from those data, and as to 
the objects included in them, be at once reoon« 

* Gfeenwidk f Maakdpud^ 



OF NATURAL PHIL080PHT. 79 

stractedy and appear precisely as it stood at their 
coadumm. To take another instance : minerak^y 
till modem times, could hardly be said to exist 
The description of even the precious st<mes in 
Theophiastus and Pliny are, in most cases, hardly 
sufficient to identify them, and in many All short 
even of that humble object ; more recent observers, 
by attending more carei^y to the obvious char 
racters of minerals, had firmed a pretty extensive 
catalogue of them, and made various attempts to 
Brrange and methodise the knowledge thus ac« 
quired, and even to deduce some general conclu- 
sions respecting the forms they habitually assume : 
but from the moment that chemical analysis was 
applied to resolve them into their constituent ele« 
ments, and that, led by a happy accident, the 
genius of Bergmann discovered the general fiict, that 
they could be cloven or split in such directions as 
to li^ bare their peculiar primitive <Mr fundamental 
forms, (which lay omcealed within them, as the 
statue might be conceived encrusted in its marble 
envelope,) ^-frorn that moment, mineralogy ceased 
to be an unmeaning list of names, a mere laborious 
catali^uing of stones and rubbish, and became, 
what it now i8» a r^ular, methodical, and most 
important science, in which ev^ year is bringing 
to light new relalaons, new laws, and new practical 
applications. 

(68.) Experience once recognized as the fountain 
of all our knowledge of nature, it follows that, in the 
study of nature and its laws, we ought at once to 
Qiake up our minds to dismiss as idle prejudices, or 
at least suspend as premature, any preconceived 



80 DISCOURSE ON THS ST0DY 

notion of what might or what ought to l^e the order 
of nature in any proposed case, and content ouiv 
selves with observing, as a plain matter of fact, what 
is. To experience we refer, as the only ground of all 
physical enquiry. But before experience itself can 
be used with advantage, there is one preliminary 
step to make, which depends wholly on ourselves t 
it is the absolute dismissal and clearing the mind 
of all prejudice, from whatever source arising, and 
the determination to stand and &11 by the result of 
a direct appeal to facts in the first instance, and of 
strict logical deduction from them afterwards. Now, 
it is necessary to distinguish between two kinds of 
prejudices, which exercise very different dominion 
over the mind, and, moreover, differ extremely in 
the difficulty of dispossessing them, and the process 
to be gone through for that purpose. These are, — 
I 1. Prejudices of opinion. 

2. Prejudices of sense. 
(69.) By prejudices of opinion, we mean opinions 
hastily taken up, either from the assertion of others, 
from our own superficial views, or from vulgar ob- 
servation, and which, from being constantly ad- 
mitted without dispute, have obtained the strong 
hold of habit on our minds. Such were the opinions 
once maintained that the earth is the greatest body 
in the universe, and placed immovable in its cen* 
tre, and all the rest of the universe created for its 
sole use ; that it is the nature of fire and of sounds 
to ascend ; that the moonlight is cold ; that dewsjatt 
from the air, &c. 

(70.) To combat and destroy such prejudices we 
may proceed in two ways, either by demonstrating 



f 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY* 81 

the &l8ehood of the facts alleged in their support, ' 
or bj showing how the appearances, which seem to ' 
countenance them, are more satis&ctorily accounted ^ | 
for without their admission. But it is unfortim- 
ately the nature of prejudices of opinion to ad- 
here, in a certain degree, to every mind, and to some 
with pertinacious obstinacy, j^t^m mdSKiftiw, after all 
ground for their reasonable entertainment is de- 
stroyed. Against such a disposition the student of 
natural science must contend with all his power. Not 
that we are so unreasonable as to demand of him an 
instant and peremptory dismission of all his former 
opinions and judgments ; all we require is, that he 
will hold ihem without bigotry, retain till he shall 
see reason to question them, and be ready to resign 
them when fairly proved untenable, and to doubt 
them when the weight of probability is shown to lie 
against them. If he refuse this, he is incapable of 
science. 

(71.) Our resistance against the destruction of 
the other class of prejudices, those of sense, is com- 
monly more violent at first, but less persistent, than 
in the case of those of opinion. Not to trust the 
evidence of our senses, seems, indeed, a hard con- 
dition, and one which, if proposed, none would com- 
ply with. But it is not the direct evidence of our 
senses that we are in any case called upon to reject, 
but only the erroneous judgments we unconsciously 
fornx firom them, and this only when they can be 
shown to be so ^ oounier evidence of the tame wrt; 
when one sense is brought to testify against another, 
for instance; or the same sense against itself, and 
the obvious conclusions in the two cases disagree, so 

6 



82 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

as to compel us to acknowledge that one or other 
must be wrong. For example, nothing at first can 
seem a more rational, ^obvious, and incontrovertible 
conclusion, than that the colour of an object is an 
inherent quality, like its weight, hardness, &c. and 
that to see the object, and see it of its own colour^ 
when nothing intervenes between our eyes and it, 
are one and the same thing. Yet this is only a 
prejudice ; and that it is so, is shown by bringing for- 
ward the same sense of vision which led to its adop- 
tion, as evidence on the other side ; for, when the 
differently coloured prismatic rays are thrown, in a 
dark room, in succession upon any object, whatever 
be the colour we are in the habit of calling its own, 
it win appear of the particular hue of the light which 
falls upon it : a yellow paper, for instance, will ap- 
pear scarlet when illuminated by red rays, yellow 
when by yellow, green by green, and blue by blue 
rays ; its own (so called) proper colour not in /Ae leatt 
degree mixing with that it so exhibits, 

(72.) To give one or two more examples of the 
kind of illusion which the senses practise on us, or 
rather which we practise on ourselves, by a mis- 
interpretation of their evidence: the moon at its 
rising and setting appears much larger than when 
high up in the sky. This is, however, a mere erro- 
neous judgment ; for when we come to measure its 
diameter, so far from finding our conclusion borne 
out by &ct, we actually find it to measure materially 
less. Here is eyesight opposed to eyesight, with the 
advantage of deliberate measurement. In ventrflo* 
quism we have the hearing at variance with all the 
other senses, and especially with the sight, which is 



or NATURAL PBILOSOPHT. 88 

sometimes contradicted bj it in a very extraordinary 
and sarprifiing mann^, as when the voice is made to 
seem to issaefiom an inanimate and motionless object. 
If we (4ange our hands, one into ice-cold water, and 
the other into water as hot as can be home^ and, 
after letting them stay awhile, suddenly transfer 
them both to a vessel full of water at a blood heat, 
the one will feel a sensation of heat, the other of 
cold. And if we cross the two first fingers of one 
hand, and place a pea in the fork between them, 
moving and rolling it tboat on a table, we shall 
(especially if we dose our eyes) be fully persuaded 
we have two peas. If the nose be held while we 
are eating cinnamon, we shall perceive no difference 
between its flavour and that of a deal shaving. 

(73.) These, and innumerable instances we might 
dte, will convince us, that though we are never de- 
ceived in the sensible impression made by external 
objects on us, yet in forming our judgments of them 
we are greatly at the mercy of circumstances, 
which either modify the impressions actually re- 
ceived, or combine them with adjuncts which have 
become habitually associated with different judg- 
ments; and, therefore, that, in estimating the degree 
of confidence we are to place in our conclusions, 
we must, of necessity, take into account these modi- 
fying or accompanying circmnstances, whatever they 
maybe. We do not^ of course, here speak of deranged 
organization ; such as, for instance, a distortion of the 
eye, producing double vision, and still less of mental 
delusion, which absolutely perverts the meaning of 
sensible impressions. 

(74.) As the mind exists not in the place of sensi- 

o 2 



r 



84 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

ble objects, and is not brought into immediate re- 
lation with them, we can only regard sensible 
impressions as signals conveyed from them by a 
wonderful, and, to us, inexplicable mechanism, to our 
minds, which receives and reviews them, and, by 
habit and association, connects them with corres- 
ponding qualities or affections in the objects; just as 
a person writing down and comparing the sigpuJs of 
a telegraph might interpret their meaning. As, for 
instance, if he had constantly observed that the 
exhibition of a certain signal was sure to be followed 
next day by the announcement of the arrival of a 
ship at Portsmouth, he would connect the two &cts 
by a link of the very same nature with that which 
connects the notion of a large wooden building, filled 
with sailors, with the impression of her outline on 
the retina of a spectator on the beach. 

(75.) In captain Head's amusing and vivid de- 
scription of his journey across the Pampas of South 
America occurs an anecdote quite in point. His 
guide one day suddenly stopped him, and, pointing 
high into the air, cried out, << A lion I " Surprised at 
such an exclamation, accompanied with such an act, 
he turned up his eyes, and with difficulty perceived, 
at an immeasurable height, a flight of condors 
soaring in circles in a particular spot. Beneath 
that spot, far out of sight of himself or guide, lay 
the carcass of a horse, and over that carcass stood 
(as the guide well knew) the lion, whom the con- 
dors were eyeing with envy from their airy height. 
The signal of the birds was to him what the sight 
of the lion alone could have been to the traveller, 
a full assurance of its existence. 



OF NATURAL PHIL080PHT. 85 



CHAP. IL 
OF THB ANALYSIS OF PHENOMBICA. 

(76.) PHXSOUENAy then, or appearances, as the word 
is literally rendered, are the sensible results of. 
processes and operations carried on among external 
objects, or their constituent principles, of which they 
are only signals, conveyed to our minds as aforesaid. 
Now, these processes themselves may be in many in- 
stances rendered sambles that is to say, analjrsed, 
and shown to consistin the motions or other affections 
of sensible objects themselves. For instance, the phe- 
nomenon of the sound produced by a musical string, 
ix a bell, when struck, may be shown to be the result 
of a process consisting in the rapid vibratory motion 
of its parts communicated to the air, and thence to 
our ears ; though the immediate effect on our organs 
of hearing does not excite the least idea of such a 
motion. On the other hand, there are innumerable 
instances of sensible impressions which (at least at 
present) we are incapable of tracing beyond the 
mere sensation; for example,' in the sensations of 
bitterness, sweetness, &c. These, accordingly, if 
we were inclined to form hasty decisions, might be 
regarded as ultimate qualities ; but the instance of 
sounds, just adduced, alone would teach us caution 
in such decisions, and incline us to believe them 
mere results of some secret process going on in 
our organs of taste, which is too subtle for us to 

o 3 



8e DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

trace. A simple experiment will serve to set this 
in a clearer light. A solution of the salt called by 
chemists nUrate of silvery and another of the Ajjpo- 
svlphite ofsodoy have each of them separately, when 
taken into the mouth, a disgustingly bitter taste; 
but if they be mixed, or if one be tasted before the 
mouth is thoroughly cleared of the other, the sensi- 
ble impression is that of intense sweetness. Again, 
the salt called tungstate of soda when first tasted 9 
sweet, but speedily dianges to an intense and pure 
bitter, like quassia.^ 

(77.) How &r we may ever be enabled to attain a 
knowledge of the ultimate and inward processes of 
nature in the production of phenomena, we hav^ ao 
means of knowing ; but, to judge from the degree of 
obscurity which hangs about the (mly case in which 
we feel within ourselves a direct power to produce 
any one, there seems no great hope of penetratiag 
so far. The case alluded to is the production «f 
motion by the exertion of force. We are conscioua 
of a power to move our limbs, and by their inter- 
vention other bodies; and that this effect is the 
result of a certain inexplicable process which we 
are aware of, but can no way describe in words, bj 
which we exert ^ce. And even when such ex- 
ertion produces no visible effect, (as when we press 
our two hands violently together, so as just to opp> 
pose each other*s effort,) we still perceive, by the 
fatigue and exhaustion, and by the impossibility of 
maintaining the effort long, that something is going 
on within us, of which the mind is the agent, and 
the will the determining cause. This impresaioQ 

* Thomson'fl First FrindplM of Ghemistry, vol ii. pt es* 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 87 

wfaidi we receive of the nature of force, from our 
own effort and our sense of fatigue, is quite different 
from that which we obtain of it from seeing the 
eStd of force exerted bj others in producing itio- 
IJMi. Were there no such thing as motion, had 
we been from infancy shut up in a dark dungeon, 
and every limb encrusted with plaster, this internal 
coDscionsness would give us a complete idea of 
fiiTce; but when set at liberty, habit alone would 
enable us to recognize its exertion by its signaly 
BBOticra, and dktt only by finding that the same 
action d the mind which in our confined state en- 
aUes U8 to fiitigue and exhaust ourselves by the 
tennon of our muscles, puts it in our power, when 
at liberty, to move ourselves and other bodies. But 
how obscure is our knowledge of the process going 
on within us in the exercise of this important privi- 
lege> in virtue of which alone we act as (Hrect causesy 
we may judge firom this, that when we put any limb 
m modon, the seat of the exertion seems to us to 
be m ^ limb^ whereas it is demonstrably no such 
thmg, but either in the brain or in the spinal 
nsarrow; the proof of which is, that if a little fibre, 
called a nerve, which forms a communication between 
the limb and the brain, or spine, be divided in any 
port of its course, however we may make the effort, 
the limb will not move. 

(78.) This one instance of the obscurity which 
hangs about the only act of £rect ccatsatian of 
which we have an immediate consciousness, will 
flyffee to i^ow how little prospect there is that, 
in our investigation of nature, we shall ever be able 
to snive at a knowledge of ultimate causes, and wiS 

G 4 



88 DISCOUBSE OK THE STUDY 

teach 118 to limit our views to that of Imos, and to 
the analysis of complex phenomena by which they 
are resolved into simple (mes, whidi, appearing to 
us incapable of fiirther analysis, we must consent 
to r^ard as causes. Nor let any one complain of 
this as a limitation of his Acuities. We have here 
*' ample room and verge enough" for the Aill exer- 
cise of all the powers we possess ; and, besides, it 
does so happen, that we are actuaUy able to trace 
up a very large portion of the phenomena of the uni- 
verse to this one anuey viz. the exertion of mecha- 
nical yonoe; indeed, so large a portion, that it has 
been made a matter of speculation whether this is 
not the only one that is capable of acting on material 
beings. 

(79.) What we mean by the analysis of oon^lex 
phenomena into simpler ones, will best be under- 
stood by an instance. Let us, therefore, take the 
phenomenon of sound, and, by considering the 
various cases in which sounds of all kinds are pro- 
duced, we shall find that they all agree in these 
points : — 1st, The excitement of a motion in the 
sounding body. 2dly, The communication of this 
motion to the air or other intermedium whidi is 
interposed between the sounding body and our 
ears. Sdly, The propa^tion of such motion from 
particle to particle of such intermedium in due 
successicm. 4thly, Its communication, from the par- 
ticles of the intermedium adjacent to the ear, to 
the ear itsel£ 5thly, Its conveyance in the ear, by a 
certain mechanism, to the auditory nerves. 6thly,The 
excitement of sensation. Now, in this analysis, we 
perceive that two principal matters must be under«* 



or HATmiAL PBIL080PHT. 



89 



Stood, before we can have a true and ooiqilete 
knowledge of fioond:— lit. The ezcitemeiit and 
propagation of motion. Sdlj, The prodndion of 
sensation. These, then, are tiro other phenoinena» 
of a simplery or, it would be more correct to say, of 
a more general or elementary order, into wl^ch 
the complex phenomenon of sound resdves itsel£ 
But again, if we consider the communication of 
motion hem body to body, or from one part to 
another of the same, we sludl percriye that it is 
again resolvable into sereral other phenomena. 
Ist^ The original setting in motion of a material 
body, or any part of one. 2dly, The behaviour 
of a particle set in motion, when it meets another 
lying in its way, or is otherwise impeded or inflo^ 
enced by its connection with surrounding particles. 
3dly, The behaviour of the particles so impeding 
or influencing it under such circumstances; besides 
wiiich, the last two point out another phenomenon, 
which it is necessary also to consider, viz. the phe- 
nomencm of the connection of the parts of material 
bodies in masses, by which they form aggregates^ 
and are enabled to influence each other's motions. 

(80.) Thus, then, we see that an analysis of the 
phenomenon of sound leads to the enquiry, 1st, of 
two cauteif viz. the cause of motion, and the cause 
of sensation, these being phenomena which (at least 
as human knowledge stands at present) we are 
unable to analyse further; and, therefore, we set 
them down as simple, elementary, and referable^ 
for any thing we can see to the contrary, to the 
hnmediate action of their causes. 2dly, Of several 
questions relating to the connection between the 



90 x>rscouBSE on the study 

motion of material bodies and its cause, such as, 
Whd ufiil keg^pen when a monriDg body is sur- 
rounded on all sides bj others not in motion ? What 
WfU happen when a body not in motion is advanced 
upon bjr a moving one? It is evident that the 
answers to such quealiona as these can be no 
other than hnoB rfnuOum^ in the sense we have 
above attributed to laws of nature, vias. a statement 
in words of what will happen in such and such 
proposed general contingencies!. Lastly, we are 
led, by pursuing the analysis, and considering the 
phenomenon of the aggr^ation of the parts of 
material bodies, and the way in which they in* 
fluence each oihev, to two other general pheno- 
mena, viz^ the cohesion and elasticity of matter ; 
and these we have no means of analysing further, 
and must, ther^bre, regard ihem (till we see 
reasons to the contrary) aa tMmate phemomem^ 
and referable to the direct action of causes, viz. 
aa attractive and a repukiveyora^ 

(81.) Of force, as cosmlerbelanced by opposing 
feree, we ham, as already said^ an internal con- 
sciousness ; and though it may seem straage to us 
that matter should be capable of exerting on mat- 
ter the BBtme kind of effort, wfaidi, jvuiffaag alone 
ftom thia oonsdousness, we might be led to re* 
gard aa a mental one; yet we cannot refuse the 
direct evid»ce of our senses^ which shows us 
that when we keep a spring stretched with one 
hand, we feel our effort qiposed exactly in the same 
way as if we had oursdves opposed it with the 
other hand, or as it would be by that of anodier 
person. The enquiry, therefore, into the aggre- 



or NATDRJX FB1L08QPST. 91 

gatkm of matter resotwet itielf into the general 
question. What will be the behaTioiir of material 
particles mider the mutual action of oppoaing 
ftices capable of oonnteibalanciag eadi other? 
and tbe ansirer to this question can be no other 
than the anBonncement of the Ana of equilibriuDi» 
whatever kw that maj be. 

(82.) With regard to the cause of sensatinnj it 
must be regarded as much more obscure than that 
af motion, inasmuch as we hanre no oonacioua know- 
le^e of ity ft. & we ha?e no power, by any act of 
our minds and will, to call up a sensation. It is 
true, we are not destitute of an approach to it^ 
since, by an eflbrt of memory and imagination, we can 
produce in cor mincb an impression, or idea, of a 
sensation which, in peculiar cases, may even i^ 
proach hi vividness to actual reality. In dreams, too, 
and, in some cases of disordered nerves, we have 
sensatiimB without objects. But if force^ as a cause 
of motion, is obscure to us, even while we are in the 
act of exercfaiiig it, how much more so is this 
other cause, whose exercise we can only imitate 
in^erftctly by any voluntary act, and of whose 
purely bitemal action we are only fUly conacious 
when in a state that incapacitates us from reasoning, 
and almost from observation ! 

(89.) Dismissing, tlien, as beyond onr reach, the 
enquiry into causes, we must be content at present 
to concentrate our attention oa the laws which pre- 
vail; among phenomena, and which seem to be thehr 
iwmediwt.e results. From die instance we have just 
given, we may pesceive that every enquiry into, the 
intimate natur&of a complex phmiomenon branohaa 



92 DISC0I7RSB OK THE STUDY 

out into as many different and distinct enquiries as 
there are simple or elementary phenomena into 
which it may be analysed ; and that, therefore, it 
would greatly assist us in our study of nature, if we 
could, by any means, ascertain what are the lidti- 
mate phenomena into which all the composite ones 
presented by it may be resolved. There is, how- 
ever, clearly no way by which this can be ascertained 
d priori. We must go £b nature itself, and be 
guided by the same kind of rule as the chemist in 
his analysis, who accounts every ingredient an de^ 
meni tiU it can be decompounded and resolved into 
others. So, in natural philosophy, we must account 
every phenomenon an elementary or simple one till 
we can analyse it, and show that it is the result of 
others, which in their turn become elementary. 
Thus, in a modified and relative sense, we may 
stiU continue to speak of causes, not intending 
thereby those ultimate principles of action on whose 
exertion the whole firame of nature depends, but 
of those proximate links which connect pheno- 
mena with others of a simpler, higher, and more 
general or elementary kind. For example: we 
may regard the vibration of a musical string as 
the proximate cause of the soimd it yields, receiving 
it, so &r, as an ultimate ftct, and waving or de« 
ferring enquiry into the cause of vibrations, which 
is of a higher and more general nature. 

(S4h) Moreover, as in chemistry we are some- 
times compelled to acknowledge die existence of 
elements different from those already identified and 
known, though we cannot insulate them, and to 
perceive that substances have the characters of 






OV NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 9S 

compouncb, and must therefore be susceptible of 
analysis, though we do not see how it is to be 
set about; so, in physics, we may perceive the 
complexity of a phenomenon, without being able 
to per^^rm its analysis. For example: in mag- 
netism, the agency of electricity is clearly made 
out, and they are shown to stand to one another in 
the relation of effect and cause, at least in so fiur 
as that all the phenomena of magnetism are product- Ay -v < 
ble by electricity, but no electric phenomena have ^^w>^f 
hitherto ever been produced by magnetism?) But d i ccrJ^ 
Che analysis of magnetism, in its relation to particular ^^*'" ^ k^ 
metals, is not yet quite satis&ctorily performed ; and ^^ '. - ' 
we are compelled to admit the existence of some ^'" ' 
cause, whether proximate or ultimate, whose pre-*** ru^^- 
sence in the one and not in the other phenomenon ^ ^^ > 
determines their difference. Cases like these, of all ^^^ '^ 
which science presents, offer the highest interest. . ^ "^ 
They excite enquiry, like the near approach to the 
solution of an enigma; they show us that there is 
light, could only a certain veil be drawn aside. 

(85.) In pursuing the analysis of any pheno- 
menon, the moment we find ourselves stopped by 
one of which we perceive no analysis, and which, 
therefore, we are forced to refer (at least provision- 
ally) to the class of ultimate facts, and to regard as 
elementary, the study of that phenomenon and of 
its laws becomes a separate branch of science. If 
we encoimter the same elementary phenomenon in 
the analysis of several composite ones, it becomes 
still more interesting, and assumes additional im- 
portance ; while at the same time we acquire in- 
formation respecting the phenomenon itself, by ob- 



r 



94 DISCOURSE ON THE BTtTDT 

Serving those with which it is habitually associated, 
that may help us at length to its analysis. It is 
thus that sciences increase, and acquire a mu- 
tual relation and dependraicy. It is thus, too, 
that we are at length enabled to trace parallels 
and analogies between great branches of science 
themselves, which at length terminate in a percep* 
tion of their dependence on some common phe- 
n(»nenon of a more general and elementary nature 
than that which form the subject of either se- 
parately. It was thus, for example, that, previous 
to Oersted's great discovery of electro-magnetism^ 
a general resemblance between the two sciences of 
electricity and, magnetism was recognised, and 
many of the chief phenomena in each were ascer-^ 
tained to have their parallels, mutaiis mutemditf in 
the other. It was thus, too, that an analogy sub* 
sisting between sound and light has been gradually 
traced into a closeness of agreement, which can 
hardly leave any reasonable doubt of their vlti* 
mate coincidence in one common phenomenon, the 
vibratory motion of an elastic medium. If it be 
allowed to pursue our illustration from chemistry* 
and to ground its application not on what has been, 
but on what may one day be, done, it is thus that 
the general femily resemblance between certain 
groups of bodies^ now regarded as elementary, 
(as nickel and cobalt, for instance, chlorine, iode, 
and brome,) will, perhaps, lead us hereafter to per- 
ceive relations between them of a more intimate 
kind than we can at present trace. 

(86.) On those phenomena which are most fre- 
quently encountered in an analysis of nature, and 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 95 



irbich most decidedly resist further 
it is evident that the greatest pains and attention 
ought to be bestowed, not onl j because they funiish^ 
a key to the greatest number o^ enquiries, ani 
s^rve to group and classify together the greatest 
range of phenomena, but by reason of their higher 
nature, and because it is in these that we must 
look for the direct action of causes, and the most 
extensive and general enunciation of the laws of 
nature. These, once discovered, place in our power 
the explanatimi of all particular facts, and become 
grounds ci reasoning, independent of particular 
trial : thus playing the same part in natural philo- 
sophy that axioms do in geometry ; containing, in a 
refined and condensed state, and as it were in a 
quintessence, all that our reason has occasion to 
draw from experience to enable it to follow out 
the truths of physics by the mere implication of 
logical argument. Indeed, the axioms of geometry 
themselves may be regarded as in some sort an 
appeal to experience, not corporeal, but mental. 
When we say, the whole is greater than its part, 
we announce a general fbct, which rests, it b 
true, on our ideas of wh<4e and part ; but, in abs- 
tracting these notions, we begin by considering 
them as subsisting in space, and time, and body, 
and again, in linear, and superficial, and solid space. 
Again, when we say, the equals of equals are equal, 
we mentally make comparisons, in equal spaces, 
equal tunes, &c.; so that these axioms, however 
self-evident, are still general propositions so far of 
the inductive kind, that,independently of experience, 
they would not present themselves to the mind. 



96 DISCOURSE OK THE 8TUDT 

The onlj difference between these and axioms ob- 
tained from extensive induction is this, that, in 
raising the axioms of geometry, the instances offer 
themselves spontaneously, and without the trouble 
of search, and are few and simple; in raising 
those of nature, they are infinitely numerous, com- 
plicated, and remote; so that the most diligent 
research and the utmost acuteness are required 
to unravel their web, and place their meaning in 
evidence. 

(87*) By far the most general phenomenon with 
which we are acquainted, and that which occurs 
most constantly, in every enquiry into which we 
enter, is motion, and its communication. Djmamics, 
then, or the science of force and motion, is thus 
placed at the bead of all the sciences ; and, hi^ 
pily for human knowledge, it is one in which 
the highest certainty is attainable, a certainty no 
way inferior to mathematical demonstration. As 
its axioms are few, simple, and in the highest de- 
gree distinct and definite, so they have at the same 
time an immediate relation to geometrical quantity, 
space, time, and direction, and thus aceommodate 
themselves with remarkable &cility tP geometrical 
reasoning. Accordingly, their consequences maybe 
pursued, by arguments purely mathematical, to any 
extent, insomuch that the limit of our knowledge 
of dynamics is determined only by that of pure 
mathematics, which is the case in no other branch of 
physical science. 

(88.) But, it win now be asked, how we are to 
proceed to analyse a composite phenomenon into 
simpler ones, and whether any general rules can be 



or NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 97 

given for this important process ? We answer, None ; 
any more than (to pursue the illustration we have 
already had recourse to) general rules can be laid 
down by the chemist for the analysis of substances 
of which all the ingredients are unknown. Sudi 
rules, could they be discovered, would include the 
whole of natural science; but we are very fiur, indeed, 
from being able to propound them. However, we 
are to recollect that the analysis of phenomena, 
philoso]^ically speaking, is principally useful, as it 
enables us to recognize, and mark for special inves- 
tigation, those which appear to us simple; to set me- 
thodically about determining their laws, and thus to 
&C]litate the work of raising up general axioms, or 
forms of words, which shall include the whole of 
them ; which shall, as it were, transplant them out of 
the external into the intellectual world, render them 
creatures of pure thought, and enable us to reason 
them out dprioru And what renders the power of 
doing this so eminently desirable is, that, in thus 
reasoning back from generals to particulars, the pro- 
positions at which we arrive apply to an immense 
multitude of combinations and cases, which were 
never individually contemplated in the mental pro- 
cess by which our axioms were first discovered; and 
tbat, consequently, when our reasonings are pushed 
to the utmost limit of particularity, their results 
appear in the form of individual factSy of which we 
might have had no knowledge from immediate expe- 
rience; and thus we are not only furnished with the 
explanation of all known facts, but with the actual 
discovery of such as were before unknown. A re- 
markable example of this has already been mentioned 

H 



^ 



98 DisGouasE ov the study 

iji Fresners d priori discovery of the extraordinary 
refraction of both rajs in a doubly refracting medium. 
To give another example : — The law of gravitation 
is a physical axiom of a very high and universal 
kind, and has been raised by a succession of indu^ 
tlons and abstractions drawn from the observation of 
numerous facts and subordinate laws in the phmetar]^ 
system. When this law is taken for granted, and 
laid down as a basis of reasoning, and applied to 
the actual condition of our own planet, one of the 
consequences to which it leads is, that the earth, 
instead of being an exact sphere, must be compressed 
or flattened in the direction of its polar diameter, 
the one diameter being about thirty miles shorter 
than the other ; and this conclusion, deduced at 
first by mere reasoning, has been since found to be 
true in fact. All astronomical predictions are 
examples of the same thing, 

(89.) In the important busmess of raising these 
axioms of nature, we are not, as in the analysis of 
phenomena, left wholly without a guide. The na- 
ture of abstract or general reasoning points out in 
a great measure the course we must pursue. A 
law of nature, beii^ the statement of what will 
happen in certain general contingencies, may be 
regarded as the announcement, in the same words* 
of a whole group or dass of phenomena. When* 
ever, therefore, we perceive that two or more phe- 
nomena agree in so many or so remarkable points, as 
to lead us to regard them as forming a dass orgroiqi, 
if we lay out of consideration, or abstrad, aU the cir- 
cumstances in which they disagree, and retain in 
our minds those only in which they agree, and 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 99 

then, iBider this kind of mental coBvention, frame a 
definition w statement of one of them, in such words 
.that it shall eipply equally to them all, such state- 
ment will ^pear in the form of a general prcqxwi- 
tion, having so &r at least the character <^ a law of 
nature* 

. (90.) For example: a great number of trans- 
pfflrent substances, when exposed, in a certain par- 
ticular manner, to a beam of light which has been 
fureptt^ by imdeigoing certain reflexions or refrac- 
tions, (and has thereby acquired peculiar properties, 
and is said to be " polarized^**) exhibit very vivid 
and beaut^ ccdours, disposed in streaks, bands, 
&e* of great regularity, which seem to arise within 
the substance, and which, from a certain vegu- 
iar sueoession observed in their appearance, are 
eaHed ^* periodical occurs." Among the substances 
which exhibit periodical colours occur a great 
variety of transparent solids, but no fluids and no 
opaque solids. Here, then, there seems to be suf- 
ficient community of nature to enable us to use a 
glBoesvl term, and to state the proposition as a law, 
viz. inaupaiwiU solids exhibit periodical colours by 
exposure to polarized light. However, this, though 
true of many, does not apply to all transparent 
solids, and therefore we cannot state it as a general 
iruth (HT law of nature in this form ; although the 
reverse {Mropositicm, that all solids which exhibit 
such odours in such circumstances are tranS" 
par&iii would be correct and generaL It becomes 
necessary, then, to make a list of those to which it 
does apply ; and thus a great number <^ substances 
of all kinds become grouped together, in a class 

H 2 



92 BISCOUBSB ON THE STUDY 

out into as many different and distinct enquiries as 
there are simple or elementary phenomena into 
which it may be analysed; and that, therefore, it 
would greatly assist us in our study of nature, if we 
could, by Bsay means, ascertain what are the ulti- 
mate phenomena into which all the composite ones 
presented by it may be resolved. There is, how- 
ever, clearly no way by which this can be ascertained 
d prioTu We must go & nature itself, and be 
guided by the same kind of rule as the chemist in 
his analysis, who accounts every ingredient an ele^ 
meni till it can be decompounded and resolved into 
others* So, in natural philosophy, we must account 
every phenomenon an elementary or simple one till 
we can analyse it, and show that it is the result of 
others, which in their turn become elementary. 
Thus, in a modified and relative sense, we may 
still contmue to speak of causes, not intending 
thereby those ultimate principles of action on whose 
exertion the whole frame of nature depends, but 
of those proximate links which connect pheno- 
mena with others of a simpler, higher, and more 
general or elementary kind. For example: we 
may regard the vibration of a musical string as 
the proximate cause of the sound it yields, receiving 
it, so ^, as an ultimate fact, and waving or de* 
ferring enquiry into the cause of vibrations, which 
is of a higher and more general nature. 

(84.) Moreover, as in chemistry we are some- 
times compelled to acknowledge the existence of 
elements different from those already identified and 
known, though we cannot insulate them, and to 
perceive that substances have the characters of 



f< 



f >. .^f 



OV NATUBAL PHIL080PHT. 9S 

compounds, and must therefore be susceptible of 
analysis, though we do not see how it is to be 
set about; so, in physics, we may perceive the 
complexity of a phenomenon, without being able 
to per^^rm its analysis. For example: in mag- 
netism, the agency of electricity is clearly made 
out, and they are shown to stand to one another in 
the relation of effect and cause, at least in so fiur 
as that all the phenomena of magnetism are produci- y^o *'*'• 
ble by electricity, but no electric phenomena have L^w>^f 
hitherto ever been produced by magnetismT) But ^< ccrC^ ^ 
Che analysis of magnetism, in its relation to particular ^^* " * <o 
metals, is not yet quite satisfactorily performed ; and ^^ 
we are compelled to admit the existence of some ^-^ ' * * 
cause, whether proximate or ultimate, whose pre- '** rU^^j, 
sence in the one and not in the other phenomenon ^^^> 
determines their difference. Cases like these, of all ^^^ '^ 
which science presents, offer the highest interest. , '^' ' ' 
They excite enquiry, like the near approach to the 
solution of an enigma; they show us that there is 
light, could only a certain veil be drawn aside. 

(85.) In pursuing the analysis of any pheno- 
menon, the moment we find ourselves stopped by 
one of which we perceive no analysis, and which, 
therefore, we are forced to refer (at least provision- 
ally) to the class of ultimate facts, and to regard as 
elementary, the study of that phenomenon and of 
its laws becomes a separate branch of science. If 
we encoimter the same elementary phenomenon in 
the analysis of several composite ones, it becomes 
stiU more interesting, and assumes additional im- 
portance ; while at the same time we acquire in- 
formation respecting the phenomenon itself, by ob- 



92 BISCOUBSB OK THE STUDY 

out into as manj different and distinct enquiries as 
there are simple or elementary phenomena into 
which it may be analysed; and Uiat, therefore, it 
would greatly assist us in our study of nature, if we 
could, by my means, ascertain what are the ulti- 
mate phenomena into which all the composite ones 
presented by it may be resolved. There is, how- 
ever, clearly no way by which this can be ascertained 
d priori. We must go & nature itself, and be 
guided by the same kind of rule as the chemist in 
his analysis, who accounts every ingredient an de^ 
ment till it can be decompoimded and resolved into 
others. So, in natural philosophy, we must account 
every phenomenon an elementary or simple one till 
we can analyse it, and show that it is the result of 
others, which in their turn become elementary* 
Thus, in a modified and relative sense, we may 
still continue to speak of causes, not intending 
thereby those ultimate principles of action on whose 
exertion the whole frame of nature depends, but 
of those proximate links which connect pheno- 
mena with others of a simpler, higher, and more 
general or elementary kind. For example: we 
may regard the vibration of a musical string as 
the proximate cause of the sound it yields, receiving 
it, so ^, as an ultimate &ct, and waving or de- 
ferring enquiry into the cause of vibrations, which 
is of a higher and more general nature. 

(84.) Moreover, as in chemistry we are some- 
times compelled to acknowledge the existence of 
elements different from those already identified and 
known, though we cannot insulate them, and to 
perceive that substances have the characters of 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 9S 

compounds, and must therefore be susceptible of 
analysis, though we do not see how it is to be 
set about; so, in physics, we may perceive the 
complexity of a phenomenon, without being able 
to per^^rm its analysis. For example: in mag- 
netism, the agency of electricity is clearly made 
out, and they are shown to stand to one another in 
the relation of effect and cause, at least in so fiur 
as that all the phenomena of magnetism are product- A/. V 
ble by electricity, put no electric phenomena lunre ^^w>^^ 
hitherto ever been produced by magnetism!) But d^^rtC^t'^ 
the analysis of magnetism, in its relation to particular ^^*' * k) 
metals, is not yet quite satisfactorily performed ; and ^<^ '. • ^ ^ ' 
we are compelled to admit the existence of some ^''^ * 
cause, whether proximate or ultimate, whose pre- '** /***^^. 
sence in the one and not in the other phenomenon / > 
determines their difference. Cases like these, of all '^^/'' 
which science presents, offer the highest interest. 
They excite enquiry, like the near approach to the 
solution of an enigma; they show us that there is 
light, could only a certain veil be drawn aside. 

(85.) In pursuing the analyMS of any pheno- 
menon, the moment we find ourselves stopped by 
one of which we perceive no analysis, and which, 
therefore, we are forced to refer (at least provision- 
ally) to the class of ultimate facts, and to regard as 
elementary, the study of that phenomenon and of 
its laws becomes a separate branch of science. If 
we encounter the same elementary phenomenon in 
the analysis of several composite ones, it becomes 
still more interesting, and assumes additional im- 
portance ; while at the same time we acquire in- 
formation respecting the phenomenon itself, by ob- 



''A V, 



104 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 



CHAP. m. 

OF THE STATE OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE IN GENERAL, PRB- 
yiOUS TO THE AGE OF GALILEO AND BACON. 

(96.) It 18 to oiir immortal countryman Bacon 
that we owe the broad annomicement of this grand 
and fertile principle ; and the derelopement of the 
idea, that the whole of natural philosophy consists 
entirely of a series of inductive generalizations, 
commencing with the most circumstantially stateo 
particulars, and carried up to universal laws, o: 
axioms, which comprehend in their statements 
every subordinate degree of generality, and of a 
corresponding series of inverted reasoning from 
generals to particulars, by which these axioms are 
traced back into their remotest consequences, and 
all particular propositions deduced from them; as 
well those by whose immediate consideration we 
rose to their discovery, as those of which we had 
no previous knowledge. In the course of this 
descent to particulars, we must of necessity en- 
counter all those &cts on which the arts and works 
that tend to the accommodation of human life 
depend, and acquire thereby the command of an 
unlimited practice, and a disposal of the powers 
of nature co-extensive with those powers them- 
selves. A noble promise, indeed, and one which 
ought, surely, to animate us to the highest exertion 
of our faculties ; especially since we have already 
such convincing proof that it is neither vain nor 
rash, but, on the contrary, has been, and continues 



OV NATUXAL PHIL080PRT. 105 

to be, fulfilled, with a promptness and liberality 
which even its illustrious author in his most sanguine 
mood would have hardly ventured to anticipate. 

(97.) Previous to the publication of the Novum 
Qrganum o£ Bacon, natural philosophy, in any 
Intimate and extensive sense of the word, could 
hardly be said to exist. Among the Greek phi- 
losophers, of whose attainments in science alone, 
in the earlier ages of the world, we have any posi- 
tive knowledge, and that but a very limited one, 
we are struck with the remarkable contrast be- 
tween their powers of acute and subtle disput*> 
ation, their extraordinary success in abstract rea- 
soning, and their intimate familiarity with subjects 
purely intellectual, on the one hand ; and, on the 
other, with their loose and careless consideration 
of exteinal nature, their grossly illogical deduc- 
tions of principles of sweeping generally from 
few and ill-observed facts, in some cases ; and their 
reckless assumption of abstract principles having 
no foundation but in their own imaginations, in 
others; mere forms of words, with nothing cor- 
responding to them in nature, from which, as from 
mathematical definitions, postulates, and axioms, 
tfaey imagined that all phenomena could be de- 
rived, all the laws of nature deduced. Thus, for 
instance, having settled it in their own minds, that 
a circle is the most perfect of figures, they con- 
cluded, of course, that the movements of the heavenly 
bodies must all be performed in exact circles, and 
with uniform motions; and when the plamest ob- 
servation demonstrated the contrary, instead of 
doubting the principle, they saw no better way of 



106 mSCOURSE ON THE 8TUDT 

getting out of the difficulty than by having recourse 
to eadless combinations of circular motions to pre- 
serve their ideal perfection, 

(98.) Undoubtedly among the Greek philosophers 
were many men of transcendent talents and virtuesy 
the ornaments of their species, and justly entitled to 
the veneration of all posterity; but regarded as abody 
they can hardfy be considered otherwise than as a 
knot of disputatious candidates for popular favour, 
too busy in maintaining their ascendency over their 
followers and admirers, by an ostentatious display of 
superior knowledge, to have the leisure (had they 
always the indinatMMi) to base their pretensions oa 
a deep and sure foundation, and yet too sensible of 
the disgrace and inconvenience of failure, not to 
defend their dogmas^ however elialkyw, when <Hiee 
pr<Hnulgated» against their keen and sagacious oppo* 
netktB, by every art of sophism or appeal to passioii. 
Hence the crudities and chimeiical views with 
whidi their systems (^plubsophy, both natural and 
moral, were overloaded; their endksa disputes 
sboat Terbal subtleties, and, last and worst, the 
proud assun^oB with wluch they sheltered 'ijgiMK 
nmce and mdi^iice under the screen of unmtdli* 
§^Ue jargon or dogmatical assertioik Perhaps, how* 
ever, this character applies rather to the later than 
to the earlier of the Greek philosophers The spvie 
of ratiomyi enqimy mto nature seems^ i^ we can 
jud^ firom the uncertain and often oontradicterf 
notices httsded down to us of their tenets^ to hare 
been ftr more alive, and less warped by this van 
and arrogant turn, then than at a later period. We 
know not now what was the i^ecise netaaag 



or KATURAI* PHIL080PHT* 107 



attached by Thales to his opinion, that water 
the origin of aU things ; but modem gedogista will 
not be at a loss to conceive how an obaenrant ta^ 
Teller might become impressed with this notion^ 
without having recourse to the mjstic reoordt of 
Egypt or Chaldea. His ideas of edipses and of the 
nature of the moon were sound ; and his prediction 
ci an ecUpse of the sun, in particular, was attended 
with circomstances so remarkaiUe as to have nHde 
it a matter of important investigatioo to modem a^ 
tronomers. Anazagoras, among a number of erode 
and imperfectly explained notions, i^ieculated nh 
tionally enough on the cause of the winds and of 
the rttiibow, and less absurdly on eardifoakes than 
many modem geologists have done, and appears ge» 
neraOy to have had his attention aHve to nature, and 
his mind open to just reasoning on its phenomena; 
whfle Fythi^oras, whether he reasoned it out fixr him- 
sdt^ or borrowed the notion from B^^rpt or India, had 
attained a just conception of the general diqwaition 
of the parts of the solar system, and the pikce hdd 
by the earth in it ; nay, according to some accounl s» 
Imd even raised his views so &r as to speculate on 
the attraction of the sun as the bond of its union. 

(99.) But the successors of these b(md fiAt en- 
quirers into nature debased the standard cf troth ; 
and, taking advantage of the credit jnsdy atladted to 
their discoveries, renounced the modest cha r acter of 
learners, and erected themselves into teadiers,and,to 
maintain their pretennons to this character, adu pt atf 
the tone of men who had nothing further to learn. 
Unfortunately for trae science, the i^tional diani^ 
tec..g|ve every encouragement to pretensions of this 



108 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

kind. That restless cravmg after novelty, which 
- distinguished the Greeks in their civil and political 
relations, pursued them into their philosophy. What- 
ever speculations were only ingenious and new had 
irresistible charms; and the teacher who could em- 
body a clever thought in elegant language, or at 
once save his followers and himself the trouble of 
thinking or reasoning, by bold assertion, was too 
often induced to acquire cheaply the reputation of 
superior knowledge, snatch a few superficial notions 
from the most ordinary and obvious facts, envelope 
them in a parade of abstruse words, declare them 
the primary and ultimate prmciples of all things, 
and denounce as absurd and impious all opinions 
opposed to his own. 

(100.) In this war of words the study of nature 
was neglected, and an humble and patient enquiry 
afler facts altogether despised, as unworthy of the 
high/iriort ground a true philosopher ought to take. 
It was the radical error of the Greek philosophy to 
imagine that the same method which proved so emi- 
nently successful in mathematical, would be equally 
so in physical, enquuries, and that, by setting out 
from a few simple and almost self-evident notions, or 
axhmsy every thing could be reasoned out* Accord- 
ingly, we find them constantly straining their inven-'- 
tion to discover these principles, which were to prove 
80 pregnant. One makes Jire the essential matter 
and origin of the universe ; another, otV; a third, 
discovers the key to every difficulty, and the ex- 
planation of all phenomena^ in the << ro eugtipw** or 
infinitude of things; a fourth, in the to cp and 
ihe T» fMf i¥f that is to say, in entity and nonenti^;— - 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHT. 109 

till at length an authority, which was destined to 
coDomand opinions for nearly two thousand years, 
settled this important point, by deciding, that maUety 
fomiy and privatwny were to be considered the prin- 
ciples of all things. 

(101.) It were to do injustice to Aristotle, however, 
to judge of him by such a sample of his philosophy. 
He, at least, saw the necessity of having recourse 
to nature for something like principles of phy- 
sical science; and, as an observer, a coUectiv 
and recorder of facts and phenomena, stood with- 
out an equal in his age. It was the fiiult of that 
age, and of the perverse and flimsy style of verbal 
disputation which had infected all learning, rather 
than his own, that he allowed himself to be con- 
tented with vague and loose notions drawn from 
general and vulgar observation, in place of seeking 
carefully, in well arranged and thoroughly con- 
sidered instances, for the true laws of native. His 
voluminous works, on every department of human 
knowledge existing in his time, have nearly all 
perished. From his work on animals, which has 
descended to us, we are, however, enabled to ap- 
preciate his powers of observation ; and a parallel 
drawn by an eminent Oxford professor between his 
classifications and those of the most illustrious of 
living naturalists, shows him to have attained a 
view of animated nature in a remarkable degree 
comprehensive, and which contrasts strikingly with 
the confusion, vagueness, and assumption of his 
physical opinions and dogmas. In these it is easy 
to recognize a mind not at home, and an impression 
of the necessity of saying something learned and 



/ 



r 

110 BISCOUBSE ON THX 8TUDT 

systematiCy without knowing what to say. Thus, 
he divides motions into natural and unnatural ; the 
natural motion of fire and light bodies being up- 
wards, those of heavy downwards, each seeking its 
kindred nature in the heavens and the earth. Thus, 
too, the immediate impressions made on us by ex- 
ternal objects, such as hardness, colour, heat, &c. 
are referred at once, in the Aristotelian philosophy, 
to occult qualities, in virtue of which they are as 
they are, and bey(md which it is useless to enquire.* 

• Galiko exposes nn^Muingly the AxistoteHan style of reft- 
aoning. The reader may take the f<dlowmg from Urn as a Bp». 
dmea of its quality. The object is to prove the immutability 
and incorruptibility of the heavens ; and thus it is done :— 
I. Mutation is either generation or corruption. 
II. Generation and corruption only happen between con- 
traries. 

III. The motions of contraries are contraiy. 

IV. The odestial motions are circular. 
V. Circular motions have no contraries. 

a. Because there can be but three simple motions. 

1. To a centre. 

S, Round a centre. 

S. Worn a centre. 
$, Of tkiee tbingi, one only can be contrary to aoe, 

7. But a motioa to a centre is manifestly the conftnuy 

to a motion from a centre. 

8. Therefore a motion round a centre (t. e» a drcula** 

motion) remains without a contraiy. 
VI. Therefore celestial motions have no oonlnnies — flerew 
Jbire among oeleatial tkiagt these an no contnric^ 
«— therefore the heavens are «tenia), immutable^ 
coKTuptible, and so forth. 
It is evident that all this string of nonsense depends on 
excessive vagueness of the notions of generation, ooiniptioii^ 
contrariety, &c. on which the changes are rung. -— &e Ga.%^^ 
ue^ S^tlema Coemicum, Dial. i. p. 30. 



r 

I 



OY KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 



Ill 



0£ course there will occur a limit beyond whidi ' 
it if useless for merdj human faculties to enquire ; 
but where that limit is placed, experience alone caa 
teach us ; and at least to assert that we Aaoe attained 
h, is now uniyersallj recognieed as the sure criterion 
of dogmatism. 

(102.) In the early ages oi the church the writ- 
ings of Aristotle were condemned, as allowing too 
much to reason and sense ; and even so late as the 
twelfth century they were sought out and burned, 
and their readers excommunicated. By d^prees, 
however, the extreme injustice d this impeachment 
oi their character was acknowledged: they became 
the &.yourite study of the schoolmen, and fiimished 
the keenest weapons <^ their controversy, being 
appealed to in all disputes as of sovereign aotho* 
rity ; so that the slightest dissent from any c^inioii 
of the ^ great master," however absurd or unin« 
telligible, was at once drowned by damour, or 
ulenced by the still more effectual argument <^ 
bitter persecution. If the logic of that gjkxnny 
periodcouldbejusdy described as <' the art of talking 
uniptelligiblyon matters df which we are ignorant," 
its -ptsjsiCB might, with equal truth, be summed up 
in a ddiberate preference of ignorance to knowledge, 
b matters of every day's experience and use. 

(lOS.) In '< this opake of nature and of soul," 
the perverse activity of the alchemists from time 
to time struck out a doubtful sparic*; and our 

* Macquer jusdy obsenres, that the alchemists would ha^ 
vendered essential sendee to chemistry had they only related 
their unsuccessful experiments as clearly as they have obscurely 
related those which they pretend to have been succesafuL— 
Macpur*s Dictionary of Cliemistfy, i. x. 



112 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

illustrious countryman, Roger Bacon, shone out at 
the obscurest moment, like an early star predict- 
ing dawn. It was not, however, till the sixteenth 
century that the light of nature began to break 
forth with a regular and progressive increase. The 
vaunts of Paracelsus of the power of his chemical 
remedies and^ elixirs, and his open condemnation of 
the ancient pharmacy, backed as they were by many 
surprising cures, convinced all rational ph3r8ician8 
that chemistry could furnish many excellent reme- 
dies, unknown till that time*, and a number of 
valuable experiments began to be made by phy- 
sicians and chemists, desirous of discovering and 
describing new chemical remedies. The chemical 
and metallurgic arts, exercised by persons empi- 
rically acquainted with their secrets, began to be 
seriously studied with a view to the acquisition of 
rational and useful knowledge, and regular trea- 
tises on branches of natural science at length to 
appear. George Agricola, in particular, devoted 
himself with ardour to the study of mineralogy 
and metallurgy in the mining districts of Bohemia 
and Schemnitz, and published copious and metho- 
dical accounts of all the facts within his knowledge: 
and our countryman, Dr. Gilbert of Colchester, in 

* Panu»lsii8 pafimned niofrt of these cufes by mercory and 
cq[>ium, the lue of which latter drug he had learned in Tuifcay. 
Of mercurial preparations the phyndans of his tame were igno- 
rant, and of opium they were afraid, as being "ooldinthe fourth 
degree." Tartar was likewise a great favourite of Pa r ac el sus^ 
who imposed on it that name, '* because it contains the water, 
the salt, the oil, and the add, which bum the patient aa bell 
does :** in shorty a kind of oounteibalance to his opinm. 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 115 

1590» published a treatise on magnetism, fiill of 
valuable &cts and eicperiments, ingeniously re»> 
soned cm; and he likewise extended his enquiries 
to a rariety of other subjects, in particular to elec- 
tricity. 

(104!.) But, as the decisive mark of a great com« 
mendng change in the direction c£ the human 
Acuities, astronomy, the only science in which the 
ancients had made any real progress, and ascended 
to any thing like large and general conceptions, 
b^an once more to be studied in the best spirit 
of a candid philosophy; and the Copemican or 
Pythagorean system arose or revived, and rapidly 
gained advocates. Gralileo at length appeared, and 
openly attacked and refuted the Aristotelian dog- 
mas respecting motion, by direct appeal to the evi- 
dence o£ sense, and by experiments of the most 
convincing kind. The persecutions which such a 
step drew upon him, the record of his perseverance 
and sufferings, and the ultimate triumph of his 
opinions and reasonings, have been too lately and 
too well related* to require repetition h^e. 

(105.) By the discoveries of Copernicus, Kepler, 
and Galileo, the errors of the Aristotelian philo- 
sophy were efiectually overturned on a plain fq>peal 
to the &cts of nature ; but it remained to show on 
broad and general principles, how and why Aristotle 
was in the wrong ; to set in evidence the peculiar 
weakness of his method of philosophizing, and to 
substitute in its place a stronger and better. This 

* See the life of Galileo Galilei, by Mr. Drinkwater, with 
niustrBtioiis of the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy. 

I 



t 



114 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

important task uras executed by Francis Bacon, Lord 
.Verulam, who will, therefore, justly be looked upon 
in all future ages as the great reformer of philo- 
sophy, though his own actual contributions to the 
stock of physical truths were small, and his ideas 
of particular points strongly tinctured with mistakes 
and errors, which were the £iult rather of the 
general want of physical tnformation of the age 
than of any narrowness of view on his own part ; 
and of this he was fully aware. It has been at- 
tempted by some to lessen the merit of this great 
achievement, by showing that the inductive method 
had been practised in many instances, both ancient 
and modem, by the mere instinct of mankind ; bat 
it is not the introduction of inductive reasoning, as 
a new and hitherto untried process, which charac- 
terises the Baconian philosophy, but his keen per- 
ception, and his broad and spirit-stirring^ almost 
enthusiastic, announcement of its paramount im- 
portance, as the alpha and omega of science, as the 
grand and only chain for the linking together of 
physical truths, and the eventual key to every dis- 
covery and every application. Those who would 
deny him his just giory cm such grounds would 
refuse to Jenner or to Howard their civic crowns, 
because a £ew farmers in a remote province had, 
time out of nund, been acquainted with vaccin- 
ation, or philanthropists, in eJl ages, had occasion- 
ally visited the prisoner in his dungeon. 

(106.) An immense impulse was now given to 8ci« 
ence, and it seemed as if the genius of mankind, long 
pent up, had at length rushed eagerly upon Nature, 



1 



dV VATUEAL FHIL080PHT. 115 

and commenced, with one accord, the great work of 
tanang up her hitherto unlnrokea Boil» and exposing 
the treasures so long concealed. A general sense 
now prevailed of the poverty and insufficiency of 
existing knowledge in maUert of fact g and, as inform- 
ation flowed &st in, an era of excitemoit and won- 
der commenced, to which the annals of mankind 
had furnished nothing similar. It seemed, too, as 
if Nature herself seconded the impulse ; and, while 
she supplied new and extraordinary aids to those 
senses which were hoiceforth to be exercised 
IB her investigaticMi, — while the telescope and the 
mioroscope laid open the n^nke in both directions, 
-^ as if to call attention to her wonders, and signalise 
the epodb, she dii^layed the rarest, the most splendid 
and mysterious, of all astr<momical [^enomena, the 
appearance and subsequent total extmctaon of a 
new and brilliant fixed star twice within the life- 
time (^Galileo himself. * 

(107.) The immetfiate followers (tf Bacon and 
Ckdileo transacked all nature fix new and surprising 
fiu^ts, with something of that craving for the mar- 
vellous, mhkik might be regarded as a remnant of 
the age of alchemy and natintd magic, but which, 
mider proper regulation, is a most powerfid and 
useM stimulus to experimental enqinry. Boyle, in 
particular, seemed animated by an enthusiasm of 
ardow, which hurried him fhira subject to suliject, 

* Tbe teD^Knraiy star in Gaflfliopeia observed by Cornelius 
Gremma, in 1572* was so bright as to be seen at noon-day. That 
in Serpentarius, first seen by Kepler in 1604, exceeded in 
brilHancy all the other stars and planets. 

I 2 



106 mscouRSE ovc the study 

getting out of the dilEculty than by havmg recourge 
to endless combinations of circular motions to pre* 
serve their ideal perfection. 

(98.) Undoubtedly among the Greek philosophers 
were many men of transcendent talents and virtues, 
the ornaments of their species, and justly entitled to 
the veneration of all posterity; but regarded as abody 
they can hardly be considered otherwise than as a 
knot of disputatious candidates for popular favour, 
too busy in maintaining their ascendency over their 
Mower, and admirers, by an ostentatious display of 
superior knowledge, to have the leisure (had they 
always the inclination) to base their pretensions oa 
a deep and sure foundation, and yet too sensible of 
the disgrace and inconvenience of fiulure, not to 
defend their dogmas, however shallow, when Goce 
promulgated^ against their keen and sagacious eppo- 
ne&ts, by every art of sophism or appeal to pasnon. 
Hence the crudities ttid chim^cal views with 
which their systems of philosc^hy, both natural and 
moral, were overloaded; their endlesa dilutes 
sboat yerbal subtleties, and, last and worst, the 
proud assun^on with wh]<^ they sheltered '^imk 
raace and indokiice under the screen of imkytdii- 
giMe jargon or dogmatical assertiociw Perhaps, how- 
ever, this character applies rather to the later than 
to the earlier of the Greek philosc^enb The sfmt 
of rational eaqmry into nature seems^ if we can 
jui%e from the uncertiun and often oontradicteiy 
notices hmded down to us of theur tenets, to hare 
be^i hit more alive, and less warped by this vaki 
and arrogant tiim, then than at a later period. We 
know not now what was the precise meaamg 



or NATUBAI* PHIL080PRT* 107 

attached by Thales to his opinion, that water wag 
the origin of aQ things ; but modem geologisU wiU 
not be at a loss to ccMiceiTe how an obserrant tn^ 
Teller might become impressed with this notiooy 
without having recourse to the mystic records of 
Egypt or Chaldea. His ideas of edipses and of the 
nature of the moqoi were sound; and his prediction 
1^ an eclipse of the sun, in particular, was attended 
with circumstances so remarkaUe as to hove isdn 
it a matter of important investigaticn to modem as- 
tronomers. Anaxagoras, among a number of erode 
and imperfectly explained notions, ^peculated r»* 
tionally enough on the cause of the winds and of 
the rmnbow, and less absurdly on earth^oakes than 
many modem geologists have done, and appears ge- 
nerajly to have had his attention aHve to nature, and 
his mind open to just reasoning on its |riienonKB8 ; 
wfai^e Pythagoras, whether he reasoned it out for hsn- 
sel^ or borrowed the notion from Egypt or Indian had 
attffioied a just conception of the general diyi tio n 
o£ the parts of the solar system, and the pkce held 
by the earth in it ; nay, according to some aecouttts» 
had even raised his views so fiur as to specnlate on 
the attraction of the sim as the bond cf its nnioB. 

(99.) But the successors of these bondjide en- 
quirers into nature debased the stmdard of troth ; 
an<^ taking advantage of the credit justly attached to 
tfaeir discoveries, renounced ^be modest dbamcterof 
l^ffners, and ereeted themselves into teaders^andyto ( 
mamtain their pretennons to this character, adopted^ 
the tone o£ men who had nothing further to leanu 
Unfortunately &r true science, the national dianie* 
tecLgSve every encouragement to pretensions of thia 



/ 



108 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

kind. That restless craving after novelty, which 
distinguished the Greeks in their civil and political 
relations, pursued them into their philosophy. What- 
ever speculations were only ingenious and new had 
irresistible charms; and the teacher who could em- 
body a clever thought in elegant language, or at 
once save his followers and himself the trouble of 
thinking or reasoning, by bold assertion, was too 
often induced to acquire cheaply the reputation of 
superior knowledge, snatch a few superficial notions 
from the most ordinary and obvious facts, envelope 
them in a parade of abstruse words, declare them 
the primary and ultimate principles of all things, 
and denounce as absurd and impious all opinions 
opposed to his own. 

(100.) In this war of words the study of nature 
was neglected, and an humble and patient enquiry 
afler fisu;ts altogether despised, as unworthy of the 
high priori ground a true philosopher ought to take. 
It was the radical error of the Greek philosophy to 
imagine that the same method which proved so emi- 
nently successful in mathematical, would be equally 
so in physical, enquiries, and that, by setting out 
from a few simple and almost self-evident notions, or 
axunnsy every thing could be reasoned out. Accord- 
ingly, we find them constantly straining their inven-'- 
tion to discover these principles, which were to prove 
so pregnant. One makes Jire the essential matter 
and origin of the universe ; another, air; a third, 
discovers the key to every difficulty, and the ex- 
planation of all phenomena^ in the ^' ro amupop** or 
infinitade of things; a fourth, in the to Ip and 
the T» fMf jy, that is to say, in entity and nonenti^;— - 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHT. 109 

till at length an authority, which was destined to 
command opinions for nearly two thousand years, 
settled this important point, by deciding, that matter^ 
form^ and privationy were to be considered the prin- 
ciples of all things. 

(101.) It were to do injustice to Aristotle, howeYer, 
to judge of him by such a sample of his philosophy. 
He, at least, saw the necessity of having recourse 
to nature for something like principles of phy- 
sical science; and, as an observer, a collector 
and recorder of facts and phenomena, stood with- 
out an equal in his age. It was the fiiult of that 
age, and of the perverse and flimsy style of verbal 
disputation which had infected all learning, rather 
than his own, that he allowed himself to be con- 
tented with vague and loose notions drawn from 
general and vulgar observation, in place of seeking 
carefully, in well arranged and thoroughly con- 
sidered instances, for the true laws of nature. His 
voluminous works, on every department of human 
knowledge existing in his time, have nearly all 
perished. From his work on animals, which has 
descended to us, we are, however, enabled to ap- 
preciate his powers of observation ; and a parallel 
drawn by an eminent Oxford professor between his 
classifications and those of the most illustrious of 
living naturalists, shows him to have attained a 
view of animated nature in a remarkable degree 
comprehensive, and which contrasts strikingly with 
the confusion, vagueness, and assumption of his 
physical opinions and dogmas. In these it is easy 
to recognize a mind not at home, and an impression 
of the necessity of saying something learned and 



r 

110 BISCOUBSE ON THX 8TUDT 

systematic^ without knowing what to say. Thus, 
he divides motions into natural and unnatural ; the 
natural motion of fire and light bodies being up- 
wards, those of heavy downwiurds, each seeking its 
kmdred nature in the heavens and the earth. Thus, 
too, the immediate impressions made on us by ex- 
ternal objects, such as hardness, colour, heat, &c. 
are referred at once, in the Aristotelian philosophy, 
to occult qualities, in virtue of which they are as 
diey are, and bey(md which it is useless to enquire.* 

• Galileo exposes nn^Muingly the AristoteEaa style of rea- 
aoning. The reader may take the f<dlowiiig from him as a ape- 
dmea of its quality. The object is to prove the immutability 
and incorruptibility of the heavens ; and thus it is done :— 
I. Mutation is either generation or corruption. 
II. Generation and corruption only happen between con- 
traries. 

III. The motions of contraries are contraiy. 

IV. The odestial motions are circular. 
V. Circular motions have no contraries. 

a. Because there can be but three simple motions. 
1. To a centre. 
S. Round a centre. 
S. Worn a centre. 
/3. Of tkiee ihingib oae only can be contrary to aoe, 
7. But « motioa to a centre is manifestly the cantraiy 

to a motion from a centre. 
S. Therefore a motion round a centre (i. e* a circular 
motion) remains without a contnuy. 
yi. Tkertfore celestial motions have no contnriea -« there* 
Jbre among oelwiiial ikimg^ theve judb no contnvica 
— ikerefurt the heavens are «tenia)« iramotdbl^ in- 
corruptible, and so forth. 
It is evident that all this string of nonsense depends on Ibe 
excesnve vagueness of the notions of generation, ooiniptioii» 
c on trarie ty , &c. on which the changes are rung.^>fte Gau- 
ue^ ij^HMM Cofnncvm, Dial. i. p. 30. 



OY KATUBAL FHILOSOPHT. 



Ill 



Of course there will occur a limit beyond whidi 
it is useless for merdj human faculties to enquire ; 
but nrhere that limit is placed, experience alone caa 
teach us ; and at least to assert that we ^aoe attained 
it, is now uniyersallj recognized aa the sure criterion 
of dogmatism. 

(102.) In the earlj ages of the church the writ- 
ings of Aristotle were condemned, as allowing too 
much to reason and sense ; and even so late as the 
twelfUi century they were sought out and bumedi 
and their readers excommunicated. By degrees, 
howeveTj the extreme injustice d this impeachment 
of their diaraoter was acknowledged: they became 
the &yourite study of the schoohnen, and furnished 
the keenest weapons <^ their controversy, being 
appealed to in all disputes as of sovereign aotho* 
nty; so that the slightest dissent from any c^inioa 
of the ^ great master/' however absurd or unin« 
telligihle, was at once drowned by damour, or 
sileoced by the atill more effectual argument of 
bitter persecution. If the logic of that gjkxnny 
period could be justiy described as << the art of talking 
uniBtelligibly on mattes df which we are ignorant,'' 
its physics might, with equal truth, be summed up 
ia a ddibecste preference of ignorance to knowledge, 
m matters of every day's experience and use. 

(lOS.) In << thb opeke of nature and of soul," 
the perverse activity of the alchemists from time 
to time struck out a doubtful spark*; and our 

* Maoqpier justly obsenres, that the alchemists would ha^e 
tendered essential service to chemistry had they only related 
thdr unsuccessful experiments as clearly as they have obscurely 
related those which they pretend to have been successful.— 
^(Kfuer^s Dictionary of Chemistry, i. x. 



112 DISCOXTRSE ON THE STUDY 

illustrious countrjrman, Roger Bacon, shone out at 
the obscurest moment, like an early star predict- 
ing dawn. It was not, however, till the sixteenth 
century that the light of nature began to break 
forth with a regular and progressive increase. The 
vaunts of Paracelsus of the power of his chemical 
remedies and^ elixirs, and his open condemnation of 
the ancient pharmacy, backed as they were by many 
surprising cures, convinced all rational ph3r8icians 
that chemistry could furnish many excellent reme- 
dies, unknown till that time*, and a number of 
valuable experiments began to be made by phy- 
sicians and chemists, desirous of discovering and 
describing new chemical remedies. The chemical 
and metallurgic arts, exercised by p^sons empi- 
rically acquainted with their secrets, began to be 
seriously studied with a view to the acquisition of 
rational and useful knowledge, and regular trea- 
tises on branches of natural science at length to 
appear. George Agricola, in particular, devoted 
himself with ardour to the study of mineralogy 
and metallurgy in the mining districts of Bohemia 
and Schemnitz, and published copious and metho- 
dical accounts of all the facts within his knowledge: 
and our countryman, Dr. Gilbert of Colchester, in 

* Panu»lsii8 perfonned niofrt of these cufes by mercury and 
cq[>iiiin, the lue of in^ch latter drug he had learned in Tuikoy. 
Of mercurial preparations the physicians of his time were igno- 
rant, and of opium they were afraid, as being "cold in the fourth 
degree.*' Tartar was likewise a great favourite of Faraoebusy 
who imposed on it that name, « because it contains the water, 
the salt, the oil, and the add, which bum the patientaa h^ 
does :** in shorty a kind of oounteibalanoe to his opinm. 



^ 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 115 

1590, puUished a treatise on magnetism, fiill of 
valuable fiicts and experiments, ingeniously re»* 
soned on; and he likewise extended his enquiries 
to a variety of other subjects, in particular to elec- 
tricity. 

(104.) But, as the decisive mark of a great com- 
mencing change in the direction of the human 
&culties, astronomy, the only science in which the 
ancients had made any real progress, and ascended 
to any thing like large and general conceptions, 
began once more to be studied in the best spirit 
of a candid philosophy; and the Copemican or 
Pythagorean system arose or revived, and rapidly 
gained advocates. Galileo at length appeared, and 
openly attacked and refiited the Aristotelian dog- 
mas respecting motion, by direct appeal to the evi- 
dence of sense, and by experiments of the most 
omvincing kind. The persecutions which such a 
step drew upon him, the record of his perseverance 
and sufferings, and the ultimate triumph of his 
opinions and reasonings, have been too lately and 
too well related* to require repetition here. 

(105.) By the discoveries of Copernicus, Kepler, 
and Gridileo, the errors of the Aristotelian philo- 
sophy were effectually overturned on a plain appeal 
to the &ct8 of nature ; but it remained to show on 
broad and general princi^des, how and why Aristotle 
was in the wrong ; to set in evidence the peculiar 
weakness of his method of philosophizing, and to 
substitute in its place a stronger and better. This 

* See the Life of Galileo Galilei, by Mr. Drinkwater, with 
lUtutnitions of the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy. 

I 



124 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

evident that every step of our enquiry must be per* 
fectiy free from the slightest degree of looseness 
and indecision, and carry with it the full force of 
strict numerical announcement ; and that, therefore, 
the observations themselves on which all laws ulti- 
mately rest ought to have the same property. None 
of our senses, however, gives us direct information 
for the exact comparison of quantity. Number, 
indeed, that is to say, integer number, is an object 
of sense, because we can count ; but we can 
neither weigh, measure, nor form any precise esti- 
mate of fractional parts by the unassisted senses. 
Scarcely any man could tell the difference between 
twenty pounds and the same weight increased or 
diminished by a few ounces ; still less could he judge 
of the proportion between an ounce of gold and a 
hundred grains of cotton by balancing them in his 
hands. To take another instance: the eye is no 
judge of the proportion of different degrees of illu- 
mination, even when seen side by side ; and if an 
interval elapses, and circumstances change, nothing 
can be more vague than its judgments. When we 
gaze with i^dmiration at the gorgeous spectacle of 
the golden clouds at sunset, which seem drenched 
in light and glowing like flames of real fire, it is 
hardly by any effort we can persuade ourselves 
to regard them as the very same objects which at 
noonday pass unnoticed as mere white clouds basking 
in the sun, only participating, from their great hori- 
zontal distance, in the ruddy tint which luminaries 
acquire by shining through a great extent of the 
vapours of the atmosphere, and thereby even losing 
iomething of their light So it is with our esti- 



OF KATVKAL PHILOSOPHY. 125 

mates of time, velocity, and all other matters of 
quantity ; they are absolutely vague, and inadequate 
to form a foundation for any exact conclusion. 

(118.) In this emergency we are obliged to have 
recourse to instrumental aids, that is, to contrivances 
which shall substitute for the vague impressions 
of sense the precise one of number, and reduce all 
measurement to counting. As a first preliminary 
towards effecting this, we ^ on convenient tiandards 
of weight, dimension, time, &&, and invent contriv- 
ances for readily and correctly repeating them as 
often as we please, and counting how often such a 
standard unit is contained in the thing, be it weight, 
space, time, or angle, we wish to measure ; and if 
there be a fractional part over, we measure this 
as a new quantity by aliquot parts of the former 
standard. 

(119.) If every scientific enquirer observed only 
fi^r his own satisfaction, and reasoned only on his 
own observations, it would be of littie importance 
what standards he used, or what contrivances (if 
only just ones) he employed for this purpose ; but if 
it be intended (as it is most important they should) 
that obsarvations once made should remain as records 
to all mankind, and to all posterity, it is evidentiy of 
the highest consequence that all enquirers should 
agree on the use of a common standard, and that 
this should be one not liable to change by lapse 
of time. The selection and verification of such 
standards, however, will easily be understood to be 
a matter of extreme difficulty, if only firom the mere 
circumstance that, to verify the permanence of one 
standard, we must compare it with others, which it 



126 PI8C0URSX ON THE STUDY 

is possible may be themselves inaociirate, or, at least* 
stand in need of verification. 

(120.) Here we can onlj call to our aasistaDce 
the presumed permanence of the great laws of 
nature, with all experience in its fiwour, and the 
sixong impression we have of the general coraposare 
and steadiness of every thing relating to the gigantic 
mass we inhabit — << die great globe itsel£" la its 
uniform rotation on its axis, accordingly, we find a 
standard of time, which nothing has ever given us 
reason to regard as sdbject to change, and which,, 
compared with other periods which the revolutiona 
of the planets about the sun a£Sird, has demonstrably 
undergone none smce the earliest history. In the 
dimensions of the earth we find a natural unit 
of the measure of space, whidi possesses in per- 
fection every quality that can be desired; and ia 
its attraction corniced with its rotation the re- 
searches of dynamical science have enabled us» 
through the medium of the pendulum, to obtain 
another invariable standard, more refined and kas 
obvious, it is true, in its origin, but possessing a 
great advantage in its capability of ready verification, 
and therefi)re easily made to serve as a check on 
the other. The former, viz. direct measurement 
of the dimensions of the earth, is the origin of 
the metre, the French unit of linear measure ; the 
latter, of the British yard Theoretically speaking, 
they are equally eligible ; but when we consider that 
the qmntity dxrecdy meagured, in the case of die 
mdtre, is a length a great many thousand times the 
final unit, and in the pendulum or yard very nearfy 
the unit 'itself there can be no hesitation in ^ving 



OV NATURAL FHIL080PHT. 1^ 

the preferenoe as an original meaaure to the ^Hmer, 
became any error committed in the prooefla bj 
which thi^ is determined beoonfes subdivided in 
the final result ; while, on the other hand, any mi- 
nute error ocHnmitted in determining the length of 
the pendulum becomes multiplied by the repetitioL 
of the unit in all measurements of considerable 
lengths performed in yards. 

(12L) The same admirable invention of the pen* 
dulum affords a means of subdividing time to an 
almost unlimited nicety. A dock is nothing more 
than a piece of mechanism for counting tbs oscil* 
lations o£ a pendulum ; and by that peculiar property 
of the pendulum, that one vibration oommencea 
exactly wbere the last terminates, no part of time is 
lost or gained in the juxta-positioQ of die units so 
counted, so that the precise fractional part c^ a day 
can be ascertained which each such unit measures. 

(122.) It is owing to this peculiar prc^iertyby 
which tikejuxtippasition of units of time and weight 
can be performed wUkout errors that the whole of 
the accuracy with which time and weight can be 
multiplied and subdivided is owing. * Tbe same 
thing cannot be accomplished in jpoee, by any method 

* The abstract principle of repetition in matters of measure- 
ment (viz. juxtap-poaition of units without error) is iqpplicablc 
to a great yariety of cases in which quantities are xequired to be 
determined to minute nicety. In chemistry, in determining 
the standard atomic weights of bodies, it seems easily and com- 
pletely applicable, by a process which will suggest itself at once 
to every chemist, and seems the only thing wanting to place 
the exactness of chemical determinations on a par with astro* 
Domical measurements. 



128 . DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

we are yet acquainted with, so that our means of 
subdividing space are much, inferior in precision. 
The beautiful principle of repetition, invented by 
Borda, offers the nearest approach to it, but cannot 
be said to be absolutely free from the source of error 
in question. The method of *< double weighing,*' 
which we owe to the same distinguished observer, 
affords an instance of the direct comparison of two 
equal weights independent of almost every source of 
error which can affect die comparison of one object 
with another. It has been remarked by Biot, that 
previous to the invention of this elegant method, in- 
struments afforded no perfect means of ascertaining 
the weight of a body. 

(123.) But it is not enough to possess a standard 
of this abstract kind : a real material measure most 
be constructed, and exact copies of it taken. This, 
however, is not very difficult ; the great difficulty is 
to preserve it unaltered from age to age ; for unless 
we transmit to posterity the units of our measure- 
ments, suck as we have ourselves used Mem, we, in 
fact, only half bequeath to them our observations. 
This is a point too much lost sight oi^ and it were 
much to be wished that some direct provision fi>r 
so important an object were made.* 

* Accurate and perfectfy authentic copies of the yaxd and 
pound, executed in platina, and hamedcally sealed in giaas, 
should be deposited deep in the interior of the massiTe stone-wofk 
of some great public building, whence they could only be rescued 
with a degree of difficulty sufficient to pztdude their being dis- 
tnibed unless on some very high and urgent occasion. The 
Act should be publicly recorded, and its memory preserved by an 
finsoiption. Indeed, how much valuable and useful infonnatioB 



OF KATUKAL PHILOSOPHY. 129 

(1^) Bat, it may be asked, if our measuremeiit of 
qiiantiiy is thus unavoidably liable to error, how is 
it possible that our observations can possess that 
quality of numerical veracity which is requisite to 
render, them. the foundation of laws, whose distin- 
guishing perfection consists in their strict mathe* 
matical expression ? To this the reply is twofold. 
1st, that though we admit the necessary existence 
of numerical error in every observation, we can 
always assign a limit which such error cannot pos* 
sibly exceed ; and the extent of this htiiude oferwr- 
of obtervation is less in proportion to the perfection 
oi the instrumental means we possess, and the care 
bestowed oa their employment. In the greater part 
of modem measurements it is, in point of fact, ex* 
tr^odely minute, and may be still further diminished, 
almost to any required extent, by repeating the 
measurements a great number of times, and under a 
great variety of circumstances, and taking a mean 
c^ the results, when errors of opposite kinds will, at 
length, compensate each other. But, 2dly, there 

of tbe actual eiisdog state of arts and knowledge at any 
period might be transmitted to posterity in a distinct, tan- 
gible^ and imperishable form, if, instead of the absurd and use- 
leas deposition of a few coins and medals under the founds 
actions of buildings, specimens of ingenious implements or 
condensed statements of scientific truths or processes in arts 
and manniactures, were substituted. Will books infallibly 
preserve to a remote posterity all that we may desire should be 
liereafter known of ourselTea and our discoveries, or all that 
posterity would wish to know ? and may not a useless cere- 
mony be thus transformed into an act of enrolment in a perpe- 
tual archive of what we most prize, and acknowledge to be most 
valiiahle? 



130 



mscorasB on tmk. &tu>t 



exttt». a mack more fimdtmwtai replj; to tbtk. ot>> 
jectioB. In BPHfiOBing vftak our ohoewatioB^ iho 
cxisteooe a^d posaible amounl of quaalitatnre eorat 
IS. alirayg to be aUowed fi>r ; and the «cteAt towlBeh 
theories may be affected by it ia nevev to be lest 
sight o£ In reasoning upwaEds, from obsewationa 
confessedly imperfect to general lasra^ we mnal 
take care always to regard our ooncluskms aa oo»> 
ditional, ao &ir aa they may be a&cted bjr sadi 
unavoidable imperfectiona; and whenntleB^gthwe 
shall have arrived at our highest poinly and attainad 
to axioms which aduMt of general and deductive 
fca8onii^> the questi<m» whether they ors vitiated 
by the errofs^of observMion or not» ndH sliU remain 
to be decided* and must become the ob|eG6 of sub* 
sequent verification. This point viU be mad^th* 
Bul^ect of more distinct conaideratiiQn hercaftcg» 
whi^ we come to i^eak of the veri<M»tion> of theai'iea 
and the laws of probability^ 

(12B.y With respect taour aeoovd of ebsarvatsans^ 
it should be not only circumstantial but/nA/iil/ by 
which we mean, that it shoidd ec«tam aft we did 
o&«erve, and nothii^ eke* Without aqr intention of 
ftbifying our record, we may do so unperceived by 
ourselves, owing to a mitturia of the wws and Ian- 
gyage of an erroneous theory with that of sjwple ftct. 
Thus,, for ^x^an^e, i^ i^ des^iiig th^ efieet of 
l^tning, we shonld say, ^ The thaQderiboit standc 
with violence against the side (rf^the house, and bent 
in the wall,'' a fact would be stated which we. did 
not see, and would lead our I^earers to bdi^vQ tbul 9 
solid or ponderable projectile was ppncemeAi The 
^ strong smell of sulphur," wbidk is sometimM 



to woauntfemj lightning, it a.TeouuBit cf die tfaeorf 
vUdk made t^^^iy^^ and ligfatiung the f^p lflaiini c£ 
mhmi uSwaUL gaupowdatf imajwaid of tu^hnreona 
and n itcDi i a exfaalationab Tliere are aoooe aulnecta 
pnrfjrnhtrlj' inftsted vitli tfcia nature of theory in 
the statemoit of observed &ct. The older che- 
nuairy was so. oTeffaoiiie by tins misdiieC aa quite 
lo eonloinid and ndfify the deacriptioBs of iunumer- 
aJUe onriooa and kborioua experiments. And in 
geolegf , tiB a vexj reecnt period, it waa often ez- 
trenelj ditenk , from tSus cincinutance, to know 
wtet flim the ftcts observed. Thus, FaiQaa de St. 
Fond, in hi^ work on tihe volcanoea of central 
Bnutce, descrihes with enrery appearance of minute 
yaeciaion cratera existing no where bnt in hta own 
iva^^mtion* There is na greater fimlt (direct fidtt* 
Scation of &ct escepited) which can be committed 
bfF m^ obamrer* 

(126.) Wbrai particttlat branchea of science hoere 
ae^uaed that degree of consisteAqr and generality 
w^ieba&nito of aa abstract statement of lam, and 
lagitimata deductive reasonmg^ the princ^ of the 
^idaioa of labow tenda ta separate the province of 
^ observev from tibat of the theodnti. There is no 
aeeoimting^ lor ib& deference of minda or indin* 
atjeoai, wUeh leada ona man tot observe, with inter* 
eat th» diivelepcineiita of phenomena,, another to 
i^eetdrite oatjietr causeai but were it. not for diis 
liappy disagoeemant^ it may be doubted wh&dier the 
bl^ier sciences eoidd ever have attamed even their 
pmvt^dfiigjDee of pecfeetieiifa. Aa lowsaoquire ge>* 
QeraUty^ tJafeinAaenoe of individual observations be^ 
raweri las%. and a hig^bu^ and: l^gher dagvee of 

K 2 ' 



132 DISCOUBSE ON THE STUDY 

refinement in their performance^ as well as a great 
multiplication in their nmnber,* becomes necessary 
to give thein importance. In astronomy, for in- 
stance^ the superior departments of theory are com* 
pletely disjoined from the routine of practical ob- 
servation. 

(127.) To make a perfect observer, however, either 
in astronomy or in any other department of science, 
an extensive acquaintance is requisite, not only 
with the particular science to which his observations 
relate, but with every branch of knowledge which 
may enable him to appreciate and neutralize the 
effect of extraneous disturbing causes. Thus fur- 
nished, he will be prepared to seize on any of those 
minute indications, which (such is the subtlety of 
nature) often connect phenomena which seem quite 
remote from each other. He wiU have his eyes as 
it were opened, that they maybe struck at once with 
any occurrence which, according to received theories, 
ought not to happen ; for these are the facts which 
serve as clews to new discoveries. The deviation 
of the magnetic needle, by the influence of an 
electrified wire, must have happened a thousand 
times to a perceptible amount, under the eyes of 
persons engaged in galvanic experiments, with phflo- 
sophical apparatus of all kinds standing around them ; 
but it required the eye of a philosopher such as 
Oersted to seize the indication, refer it to its origin, 
and thereby connect two great branches of science. 
The grand discovery of Malus of the polarization 
of light by reflection originated in his casual remark 
of the disappearance of one of the images of a 
wmdow in the Luxemboui^ palace, one ereDin^ 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHT- 133 

wh&k Strongly Dluminated fay the setting sun, viewed 
through a doubly refracting prism. 

(128.) To avail ourselves as far as possible of the 
advantages which a division of labour may afford 
&r the collection of &cts, by the industry and ac- 
tivity which the general difiusion of mformation, in 
the present age, brings into exercise, is an object of 
great importance* JHiere .is scarcely any well- / i 
ij^ormed^rson^lEhOrif -he.has but the will, has | 
not also the power to add something essential to ' 
"^^e general jBtock of knowledge, if he will only 
observe regularly and methodically some particular 
class'bf facts which may most excite his jittention, 
or'whidh his situation may best enable him to study 
witfiTeSect. To instance one or two subjects, 
wliidi van only be effectually improved by the 
united observations of great numbers widely dis- 
persed: — Meteorology, one of the most compli- 
cated but important branches of science, is at 
the same time one in which any person who will 
attend to plain rules, and bestow the necessary 
degree of attention, may do effectual service. 
What benefits has not Geology reaped from the 
activity of industrious individuals, who, setting aside 
all theoretical views, have been content to exercise 
the useful and highly entertaining occupation of 
collecting specimens from the countries which they 
visit? In short, there is no branch of science what- 
ever in which, at least, if useful and sensible 
queries were distinctly proposed, an immense mass 
^valuable information might not be collected from 
those who, in their various lines of life, at home or 
abroad, stationary or m travel, would gladly avail 

K 3 



134 DISCOURSE ON JJER SfUDY 

themselves of opportunities of being iiseftd. Ms* 
thing would tend better to aStUB tins «ttd dun the 
circulation of printed skdoton fems, on tatioiis sub- 
jectS) which should be jo ftmed as, let, to«sk ifis- 
tinct and pertinemt questionB, admitting of ahert and 
definite answers ; 2dly» To call finrexaet mummcal 
statement on all principal pcMnts; ^dy. To poisft 
out die attesdMit CETounartances most lifcdy to prova 
influentia], and whidi o^ght to be observed ; 4thly, 
To call fw their transmiiiaiop to a common centre. 



ov KjinmAL Maosotat. 1S5 



CHAP. ¥• 
cfp nre cUkssT^icATitm of natukal objects and 

FHtorOBBNA, AND OP VoHfeliroLAtVBfc. 

^12d.) Ttis noBdier and noie^ of objects and re- 
latkmB which die observathm (^'nature brings before 
418 are so great as to distract the attention, unlesB 
assirted and netfaodized by such judidouB distri- 
bation of tiiem in classes as shail Ihnk oar view to 
a few at a time, or to gronips so bound toge^er by 
gienend resemManees that, for the immediate pur- 
Ipope lor wbicii we cottsidter them, tbey miay be 
regarcted as imiividtals. Bdbre we can enter into 
any tliiBg whidi deserves to be ddied a genend and 
sjmteinatic view of nature^ it is necessary that we 
riioidd |>oBless an enuBaterati<m, if not complete, 
}at least «f conioderable extent^ <yf her materials 
aad combinlttiioHB; and that those which appeair 
i& any degree iUpoHamt should be distinguished 
%g^ names which may not only tekid to ik theiii 
in dur recdttectii^, but ikiay constitute^ as it weii^y 
Attctei or centte^ ab<>ut #hich kifofmation may 
ediect into manses The knposition of a name ob 
%tky subject df cont«mplatioki> be it a material object, 
Jk pheiefdmenoia df natine, or a ]|roup <)f &cts and rela- 
tfiM^ looked wpon in ^ peculiar point of view, is ah 
tp&A in its ^bMry of great importance. It not only 
leliables us readily t6 refer to it in conversation or 
WtitSivg, without cffcumlocutifHi, but, what is bf 

K 4 



1S6 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

more consequenoe, it gives it a recognized exist- 
ence in our own minds, as a matter for separate 
and peculiar consideration ; places it on a list for 
examination ; and renders it a head or title, under 
which information of various descriptions may be 
arranged ; and, in consequence, fits it to perform the 
office of a connecting link between all the subjects 
to which such information may refer. 

(130.) For these piurposes, however, a temporary 
or provisional name, or one adapted for common 
parlance, may suffice. But when a very great mul- 
titude of objects come to be referred to one class, 
especially of such as do not offer very obvious 
and remarkable distinctions, a more systematic 
and regular nomenclature becomes necessary, in 
which the names shall recall the differences as well 
as the resemblances between the individuals of a 
class, and in which the direct relation between the 
name and the object shall materially assist the so- 
lution of the problem, << given the one, to determine 
^ other.** How necessary this may become, wiU 
be at once seen, when we consider the immense 
number of individual objects, or rather species, 
presented by almost every branch of science of any 
extent ; which absolutely require to be distinguished 
by names. Thus, the botanist i^ conversant with from 
80,000 to 100,000 species of plants ; the entomo- 
logist with, perhaps, as many, of insects : the chemist 
has to register the properties of combinations, by 
twos, threes, fours, and upwards, in various doseSy 
of upwards of fifty different elements, all distin- 
guished from each other by essential differences ; 
and of which though a great many thousands are 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. ^ 1S7 

known, by far the greater part have never yet L ^n 
formed, although hundreds of new ones are comki^ 
to light, in perpetual succession, as the science ad- 
vances; all. of which are to be named as they 
arise. The objects of astronomy are, literally, as 
numerous as the stars of heaven ; and although not 
midre than one or two thousand require to be ex- 
pressed by distinct names, yet the number, respect- 
ing which particular information is required, is. not 
less, than a hundred times that amount ; and all these 
must be registered in lists, (so as to be at once re- 
ferred to, and so that none shall escape,) if not by 
actual names, at least by some equivalent means. 

(131.) Nomenclature, then, is, in itself, undoubt- 
edly an important part of science, as it prevents our 
being lost in a wilderness of particulars, and involved 
in inextricable confusion. Happily, in those great 
branches of science where the objects of.classifi- 
cadon.are most numerous, and the necessity for a 
dear and convenient nomenclature most pressings 
no very great difficulty in its establishment is felt. 
The very multitude of the objects themselves 
affords the power of grouping them in subordinate 
classes, sufficiently well defined to admit of names, 
and these again into others, whose names may be- 
come attached to, or compounded with, the formeri 
till at length the particular species is identified. 
The facility with. which the botanist, the entomo- 
logist, or the chemist, refers by name to any indivi- 
dual object in his. science shows what may be ac- 
ocKnplished in this way when characters are them- 
selves distinct. In.odier branches, however,, conr 
siderable difficulty is experienced. This arises 



\ 



13B JIUHSOOKBB SON VHE STUDY 

mostly 'wliere tive isprecies to be AtiiigtiiBlrefd at 
mfpunsteA ftmi e«ob Miher chiefly by difference in 
ddgi^ie, (^ oei^sain qinditieB comnrnn to all, and 
Wli€(re tiie degrees ishade iftto eadi otiier inneotMy. 
9^Fh^» such «ubjeot6 isaii liordiy be consiiilered 
1^ foir^ystemaiic tMAnendateflre; and thai l^e ai- 
umpt ffy apply it oaglft «iidy %o be partial, anbradfig 
voefa ^oups Iffiid paroelift idf ^ditidiiftls ab figvifi^ 
iti diaracfteiiB ^vi^fniy a»itia*al and g^neric^ wi& 
leaving the rektiakider mder trivial or provigioiid 
dGJbOtninations, tfll i^ shidl be bett^ idiown, and 
)uipable of b^g scktuifteaify grouped* 

(1S2.) Indeed, ii<mieMClftUire, ki b aystfeuiadc poiktt 
oif vie#) ifi ato ndudi, pettiapi fnot%> a congeqinehce 
^lui a i»idlse Of liX«efnded Imo^le^e^ Any M^ 
mely gh6 Ito aftbifi^fivy tiain&is to a things tae^iely td 
be Mt to tatt: of it^ bat> to give a name whidk 
abafl «t 'Ctti^ tehr k to a place in a syMet^ W^ 
ttiM; tofiitr Its pr^etti<iii$ and We must Aom h 
ayfeteob ka^e enough, and ti^gular enov^, lo teeetv^ 
•tins pliK^^whidi bdonga to k, and to tad othteK 
It nppoaMy ^(^r^ro, doiribtfU «^heiher it is do- 
Aflpable^ ibt the eatential puypotes of adenta, that 
^tteme rcliMMaMbt in aytdetnaiie Bomandaxnaia 
Aeuld bb ittiated on. Were science petCed, la* 
deed, aystieflfta of dawifetttion m^t be ag^read 
oti, wMdi flhoald aaiign to every object in natttrft 
ft place in some class, to which it movie remarkaUy 
attd preeminently belonged than to any others ana 
under which it might acquire a name, never aftar* 
wirds subjaic^ to diange. But, so long as titia ia not 
the oas^ soad new relations are daily diacoveiredk 
w« ttiust be very cautious how wis fastst strong 



<m ihe eslalilnlniitnt and extfensim €i dancag 
irfaidi imve m tliem eiQr tbijig artifioia]^ M a basis 
0i a rigid nomcBdbfture ; and espedall j lioir we 
matadLe the means for tiie^nd, aad sacrifioe eohye^ 
aieiice aod distiiietBess to « ri^e fbr ar^ 
Evecy wMnendalare dq^ieiideiit en aftincial dassi- 
fications is necessarily sul(ject to fluctiu^ioBS ; and 
iiardly any thing can connterMance tlie evil of 
disturbmg weUneslaUislied names, whidi ha^e once 
acquired a gencval circidtftion. In native^ one and 
^lie same dfaject makes a iMtft of an infinite nmnber 
iif different syiton^-^an in^vidnal in an mfiule 
number of groi^)s» some of greater, some of less 
iaqportance) aoocurdiag to tlie ctifferent.f)oiBts of view 
in wfakb thqrBiay be eonndered. Henoe^asnumy 
diffesent sjstems «f nomeaelatiare BMiy be ima- 
j^ned as there oanl» discovered ^i^Eerait heads of 
dassification, while yet it is Ulgl^y deskaUe thait 
each ol^gect ehoiQd be nnitBrsally fipoken of under 
one name, ifp ost Ma* Consequently, in ali subjects 
where oomprdbensive heads of classttcati^m do not 
yrmmnen^ offer themad ves, all nomendature must 
lie mbalaoce of difficulties, and a good» shcnrt^ tus- 
eneontn^ name, Which has once obtained « fiiotii^ in 
usage^ is preferable to dmost my othen 

^133.) There is noscienoe in which Ihe evils re« 
sdting &(Mn a mge for nomenclature have been ^t 
to «udi an extent as in ramerslogy. Hie number 
-€£ myle minerab aotuaHy recognised by mineralo- 
gists does not exceed a few hundreds, yet there 
is scarcely one whidi has not four or five names 
m different books. The consequence is most un- 
happy. No name is suffered to endure long enough 



140 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

to take root ; and every new writer oa this inter* 
esting science begins, as a matter of course, by 
making a talnda rasa of all former nomenclature^ 
and proposing a new one in its place. The climax 
has at length been put to this most inconvenient 
and bewildering state of things by the appearance 
of a system supported by extraordinary merit m 
other respects, and therefore carr3ring Ihe highest 
authority, in which names which had acquired 
universal circulation, and had hitherto maintained 
their ground in the midst of the general confusion^ 
and even worked their way into common language^ 
as denotive of species too definite to. admit of mis- 
take, are actually rendered generic^ and extended to 
whole groups, comprising objects agreeing in nothing 
but the arbitrary heads of a classification fix)m whidi 
the most important natural relations are professedly 
and purposely rejected.* 

(134.) The classifications by which, science' is ad- 
vanced, however, are widely different from those 
which serve as bases for artificial systems of nomen- 
clature. They cross and intersect one another, as it 
were, in every possible way, and have for their very 
aim to interweave all the objects of nature in a dose 
andcompact web of mutual relations and depend^ice. 
Ai8 soon, then, as any resemblance or analogy, any 
point of agreement whatever, is perceived between 
any two or more things, — be they what they wOl, 
whether objects, or phenomena, or laws, — they 



* In the syttem alluded to, tlie name of qoarts is 
to iolite and obsidian ; that of mica to plumbago, chlorite, and 
uranite ; sulphur, to orpiment and realgar, &c See Mob^s 
System of Mineralogy, translated by Haidinger. - 



OF KATUItAL FHILOSOPKY. 141 

mediatelj and ^pao^Sicfty constitute themselves into 
agnHip or dass^ which may become enlarged to any 
extent by the accession of such new objects, pheno- 
mena, or laws, agreeing in the same point, as may 
oome to be subsequently ascertained. It is thus that 
the materials of the world become grouped in natural 
§milies, such as chemistry furnishes examples of, 
in its various groups of acids, alkalies, sulphurets, &a; 
or botany, in its euphorbiaceas, umbelliferae, &c. 
(t is thus, too, that phenomena assume their places 
inder general points of resemblance ; as, in optic8» 
.hose whidh refer themselves to the class of periodic 
colours, double refraction, &c.; and that resem- 
ilances themselves become traced, which it is the 
iHisiness of induction to generalize and include in 
abstract propositions. 

(135.) But every class formed on a positive resem- 
bkmce of characters, or on a distinct analogy, draws 
with it the consideration of a negative class, in which 
that resemblance either does not subsist at all, or the 
contrary takes place ; and again, there are classes in 
which a given quality is possessed by th^ differ- 
ent individuals in a descending scale of intensity. 
' Now, it is of consequence to distinguish between 
cases in which there is a real opposition of quality, 
or a mere diminution of intensity, in some quality 
susceptible of degrees, till it becomes impercep- 
tibie. For example, between transparency and 
o|iacity there would at first sight appear a direct 
opposition ; but, on nearer consideration, when we 
consider the gradations by which transparency di- 
minishes in natural substances, we shall see reason 
to admit that the latter quality, instead of being the 



i^ I^fSCOUHajB ON TUX STlTSy 

q^lWfte of Ae fonner, i» oi^jr its eairenm 
degree*. Afi^y intibeanfiageroeat of naturd ohjeete 
uoder the head of wei^ er spedfic gnuritji tfaa 
seste Qi^tends through all oatui^e^ and i;v« loaovr cf oa 
Qftlural body in which th« opposite of gravitj) or 
positive kvUiff^ subsista^ Oft the other hand^ tke 
opposite electricitiea ; the north and south mags 
netk polarities ; the alkaline and acid quaUties of 
chemical agents ; the positive and negative rotations 
injf^ressed by plates 6i rodk crystal on the planes 06 
polarissation of the cays of light, and maiiy otibcff 
cases, exem^ify not merely a negation,, but an ai!lm. 
(^Kwition of quality. Both these modes of daaaifr 
caAionhave their peculiar importance in the indue* 
tive process : the. one> as.affooding an opportunity of 
tracing a relation between phenomena by the observ- 
ation of a correspondence in their scales of intenaily ; 
the other, by that of conira8t,.as iReshdlshoir'moM. 
ait liarge in the next section* 

(ld6.) There is a veuy wide distinction, too^tobe.* 
taken between such classes as tunt upoa a stn^ 
head of ];esemblance among individuals otherwise- 
very different, and such as bind together in natural 
groups, by a great 'variety of aadogiesi. objects 
which yet differ in many remarkable particidav. 
For ezan^le: if we make colourless transpareiMy 
a head of classification, the list of the ctess will 
comprise objects differing most widely in their 
nature, such as water, air, diamond, spirit of wiae^ 
glass, &c On the odier hand, the chemical fimiiliitf? 
ei alkalifis, metals, &c are instances of greope of 
the other kind; which, with propo^ties in many 
re^ectt different, still agvee in a general 



Uaace of several otJien, which at once decides 
us in considenng them as having a natoral relation. 
In the former cases, our ingenuity is exercised to de- 
tennine what can be the cause of their resemblance^ 
in the latter, of their diflbrence ; the former belong i ' ^ 
tq the province of inductive generalization, and 
^ord the most instructive cases for the investiga- \ 
tioa of causes; the latter appertain to the more 
secret recesses of nature ; the very existence of such 
&Dci3ies being ia itself one of the i^ceat and corapU-^ 
<^ted phenomena of the universe, which we cannot 
hope to unriddle without aiU inlamate and extensive^ 
acquaintance with the highest laws.* 

^ The following pasnge, from lindley'i Synopma of the 
Bniish flora, characterues JMStly the reopectiTe merits, 
in a phflosophical point of view, of natural and artificial 
ajfstema of daadfication in general, thougik United in ha 
tiipWMJan to hU ovn wnmedhrtft acicBoe : -^** After all that 
liaa been efifected, or Is likely to be aoGonq>l]8hed heiealWr» 
tbeve ^nSl always be more difficulty in acquiring a knowledge 
oC ti»e nptnnl systen^ of botany than of the Linnaean. The 
lalter akims only the surUtce, of things, and leaves the student 
in the fimded possession of a sort of infbrmation which it i* 
easy enough to obtain, but which is of litde value when ae> 
qnhed : the foima leqniBef a minale imresligatioa of evety. 
paat and eresej ppnporly kjoown; ^ eidsl ia plantsj but wbm 
iHideratiood has conveyed to the mind a store of reel infooik* 
a^jjMi^.of the utmost u?^ to map in every stationof life* What- 
ever ^e difficulties may be of becoming acquainted with planta 
according to th&B method, they are. inseparable from botany^ 
wldch cannot be usefrdly atudted mthout encountering them*** 
Sdnlkr has ^ome beautifiil linea. on iMa^ entitled « Menadto 
nam Wdmii** (oi; HMoiMt Ks^k^^e}; Gejioh^^ vc^tk 



144 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 



CHAP. VT. 

OF THE FIRST STAGE OF INDUCTION. — THE DISCOVERT 
OF PROXIMATE CAUSES, AND LAWS OF THE LOWEST 
DEGREE OF GENERALITY, AND THEIR YERIFICATION. 

(137.) The first thing that a philosophic mind 
considers, when any new phenomenon presents 
itself, is its explanation, or reference to an imme- 
diate producing cause. If that cannot be ascer- 
tained, the next is to generaUze the phenomenon, 
and include it, with others analogous to it, in the 
expression of some law, in the hope that its con- 
sideration, in a more advanced state of knowledge, 
may lead to the discovery of an adequate proxi- 
mate cause. 

(138.) Experience having shown us the manner 
in which one phenomenon depends on another in a 
great variety of cases, we fin^ ourselves provided, 
as science extends, with a continually increasing 
stock of such antecedent phenomena, or causes 
(meaning at present merely proximate causes), 
competent, under different modifications, to the 
production of a great multitude of effects, besides 
those which originally led to a knowledge of them. 
To such causes Newton has applied the term verm 
eauum; that is, causes recognized as having a real ex- 
istence in nature, and not being mere hypotheses or 
figments of the mind. To exemplify the distinc- 
tion : — The phenomenon of shells found in rocksi at 



k 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 145 

a great height above the sea, has been attributed 

to several causes. By some it has been ascribed 

to a plastic virtue in the soil ; by some, to ferment^ 

ation ; by some, to the influence of the celestial 

bodies ; by some, to the casual passage of pilgrims 

with their scallops; by some, to birds feeding on 

diell-fish ; and by all modem geologists, with one 

consent, to the life and death of real mollusca 

at the bottom of the sea, and a subsequent 

alteration of the relative level of the land and 

sea. Of these, the plastic virtue and celestial 

influence belong to the class of figments of fancy. 

Casual transport by pilgrims is a real cause, and 

might account for a few shells here and there 

dropped on frequented passes, but is not extensive 

enough for the purpose of explanaticm. Ferment^ 

ation, generally, is a real cause, so flu* as that 

there ti such a thing; but it is not a real cause 

of the production of a shell in a rock, since no 

such thing was ever witnessed as one of its effects, 

and rocks and stones do not ferment. On the other 

hand, for a shell-fish dying at the bottom of the 

sea to leave his shell in the mud, where it becomes 

silted over and imbedded, happens daily ; and the 

elevation of the bottom of the sea to become dry 

land has really been witnessed so often, and on such 

a scale, as to qualify it for a vera causa available in 

sound philosophy. 

(139.) To take another instance, likewise drawn 
from the same deservedly popular science : — The 
fact of a great change in the general diraate of 
large tracts of the globe, if not of the whole earth, 
and of a diminution of general temperature, having 

T. 



14S DISCOURSE ON THE STUP7 

been recognised by geol(^ist8, from their examin- 
.ation of the remains of animals and vegetables of 
former ages enclosed in the strata, various causes 
for such diminution of temperature have been as- 
signed. Some consider the whole globe as having 
gradually cooled from absolute fusion ; some regard 
the immensely superior activity of former volcanoes, 
and consequent more copious communication of in- 
ternal heat to the surface, in former ages, as the 
cause. Neither of these can be regarded as real 
causes in the sense here intended ; for we do not 
know that the globe has so cooled from fusion, nor 
are we sure that such supposed greater activity of 
former than of present volcanoes really did exist. 
. A cause, possessing the essential requisites of a 
t/ vera causay has, however, been brought forward* 
in the varying influence of the distribution of land 

* Lyell's Principles of Geology, vol. i. Foinrier, M^m. ^ 
TAcad. des Sciences, torn. viL p. 592. " L'^tablissement at 
le progr^ des soci^t^s humaines, Tactions des forces naturelle% 
pen vent changer notablement, et dans de vastes contr^es, T^tde 
la surface du sol, la distribution des eaux, et les grands mouve- 
mens de Fair. De tels efiets sont propres k hire varier, dans 
le cours de plusieurs slides, le d^gr6 de la chaleur moyemie • 
car les expressions analytiques comprennent des coeffidena qui 
•e rapportent k V^tat superfidel, et qui influent beaucoup 
U valeur de la temperature." In this enumeration, by 
Fourrier, of causes which may vary the general relation of 
surface of extensive continents to heat, it is but justice to 
Lyell to observe, that the gradual shifting of the j)laces of 
continents themselves on the surface of the globe, by the 
ing action of the sea on the one hand, and the elevating 
of subterranean forces on the other, does not expressly 
and cannot be fairly included in the general sense of the 
which confines itself to the consideration of such changes 
4 may take place on the existing surface of the land. 



OF NATUaAX PQIL080PHV. 



147 



and sea over the surface of the globe : a change of 
such distribution, in the lapse of ages, by the d^ra- 
dation of the old continents, and the devation of 
Mew, being a demonstrated fact ; and the influence 
of such a change on the dimates c^ particular re- 
gions, if not of the whole globe, being a perfectly 
&3T conclusion, from what we know of continental, 
insular, and oceanic climates by actual observation. 
Here, then, we have, at least, a cause on which a 
philosopher may consent to reason; though, whether 
the changes actually going on are such as to warrant 
the whole extent of the conclusion, or are even 
taking place in the right direction, may be con- 
sidered as undecided till the matter has been more 
thoroughly examined. 

(140.) To this we may add another, which 
has likewise the essential characters of a vera 
tan/My in the astronomical fact of the actual slow 
diminution of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit 
round the sun ; and which, as a general one, affect- 
ing the mean iemperaiuTe of the whole globe^ and 
as one of which the effect is both inevitable, and 
aosceptihle, to a certain degree, of exact estimation, 
<ieserves consideration. It is evident that the 
ifiean temperature of the whole surface of the 
globe, in so far as it is maintained by the action 
€^ the sun at a higher degree than it would have 
were the sun extinguished, must depend on the ' 
mean quantity of the sun's rays which it receives, or, 
which comes to the same thing, on the toted quantity 
received in a given invariable time : and the length 
of the year being unchangeable in all the fluctu- 
ations of the planetary system, it follows, that the 

L 2 



/ 



148 mscouRss on' the study 

tota] €mnuai amount of solar radiation will deter- 
mine, (kBtens paribus, the general climate of the 
earth. Now, it is not difficult to show that this 
amount is inversely proportional to the minor axis 
of the ellipse described by the earth about the 
sun, regarded as slowly variable ; and that, there- 
fore, the major axis remaining, as we know it to be, 
constant, and the orbit being actually in a state of 
approach to a circle, and, consequently, the minor 
axis being on the increase, the mean annual amount 
of solar radiation received by the whole earth must 
be actually on the decrease. We have here, there«> 
fore, an evident real cause, of sufficient univer- 
sality, and acting in the right diredUmy to account 
for the phenomenon. Its adequacy is another 
consideration.* 

(141.) Whenever, therefore, any phenomenon pre- . 
sents itself for explanation, we naturally seek, in 
the first instance, to refer it to some one or other 
of those real causes which experience has shown to 
exist, and to be efficacious in producing similar 
phenomena. In this attempt our probability of 
success will, of course, mainly depend, 1st, On the 
number and variety of causes experience has placed 
at our disposal ; 2^y, On our habit of applying them 
to the explanation of natural phenomena ; and, Sdly, 
On the number of analogous phenomena we can 
collect, which have either been explained, or whidi 
admit of explanation by some one or other of thoie 
causes, and the closeness of their analogy with that 
in question. 

* The reader will find this subject further developed in a 
paper lately communicated to the Geological Society. 



OV NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 14f9 

(142.) Here, Uien, we see the ^eat importance 
of possessing a stock of analogous instances or phe- 
nomena which class themselves with that under 
consideration, the explanation of one among whidi 
may naturally be expected to lead to that of all 
die rest. If the analogy of two phenomena be 
very dose and striking, while, at the same time, die 
cause of one is very obvious, it becomes scarcely 
possible to reftwe to admit the action of an analogous 
cause in the other, though hot so obvious in itself 
For instance, when we see a stone whirled round in 
a sling, describing a circular orbit round the hand, 
keeping die string stretched, and flying away the 
moment it breaks, we never hesitate to r^ard it as 
retained in its orbit by the toision of the string, 
that is, by a force directed to the' centre ; for we 
&el that we do really exert such a force. We have 
here lA« dared perc^fHan of the cause. When, 
therefore, we see a great body like the moon cir- 
culating round the earth and not flying off, we 
cnumot help believing it to be prevented from so 
doing, not indeed by a material tie, but by that 
which operates in the other case through the in- 
termectium of the string, — z. farce directed con- 
standy to the centre. It is thus that we are con- 
tinually acquiring a knowledge of the existence 
of causes acting under drcumstances of such con- 
cealment as effectually to prevent their direct dis- 
covery. 

(14S.) In general we must observe that motion, 
-wherever produced or changed, invariably points 
out the existence of force as its cause; and diua 
the forces of nature become known and measured 

L 3 



/ 



150 DISCOURSE OK THB STUDY 

by the motions they produce. Thus, the foret of 
magnetisin becomes known by the deviation pro- 
duced by iron in a compass needle, or by a needle 
leaping up to a magnet held over it, as certainly as 
by that adhesion to it, when in contact and at rest, 
which requires force to break the connection ; and 
thus the currents produced in the surface of a quan- 
tity of quicksilver, electrified under a conducting 
fiuid, have pointed out the existence and directioB 
of forces of enormous intensity developed by die 
electric circuit, of which we should not odierwise 
have had the least suspicion.* 

( 144.) But when the cause of a phenomenon nei- 
tlier presents itself obviously on the consideration of 
the phenomenon itself, nor is as it were forced on 
our Intention by a case fA strong analogy, subh as 
above described, we have then no resource but in 
a deliberate assemblage of all the parallel instances 
we can muster ; that is, to the formation of a class 
of foots, having the f^enomenon in question for a 
head of classification ; and to a search among the 
individuals of this dass for some other common 
points of agreement, among which die canse will 
of necessity be found. But if more dian one canse 
should appear, we must then endeavour to fin^ or, if 
we cannot find; tojuroefteee, newfada^ inwfaich each of 
these in succession shall be wandng, while yet they 
agree in the general point in question. Here we 
find the use of what Bacon terms " crucial insUmee^!' 
which are phenomena brought forward to decide 
between two causes, each having the same aaalogiea 
in its favour. And here, too, we perceive die utflit j 

• FhiL Trans. 1824. 



OF VATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 151 

ef eaiperiment as distinguished from mere passive 
observation. We make an experiment of the cru- 
cial kind when, we form combinations^ and put in 
action causes from which some particular one shall 
be deliberately exduded, and some other purposely 
admitted; and by the agreement or disi^eement 
of the resulting phenomena with those of the dass 
under examination, we decide our judgment. 

(I4s5.) When we would lay down general rulea 
for guiding and facilitating our search, among a 
great mass of assembled facts, for their common 
causey we must have regard to the characters of 
that rdation which we intoid by cause and effect. 
Now, these are, *- 
Ist, Invariable connection, and, in particular, in- 
variable antecedence of the cause and conse- 
quence of the effect, unless prevented by some 
counteracting cause. But it must be observed^ 
tiiat, in a great number of natural phenomena, 
the effect is produced gradually, while the cause 
often goes on increasing in intensi^ ; so that 
the antecedence of the one and consequence of 
the other becomes difficidt to trace, though it 
really exists. On the other hand, the efiect 
often fbllows the cause so instantaneously, that 
the interval cannot be perceived. In conse* 
quence of this,.it is sometimes difficult to decide^ 
of two phenomena constancy accompanying one 
another, which is cause or which effect* 
Sdy Invariable n^ation of the effect with absence 
of ihe cause, unless some other canse be ca- 
pable of producing the same effiect. 
3d, Increase or diminution of the effect^ with 

L 4 



152 DI8COUBSE ON THE STUDY 

the increased or diminished intensity of the 
cause, in cases which admit of increase and di- 
minution. 

4th, Proportionali^ of the effect to its cause in 
all cases cidireci uninyxded action. 

5th, Reversal of the effect with that of the causes 

(146.) From these characters we are led to the 
following observations, which may be considered as 
so many propositions readily applicable to particular 
cases, or rules of philosophizing: we condud^ 
1st, That if in our group of &cts there be one in 
which any assigned peculiarity, or attendant cir- 
cumstance, is wantmg or opposite, such peculiarly 
cannot be the cause we seek. 

(147*) 2d, That any circumstance in whidi all 
the facts without exception agree, majf be the 
cause in question, or, if not, at least a collateral 
^ect of the same cause: if there be but one 
such point of agreement, this possibili^ becomes a 
certainty ; and, on the other hand, if there be more 
than one, they may be concurrent causes. 

(148.) 3d, That we are not to deny the existence 
of a cause in &vour of which we have a unanimooB 
agreement of strong analc^es, though it may not be 
apparent how such a cause can produce the effect^ 
or even though it may be difficult to conceive its 
existence under the circumstances of the case ; in 
such cases we should rather appeal to experience 
when possible, than decide & priori against the causes 
and try whether it cannot be made apparent. 

(149.) For instance : seeing the sun vividly luml* 
nous, every analogy leads us to condude it intensely 
hot. How heat can produce light, we know not ; 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY* 153 

and how such a heat can be maintained, we can 
form no conception. Yet we are not, therefore* 
entitled to denj the inference. 

(150.) 4th, That contrary or opposing facts are 
equally instructive for the discovery of causes with 
&vouiable ones. 

(151.) For instance: when air is confined with 
moistened iron filings in a dose vessel over water, 
its bulk is diminished, by a certain portion of it 
being abstracted and combining with the iron, pro- 
ducing rusL And, if the remainder be examined, 
it is found that it will not support flame or animal 
life. This contrary fact shows that the cause of the 
support of flame and animal life is to be looked for 
in that part of the air which the iron abstracts, and 
which rusts it. 

(152.) 5th, That causes wfll very firequently be- 
come obvious, by a mere arrangement of our fiu;ts in 
the order of intensity in which some peculiar quality 
subsists; though not of necessity, because counter- 
acting or modifying causes may be at the same 
time in action. 

(153.) For example : sound consists in impulses 
communicated to our ears by the air. If a series of 
impulses of equal force be communicated to it at 
equal intervals, of time, at first in slow succession, 
and by degrees more and more rapidly, we hear at 
£rst a rattling noise, then a low murmur, and then a 
lium, which by degrees acquires the character of a 
musical note, rising higher and higher in acuteness, till 
its pitch becomes too high for the ear to follow. And 
fitnn this correspondence between the pitch of the 
xicte and the rapidity of succession of the impulse, we 



154 DISCOURSE ON THE STUBY 

conclude that our sensation c^ the different pitches 
of musical notes originates in the different rapidities 
with which their impulses are communicated to our 
ears. 

(I54i.) 6th, That such counteracting or modifying 
causes may subsist unperceived, and anntd the 
effects of the cause we seek, in instances which, 
but for their action, would have come into our class 
of favourable facts ; and that, therefore, exceptions 
may often be made to disappear by removing or 
allowing for such counteracting causes. This remark 
becomes of the greatest importance, when (as is 
often the case) a single striking exception stands 
out, as it were, against an otherwise unanimous array 
of facts in favovir of a certain cause. 

(155.) Thus, in chemistry, the alkaline quality of 
the alkaline and earthy bases is found to be due to 
the presence of oxygen combined with one or other 
of a peculiar set of metals. Ammonia is, however^ 
a violent outstanding exception, such as here alluded 
to, being a compound of azote and hydrogen : but 
there are almost certain indications that this excep- 
tion is not a real one, but assumes that appearance 
in consequence of some modifying cause not under* 
stood. 

(156.) 7th, If we can either find produced by 
nature, or produce designedly for ourselves, two in* 
stances which agree exacdy in all but one particular, 
and differ in that one, its influence in producing 
the phenomenon, if it have any, miut thereby be 
rendered sensible. If that particular be present 
in one instance and wanting altogether in the 
other, the production or non-production of the phe* 



or NATBBAL VHILOSOPffir; 255 

nomeBOB will decide whether it be or be not tiie 
<»dy caiue : still more evideiitljy if it be preeent 
a m i rar Um m bk the two caaes, and the effect be 
thereby rerersed. But if its total presence ee 
sfasence onlj produces a change in the degne or 
iBtensitfr of the phenomenony we can then only 
oomdiids dut it acts as a c oncuif t nt caose or 
on&ditiOB iRdi some other to be sought elsewhere* 
Li. nature, it is oomparatiTel j rare to find «— »ft«r^» 
pointedly diiering in one drcumstance and agree* 
ii^ in every other ; but when we call eiqperiment to 
om- aid) it i» easy to produce tiiem ; and tins i% in 
ftety the grand application of eaperimeniB of enquiry 
inphyfficalreseardies. Thiy become more Yaiuable^ 
and their results dearer, in pn^rtion as ^y poB« 
sess this quality (oi agreeing exactly in all their 
dreitmstances bat one), since die question put to 
nature becomes thereby more printed, and its anf> 
swer mere decisive. 

(157.) 8th, If we cannot obtain a complete ne* 
gative or o|^x)sition oi the circumstance whose in* 
ftience we would ascertain, we must endeavour to 
find cases where it varies considerably in degree» 
IfMf e«mot be done, we may perhaps be able ta 
weaken or exalt its influence by the introductk>n o£ 
some fresh circumstance, which, abstractedly con* 
stderec^ seems Uk^ to produce this efiect, and thna 
obtain m£rect evidence of its influence. But then 
we sore i^ays to remember, that the evidsnce so 
obtamed i$ indirect, and that the new circumstance 
introduced may have a direet influence of its own^ 
or may exercise a modi^^ing one on some odar 
cfaxumstance. 



156 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(158.) 9ih, Complicated phenomena, in which 
several causes concurring, opposing, or quite in- 
dependent of each other, operate at once, so as 
to produce a compound effect, may be simplified by 
subducting the effect of all the known causes, as 
well as the nature of the case permits, either by 
deductive reasoning or by appeal to experience, and 
thus leaving, as it were, a residtud phenomenon to be 
explained. It is by this process, in fact, that 
science, in its present advanced state, is chiefly pro- 
moted. Most of the phenomena which nature pre- 
sents are very complicated ; and when the efiects of 
all known causes are estimated with exactness, and 
subducted, the residual facts are constantly appear- 
ing in the form of phenomena altogether new, and 
leading to the most important conclusions. 

(159.) For example : the return of the comet pre* 
dieted by professor Encke, a great many times in 
succession, and the general good agreement of its 
calculated with its observed place during any one 
of its periods of visibility, would lead us to say that its 
gravitation towards the sun and planets b the sole 
and sufficient cause of all the phenomena of its 
orbitual motion ; but when the effect of this cause . 
is strictly calculated and subducted from the cib- 
served motion, there is found to remain behind a 
residual phenomenon^ which would never have been, 
otherwise ascertained to exist, which is a small 
anticipation of the time of its reappearances or a 
diminution of its periodic time, which cannot be 
accounted /or by gravity, and whose cause is there- 
fore to be enquired into. Such an anticipation, 
would be caused by the resistance of a medium 



OP NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 157 

seminated through the celestial regions ; and as 
there are other good reasons for believing this to 
be a vera causoy it has therefore been ascribed to 
such a resistance. 

(160.) This 9th observation is of such import- 
ance in science, that we shall exemplify it bj an- 
other instance or two. M. Arago, having suspended 
a- magnetic needle by a silk thread, and set it 
in vibration, observed, that it came much sooner 
to a state of rest when suspended over a plate of 
copper, than when no such plate was beneath 
it. Now, in both cases there were two vera 
causes why it should come at length to rest, viz. the 
resistance of the air, which opposes, and at length 
destroys, aU motions performed in it ; and the want 
of perfect mobility in the silk thread. But the 
effect of these causes being exactly known by the 
observation made in the absence of the copper^ and 
being thus allowed for and subducted, a residual 
phenomenon appeared, in the fact that a retarding 
influence was exerted by the copper itself; and this 
&ct, once ascertained, speedily led to the knowledge 
of an entirely new and unexpected class of relations. 
To add one more instance. If it be true (as M. 
Fourrier considers it demonstrated to be) that the 
celestial regions have a temperature independent 
of the sun, not greatly inferior to that at which 
quicksilver congeals, and much superior to some de- 
grees of cold which have been artificially produced, 
two causes suggest themselves: one is that assigned 
bj the author above mentioned; the radiation of tb<; 
stars ; another may be proposed in the ether or elaUic 
medium mentioned in the last section, whicK the 






158 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

phenomena of light and the resistance of cometi 
give us reason to believe fills all space, and vrhiot^ 
in analogy to all the elastic media known, may he 
supposed to possess a temperature and a q^ecific 
heat of its own, which it is capdi>le of coimnuni- 
cating to bodies surrounded by it. Now, if we 
consider that the heat radiated by the sun follows 
the same proportion as its light, and r^ard it as 
reasonable to admit with respect to stellar heat 
what holds good of solar ; the effect of stellar radia* 
tion in maintaining a temperature in space should 
be as much inferior to that of the radiation of the 
sun as the %ht of a moonless midnight is to that 
of an equatorial noon ; that is to say, almost incon- 
ceivably smaller. Allowing, then, the full effect 
for this cause, there would still remain a great 
residuum due to the presence of the ether. 

(161.) Many of the new elements of cheoEustry 
have been detected in the investigation of reskbud 
pkenomeneu Thus, Arfwedson discovered lithia by 
perceiving an excess of weight in the sulphate pro- 
duced from a small portion of what he considered as 
magnesia present in a mineral he had analysed. It 
is on this principle, too, that the smaU concentnUed 
residues €fgreat*operaiwns in the arts are almost sure 
to be the lurking places of new chemical ingredients : 
witness iodine, brome, selenium, and the new metab 
accompanying platina in the experiments of Wol- 
laston and Tennant. It was a happy thought of 
Glauber to examine what every body else threw 
»»way. 

tl62.) Finally, we have to observe, that the de- 
tectiion of a possible cause, by the comparison ot 



or NATURAL PHIU>SOPUT. 159 

eaBembled casesy nutii lead to one of two things : 
either, let. The detection of a real cause, and of ita 
manner of aic^ing, so as to furnish a complete ex- 
planation of the fiicts ; or, 2dly, The establishment 
flf an abstract law of nature, pointing out two phe- 
nomena of a general kind as invariably connected; 
and asserting, that where one is, there the other 
win always be found. Such invariable oMmection 
is itsdf a phenomenon of a higher wder than any 
particular &ct ; and when many such are discovered* 
we may again proceed to classify, combine^ and 
examine them, with a view to the detection af their 
causes, or the discovery of still more general laws, 
and so on without end. 

(16S.) Let us now exemplify this inductive search 
finr a cause by one general example : suppose dew 
were the phenomenon proposed, whose cause we 
would know. In the first place, we must separate 
dew from rain and the moisture of fogs, and limit the 
application of the term to what is really meant, 
which is, the spontaneous appearance of moisture on 
substances exposed in the open air when no rain or 
visible wet is falling. Now, here we have analogous 
phenomena in the moisture which bedews a cold 
metal or stone when we breathe upon it ; that which 
appears on a glass of water fresh from the well in hot 
weather ; that which appears on the inside of windows 
when sudden rain or hail chills the external air ; that 
which runs down our walls when, after a long frost, a 
warm moist thaw ix>mes on : all these instance^ 
agree in one point (Rule 2. § 147.), the coldness of 
the object dewed, in comparison with the air in 
contact with it. 



160 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(1645.) But, in the case of the night dew, is this a 
real cause — is it a fact that the object dewed is odder 
than the air ? Certainly not, one would at first be 
inclined to say ; for what is to make it so ? But the 
analogies are cogent and unanimous ; and, therefore^ 
(pursuant to Rule 3. § 148.) we are not to discard their 
indications ; and, besides, the experiment is easy : we 
have only to lay a thermometer in contact with the 
dewed substance, and hang one at a little distance 
above it out of reach of its influence. The experi- 
ment has been therefore made; the question has 
been asked, and the answer has been invariably in the 
/^ affirmative. Whenever an object contracts dew, it is 
I colder than the air. Here, then, we have an mvo- 
\ riable concomitant circumstance : but is this chill an 
effect of dew, or its cause ? That dews are accom* 
panied with a chill is a common remark ; but vulgar 
prejudice would make the cold the effect rather 
thm the cause. We must, therefore, collect more 
facts, or, which comes to the same thing, vary the 
circumstances ; since every instance in which the 
circumstances differ is a fresh fact ; and, especiaDy, 
we must note the contrary or negative cases (Ride 
4. § 150.), t. e. where no dew is produced. 

(165.) Now, 1st, no dew is produced on the sur- 
face of polished metalsy but it is very copiously on 
glass, both exposed with their faces upwards, and 
in some cases the under side of a horizontal plate of 
glass is also dewed ; which last circumstance (by 
Rule 1. § 146.) excludes the fM of moisture from 
the sky in an invisible form, which would natur- 
ally suggest itself as a cause. In the cases of 
polished metal and polished glass, the contrast 



or ITATURAL PHII.OSOTHT. 161 

^Mm% evldentlj that the suhsiance has much to do 
^itb the phenomenon ; therefore, let the suhstance^ 
akmebe diversified as much as possible, by exposing 
polished surfaces of various kinds. This done, a 
teak tf iniensi^ becomes obvious (Rule 5. § 152i). 
Itiose polished substances are found to be most 
strongly dewed which conduct heat worst; while 
those whkh conduct well resist dew most effectunlly. 
Here we encounter a law of the first degree of gene- 
rally. But, if we expose rough surfaces, instead of 
polished, we sometimes find this law interfered with 
(Rvle 5* § 152.). Thus, roughened iron, especially if 
painted over or blackened, becomes dewed sooner 
than varnished paper : the kind of surface therefore 
has a great influence. Expose, then, the same ma- 
terial in very diversified states as to sur&ce (Rule 7* 
§ 156.), and another scale of intensity becomes at onoe 
apparent ; those surfaces which part wUh their hmi 
most readily by radiation are found to contract 
dew most copiously: and thus we have detected 
another law of the same generality with the former, 
by a comparison of two classes of facts, one relating 
to dew, the other to the radiation of heat from 
sur&ces. Again, the influence ascertained to exist 
of substance and surface leads us to consider that of 
texture : and hare, again, we are presented on trial 
with remarkable differences, and with a third scale 
qf tntensit^y pointing out substances of a dose firm 
textinre, such as stones, metals, &c. as imfavour- 
abHey but those of a loose one, as doth, wool, vdvet, 
eiderdown, cotton, &c. as eminently favourable, to 
the contraction of dew : and these are precisely those 
whidi are btot adapted for dothing, or for impeding 

M 



162 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

the free passage of heat from the skin into the air, 
so as to allow their outer surfaces to be very c(dd 
while they remain warm within* 

(166.) Lastly, among the negative instances, 
(§ 150.) it is observed, that dew is never copiously 
deposited in situations much screened from the open 
*sky, and not at all in a cloudy night; but if the 
clouds withdraw, even for a few minutes, and leave 
a dear opening, a deposition of dew presently begins, 
and goes on increasing. Here, then, a cause is dis- 
tinctly pointed out by its antecedence to the effect 
in question ($ 145.). A dear view of the doudless 
sky, then, is an essential condition, or, which comes 
to the same thing, clouds or surrounding objects act 
as opposing causes. This is so much the case, that 
dew formed in clear intervals will oflen even eva> 
porate again when the sky becomes thickly overcast 
(Rule 4. § 150.). 

(167.) When we now come to assemble these partial 
inductions so as to raise from them a general con- 
dusion, we consider, 1st, That all the condusions we 
have come to have a reference to that first general 
fact — the cooling of the exposed surface of the body 
dewed below the temperature of the air. Those 
surfaces which part with their heat outwards most 
readily, and have it supplied from within most 
slowly, will, of coiurse, become coldest if there be an 
opportunity for their heat to escape, and not be 
restored to them from without. Now, a dear sky a^ 
fords such an opportunity. It is a law well known 
to those who are conversant with the nature of heal» 
that heat is constantly escaping from all bodies in 
rays, or by radiaHony but is as constantly restored 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 165 

to them by the similar radiation of others surround- 
ing them. Clouds and siurounding objects therefore 
act as opposing causes by replacing the whole or a 
great part of the heat so radiated away, which can 
escape effectually, without being replaced, only 
through openings into infinite space. Thus, at' 
length, we arrive at the general proximate cause of 
dew, in the cooling of the dewed sur&ce by radia- 
tion faster than its heat can be restored to it, 
by communication with the ground, or by counter- 
radiation ; so as to become colder than the air, and 
thereby to cause a condensation of its moisture. 

(168.) We have purposely selected this theory 
of dew, first developed by the late Dr. Wells, as one 
of the most beautiful specimens we can call to mind 
of inductive experimental enquiry lying within a 
moderate compass. It is not possible in so brief a 
space to do it justice; but we earnestly recommend 
his work* (a short and very entertaining one) for 
^rosal to the student of natural philosophy, as a 
fiodel with which he will do well to become fa- 
^iar. 

(169.) In the analysis above given, the formation 
of dew is referred to two more general phenomena ; 
the radiation of heat, and the condensation of in- 
visible vapour by cold. The cause of the former 
is a much higher enquiry, and may be said, indeed, 
to be totally unknown ; that of the latter actually 
forms a most important branch of physical enquiry. 
In such a case, when we reason upwards till we reach 
an tdtimate fact, we regard a phenomenon as fidly ex- 
plained ; as we consider the branch of a tree to 

• Wells on Dew. 
M 2 



164 DISCOURSE ON THE STUI>T 

terminate when traced to its. insertion in the tnmki 
or a twig to its junction with the branch ; or rather, 
as a rivulet retams its importance and itft nfone tiU 
lost in some larger tributary, or in the main river 
which delivers it into the ocean*. This, however, al- 
ways supposes that, oa a reconsideration of the case^ 
we see clearly how the admission of such a faot» 
with' all its attendant laws, will perfectly accoimt 
for ewri^paftieular — as well those which, in the dif- 
ferent stages of the induction,.have.ledus to a know* 
ledge of. it, aa those which we had neglected, or 
considered less minutely than the rest. But, had 
we.no preyiouB.knowlec^e of the radiation of heat, 
this same induction would have made it known to 
us, and, duly considered, might have led to the 
knowledge of many of its laws* 

(170*) III the study of nature^ we must not, 
therefore,, be scrupulous as to haw we reach to a 
knowledge of such general facts: provided only 
we veriiy.them carei^y when once detected, we 
must be content to seize them wherever they are to 
be found. And this brings us to consider the veri* 
^fica^ion of inductions. 

(171*) If, incur induction, every individual caae 
has actually been present to our minds, we are sure 
that it will find itself duly rqsresenied in our fined COQ* 
dusion : but this is impossible for such cases as 
were tmknawn to uS; and hardly ever happens even 
with all the known cases ; for such is the tendency 
of the human mind to speculation, that on the least 
idea of an analogy between a few phenomeni^ it 
leaps forward, as it were, to a cause or law, to the 
temporary neglect of all the rest ; so that, in BacU 



or NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 165 

ahnost all our prindpal indactionsmufltbe regarded 
as a series of ascents and descents, and of condnsions 
^Mi a few cases, yerified by trial on many. 

"(172;) Whenever, therefore, we think we have 
been led by induction to the knowledge of the proxi- 
mate cttose of a phenomenon or of a lawdf ntiture, our 
nisKt business is to examine deliberately and serieUim 
all the tBBCR we have collected of its occurrence, in 
order 'to satisfy ourselves that they are explicable 
by our cause, or £urly included in the expression 
<9f our tew : and in case any exception occurs^ it must 
be «Ekrefiilly noted and set aside for re*«xamination 
nt a more advanced period, when, possibly, the cause 
of exception may appear, and the exception itself, 
by allowing for the effect of that cause, be brought 
over to ^be side of our induction ; but should ex- 
eepticms prove numerous and "various in their fea- 
tmeoy our &ith in the conclusion will be propor- 
tidnally shi&en, and at all events its importance 
lessened by the destruction of its universality. 

(17S.) In the conduct of this verification, we are to 
con^denr whether the cause or law to which we are 
ocHiduCied be one already known and recognised as 
a more general one, whose nature is well understood, 
and of whidi the phenomenon in question is but one 
more case in addition to tliose already known, or 
#h^di€<r it be one less general, less known, or alto- 
gether new. In tiie latter case, our verification will 
sdffice, if it merely shows that all the cases con- 
sidered are plainly cases in point. But in the 
former, tiie process of verification is of a much more 
severe and definite kind. We must trace the action 
^our cause witii distinctness and precision, as modi- 

M S 



166 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDJ 

fied by aU the circumstances of each case ; we must 
estimate its effects, and show that nothing unex- 
plained remains behind ; at least, in so far as the 
presence of unknown modifying causes is not coo- 
cemed. 

(174.) Now, this is precisely the sort of process in 
which residual phenomena (such as spoken of in art. 
158.) may be expected to occur. If our induction 
be really a valid and a comprehensive one, whaiever 
remams imexplained in the comparison of its con- 
clusion with particular cases, under all their circum- 
stances, is such a phenomenon, and comes in its 
turn to be a subject of inductive reasoning to dis- 
cover its cause or laws. It is thus that we may be 
said to witness facts with the eyes of reason ; and it 
is thus that we are continually attaining a know- 
ledge of new phenomena and new laws which lie 
beneath the surface of things, and give rise to tbe 
creation of fresh branches of science more and 
more remote from common observation. 

(175.) Physical astronomy affords numerous and 
splendid instances of this. The law, for examj^, 
which asserts that the planets are retained in their 
orbits about the sun, and satellites about their pri- 
maries, by an attractive force, decreasing as the 
square of the distances increases, comes to be veri- 
fied in each particular case by deducing from it 
the exact motions which, under the circumstancefl* 
ought to take place, and comparing them with feet. 
This comparison, while it verifies in general the 
existence of the law of gravitation as supposed, and 
its adequacy to explain all the principal motions 
of every body in the system, yet leaves some 



OY NATUBAL FHIL080PHT* 167 

small deviations in those of the planets, and some 
y&j considerable ones in that of the moon and other 
satellites, still miaccounted for; residual phenomena, 
which still remain to be traced up to causes. By 
farther examining these, their causes have at length 
been ascertained, and found to consist in the mutual 
actions of the planets on each other, and the dis- 
turbing influence of the sun on the motions of the 
•satellites. 

(176.) But a law of nature has not that d^ee of 
generality which fits it for a stepping-stone to 
greater inductions, unless it be umversat in its ap- 
•pb'cation. We cannot rely on its enabling us to 
extend our* views beyond the circle of instances 
from which it was obtained, unless we have already 
had experience of its power to do so ; unless it« 
actually has enabled us before trial to say what will 
take place in cases analogous to those originally 
contemplated ; unless, in diort, we have studiously 
placed ourselves in the situation of its antagonists, 
and even perversely endeavoured to find exceptions 
to it without success. It is in the precise pro- 
portion that a law once obtained endures this 
extreme severity of trial, that its value and im- 
portance are to be estimated ; and our next step in 
the verification of an induction must therefore con- 
sist in extending its application to cases not origin- 
ally contemplated; in studiously varying the cir- 
cumstances under which our causes act, with a view 
to ascertain whether their effect is general ; and in 
pui^ing the application of our laws to extreme 
cases. 

(177.) For example, a fidr induction from a 

M 4* 



168 J>ISCOURS£ ON THE STUDY 

great number of facts led Galileo to oondude that 
the accelerating power of gravity is the same on all 
sorts of bodies^ atkd on great and small masses indif- 
ferentlj; and this he exemplified, by letting bodies 
of very different natures and weights &U at the 
same instant from a high tower, when it was ob- 
served that they struck the ground at the same 
moment, abating a certain trifling differenoey due^as 
he justly believed it to be, to the greater prqMK- 
tional resistance of the air to lig^t than to heavy 
bodies. The experiment could not, at that time> 
be &irly tried with extremely light substancesy audi 
as cork, feathers, cotton, ^c. because of the great re- 
sistance experienced by these in their fall ;'no means 
being then known of removing this cause of disturb- 
#ance. It was not, theref^e, till after the invention 
of the air-pump that this law could be put to the 
severe test of an extreme case. A guinea and a 
downy feather. were let drop at once from the upper 
part of a tall exhausted glaiss, and struck the hoir 
tom at the same moment. Let any one make tiie 
trial in the tur, and he will perceive the force of an 
eaeireme ccue* 

(1780 In theverificationofa law whoae expression 
is qtuMntUaOve^ not only must its generality be esta- 
blished by the trial of it in as various circumstances 
as possible, but every such trial must be one of pre- 
cise measurement. And in such cases the means 
taken for subjecting it to trial ought to be so de- 
vised as to repeat and multiply a great numb^ of 
times any deviation (if any exist); so that, let it be 
ever so small, it shall at last become sensible. 
(179.) For instance, let the law to be verified 



OP NATVHAX. PHILOSOPHY. 169 



be, that Ae gwmfy of weary nmtarial bo(fy is in the 
dirtci proporUmi of its num^ which U tmly another 
mode 0f expressing Gralileo's law dbove mentiMied. 
Tbe time ef falling from any moderate height cannot 
he measured with precision enough fi>r our purpose : 
fa»t if it can be repeated a very great multitude of 
^t»uritkoutanylo98orgam in the intervalsyand the 
wh^ amount of the times of M so repeated mea- 
sui^ by a dock; and if at the same time the resist- 
ance of the air can be rendered exactify alike for all the 
bodies Iried, we have here Galileo's trial in a much 
more refined state ; and it is evident that almost un- 
limited* exactness may be obtained. Now, all this 
Newton accom^dished by the simple and elegant 
contrivance of enclosing in a hollow pendulum the 
aame weights of a great number of substances the . 
most different that could betfbtund in all respectSt as 
gold, glass, wood, water, wheat, &C.*, and ascertain- 
ing the. time .required for the pendulum so charged « 
to make a great number, of oscillations ; in each of 
which it is dear the weights had to fall, and be 
raised ^igain successivdy, without loss of time, 
through the same idenHcal spaces. Thus any differ- 
ence, howler inconsiderable, that might exist in the 
time of one such &11 and rise would be multiplied and 
accumulated till they became sensible. And none 
having been discovered by so delicate a .process in 
any case, the law was considered verified both in re- 
^ped of generality and exactness. This, however, is 
nothin g to the verifications afforded by astronomical 
phenomena, where the deviations, if .any, accumu- 
late for thousands of year« instead of .a few hours. 

^ BrincipiB, book m, -prqp. €. 



170 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(180.) The surest and best diaracteristic of a 
well-founded and extensive induction, however, is 
when verifications of it spring up, as it were, 
spontaneouslj, into notice, from quarters where 
they might be least expected, or even among 
instances of that very kind which were at first 
considered hostile to them. Evidence of this kind 
is irresistible, and compels assent with a weight 
which scarcely any other possesses. To give an ex- 
ample: M. Mitscherlich had announced a law to this 
effect — that the chemical elements of which all 
bodies consist are susceptible of being classified 
in distinct groups, which he termed Uomorphous 
groups; and that these groups are so related, 
that when similar combinations are formed of indi- 
viduals belonging to two, three, or more of them, 
such combinations will crystallize in the same geo- 
metrical forms. To this curious and important 
law there appeared a remarkable exception* Ac- 
cording to professor Mitscherlich, the arsenic and 
phosphoric acids are similar combinations coming 
under the meaning of his law, and their combin- 
ations with soda and water, forming the salts 
known to chemists under the names of arseniate 
and phosphate of soda, ought, if the law were 
general, to crystallize in identical shapes. The 
fact, however, was understood to be otherwise. 
But lately, Mr. Clarke, a British chemist, having 
examined the two salts attentively, ascertained 
the &ct that their compositions deviate essentiaDjr 
from that similarity which M. Mitscherlich's law 
requires; and that, therefore, the exception in 
question disappears. This was something: bat. 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 171 

pursuing the subject Airther, the same ingenious 
enquirer happily succeeded in producing a new phos- 
phate of soda, differing from that generally known 
in containing a different proportion of water, and 
agreeing in composition exactly with the arseniate. 
The crystals of this new salt, when examined, 
were found by him to be precisely identical in form 
with those of the arseniate : thus verifying, in a 
most striking and totally unexpected manner, the 
law in question, or, as it is called, the law of 
isomorphism. 

(181.) Unexpected and peculiarly striking con- 
firmaticms of inductive laws frequently occur in the 
form of residual phenomena, in the course of inves- 
tigations of a widely different nature from those 
which gave rise to the inductions themselves. A 
very el^ant example may be cited in the unex- 
pected confirmation of the law of the developement 
of heat in elastic fluids by compression, which is 
afforded by the phenomena of sound. The enquiry 
into the cause of sound had led to conclusions re- 
^>ecting its mode of propagation, from which its 
velocity in the air could be precisely calculated. 
The calculations were performed ; but, when com- 
pared with fact, though the agreement was quite 
sufficient to show the general correctness of the 
caofie and mode of propagation assigned, yet 
the whole velocity could not be shown to arise 
from this theory. There was still a residual velo- 
city to be accounted for, which placed dynamical 
l^iilosophers for a long time in a great dilemma. 
At length La Place struck on the happy idea, that 
this might arise from the heat developed in the act 



172 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

of that condensation whidi necessaiil j takes place at 
-evtry yibiation by which sound is conveyed. The 
matter iras sulijected to exact calculation, and the 
result was at once the complete explanation of the 
residual phenomenon, and a striking confirmation 
of the general law of the developement of heat by 
compression, under drcumstances l)^yond artificial 
imitation* 

(182.) 'In extending our inductions to cases not 
originally contemplated, there is one step which 
always strikes the mind with peculiar force, and with 
such a sensation -of novelty and surprise, as often 
gives it a 'Weight beyond its due philosophic value. 
-It is the transition )from the little to the great, and 
woe vendy butiespedally the former. It is so beau- 
tiful to see, for instance, an cKperiment perfbrmed 
in a watch-glass, or before a blowpipe, succeed, in a 
great manufiictory, on many tons of matter, or, in the 
Jbosom of a volcano, upon millions of cubic fathoms 
of lava, that wealmost forget that thesegreat masses 
are made vp of watch-glassfuls, and blowpipe- 
beads. We see the enormous intervals between the 
tftars and planets ci the heavens, which afibrd room 
fi}r innumerable processes to be carried on, fat 
light and heat to circulate, and for curious and 
complicated motions to go fi»rward among them : 
w^ lode move attentive^, and we see sidereal sys- 
tems, pobablynot lesffvast and'complicated than our 
own, crowded af^pareotly into a small space (firom 
die efiect of their distance from us), and forming 
groups resenibling bodies of a substantial appear^ 
ance, iiaving form and outlme : yet we recoil with 
incredulous surprise when we are asked wfy we 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHT. 173 

casnot conceive the atoms of a grain of sand to be 
as remote from each other (proportionallj to their 
sizes) as the stars of tbe firmament; and why 
there may not be going on^ in that Iktle microcosm, 
processes as complicated and wonderful as those of 
the great world aroand us. Yet the student who 
makes any progress in natural philosophy will en>> 
counter munbisrless cases in whidi this transfer of 
ideas from the one extreme of magnitude to the 
other will be called feiti he will find, for instance, 
the phenomena of^tue propagation of winds referred 
to die same laws which regulate the propagation 
of motioDS throu^ the smallest masses of air ; those 
of lightning assimilated to the mere communication 
of an electric sparky and those of earthquakes to the 
tremovsof a stretched wire: in. short, he must lay 
his. account to finding the disttnetion of great and 
little altogether annihilated in nature: and it is well ' 
for man that such is the. case^ and that: the same 
lawB^ which he can disoorer and verify, in his own 
circumscribed sphere of power^ should prove avail- 
able to him when he comes to aj^y them on the. 
greatest scale; since it is thus only that .he is en- 
abled to become an exciting cause in operations of 
any considendble magnitude, and tojvindicate his 
importance in creation. 

(189.) But die business of induction, does not 
end here : its final result must be foHowed out into 
all its consequences, and applied to all those cases 
which seem ev«i remotely to bear, upon- tiie sub- 
ject of enquiry* Every new addition to our stock 
of causes becomes a means of fresh attack with new 
vantage ground upon all those unexi^ained parts of 



174 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

former phenomena which have resisted previous 
efforts. It can hardlj he pressed forcibly enough 
on the attention of the student of nature, that there 
is scarcely any natural phenomenon which can be 
fully ai^d - completely explained in all its circum- 
stances, without a union of several, perhaps of all^ 
the sciences. Hie* great phenomena of astronomy, 
indeed, may be considered exceptions ; but this is 
merely because their scale is so vast that one only 
of the most widely extending'^orces of nature takes 
the lead, and all diose agents whbse sphere of action 
is limited to narrower bounds, and which determine 
the production of phenomena nearer at hand, are 
thrown into the back ground, and become merged 
and lost in comparative insignificance. But in .the 
more intimate phenomena which surround us it Q| 
far otherwise. Into what a complication of different 
branches of science are we not led by the considep* 
ation of such a ptienomenon as rain, for instance* 
or flame, or a thousand others, which are constantly 
going on before our eyes? Hence, it is hardly 
possible to arrive at the knowledge of a law of 
any degree of generality in any branch of science, 
but it immediately furnishes us with a means of 
extending our knowledge of innumerable others, 
the most remote from the point we set out from ; 
so that, when once embarked in any physical re- 
search, it is impossible for any one to predict where 
it may ultimately lead him. 

(184.) This remark rather belongs to the inverse 
or deductive process, by which we pursue laws into 
their remote consequences. But it is very important 
to observci that the successful process of scientific 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 175 

enquiry demands continually the alternate use of 
both the inductive and deductive method. The path 
by which we rise to knowledge must be made smooth 
and beaten in its lower steps, and often ascended and 
descended, before we can scale our way to any emi- 
nence, much less dimb to the summit. Hie achieve- 
ment is too great for a single effort; stations must 
be established, and communications kept open with 
all below. To quit metaphor ; there is nothing so 
instructiye, or so likely to lead to the acquisition of 
general views, as this pursuit of the consequences of 
a law once arrived at into every subject where it 
may seem likely to have an influence. Hie dis- 
covery of a new law of nature, a new ultimate &ct, 
or one that even temporarily puts on that appear- 
ance, is like the discovery of a new element in che- 
mistry. Thus, selenium was hardly discovered by 
Berzelius in the vitriol works of Fahlun, when it 
presently made its iq[>pearance in the sublimates of 
Stromboli, and the rare and curious products of the 
Hungarian mines. And thus it is with every new 
law, or general fact. It is hardly announced before 
its traces are found every where, and every one is 
astonished at its having so long remained concealed. 
Ajid hence it happens that unexpected lights are 
^ed at length over parts of science that had been 
Abandoned in despair, and given over to hopeless 
obscurity. 

(185.) The verification of quemtUxUive laws has 
been already spoken of (178.) ; but their importance in 
physical science is so very great, inasmuch as they 
alone afford a handle to strict mathematical deduc- 
tive application, that something ought to be said of 



176 DISCOURSE ON THE STXn>T 

the nature of the inductions by which they are t9 
be arrived at. In their simplest or least general 
stages (of which alone, we speak at present) they 
usually express, some numerical relation between 
two quantities dependent on each other, either as 
collateral effects o£ a common cause, or as the 
amount of its. effect under given numerical circum- 
stances or daieu fbr example, the law of refrac- 
tion before noticed (§ 22.) expresses, by a very- 
simple relation, the amount of angular deviation of a 
ray of light .from its course, when the anffk at which 
it is inclined to the refracting surface is known, 
viz. that ' the sine of the angle whjch the incident 
ray makes with a. perpendicular to the surface is 
always to that of the angle made by the refracted 
ray with the same-perpendicular, in a constant pro- 
portion, so long aa-'the refracting substance is the 
same. To ainrive inductively at laws of this kind, 
where one quantity depends on or varies uM anodier, 
all that is required is a series of carefbl and exact 
measures in every different state of the datmm and 
qu6Bsiium, Here^ however^ the mathematical form 
of the law being of the highest importance, the 
greatest attention must be given to the extreme eases 
as well as to all those points where the one quanti^ 
changes rapidly with a small change of the other.* 
The results must be set down in a table in whidi 
the datum gradually increases in magnitude from 
the lowest to the highest limit of which it is sus- 

* A very curious instance of the pursuit of a law conqtleldy 
empirical into an extreme case is to be found in Newton's rule £ar 
Ihe dilatation of his coloured rings seen between glasaeiat gremft 
obliquities. Optics, book il. part i obs. 7. 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 177 

ceptible. It will depend then entirely on our habit 
of treating mathematical subjects, how far we may 
be able to include such a table in the distinct state- 
ment of a mathematical law. The discovery of 
such laws is often remarkably facilitated by the 
contemplation of a class of phenomena to be noticed 
ftirther on, under the head of Collective Instances, 
(see $ 194.) in which the nature of the mathe- 
matical expression in which the law sought is com- 
prehended, is pointed out by the figure of some 
curve brought under inspection by a proper mode 
of experimenting. 

(186.) After all, unless our induction embraces 
a series of cases which absolutely include the 
whole scale of variation of which the quantities 
in question admit, the matliematical expression so 
obtained cannot be depended upon as the true one, 
and if the scale actually embraced be small, the 
extension of laws so derived to extreme cases will 
in all probability be exceedingly fallacious. For 
example, air is an elastic fluid, and as such, if 
enddsed in a confined space and squeezed, its bulk 
diininishes : now, from a great number of trials made 
in cases where the air has been compressed into a 
half, a third, &c even as far as a fiftieth of its bulk, 
or less, it has been concluded that '< the density of 
air is proportional to the compressing force,*' or the 
bulk it occupies inversely as that force ; and when 
the air is rarefied by taking off part of its natural 
pressure, the same is found to be the case, within 
very extensive limits. Yet it is impossible that this 
should be, strictly or mathematically speaking, the 
true law ; for, if it were so, there could be no limit 



178 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

to the condensation of air, while yet we have the 
strongest analogies to show that long before it had 
reached any very enormous pit6h the air would be 
reduced into a liquid, an(^ even, perhaps, if pressed 
yet more violently, into a solid form. 

(187.) Laws thus derived, by the direct process 
of including in mathematical formulae the results 
of a greater or less number of measurements, are 
called '^ empirical laws." A good example of such 
a law is that given by Dr. Young (Phil. Trans. I8269) 
for the decrement of life, or the law of mortality. 
Empirical laws in this state are evidently unverified 
indiictionSf and are to be received and reasoned on 
with the utmost reserve. No confidence can ever 
be placed in them beyond the limits of the data from 
which they are derived ; and even within those li- 
mits they require a special and severe scrutiny to 
examine how nearlt/ they do represent the observed 
facts ; that is to say, whether, in the comparison of 
their results with the observed quantities, the dif- 
ferences are such as may fairly be attributed to error 
of observation. When so carefiilly examined, they 
become, however, most valuable; and frequently^ 
when afterwards verified theoreticaUy by a deduc- 
tive process (as will be explained in our next chap- 
ter), turn out to be rigorous laws of nature, and afford 
the noblest and most convincing supports of which 
theories themselves are susceptible.. The finest 
instances of this kind are the great laws of the 
planetary motions deduced by Kepler, entirely 60m 
a comparison of observations with each other, with 
no assistance from theory. These laws, viz. thai 
the planets move in ellipses round the sun; that 



OF NATURAL FHILOSOFHT. 179 

€8ch describes about the sun's centre equal areas in 
equal times ; and that in the orbits of different pla- 
nets the squares of the periodical times are propor- 
tbnal to the cubes of the distances ; were the results 
of inconceivable labour of calculation and compari- 
son: but they amply repaid the labour bestowed 
on them, by affording afterwards the most condusive 
and unanswerable proofs of the Newtonian system. 
On the other hand, when empirical laws are unduly 
rdied on beyond the limits of the observations from 
idiich they were deduced, there is no more fertile 
source of fatal mistakes. The formulae which have 
been empirically deduced for the elasticity of steam 
(till very recently), and those for the resistance of 
fluids, and other similar sul]jects, have almost inva- 
riably failed to support the theoretical structures 
whicli have been erected on them. 

(188.) It is a remarkable and happy &ct, that the 
shortest and most direct of all inductions should 
be that which has led at once, and almost by 
a single step, to the highest of aU natural laws, — 
we mean those of motion and force. Nothing can 
be more simple, precise, and general, than the 
enunciation of these laws ; and, as we have once 
before observed, their application to particular facts 
in the descending or deductive method is limited 
by nothing but the limited extent of our mathe- 
matics. It would seem, then, that dynamical science 
were taken thenceforward out of the pale of in- 
duction, and transformed into a matter of absolute 
d priori reasoning, as much as geometry; and so it 
would be, were our mathematics perfect, and all the 
4kBta known. Unhappily, the first is so far from being 

N 2 



180 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDZ 

the case, that in many of the most interesting 
branches of dynamical enquiry they leave us com- 
pletely at a loss. In what relates to the motions of 
fluids, for instance, this is severely felt. We can 
include our problems, it is true, in algebraical equa- 
tions, and we can demonstrate that they caniam 
the solutions ; but the equations themselves are so 
intractable, and present such insuperable difficulties, 
that they often leave us quite as much in the dark 
as before* But even were these difficulties over- 
come, recourse to experience must still be had, to 
establish the data on which particular applications 
are to depend; and although mathematical analy- 
sis affords very powerful means of rqnvsenting in 
general terms the data of any proposed case, and 
c^iertcardsy by comparison of its results with &ct» 
determining tvhat those data must be to explain 
the observed phenomena, still, in any mode of 
considering the matter, an appeal to experience in 
every particular instance of application is unavoid- 
able, even when the general principles are regarded 
as sufficiently established without it Now, in all 
such cases of difficulty we must recur to our in- 
ductive processes, and regard the branches of dy- 
namical science where this takes place as purely 
experimental. By this we gain an inunense ad- 
vantage, viz. that in all those points of them where 
the abstract d3aiamical principles do afford distinct 
conclusions, we obtain verifications for our induc- 
tions of the highest and finest possible kind. When 
we work our way up inductively to one of these 
results, we cannot hdp feeling the strongest 
ance of the validity of the induction. 



dF NATURAL PHILOSOPHT. i6i 

(189.) The necessity of this appeal to experiment 
in every thing relating to the motions of fluids on 
the large scale has long been felt. Newton himself, 
who laid the first foundations of hydrodynamical 
science (so this branch of d3nQamics is called), dis- 
tmctly perceived it, and set the example o£ laborious 
and exact experiments on their resistance to motion, 
and other particulars. Venturi, Bernoulli, and 
many others, have applied the method of experiment 
to the motions of fluids in pipes and canals; and 
recently the brothers Weber have published an ela- 
borate and excellent experimental enquiry into the 
phenomena of waves. One of the greatest and most 
successful attempts, however, to bring an important, 
and till then very obscure, branch of d3nQamical 
enquiry back to the dominion of experiment, has 
been made by Chladni and Savart in the case of 
sound and vibratory motion in general; and it is 
greatly to be wished that the example may be fol- 
lowed in many others hardly less abstruse and 
impracticable when theoretically treated. In such 
cases the inductive and deductive methods of en- 
quiry may be said to go hand in hand, the one veri- 
fying the conclusions deduced by the other ; and the 
combination of experiment and theory, which may 
thus be brought to bear in such cases, forms an en- 
gine of discovery infinitely more powerful than either 
taken separately. This state of any department of 
science is perhaps of all others the most interesting, 
and that which promises the most to research. 

(190.) It can hardly be expected that we 
should terminate this division of our subject without 
Bome mention of the " prerogatives of instances " 

N 3 



182 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

of Bacon, by which he understands characteristic 
phenomena, selected from the great miscellaneous 
mass of facts which occur in nature, and which, by 
their number, indistinctness, and complication, tend 
rather to confuse than to direct the mind in its 
search for causes and general heads of induction. 
Phenomena so selected on account of some pecu- 
Karly fisrcible way in which they strike the reason, 
and impress us with a kind of sense of causatioo, 
or a particular aptitude for generalization, he con- 
siders, and justly, as holding a kind of prerogative 
dignity, and claiming our first and especial attentioa 
in physical enquiries. 

(191.) We' have already observed that, in form* 
ing inductions, it will most commonly happen that 
we are led to our conclusions by the especial 
force of some two or three strongly impressive 
facts, rather than by affording the whole mass of 
cases a regular consideration ; and hence the need 
of cautious verification. Indeed, so strong is this 
propensity of the human mind, that there is hardly 
a more common thing than to find persons ready to 
assign a cause for every thing they see, and, in so 
doing, to join things the most incongruous, by ana* 
logies the most fanciful. This being the case, it is 
evidently of great importance that these first ready 
impulses of the mind should be made on the con- 
templation of the cases most likely to lead to good 
inductions. The misfortune, however, is, in natural 
philosophy, that the choice does not rest with us. 
We must take the instances as nature presents 
them. Even if we are furnished with a list of them 
in tabular order, we must understand and compare 



OV STATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 183 

them with each other, before we can tell which are 
the instances thus deservecDj entitled to the highest 
consideration. And, after all, after much labour in 
tain, and groping in the dark, accident or casual 
observation will present a case which strikes us at 
once with a full insight into a subject, before we 
can even have time to determine to what class its 
jpren^oi^e belongs. For example, the laws of cr|rB- 
taUography were obscure, and its causes still more 
so, till Haiiy fortimately dropped a beautiful crystal 
of calcareous spar on a stone pavement, and broke 
it. In piecing together the fragments, he observed 
their facets not to correspond with those of the 
crystal in its entire state, but to belong to another 
form; and, following out the hint offered by a 
** glaring mstcmce'* thus casuaUy obtruded on his 
notice, he discovered the beautiful laws of the 
deavage, and the primitive forms of minerals. 

(192.) It has always appeared to us, we must 
confess, that the help which the classification of in- 
stances, under their different titles of prerogative, 
affords to inductions, however just such classification 
may be in itself, is yet more apparent than real. 
The force of the instance must be felt in the mind, 
before it can be referred to its place in the system ; 
and, before it can be either referred or appretiated, 
it must be known ; and when it is appretiated, we 
are ready enough to interweave it in our web of in- 
duction, without greatly troubling ourselves with 
enquiring whence it derives the weight we acknow- 
ledge it to have in our decisions. However, since 
much importance is usually attached to this part of 

N 4 



J84 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

Bacon's work, we shall here ^ve a few examples 
to illustrate the nature of some of his principal cases. 
One, of what he calls ^^ glaring instances, " has just 
been mentioned. In these, the naJburej or cause en- 
quired into, (which in this case is the cause of the 
assumption of a peculiar external form, or the in- 
ternal stmcture of a crystal,) '< stands naked and 
alone, and this in an eminent manner, or in the 
highest degree of its power/' No doubt, such in- 
stances as these are highly instructive ; but the 
difficulty in physics is to find «uch, not to perceive 
their force when found. 

(193.) The contrary of glaring are " clandestine 
instances,*' where ^^ the nature sought is exhibited 
in its weakest and most imperfect state." Of 
this. Bacon himself has given an admirable ex- 
ample in the cohesion of fluids, as a clandestme 
instance of the *^ nature or quality of consistencey 
or solidity." Yet here, again, the same acute discri- 
mination which enabled Bacon to perceive the ana- 
logy which connects fluids with solids, through the 
common property of cohesive attraction, would, at 
the same time, have enabled him to draw from it, 
if properly supported, every consequence necessary 
to forming just notions of the cohesive force ; nor 
does its reference to the class of clandestine in- 
stances at all assist in bringing forward and ma- 
turing the final results. When, however, the final 
result is obtained, — when our induction is complete, 
and we would verify it, — this class of instances is q£ 
great use, being, in fact, frequently no other than 
that of extreme cotes, such as we have already spoken 
of (in § 177>)> which, by placuig our conclusions. 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 185 

it were, in violent circumstances, tryllieir temper, 
and bring their vigour to the test. 

(194!>.) *^ Collective instances," in Bacon's classi- 
fication, are no other than general facts, or laws of 
some degree of generality, and are themselves the 
results of induction. But there is a species of col- 
lective instance which Bacon does not seem to have 
contemplated, of a peculiarly instructive character ; 
and that is, where particular cases are offered to our 
observation in such numbers at once as to make the 
induction of their law a matter of ocular inspection. 
For example, the parabolic form assumed by a jet of 
water spouted from a round hole, is a coUecHve tn- 
stanee of the velocities and directions of the motions 
of all the particles which compose it seen at onecy 
and which thus leads us, without trouble, to recog- 
nize the law of the motion of a projectile. Again, 
die beautiM figures exhibited by sand strewed on 
Tegular plates of glass or metal set in vibration, 
are collective instances of an infinite number of points 
which remain at rest while the remainder of the 
plate vibrates ; and in consequence afford us, as it 
were, a sight of the law which regulates their ar 
rai^ement and sequence throughout the whole 
surface. Tlie beautifully coloured lemniscates seen 
around the optic axes of crystals exposed to polar- 
ized light afford a superb example of the same 
kind, pointing at once to the general mathematical 
expression of the law which regulates their pro- 
duction.* Of such collective instances as these, it 
is easy to see the importance, and its reason. They 
lead us to a general law by an induction which 

* See Phil. Trans. 1819. 



186 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

offers itsielf spontaneously, and thus furnish ad- 
vanced points in our enquiries ; and when we start 
from these, already << a thousand steps are lost." 

(195.) A fine example of a collective instance is 
that of the system of Jupiter or Saturn widi its 
satellites. We have here, in miniature, and seen 
at one view, a system similar to that of the planets 
about the sun ; of which, from the circumstance of 
our being involved in it, and unfavourably situated 
for seeing it otherwise than in detail, we are in- 
capacitated from forming a general idea but by 
slow progressive efforts of reason. Accordingly, the 
contemplation of the drcumjovial planets (as they 
were called) most materially assisted in securing 
the admission of the Copemican system. 

(196.) Of << Crucial instances" we have also al- 
ready spoken, as affording the readiest and securest 
means of eliminating extraneous causes, and decid- 
ing between rival hypotheses. Owing to the dis- 
position of tlie mind to form hypotheses, and to 
prejudge cases, it constantly happens that, among 
all the possible suppositions which may occur, two 
or three principal ones occupy us, to the exclusion 
of the rest ; or it may be that, if we have been less 
precipitate, out of a great multitude rejected for 
obvious inapplicability to some one or other case, 
two or three of better claims remain for decision ; 
and this such instances enable us to do. One of 
the instances cited by Bacon in illustration of his 
crucial class is veVy remarkable, being neither more 
nor less than the proposal of a direct experiment to 
determine whether the tendency of heavy bodies 
downwards is a result of some peculiar mechanism 



OV NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 187 

in themselvesy or of the attraction of the earth <' by 
the corporeal mass thereof^ as by a collection of 
bodies of the same nature.** If it be so, he says, 
^ it wHl follow that the nearer all bodies approach 
to the earth, the stronger and with the greater 
force and velocity they will tend tb it; but the 
&rther they are, the weaker and slower:" and his 
experiment consists in comparing the effect of a 
spring and a weight in keeping up the motions of 
two *^ clocks," regulated together, and removed al- 
ternately to the tops of hi^ buildings and into the 
deepest mines. By clocks he could not have meant 
pendulum clocks, which were not then known, (the 
first made in England was in 1662,) buty?y-docks, 
so that the comparison, though too coarse, was not 
contrary to sound mechanical principles. In short, 
its principle was the comparison of the effect of a 
spring with that of a weight, in producing certain 
motions in certain times, on heights and in mines. 
Now, this is the very same thing that has really been 
done ixk the recent experiments of professors Airy 
and Whew ell in Dolcoath mine: a pendulum (a 
weight moved by gravity) has been compared with 
a chronometer balance, moved and regulated by a 
spriiig. In his 37th aphorism. Bacon also speaks of 
gravity as an incorporeal power, acting at a distance, 
and requiring time for its transmission $ a consider- 
ation which occurred at a later period to Laplace, 
in one of his most delicate investigations. 

(197.) A well chosen and strongly marked cru- 
dud instance is, s<»netime8, of the highest import- 
ance ; when two theories, which run parallel to each 
other (as is sometimes the case) in their explan- 



188 UISCOURSB ON THE STUDY 

ation of great classes of phenomena, at length 
come to be placed at issue upon a single fact- A 
beautiful instance of this will be cited in the next 
section. We may add to the examples above given 
of such instances, that of the application of chemical 
tests, which are almost universaUy crucial experi- 
ments. 

(198.) Bacon's " travelling instances" are Uiose 

in which the nature or quality under investigation 
" travels," or varies in degree ; and thus (accord- 
ing to $ 152.) afford an indication of a cause by 
a gradation of intensity in the effect. One of his 
instances is very happy, being that of " paper, 
which is white when dry, but proves less so when 
wet, and comes nearer to the state of transparency 
upon the exclusion of the air, and admission of 
water." In reading this, and many other instances 
in the Novum Organum, one would almost suppose 
(had it been written) that its author had taken 
Uiem from Newton's Optics. 

(199.) The travelling instances, as well as what 
Bacon terms << frontier instances," are cases in whidi 
we are enabled to trace that general law whidi 
seems to pervade all nature — the law, as it is 
termed, of contmuity, and which is expressed in the 
well known smitence, ^< Natura non agit per sal- 
turn." The pursuit of this law into cases where its 
application is not at first sight obvious, has proved 
a fertile source of physical discovery, and led ns to 
the knowledge of an analogy and intimate connecs- 
lion of phenomena between which at first we should 
never have expected to find any. 

(200.) For example, the transparency of gold \^mf^ 



OF KATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 189 

which permits a bluish^reen light to pass through 
it, is a frontier instance between the transparency 
of pellucid bodies and the opacity of metals, and it 
prevents a breach of the law of continuity between 
transparent and opake bodies, by exhibiting a bo^ 
€£ the class generally r^arded the most opake in 
nature, as still possessed of some slight degree of 
transparency. It thus proves that the quality of 
opacity is not a contrary or anioffomsi quality to 
that of transparency^ but only its ^Ltreme lowest 
degree. 



190 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 



CHAP. VIL 

OF THE HIGHER DEGREES OF INDUCTIVE GENERALIZA- 
TION, AND OF THE FORMATION AND VERIFICATION 
OF THEORIES. 

(201.) A.S particular inductions and laws of the first 
degreeof generality are obtained from the consider- 
ation of individual facts, so Theories result from a 
consideration of these laws, and of the proximate 
causes brought into view in the previous process, 
regarded all together as constituting a new set of 
phenomena, the creatures of reason rather than of 
sense, and each representing under general lan- 
guage innumerable particular facts. In raising these 
higher inductions, therefore, more scope is given to 
the exercise of pure reason than in slowly groping 
out our first results. The mind is more disencum- 
bered of matter, and moves as it were in its own 
element. What is now before it, it perceives more 
intimately, and less through the medium of sense, 
or at least not in the same manner as when actually 
at work on the immediate objects of sense. But it 
must not be therefore supposed that, in the formation 
of theories, we are abandoned to the unrestrained 
lAxercise of imagination, or at liberty to lay down 
arbitrary principles, or assume the existence of mere 
fanciful causes. Tlie liberty of speculation which 
we possess in the domains of theory is not like 
the wild licence of the slave broke loose from hb 



/ 



or NATURAL FRILOSOPHT* 191 

fetters, but rather like that of the freeman who has 
learned the lessons of self-restraint in the school of 
just subordination. The ultimate objects we pursue 
in the highest theories are the same as those of the 
lowest inductions ; and the means by which we can 
most securely attain them bear a dose analogy to 
those which we have found successM in such in- 
ferior cases. 

(202.) Tlie immediate object we propose to our- 
selves in physical theories is the analysis of pheno- 
mena, and the knowledge of the hidden processes , 
of nature in their production, so far as they can be / 
traced by us. An important part of this knowledge 
consists in a discovery of the actual structure or 
mechanism of the universe and its parts, through 
which, and by which, those processes are executed; 
and of the agents which are concerned in their 
performance. Now, the mechanism of nature is 
for the most part either on too large or too small ^ \ j( 
scale to be immediately cognizable by our senses ; 
and her agents in like manner elude direct observ- 
ation, and become known to us only by their effects- 
It is in vain therefore that we desire to become 
witnesses to the processes carried on with such 
means, and to be admitted into the secret recesses 
and laboratories where they are effected. Micro- 
scopes have been constructed which magnify more 
than a thousand times in Unear dimension, so that 
the smallest visible grain of sand may be enlarged 
to the appearance of one a thousand mOlion times 
more bulky ; yet the only impression we receive by 
viewing it thrpugh such a magnifier is, that it re- 
minds us of some vast fragment of a rock, while the 



192 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDT 

intimate structure on which depend its colour, its 
hardness, and its chemical properties, remidns still 
concealed : we do not seem to have made even an 
approach to a closer analysis of it by any such 
scrutiny. 

(203.) On the other hand, the mechanism of the 
great system of which our planet forms a part 
escapes immediate observation by the immensity of 
its scale, nay, even by the slowness of its evolutions. 
The motion of the minute hand of a watch can 
hardly be perceived without the closest attention, 
and that of the hour hand not at all. But what are 
these, in respect of the impression of slowness they 
produce in our minds, compared with a revolving 
movement which takes a whole year, or twelve, 
thirty, or eighty years to complete, as is the case 
with the planets in their revolutions round the smu 
Yet no sooner do we come to reflect on the linear 
dimensions of these orbs, (which however we do 
not seCy nor can we measure them but by a long, 
cu*cuitous, and difficult process,) than we are lost in 
astonishment at the swiftness of the very motioDs 
which before seemed so slow.* The motion of the 
sails of a windmill offers (on a small scale) an lUua- 
trative case. At a distance the rotation seems slour 
and steady — but when we stand dose to one of the 
sails in its sweep, we are surprised at the swiftneM 
with which it rushes by us. 



• ** When we are told that Saturn moTes in his ortit 
than 82,000 miles an hour, we fiuicy the motion to be swift ; hmX 
when we find that he is more than three hours moving his owm 
diameter, we must then think it, as it really is, slow.** Thiv^ 
letters on ?arious Subjects, by William Jackson, 179S. 



OV HATUBAL FHILOSOPHT. 195 

(201^) Again, the agents emplojed by nature to act 
on material stractures are in¥i89)le, and only to be 
traced by the effects they produce. Heat dilates 
matter with an irresistible f(Nrce ; but what heat if, 
remains yet a problem. A current of electricity 
passing along a wire moves a magnetized needle at a 
distance; but except from this effect we perceive no 
difference between the condition of the wire when it 
conveys and when it does not convey the stream : 
and we apply the terms current, or stream, to the 
electricity only because in some of its relations 
it reminds us of something we have observed in a 
stream of air w water. In like manner we see 
that the moon circulates about the earth; and be- 
cause we believe it to be a solid mass, and have 
never seen one solid substance revolve round an- 
other within our reach to handle and examine 
unless retained by a force or united by a tie, we 
conclude that there is a force, and a mode of con- 
nection, between the moon and the earth ; though, 
what that mode can be, we have no conception, 
nor can imagine how such a force can be exerted 
at A distance, and with empty space, or at most an 
invisible fluid, between. (See ( 148.) 

(205.) Yet are we not to despair, since we 
see regular and beautiful results brought about in 
human works by means which nobody would, at 
first sight, think could have any thing to do with 
then. A sheet of blank paper is placed upon a 
firame, and shoved forwards, and after winding its 
wBy successively over and under half a dozen 
i^ollers, and performing many other strange evo- 
lutions, comes out printed on both sides. And, 

o 



1945 J>ISCOURS£ ON THE STUDY 

after all, the acting cause in this process is nothing 
more than a few gallons of water boiled in an iron 
vessel, at a distance from the scene of operations. 
But why the water so boiled should be capable of 
producing the active energy which sets the whole 
apparatus in motion is, and will probably long 
remain, a secret to us. 

(206.) This, however, does not at all prevent our 
having a very perfect comprehension of the whole 
subsequent process. We might frequent printing- 
houses, and form a theory of printing, and having 
worked oiu* way up to the point where the mechanical 
action commenced (the boiler of the steam-engine), 
and verified it by taking to pieces, and putting toge- 
ther again, the train of wheels and the presses, and by 
sound theoretical examination of all Uie transfers of 
motion from one part to another ; we should^at length, 
pronounce our theory good, and declare that we 
understood printing thoroughly. Nay, we mi^t 
even go away and apply the principles of medianism 
we had learned in this enquiry to other widely 
different purposes; construct other machines, and 
put them in motion by the same moving power, 
and all without arriving at . any correct idea as to 
the ultimate source of the force employed. But, 
if we were inclined to theorize &rther, we might 
do so ; and it is easy to imagine how two theorists 
might form very different hypotheses as to the origin 
of the power which alternately raised and depressed 
the piston-rod of the engine. One, for example, m%iit 
maintain that the boiler (whose contents we will va^ 
pose that neither theorist has been permitted to 
examine) was the den of some powerful unknown 



y? NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 19o 

animal, and he would not be without plausible 
analogies in the warmth, the supply of fuel and 
water, the breathing noises, the smoke, and above 
all, the mechanical power exerted. He would say 
(not without a show of reason), that where there is 
a positive and wonderful effect, and many strong 
analogies, sudi as materials consumed, and all the 
usual signs of life maintained, we are not to deny 
the existence of animal life because we know no 
animal that consumes such fix>d. Nay, he might 
observe with truth, that the fuel actually consists 
p£ the chemi^ ingredients which constitute the 
chief food of all animals, &c. ; while, on the other 
hand, his brother theorist, who caught a glimpse 
of the fire, and detected the peculiar sounds of 
ebullition, might acquire a better notion of the 
case, and form, a theory more in consonance with 
£ict. 

(207.) Now, nothing is more common in phy- 
sics than to find two, or even many, theories main- 
tained as to. the origin of a natural phenomenon. 
For instance, in the case of heat itself, one con- 
aiders it as a really existing material fluid, of such 
exceeding subtlety as to penetrate all bodies, and 
•even to be capable of combining with them che- 
xnically; while . another regards it as nothing but 
a rapid vibratory or rotatory motion in the ulti- 
mate particles of the bodies heated ; and produces 
a singularly ingenious train of mechanical reason- 
ing to show, that there is nothing contradictory to 
^und djrnamical principles in such a doctrine. 
Thus> again, with light:- one- considers it as con- 
jiisting in actual particles darted forth firom lumia« 

o 2 



196 DISCaUR&E ON THE stud4^ 

0U8 bodies, and acted upon in their progress bj 
forces of extreme intensity residing in the sub- 
stances on which they strike ; another, in the vi- 
bratory motion of the particles of luminous bodiei^ 
communicated to a peculiar subtle and highly elas- 
tic ethereal medium, filling all space, and conreyed 
through it into our eyes, as sounds are to our ears^ 
by the undulations of the air. 

(208.) Now, are we to be deterred from fhda»- 
ing hypotlieses and constructing theories, because 
we meet with sudi dilemmas, and find oursehres 
fi*equently beyond our depth? Undoubtedly not 
Est qmdam prodire tenms si turn dahtr ttknt, 
Hypotheses, with respect to theories, are what 
presumed proximate causes are witibi respect to 
particular inductions: they afbrd us moCfves for 
I searching into analogies ; grounds of citation to 
bring before us all the cases which seem to bear 
upon them, for examination. A wdl imi^ined 
hypothesis, if it have been suggested by a faff 
inductive consideration of general laws, can hanfly 
&il at least of enabling us to generalize a step 
faither, and group together several such laws under 
a more universal expression. But this is taldi^ a 
very limited view of the value and importance of 
hypotheses : it may happen (and it has happened 
in the case of tfte undulatoiy doctrine of light) 
that such a weight of analogy and probability mi^ 
become accumulated on the side of an hypothesis^ 
that we are compelled to admit one of two things ^ 
either that it is an actual statement of what reaDy 
passes in nature, or that the reality, whatever it be» 
must run so dose a parallel with it, as to admit 



or NATURAL PHILOSOPHT. 197 

8(Hne mode of eiqprenion common to both, at lea$t 

in 80 &r as the phenomena actually known are 

GOQcerned. Now, this is a very great step, not 

only for its own sate, as leading us to a high pomt 

in philosophical speculation, but for its applica* 

tions; because whatever condusions we deduce from 

an hypothesis so supported roust have at least a 

strong jHresumption in their favour: and we may 

be thus led to the trial of many curious experi* 

pients, and to the imagining of many use^ and 

important oontrivances» which we should never 

otherwise have thought oi^ and which, at all events, 

1^ verified in [Nractice^ are real additicms to our stock 

of knowledge and to the arts of life. 

(209.) In framing a theory which shall render 
a ratioBsl account of any natural phenomoion, we 
havejlrsi to consider the agents on which it de« 
peiyis, or the causes to which we regard it as 
ultimately refen^le. These agents are not to be 
arbitraiily assumed ; they must be such as we have 
gOQd inductive grounds to believe do exist in nature, 
and do perform a part in phenomena analogous to 
those we would render an account of; or such, 
whose presence in the actudi case can be demon- 
strated by unequivocal signs. They must be vera 
0sau9tBy in shcnrt, which we can not only show to exist 
and to act» but the laws oi whose acdon we can de- 
rive independently, by direct induction, from expe- 
liments purposely instituted ; or at least make such 
Biq>p09itions respecting them as shall not be contrary 
to our experience, and whiqh will remain to be 
verified by the coincidence of the conclusions we 
shall deduce from them, with facts. For example, in 

o 3 



198 DX8C0URSS OK TBV BTUDT 

the theory of gravitation we suppose an agent, — 
force, or mechanical power, — to act on ofmy material 
body which is placed in the presence of any others 
and to urge the two mutually towards each other: 
This is a vera canua; for heavy bodies (that is, 
all l>odie8, but some more, some less,) tend to, or 
endeavour to readi, the earth, and require the 
exertion of force to counteract this endeavour, or 
to keep them up. Now, diat which opposes and 
neutralizes force is force. And again, a plumb4ine^ 
which, when allowed to hang freely, always hangs 
perpendicularly ; is found to hang observably aside 
from the perpendicular when in the neighbourhood 
of a considerable mountain ; thereby proving that a 
force is exerted upon it, which draws it towards die 
mountain. Moreover, since it is a &ct that the 
moon does circulate about the eardi, it must be 
drawn towards the earth by a force ; for if there 
were no force acting upon it, it would go on in a 
straight line without turning aside to circulate in an 
orbit, and would, therefore, soon go away and be lost 
in space. This force, then, which we odl the font 
of gravity, is a real cause. 

(210.) We have next to consider the laws which 
regulate the action of these our primary agents; 
and these we can only arrive at in three ways : Ist, By 
inductive reasoning; that is, by examining sJl the cases 
in which we know them to be exerctsed, inferring 
as well as circumstances will permit, its amount or 
intensity in each particular case, and then pieciog 
together, as it were, these disfecta membra ^gcnenl" 
izing from them, and so arriving at the laws desired; 
2dly, By forming at once a bold hypothesis, per* 



aw KATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 199 

Ucolarizmg the law, and tr3riiig the truth of it by 
fbllowing out its consequences and comparing them 
with facts; or, Sdly, By a process partaking of 
both these, and combining the advantages of both 
without their defects, viz. by assuming indeed the 
hnrs we would discover, but so generally expressed, I ^ 
diat they shall include an unlimited variety of 
particular laws; — following out the consequences 
of this assumption, by the application of such general 
principles as the case admits; — comparing them 
m succession with all the particular cases within our 
knowledge ; and, lastly, on this comparison^ so modi- 
fying and restricting the general enunciation of our 
laws as to make the results agree, 

(211.) All these three processes for the discovery 
of those general elementary laws on which the 
higher theories are grounded are applicable with 
different advantage in different circumstances. We 
might exemplify their successive application to 
the case of gravitation ; but as this would rather 
lead into a disquisition too particular for the ob- 
jects of this discourse, and carry us too much 
into the domain of technical mathematics, we shall 
content ourselves with remarking, that the method 
last mentioned is that which mathematicians (espe- 
cially such as have a considerable command of those 
general modes of representing and reasoning on 
quantity, which constitute the higher analysis,) find 
tihe most universally applicable, and the most effica- 
cious; and that it is applicable with especial ad- 
vantage in cases where subordinate inductions of 
the kind described in the last section have already 
led to laws of a certain generality admitting of 

o 4 



2200 DISCOURSE ON THB ST17DY 

mathematical expression. Such a case, for instancey 
is the elliptic motion of a planet, which is a general 
proposition including the statement of an infinite 
number of particular j9&iceff, in which the laws of its 
motion allow it to be some time or other found, and 
for which, of course, the law of force must be so 
assumed as to account. 

(212.) With regard to the first process of the 
three above enumerated, it is in fact an induction 
of the kind described in § 185. ; and all the re- 
marks we there made on that kind of induction 
apply to it in this stage. The direct assumption 
of a particular h3rpothesis has been occasionallj 
practised very successfully. As examples, we may 
mention Coulomb's and Poisson's theories of elec* 
tricity and magnetism, in both which, phenomena 
of a very complicated and interesting nature 
are referred to the actions of attractive and re* 
pulsive forces, following a law similar in its expres- 
sion to the law of gravitation. But the difficid^ 
and labour, which, in the greater theories, always 
attends the pursuit of a fundamental law into tto 
remote consequences, effectually precludes this me- 
thod from being commonly resorted to as a meaae 
of discovery, unless we have some good reaaoo« 
from analogy or otherwise, for believii^ that the 
attempt will prove successful, or have been first 
led by partial inductions to particular laws whiob 
naturally point it out for trial. 

(213.) In this case the law assumes all the dia* 
racters of a general [^enomenon resulting from ait 
induction of particulars, but not yet verified by com* 
parison with all the particulars, nor extended lo aU 



OV NATVBAI. PHILOS<»KT. 901 

that it is capable of induding. (See $ 171*) It 
16 tbe Terification of sudi inductions which oon- 
idtntes theoiy in its largest sense, and which* 
embraces an estimation of the uxBuence of aU such 
Gircinnstances as may modify the eiect of the 
caose whose laws of action we have arrived at and 
would verify* Toretumtoourexan^les particular 
inductions drawn from the motions of the several 
planets i^ut the sun, and o£ the satellites round 
their primaries, &c« having led us to the general 
conception of an attractive force exerted by every 
particle of matter in the universe on every other 
acc(x*ding to the law to which we attach the 
name of gravitation; when we would verify this 
Isducti^i, we must set out with assuming this law, 
eon^ering the whcde system as subjected to its 
b^uence and implicitiy obeying it, and nothing in- 
terfering with its action ; we then, for the first time, 
perceive a train of modifying circumstances which 
had not occurred to us when reasoning upwards from 
particulars to obtain the fundamental law ; we per- 
ceive tiiat oj? th6 planets must attract each otkevy 
must tiierefore cbraw each other out of the orbits 
whidi they would have if acted on only by the sun ; 
aiMl as this was never contemplated in tiie inductive 
process, its validity becomes a question, which can 
md J be determined by ascertaining precisely how 
great a deviation tiiis new class of mutual actions 
will produce. To do this is no easy task, or rather, 
It is the most difficult task which the genius of man 
has ever yet accomplished s still, it hag been accom- 
pliAed by the mere explication oi the general laws 
of dynamics ; and the result (undoubtedly a most 



1 



202 6tSC0URSE ON TAE STUDY 

beautiful and satis&ctoty one) is, that all those 
observed deviations in the motions of our system 
which stood out as exceptions ($ 154.), or were 
noticed as residual phenomena and reserved for 
further enquiry (J 158.), in that imperfect view of 
the subject which we got in the subordinate process 
by which we rose to our general conclusion, prove 
to be the immediate consequences of the above-men- 
tioned mutual actions. As such, they are neither 
exceptions nor residual facts, but fulfilments of 
general rules, and essential features in the state- 
ment of the case, taithoui whicti our induction would 
be invalid, and the law of gravitation positively un- 
true. 

(214.) In the theory of gravitation, the law is all 
in sdl, applying itself at once to the materials, and di- 
rectly producing the result (A). But in many other 
cases we have to consider not merely the laws which 
regulate the actions of our ultimate causes, but a 
system of medianism, or a structure of parts, through 
the intervention of which their effects become 
sensible to us. Thus, in the delicate and curiotn 
electro-dynamic theory of Ampere, the mutual 
attraction or repulsion of two magnets is referred 
to a more universal phenomenon, the mutual action 
of electric currents, according to a certain funda- 
mental law. But, in order to bring the case of a 
magnet within die range of diis law, he is obliged 
to make a supposition of a peculiar structure or 
mechanism, which constitutes a body a magnet, 
?iz. that around each particle of die body there 
shall be constantly circulating, in a certain stateA 
direction, a small current of electric fluid. 



OV NATtTBAL PHILOSOPHr. %S 

(215.) Thisy we may say, u too complex ; it is 
artificial, and camiot be granted : yet, if the ad- 
mission of this or any other structure tenfold more 
artificial and complicated will enable any one to 
present in a general point of view a great number 
of particular ^cts, — to make them a part of one 
system, and enable us to reason from the known 
to the unknown, and actually to predict facts brfore 
iriaiy — we would ask, why should it not be granted? 
When we examine those instances of nature's work- 
manship which we can take to pieces and under- 
stand, we find them in the highest degree artificial 
in our own sense of the word. Take, for example, 
the structure of an eye, or of the skeleton of an 
animal, — what complexity and what artifice I In 
the one> sl pellucid mtucle; a lens formed with ellip- 
tical surfaces ; a circular aperture capable of en- 
largement or contraction without loss of form. In 
the other, a firamework of the most curious car- 
pentry ; in which occurs not a single straight line, 
nor. any known geometrical curve, yet all evidently 
systematic, and constructed by rules which defy our 
research. Or examine a crystaUized mineral, which 
we can in some measure dissect, and thus obtain* 
direct evidence of an internal structure. Neither 
artifice nor complication are here wanting; and 
though it is easy to assert that these appearances 
are, afler all, produced by something which would 
be very simple, if we did but know it, it is plain 
that the same might be said of a steam-engine ex- 
ecuting the most complicated movements, previous 
to any investigation of its nature, or any knowledge 
of the source of its power. 






2(H PitfCOUESE ON THB STUDY 

' (216.) In estimatingy hovreyer, the value of a 
theorj, we are not to look, in the fint uutanctf 
to the question* whether it establishes satisfiicto- 
lily, or not, a particular process or mechanism ; for 
of this* after all, we can never obtain more than 
that indirect evidence which consists in its leading 
to the same results. What, in the actual state of 
science, is fiir more important for us to knoiw, is 
whether our theory truly represent all the facts, and 
include (tU the laws, to which observation and induc- 
tion lead* A theory which did this would, no doubt, 
go a great way to establish any hypothesis of me- 
chanism or structure, idiich might form an essen* 
tial part of it: but this is Tery &r from being 
the case, except in a few limited instances; and, 
till it is so, to lay any great stress on hypotheses 
of the kind, except in as much as they serve 
as a scaffold for the erection of general laws, is 
to ^ quite mistake the scaffi^d for the pile." Re* 
garded in this lig^t, hypotheses have often an emi- 
nent use : and a ftKsility in framing them, if attended 
with an equal fiu^ility in laying them aside when 
they have served their turn, is one of the most 
valuable qualities a philosopher can possess ; whiles 
on the other hand, a bigoted adherence to them^ 
6r indeed to peculiar views of any kind, in oj^msi- 
tion to the tenor of &cts as they arise, is the bene 
of all philosophy. 

(217.) There is no doubt, however, that the 
safest course, when it can be followed, is to rise bj 
inductions carried on among laws, as among ftcta, 
from law to law, perceiving, as we go on, how laws 
which we have looked upon as uncmmected be- 



or HATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 90B 

come paiticnlar cases, either one of ihe other, 
or all of one still more genotd, and, at length, blend 
altogether in the point of view from which we learn 
toregardthem. An example will illustrate what we 
mean. It is a general law, that aU hot bodies 
flirow out or ra^tUe heat in all directions, (by 
which we mean, not that heat is an actual sub- 
stance darted out from hot bodies, but only that 
the laws of the transmisdon of heat to distant objects 
are similar to those which would regulate the dis- 
tribution of particles thrown forth in all directions,) 
and that other colder bodies placed in their neigh- 
bourhood become hot, ea if they received the heat 
so radiated. Again, all solid bodies which become 
heated in one part condueij or difiuse, the heat 
frcmi that part through their whde substance. 
Here we have two modes of communicating heat,«<^ 
by radiation, and by conduction; and both these 
have their peculiar, and, to all appearance, very dif- 
ferent laws. Now, let us bring a hot and a cold 
body (of the same substance) gradually nearer 
and nearer together,-* as they approach, the heat 
win be communicated from the hot to the cold 
one by the laws cf radiaiion; and from the nearer 
to the farther part of the colder one, as it gra- 
dually grows warm, by those of eonducdon. Let 
their distance be diminished till they just lightly 
toudi. How does the hei^ now pass from one to 
the other? Doubtless, by radiation; for it may 
be proved, that in such a contact there is yet 
im interval. Let them then be forced together, 
and it will seem dear that it must now be by 
€xmduoium. Yet their itUerval must diminish grar 



206 DISCOURSE ON THE STT7DT 

dually, as the force by which they are pressed 
togedier increases, till they actually cohere, and 
form one. The law of continoity, then, of whicb 
we have before spoken (( 199.), forbids us to sup* 
pose that the intilnate nature of the process of 
communication is changed in this transition from 
light to violent contact, and from that to actual 
union. If so, we might ask, at what point does the 
change happen ? Especially since it is also de- 
monstrable, that the partides of the most solid 
body are not, really, in contact. Therefore^ the 
laws ' of conduction and radiation have a mutual 
dependence, and the former are only extreme cases 
of the latter. If, then, we would rightly understand 
- what passes, or what is the process of nature in 
the slow communication of heat through the sub- 
stance of a solid, we must ground our enquiries 
upon what takes place at a distance, and dien urge 
the laws to which we have arrived^ up to their 
extreme case. 

(218.) When two theories run parallel to eadi 
other, and each explains a great many facts in com- 
mon with the other, any experiment which affords a 
-crucial instance to decide between them, or by 
which one or odier must frJl, is of great importance. 
In thus verifying dieories, since they are grounded 
on general laws, we may appeal, not merely to par- 
ticular cases, but to whole classes of &ct8 ; and we 
therefore have a great range among the individuals 
of these for the selection of some particular effect 
which ought to take place oppositely in the event 
of one of the two suppositions at issue bemg rig^it 
and the other wrong. A curious example is giv^oi 



OF NATURAL FHIL080FHT. SffJ 

by M, Fresnel, as decisive, in his mindy of the ques- 
tion between the two great opinions on the nature 
of light, which, since the time of Newton and 
Hujghens, have divided philosophers. (See $ 207«) 
When two very dean glasses are laid one on the 
other, if they be not perfectly flat, but one or both 
in an almost imperceptible degree convex or promi- 
nent, beautiful and vivid colours will be seen between 
them ; and if diese be viewed through a red glassy 
their appearance will be that of alternate, dark and 
bright stripes. These stripes are formed between the 
two sur&ces in apparent contact, as any one may 
satisfy himself by using, instead of a flat plate of 
glass for the upper one, a triangular-shaped piece, 
called a prism, like a three-cornered stick, and 
looking through the inclined side of it next the 
eye, by which arrangement the reflection of light 
from the upper sur&ce is prevented from inter- 
mixing with that from the sur&ces in contact. 
Now, the coloured stripes thus produced are ex- 
plicable (Ml both theories, and are f^pealed to by 
Both as strong confirmatory facts ; but there is a 
difference in one circumstance according as one or 
the other theory is employed to explain them. In 
the case of the Huyghenian doctrine, the intervals 
between the bright stripes ought to appet^r ahsohddy 
Hack ; in the other, half bright^ when so viewed 
through a prism. This curious case of difference 
was tried as soon as the opposing consequences of 
the two theories were noted by M. Fresnel, and the 
result is stated by him to be decisive in favour of 
that theory which makes light to consist in the 
vibrations of an elastic medium. 



B06 SI6COURSB oir the STinrr 

(219.) Theories are best armed at bj the con- 
sideration of general laws ; but most securely Terified 
by comparing &em with particular facts, because 
this serves as a verification of the whole train of 
induction, from the lowest term to the highest. 
But then, the comparison must be made with ftcts 
purposely selected so as to include every variety of 
case, not omitting extreme ones, and in sufficient 
number to afford every reasonable probability of 
detecting error. A single numerical comcidence in 
a final conclusion, however striking the coincidence 
or important the subject, is not sidicient. Newton's 
theory of sound, for example, lead» to a numerical 
expression for the actual velocity of sound, differing 
but little firom that afiEbrded by the correct theory 
afterwards explained by La Grange, and (when cer- 
tain considerations not contemplated by him are 
aUowed for) agreeing with fisu^t ; yet this coincidence 
is no verification of Newton's view of the general 
subject of sound, which is defective in an essential 
point, as the great geometer last named has very 
satisfisu^torily shown. This example is sufficient to 
inspire caution in restii^ the verificatbn of dieories 
upon any thing but a very extensive comparison with 
a great mass of observed fkcts. 

(220.) But, on the other hand, when a theory 
will bear the test of such extensive comparison, 
it matters little how it has been originally firamed. 
However strange and, at first sight, inadmissible its 
postulates may appear, or however singular it may 
seem that suc^ postulates should have been fixed 
upon, — if they only lead us, by legitimate reasonings, 
to conclusions in exact accordance with numerous 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 1809 

obsermtions purposel j made under such a variety of 
circumstances as faiiiy to embrace the whole range 
of the phenomena which the theory is intended to 
account for, we cannot refuse to admit them ; or 
if we still hesitate to r^aord them as demonstrated 
truths, we cannot, at least, object to receive them 
as temporary substitutes £ot such truths, untfl the 
latter ^all become known. If they suffice to ex- 
plam 4dl the phenomena known, it becomes highly 
improbable diat they will not explain more ; and if 
aH their conclusions we have tried have proved 
carrecty it is probable that others yet untried will 
be found so too ; so that in rejecting them altogether, 
we should reject all the discoveries to whidi they 
may lead. 

(221.) In all theories which profess to give a true 

account of the process of nature in the production 

of any class of phenomena, by referring them to 

general laws, or to the action of general causes, 

trough a train of modifying circumstances ; before 

we can apply those laws, or trace the action of those 

causes in any assigned case, we require to know the 

circumstances: we must have datawhereon to ground 

their application. Now, these can be learned only 

from observation ; and it may be seem to be aiguing 

in a vicious circle to have recourse to observation 

for any part of those theoretical conclusions, by 

wfiose comparison with fact the theory itself is to 

be tried. The consideration of an example will 

enable us to iKinove ttds difficulty. The most 

general law which lias yet been discovered in che- 

HiistTy is this, that idl the elementarv substances in 

nature are susceptible of entering into combination 

p 



210 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

with each other only in fixed or defimte proporiums 
by weight, and not arbitrarily ; so that when any 
two substances are put together with a view to 
unite them, if their weights are not in some certain 
determinate proportion, a complete combination will 
not take place, but some part of one or the other 
ingredient will remain over and above, and uncom- 
bined. Suppose, now, we have found a substance 
having all the outward characters of a homi^- 
neous or unmixed body, but which, on analysis, we 
discover to consist of sulphur and lead in the 
proportion of 20 parts* of the former to 130 of the 
latter ingredient ; and we would know whether this 
is to be regarded as a verification of the law of 
definite proportions or an exception to it. The 
question is reduced to this, whether the proportion 
20 to ISO be or be not that fixed and definite pro- 
portion, (or one of them, if there be more than one 
proportion possible,) in which, according to the law 
in question, sulphur and lead can combine ; now, 
this can never be decided by merely looking at the 
law in all its generality. It is clear, that when par- 
ticularized by restricting its expression to sulphur 
and lead, the law should state what are those par- 
ticular fixed proportions in which these bodies can 
combine. That is to say, there must be certain data 
or numbers, by which these are distinguished firom 
all other bodies in nature, and which require to be 
known before we can apply the general law to the 
particular case. To determine such data, obsenr- 
ation itiij^t be consulted ; and if we were to have 
recourse to that of the combination of the two 8ul>» 
stances in question with each other, no doubt thece 



OF NATURAL PHIL080PHT. 211 

would be ground for the logical objection of a vicious 
cbde : but this is not done ; the determination of 
these numerical data is derived from experiments 
purposely made on a great variety of different 
combinations, among which that under consider- 
ation does not of necessity occur, and all these 
being found, independently of each other, to agree in 
giving the same results, they are therefore safely as- 
sumed as part of die system. Thus, the law of defi- 
nite proportions, when applied to the actual state of 
nature, requires two separate statements, the one 
announcing the general law of combination, the 
other particularizing the numbers appropriate to 
the several elements of which natural bodies con- 
sist, or the data of nature. Among these data, if 
arranged in a list, there will be found opposite to the 
element sulphur the number 16, and opposite to 
kad, 104<*; and since 20 is to 130 in the exact 
proportion of 16 to 104<, it appears that the com- 
bination in question affords a satisfactory verification 
of the law. 

(222.) The great importance of physical data 
of this description, and the advantage of having 
them well determined, will be obvious, if we con- 
sider, that a list of them, when taken in combin- 
ation with the general law, affords the means of 
determining at once the exact proportion of the 
ingredients of all natural compounds, if we only 
know the place they hold in the system. In 
chemistry, the number of admitted elements is 
between fifty and sixty, and new ones are added 
continually as the science advances. Now, the mo- 

* Thomson's First Principles of Chemistry. 

p 2 



212 DISCOURSK ON TRE STUDY 

ment the number corresp<Hulittg' to any new sidi- 
stance added to the list is determined, we hanre, 
in fact, ascertained all the proportions in whkh it 
can enter into combination with di (iie othersy so 
that a careful experiment made with the olbject 
of determining this number is, in fiu^ equivalent 
to as many difPerent expenments as there are 
binary, ternary, or yet more complicated cambii»- 
ations capable of existing, into which the new 
substance may enter, as an ingredient. 

(223.) The importance of obtaming exact phj^ 
sical data can scarcely be too much insisted on, ibr 
without them the most elaborate theories are littie 
better than mere inapplicable forms of words. A 
would be -of little consequence to be infimned, 
abstractedOiy, that ihe sun and ffdanets attract eack 
other, with forces proportional to their maasee^ 
and inversely as the squares of their distanc ea : 
but, as soon as we know the data of our systen, as 
soon as we have an accurste statemeaait (no matter 
how obtained) of the distances, masses, and actol 
motions of the several bodies which compose it, 
we need no more to enable us to predict all titt 
movements of its several parts, and the dianges 
that will happen in it for thousands of years to 
come; and evea to extend our views backwards 
into time^ and recover irom the past, phenomena^ 
which no observation has noted, and no hnstoiy 
recorded, and which yet (it is possible) nay have 
left indelible traces of tjiear existence in tiieir 
influence on the state of nature in our awa giobe^ 
and those of die other planets. 

(224.) The proof, too, that our dataore correctly 



or NATURAL FHILOSOPHT. 315 

jaaomed, is mvirfyed ia the gea^nd; verificatkia of &^ 
wbole theory, ef whidi* when <»ce asguoied, they 
jom a part 3 and the same comparis<» with ob» 
servatioa which eoaUea ub to decide on the truth of 
ibB abstract principle, enables us, at the same time, 
to aaeevtaia whether we have filled the values of our 
data IB aoeordaiice with the actual state of nature. 
JT not, it becoines aa ix^portant question, whether 
the assuiaed Ydues can be corrected^ so as to bring 
^ resutls of theory to agree with &6ts? Thus it 
liappens, that as theories a|>proach to their pofec* 
lion, a more aoA more e^Eact determination of data 
becomes requisite Deviations from observed &ct, 
which, in a first or ai^oodmative verification, may 
||Q disregarded as trifiingj^ become important when 
a hi^ degree of precision is attained^ A difference 
between the calculated and obaerved places of a 
planeta which would hav^ been disr^arded by 
K^^er ii) his verification of the law pf elliptic 
motioQ, woidd i¥>w he oHisidered fttal to the theoxy 
of gravitV), unless it could he ^hown to ariae fixim an 
e^oneoMs assumption of some of the numerical data 

(225.) Tbfit obiervations moat af^propriate for the 
ready and e9;act d^teminalion of physical data are^ 
ther^ve^ those which iti ifi^ most necessary to have 
performed with exactness and perseverance. Hence 
it is» tfiat their performance? in many caaes, becomes 
a national conccam, and observatories are erected and 
nwintaMwdt and expeditions despatched to distant 
regions, at an ^xpeqse whieh, to a aiqperficial view, 
woidd appear vaost di^qp(^i(Hied to their objects. 
But it may very reasonably be asked why the dir^ 

p S 



214 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

assistance afforded by governments to the execution 
of continued series of observations adapted to this 
especial end should continue to be, as it has hitherto 
almost exclusively been, confined to astronomy. 

(226.) Physical data intended to be employed 
as elements of calculation in extensive theories, 
require to be known with a much greater degree 
of exactness than any single observation possesses, 
not only on account of their dignity and import- 
ance, as affording the means of representing an 
indefinite multitude of facts ; but because, in the 
variety of combinations that may arise, or in the 
changes that circumstances may undergo, cases 
will occur when any trifling error in one of the 
data may become enormously magnified in the final 
result to be compared with observation. Thus, in 
the case of an eclipse of the sun, when the moon 
enters very obliquely upon the sun's disc, a trifling 
error in the diameter of either the sun or moon 
may make a great one in the time when the edipse 
shsJl be announced to commence. It ought to be 
remarked, that these are, of all others, the con- 
junctures where observations are most available for 
the determination of data; for, by the same rule 
that a small change in the data will, in such cases, 
produce a great one in the thing to be observed; 
so, vice versdf any moderate amount of error, com- 
mitted in an observation undertaken for ascertaining 
its value, can produce but a very trifling. one in the 
reverse calculation from which the data come to be 
determined by observation. This remark extends 
to every description of physical data in every de- 
partment of science, and is never to be overlooked 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 



215 



when the object in view is the determination of 
data with the last degree of precision. 

(227-) But how, it may be asked, are we to 
ascertain * by observation, data more precise than 
observation itself? How are we to conclude the 
value of that which we do not see, with greater 
certainty than that of quantities which we actually 
see and measure? It is the number of observe' 
ations which may be brought to bear on the deter- 
mination of data that enables us to do this. What- 
ever error we may commit in a single determination, 
it is highly improbable that we should always err 
the same way, so that, when we come to take an 
average of a great number of determinations, (un- 
less there be some constant cause which gives a 
bias one way or the other,) we cannot fail, at 
length, to obtain a very near approximation to the 
truth, and, even allowing • a bias, to come much 
nearer to it than can fairly be expected from any 
single observation, liable to be influenced by the 
same bias. 

(228.) Thb useful and valuable property of the 
average of a great many observations, that it brings 
us nearer to the truth than any single observation 
can be relied on as doing, renders it the most con- 
stant resource in all physical enquiries where accu- 
racy is desired. And it is surprising what a rapid 
effect, in equalizing fluctuations and destroying 
deviations, a moderate multiplication of individual 
observations has. A better example can hardly 
be taken than the average height of the quicksilver 
in the common barometer, which measures the 
pressure of the air, and whose fluctuations are pro- 

p 4 



}j 



216 J>IBCOURSB ON THE STUDY 

verbial. Nevertheless, if we oxAy observe it regik 
larly every day, sad, at the end of each moatfa, 
take an average of the observed heights, we shall 
find the fluctuations surprisingly diminisliEed m 
amount; and if we go on for a whole year» or 
ibr many years in succession, the annual averages 
will be found to agree with still greater exactness. 
This equalizing power of averages, l^ destseybg 
all such fluctuations as are irregular or accidental,, 
frequently enables us to obtain evidence of flniy 
f uations really regular, periodic in their reoDrene^ 
and so much smaller in their amount thaat tfaa 
dental ones, that, but for this mode of 
they never would have become apparent. ThiBr if 
the height of the barometer be observed fbor fiita 
a day, constantly, £6t a few months, and the 
averages taken, it will be seen that a regular dmfy 
fluctuation, of very nnall amount, takes place^ the 
quicksilver rising and falling twice in the iouit-aiid* 
twenty hours. It is by such observaftioiis that 
we are enabled to ascertain— what no siaglenM** 
sure (unless by a fortunate coincidence)^ could ghre 
us any idea, and never any certain knowledge o£— 
the true sea level at any part of the coast, or the 
height at which the water of the ocean woiM 
stand, if perfectly undisturbed by winds, wavca^ 
or tides : a subject oE very great importance, and 
upon which it would be highly desirable to pee* 
sess an extensive series of observations, at a great 
many pmnts on the coasts of the principal cenii* 
nents and islands over the whdte globe. 

(229ii) In all cases where there is a direct and 
simple rdation between the phenomenon obeerred 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 217 

and a single dtxium oa wkidi ii depoids, every 
8m|;le observatioa witt give a value •£ this ^iuuitit}r» 
and the average of all (under eeitain reslarietions) 
will be ita exact value. We say, under certain 
restrictions; &«, if the circnmslances under wUcJk 
the observations are made be not alike^ Aey maf 
juA all be equally favourable to cauiGtnesB» and it 
would be doing injustice to those most advafr- 
tageoui^ to dass them with the rest.. In such 
cases as theae» as well as in cases where the sbto 
are numerous and complicated together^ so aa not 
to admit of singley separate detenniaatiaB (a thing 
of continual occurrence), we have to eatci into 
very nice, and often not a little intricate, con- 
siderations respecting the probaUe nceanej oi oui 
results, or the limits of error within iMidi it is 
pnjbMe they lie. In so doing we are obliged to 
have recourse to a refined and curious branch 
of mathematical enquiry^ called the doctrine of 
probabilities, the object of which (aa its name 
imports) is to reduce our estimation of the pro* 
babilily of any conclusion to calculation, so as to 
be able to give more thaa a mere guess at the 
d^ee of reliance which ought to be pUced in 
it. 

(250.) To give some general idea of the consi- 
derations which such computations involve, let us 
imagine a person firing with a pistol at a wafer on a 
wan ten yards distant : we might, in a general way, 
take it fi>r granted, that he would hit the wall, but 
not the wafer, at the first shot ; but if we would form 
any thing like a probable conjecture a£kno nsorhe 
l^ould come to it, we must first have an idea of his 



218 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

skill. No better way of judging could be devised than 
by letting-him fire a hundred shots at it, and marking 
where they all struck. Suppose this done, — suppose 
the wafer has been hit once or twice, that a certain 
number of balls have hit the wall within an inch of 
it, a certain number between one and two inches, 
and so on, and that one or two have been some feet 
wide of the mark. Still the question arises, what 
estimate are we thence to form of his skill ? how 
near (or nearer) may we, after this experience, 
safely, or at least not unfairly, bet that he will come 
to the mark the next subsequent shot? This the 
laws of probability enable us on such data to say. 
Again, suppose, 56^e we were allowed to measure 
the distances, the wafer were to have been taken 
away, and we were called upon, on the mere evi- 
dence of the marks on the wall, to say where it had 
been placed; it is clear that no reasoning would en- 
able any one to say with certainty ; yet there is as- 
suredly one place which we may fix on with greater 
probability of being right than any other. Now, 
this is a very similar case to that of an observer — 
an astronomer for example — who would determine 
the exact place of a heavenly body. He points 
to it his telescope, and obtains a series of results 
disagreeing among themselves, but yet all agreeing 
within certain limits, and only a comparatively small 
number of them deviating considerably from the 
mean of aU ; and firom these he is called upon to 
say, definitively, what he shall consider to have 
been the most probable place of his star at the 
moment Just so in the calculation of physical 
data; where no two results agree exactly, and 



OP NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 219 

where all come within limits, some wide, some 
dose, what have we to guide us when we would 
make up our minds what to conclude respecting 
them ? It is evident that any system of calcula- 
tion that can be shown to lead of necessity to the 
most probable conclusion where certainty is not 
to be had must be valuable. However, as this doc- 
trine is one of the most difficult and delicate among 
the applications of mathematics to natural philo- 
sof^y, this slight, mention of it must suffice at 
present. \ 

(231.) In the foregoing pages we have endea- 
voured to explain the spirit of the methods to which, 
since the revival of philosophy, natural science has 
been indebted for the great and splendid advances 
it has made. What we have all along most earnestly 
desired to impress on the student is, that natural 
philosophy is essentially united in all its depart- 
ments, through all which one spirit reigns and one 
method of enquiry applies. In cannot, however, be 
studied as a whole, without subdivision into parts ; 
and, in the remainder of this discourse, we shall 
therefore take a summary view of the progress 
which has been made in the different branches into 
which it may be most advantageously so subdivided, 
and endeavour to give a general idea of the nature 
of each, and of its relations to the rest. In the 
course of this, we shall have frequent opportunity 
to point out the influence of those general principles 
we have above endeavoured to explain, on the pro- 
gress of discovery. But this we shall only do as 
cases arise, witiiout entering into any regular 
analysis of the history of each department with that 



9S0 I>ISC<H^ASS ON THB STUDY 

view. Sooh aa analjsia wotd^ indeed^ be a moti 
UBeftd aii4 valiiaUe w^odct but would &r exceed our 
pires^nt limits. We are not, ho«rever>. vithovt a 
hope that this great deaideraliun io Bcience wSk, 
ere loDg> be supplied frcm a quairter evoy wmj 
calculated t» d(^ it jualiec^ 



OF NATUBAL FHILOSOPfir. 281 



PART III. 

OF THE SUBDIVISION OF PRT8ICS INTO ©ISTlNCt 
BRANCHES, Aim THEIR MUTUAL RELATIONS. 

CHAPTEJEl L 

OF THE FHENOMENA OF FORCE, AND OF THE CONSTI- 
TUTION OF NATURAL BODIES. 

(232.) jNTatusal History may be considered in 
tire very different lights: eitker, Isty m a oollectian 
of &ct8 aad dbjects presented by naitiire, fiom the 
fflomwiation, juudysis, and oombinatioB of whidi we 
ac qaip c w iiateFcr Imowtedge-w^ are capaHe of attain- 
ing both of the order of nature, and of the agents riie 
amployB for pododng her ends, and £tom which, 
dieretee, afi sciences arise ; or, 2dly, as an assem- 
blage of phenomena to be expUimed; of effects to 
be deduced from causes; and of materials prepared 
to our handB, &r the application of our principles to 
ns^d purposes. Nalwal faistoiy, therefore, con- 
sidered in the one or the other of these points 
of view, is either the beghming or Ihe end of phy- 
Hcal sctenoe. As it offers to is, in a oonlnsed and 
interwoven mass, the eiements of all oiar Isnowledge, 
oar business is to disentangle, to anange, and to 
present them k a separate and distinct state; and 
to this ^fidwe are called upon to resolve the important 
bat complicated prdbleas — Given the effect, or as- 



222 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

semblage of effects, to find the causes. The principles 
on which this enquiry relies are those which constitute 
tlie relation of cause and effect, as it exists with 
reference to our minds ; and their rules and mode 
of application have been attempted to be sketched 
out, (though in far less detail than the intrinsic 
interest of the subject, both in a logical and prac- 
tical point of view, would demand,) in the fore- 
going pages. It remains now to bring together, in a 
summary statement, the results of the general ex- 
amination of nature, so far as it has been prosecuted 
to the discovery of natural agents, and the mode in 
which they act. 

(233.) The first great agent which the analysis 
of natural phenomena offers to our consideration, 
more frequently and prominently than any other, is 
force. Its effects are either, 1st, to counteract the 
exertion of opposing force, and thereby to maintain 
equilibrium ; or, 2dly, to produce motion in matter. 

(234.) Matter, or that, whatever it be, of which 
all the objects in nature which manifest themselves 
directly to our senses consist, presents us with two 
general qualities, which at first sight appear, to stand 
in contradiction to each other — activity and inertness. 
Its activity is proved by its power of spontaneously 
setting other matter in motion, and of itself obeying 
their mutual impulse, and moving under the influence 
of its own and other force ; inertness, in refusing to 
move unless obliged to do so by a force impressed 
externally, or mutually exerted between itself and 
other matter, and by persisting in its state of motion 
or rest unless disturbed by some external cause. 
Yet in reality this contradiction is only apparent. 



07 NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 223 

Force being the cause, and motion the effect pro- 
duced by it on matter, to say that matter is inert, 
or has meriia^ as it is termed, is only to say that 
the cause is expended in producing its effect, and 
that the same cause cannot (without renewal) pro- 
duce double or triple its own proper effect In this 
point of Tiew, equilibrium may be conceived as a 
continual production of two opposite effects, each 
undoing at every instant what the other has done. 

(235.) However, if this should appear too metaphy- 
sical, at all events this difference of effects gives rise 
to two great divisions of the science of force, which 
are commonly known by the names of Statics 
and Dynamics ; the latter term, which is general, 
and has been used by us before in its generd sense, 
being usually confined to the doctrine of motion, as 
produced and modified by force. Each of these 
great divisions again branches out into distinct sub- 
divisions, according as we consider the equilibrium 
or motion of matter in the three distinct states in 
which it is presented to us in nature, the solid, 
liquid, and aeriform state, to which, perhaps, ought 
to be added the viscous, as a state intermediate be- 
tween that of solidity and fluidity, the consideration 
of which, though very obscure and difiicult, offers a 
high degree of interest on a variety of accounts. 

(236.) The principles both of the statical and 
dynamical divisons of mechanics have been defini- 
tively fixed by Newton, on a basis of sound induction; 
and as they are perfectly general, and apply to every 
case, they are competent, as we have already before 
observed, to the solution of every problem that can 
occur in the deductive processes, by which pheno- 



224* DiscoimsE on the stuot 

mena are to be exfilained, or effects calculated. 
Hence, they andude every questkm that can arise 
respecting tiue motions and rest of the smallest {>ar- 
tides of matter, as welT as of tfaie largest masses. 
But the mode of reasoning from these general prin- 
ciples difficrs materially, whether we consider ikem 
as applied to masses of matter of a sensible uze, or 
to those exoessivdiy minute, and peribtafw indivisible, 
molecules of whidi sudi masses are composed. 
The investigations whidi relate to the latter subject 
are extremely intricate, as they necessarily involve 
the consideration of the hjrpotheses we may form 
jnespecting the intimate constitution of the sevend 
sorts of bodies above enumerated. 

(237.) On the other hand, those which respect the 
equilibrium and motions of sensible masses of matter 
^e happily capable of being so managed as to render 
mmeceisaiy the adoption of any particular hypothesis 
of structure. Thus, in reasoning respecting the sp- 
plication offerees to a solid mass, we suppose its parts 
indissolubly and unalterably connected ; it matters 
not by what tie, provided this condition be satisfied, 
that one p(»nt of it cannot be moved without setting 
idl the rest in motion, so that the relative situation 
of the parts one among another be not diaoged. 
This is the abstract notion of a solid which the me- 
chanician employs in his reasonings. And their con- 
dusions will apply to natural bodies, of course^ only 
so &r as tiiey conform to such a definition. In atrict- 
ness of speaking, however, there are no bodies whic^ 
absolutdy conform to it No substance is knovm 
whose parts are absolutdy incapable of jriddii^ ovie 
among another; but the amount by which they do 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. ^25 

yield is so excessively small as to be demonstrably 
incapable, in most cases, of having any influence 
on the results : and in those where it has such in- 
fluence, an especial investigation of its amount can 
always be made. This gives rise to two subdivisions 
of the application of mechanical reasonings to solid 
masses. Those which refer to the action of forces 
on flexible or elastic, and on inflexible or rigid» 
bodies, comprehending under the latter all such 
whose resistance to flexure or fracture is so ver^ 
great as to permit our adoption of the language and 
ideas of the extreme case without fear of material 
error. 

(238.) In like manner, when we reason respecting 
the action of forces on a fluid mass, all we have 
occasion to assume is, that its parts are freely move- 
able one among the other. If, besides this, we 
choose to regard a fluid as incompressible, and 
deduce conclusions on this supposition, they will 
hold good only so far as there may be found such 
fluids in nature. Now, in strictness, there are none 
such ; but, practically speaking, in the greater number 
of cases their resistance to compression is so very 
great that the result of the reasoning so carried on 
is not sensibly vitiated; and, in the remaining cases, 
the same general principles enable us to enter on a 
special enquiry directed to this point : and hence the 
division of fluids, in mechanical language, into comi- 
pre^sible and incompressible, the latter being only 
the extreme or limiting case of the former. 

(239.) As we propose here, however, only to 
consider what is the. actual constitution of nature, 
we shall regard all bodies, as tliey really ^e, more 

Q 



226 DISCOURSE OV THE "STXJin 

or less flexible and yielding. We -know for certaiHy 
that the space which any material Iboc^ appears to 
occupy is not entirely 'filled by it ; because there is 
none which by the application of a sufficient force 
may not be eompreised or forced into a smaller space, 
and which, either wholly, as in air or liquids, or in 
part, as in the -greater number of solids, will not re- 
cover its former dimensions when the force is taken 
off. In the case of air, this condensation may be 
urged to almost any extent ; and not only does tL 
mass of air «o condensed completely recover its on- 
ginal bulk, when the applied pressure is removed, 
but if that ordinary pressure under which it exists 
at the earth's surface (and which arises from the 
weight of the atmosphere)l)e also removed by an air- 
pump, it will still further dilate itself witihout linnt 
80 far as we have yet been able to try it. Hence 
we are led to the conclusion that the particles of ur 
are mutually elastic, and have a ienidawy to receeb 
from one ano^eTf which can only be counteracted by 
faroe^ and therefore is itself a fbrce of the repulsive 
kind. Nevertheless, as air is heavy, and as gravi- 
tation is a universal property of matter, there is^o 
doubt that this repulsive tendency must hare a 
limit, and that there is a distance to which, if the 
particles of the air could lie removed from eadi 
other, their mutual repulsion woi^ cease, and an 
attractifm take its place. This limit is probably 
attained at some very great heiglht dxnre the earA's 
Burface, beyond whidh, of t:ottrse, its atmosphere 
cannot extend. 

(240i) What, however, we can only condade by 
this or similar reasoning respecting air, we see dKa* 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 2^ 

tiDCtly in liquids. They are all, though m a small de- 
gree, compressible, and recover their former dimen- 
sidns con^letely when ^e pressure is removed ; but 
they cannot be dilated (by mechanical means), and 
liave no tendency, while they remain Hquids, to en- 
brge themselves beyond a certain limit, and there- 
fore they assume a determinate surface while at 
reist, and their parts actufdly resbt further separ- 
ation with a considerable force, thus giving rise to 
the phenomenon of the cokesion €f liquids. 

(24<1.) Both in air and in liquids, however, the 
most |ierfect freedom of motion of the parts among 
each other subsists, which could hardly be the case 
if they were not separate and independent of each 
other. And from this, combined with the foregoing 
considerations, it has been concluded that they do 
not actually touch, but are kept asunder at deter- 
mmate distances from each othor, by the constant 
action of the two forces of attraction and repulsion, 
which are supposed to balance and counteract eadi 
other at thcordinary distances of the particles, but 
to prevail, the one, or the o&er, according as they 
are forcibly tn'ged together or pulled asunder. 

i(24<2.) In solids, however, '^e case is verydifferent. 
The mutual free motion of their parts inter se is 
powerfully impeded, and in some almost destroyed. 
In some, a slow and gradual change of^gure may be 
^odnced t6 a great extent, \ij pressure or blows, 
as for mstance in the metals, day, Imtter, &c. ; in 
others, fhuH^ure is the consequence of any attempt 
to change the figure by violence beyond a certain 
very small Hmit In soUds, then, it is evident, that 
Ibe coniiideration of their intimate structure has a 

q2 



228 DISCOURSE ON, THE STUDY 

very great influence m modifying the general results 
of the action of such attractive and repulsive forces 
as may be assumed to account for the phenomena 
they present ; yet the general facts that their parts 
cohere with a certain energy, and that they resist dis- 
placement or intrusion on the part of other bodies, 
are sufficient to demonstrate at least the existence 
of such forces, whatever obscurity may subsist as to 
their mode of action. 

(243.) This division of bodies into airs, liquids, 
and solids, gives rise, then, to three distinct branches 
of ^lechanical science, in each of which the general 
principles of equilibrium and motion have their pe- 
culiar mode of application ; viz. pneumatics, hydro- 
statics, and what might, without impropriety, be 
termed stereostatics. 

Pneumatics. 

(244.) Pneumatics relates to the equilibrium or 
movements of aerial fluids uader all circumstances 
of pressure, density, and elasticity. The weight of 
the air, and its pressure on all the bodies on the 
earth's surface, were quite unknown to the ancients, 
and only flrst perceived by Galileo, on the occasion 
of a sucking-pump refusing to draw water above a 
certain height. Before his time it had always been 
supposed that water rose by suction in a pipe, in 
consequence of a certain natural abhorrence of a 
vacuum or empty space, which obliged the water to 
enter by way of supplying the place of the air sucked 
out. But if. any such abhorrence existed, and had 
the force of an acting causey which could urge water 
a single foot into a pipe> there is no reason wbj tbe 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 229 

same principle should not cany it up two, three, or 
any number of feet ; none why it should suddenly 
stop short at a certain height, and refuse to rise 
higher, however violent the suction might be, nay, 
even fall back, if purposely forced up too high. 

(245.) Galileo, however, at first contented himself 
with the conclusion, that the nattval abhorrence of 
a vacuum was not strong enough to sustain the 
water more than about thirty-two feet above its 
level ; and, although the true cause of the pheno- 
menon at length occurred to him, in the pressure of 
the air on the general surface, it was not satisfactorily 
demonstrated till his pupil, Torricelli, conceived the 
happy idea of instituting an experiment on a small 
scale by the use of a much heavier liquid, mercury, 
instead of water, and, in place of sucking out the 
air from above, employing the much more efiectual 
method of filling a long glass tube with mercury, 
and inverting it into a basin of the same metal. It 
was then at once seen, as by a glaring instance^ that 
the maintenance of the mercury in the tube (which 
is nothmg else than the common barometer) was the 
effect of a perfectly definite external cause, while its 
fluctuations firom day to day, with tlie varying state 
of the atmosphere, strongly corroborated the notion 
of its being due to the pressure of the external air 
on the surfece of the mercury in the reservoir. 

(246.) The discovery of Torricelli was, however, 
at first much misconceived, and even disputed, till 
the question was finally decided by appeal to a cru- 
cial instance, one of the first, if not/ the very first 
on record in physics, and for which ,wq are indebted 
to the celebrated Pascal. His acuteness p(?jrc^ived 

a 3 



SSO I^ISCOURSB X>N THE STVDY 

that if the weight of the inoumb^t air be the direct 
cau^ of the elevation of the mercury, it must be,< 
measnredby the amount of that elevation, andthere* 
fQte that,by carr3dng a barometer up a highmoui^taiii^ 
and go ascending into the atmosphere above a lai)ge 
portion of the incuoibent air, the pressure, as well 
as the length' of the column sustaiiiedby it, mu9t b^ 
diminished ; while, on the other hand, if the pheno-. 
menon were due to the cause originally asmgned, no 
difference could be expected to take plao^ whether 
the observation were made on a mountam or on the 
]^n. Perhaps the decisive effect of the experiment 
which he caused to be instituted for the purpose, on 
the Puy de Dome, a high mountain in Auveigne, 
while it convinced every one of the truth of Torri* 
celli's views, tended, more powerfully than any thing 
which had previously been done in^ science to con* 
firm, in the minds of men, that di^osition to expe^ 
rimental verification which had scarcely yet Udcen* 
full and secure root* 

(247.). Inmiediately on this discovery followed 
that of the air-pump, by Ottp.von.Gu^ricke of Mag« 
deburgh, whose aim seems to have been. to decide 
the question, whether a vacuum could or could not 
exist, by endeavouring to make one. The imper^ 
fi^ction of his mechanism enabled him only to dimi- 
nish the aerial contents of bis receivers, not entirety 
ta empty them ; but the curious effects, produced by 
even a partial exhaustion of air ^eedily exx^ited a^ 
tantion, and induced our illustrious countiymaiiy 
Robert Boyle, to the prosecution of those expeii- 
iqenta which terminated in his hands, and in those 
of Hauksbee, Hooke^ Mariotte, and other% in ai 



OT NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 281 

fictory knowledge of the general law of the equili* 
braim of the air under the influence of greater or lesa 
pre88«tt<e8. These discoveries have since been ex- 
tended to all the various descriptions of aerial fluid* 
wjiich chemistry has shown to exist, and to main- 
tain their aeriform state under artificial pressure^ 
sad even to those whidi may be produced from 
liquids reduced to a state of vapour by heat» so lon^ 
as. they retain that state. 

(246.) The manner in which the observed law o£ 
equilibrium of an elastic fluid, like air, may be con- 
aidered* to* originiate In the mutual repulsion of its 
particles, has been investigated by Newton, and thee 
actual statement of the law itself, as announced by 
Mariotte, *^ that the density of the air, or the quan- 
ti^ of it contamed in the same sfMce, is» cateris 
p«ri&ia^,proportional to the pressure it 8upp<Hrts/' haa^ 
recently been verified within very extensive limits 
by direct experiment, by a onunittee of the RojFal- 
Academy of Paris» This law contains the principle 
of solution of every dynamical question that can. 
OQCOP relative to the equilibrium of elastic fluids* 
and ia therdbre to be regarded as one of the bluest 
axioms m- the science of pneumatics, 

JBjydrosUiiics^. 

(^9«) The principles of the equilibrium of: 
l^uids, understanding by this word such fluids as do 
not, though quite at liberty, attempt to dilate them* 
s^vea beyond a, certain, point, are at once few and 
simple* The first, steps towards a knowledge of them/ 
wesre made by Archimedes, who established the: 
^^eral fact^ Uuut a solid immersed in. a liquid loses 

Q 4 



232 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

a portion of its weight equal to that of the liquid it 
displaces. It seems very astonishing, after this, that 
it should not have been at once concluded that the 
weight thus said to be lo^ is only counteracted bj 
the upward pressure of the liquid, and that, there- 
fore, a portion of any liquid, surrounded on all sides 
by a liquid of the same kind, does really exert its 
weight in keeping its place. Yet the prejudice that 
<< liquids do not gravitate in their natural place*' 
kept its ground, and was only dispelled with the 
mass of error and absurdity which the introduction 
of a rational and experimental philosophy by Gralileo 
swept away. 

(250.) The hydrostatical law of the equal pres- 
sure of liquids in aU directions, with its train of 
curious and important consequences, is an imme- 
diate conclusion from the perfect mobility of their 
parts among one another, in consequence of which 
each of them tends to recede from an excess of 
pressure on one side, and thus bears upop the rest, 
and distributes the pressure among its neighbours. ' 
In this form it was laid down by Newton, and has ' 
proved one of the most useful and fertile principles 
of physico-mathematical reasoning on the equi- ' 
librium of fluid masses, as affording a means of 
tracing the action of a force applied at any point 
of a liquid through its whole extent. It applies, 
too, without any modification, to expansible fluids 
as well as to liquids; and, in the applications of 
geometry to this subject, enables us to dispense 
with any minute and intricate enquiries as to the 
mode in which individual particles act on each other. 

(251.) In a practical point of view, this law is 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 233 

remarkable for the directness of its application to 
useful purposes. The inunediate and perfect distribu- 
tion of a pressure applied on any one part, however 
small, of a fluid siv&ce through the whole mass, en- 
ables us to communicate at one inaUmt the same pres- 
sure to any number of such parts by merely increasing 
the surface of the fluid, which may be done by 
enlarging the containing vessel ; and if the vessel 
be so constructed that a large portion of its surface 
idiall be moveable together, the pressures on all the 
similar parts of this portion will be united into one 
ocmsentient force, which may thus be increased to 
any extent we please. The hydraulic press, in- 
vented by Bramah, (or rather applied by him af);er 
a much more ancient inventor, Stevin,) is con- 
structed on this principle. A small quantity of 
water is driven by sufficient pressure into a vessel 
akready fuUy and provided with a moveable sur^e 
or piston of great size. Under such circumstances 
something must give way ; the great surface of the 
piston accumulates the pressure on it to such an 
extent that nothing can resist its vidence. Thus, 
trees are torn up by the roots ; piles extracted from 
the earth ; woollen and cotton goods compressed 
into the most portable dimensions ; and even hay, 
for military service, reduced to such a state of 
coercion as to be easily packed on board transports. 
(252.) Liquids differ from aeriform fluids by 
their eohesionj which may be regarded as a kind 
of af^roach to a solid state, and was so regarded 
by Bacon (193.). Indeed, there' can be little doubt 
that the solid, liquid, and aeriform states of bodies 
are merely stages in a progress of gradual tran- 



3S4 pISCOURSB ON THS STUDY 

sition from one extreme to the other; and tbat». 
however strongly marked the distinctions be.tween 
them may j^gear^they ivoll ultimately turn out ta 
he separated by no sudden^ or violent line of de«. 
mai:catiQn, but shade into each other by insens3>le: 
gradations. The lata experiments of Baron Cagpard 
de la<Tour may be regarded as a flrstt step towards, 
the full' demonstration pf this (199.)* But the 
cohesion of liquids is not, lilce that of solid8> so 
mpdifi&d/ by their structiore in other respects as ta. 
destroy the mobility, of their parts one among an- 
other (unless in. those cases of nearer approach to 
the- solid state. whi(^ obtain in. viscid or gummy 
liquids)- On the contrary^ the tiwo qualities co-exist» 
and give risQ to a numbenofl curious, and intricate 

(253.) One of the most remarjiable of these is- 
axillary attraction,, or capillarity as it is sometimea 
called Every body has remarked, the adhesion o£ 
water to gUisa. The elevation of die general surface 
of the liquid where it is in contact with the con- 
taining vessel ; the form of<a drop suspended at the 
under side of a solid : these are instances of capil* 
lary attraotaon* If a small glass, tube with a bore 
as fine as a. hair, be immersed in water^ the water 
wall be observed, to rise in it to a certain height^ 
and to assume a concave surface at its upper ex^ 
tr^mity* The attraction, of the glass on the water» 
and the cohesion of the parts of the water to eadt 
other, are no doubt the joint causes, of thia curious 
effi^ct; but the mode of action is at- once obscure 
and comfdex ; and although the researches of Li^. 
|dM» and Young have thrown great light on it, fur«« 



OF NATURAI. PHILOSOPHY. 2S5 

ther inirestigatioQ seemft necessaiy before we can 
be^ said distinctlj to understand it* 

(254v). As the capillarity and cohesion of the parts 
of liquids shows them to possess the pow^r of 
i^utual attraction, so their elasticity demonstrates 
thtit they also possess that of repulsion when for-, 
cibly brought nearer than their natural state.. From, 
the extremely sipall extent to which the compres- 
sion of liquids can be carried by any force we can. 
employ, compared with that of aii^ w.e must con- 
cli)4e that this repulsion is much mora violent in 
the former than in the latte^r, but counteracted also 
by a ipore powerful force of attraction* So much, 
more powerful, indeed, is. the resistance of liquids 
to compression, that they were usually, regarded as 
incompressible; an opinion corroborated by a. cele- 
brated experiment made at Florence, in which 
water was forced through the pores (as it was said) 
of agolden ball. More reqent experiments by Cantoni 
and since by Ferkins, Oersted, and others, have 
demonstrated howevjer the contrary,, and assigned 
the amount of compression. 

(255») The consideration, of the motions of fluids* 
whether liquid or expansible, is infinitely more com- 
lUcated than that of their equilibrium. When their 
notions are slow, it is. reasonable to suppose tliat 
the law of the equable distribution of pressure ob- 
tains; but in veiy rapid, displacements of their 
parts one among the other, it is not easy tp see how 
such an equable distribution can be accomplished, 
and some phenomena, exist which seem to indicate 
» contrary conclusion. 

(256.) Independent of this,, there are difficulties, 



2S6 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

of an almost insuperable nature to the regular de* 
ductive application of the general principles of 
mechanics to this subject, which arise from the 
excessive intricacy of the pure mathematical en- 
quiries to which its investigation leads. . It was 
Newton who set the example of a first attempt to 
draw any conclusions respecting the motion of fluid 
masses by direct reasoning from dynamical prin* 
ciples, and thus laid the foundation of Hydro- 
dynamics ; but it was not till the time of D'Alem- 
bert that the method of reducing any question 
respecting the motions of fluids under the action 
of forces to strict mathematical investigation could 
be said to be completely understood. But the cases 
even now in which this mode of treating such ques- 
tions can be applied with full satisfaction are few 
in comparison of those in which the experimental 
method of enquiry as already observed (189.) is 
preferable. Such, for example, is that of the re- 
sistance of fluids to bodies moving through them ; 
a knowledge of which is of great importance in 
naval architecture and in gunnery, where the re- 
sistance of the air acts to an enormous extent. 
Such, too, among the practical subjects which de- 
pend mainly on this branch of science, are the use 
of sails in navigation ; the construction of wind-mifls, 
and water-wheels ; the transmission of water throtigli 
pipes and channels ; the construction of docks and 
harbours, &c. 

NaJbare cf Solids in generaL 

(257.) The intimate constitution of solids is, in skll 
probability, very complicated, and we cannot be 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 237 

to know much of it. By some recent delicate ex- 
periments on the dimensions of wires violently 
strained, it has been shown that they are to a 
certain small extent capable of being dilated by 
tension, as they are also of being compressed by 
pressure, but within limits even narrower than those 
of liquids. Usually, when strained too far, they 
break, and refuse to re-unite ; or, if compressed too 
forcibly, take a permanent contraction of dimension. 
Thus, wood may be indented by a blow, and metals 
rendered denser and heavier by hammering or 
roHing. There is a certain degree of confusion 
prevalent in ordinary language about the hardness, 
elasticity, and other similar qualities, of solids, wEich 
it may be well to remove. Hardness is that dis- 
position of a solid which renders it difficult to 
displace its parts among themselves. Thus, steel 
18 harder than iron ; and diamond almost infinitely 
harder than any other substance in nature : but die 
compressibility of steel, or the extent to which it 
will yield to a given pressure and recover itself, is 
not much less than that of sofl iron, and that of 
ice is very nearly the same with that of water. 

(258.) Again, we call Indian rubber a very elastic 
body, and so it is; but in a different sense from 
steel. Its parts admit of great mutual displace- 
ment without permanent dislocation ; however dis- 
torted, it recovers its figure readily, but with a 
small £oirce. Yet, if Indian rubber were to be en- 
dosed in a space that it just filled, so as not to 
permit its parts to yield laterally, doubtless it would 
resist actual compression with great violence. Here, 



238 Discouii&^E aK f he study 

then, we have aft 'instanoe of two kinds orf ela»< 
'ticity in &ne substance-; a feebler -^ffofrt df reoovetf 
iftotn dist6i*ied ligiire, atid a moire Viol^it one from 
'a state otf* altered dii»iensi<$n. Both, howem, ovi- 
.^inate in the satbe cateds, and are r€^el<able to die 
same pirhi'ci{>le8 ; the ^^m^r being In fact only a 
modified caiBe '0f the 'ladtor, as the eSovt of a steel 
sprii^, ^faen 'bent, to rei^ov^ its fi>rmer shi^ is 
referable to ihe same forces which give to steel its 
hardness and strength to resist actual compressioii 
and fhu^ure. 

(259.) The toughness of a 'SdKd, dr that quali^ 
hy \^hi€h it >will endure heavy blows without break* 
big, is again distinct fh)m hardneas tiiouj^ often 
GOhlbunded wkh it. It consists in a certain yielding 
4£ parts with a p^yw^rftH general cohesion, and la 
compatible w^ various degrees of elasticity. Mal- 
lefllbhity is agdb another quality «f scdids, especialfy 
metals, quite distinct from toughnesl^ and dependi 
An their capability of being dqnived of their figure 
without an oflbrt to recov^lr it and without fracture. 

(260.) Tenacity, again, is^a property of solids mote 
directly depending on the 'cohesion of their parts 
than toughness. It donsiMs in their ^Mfwer of renal- 
ing separation by a strain steady applied, while 
the quality of toughness ia materiaily influenced ligr 
their disposition to communicate thfou^ their bqIv 
atance the jarring effect of a bk^. Aooordin^ty^ 
the tenacity of a solid is tt -AkeUt tneasure of lilie 
tohesive attraction of its parts, and Is the befli 
proof df iSie exiatence of sudi a pcrwer* 



on KAtURAL PHILOSOPHY. 239 

(%1.) It cannot be supposed that tliese aifd 
many ddier tangible qualities, as they may be called, 
should subsist 'in solids without a colrespondhig 
mechanism in thebr mtemal structure. That they 
have such a medianism, and that a very otdrious and 
intricate one, the phenomena of crystallograplQr 
sufficiently diow. This interesting and beautifiil 
department of naturid science is of comparatively 
very modevn date. That many natiu*al substances 
affected certain forms must have been Imown from 
the earliest times. Pliny appears to have been ac- 
quainted with this faCtf at least in some instances, 
as he describes the forms df quartz and diamond. 
But tin the time df Linnaeus no material attention 
seems to have been bestowed on the subject. He, 
liowever, observed, and described with care, the 
crystalline forms of a variety of substances, and even 
regarded them as so definite a character of the 
solids which assumed tSiem, that he supposed every 
particular form to be gener£(ted by a particular salt. 
Kom6 de lisle pursued the study of the crystalline 
forms of bodies yet farther. He first ascertained 
the important &ct of the constancy of the angles 
at which their fkceB meet ; and observing further 
ihut many of them arppear in several different shapes, 
first conceived the idea that these shapes might 
l>e reducible to one, appropriated in a peculiar 
Iftfionner to eadh stAstance, and modified by strict 
geometrical laws. Bergmann, reasoning on a fact 
imparted to him by his pupil Gahn, made a yet* 
greater step, and showed how at least one iSpecies 



240 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

of crystal might be built up of thin lamins ranged 
in a certain order, and following certain rules of 
superposition. He failed, however, in deducing just 
and general conclusions from this remark, which, 
correctly viewed, is the foundation of the most im- 
portant law of crystallography, that which connects 
the primitive form with other forms capable of being 
exhibited by the same substance, by a certain 
fixed relation. An idea may be formed of what is 
meant by this sort of connection of one form with 
another, by considering a pointed pyramid built 
up of cubic stones, disposed in layers, each of 
which separately is a square plate of the thickness 
of a single stone. These layers, laid horizontally 
one on the other, and decreasing regularly in size 
from the bottom to the top, produce a pyramidal 
form with a rough or channeled surface ; and if the 
layers are so extremely thin that the channels cease 
to be visible to the eye, the pyramid will seem 
smooth and perfect. 

(262.) Very shortly after this, and without 
knowledge of what had been done by Gahn and 
Bergmann, the Abb6 Hauy, instructed by the ac* 
cidental fracture of a fine groupe of crystals, made 
the remark noticed already (in 67-), and reasoning 
on it with more caution and success, and pucw 
suing it into all its detail, developed the general 
laws which regulate the superposition of the layers 
of particles of which he supposes all crystals to 
be built up, and which enable us, from, knowing 
their primitive forms, to discover, previous to trial, 
what other forms they are capable of assuming; 
and which, according to this idea, are called deriv- 



OF NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 241 

ative or secondary forms. Mohs and others have 
since imagined processes and systems by which the 
derivation of forms from each other is facilitated^ 
and have corrected some errors of over-hasty gener- 
alization into which their predecessors had fallen, 
as well as advanced, by an extraordinary diligence 
of research, our knowledge of the forms which the 
various substances which occur in nature and art 
actually do assume. 

(263.) In what manner a variety in point of ex* 
temal form may originate in a variety qf figures 
in the ultimate particles of which a solid is com- 
posed, may very readily be imagined by considering 
what would happen if the bricks of which an edifice 
is constructed had all a certain leaning or bias in 
one direction out of the perpendicular. Suppose 
every brick, for instance, when laid flat on its fiice, 
with its longer edges north and south, had its eastern 
and western &ces upright, but its northern and 
southern ones leaning southwards at a certain in* 
dination the same for each brick; a house built 
of such bricks would lean the same way, if the 
bricks fitted well together. If, besides this, the 
eastern and western faces of the bricks, instead of 
being truly upright, had an inclination eastward, the 
house would have a similar one, and all its four 
comers, instead of being upright, would lean to the 
south-east. Suppose, instead of a house, a pyramid 
were built of such oblique bricks, with the sides of 
its base directed to the four points of the compass ; 
then its point, instead of being situated vertically 
over the centre of its base, would stand perpendi- 
cularly over some point to the south-east of that 

s 



242 lXt8COURS£ ON tHB STUDY 

centre, and the pyramid itaelf would hiive its aides 
'&cing the south and the east, more highly inclinad 
to the horizon than those towards the north and 
wost. 

(264.) Whatever conception we naay form of the 
manner in which the particles of a crystal cohese 
and form masses, it is next to impossible to- divest 
ourselves of the idea of a determinate figure eom- 
mon to them all. Any other su^^sition^ indeed, 
would be incompatible with that exact similarity in 
all other ivespects which the phenomena of chemistry 
may be considered as having demonstrated* How- 
ever, it must be borne m mind that this idea, plau- 
sible as it may appear, is yet in some degree hypo- 
thetical, and that the laws of crystallogr^fihy, as 
determined from inductive observation, are quite 
independent of any supposition of the kind, or even 
of the existence of such things as ultimate particles 
or atoms at all. 

(265.) Still, that peculiar internal constitution of 
solid bodies, whatever it be, which is indicated by 
the assumption of determinate figures, by their 
splitting easier in some directions than in otheiBy 
and by their presenting glittering plime surfiu^es 
when broken into fragments, cannot but have an 
important influence on all their relatious to external 
agents, as well as to their internal movementa and 
the mutual actions of their parts on one another. 
Accordingly, the division of bodies into crystallized 
and uncrystallized, or imperfectly crystallized, is 
' one of the most universal importance ; and ahnoat 
all the phenomena produced by those more intimate 
natural causes which act within small limits^ and as 



X>T STATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 245 

it were an the ioimediate medbanisa of solid tub. 
stances, are remarkably modified by their cryttalline 
ftrocture. Thusi in transparent aoUda, the course 
taken by the rays of light, in traversing them, aa 
weH as the properties impressed upon them in so 
doing, are indmately connected with this structure 
The recent experiments of M. Savart, too, have 
proved that this is also the case with their power 
of resistance to external force, on which depends 
their elasticity. Crystallized substances, according 
to the results of these experiments, resist compres- 
sion with different degrees of elastic force, according 
to the direction in which it is attempted to compress 
thfin ; and all the phenomena dependent on their 
dbisticity are affected by this cause, especially those 
which relate to their vibratory movements and their 
conveyance of sound. 

(266.) There can be little doubt that modifica- 
tions, similarly depending on the internal structure 
of crystals, will be traced through every depart- 
ment of physics. In that interesting one whidi 
relates to the action of heat in expandii^ the 
dimensions of substances, a beginning has already 
beien made by Professor Mitscherlich. It had long 
been known that aQ substances are dilated by heat, 
and no exception to this law has been found, so 
Icmg as we regard the buR of the heated body. 
Thus, an iron rod when hot is both longer and 
thicker than when cold ; and the difference of di- 
mensiont though but trifling in itself, is yet capable 
of being, made sensible, and is of considerable con- 
se^ence in engineerii^ Thxis, too, ^e quicksilver 
in 8 common thermometer occupies a larger i^ace 

R 2 



2M DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

when hot than when cold; and being confined by 
the glass ball, (which also expands, but not 90 muck 
m prcpariian,) it is forced to rise in the tube. These 
and similar facts had long been known ; and accu- 
rate measures of the total amount of dilatation of 
a variet J of different bodies, under similar accessions 
of heat, had been obtained and registered in tables. 
But no one had suspected the important fact, that 
this expansion in crystallized bodies takes place 
under totally different circumstances from what 
obtains in uncrystallized ones. M. Mitscherlich has 
lately shown that such substances expand differently 
in different directions, and has even produced a 
case in which expansion in one direction is actually 
accompanied with contraction in another. This 
step, the most important beyond a doubt whidi 
has yet been made in pjrrometry, can however only 
be regarded as the first in a series of researches 
which will occupy the next generation, and which 
promises to afford an abundant harvest of new 
facts, as well as the elucidation of some of the 
most obscure and interesting points in the doctrine 
of heat. 

(267.) From what has been said, it is clear that if 
we look upon solid bodies as collections o£ particles 
or atoms, held together and kept in their places by 
the perpetual action of attractive and repulsive 
forces, we cannot suppose these forces, at least in 
crystallized substances, to act alike in all directions. 
Hence arises the conception afpolarityj of which we 
see an instance, on a great scale, in the magnetic 
needle, but which, under modified forms, there b 
nothing to prevent us from conceiving to act among 



07 NATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 245 

the ultimate atoms of solid or even fluid bodies, 
and to produce all the phenomena which they 
exhibit in their crystallized state, either when acting 
on each other, or on light, heat, &c It is not di£B- 
cult, if we give the reins to imagination, to conceive 
how attractive and repulsive atoms, bound together 
by some unknown tie, may form little machines or 
compound particles, which shall have many of the 
properties which we refer to polarity ; and accord- 
ingly many ingenious suppositions have been made 
to that effect : but in the actual state of science it 
is certainly safest to wave these hypotheses, without 
(lowever absolutely rejecting them, and regard the 
polarity of matter as one of the ultimate phenomena 
to which the analysis of nature leads us, and of 
which it is our business fully to investigate the laws, 
before we endeavour to ascertain its causes, or trace 
the mechanism by which it is produced. 

(268.) The mutual attractions and repulsions of the 
particles of matter, then, and their polarity, idiether 
regarded as an original or a derivative property, are 
the forces which, acting with great energy, and 
within very confined limits, we must look to as the 
principles on which the intimate constitution of all 
bodies and many of their mutual actions depend. 
These are what are understood by the general term 
o£ molecular farces. Molecular attraction has been 
attempted to be confounded by some with the 
general attraction of gravity, which all matter exerts 
on all other matter ; but this idea is refuted by the 
plainest &cts. 



R 3 



3i6 DISCOURSX ON THB STUDT 



CHAP. IL 

OF THB COMHUNICATION OF MOTION THROUGH 
BODIBS. — OF SOUND AND LIGHT. 

(^9») Thb propagatioB of motion throHgli all nl^ 
stanoes, whether of a single inpulaey aa a blow or 
thrust, or of one frequently and regularlj repeated^ 
such as a jarring or vibratory movenMnV depends 
wholly on these molecular forcea; and it is on sock 
propagation that sound and rery probably li^t de- 
pend. To conceive the manner inwhicba motion may 
be conveyed from one part of a substance to another, 
whether solid or fluid, we may attend to what takes 
place when a wave is made to run along a streCdied 
string, or the surfkee c^ stiU water. Eveiy part of 
the string, or water, is in succession moved fima its 
]^ace, and agitated with a motion ttn^ar to thaft af 
the original impulse, leaving its place and re^ammg 
to it, and when one part ceases to move the next 
receives as it were the impression^ and forwards it 
onward. This may seem a slow and cvcuitoua ptf^ 
cess in description ; but when sound, fyr examplei m 
conveyed through the air, we are to conrider, lat, 
that the air, the substance actmdly in motran, » eie* 
tremely light and acted upon by a very pcrweiM 
elasticity, so that the force whidi propagates tlie 
motion, or by which the particles adjacent aet an^ 
and urge forward, each other, is very great, compared 
with the quantity of materials set in motion by it : 



or KATURAt PHILOSOPHT. ^7 

8Ddthe some is trae, even in a greater degree, in 
liquids and solids ; for in these the elastic forces 
are eren g^eat^, in proportion to the weight, than 
inaff. 

(370.) A general notion of the mode in which 
sounds are conveyed through the air was not alto- 
gether deficient among the ancients; but it is to 
Newton that we owe the first attempt to analyze 
the process, and ^ow correctly what takes place in 
the Gommunication of motion from particle to par- 
ticle. Reasoning on the properties of the air as an 
elastic body, be showed the effect of an impulse on 
uty portion of it to consist in a condensation of 
the air immediately adjacent in the direction of the 
ilBpBlse, wfaidn then, re-acting by its ^ing, drives 
hack tber portion which had advanced to its original 
place, and an the same time urges forward the por- 
tbn beftre it, hy the direction of the impulse, so 
that every particle c^ternately advances and retreats. 
Bat, i» pursuing this idea into its details, Newton 
feR into some errors which were pointed out by 
Ctamer, tho«igh their origin was not traced, nor the 
reasoning cdrrected, tffl the subject was resumed by 
Lagrange and Euler i nor is this any impeachment 
of the penetration of our immortal coxmtryman. The 
maOieniaieical theory of the propagation of sound, 
and of vibratory and undulatory motions in general, 
ia one of the utmost intricacy ; and, in spite of every 
excxtion <m the part of the most expert geometers, 
ctmtxnaefA to this day to give continual occasion for 
fireah researches; while phenomena are constantly 
preaenting lliemselves, which show how fkr we are 
firom being able to deduce all the particulars, even 

R 4t 



248 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

^of cases comparatively simple, by any direct reason- 
ing from first principles. 

(271.) Whenever an impulse of any kind is con- 
veyed by the air, to our ears, it produces the im- 
pression of sound; but when such an impulse is 
regularly and uniformly repeated in extremdy rapid 
succession, it gives us that of a musical note, the 
pitch of the note depending on the rapidity of the 
succession (see art. 153.). The sense of harmony, 
too, depends on the periodical recurrence of coinci- 
dent impulses on the ear, and affords, perhaps, the 
only instance of a sensation for whose pleasing im- 
pression a distinct and intelligible reason can be 
assigned. 

(272.) Acoustics, then, or the science of sound, 
is a very considerable branch of physics, and <me 
which has been cultivated from the earliest ages. 
Even Pythagoras and Aristotle were not ignorant of 
the general mode of its transmission through the 
air, and of the nature of harmony ; but as a branch 
of science, independent of its ddightful implication 
m the art of music, it could be hardly said to exist, 
till its nature and laws became a matter of experi- 
mental enquiry to Bacon and Galileo, Mersenne and 
Wallis ; and of mathematical investigation to Newton, 
and his illustrious successors, Lagrange and Euler. 
From that time its progress, as a branch both of 
mathematical and experimental science, has been 
constant and accelerated. A curious and beantifol 
method of observation, due to Chladni, consists in 
the happy device of strewing sand over the surftoes 
of bodies in a state of sonorous vibration, and mark- 
ing the figures it assumes. This has made their 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 24^9 

• 

motions susceptible of ocular examination, and has 
been lately much improved on, and varied in its ap- 
plication, by M. Savart, to whom we also owe a sac- 
cession of instructive researches on every point 
connected with the subject of sound, which may 
rank among the finest specimens of modem experi- 
mental enquiry. But the subject is &r from being 
exhausted ; and, indeed, there are few branches of 
physics which promise at once so much amusing in- 
terest, and such important consequences, in its 
bearings on other subjects, and especially, through 
the medium of strong analogies, on that of light. 

Light cofid Vision. 

" (273.) The nature of light has always been involved 
in considerable doubt and mystery. The andients 
could scarcely be said to have any opinion on the 
subject, unless, indeed, it could be considered such 
to affirm that distant bodies could not be put into 
communication without an intermedium ; and that, 
therefore, there must be something between the eye 
and the thing seen. What that something is, how- 
ever, they could only fqjrm crude and vague con- 
jectures. One supposed that the eyes themselves 
emit rays or emanations of some unknown kind, by 
which distant objects are as it were felt ; a singularly 
imfortunate idea, since it gives no reason why 
objects should not be equally well seen in the dark — 
no account, in short, of the part performed by Ught 
ill vision. Others imagined that aU visible objects are 
constantly throwing out from them, in all directions, 
fiome sort of resemblances or spectral forms of 
themselves, which, when received by the eyes, 



250 DISCOURSE ON THB STUST 

prodoee an impremion of the objects. Vague aaA 
cfamsy as this hypothesis olnrioiiily isi it asstgns fttf 
the object a power, and to Hght a diffinive prop^ 
gation in all directions^ which are^ the one and the 
etheTy ndependent of otir eyes, and therefore goes 
to separate the phercmeiHi of Hght from lihose of 
vinbfi. 

(274.) The hypothesis of Newton is a nefinemenl 
and improvement on this idea. Instead of spectra er 
resemblances, he soppoites Imninous olqecfet actmdfy 
to dart ooC from them in all cGarectian% pert idee of 
inconceiTd)le minoteness (as indeed they moat be^ 
having such an enormous velocity (see 17.)i not to 
dash in pieces every thing they str&e upon). These 
partifdcs he supposes to he acted upon by attrws^e 
and repulsive forces^ residing m ail matoni bodie8» 
the latter eiEtending to some very smaH cystonee 
beyond theht sur&ces; and by the aetkm of these 
ftvcevtobetmmed smde from tiieir natural straigfae« 
lived coarse, without ever comiog in actual eontaet 
with the particles themselves of the bodies on whidi 
they M, but ei^ier being turned back and r^tdtA 
by the repolscre forces before they reach them^ er 
peaetradng between their intervafe, as a bkd nay 
be supposed to fty through the braocfaea of a fbmt, 
and aodergoidg aU their action^ to take at ^littinif 
them a direction finaly determiaed by the peaitisBi 
of the sudbee at wlffch they emeige widi reelect 
to dieir course* 

(27&) This hypothesis^ whidr was dfecuseed sni 
reasoned upon by Newton in a maimer worttay ef 
kimscAi^ aflbvdi^ by the applieatiQa of the saase 
dynamicd laws which he had ap^ied with so much 



OF KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 251 

suceefls to tbe ex{^aiiation of the planetaiy ]iiotioii9» 
not merely a plauubley but a perfectly reasonable 
asEid iak explanation of all the usual phenoBaena of 
l%ht kzHywB in bis time. His own beautiiiil di»- 
ooveriesy too^ of the different refrangilHlities of 
the differently cc^ured rays^ were perfectly well 
repreflented in this theory, by simply admitting a 
difference of velocity in the particles, which produce 
in the eye the sensations of different colours. And had 
the properties of light remained c(»fined to these* 
there would have been no occasion to have resorted 
to any other mode of conceiring it. 

(276.) A very different hypothests had» however, 
beea anggested about the same period by Hiiyghens». 
who supposed l^t to be produced in th« same 
manner with sound, by the cemnianicatioQ of ai 
vHnatoty motion from tbe himinous body to a 
higtkly elastic fluid, which he imagined as fitting all 
sfNtce^ and as being less condensed within the Uiotta 
of qpaceooGUf^edby matter, and that to a grei^er or 
leaa extent, acceding to the nature of the occupying 
aabslanee* Thus, in place of any thing actually 
thrown oS, he substituted wavesy or vibrations, pro- 
pagated ki an directions from luminous bodies^ 
through thoB medium^ or ether, as he called it. 
Huyghens> being himsdf a consummate mathenui* 
tftdm,. was enidiled to trace many of the conse- 
qtiencet of this hypothesis* and to show that the 
ordinary krars of reflectien and refraction were repre- 
sented ot aceonnted&r by it,as well asby Newton'a 
But the hirypothesis of Hayghens has not been iUly 
saocessfoL in accountmg ^r what may be conal- 
diered the dzief of aU optical £icts, the production of 



252 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDT 

colours in the ordinary refraction of light by a prism, 
of which the theory of Newton gives a complete 
and elegant explanation; and the discovery of 
which by him marks one of the greatest epochs in 
the annals of experimental science. This, which has 
been often urged in objection to it, renuuns still, 
if not quite unanswered, at least only imperfectly 
removed. 

(277.) Other phenomena, however, were not 
wantmg to afford a further trial of the estplanatory 
jfoiDers of either h3rpothesis. The di£Fraction or 
inflection of light, discovered by Grimaldi, a Jesuit 
of Bologna, seemed to indicate that the rays of 
light were turned aside from their straight course 
by merely passing near bodies of every descrip- 
tion. These phenomena, which are very curious 
and beautiful, were minutely examined by Newton, 
and referred by him to the action of repulsive forces 
extending to a sensible distance from the surfaces 
of bodies ; and his explanation, so &r as the facts 
known to him are concerned, appears as satisfactoiy 
as could reasonably be then expected; and much 
more so than anything which could at that time be 
produced on the side of the hypothesis of Huy- 
ghens, which, in fact, seemed incapable of giving 
any account whatever of them. 

(278.) Another class of delicate and splendid 
optical phenomena, which had begun to attract at- 
tention somewhat previous to Newton's time, seemed 
fo leave both hypotheses equally at a loss. These 
were the colours exhibited by very thin filni8» 
either of a liquid (such as a soap-bubble), or of air» 
as when two glasses are laid together with only air 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 253 

between them. These colours were examined by 
Newton with a minuteness and care altogether un- 
exampled in experimental philosophy at that time, 
and with which few researches undertaken since 
willbear to stand in competition. Their result was 
a theory of a very singular nature, which he 
grounded on an hjrpothesis of what he termed fiu 
tf easy tnnumission and reflection; and which sup- 
posed each ray of light to pass in its progress 
periodically through a succession of states such as 
would alternately dispose it to penetrate or be 
reflected back from the surface of a body on which 
it might isill. The simplest way in which the reader 
may conceive this hjrpothesis, is to regard every 
particle of light as a sort of little magnet revolving 
rapidly about its own centre while it advances in its 
course, and thus alternately presenting its attractive 
and repulsive pole, so that when it arrives at the 
sur&ce of a body with its repulsive pole foremost, 
it is repelled and reflected ; and when the contrary 
attracted, so as to enter the sur&ce. Newtoi^ 
however, very cautiously avoided announcing his 
theory in this or any similar form, confining himselit 
entirely to general language. In consequence, it 
has been confidently asserted by all his followers, 
that the doctrine of fits of easy reflection and trans- 
mission, as laid down by him, is substantially nothing 
more than a statement of facts. Were it so, it is 
dear that any other theory which should offer a 
just account of the same phenomena must ultimately 
involve and coincide with that of Newton. But 
this, as we shall presently see, is not the case ; and 
this instance ought to serve to make us extremely 



2B4t JDI8COUI18E ON THE STUDY 

cautious how we evo^oy, iu stating physical lavs 
derived from experizueut, language whiph invoLyai 
any thing iu the slightest degree theoretical, if we 
would present the laws themselves in a form which 
no future research shall modify or subvert 

(279.) A third class of optical phenomena, whidi 
were likewise discovered while Newton was yet 
engaged in his c^tical researches, was that exhibited 
by doubly refracting crystals. In what the pheno- 
menon of double refraction consists, we have idready 
had occasion to explain. The fact itself was first 
noticed by Erasmus Bartolin in the crystal caUed 
Iceland spar; and was studied with attention by 
Huyghens, who ascertained its laws, and referred it 
with remarkable ingenuity and success to his theory 
of light, by the additional hypothesis of such a con- 
6tituti<xi of his ethereal medium within the crystal 
as should enable it to convey an impulse &ster in 
one direction than another: as if, for example's 
sake, we should suppose a sound conveyed throi;^h 
the air with different degrees of rapidity in a ver- 
tical and horizontal direction, 

(280.) Some remarkable &ct8 accompanying the 
Rouble refraction produced by Iceland spar, which 
Bartolin, Huyghens, and Newton, had observed, led 
the latter to conceive the singular idea that a ray of 
li^t after its emergence from such a oystal accjuires 
sidest that is to say, distinct relations to surrounding 
space^ which it carries with it through its whole 
subsequent course, and which give rise to all thoae 
curious and complicated phenomena which are now 
known under the name of the pohrizaiiom rf UghL 
These results, however, appeared so extraordinaij. 






OV VATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 255 

and o&ced so littie handle for iRirdier enquiij, thai 
Iheir examination dropped, as if bjr common am* 
sent; Newton himself resting content wi& urging 
•tmiDgly the appasent incompatibility of these pro* 
perties witii tbe Hnyghenian doctrine, but without 
making any aittempt to exjdain them by his own. 

(d6L) From the period of Newton's optical dis* 
floveries to the eommenoement of the present cen- 
tury, no great accession to our knowledge of the 
nature of light was made, if we except one, 
viuch, from its invaluable practical appUcatioa, 
must ever hold a prominent place in the annals both 
ef art and science : we mean, the discovery of the 
prindpie of the adbromatic tdiescope, which on* 
ginated in a discussion between the celebrated 
geomet^' Euler, Elingenstiema, an eminent Swedidi 
jMosopker, and omr own countryman, the admbaUe 
optician DoUond, on the occasion of certain abatmet 
theoretical invei^gations of the former, which led 
him to speculate on its pombiUty, and which idti* 
mately terminated in its complete and happy «»^ 
euHon by tihe latter ; a memorable case in science, 
though not a aingular one, where the speculative 
geometer in his chamber, apart from die world, 
and existing among abstractions, has originated 
tiews of the noUest practical application.* 

(282.) Hie explanation which our knowledge of 
(^tical laws affi)rd8 of the mechanism of the eye, and 
l^e process by which vision » performed, is as com* 

* There seems no doubt, howeTer, that an achromatic 
telescope had been constructed by a private amateur, a Mr. 
Han. tome time before either Euler or Dollond ever thought 
ofU. 






256 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

plete and satisfactory as that of hearing by the propa- 
gation of motion through the air. The camera ob- 
scura, invented by Baptista Porta in 1560, gave the 
first idea how the actual images of extanal objects 
might be conveyed into the eye, but it was not tiE 
after a considerable interval that Kepler, the im- 
mortal discoverer of those great laws which regu- 
late the periods and motions of the planets, pointed 
out distmctly the i^ces performed by the severd 
parts ot the eye in the act of vision. From this to 
the invention of the telescope and microscope 
there would seem but a small step, but it is to acci- 
dent rather than design that it is due ; and its re- 
invention by Galileo, on a mere description of iti 
effects, may serve, among a thousand simflar in- 
stances^ to show that inestimable practical iqvpli- 
cations lie open to us, if we can only once brk^ 
ourselves to conceive their possibility, a lesson, 
which the invention of the achromatic telescope it- 
self, as we have above related it, not less strongly 
exemplifies. 

. (283.) The little instrument with whidi GalSeo'a 
splendid discoveries were made was hardOiy sape*- 
rior in power to an ordinary finder of the present day; 
but it was rapidly improved on, and in the hands a£ 
Huyghens attained to gigantic dimensions and very 
great power. It was to obviate the necessity of the 
enormous length required for these telescopes, and 
yet secure the same power, that Gregory and Newtoa 
devised the reflecting telescope, which has since 
become a much more powerful instrument than its 
original inventors probably ever contemplated. 
(284.) The telescope, as it exists at present, with 



OV NATURAL PHZLOSOFHY. !3S7 

the improvemeiits m its wiiucture and execution 

which modern artists hare effected^ nuist assuredly 

be ranked among the higliest and most refined 

fnednctions of hnnuui art; diat in whidi mas has 

tiecn able to appronrimate more dosety to the 

vorkmanship of nature and whidi has oonfenred 

4ipQn him, if not another sense, at least an exalt- 

atam of one alreadjr possessed bj him that merits 

ahnost to be regarded as a new oie. Nor does it 

appear jet to bare raKhed its ultimate perfection, 

to which indeed it is difficult to assign any bounds, 

when we tid^e into coosideratiaB the wonderM 

progress which workraanahip of every kind is 

laai^ng, and the delicacy, £ur superior to that of 

former times, with whidi materials may now be 

wrmight, as wdl as the ingenioas inventions and 

QombinationB which every year is bringing forth 

for accomplishing the same ends by means hitherto 

unattempted. * 

(285.) After a long torpor, the knowledge of the 
properties of li^t began to make firesb progress 
skoat tibe end of the last century, adirancmg with 
$m aecderated rapidity, which has conthmed un- 
abated to the present time* The example was set 
by ovor kite admirable and lamented oomdayman, 

* W^ nlhl^** *" *^ rarimtly invented aghi-BWMtig cnmhana^nf^f 

at Messrs* Barlow and Rogers, and the dense glasses of 
DvMch Mr. Faraday has recently explained the manufacture in 
B memoir AiU of the most beautiful examples of delicate and 
sncceasfid dbmeicaiL manipulation, and which promise to give 
xSae to » new era in optical practioe, by wbicb tiie next gene.' 
ntioa at ]«ast may benefit. See Phil. Tnuu. issa 

S 



258 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

Dr. WoUaston, who re-examined and verified the 
laws of double refraction in Iceland spar announced 
by Huyghens. Attention. being thus drawn to the 
subject, the geometry of Laplace soon found a means 
of explaining at least one portion of. the mystery 
of this singular phenomenon, by the Newtonian 
theory of light, applied under certain supposed con- 
ditions ; and the reasoning which led him to the re- 
sult (at that time quite unexpected), may justly be 
regarded as. one of his happiest efforts. The pro- 
secution of the subject, which had now acquired a 
high degree of interest, was encouraged by the offer 
of a prize on the part of the French Academy of 
Sciences ; and it was in a memoir which received this 
honourable reward on that occasion, in 1810, that 
Malus, a retired officer of engineers in the Frendi 
army, announced the great discovery of itie polarizer 
turn of light by ordinary reflection at the sur&ce of 
a transparent body. 

(286.) Malus found that when a beam of light is 
reflected from the surface of such a body at a certain 
angle, it acquires precisely the same singular pro- 
perty which is impressed upon it in the act of double 
refraction, and which Newton had before expressed 
by saying that it possessed sides. This was the first 
circumstance which pointed out a connection be- 
tween that hitherto mysterious phenomenon and 
any of the ordinary modifications of light ; and it 
proved ultimately the means of bringing the whole 
within the limits, if not of a complete explanatioa» 
at least of a highly plausible theoretical represent^ 
ation. So true is, in science, the remark of Bacon, 



- > 



07 NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 259 

that no natural phenomenon can be adequately 
studied in . itself ahney but, to be understood, must 
be considered as it stands connected with allnature. 

(287.) The new class of phenomena thus disclosed 
Were immediately studied with diligence and suc- 
cess, both abroad by Mains and Arago, and at 
home by our countryman Dr. Brewster, and their 
laws investigated with a care proportioned to their 
importance ; when another and apparently still more 
extraordinary class of phenomena presented itself 
in the production of the most vivid and beautiful 
colours (every way resembling those observed by 
Newton in thin films of air or liquids, only infinitely 
more developed and striking,) in certain transparent 
crystaUized substances, when divided into flat plates 
in particular directions, and exposed in a beam of 
polarized light. The attentive examination of these 
colours by WoUaston, Biot, and Arago, but more 
especially by Brewster, speedily led to the disclosure 
of a series of optical phenomena so various, so 
brilliant, and evidently so closely connected with the 
most important points relating to the intimate struc- 
ture of crystallized bodies, as to excite the highest 
interest, — that sort of interest which is raised when 
we feel we are on the eve of some extraordinary 
discovery, and expect every moment that some lead- 
ing fact will turn up, which will throw light on all 
that appears obscure, and reduce into order all that 
seems anomalous. 

(288.) This expectation was not disappointed* 
So long t)efore the time we are speaking of as the 
first year of the present century, our illustrious 

s 2 



W(i DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

countryman, the late Dr. Thomas Young, had esta- 
blished a principle in optics, which, regarded as a 
physical law, has hardly its equal for beauty, sim- 
plicity, and extent of application, in the whole circle 
of science. Considering the manner in which the 
vibrations of two musical soimds arriving at once at 
the ear affect the sense with an impression of sound 
or silence according as they conspire or oppose 
each other's effects, he was led to the idea that 
the same ought to hold good with light as with 
sound, if the theory which makes light analogous to 
sound be the true one ; and that, therefwe, two raya 
of light, setting off from the same origin, at the same 
instant, and arriving at the same place by different 
routes, ought to strengthen or wholly or partially 
destroy each other's effects according to the differ- 
ence in length of the routes described by them« 
That two lights should in any circumstances com- 
bine to produce darkness may be considered strange, 
but is literally true; and it had even been noticed 
long ago as a singular and unaccountable &ct by 
Grimaldi, in his experiments on the inflection a£ 
light. * The experimental means by which Dr. Young 
confirmed this principle, which is known in optics 
by the name of the inteiferenc^ of the rays of Kght, 
were as simple and satis&ctory as the principle 
itself is beautiful; but the verifications of it, drawn 
firom the explanation it affords of phenomena appa- 
rently the most remote, are still more so. Newton*a 
colours of thin films were the first phenomena to 
which its author ^plied it with full success. Its 
next remarkable application was to those of diffirao- 



OF KATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 261 

£on, of which, in the hands of M. Presnel, a late 
eminent French geometer, it also furnished a com* 
plete expknation, and that, too, in cases to which 
Newton's hypothesis could not apparently be madd 
to apply, and through a con plication of circum- 
stances which might afford a very severe test of 
any h3rpothe8is. 

(289.) A simple and beautiful experiment on the 
interferences of polarized light due to Fresnel and 
Arago enabled them to bring Dr. Young's law to 
bear on the colours produced by crystallized plates 
in a polarized beam, and by so doing afforded a 
key to all the intricacies of these magnificent but 
complex phenomena. Nothing now was wanting to 
a rational theory of double refraction but to frame 
an hypothesis of some mode in which light might 
be conceived to be propagated through the elastic 
medium supposed to convey it in such a way as not 
to be contradictory to any of the fiicts, nor to 
the general laws of dynamics. This essential idea, 
without which every thing that had been before 
done would hare been incomplete, was also fur-> 
nished by Dr. Young, who, with a sagacity which 
would have done honour to Newton himself, had 
declared, that to accommodate the doctrine of 
Huyghens to the phenomena of polarized light it is 
necessary to conceive the mode of propagation of 
a luminous impulse through the ether, differently 
from that of a sonorous one through the air. In the 
latter, the particles of the air advance and recede 3 
in the former, those of the ether must be supposed 
to irembie laterally. 

s 3 



262 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

(290.) Taking this as the groundwork of hig 
reasoning, Fresnel succeeded in erecting on it a 
theory of polarization and double r^*action, so 
happy in its adi^itation to facts, and in the coin- 
cidence with experience of results deduced from it 
by the most intricate analysis, that it is difficult to 
conceive it unfounded. If it be so, it is at least the 
most curiously artificial system that science has yet 
witnessed ; and whether it be so or not, so long as 
it serves to group together in one comprehensive 
point of view a mass of facts almost infinite in 
number and variety, to reason from one to another, 
and to establish analogies and relations between 
them ; on whatever hypothesis it may be founded, 
or whatever arbitrary assumptions it may make 
respecting structures and modes of action, it can 
never be regarded as other than a most real and 
important accession to our knowledge. 

(291.) Still, it is by no means impossible that the 
Newtonian theory of light, if cultivated with equal 
diligence with the Huyghenian, might lead to an 
equally plausible explanation of phenomena now 
regarded as beyond its reach. M. Biot is the au- 
thor of the h3rpothesis we have already mentioned 
of a rotatory motion of the pjarticles of light about 
their axes. He has employed it only for a very 
limited purpose ; but it might doubtless be carried 
much farther ; and by admitting only the regular 
emission of the luminous particles at equal intervals 
of time, and in similar states of motion from the 
shining body, which does not seem a very forced sup- 
position, all the phenomena of interference at least 



OP NATU&AI.' PHILOSOPHY. 263 

would be readily enough explained without the ad- 
mission of an ether. 

(292.) The optical examination of crystallized 
substances affords one among many fine examples 
of the elucidation which every branch of science is 
capable of affording to every other. The indefa^ 
tigable researches of Dr. Brewster and others have 
shown that the phenomena exhibited by polarized 
light in its transmission through crystals afford a 
certain indication of the most important points 
relating to the structure of the crystals themselves, 
and thus become most valuable characters by which 
to recognise their internal constitution. It was 
Newton who first showed of what importance as a 
physical character, — as the indication of other pro- 
perties,— 'the action of a body on light might become ; 
but the characters afforded by the use of polarized 
light as an instrument of experimental enquiry are 
so marked' and intimate, that they may almost be 
said to have furnished us with a kind of intellectual 
sense, by which we are enabled to scrutinize the 
internal arrangement of those wonderful structures 
which Nature builds up by her refined and invisible 
architecture, with a delicacy eluding our conception, 
yet with a symmetry and beauty which we are never 
weary of admiring. In this point of view the science 
of optics has rendered to mineralogy and crystallo- 
graphy services not less important than to astronomy 
by the invention of the telescope, or to natural his- 
tory by that of the microscope; while the relations 
which have been discovered to exist between the 
(^tical properties of bodies and their crystalline forms, 

8 4 



£64; DUCOVRfiX OS THE 8TUDT 

and even tlieir diemiial habitudecs have afforded 
numerous and beautiful instances of general laws 
ccmduded from laborious and painful induction, and 
curiously exemjdifying the simplicity of nature as it 
emerges slowly from an entangled mass of particulars 
in which, at first, neither order nor connection can 
be traced. 



J 



OW NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 265 



CHAP. UL 

OF COSHICAL PHENOMENA. 

Astronomy and CdetiUd Med^emies, 

{293.) A.STRONOMY, as has been observed in the 
former part of this discourse, as a science of obse^- 
ation, had made considerable progress among the 
ancients: indeed, it was the odIj branch of j^jsical 
science which could be regarded as having been cul- 
tivated by them with any degree of assiduity or real 
success. The Chaldean and Egyptian records had 
furnished materials from which itk6 motions of the 
sun and moon could be calculated with sufficient ex* 
actness for the prediction of eclipses t and some re- 
markable cycles, or periods of years in which the 
lunar eclipses return in very nearly the same order, 
had been ascertamed by observation. Considering 
the extreme imperfection of their means of measuring 
time and space, this was, perhaps, as much as could 
have been expected at that early period, and it was 
followed up for a while in a philosophical spirit of 
just speculaticm, which, if continued, could hardly 
have i&iled to lead to sound and important conclu* 
sions. 

(294^) Unfortunately, however, the philosophy of 
Aristotle laid it down as a principle, that the celestial 
motions were regulated by laws proper to themselveSi 
and bearing no affinity to those which prevail on 



956 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

earth. By thus drawing a hroad and impassable line 
#f separation between celestial and terrestrial me- 
chanics, it placed the former altogether out of the 
pale of experimental research, while it at the same 
time impeded the progress of the latter by the as- 
sumption of principles respecting natural and un- 
natural motions, hastily adopted from the most 
superficial and cursory remark, undeserving even 
the name of observation. Astronomy, therefore, con- 
tinued for ages a science of mere record, in which 
theory had no part, except in so far as it attempted 
to conciliate the inequalities of the celestial motions 
with that assumed law of uniform circular revoluticxi 
which was alone considered consistent with the per- 
fection of the heavenly mechanism. Hence arose 
an unwieldy, if not self-contradictory, mass of hjrpo- 
thetical motions of sim, moon, and planets, in circles, 
whose centres were carried round in other circles, 
and these again in others without end, — <^ cycle on 
epicycle, orb on orb," — till at length, as observation 
grew more exact, and fresh epicycles were continually 
added, the absurdity of so cumbrous a mechanism 
became too palpable to be borne. Doubts were ex- 
pressed, to which the sarcasm of a monarch * gave a 
currency they might not have obtained in a period 
when men scarcely dared trust themselves to think; 
and at length Copernicus, promulgating his own, or 
reviving the I^thagorean doctrine, which places 
the Sim in the centre of our system, gave to astrcH 
nomy a simplicity which, contrasted with the com* 
plication of the preceding views, at once commanded 
assent 

, * Alphonso of Castile, 1252. 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHT. 267 

(295.) An elegant writer*, whom we have before 
had occasion to quote, has briefly and neatly ac- 
counted for the conilised notions which so long pre- 
rtaled respecting the constitution of our system, 
and the difficulty experienced in acquiring a true- 
notion of the disposition of its parts. *' We see it," 
he observes, *<not in ptaUf but in secHonJ* The 
reason of this is, that our point of observation- 
lies in its general plane, but the notion we aim at 
jRyrming of it is not that of its section, but of its plan. 
This is as if we should attempt to, read a book, or 
make out the countries on a map, with the eye on a 
level with the paper. We can only judge directly 
of the distances of objects by their sizes, or rather 
of their change of distance by their change of size ; 
neither have we any means of ascertaining,, otherwise 
than indirectly, even their positions, one among the 
other, from their apparent places as seen by us. Now, 
the variations in apparent size of the sun and mocm 
are too small to admit of exact measure without the 
use of the telescope, and the bodies of the planets 
cannot even be distinguished as having any distinct 
size with the naked eye. 

(296.) The Copemican system once admitted,how- 
ever, this difficulty of conception, at least, is effectu- 
ally got over, and it becomes a mere problem of geo« 
metry and calculation to determine, from the observed 
places of a planet, its real orbit about the sun, and 
the other circumstances of its motion. > This Kepler 
accomplished for. the orbit of Mars, which he ascer- 
tained to be an ellipse having the sun in one of its 
foci ; and the same law, being extended by inductivi 

* Jackson, Letters on Various Subjects, &c 



^B DtSCOURBE ON THE STUDY 

analogy to all the planets, was found to be verified in 
the case of each. This with the other remarkable 
laws which are usually cited in physical astronomy 
by the name of Kepler's laws, constitute undoubt- 
edly the most important and beautiful ^stem of 
geometrical relations which have ever been disco- 
vered by a mere inductive process, independent of 
any consideration of a theoretical kind« They com- 
prise within them a compendium of the motions of 
all the planets, and enable us to assign their places 
in their orbits at any instant of time past or to come 
(disregarding their mutual perturbations), provided 
certain purely geometrical problems can be numeri- 
cally resolved. 

(297.) It was not, however, till long after Kepler's 
time that the real importance of these laws could ht 
felt. Regarded in themselves, they ofiered, it ^ true^ 
a fine example of regular and harmonious disposition 
in the greatest of all the works of creation, and a 
striking contrast to the cumbersome mechanism of 
the crudes and epicycles whidi preceded them ; but 
there their utility seemed to terminate, and, indeed* 
Kepler was reproached, and not without a semblance 
of reason, with having rendered the actual cal- 
culation of the places of the planets more difficult 
than before, the resources of geometry bemg then 
inadequate to resolve the problems to whidi the 
strict application of his laws gave rise. 

(298.) The first result of the invention of the 
telescope and its application to astroiiomical pur- 
poses, by Galileo, was the discovery of Jupiter's 
disc and satellites, — of a system offering a beautiful 
miniature of that greater one of which it forms a 



t>r NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 269 

portion, and presenting to the eye of sense, at a 
single glance, that disposition of parts which in the 
planetary system itself is discerned only by the eye of 
reason and imagination (see 195.). Kepler had the 
satis&ction of seeing it ascertained, that the law which 
he had discovered to connect the tunes of revolution 
of the planets with their distances from the sun, holds 
good also when apfdied to the periods of circulation 
of these little attendants round the c^itre of their 
principal; thus demonstrating it to be something 
more than a mere empirical rule, and to depend on 
die intimate nature of planetary motion itself. 

(299.) It had been objected to the doctrine of 
Cc^micus, that, were it true, Venus should appear 
sometimes homed like the moon. To this he an- 
swered by admitting the conclusion, and averrii^ 
that, should we ever be ^le to see its actual shape, 
it wondd appear so. It is easy to imagine with what 
£m;e the application would strike every mind when 
tibe telescope confirmed this prediction, and showed 
the planet just as both the philosopher and his ob- 
jectors had agreed it ought to appear. The history 
of science affords perhaps only one instance analogous 
to this. When Dr. Hutton expounded his theory of 
the consolidation of rocks by the application ofheat, 
at ft great depth below the bed of the ocean, and 
especially of that of marble by actual fusion ; it was 
objected that, whatever might be the case with 
others, with calcareous or marble rocks, at least, it 
was impossible to grant such a cause of ccmsotid- 
alitoD, since heat decomposes their substance and 
converts it into quicklime, by driving off the car* 
bonic acid, and leaving a substance perfectly io« 



270 DISCOURSE OH THE STUDY 

fatSblef and incapable even of agi^utinatkm bj heaL 
To this he replied^ that the pressure under whidi 
the heat was applied would prevent the escape of 
the carbonic acid ; and that being retained, it might 
be expected to give that fusibility to the compound 
which the simple quicklime wanted. The next 
generation saw this anticipation converted into an 
observed fact, and verified by the direct experiments 
of Sir James Hall, who actually succeeded in melt- 
ing marble, by retaining its carbonic acid undet 
violent pressure. 

(300.) Kepler, among a number of vague and 
even wild speculations on the causes of the motions 
whose laws he had developed so beautifidly and 
with so much patient labour, had obtained a glimpse 
of the general law of the inertia of matter, as i^ 
plicable to the great masses of the heavenly bodies 
as well as to those with which we are conversant 
on the earth. After Kepler, Galileo, while he gave 
the finishing blow to the Aristotelian dogmas whidi 
erected a barrier between the laws of celestial and 
terrestrial motion, by his powerful argument and 
caustic ridipule, contributed, by his investigations 
of the laws of falling bodies and the motions of pro- 
jectiles, to lay the foundation of a true system of 
dynamics, by which motions could be determined 
from a knowledge of the forces producing them, 
and forces from the motions they produce. Hooke 
went yet farther, and obtained a view so distinct of 
the mode in which the planets might be retained 
in their orbits by the sun's attraction, that, had his 
mathematical attainments been equal to his fdiilo- 
sophical acumen, and his scientific pursuits been 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 271 

less yarious and desultory, it can hardly be doubted 
that he would have arrived at a knowledge of the 
law of gravitation. 

(301.) But every thing which had been done to- 
wards this great end, before Newton, could only be 
regarded as smoothing some first obstacles, and 
preparing a state of knowledge, in which powers 
like his could be efiPectually exerted. His wonderful 
combination of mathematical skill with physical 
research enabled him to invent, at pleasure, new and 
unheard-of methods of investigating the effects of 
those causes which his clear and penetrating mind 
detected in operation. Whatever department of 
science he touched, he may be said to have formed 
afresh. Ascending by a series of close-compacted 
inductive arguments to the highest axioms of dy- 
namical science, he succeeded in applying them to 
the complete explanation of all the great astronomi- 
cal phenomena, and many of the minuter and more 
enigmatical ones. In doing this, he had every thing 
to create: the mathematics of his age proved 
totally inadequate to grapple with the numerous 
difficulties which were to be overcome; but this, 
so far from discoiu^ing him, served only to afford 
new opportunities for the exertion of his genius, 
which, in the invention of the method of fluxions, 
or, as it is now more generally called, the differential 
calculus, has supplied a means of discovery, bearing 
the same proportion to the methods previously in 
use, that the steam-engine does to the medianical 
powers employed before its invention. Of the optical 
discoveries of Newton we have already spoken ; and 
if the magnitude of the objects of his astronomical 



272 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

disooveries excite cnir admiration of the mental 
powers whidi could so familiarly grasp them, the 
minuteness of the researches into whidi he there 
set the first example of entering, is no less cal- 
culated to produce a correspcmding impression. 
'Whichever way we turn our view, we find ours^ecr 
compeUed to bow before his genius, and to assign 
to the name of Newton a place in our reneration 
which belongs to no other in the annals c^ science. 
His era marks the accomplished maturity of the 
human reason as ap[died to such objects. Every 
thing which went before might be more properly 
compared to the first imperfect attempts of child- 
hood, or the essays of inexpert, though promising, 
adolescence. Whatever has been since perfcHraed, 
however great in itself, and worthy of bo sjdendid 
and auspicious a beginning, has never, in point c^ 
intellectual effort, surpassed that astonishmg one 
which produced the Principia. 

(S02.) In this great woric, Newttm i^wi all the 
celestial motions known in his time to be conse- 
quences of the simple law, that every particle of 
matter attracts every other partide in the univene 
with a fi>rce pn^rtionai to the product of their 
masses directly, and the square of their mutuai 
(^stance inversely, and is itself attracted with an 
equal force. Setting oat from this^ he expkujos bov 
an attractiim arises between the great qpbericaL 
masses of which our system consists, rcgidoted by 
a law precisely simiiBr in its expression ; how the 
eUiptic motions of {Planets about the sun, and of 
satellites about their primaries, according to the 
eicact rules iadhictiv^ arrived at by Kepler» result 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 273 

as necessary consequences from the same general 
law of force ; and how the orbits of comets them* 
selves are only particular cases of planetary move- 
ments. Thence proceeding to applications of greater 
difficulty, he explains how the perplexing inequa- 
lities of the moon's motion result from the sun's 
disturbing action ; how tides arise from the unequal 
attraction of the sun as well as of the moon on the 
earth, and the ocean which surrounds it; and, lastly, 
how the precession of the equinoxes is a necessary 
consequence of the very same law. 

(303.) The immediate successors of Newton found 
full occupation in verifying his discoveries, and in 
extending and improving the mathematical methods 
which it had now become manifest were to prove the 
keys to an inexhaustible treasure of knowledge. The 
simultaneous but independent discovery of a me- 
thod of mathematical investigation in every respect 
similar to that of Newton, by Leibnitz, while it 
created a degree of national jealousy which can now 
only be pitied, had the effect of stimulating the 
continental geometers to its cultivation, and im- 
pressing on it a character more entirely independent 
of the ancient geometry, to which Newton was 
peculiarly attached. It was fortunate for science 
that it did so ; for it was speedily found that (with 
one fine exception on the part of our countryman 
Maclaurin, followed up, after a long interval, by the 
late Professor Robison of Edinburgh, with equal 
elegance,) the geometry of Newton was like the 
bow of Ulysses, which none but its master could 
bend ; and that, to render his methods available 
beyond the points to which he himself carried them, 

T 



274 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDT 

it was necessary to strip them of every vestige of 
that antique dress in which he had delighted to 
clothe them. This, however, the countrymen oi 
Newton were very unwilling to do ; and they paid 
the penalty in finding themselves condemned to 
the situation of lookers on, while their contiaental 
neighbours both in Germany and France were push- 
ing forward in the career of mathematico-physical 
discovery with emulous rapidity. 

(304.) The legacy of research which Newton may 
be said to have left to his successors was truly im- 
mense. To pursue, through all its intricacies, the 
consequences of the law of gravitation ; to account 
for all the inequalities of the planetary movements, 
and the infinitely more complicated, and to us more 
important ones, of the moon ; and to give, what 
Newton himself certainly never entertained a con-' 
ception of, a demonstration of the stability and 
permanence of the system, under all the accumu- 
lating influence of its internal perturbations ; this 
labour, and this triumph, were reserved for the suc- 
ceeding age, and have been shared in succession by 
Clairaut, D' Alembert, Euler, Lagrange and Laplace. 
Yet so extensive is the subject, and so difficult and 
intricate the purely mathematical enquiries to whidi 
it leads, that another century may yet be required 
to go through with the tasL The recent discoveries 
of astronomers have supplied matter for investiga- 
tion, to the geometers of this and the next genera- 
tion, of a difficulty far surpassing any thing that had 
before occurred. Five primary planets have been 
added to our system ; four of them since the com- 
mencement of the present century, and these, 



¦»¦.¦,- 



or KATUBAL PHILOBOPHT. 9^5 

gulariy deviating firom the general analogy of the 
ethers, and offering eeuei ofd^ffiouUy in theory, which 
BO dne had before contemplated. Yet even the in- 
tricate questions to which these bodies have given 
rise seem likely to be surpassed by those which have 
eome into view, with the discovery of several comets 
revolving in elliptic orbits, like the planets, round the 
sun, in very moderate periods. But the resources 
of modem geometry seem, so far from being ex- 
hausted, to increase with the difficulties they have 
to encounter, and already, amoi^ the successors of 
Lagrange and Laplace, the present generation has to 
enumerate a powerful array of names, which promise 
to render it not less celebrated in the annals of 
physico-mathematical research than that which has 
just passed away. 

(80.5.) Meanwhfle the positions, figures, and di- 
mensions of all the planetary orbits, are now well 
known, and their variations from century to century 
in great measure determined ; and it has been ge- 
nerally demonstrated, that all the changes which 
the mutual actions of the planets on each other can 
produce in the course of indefinite ages, are pe- 
riodicalf that is to say, increasing to a certain ex- 
tent (and that never a very great one), and then 
again decreasing ; so that the system can never be 
destroyed or subverted by the mutual action of its 
parts, but keeps constantly oscillating, as it were, 
round a certsun mean state, from which it can never 
deviate to any ruinous extent. In particular, the 
researches of Laplace and Lagrange have demon- 
strated the absolute invariability of the mean distance 
of each planet from the sun, and consequently of its 

T 2 



¦276 • DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

periodic time. Relying on these grand discoveries, 
we are enabled to look forward, from the point of 
time which we now occupy, many thousands of years 
into futurity, and predict the state of our system 
without fear of material error, but such as may arise 
from causes whose existence at present we have no 
reason to suppose^ or from interference which we 
have no right to anticipate. 

(306.) A correct enumeration and description of 
the fixed stars in catalogues, and an exact know- 
ledge of their position, supply the only effectual 
means we can have of ascertaining what changes 
they are liable to, and what motions, too slow to de- 
prive them of their usual epithet, ,/£xeef, yet sufficient 
to produce a sensible change in the lapse of ages^ 
may exist among them. Previous to the invention 
of the compass, they served as guides to the navi- 
gator by night ; but for this purpose, a very mo- 
derate knowledge of a few of the principal ones 
sufficed. Hipparchus was the first astronomer, who* 
excited by the appearance of a new star, conceived 
the idea of forming a catalogue of the stars, with a 
view to its use as an astronomical record, *' by 
which," says Pliny, " posterity will be able to «ii»- 
cover, not only whether they are bom and die, but 
also whether they change their places, and whether 
they increase or decrease." His catalogue, containing 
more than 1000 stars, was constructed about 128 
years before Christ. It was in the course of the la- 
borious discussion of his own and former observations 
of them, undertaken with a view to the formation at 
this catalogue, that he first recognised the fact of that 
slow, general advance of all the stars eastward, when 



OP NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 277 

•compared with the place of the equinox, which is 
'known under the name of the precession of the 
equinoxes, and which Newton succeeded in refer- 
ring to a motion in the earth's axis, produced by the 
attraction of the sun and moon. 

( 307.) Since Hipparchus, at various periods in the 
history of astronomy, catalogues of stars have been 
formed, among which that of Ulugh Begh, comprising 
,about 1000 stars, constructed in 1437, is remarkable 
.as the production of a sovereign prince, working per- 
sonally in conjunction with his astronomers; and th^ 
of Tycho Brahe, containing 777 stars, constructed in 
1600, as having originated in a phenomenon similar 
to that which drew the attention of Hipparchus. 
In more recent times, astronomers provided with 
the finest instruments their respective eras could 
supply, and established in observatories, munificently 
endowed by the sovereigns and governments of 
different European nations, have vied and are still 
vying with each other, in extending the number of 
registered stars, and giving the utmost possible 
degsee of accuracy to the determination of their 
places. Among these, it would be ungrateful not to 
claim especial notice for the superb series of ob- 
servations which, under a succession of indefatigable 
and meritorious astronomers, has, for a very long 
period, continued to emanate from our own national 
observatory of Greenwich. • 

(308.) The distance of the fixed stars is so im- 
mense, that every attempt to assign a limit, within 
which it mvMt fall, has hitherto failed The enquiries 
of astronomers of all ages have been directed to ascer- 
lain this distance, by taking the dimensions of our own 

T 3 



27S MSCOURSK OK TBE 8TUOT 

particular 83r8tein of son and planets, or of the earth 
ksei£y as the unit of a scale en whidi it might be 
measured. But ahhou^ many have imagined that 
their observations afforded grounds- for the decisioiK 
of this interesting point, it has uniformly happened 
either that the phenomena on which they retied 
have proved to be referable to other causes not 
previously known, and which the superior accuracy 
of their researches has for the first time brought ta 
light; or to errors arising from instrumental im> 
perfections and unavoidable defects of the observ* 
ations themselves* 

(S09.) The only mdicaticm we can expect to ol^ 
tain of the actual distance of a star, would consist 
in an annual change in its apparent place corre- 
sp(mding to ^e motion of the earth round the sim» 
called its anmrnat paraUaxy and iHiidi is nothing 
more than the measure of the iqoparent size of the 
earth's orbit as seen from the star. Many ebservera 
have thought they have detected a measuraUe 
amount (^this parallax ; but as astronomical instnt* 
ments have advanced in perfection, the quantity 
whidi ihey have successively assigned to it has 
been continually reduced within narrower and nar* 
rower limits, and has invariably been commensurate 
with the errors to which the instruments used 
might fairly be considered liaise. Tlie condusioii 
this strongly presses on us is, that it is really e 
quantity too small to admit of distinct measurement 
in the present state of our means for that purpose; 
and that, therefore, the distance ot the stais must 
be a magnitude of such an order as the imagination 
almost shrinks firom contemplatmg. But this i^ 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 279 

crease in our scale of dimension calls for a corre- 
sponding enlargement of conception in all other 
respects. The same reasoning which places the 
stars at such immeasuratble remoteness, exalts them 
at Ihe same time into glorious bodies, similar to, and 
even far surpassing, our own sun, the centres per- 
haps of other planetary systems, or fulfilling purposes 
of whidi we can have no idea, from any analogy in 
what passes immediately around us. 

(310.) The comparison of catalogues, published 
at different periods, has given occasion to many 
curious remarks, respecting changes both of place 
and brightness among the stars, to the discovery of 
variable ones which lose and recover their lustre 
periodically, and to that of the disappearance of 
several from the heavens so completely as to have 
lefl no vestige discernible even by powerful tele- 
scopes. In proportion as the construction of astro- 
nomical and optical instruments has gone on im- 
proving, our knowledge of the contents of the heavens 
has . undergone a corresponding extension, and, at 
the same time, attained a degree of precision which 
could not have been anticipated in former ages. 
The places of all the principal stars in the northern 
hemisphere, and of a great many in the southern, 
are now known to a degree of nicety which must 
in&llibly detect any real motions that may exist 
among them, and has in fact done so, in a great 
many instances, some of them very remarkable 
ones^ 

(Sll.) It IS only since a comparatively recent 
date, however, that any great attention has been 
bestowed on die smaller stars, among which there can 

T 4 



280 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

be no doubt of the most interesting and instructive 
phenomena being sooner or later brought to light 
The minute examination of them with powerful 
telescopes, and with delicate instruments for the 
determination of their places, has, indeed, already 
produced immense catalogues and masses of observ- 
ations, in which thousands of stars invisible to the 

« 

naked eye are registered ; and has led to the dis- 
covery of innumerable important and curious facts, 
and disclosed the existence of whole classes of ce- 
lestial objects, of a nature so wonderful as to give 
room for unbounded speculation on the extent and 
construction of the universe. 

(312.) Among these, perhaps the most remarkable 
are the revolving double stars, or stars which, to 
the naked eye or to inferior telescopes, iq)pear 
single ; but, if examined with high magnifying pow- 
ers, are found to consist of two individuals placed 
almost close together, and which, when carefully 
watched, are (many of them) found to revolve in 
regular elliptic orbits about each other ; and so fiur 
as we have yet been able to ascertain, to obey the 
same laws which regulate the planetaiy movements. 
There is nothing calculated to give a grander idea 
of the scale on which the sidereal heavens are 
constructed than these beautiful systems. When we 
see such magnificent bodies united in pairs, un- 
doubtedly by the same bond of mutual gravitation 
which holds together our own system, and sweeping 
over their enormous orbits, in periods comprehend- 
ing many centuries, we admit at once that they must 
be accomplishing ends in creation which will remain 
for ever unknown to man ; and that we have here 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 281 

attained a point in science where the human intellect 
is compelled to acknowledge its weakness, and to feel 
that no conception the wildest imagination can form 
will bear the least comparison with the intrinsic 
greatness of the subject. 

Geology. - 

(313.) The researches of physical astronomy are 
'^confessedly incompetent to carry us back to the 
origin of our system, or to a period when its state 
was, in any great essential, different from what it is at 
present. So far as the causes now in action go, and 
80 far as our calculations will enable us to estimate 
their effects, we are equally unable to perceive in 
the general phenomena of the planetary system 
either the evidence of a beginning, or the prospect 
of an end. Geometers, as already stated, have de- 
monstrated that, in the midst of all the fluctuations 
which can possibly take place in the elements of the 
orbits of the planets, by reason of their mutual at- 
traction, the general balance of the parts of the 
system will always be preserved, and every de- 
parture from a mean state periodically compensated. 
But neither the researches of the physical astro- 
nomer, nor those of the geologist, give us any 
ground for regarding our system, or the globe we 
inhabit, as of eternal duration. On the contrary, 
there are circumstances in the physical constitution 
of our own planet which at least obscurely point to 
an origin and a formation, however remote, since it 
has been foimd that the figure of the earth is not 



282 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

^obular but elliptical, and that its attraction is such 
as requires us to admit the interior to be more dense 
than the exterior, and the density to increase with 
sbme degree of regularity from the surface towards 
the centre, and thaty in layers arranged elliptically 
round the centre, circumstances which could scarcely 
happen without some such successive deposition of 
materials as would enable pressure to be propagated 
with a certain degree of freedom from one part of 
the mass to another, even if we should hesitate to 
admit a state of primitive fluidity. 

(314.) But from such indications nothing distinct 
can be concluded; and if we would speculate to any 
purpose on a former state of our globe and on the suo 
cession of events which from time to time may have 
changed the condition and form of its sur&ce, we 
must confine our views within limits far more 
restricted, and to subjects much more within the 
reach of our capacity, than either the creation of the 
world or its assumption of its present figure. These, 
indeed, were favourite speculations with a race of 
geologists now extinct; but the science itself has 
undergone a total change of character, even within 
the last half century, and is brought, at length, 
effectually within the list of the inductive sciences. 
Geologists now no longer bewilder their imaginations 
with wild theories of the formation of the globe 
from chaos, or its passage through a series of hypo- 
thetical transformations, but rather aim at a careful 
and accurate examination of the records of its former 
state, which they find indelibly impressed on the 
great features of its actual sor&ce, and to the 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 285 

evidences of former life and habitation which or- 
ganised remains imbedded and preserved in its 
strata indisputably afford. 

(315.) Records of this kind are neither few nor 
vague ; and though the obsoleteness of their language 
when we endeavour to interpret it too minutely, may» 
and no doubt often does, lead to misappr^ension, 
still its general meaning is, on the whole, unequi- 
vocal and satisfiurtory. Such records teach us, in 
terms too plain to be misunderstood, that the whole 
or nearly the whole of our present lands and con- 
tinents were formerly at the bottom of the sea^ 
where they received deposits of materials from the 
wearing and degradation of other lands not now 
existing, and ^mished receptacles for the remains 
of marine animals and plants inhabiting the ocean 
above them, as well as for similar spoils of the land 
washed down into its bosom. 

(316.) These remains are occasionally brought 
to light ; and their examination has afforded indubi- 
table evidence of the former existence of a state of 
animated nature widely different from what now 
obtains on the globe, and of a period anterior to that 
in which it has been the habitation of man, or 
rather, indeed, of a series of periods, of unknown 
duration, in whidi both land and sea teemed with 
forms of animal and vegetable life, which have suc- 
cessively disiqppeared and given place to others^ 
and these again to new races approximating gra- 
dually more and more nearly to those which now in- 
habit them, and at length comprehending species 
which have their counterparts existing. 

(317.) These wrecks of a former state of nature^ 



284 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

thus wonderfully preserved (like ancient medals and 
inscriptions in the ruins of an empire), afford a sort 
of rude chronology, by whose aid the successive de- 
positions of the strata in which they are found may 
be marked out in epochs more or less definitely 
terminated, and each characterized by some pe- 
culiarity which enables us to recognise the deposits 
of any period, in whatever part of the world they 
may be found. And, so far as has been hitherto 
Investigated, the order of succession in which these 
deposits have been formed appears to have been 
the same in every part of the globe. 

(318.) Many of the strata which thus bear evi- 
dent marks of having been deposited at the bottom 
of the sea, and of course in a horizontal state, are 
now found in a position highly inclined to the ho- 
rizon, and even occasionally vertical. And they 
oflen bear evident marks of violence, in their bend- 
ing and fracture, in the dislocation of parts which 
were once contiguous, and in the existence of vast 
collections of broken fragments which afford every 
proof of great violence having been used in accom- 
plishing some at least of the changes which have 
taken place. 

(319.) Besides the rocks which carry this in- 
ternal evidence of submarine deposition, are nuiny 
which exhibit no such proofs, but on the contrary 
hold out every appearance of owing their origin to 
volcanoes or to some other mode of igneous action ; 
and in every part of the world, and among strata 
of all ages, there occur evidences of such action so 
abundant, and on such a scale, as to point out the 
volcano and the earthquake as agents which may 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 285 

have been instrumental in the production of those 
changes of level, and those violent dislocations 
which we perceive to have taken place. 

(320.) At all events, in accounting for tliose 
changes, geologists have no longer recourse, as for- 
merly, to causes purely h3rpothetical, such as 
a shifting of the earth's axis of rotation, bringing 
the sea to overflow the land, by a change in the 
place of the longer and shorter diameters of the 
spheroidal figure, nor to tides produced by the at- 
traction of comets suddenly approaching very near 
the earth, nor to any other fanciful and arbitrarily 
assumed h3rpothe8es ; but rather endeavour to con- 
fine themselves to a careftd consideration of causes 
evidently in action at present, with a view to ascer- 
tain how far they, in the first instance, are capable 
of accounting for the facts observed, and thus legi- 
timately bringing into view, as residual phenomena, 
those effects which cannot be so accounted for. 
When this shall have been in some measure accom- 
plished, we shall be able to pronounce with greater 
security than at present respecting the necessity of 
admitting a long succession of tremendous and 
ravaging catastrophes and cataclysms, — epochs of 
terrific confusion and violence which many geo- 
logists (perhaps with justice) regard as indispens- 
able to the explanation of the existing features of 
the world. We shall learn to distinguish between 
the effects which require for their production the 
sudden application of convulsive and firacturing 
efforts, and those, probably not less extensive, 
changes which may have been produced by forces 
equally or more powerful, but acting with less irre- 



S86 DISCOURSE OK THX ftTITDT 

gularity, and so distributed over time as to produce 
none of those interreffnumsi of chaotic anarchy whidi 
we are apt to think (perhaps erroneously) great di»- 
figurements of an order so beautiful and harmonious 
as that of nature. 

(321.) But to estimate justly the effects of 
causes now in action in geology is no easy task. 
There is no ci priori or deductive process by whidi 
we can estimate the amount of the annual erosion, 
for instance, of a continent by the action of mieteoric 
agents, rain, wind, frost, &C., nor the quantity of 
destruction produced on. its coasts by the direcl 
violence of the sea, nor the quantity of lava thrown 
up per annum by volcanoes over the whole surftce 
of the earth, nor any similar effect. And to con- 
sult experience on all such points is a slow and 
painful process if rightly gone into, and a veiy fid* 
lible one if only partially executed. Mudi, then* 
at present must be lefl to opinion, and to that sort 
of dear-judging tact which sometimes anticipates 
experience ; but this ought not to stand in the way 
of our making evecy possible effort to obtain accu- 
rate information on such points, by which alone 
geology can be rendered^ if not an experimental 
science, at least a science of that kind of active 
observation which forms the nearest approach to it, 
where actual experiment is impossible. 

(S22.) Let us take, for example, the question, 
** What is the actual direction in whioh dianges of 
rdative level are taking place between the Aitiaripg 
continents and seas?'* If we consult partial 
perience, that is, a2? the information that we 
respecting andent sea-marks, soundings, Ac, 



OV NATUAAL PHILOSOPHY. 5^7 

ahdl only find ourselves bewildered in a mass of 
conflicting) because imperfect, evidence. It is ob- 
vious that the only way to decide the point is to as- 
certain, by very precise and careful observations at 
^toper stations cm coasts, selected at points where 
there exist natural marks not liable to change in 
the course of at least a century, the true elevation 
of such marks above the mean level of the sea, and 
to multiply these stations sufficiently over the whole 
globe to be capable oE affording real available know- 
ledge. Now, this is not a very easy operation (con- 
sidering the accuracy required); for the mean level 
of the sea can be determined by no single observ- 
ation, any more than the mean height of the baro- 
meter at a given station, being affected both by 
periodical and accidental fluctuations due to tidesi 
winds, waves, and currents. Yet if an instrument 
adapted for the purpose were constructed, and ren- 
dered easily attainable, and rules for its use care* 
fuHy drawn up, there is little doubt we should soon 
(by the industry of observers scattered over the 
world) be in possession of a most valuable mass a£ 
information, which could not £ul to affwd a point of 
departure for the next generation, and furnish 
ground for the only kind of argument which ev^ 
can be conclusive on such subjects. 

(S2S.) Geology, in the magnitude and sublimiiy 
of the objects of which it treats, undoubtedly ranks, 
in the scale of the sciences, next to astronomy ; 
like astronomy^ too, its progress depends on the 
continual accumulatkm of observations carried on 
for ages. But, unlike astronomy, the observations 
OD which it depends, when the whole extent of the 



288 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

subject to be explored is taken into consideration, 
can hardly yet be said to be more than commenced. 
Yet, to make up for this, there is one important dif- 
ferience, that while in the latter science it is impos- 
sible to recall the past or anticipate the future, and 
observation is in consequence limited to a single 
fact in a single moment ; in the former, the records 
of the past are always present ; — they may be exa- 
mined and re-examined as often as we please, and 
require nothing but diligence and judgment to put us 
in possession of their whole contents. Only a very 
small part of the surface bf our globe has, however, 
been accurately examined in detail, and of that small 
portion we are only able to scratch the mere ex- 
terior, for so we must consider those excavations 
which we are apt to regard as searching the bowels 
of the earth ; since the deepest mines which have 
been sunk penetrate to a depth hardly surpassing the 
ten thousandth part of the distance between its sur- 
face and its centre. Of course inductions founded 
on such limited examination can only be regarded 
as provisional, except in those remarkable cases where 
the same great formations in the same order have been 
recognised in very distant quarters, and without ex- 
ception. This, however, cannot long be the case. Tlie 
spirit with which the subject has been prosecuted for 
many years in our own country has been rewarded 
with so rich a harvest of surprising and unexpected 
discoveries, and has carried the investigation of our 
island into such detail, as to have excited a corre- 
sponding spirit among our continental neighbours ; 
while the same zeal which animates our countrymea 
on their native shore accompanies them in their so- 



OV KAtUKAL PHiLosorav. 289 

journs abroad, and has already begun to supply a 
fond of information respecting the geology of our 
Indian possessions, as well as of every other point 
where English intellect and research can pene- 
trate. 

(324.) Nothing can be more dedirable than that 
every possible facility and encouragement should be 
afforded for such researches, and indeed to the pur- 
suits of the enlightened resident or traveller in every 
department of science, by the representatives of out 
national authority wherever our power extends. By 
these only can our kaawledge of the actual state 
of the surface of the globe, and that of the animals 
and vegetables o£ the ancient continents and seas, be 
extended and perfected, while more complete in- 
formation than we at present possess of the habits of 
those actually existing, and the influ^ice of changes 
of climate, food, and circumstances, on them, laay 
be expected to render material assistance to our- 
speculations respecting those whidi have become 
extinct. 



290 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 



CHAP. IV. 

OF THE EXAMINATION OF THE MATERIAL CONSTITUENTS 

OF THE WORLD. 

Minendogy. 

(S25.) The consideration of the history and struc- 
ture of our globe, and the examination of the fossil 
contents of its strata, lead us naturally to consider 
the materials of which it consists. The history (^ 
tliese materials, their properties as objects of philo- 
' sophical enquiry, and their application to the usefiil 
arts and the embellishments of life, with the charac- 
ters by which they can be certainly distinguished 
one from another, form the object of mineralogy, 
taken in its most extended sense. 

. (326.) There is no branch of science which pre- 
sents so many points of contact with other depart* 
ments of physical research, and serves as a connect- 
ing link between so many distant points of phi- 
losophical speculation, as this. To the geolc^ist, 
the chemist, the optician, the crystallogn^er, 
the physician, it offers especially the veiy ele- 
ments of their knowledge, and a field for many of 
their most curious and important enquiries. Nor, 
with the exception of chemistry, is there any whidi 
has undergone more revolutions, or been exhibited 
in a greater variety of forms. To the ancients it 
could scarcely be said to be at all known, and up to 
a comparatively recent period, nothing could be 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 291 

inore imperfect than its descriptions, or more in- 
artificial and unnatural than its classification. The 
more important minerals in the arts, indeed, those 
used for economical purposes and those from which 
metals were extracted, had a certain degree of 
attention paid to them, for the sake of their utility 
and commercial value, and the precious stones for 
that of ornament. But until their crystalline forms 
were attentively observed and shown to be deter- 
minate characters on which dependence could be 
placed, no mineralogist could give any correct ac- 
count of the real distinction between one mineral 
and another. 

(327.) It was only, however, when chemical 
analysis had acquired a certain degree of precision 
and universal applicability that the importance of 
mineralogy as a science began to be recognised, and 
the connection between the external characters of 
a stone and its ingredient constituents brought into 
distinct notice. Among these characters, however, 
none were found to possess that eminent distinct- 
ness which the crystalline form offers ; a character, 
in the highest degree geometrical, and affording, as 
might be naturally supposed, the strongest evidence 
of its necessary connection with the intimate con- 
stitution of the substance. The fiiU importance of 
this character was, however, not felt until its con- 
nection with the texture or cleavage of a mineral 
was pointed out, and even then it required numerous 
and striking instances of the critical discernment of 
Haiiy and other eminent mineralogists in predicting 
from the measurements of the angles of crystals 
which had been confounded together that differ- 

u 2 



99& DISCOUHSB ON THK STUBT 

ences would be ibuad to exist in tbeir cheimGd 
compositioDi all which fHroved fully justified in their 
result before the essential value oi this character was 
acknowledgecL This waaaa doubt in great measure 
owing to the high importance set by the GerBua 
mineralogists on those external characters of touch, 
sight, weighty colour, and other sensible qualities, 
which are little susceptible, with the ^iception of 
weight, of exact determinatioB^ aod which are sul^ 
ject to material variations in. different specimens of 
the same mineral. By degrees, however, the neces- 
sity of ascribing great weight to a character so de- 
finite was admitted, especially when it was considered 
that the same step which pointed out the intimate 
connection of external form with internal structure 
furnished the mmeralogist with the means of re- 
ducing all the forms of which a mineral is susceptible 
under one general type, or primitive form, and ai^ 
forded grounds for an el^ant theoretic^ account of 
the assumption of definite figures ab tmHom 

(328.) A simple and elegant inventi(m of Dr.Woi- 
laston, the reflecting gcmicMoaeter, gave a fresh im- 
pulse to that view of mineralogy which makes tfae 
crystalline form the essential or leading character, 
by putting it in the power of every one» by the ex- 
amination of even the smallest portion of a broken 
crystal, to ascertain and verify thi^ essential cha- 
racter on which the identity of a mineral in tbe 
system of Haiiy was made to depend. Hie a^ili- 
cation of so ready and exact a method speedily led 
to important results, and to a still nicer diacrimiiK 
ation of mineral spades than could before be at- 
tained ; and the confirmation given to these roaulta 



1^ chemical analysis stamped them witk a sdenftifit 
ttid decided diaract^ which they have retained ever 
meek 

(329.) Meanwhile the progress made in chemical 

lualysis had led to the important conclusion that 

every chemical compound susceptible of assuming 

the s<did state assumed with it a determinate crys«> 

lalline form; and the progress of optical science 

had shown that die fundamental crystalline form, in 

the case at least of transparent bodies, drew with it 

a series of (^tical properties no less curious than int> 

portant in relation to the affections of light in its pass* 

age through such substances^ Thus, in every point 

of view, additi<»ia} importance became added to this 

character ; and the study of the crystalline forms 

of bodies in general assumed the form of a separate 

and independent branch of science, of whidi the 

geometrical forms of the mineral world constituted 

only a particular case. Mineralogy, however, as a 

branch of natural history, remains still distinct either 

from optics or crystallography. The mineralogist 

is content, and thinks he has performed his task, if 

not as a natural historian at least as a classifier 

and arranger, if he only gives such a characteristic 

description of a mineral as shall efiectually distin- 

guiah it from every other, and shall enable any one 

who may encounter such a body in any part of the 

world to impose on it its name, assign it a place in 

his system, and turn to his books for a farther de*- 

scription of all that the chemist, the optician, the 

Ifl^idary, or the artist, may require to know. Still 

^is is no easy matter : the laborious researches pf 

the most eminait mineralogists can hardly yet be 

u 3 



29i DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

said to have effectually accomplished it ; and its 
difficulty may be appreciated by the small number of 
simple minerals, or minerals of perfectly definite and 
well-marked characters, which have been hitherto 
made out. Nor can this indeed be wondered at, 
when we consider that by far the greater porti<m 
of the rocks and stones which compose the external 
crust of the globe consists of nothing more than 
the accumulated detritus of older rocks» in which the 
fragments and powder of an infinite variety of sub- 
stances are mingled together, in all sorts of varying, 
proportions, and in such a way as to defy separ* 
ation. Many of these rocks, however, so com- 
pounded, occur with sufficient fi*equency and uni- 
formity of character to have acquired names and to 
have been usefully implied; indeed, in the latter 
respect, minerals of this description fiir surpass all 
the others. As objects of natural histoiy, there- 
fore, they are well worthy of attention, however 
difficult it may be to assign them a place in any 
artificial arrangement 

(330.) This paucity of simple minerals, however, 
is probably rather apparent than real, and in pro- 
portion as the researches of the chemist and crya- 
tallographer shall be extended throughout nature, 
they will no doubt become much more numerona. 
Indeed, in the great laboratories of nature it can 
hardly be doubted that almost every kind of che- 
mical process is going forwards, by which com* 
pounds of every description are continually forming. 
Accordingly, it is remarked, that the lavas and 
ejected scoris of volcanoes are receptacles in which 
mineral products previously unknown are constantly 



¦H 



*5*3 



OF KATUBAL PHILOSOPHY. 295 

discovered, and that the primitive formations, as 
they are balled in geology, which bear no marks of 
having been produced by the destruction of others, 
JBue ^so remarkable for the beauty and distinctness 
of charaicter of their minerals. 

(831^) The great difficulty which has been expe- 
rienced in attempts to classify mineral substances 
by their cheinical constituents has arisen from the 
observed presence, in some specimens of minerals 
bearing that general resemblance in other respects 
as well as agreement in form which would seem to 
entitle them to be considered as alike, of ingredients 
foreign to the usual composition of the species, and 
that occasionally in so large a proportion as to ren- 
der it unjustifiable to refer tlieir occurrence to ac- 
cidental impurities. These cases, as well as some 
anomalies observed in the classification of minerak 
by their crystalline forms> which seemed to show 
iliat the same substance might occasionally appear 
under two distinct forms, as well as some remark- 
able coincidences between the forms of substances 
quite distinct from each other in a diemical point of 
view, have within a recent period given rise to a 
branch of the science of crystall(^aphy of a very 
Carious and important nature. The isomorphwn 
of certain groups of chemical elements has already 
afforded us an example illustrative of the manner in 
which inductions sometimes receive unexpected 
verifications (see 180.). The laws and relations 
thus brought to light are among the most curious 
and interesting parts of modem science, and 
seem likely in their further developement to af- 
fitfd aaxj^e scope for the exercbe of diemical and 

u 4 



,VSmM 



%9S OISCpURSS ON TH£ STUDY 

mineralogical research. Thfiy have already afforded 
innumerable fine examples of that important step in 
science by which anomalies disappear^ and occasional 
incongruities become reconciled under more gene- 
ral expressions of physical laws» and thus unite in 
affording support to those very views which they pro- 
pused» when first observed, to overset* Nothmg, in* 
deed, can be more striking than to see the very ingre* 
dient which every previous chemist and mineralogist 
would agree to disregard and reject as a mere 
casual impurity brought forward and appealed to in 
support of a theory expressly directed to the object 
of rescuing science irom the imputation of disre- 
garding, under any ckcumstances^ the plain results 
of direct experiment. 

Chemistry. 

(SS2.) The laws which concern the intimate con- 
stitution of bodies, not as respects their strudum or 
the manner in which their parts are put together* 
but as regards their materials or the ingredients of 
which those parts are composed, form the objects of 
chemistry. A solid body may be regarded as a 
fabric, more or less regularly and artificially con-' 
structed, in which the materials and the worknum- 
ship may be separately considered, and in whicht 
though the latter be ruined and confounded by 
violence, the former remain unchanged in their 
mature, though differently arranged. In liquid or 
aerial bodies, too, though there prevails a lest 
degree of difference in point of structure^ and a 
greater facility of dispersion and dissipation, than in 
solids^ yet an equal diversity of nuUeriah subsist^ 



.l^liLLH 



t>7 VATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 297 

firing to diem pn^perties difFering extremely from 
etuStk other. 

' (SSSJ) The inherent activity of matter if proved 
not only by the producdon of motion by the mutual 
attractions and repulsions of distant or contiguous 
masses, but by the changes and apparent trans- 
formations which different substances imdergo in 
Uieir sensible qualities by mere mixture. If water 
be added to water, or salt to salt, the effect is an 
increase of quantity, but no diange of quality. In this 
case, the mutual action of the particles is entirely me- 
dianical. Again, if a blue powder and a yellow one, 
each perfectly dry, be mixedand well shaken together, 
a green powder will be produced ; but this is a mere 
effect arising in the eye from the intimate mixture 
of Ihe yellow and blue light separately and inde- 
pendency reflected from the minute particles of 
each ; and the proof is had by examining the mix- 
ture with a microscope, when the yellow and blue 
grains will be seen separate and each quite unaltered. 
H the same experiment be tried with coloured 
Bquids, which are susceptible of mixing without 
diemical action, a compound colour is likewise pro- 
duced, but no examination with magnifiers is in that 
case sufficient to detect the ingredients ; the reason 
obviously being, !the excessive minuteness of the 
parts, and their perfect intermixture, produced by 
^tating two liquids together. From the mixture 
of two powders, extreme patience would enable any 
<)ne, by picking out with a magnifier grain after grain, 
to separate the ingredients. But when liquids are 
mixed, no mechanical separation is any longer prac- 
ticable ; the particles are so minute as to elude all 



{298 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

search. Yet this does not hinder us from regarding 
such a compound as still a mere mixture, and its 
properties are accordingly intermediate betvreen 
those of the liquids mixed. But this is fiir from 
being the case with all liquids. When a solutioa of 
potash, for example, and another of tartaric add; 
each perfectly liquid, are mixed together in proper 
proportions, a great quantity of a solid saline sub- 
stance falls to the bottom cMf the containing vessel, 
which is quite different from either potash or tar* 
taric acid, and the liquid from which it subsided 
offers no indications by its taste or other sensibie 
qualities of the ingredients mixed, but of something 
totally different from either. It is evident that this 
is a phenomenon widely different from that of mere 
mixture ; there has taken place a great and radical 
change in the intimate nature of the ingredients, by 
which a new substance is produced whidi had no 
existence before. And it has been produced by the 
union of the ingredients presented to each other; for 
when examined it is found that nothing has been 
lostf the weight of the whole mixture being the 
sum of the weights mixed. Yet the potash and 
tartaric acid have disappeared entirely, and the 
weight of the new product is found to be exactly 
equal to that of the tartaric acid and potash em* 
ployed, taken together, abating a small portion held 
in solution in the liquid, which may be obtained 
however by evaporation. They have therefore oom* 
bined, and adhere to one another with a cohesive 
force sufficient to form a solid out of a liquid ; a fytot 
which has thus been called into action* by merely 
presenting them to each other in a state 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 299 

(334.) It is the business of chemistry to investigate 
^ese and similar changes, or the reverse ci such 
changes, where a single substance is resolved into 
two or more others, having different properties from 
it, and from each other, and to enquire into all the 
circumstances which can influence them ; and either 
determine, modify, or suspend their accomplish- 
ment, whether such influence be exercised by heat 
or cold, by time and rest, or by agitation or pres- 
sure, or by any of those agents of which we have 
acquired a knowledge, such as electricity, light, 
magnetism, &c. 

(335.) The wonderfrtl and sudden transformations 
with whidi chemistry is conversant, the violent ac- 
tivity often assumed by substances usually considered 
the most inert and sluggish, and, above all, the insight 
it gives into the nature of innumerable operations 
which we see daily carried on around us, have con-^ 
tributed to render it the most popular, as it is one of 
the most extensively usefrd, of the sciences ; and we 
shall, accordingly, find none whidi have sprung 
forward, during the last century, with such extra- 
ordinary vigour, and luive had such extensive in- 
fluence in promoting corresponding progress in 
others. One of the chief causes of its popularity is, 
perhaps, to be sought for in this, that it is, of all the 
sciences, perhaps, the most completely an expe- 
rimental one; and even its theories are, for the 
most part, of that generally intelligible and readily 
applicable kind, which demand no intense concen- 
tration of thought, and lead to no profound mathe-' 
matical researches. The simple process of inductive 
generalization, grounded on the examination of nu' 



500 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

merous fisu^U, aU of them presenting ccmsiderable 
intrinsic interest, has sufficed, in most instances, to 
lead, by a dear and direct road, to its highest laws 
yet known. But, on the other hand, these lawsi 
when stated, are not yet fully sufficient to lead us, 
except in very limited cases, to a deductive know- 
ledge (^particulars never before examined, at least, 
not without great caution, and constant appeal to 
experiment as a check on our reasoning ; so that we 
are justified in regarding the axioms of chemistry, 
the true handles of deductive reasoning, as still un- 
known, and, perhaps, likely long to remain sa Tliis 
is no fault of its cultivators, who have comprised in 
their list the highest and most varied talents and 
industry, but of the inherent complexity of the 
subject, and the infinite multitude of causes whidi 
are concerned in the production of every, even the 
simplest, chemical phenomenon. 

(336.) The history of chemistry (on which, however, 
we are not about to enlarge,) is one of great interest 
to those who delight to trace the steps by which 
mankind advance to the discovery of truth through 
a series of mistakes and failures. It may be divided, , 
Ist, into the period of the alchemists, a lamentable 
epoch in the annals of intellectual wandeiing; 2dly, 
that of the phlogistic doctrines of Beccher and Stahl, 
in which, as if to prove the perversity of the human 
mind, of two possible roads the wrong was chosen ; 
and a theory obtained universal credence on the 
credit of great names, ingenious views, and loose 
experiments, which is negatived, in every uuiof^ee, 
by an appeal to the balance. This, too, happened, 
not by reason of unlucky coincidences, or indlvidinl 



Vi 



OF NATUBAL FHILOSOPRT. 901 

oversights, but of necessitj, and from an inherent 
defect of the theory itself, which thus impeded the 
progress of the science, as far as a science of expe- 
riment can be impeded hy a felse theory, by per- 
plexing its cultivators with the appearance of 
contradictions in their experiments where none 
really subsisted, by destroying all their confidence 
in the numerical exactness of tiieir own results, 
and by involving the subject in a mist of ?ioion'* 
ary and hypothetical causes in jdace of the true 
acting principles. Thus, in the combustion of any 
substance which is incapable of flying away in fumes, 
an increase of weight takes place, — die ashes are 
heavier than the fueL Whenever this was observed, 
however, it was passed carelessly over as arising 
from the escape of phlogiston, or ti)e principle of in- 
flammability, which was considered as being either 
the element of fire itself or in some way combined 
with it, and thus essentially liffkt It is now known 
that the increase of weight is owing to the absorp- 
tibnof, and combination with, a quantity of a peculiar 
ingredient called oocygen, from the air, a principle 
essentially heaoy. So far as weight is concerned, it 
makes no difference whether a body having weight 
enters, or one having levity escapes ; but there is 
this plain diflerence in a philosophic^ point of view, 
that oxygen is a real producible substanee, and 
phlogiston is no such thing: the former is a vera 
causey the latter an hypothetical being, introduced 
to account for what the other accounts for much 
better.. 

(337.) The third age of chemistry — that which 
may be called emphatically modem diemistiT — 



302. DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

commenced (in 1786) when Lavoisier, by a series of 
memorable experiments, extinguished for ever this 
error, and placed chemistry in the rank of one of the 
exact sciences, — a science of nmnber, weight, and 
'measure. From that epoch to the present day it has 
constantly advanced with an accelerated progress, 
and at this moment may be regarded as more pro- 
gressive than ever. The principal features in this 
progress may be comprised under the following 
general heads : — 

]. The discovery of the proximate, if not the 
ultimate, elements of all bodies, and the en- 
largement of the list of known elements to 
its present extent of between fifty and sixty 
substances. 
% The developement of the doctrine of latent 
heat by Black, with its train of important 
consequences, including the scientific theory 
of the steam-engine. 
S. The establishment of Wenzel's law of definite 
proportions on his own experiments, and 
those of Richter, a discovery subsequently 
merged in the greater generality of the 
atomic theory of Dalton. 

4. The precise determination of the atomic weights 

of the dificrent chemical elements, mainly 
due to the astonishing industry of Berzeliusy 
and his unrivalled command of chemical re- 
sources, as well as to the researches of the 
other chemists of the Swedish and German 
school, and of our countrjnnan. Dr. Thom- 
son. 

5. The assimilation of gases and vapours, by whidt 



OF NATURAL. PHILOSOPHY. 80S 

we are led to regard the former, universaUj, 
as particular cases of the latter, a generaliza- 
tion resulting chiefly from the experiments 
of Faraday on the condensation of the gases, 
and those of Gay Lussac and Dalton, on the 
laws of their expansion by heat compared 
with that of vapours. 

6. The establishment of the laws of the combin- 
ation of gases and vapours by definite vo* 
lumes, by Gay Lussac. 

7* The discovery of the chemical effects of elec- 
tricity, and the decomposing agency of the 
Voltaic pile, by Nicholson and Carlisle ; the 
investigation of the laws of such decompo- 
sitions, by Berzelius and Hisinger: the de- 
composition of the alkalies by Davy, and the 
consequent introduction into chemistry oT 
new and powerful agents in their metallic 
bases. 

8. The application of chemical analysis to all the 

objects of organized and imorganized nature, 
and the discovery of the ultimate constituents- 
of all, and the proximate ones of organic 
matter, and the recognisance of the import- 
ant distinctions which appear to divide these 
great classes of bodies from each other. 

9. Th^ applications of chemistry to innumerable 

processes in the arts, and among other useful 
purposes to the discovery of the essential 
medical principles in vegetables, and to im- 
portant medicaments in the mineral king- 
dom. 

10. The establishment of the intimate connectimr 



n 



S(H PISCOUR8B ON THX STUDY 

between chemical corapoBition and crystal- 
line fonn> by Haiiy and Yaaquelin, with the 
succesuTe rectifications the statement of that 
connection has undergone in the hands of 
Mitscherlich, Rose> and others, with the pro- 
gress of chemical and crystaUographical 
knowledge. 
(338.) To pursue these serend heads into detail 
would lead us into a treatise on chemistry ; but a 
few remarks on one or two of them, as they bear 
upon the general principles of all scientific enquiry, 
will not be irrelevant. And first, then, with refer- 
ence to the discovery of new elements, it will be 
observed, that philosophical chemistry no more aims 
at determinii^ the one essential element out of which 
all matter is fiiuned — the one ultimate principle of 
the universe — than astronomy at discovering the 
origin of the planetary movements in the applica- 
tion of a determinate projectile force in a determin- 
ate direction, or geolc^ at ascending to the creation 
of the earth. There may be such an element. Some 
singulcu* relations whidbi have been pointed out in 
the atomic weights of bodies seem to suggest to 
minds fond of speculation that there is; but philoso- 
phical chemistry is content to wait for some striking 
fact, which may either occur unexpectedly or be led 
to by the slow progress of enlarged views, to disclose 
to us its existence. Still, the multiplication of so- 
oonsidered elementary bodies has been considered 
by some as an inconvenience. We confess we do 
not coincide with this view. Whatever they be, the 
obstinacy with which they resist decomposition 
shows that they are ingredients of a very high and 



07 KATtTRAL PHIL0S0PR7. S05 

primary importance in the economy of nature ; and 
such as, in any state of science, it would be indis^ 
pensably necessary to be perfectly familiar with. 
Uke particular theorems in geometry, whidi, 
though not rising to the highest point of generality, 
have 3ret their several scopes and ranges of exten- 
dve application, they must be well and perfectly 
understood in all their bearings. Should we ever 
arrive at an analysis of these bodies, die chemical 
properties of the new elements which will then 
eome into view wHl be known only by our know- 
ledge of these, or of other compounds of the same 
diass, which they may be capable of forming. Not but 
that such an analysis would be a most important and 
mdeed triumphant achievement, and change the 
fice of chemistry; but it would undo nothing that 
has been done, and render useless no point of know- 
ledge which we have yet arrived at. 

(339.) The atomic theory, or the law of definite 
proportions, which is the same thing presented in a 
form divested of all hypothesis, after the laws of 
mechanics, is, perhaps, the most important which 
the study of nature has yet disclosed. The extreme 
simplicity which characterizes it, and whidi is 
itself an indication, not unequivocal, of its elevated 
rank in the scale of physical truths, had the effect 
of causing it to be announced at once by Mr. 
Dalton, in its most general terms, on th^ contem- 
plation of a few instances*, without passing through 
subordinate stages of painful inductive ascent by 
the intermedium of subordinate laws, such as, had 
die contrary course been pursued by him, would 

' Thomson's First Principles of Chemistry, Introduction. 

X 



306 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

have been naturally preparatory to it, and sudi as 
would have led others to it by the prosecution of 
Wenzel's and Richter's researches, had they been 
duly attended to. This is, in fact, an example, and 
a most remarkable one, of the effect of that natural 
propensity to generalize and simplify (noticed in 
17L), which, if it occasionally leads to over-has^ 
conclusions, limited or disproved by further experi- 
ence, is yet the legitimate parent of all our most valo* 
able and our soundest results. Instances like thi^ 
where great and, indexed, immeasurable steps in 
our knowledge of nature are made at once, and 
almost without intellectual effort, are well calculated 
to raise our hopes of the future progress of science^ 
and, by pointing out the simplest and most obvious 
combinations as those which are actually found to 
be most agreeable to the harmony of creation, to 
hold out the cheering prospect of difficulties dimin- 
ishing as we advance, instead of thickening around 
us in increasing complexity. 

(340.) A consequence of this immediate present- 
ation of the law of definite proportions in its most 
general form is, that its subordinate laws — those 
which limit its generality in particular cases, which 
diminish the number of combinations abstractly 
possible, and restrain the indiscriminate mixture of 
elements, — remain to be discovered. Some sudi 
limitations have, in fact, been traced to a certain 
extent, but by no means so far as the importance of 
the subject requires; and we have here abundant 
occupation for chemists for some time. 

(341.) The determination of the atomic weights 
of the chemical elements, like that of other standard 



OV NATURAL FHIL080PHT. 807 

ph jsical data, with the utmost exactness, is in itself 
a branch of enquiry not only of the greatest im- 
portance, but of extreme difficulty. Independent 
of the general reasons for desiring accuracy in this 
respect, there is one peculiar to the suliject. It 
has been suggested (by Dr. Prout), and strongly 
insisted on (by Dr. Thomson), that all the numbers 
representing these weights, constituting a scale of 
great extent, in which the extremes already known 
are in proportion to each other, as 1 to upwards of 
9Q0, are simple even multiples of the least of them. 
If this be really the case, it opens views of fnich 
inq>ortance as to justify any degree of labour and 
pains in the verification of the law as a purely in- 
ductive one. But in the actual state of chemical 
analysis, with all deference to such high authority^ 
we confess it appears to us to stand in great need 
of further confirmation, since it seems doubtfiil 
whether sudi accuracy has yet been attained as to 
enable us to answer positively for a fraction not 
exceedmg the three or four hundredth part of the 
whole quantity to be determined : at least the re- 
salts of the first experimenters, obtained with the 
greatest care, differ often by a greater amount ; and 
diis degree of exactness, at least, would be required 
to verify the law satis&ctorily in the higher parts 
of the scale. 

(S42.) The mere agitation of such a question, 
however, points out a class of phenomena in physical 
science of a remote and singular kind, and of a veij 
high and refined order, which could never become 
known but in an advanced state of science, not only 
practical, but theoretical, — we mean, such as coi^ 

X 2 



308 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

sist in observed relations among the data of physic^ 
which show them to be quantities not arbUrarUy 
assmned, but depending on laws and causes whidi 
they may be the means of at length disclosing. 
A remarkable instance of such a relation is the 
curious law which Bode observed to obtain in the 
progression of the magnitudes of the several planet- 
acy orbits. This law was interrupted between I^Jars 
and Jupiter, so as to induce him to consider a 
planet as wanting in that interval; — a deficiency 
long afterwards strangely supplied by the discovery 
of four new planets in that very interval, all. of 
whose orbits con&rm in dimension to the law in 
question, within such moderate limits of error as 
may be due to causes independent of those on which 
the law itself ultimately rests. 

(343.) Neither is it irrelevant to our subject to 
remark, that the progress which has been made in 
this department of chemistry, and the considerable 
exactness actually attainable in chemical analysisy 
have been owing, in great measure, to a circum* 
stance which might at first have been hardly con- 
sidered likely to exercise much influence on the 
progress of a science, — the discovery of platina. 
Without the resources placed at the ready dispoaal 
of chemists by this invaluable metal, it is difficult to 
conceive that the multitude of delicate analytical 
experiments which have been required to construct 
the fabric of existing knowledge could have ever 
been performed. This, among many such lessons^ 
will teach us. that the most important uses of na- 
tural objects are not those which ofier themselves 
to us most obviously. The chief use of the moon 



OF NATURAL PHIL080PHT. S09 

for man's immediate purposes remained miknown 
to him for five thousand years from his creation. 
And^ since it cannot but be that innumerable and 
most important uses remain to be discovered among 
the materials and objects already known to us, as 
well as among those which the progress of science 
must hereafter disclose, we may hence conceive a 
well-grounded expectation, not only of constant in- 
crease in the physical resources of mankind, and the 
consequent improvement of their condition, but of 
continual accessions to our power of penetrating 
into the arcana of nature, and becoming acquainted . 
«rith her highest laws. 



z 8 



310 DI8C0UBSS ON XHB STUDY 



CHAP. V. 

OF THE IMPONDERABLE FORMS OF MATTBB. 



^344.) One of the chief agents in chemistiy, on 
whose proper application and management the 
success of a great number of its enquiries depends^ 
and many of whose most important laws are di»- 
dosed to us by phenomena of a chemical nature^ 
is HEAT. Although some of its effects are con- 
tinually before our eyes as matters of the most 
common occurrence, msomuch that there is scarcely 
any process in the useful arts and manu&ctures 
which does not call for its intervention, and a^ 
though, independent of this high utility, and the 
proportionate importance of a knowledge of its 
nature and laws, it presents in itself a subject of 
the most curious speculation ; yet there is scarcely 
any physical agent of which we have so imperfect 
a knowledge, whose intimate nature is more hidden* 
or whose laws are of such delicate and difficult in- 
Testigation. 

(345.) The word heat generally implies the sens- 
ation which we experience on approaching a fire; 
but, in the sense it carries in physics, it denotes the 
cause, whatever it be, of that sensation, and of all 



09 NATURAL FHILOSOPHT. Sll 

the Other phen(mieiia which arise on the implication 
of fire, or of any other heating cause. We should 
be greatly deceived if we referred only to sensation 
as an indication of the presence of this cause. 
Many of those things which excite in our organs, 
and especially of those of taste, a sensation of heat, 
awe this property to chemical stimulants, and not 
at all to their being actually hot This error of 
judgment has produced a corresponding confusion 
oi£ language, and hence had actually at one period * 
crept into physical philosophy a great many illc^cal 
and absurd conclusions. Again, there are a number 
of chemical agents, which, from their corroding, 
blackening, and dissolving, or drying up the parts 
of some descriptions of bodies, and producing on 
them effects not generally unlike (though intrin- 
ideally very different from) those produced by heat, 
are said, in loose and vulgar language, to bum 
them ; and this error has even become rooted into 
a prejudice, by the fact that some of these agenta 
are capable of becoming actually and truly Ao^ 
during their action on moist substances, by reason 
o£ their combination with the water the latter con- 
tain. Thus, quicklime and oil of vitriol both ex- 
ercise a powerful corrosive action on animal and 
?^etable substances, and both become violently 
hot by their combination with water. They are, 
therefore, set down in vulgar parlance as substances 
of a hot nature ; whereas, in their relations to the 
physical cause oF heat, they agree with the gene- 
rality of bodies similarly constituted. 

* NoYum Organum, part ii. table 2. (24), (30), &c. on the 
form or nature of heat. 

Z 4 



SI 2. SISCOUASE ON THR ttTUDY 

(346.) The nature of heat ha^ hitherto been 
chiefly studied under the general heads 4>f — 
Ist, Its sources, or the phenomena which it usually 

accompanies. 
2d, Its communication from its sovyrces to su^ 
stances capable of receiving it, and from these 
to others^ with a view to discover the laws 
which regulate its distribution through space 
or through the bodies which occupy it. 
3d, Its ieffects, on eur senses, and on Uie bodies to 
which it \a communicated in its various d^ 
grees of int^sjty, by which, meao^ are affi»rded 
us of >measuriDg jthese 4^eea. 
ith> Its intuwate jetoti<ms to the atoms of matter, 
as .e;idubited in its capability of acquiring a 
latent state und^r certain circumstances, ;md 
of entering into fiopnething like chemical com* 
bination^. 
(347.) The most obvious sources of heat are, the 
sun, fire, animal life, fermentations, violent chemical 
actions of all kinds, friction, percussion, Mghtnin^ 
or the electric discharge, in whatever manner pro- 
duced, the sudden condensation of air, and other^ 
so numerous, and so varied, as to show the ex- 
tensive and important part it has to perform in the 
economy of nature. The discoveries of chemists, 
however, have referred most of these to the general 
head of chemical combination. Thus, fire, or the 
combustion of inflammable bodies, is nothing more 
thfm a violent chemical action attending the cook- 
bination of their ingredients with the oxygen of the 
air. Animal heat is, in like manner, referable to a 
process bearing no remote analogy to a slow com- 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. SIS 

bastion, by which a pordon of ixarbon, an inflam- 
joable principle existing in the blood, is imited with 
ilfae oxygen of the ok in respiration ; and thus car- 
ried off from the system : fermentation is nothiog 
IBQpe tiian a decomposition of chemical elemmts 
kosely united, and their re-union in a more per- 
masient state of combination. The analogy between 
Ihe sun and terrestrial fire is so natural as to have 
been chosen by Newton to exemplify the irresistible 
force of an in^ence derived from that principle. 
But the nature of the sun and the mode in which 
itswonderftd supply of light and heat is maintained 
are involved in a mystery which every discovery that 
has been made either in chemistry or optics, so far 
ftom elucidating, seems only to render more pn>- 
fiMiad. Friction as a source of heat is well known : 
iRe rub our hands to warm them, and we grease 
the axles of carriage-wheels to prevent their setting 
fire to the wood ; an accident which, in spite of 
^bi» precaution, does sometimes happen. But the 
effect of frictkm, as a means of producing heat with 
little or no consumption of materials, was not fully 
understood till made the sul]ject of direct expe- 
riment by count Rumford, whose results appear to 
have established the extra<M^dinary fact, that an 
unlimited supply of heat may be derived by friction 
from the same materials. Condensation, whether 
of air by pressure, or of metds by percussion, is 
another powerful source of heat. Thus, iron may 
be so dexterously hammered as to become red-hot, 
and the rapid condensaticm of a confined portion of 
air will set tmder on fire. 

(S48.) The most violent heats known are pro- 



314 DISCOURSE OK THE STUDY 

duced by the concentration of the solar rays by 
burning glasses,— -by the combustion of oxygen and 
hydrogen gases mixed in the exact proportion in 
i^ch they combine to produce water, — and by the 
discharge of a continued and copious current of 
electricity through a small conductor. As these 
three sources of heat are independent of eadi 
other, and each capable of being brought into 
action in a very confined space, there seems no 
reason why they might not all three be aj^lied at 
once at the same point, by which means, probably, 
effects would be produced infinitely surpassing any 
hitherto witnessed. 

(349.) Heat is communicated either by radiaikm 
between bodies at a distance, or by etmdncikm 
between bodies in contact, or between the conti- 
guous parts of one and the same body. The laws 
of the radiation of heat have been studied with 
great attention, and have been found to present 
strong analogies with that of light in some point% 
and singular differences in others. Thus, the heat 
which accompanies the sun's rays comports itsd^ 
in all respects, like light ; being subject to similar 
laws of reflection, refi-action, and even of polarisa- 
tion, as has been shown by Berard. Yet they are 
not identical with each other ; Sir William Hersdid 
having shown, by decisive experiments, verified bj 
those of Sir H. Englefield, that there exist m a 
solar beam both rays of heat which are not lumin- 
ous, and rays of light which have no heating power. 

(350.) llie heat, radiated by terrestrial fires, and 
by bodies obscurdy hot, by whatever means they 
have acquired their heat (even by exposure to the 



or HAXUaAL PHILOSOPHT. S15 

son's raj8)» differs Tery materiaUy from solar beat 

in their power of penetrating transparent substances* 

This singular and important difference was first 

noticed by Mariotte, and afterwards made the sub* 

ject of many curious and interesting experiments 

by Scheele, who found that terrestrial heat, or that 

radiated from fires or heated bodies, is intercepted 

and detainee^ by glass or other transparent bodies, 

wiule solar heat is not; and that, being so detained, 

it heats them : which the latter, as it passes freely 

through them, is incapable of doing. The more 

recent researches of Delaroche, however, hare 

shown that this detention is complete only when 

the temperature of the source of heat is low ; but 

that, as that temperature is higher, a portion of the 

heat radiated acquires a power of penetrating glass ; 

and that the quantity which does so bears con** 

tmually a larger and larger proportion to the whole, 

as the heat of the radiant body is more intense. 

This discovery is very important, as it establishes 

a community of nature between solar and terrestrial 

heat ; while at the same time it leads us to regard. 

the actual temperature of the sun as &r exceeding 

that of any earthly flame. 

(351.) A variety of theories have been firamed to 
account for these curious phenomena ; but the sub- 
ject stands rather in need of further elucidation 
from experiment, and is one which merits, and will 
probably amply repay, the labours of those who may 
hereafter devote their attention to it. The theory 
f the radiation of heat, in general, which seems to 
agree best with the known phenomena, is that of 
M. Prevost, who considers all bodies as constantly 



S16 DISCUU&SX ON THE STUDY . 

» 

radiating out heat in all directidns, and receiving it 
by a similar means of communication from others, 
and thus tending, in any space filled, wholly or in 
part, with bodies at various temperatures, to esta- 
blish an equilibrium, or equality of heat in all parts. 
Hie application of this idea to the explanation of 
the phenomenon of dew we have akeady seen (see 
167.). The laws of such radiation, under various 
drcumstimces, have been lately investigated in a 
beautiful series of experiments on the cooling of 
bodies by their own radiation in vacuo^ fay Messrs. 
IXdong and Petit, whidi offer some of the best ex- 
amples in science of the inductive investigatioa of 
quantitative laws. 

(352.) The communication of heat between bodies 
in contact, or between the different parts of the 
same body, is performed by a process called con- 
duction. It is, in fact, only a particular case bf 
radiation, as has been explained abo^.^217.); but 
a case so particular as to require a separate and 
independent investigation of its laws. The most 
important consideration introduced into the enquiiy 
by this peculiarity is that of time. The cotq- 
munication of heat by conduction is performed, fat 
the most part, with extreme slowness, while that 
performed by direct nuliation is probably not less 
rapid than the propagation of light itself. Tbe 
analysis of the delicate and difficult points wbidi 
arise in the investigation of this subject in its 
reduction to direct geometrical treatment has been 
executed with admirable success by the late Baron 
Founier, whose recent lamented death has deprived 
science of an ornament it could ill spare, thinned 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 317 

m 

as its ranks have been within the last few years. 
This acute philosopher and profound mathe- 
matician has developed, in a series of elaborate 
memoirs presented to the French Institute, the 
laws of the communication of heat through the 
interior of solid masses, placed under the influence 
of any external heating and cooling causes, and has 
in particular applied his results to the conditions on 
which the maintenance of the actual observed 
temperature on the earth's surface depends ; to ihe 
possible influence of a supposed central heat on our 
climates ; and to the determination of the actual 
amount of the heat, derived to us from the sun, or 
at least that portion of it on which the difference of 
the seasons depends. 

(353.) The principal effects of heat are the sens^ 
ations of warmth or cold consequent on its entry 
or egress into or out of our bodies ; the dilatation it 
causes in the dimensions of all substances in which 
it is accumulated ; the changes of state it produces 
ih the melting of solids, and the conversion of 
them and of liquids into vapour ; and the chemical 
changes it performs by actual decompositions 
effected in the intimate molecules of various sub- 
stances, especially those of which vegetables and 
animals are composed ; to which we may add, die 
production of electric phenomena und^ certain 
circumstances in the contact of metals, and the 
developement of electric polarity in crystallised sub- 
stances. 

(354*.) Cold has been considered by some as a 
positive quality, the effect of a cause antagonist to 
that of heat ; but this idea seems now (with perhape 



318 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

a single exception) to be universally abandoned. 
The sensation of cold is as easily explicable by th6 
passage of heat outwards through the surface of the 
body as that of heat by its ingress from without ; 
and the experiments cited in proof of a radiation of 
odd are all perfectly explained by Prevost's theory 
of reciprocal interchange. It is remarkable, how- 
ever, how very limited our means of producing in- 
tense cold are, compared with those we possess of 
effecting the accumulation of heat in bodies. Hug 
m one of the strongest argmnents adducible in £a.Yoxa 
of the doctrines of those who maintain the possibility 
of exhausting the heat of a body altogether, and 
leaving it in a state absolutely devoid of it. But we 
ought to consider, that the known methods of gene- 
rating heat chiefly turn on the production of che- 
mical combinations : we may easily conceive, there- 
fore, that, to obtain equally powerful corresponding 
frigorific effects, we ought to possess the means dT 
effecting a disunion equally extensive and rapid be- 
tween such elements, actually combined, as have 
already produced heat by their union. This, hoir- 
ever, we can only accomplish by engaging them m 
combinations still more energetic, that is to say, in 
which we may reasonably expect more heat to be 
produced by the new combmation than would be 
destroyed or abstracted by the proposed decompod- 
tion. Chemistry, however, (unaided by electric 
agency,) affords no means of suddenly breaking the 
union of two elements, and presenting both in an us* 
combined state. A certain analogy to such disuniofn, 
however, and its consequences, may be traced in the 
sudden expansion of condensed gases fr<Hn a liquid 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 319 

State into vapour, which is the most powerful source 
of cold known. 

(355.) The dilatation of bodies by heat forms the 
subject of that branch of science allied pyrometry. 
There is no body but is capable of being penetrated 
by heat, though some with greater, others with less 
rapidity ; and being so penetrated, all bodies (with a 
?ery few exceptions, and those depending cm very pe« 
collar circumstance8,)are dilated by it in bulk, though 
with a great diversity in the amount of dilatation 
produced by the same degree of heat. Of the several 
forms of natural bodies, gases and vapours are ob- 
served to be most dilatable ; liquids next, and solids 
least of all. The dilatation of solids has been made 
a subject of repeated and careful measurement by 
several experimenters; among whom, Smeatoo, 
Lavoisier, and Laplace, are the principal. The 
remarkable discovery of the unequal dilatation of 
crystallised bodies by Mitscherlich has already 
been spoken of. (266.) That of gases and vapours 
was examined about the same time by Ddton and 
Gay-Lussac, who both arrived independently at the 
conclusion of an equal dilatability subsisting in 
them aU, which constitutes one of the most remarji- 
afale points in their history. 

(356.) The dilatation of air by heat affords, per** 
fa^ps, the most unexceptionable means known of 
measuring degrees of heat. The thermometer, as 
ooriginally constructed by Cornelius Drebell, was an 
air thermometer. Those now in common use 
measure accessions of heat not by the degree of 
dilatation of air but of mercury. It has been shown, 
by the researches of Dulong and Petit, that its indi* 



S20 DISCOURSE OK tHE STUD7 

cations coincide exactly with that of the air-diermo- 
meter in moderate temperatures ; though at veiy 
devated ones they exhibit a sensible, and even 
considerable, deviation. By this instrument, whidi 
owes its present convenience and utility to the 
happy idea of Newton, who first thought of fixing 
determinate points on its scale, we are enabled to 
estimate, or at least identify, the degrees of heat ; 
and thereby to investigate with accuracy the laws 
of its communication and its other properties. Were 
we sure that equal additions of heat produced equal 
increments of dimension in any substance, the indi- 
cations of a thermometer would afford a true and 
secure iMosure of the quantity present ; but this is 
so far from being the case, that we are nearly in 
total ignorance on this important point ; a circum- 
stance which throws the greatest difficulty in the way 
of all theoretical reasoning, and even of experi- 
mental enquiry. The laws of the dilatation of liquids, 
in consequence of this deficiency of necessary pre- 
liminary knowledge, are still involved in great ob- 
scurity, notwithstanding the pains which have been 
bestowed on them by the elaborate experiments and 
calculations of Gilpin, Blagden, Deluc, Dalton, Gaj- 
Lussac, and Biot. 

(357.) The moat striking and important of the 
effects of heat consist, however, in the liquefaction of 
solid substances, and the conversion of the liquids 
so produced into vapour. There is no solid substance 
known which, by a sufficiently intense heat, may 
not be melted, and finally dissipated in vapour ; and 
this analogy is so extensive and cogent, that we 
not but suppose that all those bodies which 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 921 

liquid under ordinary circumstances, owe their li- 
quidity to heat, and would freeze or become solid iS 
their heat could be sufficiently reduced. In many 
we see this to be the case in ordinary winters ; for 
some, severe frosts are requisite ; others freeze only 
with the most intense artificial colds; and some 
have hitherto resisted all our endeavours; yet the 
number of these last is few, and they will probably 
cease to be exceptions as our means of producing 
cold become enlarged. 

(358.) A similar analogy leads us to conclude that 
aH aeriform fluids are merely liquids kept in the 
state of vapour by heat. Many of them have been 
actually condensed into the liquid state by cold ac- 
companied with violent pressure ; and as our means 
of applying these causes of condensation have im- 
proved, more and more refractory ones have succes- 
sively yielded. Hence we are fairly entitled to 
extend our conclusion to those which we have not 
yet been able to succeed with ; and thus we are led 
to regard it as a general &ct, that the liquid and 
aeriform or vaporous states are entirely dependent 
on heat ; that were it not for this cause, there 
would be nothing but solids in nature ; and that, on 
the other hand> nothing but a sufficient intensity of 
heat is requisite to destroy the cohesion of every 
substance, and reduce all bodies, first to liquids, and 
then into vapour. 

(359.) But solids, themselves, by the abstraction 
of heat shrink in dimension, and at the same time 
become harder, and more brittle ; yielding less to 
pressure, and permitting less separation between 
their parts by tension. These facts, coupled with 

Y 



322 DISCOURSS OV THB STUDY 

the greater compressibilitj of Uqukb> and the still 
greater of gases, stron^y induce us to believe that 
it is heat, and heat alone, which holds the partides 
of all bodies at that distance from each other whidb 
is necesscffy to allow of compression ; whidi in ^tci 
gives them their elasticity, and acts as the anta^ 
gonist force to their mutual attraction, which would 
otherwise draw them into actual contact, and retain 
them in a state oi absolute immobility and impene* 
trabilitj. Thus we learn to regard heat as one of 
the great maintaining powers of the universe, and to 
attadi to all its laws and relations a d^ree of in* 
portance which may justly entitle them to the most 
assiduous enquiry. 

(360.) It was first ascertained by Dr. Black that 
when heat produces the lique&ction of a solid, or 
the conversion of a liquid into vapour, the liqoid oe 
the vi^wur resulting is no hoiiar than tke sc^d or 
liquid from vrhick it was produced, though a great 
deal of heat has been expended in producing this 
effect, and has actually entered into the substance. 

(361.) Hence he chrew the conclusion that it baa 
become latmli and continues to exist in the product, 
maintainmg it in its new state, without increasing 
its temperature. He further proved, that when the 
vapour condenses, or the liquid freezes, this latent 
h«at is again given out from it. This great dia* 
covery, with its natural and hardly less important 
concomitant, that of the difference of specific heats 
in different bodies, or the different quantities of beat 
they require to raise their temperature equally, are 
the chief reasons for regarding heat as a material 
substance in a more decided manner th«i light, 



or VATURAL PIIILOSOPHT. 323 

with which in its radiant state it holds so dose an 
analogy. 

(362^) The sulgect of latent heat has been far less 
attentively studied than its great practical import- 
a&oe would appear to demand, when we consider 
that it is to this part of physical science that the 
theory of the steam-engine is mainly referable, and 
that material impror^Dents nuiy not unreasonably 
be expected in that wonderful instrument, from a 
ttore extended knowledge than we possess of the 
latent heats of different rapours. This is not the 
case, however, with the subject of specific heat, 
which was followed up immediately after its first 
promulgation with diligence by Irvine ; and, after a 
\m6£ interval, by Lavoisier and Laplace, as well as 
bj our countrjrman Crawfurd, who determined the 
8|^cific heats of many substances, both solid and 
li^ikL After a considerable period of inactivity, the 
subject was agam resumed by Delaroche and Berard, 
and sidwequently by Dulong and Petit : the result of 
whose investigations has been the inductive esta- 
blishnsent of one of those simple and elegant phy- 
sical laws tfrhich carry with them, if not their own 
evidence) at least their own recommendation to our 
belief, as being in unison with every thing we know 
of the harmony of nature. The law to which we 
dQude is this :^*^ that the atoms of all the sunple 
dhemical dements have ^:ftaetly the same ci^city 
for heat, or are ail effoMy heated or cooled by equal 
accessions or idbstraetions of heat. It is only among 
laws like this that we can expect to find a dew ca- 
pable of guidii^ us to a knowledge of the true na- 
ture of heat, and its relations to ponderable matter. 

Y 2 



324 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

Magnetism and Electriciiy* 

(363.) These two subjects, which had long main- 
tained a distinct existence, and been studied as 
separate branches of science, are at length effectually 
blended. This is, perhaps, the most satis&ctory 
result which the experimental sciences have ever 
yet attained. All the phenomena of magnetic po- 
larity, attraction, and repulsion, have at length been 
resolved into one general fact, that two currents of 
electricity, moving in the same direction repel, and 
in contrary directions attract, each other. Tlie 
phenomena of the conmiunication of magnetism and 
what is called its induced state, alone remain un- 
accounted for ; but the interesting theory which has 
been developed by M. Ampere, under Uie name of 
Electro-dynamics, holds out a hope that this dif- 
ficulty will also in its turn give way, and the whole 
subject be at length completely merged, as &r as the 
consideration of the acting causes goes, in the more 
general one of electricity. This, however, does not 
prevent magnetism from maintaining its separate 
importance as a department of physical enquiry, 
having its own peculiar laws and relations of the 
highest practical interest, which are capable d 
being studied quite apart from all consideration of its 
electrical origin. And not only so, but to study them 
with advantage, we must proceed as if that origin 
were totally unknown, and, at least up to a certain 
point, and that a considerably advanced one» conduet 
our enquiries into the subject on the same inductive 
principles as if this branch of physics were 
lutely independent of all others. 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 325 

(364.) Iron, and its oxides and alloys, were for a 
long time the only substances considered susceptible 
of magnetism. The loadstone was even one of the 
examples produced by Bacon of that class of phy- 
sical instances to which he applies the term <<In- 
stantiae monodicBd** — singidar ingtances. And the 
history of magnetism affords a beautiful comment on 
his remark on instances of this sort. << Nor should 
our enquiries, " he observes, " into their nature be 
broken off, till the properties and qualities found in 
such things as may be esteemed wonders in nature 
are reduced and comprehended imder some certain 
law ; so that all irregularity or singularity may be 
found to depend upon some common form, and the 
wonder only rest in the exact differences, degrees, 
or extraordinary concurrence, and not in the species 
itself." The discovery of the magnetism of nickel, 
which though inferior to that of iron, is still con- 
siderable; that of cobalt, yet feebler, and that of 
titanium, which is only barely perceptible, have 
effectually broken down the imaginary limit between 
iron and the other materials of the world, and esta- 
blished the existence of that general law of conti- 
nuity which it is one chief business of philosophy 
to trace throughout nature. The more recent dis- 
coveries of M. Arago (mentioned in 160.) have 
completed this generalization, by showing that there 
18 no substance but which, under proper circum- 
stances, is capable of exhibiting unequivocal signs of 
the magnetic virtue. And to obliterate all traces of 
that line of separation which was once so broad, we 
are now enabled, by the great discovery of Oersted, 
to communicate at and during pleasure to a coiled 

Y 8 



$26 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

wire of any metal indifferent! j all the properties of 
a magnet; — its attraction, repulsion, and polari^; 
and that even in a more intense degree than was pre- 
viously thought to be possible in the best natural 
magnets. In short, in this cas^, and in this case 
only, perhaps, in science, have we arrived at that 
point which Bacon seems to have understood by the 
discovery of " forms." " The form of any nature," 
says he, '< is such, that where it is, the given nature 
must infallibly be. The form, therefore, is perpe- 
tually present when that nature is present; ascer- 
tains it universally, and acoompanies it every where* 
Again, this form is suqh, that when removed, the 
given nature infallibly vanishes. Lastly, a true form 
is such as can deduce a given nature from some 
essential property, which resides in many things.** 

(365.) Magnetism is remarkable in another im- 
portant point of view. It offers a prominent, or 
" glaring instance" of that quality in nature which 
is termed jM>/(an^ (967.)) and that under circum- 
stances which peculiarly adapt it for the study of 
this quality. It does not appear that the ancienta 
had any knowledge of this property of the magnet^ 
though its attraction of iron was well known to them. 
The first mention of it in modem times cannot be 
traced earlier than USOy though it was probably 
known to the Chinese before that time. The po- 
larity of the magnet consists in this, that if suft- 
pended freely, one part of it will invariably direct 
itself towards a certain point in the horizon, the 
other towards the opposite point; and that* if two 
magnets, so suspended, be brought near each cither, 
there will take place a mutual action, in consequence 



OF KATUftAL PHILOSOPHT. S27 

of wludi, the positions of both will be disturbed, in 
lihe same manner as would happen if the corre* 
sponding parts of each repelled, and those oppositely 
directed attracted, each other; and by properly 
varying the experiment, it is found that they really 
do so. If a small magnet, freely suspended, be 
brou^t into the neighbourhood of a larger one, it 
will take a position depending on the position of the 
poies of the larger one^ with respect to its point of 
suspension. And it has been ascertained that these 
and all other phenomena exhibited by magnets in 
their mutual attractions and repulsions are ex- 
plicable on the supposition of two forces or virtues 
lodged in the particles of the magnets, the one 
predominating at one end, the other at the other ; 
and such that each particle shall attract those in 
which the opposite virtue to its own prevails, and 
repel those in which a simihr one resides with a 
force proportional to the inverse square of their 
mutual distance. 

(366.) The direction in which a magnetic bar, or 
needleofsteel,freely suspended, places itself, hasbeen 
ascertidned to be different at different points of the 
earth's surface. In some places it points exactly north 
and south, in others it deviatesfrom this direction more 
¦or less, and at some actually stands at right angles 
to it. This remarkable phenomenon, which is called 
the variation of the needle, and which was discovered 
by Sebastian Cabot in the year 1500, is accompanied 
with another called the dip, noticed by Robert Nor- 
man in 1576. It consists in a tendency of a needle, 
nicely balimced on its centre, when unmagnetized, 
to dip or point downwards when rendered magnetic^ 

Y 4 



328 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

towards a point below the horizon, and situated 
within the earth. By tracing the variation and dip 
over the wiiole surface of the globe, it has been 
found that these phenomena take place as they 
would do if the earth itself were a great magnet, 
having its poles deeply situated below the surface,*- 
and, what is very remarkable, possessing a slow 
motion within it, in consequence of which neither 
the variation nor dip remain constantly the same at 
the same place. The* laws of this motion are at 
present unknown; but the discovery of electro- 
magnetism, by rendering it almost certain that the 
earth's magnetism is merely an effect of the con- 
tinual circulation of great quantities of electricity 
round it, in a direction generally corresponding with 
that of its rotation, have dissipated the greater part 
of the mystery which hung over these phenomena ; 
since a variety of causes, both geological and others^ 
may be imagined which may produce considerable 
deviations in the intensity, and partial ones in the 
direction, of sudi electric currents. The unequal 
distribution of land and sea in the two hemisi^erea, 
by affecting the operation of the sun's heat in pn>» 
ducing evaporation from the latter, which is probably 
one of the great sources of terrestrial electricity^ 
may easily be conceived to modify the general tend* 
ency of such currents, and to produce irregularities 
in them, which may render a ^tis&ctory account of 
whatever still appears anomalous in the j^enomena 
of terrestrial magnetism. Tikis branch of science 
thus becomes connected, on a great scale, with that 
of meteorology, one of the most complicated and 
difficulty but at the same time interesting, subjects of 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 3^ 

physical research ; one, however, which has of late 
begun to be studied with a diligence which promises 
the speedy disclosure of relations and laws of which 
at present we can form but a very imperfect notion. 

(367») The communicationof magnetism from the 
earth to a magnetic body, or from one magnetic body 
to another, is performed by a process to which the 
name of induction has been given, and the laws and 
properties of such induced magnetism have been 
studied with much perseverance and success, — prac- 
tically, by Gilbert, Boyle, Knight, Whiston, Cavallo, 
Canton, Duhamel,Rittenhouse, Scoresby, and others; 
and theoretically, by ^pinus. Coulomb, and Poisson, 
and in our own country by Messrs. Barlow and 
Christie, who have investigated with great care the 
curious phenomena which take place when masses 
of iron are presented successively^ in different posi- 
tions, by rotation on an axis, to the influence of the 
earth's magnetism. The magnetism of crystallized 
bodies (partly from the extreme rarity of such as are 
susceptible. of anyconsiderable magnetic virtue) has 
not hitherto been at all examined, but wouldprobably 
afford very curious results. 

• (368.) To electricity the views of the physical 
enquirer now turn from almost every quarter, as to 
one of those universal powers which Nature seems 
to employ in her most important and secret oper- 
ations. This wonderful agent, which we see in 
intense activity in lightning, and in a feebler and 
more difiused form traversing the upper regions of 
the atmosphere in die northern lights, is present, 
probably in immense abundance, in every form of 
matter which surrounds us, but becomes sensible 



930 9I8COUBSE ON THE STUDY 

qdIj when diBtuifoed by exdtemarts of peculiar 
kinds. The most effectual of these is fricti<m, 
whidi we hare ahreadj observed to be a powerful 
source of heat. Eyerybody is fiuniliar with the 
crackling qiarks whidi fly from a cat's back idien 
stroked. These, by proper management^ may be 
accumulated in bodies suitably disposed to receive 
them, and, although then no longer visible, give 
evidence of their existence by the eidiibition of a vast 
variety of extraordinaiy phenomena, — producing 
attractions and repulsions in bodies at a distance,—* 
admitting of being transferred by contact, or by 
sudden and violent transilience o£ the interval of 
separation, from one body to another, under the 
form of sparks and flashes ; — traversing with perfect 
&C]lity the substance of the densest metals, and a 
variety of other bodies called conductors, but being 
detained by others, such as glass, and especially 
otr, which are thence called nouK^nductors, — pro- 
ducing painful shocks and convulsive motions, and 
even death itself if in sufficient quantity, in flnimalf 
through which they pass, and finally imitating, mi a 
small scale, all the effects of lightning. 

(369.) The study of these phenomena and their 
laws until a comparatively recent period occiqiied 
the entire attention of electricians, and constituted 
the whole of the science of electricity. It appears, 
as the result of their enquiries, that all the pheno- 
mena in question are explicable on the soppositioa 
that electricity consists in a rare, subtle, and highly 
elastic fluid, which in its tendency to expand and 
difiuse itself pervades with more or less facility the 
substance of conductors, but is obstructed and de* 



OF KATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 831 

tamed from expansion more or less completely bj 
non-conductors. It is supposed, moreover, that this 
electric fluid possesses a power of attraction for the 
particles of all ponderable matter^ tc^ether with 
that of a repulsion for particles of its own kind. 
Whether it has weight, or is rather to be regarded as 
a species of matter distinct from that of which pon- 
derable bodies consist, is a question of such delicacy, 
that no direct experiments have yet enabled us to 
decide it; but at all events its inertia compared 
with its elastic force must be conceived excessively 
small, so that it is to be regarded as a fluid in the 
highest degree acHve, obeying every impulse, in- 
ternal or external, with the greatest promptitude ; 
in short, a fluid whose energies can only be com- 
pared with those of the ethereal medium by which, 
in the imdulatory doctrine, light is supposed to be 
conveyed. The properties of hydrogen gas com- 
pared with those of the denser aeriform fluids will, 
in some slight degree, aid our conception of the 
excessive mobility and penetrating activity of a 
fluid so constituted. Electricity, however, must be 
regarded as differing in some remarkable points from 
all those fluids to which we have hitherto been ac- 
customed to apply the epithet elastic, such as air, 
gases, and vapours. In these, the repulsive force 
of the particles on which their elasticity depends is 
considered as extending only to very small distances, 
so as to affect only those in the immediate vicinity 
of each other, while their attractive power, by 
which they obey the general gravitation of all 
matter, extends to any distance* In electricity, on 
the other hand, the very reverse must be admitted. 



332 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

The force by which its particles repel each other 
extends to great distances, while its force of ad- 
hesion to ponderable matter must be regarded as 
limited in its extent to such minute intervals as 
escape observation. 

(370.) The conception of a single fluid of this 
kind, which when accumulated in excess in bodies 
tends constantly to escape, and seek a restoration 
of equilibrium by communicating itself to any others 
where there may be a deficiency, is that which 
occurs most naturally to the mind, and was accord- 
ingly maintained by Franklin, to whom the science 
of electricity is under great obligations for those 
decisive experiments which informed us respecting 
the true nature of lightning. The same theory was 
afterwards advocated by ^pinus, who first showed 
how the laws of equilibrium of such a fluid might 
be reduced to strict mathematical investigation. 
But there are phenomena accompanying its trans- 
fer from body to body and the state of equilibrium 
it affects under various circumstances, which ap- 
pear to require the admission o£ tvx> distinct Jiuids 
antagonist to each other, each attracting the other, 
and repelling itself; but each, alike, susceptible of 
adhesion to material substances, and of transfer 
more or less rapid from particle to particle of them. 
These fluids in the natural undisturbed state are 
conceived to exist in a state of combination and 
mutual saturation ; but this combination may be 
broken, and either of them separately accumulated 
in a body to any amount without the other, pro- 
vided its escape be properly obstructed by sur- 
rounding it with non-conductors. When so acca- 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 333 

mulated, its repulsion for its own kind and attraction 
of the opposite species in neighbouring bodies tends 
to disturb the natural equilibrium of the two fluids 
present in them, and to produce phenomena of a 
peculiar description, which are termed induced elec- 
tricity. Curious and artificial as this theoiy may 
appear, there has hitherto been produced no phe- 
nomenon of which it will not afford at least a plau- 
sible, and in by far the majority of cases a very 
satis&ctory, explanation. It has one character 
which is extremely valuable in any theory, that of 
admitting the application of strict mathematical 
reasoning to the conclusions we wduld draw from 
it. Without this, indeed, it is scarcely possible 
diat any theory should ever be fairly brought to 
the test by a comparison with facts. Accordingly, 
the mathematical theory of electrical equilibrium, 
and the laws of the distribution of the electric 
fluids over the surfaces of bodies in which they 
are accumulated, have been made the subject of 
elaborate geometrical investigation by the most 
expert mathematicians, and have attained a degree 
of extent and elegance which places this branch of 
science in a very high rank in the scale of nxa- 
thematico-physical enquiry. These researches are 
grounded on the assumption of a law of attraction 
and repulsion similar to those of gravity and mag- 
netism, and which by the general accordance of 
the results with &cts, as well as by experiments 
instituted for the express purpose of ascertaining 
the. laws in question, are regarded as sufficiently 
demonstrated. 

(37 L) The Inost obscure part of the subject b no 



334 DISCOURSB ON THE 3TUDT 

doubt the original mode of disturbance of electrical 
equilibrium, by which electricity is excited in the 
first instance, either by friction or by any other <£ 
those causes which hare been ascertained to pro- 
duce such an effect : analogies, it is true, are not 
wanting*; but it must be allowed that hitherto 

* We wiU raentSoii oiM whidi w« do not remeniiber to hm 
seen noticed elaewhere in the csk of a diMtmbaiioe of the equi- 
Ubrium of heat produced by means purely mechanical, and by 
a process depending entirely on a certain order and sequence 
of erents, and the operation of known causes. Suppose a quan- 
tity of air enclosed in a metallic; reservoir,- of some good con- 
ductor of heat, and suddenly compressed by a piston. AAer 
giting time for the heat developed by the condensetion to be 
commuiucafeed from the air to the metal which will be thenby 
more or less raised in temperature above the surrounding atmo* 
sphere, let the piston be suddenly retracted and the air restored 
to its original volume in an instant. The whole apparatus is 
now precisely in its initial situation, as to the dispoution cit its 
material parts, and the whole quantity of heat it contains re- 
mans unchanged. But it Is evident that the distribution of 
this beat within it is new very dHSsrem Irodi what it was before ; 
for the air in ittf sudden expansion cannot re-absorb in an in- 
stant of time all the heat it had parted with to the metal : it 
will, therefore, have a temperature heUw that of the general 
atmosphere, while the metal yet retains one above it. Thus, 
a subversion of the equilibrium €^ tempenture has been hnnti, 
^d^eflbcted. Heat has been drifen lirom the air into Che 
metal, while every thing else jemaiitt vnchanged. 

We have here a means by whichf iX is etident, heat may be 
obtained> to any extent, from the air, without fiieL For if, in 
place of withdrawing the piston and letting the tame air ex- 
pand, within the reservoir, it be allowed to escape so suddenly 
as not to re-absorb the heat gfven off, and fresh air be then ad- 
mitted and tbe«process repeated, any quantity of aAf mkj 
be drained of its heat 



OW NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 335 

nothing decisive has been offered on the subject ; 
and that conjectural modes of action hare in this 
instance too often usurped the ]^ace of those to 
which a careful examinaticHi ci lacts alone can 
lead us. 

(372.) Philosophers had long been familiar with 
the effects of electricity abore referred to, and with 
those which it produces in its sudden and violent 
tranrfer from one body to another, » rending and 
shattering the parts of the substances through which 
it passes, and where in great quantity, producing all 
the effect of intense heat, igniting, fusing, and vo- 
latilizing metals, and setting fire to inflammable 
bodies ; even its occasional influence in destroying 
or altering the polarity of the magnetic needle 
had been noticed : but as heat was known to be 
produced by mechanicid violence, and as magnet- 
ism was also known to be greatly affected by the 
same cause, these effects were referred rather to 
that cause than toany tiring in the pecidiar nature 
of the electric matter, and r^arded rather as an 
indirect consequence of its mode of acticm than as 
connected with its intimate nature; In short, elec- 
tricity seemed destined to furnish another in addi- 
tion to many mstances of subjects insulated from 
the rest of philosophy, and capable of being studied 
only m its own mtema! rdations, when the great 
discoveries of Galvani and Vokst placed a new 
power at the command of the ex p e ri m e n ter, by 
whose means Aose efEects wl^ich had Before been 
crowded within an inappreciable instant could be 
developed in detail and studied at leisure ; and those 
ferces which had previously exlribited themselves 



336 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

only in a state of uncontrollable intensity were 
tamed down, as it were, and made to distribute 
their efficacy over an indefinite time, and to r^u- 
late their action at the will of the operator. It was 
then soon ascertained that electricity in the act of 
its passage along conductors, produces a variety of 
wonderful effects, which had never been previously 
suspected; and these of such a nature, as to afford 
points of contact with several other branches of 
physical enquiry, and to throw new and unexpected 
lights on some of the most obscure operations of 
nature. 

(373.) The history of this grand discovery affords 
a fine illustration of the advantage to be derived in 
physical enquiry firom a close and careful attention 
to any phenomenon, however apparently trifling, 
which may at the moment of observati(m appear in- 
explicable on received principles. The convulsive 
motions of a dead frog in the neighbourhood of an 
electric discharge, which originally drew Gralvani^s 
attention to the subject, had been noticed by others 
nearly a century before his time, but attracted no 
further remark than as indicating a peculiar sensi- 
bility to electrical excitement depending on that 
remnant of vitality which is not extinguished in the 
organic firame of an animal by the deprivation of 
actual life. Galvani was not so satisfied. He ana- 
lysed the phenomenon^ and in investigating all the 
circumstances connected with it was led to the ob- 
servation of a peculiar electrical excitement which 
took place when a circuit was formed of three dis- 
tinct parts, a muscle, a nerve, and a metallic con- 
ductor, each placed in contact with the other two, 



on NATURAL ^HILOSOPHT* 337 

and which was manifested by a convukiye motion 
produced in the muscle. To this phenomenon he 
gave the name of animal electricity, an unfortunate 
epithet, since it tended to restrict enquiry into its 
nature to the class of phenomena in which it first 
became apparent. But this circumstance, which 
in a less enquiring age of science might have exer- 
cised a fatal influence on the progress of knowledge, 
proved happily no obstacle to the further develope- 
ment of its principles, the subject lining immedi- 
ately taken up with a kind of prophetic ardour by 
Yolta, who at once generalized the phenomena, re- 
jecting the physiological considerations introduced 
by Galvani, as foreign to the enquiry, and regarding 
the contraction of the muscles as merely a delicate 
means of detecting the production of electrical ex- 
citements too feeble to be rendered sensible by any 
other means. It was thus that he arrived at the 
knowledge of a general fact, that of the disturbance 
of electrical equilibrium by the mere contact of dif- 
ferent bodies, and the circulation of a current ot 
electricity in one constant direction, through a cir- 
cuit composed of three different conductors. To 
increase the intensity of the very minute and deli- 
cate effect thus observed became his next aim, nor 
did his enquiry terminate till it had placed him in 
possession of that most wonderful of all human in- 
ventions, the pile which bears his name, through 
the medium of a series of well conducted and lo- 
gically combined experiments, which has rarely, if 
ever, been surpassed in the annals of physical 
research. 
(374*) Though the original pile of Yolta was feebly 



S3S BISCOUaKK OK THE STUDY 

compared to thove gigantic combinatioiM which w«ra 
afterwards produced, it sufficed, however, to ex- 
hibit electricity under a vety diierent aqieet from 
any thing which had gone before, and to bring into 
Tiew those peculiar modifications in its action which 
Dr. WoUaston was the first to render a satis&dery 
account of, by referring them to an ti^crease of 
quantit^y accompanied with a diminuUon of inimniy 
in the supply afforded. The discovery had not 
long been made public, and the instrument in 
the hands of chemists and electricians, before it 
was ascertained that the electric current, trans- 
mitted by it through conducting liquids, produces 
in them chemical decompositions. This ciq[>ital dis- 
covery appears to have been made, in the first 
instance, by Messrs. Nicholson and Carlisle, who ob- 
served the decomposition of water so produced. It 
was speedily followed up by the still more important 
one g€ Berzelius and Hisinger, who ascertained it aa 
a general law, that, in all the decompositions so 
effected, the acids and oxygen become transferred to^ 
and accumulated- around, the positive, — and hydro- 
gen, metals, and alkalies jound the negative, pole of a 
Voltaic circuit; being transferred in an invisible, and, 
as it were, a latent or torpid state, by the action of 
the electric current, through considerable qMces, 
and even through large quantities of water or other 
liquids, again to re-appear with all their pn^rtiea 
at their appropriate resting-places. 

(375.) It was in this state of things that the sul:ject 
was taken up by Davy, who, seeing that the strongest 
chemical affinities were thus readily subverted bj 
th^ decomposing action of the pile, conceived the 



6t tfATURAL PHILOSOPHTa SSO 

happy idea of bringing to bear the intense p<iwer of 
the enormous batteries of the Royal Institution on 
those substances which, though strongly suspected 
to be compounds, had resisted all attempts to de- 
compose them ^ the alkalies and earths. They 
yielded to the force applied, and a total revolution 
was thus effected in chemistry ; not so much by th6 
introduction of the new elements thus brought to 
light, as by the mode of conceiving the nature of 
chemical sdffinity, which firom that time has been re^ 
garded (as Davy broadly laid it down, in a theory 
which was readily adopted by the most eminent 
chemists, and by none more readily than by Berze^ 
lius himself,) as entirely due to electric attractions 
and repulsions, those bodies combining most in- 
timately whose particles are habitually in a state of 
the most powerful electrical antagonism, and dis- 
possessing each other, according to the amount of 
their difference in this f espect ' 

(376.)*The connection of magnetism and electricity 
had long been suspected, and innumerable fruitless 
trials had been ma4e to determine, in the affirmative 
or negative, the question of such connection. The 
phenomena of many crystallized minerals which 
become electric by heat, and develope opposite 
electric poles at their two extremities, offered an 
analogy so striking to the pokrity of the magnet, 
that it seemed hardly possible to doubt a closer 
connection of the two powers. Tile developement 
of a similar polarity in the Voltaic pile pointed 
strongly to the same conclusion ; and experimenti 
had even been made with a view to ascertain whether 
a pile in a state of excitement might not manifest a 

z 2 



640 PISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

disposition to place itself in the magnetic meridian $> 
but the essential condition had been omitted, that of 
allowing the pileto discharge itself freely, a conditioa 
which assuredly never would have occurred of itself 
to any experimenter. Of all the philosophers who 
had speculated on this subject, none had so pertina- 
ciously adhered to the idea of a necessary connection 
between the phenomena as Oersted Baffled often, 
be returned to the attack ; and his perseverance was 
9t length rewarded by the complete disclosure of the 
wonderful phenomena of electro-magnetism. There 
is something in this which reminds us of the obsti- 
nate adherence of Columbus to his notion of the 
necessary existence of the New World ; and the 
whole history of this beautiful discovery may serve 
to teach us reliance on those general analogies and 
parallels between great branches of science by which 
one strongly reminds us of another, though no direct 
connection appears ; as an indication not to be neg- 
lected of a community of origin. « 

(377.) It is highly probable that we are still 
Ignorant of many interesting features in electrical 
;Bcience, which the study of the Voltaic circuit will 
one day disclose. The violent mechanical effects 
produced by it on mercury, placed under conduct- 
ing liquids which have been referred by Professor 
Erman to a modified form of capillary attraction, 
but which a careful and extended view of the phe- 
nomena have led others* to regard in a very dif- 
ferent light, as pointing out a primary action of a 
dynamical rather than a statical character, deserve, 
in this point of view, a further investigation ; and 

« See Phil. Trans. 1824. 



OF tTATURAL ^HlLOSOPHT^ 341 

€he curious relations of electricity to heat, as ex* 
hibited in the phenomena of what has been called 
thermo-electricity, promise an ample supply of new 
information! 

^378.) Among the remarkable effects of electricity 
dbclosed by the researches of Galvani and Voltai 
perhaps the most so consisted in its influence on: 
the nervous system of animals. The origin of mus- 
cular motion is one of those profound mysteries oi 
tiature which we can scarcely venture to hope will 
ever be fully explained. Physiologists, however, 
had long entertained a general conception of the 
conveyance of some subtle fluid or spirit from the 
brain to the muscles of animals along the nerves ; 
and the discovery of the rapid transmission of elec- 
tricity along conductors, with the violent effects 
produced by shocks, tiransmitted through the body, 
on the nervous system, would very naturally lead to 
the idea that this nervous fluid, if it had any real 
existence, might be no other than the electricaL 
But until the discoveries of Galvani and Volta, thia 
could only be looked upon as a vague conjecture^ 
The charactef of a vera causa was wanting to give it 
any degree of rational plausibility, since no reason 
could be imagined for the disturbance of the electrical 
equilibrium in die animal frame, composed as it ii 
entirely of conductors, or rather, it seemed contrary 
to the then known laws of electrical communication 
to suppose any such. Yet one strange and surpris* 
ing phenomenon might be adduced indicative of the 
possibility ci such disturbance, viz. the powerful 
shock givtHi by the torpedo and other fishes of the 
^ame kind, which presented so many analcgies witb 

z 3 



SM 919COUMSM ON THB «TUOT 

thaw arJBivg 6imii tdectricityy that tfaey could luvcDj 
be referred to a different source, tboii^ bmtkt tin 
diock veUher qperkaor any other in d i cati on of eleo" 
trical tension could be detected in thenu 

(S7a) Hie benHmbing efect of the tpvpedo had 
been ascertained to depend on cer^in singularly oon^ 
structed organs composed of membranous columns, 
fined from end to end with lamins, s^iarated 
from each other by a fluid : but of its mode of 
action no sattsfiictory aooount could be given i 
nor was there any thing in ita constructiaoiR and 
still less in the nature of its materials, to give 
the least ground for supposii^ it an electrical ap- 
paratus. But thepileof Voteasiqipliedatonce the 
anal<^8 both of structure and of effect, so as to 
leave little doubt of the electrical natmre of the ap- 
paratus, or of the pow^, a most wonderful oner 
certainly,, of the animal, to determine, by an eSnrt 
of its will, that concurrence of ponditions on which 
its activity dq>enda. This remained^ aa it probably 
ever will remain, mysterious and inei^pUeaUe; but 
tlie principle once estaUifhed, lliat there exists in 
the animal economy a power of determining the 
developement of electric excitements capable of be* 
bg transmitted along the nerveis, and it being aa^ 
eertained, by numerous and decisive experiments^ 
that the traasmisaioa of Voltaic eledricity aloi^ th^ 
nerves of even a dead animal is suSoient to produce 
the most violent muscular action, it became an easy 
step to refer the origin of muscular motion in the liv* 
ing frani^ to a similar caiMe I and to look to tha brain» 
a wonderfblly canstituled 0¥fap» ftr which no mode 
of action possessing the least plausibility had evcy 



Of KATVilAI. PKU^OflOPHT. 343 

been devued, u tiie wmroe ef th^ reqwed electrical 
power. * 

(38Ql) It ig not <HHr ial^tioB, haweveis to enter 
into any further oansidemtion of phy«iologioal $ub« 
jects. They femiy it is true, a meal iioporlant and * 
de^y intereating province of philoei^icali esquiryi 
but the view that we have taken of phyakai aeiened 
ha^ rath^ been directed to the atudy of inanimate 
nature^^ thao to that of the mysteriows phenomena 
of organization and life, which ciHialatute the objed 
of ^ysiok)gy. The hiatory of the animal and 
vegetable producticms of the gleb^ as affording 
objects and materiids far the convenience and use 
of man, and as dependent on and indicative of the 
general laws whidi determine the distribntion of 
heat, moisture, and other natural agents, over ita^ 
surface, and the revolutions it has nndeigone, are of 
course intimately connected wUh our subject, and 
will, thereforoi iHiluraUy afford itoem for some re^ 

* If the brain be an dectric pile, constantly in action, it 
miij be eon«eWe4 to diicbarge itself at lingular iiitMninb» when 
the tension of the eleetridlf developed niHsfaes a certain point, 
along the nerves which cooimiuiioate wiib the. heact, and thiif 
to excite the pulsations of that organ. This idea is forcibly 
suggested by a view of that elegant apparatus the dry pile qt 
Deluc ; in whidli the suocessive accumulations «f dectndty 
sre eanied off bf a taspended ball, trhidi ia kept by tfie ^a- 
purges Sm # sii^ of vqgvlsr pubatioii for sny length of ttms^ 
We have witnessed ik» action of such a lule maintsined in thif 
wny for wholie years in the study of the abovit-Qsmed eninent 
philosopher. The same idea of the cau^ oi the pulsation of 
the heart appears to have occurred to Dn Amott ; and is men* 
tioaed In his inefui and excellent work on physics, to which 
however, we «i« not indebted lor the raggeitioa, It having 
occurred to us independently -aany yean afo* 

Z'4 



344 SISCOORSB ON THE StUDT 

lnarks> but not such as will long detain the reader^i 
attention. 

(361.) In i^ooHogy, the connection of peculiar modes 
of life and food, with peculiarities of structure, has 
given rise to systems of classification at once ob^ 
?ious and natural; and the great progress which 
has been made in comparative anatomy has enabled 
us to trace a graduated scale of organization almost 
through the whole chain of animal being ; a scale 
not without its intervals, but which every successive 
discovery of animals heretofore imknown has tended 
to fill up. The wonders disclosed by microscopic 
observation have opened to us a new world, in 
which we discover, with astonishment, the extremes 
of minuteness and complexity of structure united ; 
while, on the other hand, the examination of the 
fossil remains of a former state of creation has 
demonstrated the existence of animals far surpassing 
in magnitude those now living, and brought to light 
many forms of being which have nothing analogous 
to them at present, and many others which afford 
important connecting links between existing genenu 
And, on the other hand, the researches of the com* 
parative anatomist and conchologist have thrown 
the greatest light on the studies of the geologistf 
and enabled him to discern^ through the obscure 
medium of a few relics, scattered here and there 
through ft stratum, circumstances connected with 
the formation of the stratum itself which he coidd 
have recognised by no other indication* This is one 
mnoDg many striking instances of the unexpected 
jjghts whidi sciences^ however i^parently remold 
may throw upon eftch others. 



CV NATURAL i»rflLOSOPlif. ^4^ 

(S82.) To hoUmy many of the same remarks apply* 
'Its artificial systems of classification, however con** 
lenient, have not prevented botanists firom endea« 
vouring to group together the objects of their 
science in natural classed having a community of 
character more intimate than those which deter- 
mine their place in the Linnean or any similar 
system ; a community of character extending over 
the whole habit and properties of the individuals 
compared. The important chemical discoveries 
which have been lately made of peculiar proximate 
principles which, in an especial manner, characterize 
certain families of plants, hold out the prospect of a 
greatly increased field of interesting knowledge in 
this direction, and not only interesting, but in a 
high degree important, when it is considered that 
the principles thus brought into view are, for l^e 
most part, very powerfiil medicines, and are, in fact^ 
the essential ingredients on which the medical 
virtues of the plants depend. The law of the dis- 
tribution of the generic forms of plants over the 
globe, too, has, within a comparatively recent period^ 
become an object of study to the naturalist ; and its 
connection with the laws of climate constitutes one 
of the most interesting and important branches of 
natural-historical enquiry, and one on which great 
light remains to be thrown by future researches. 
It is this which constitutes the chief connecting 
link between botany and geology, and renders a 
knowledge of the vegetable fossils, of any portion of 
the earth's surface, indispensable to the formation 
of a correct judgment of the circumstances under 
which it existed in its ancient state* Fossil botany 



S4f6 9I8COUIISX ON THX STUDT 

ii accordingly cultivated with great and increasing 
ardour ; and the subt^raneous << Flora ^ of a geolo- 
gic^ formation is, in many instances, studied with 
a degree a[ care and precision little inferior to that 
which its surfiice exhibits. 



QF NATURAL PHUU>aOFHT* M7 



CHAP. VI. 

OF THE CAUSES OF THE ACTUAL RAPID ADTANCE OF THE 
PHYSICAL 801BN0B9 COMPARED WITH THEIR PBOGBB88 
AT AN EARLIER PERIOD. 

(S83.) There is no more extraordinary contrast than 
that presented by the slow progress of the physical 
seiences, from the earliest i^es of the world to the 
dose of the sixteenth oentury, and the rapid de- 
relopement they have since experienced. In the 
former period of their history, we find only small 
additions to the stock of knowledge, made at long 
intervals of time ; during which a total indifference 
^ the part of the mass of mankind to the study oif 
nature operated to effect an almost complete oblivion 
of form^ discoveries, or, at best, permitted them to 
linger on record, rather as literary curiosities, than 
9s possessing, in themselves, any intrinsic interest 
end importance, A few enquiring individuak, from 
ege to age, might perceive their value, and ini§^t 
feel that irrejHressible thimt after knowledge wbicb» 
in minds of the highest order, supplies the absence 
both of external stimidus imd ^portunity. But the 
total want of a r^t directjon given Iq enquiry, and 
of a dear perception of the objects to be aimed 
at, and the advantages to be gained by syt tematic 
fund oonnected research, togetber with the generd 
upathy of aeciety to speculations remote from Ae 



S48 DISCOURSE dN tH£ STU^l!' 

ordinary afiairs of life^ and studiously kept involved 
in learned mystery, effectually prevented these oc- 
casional impulses from overcoming the inertia of 
ignorance, and impressing any regular and steady 
progress on science. Its objects, indeed, were con« 
fined in a r^ion too sublime for vulgar comprehen- 
sion. An earthquake, a comet, or a fiery meteor,, 
would now and then call the attention of the whole 
world, and produce from all quarters a plentiful 
supply of crude and fanciful conjectures on their 
causes; but it was never Supposed that science^ 
could exist among common objects, have a place 
among mechanical arts> or find worthy matter of 
speculation in the mine ot the laboratory. Yet it 
Cannot be supposed, that all the indications of nature 
continually passed unremarked, or that much good 
observation ftnd shrewd reasoning on it failed U^ 
perish unrecorded, before the invention of printing 
enabled every one to make his ideas kpown to all 
the world* The moment this took place, however^ 
the sparks of information from time to time strudc 
out, instead of glimmering for a moment, and dying 
away in oblivion, began to accumulate into a genial 
glow, and the flame was at length kindled whicb 
Was speedily to acquire the strength and rapid spread 
of a conflagratiom The universal excitement in thtf 
tninds of men throughout Europe, which the first 
out-break of modem science produced, has beea 
already spoken of. But even the most sanguine 
anticipators could scarcely have looked forward to 
that steady, unintermitted progress which it has 
abce maintained, nor to that r^id succession of 
great discoveries whidi has kept up the interest of 



<ir^ 



01* KATURAI^ PHILOSOPHY. j^ 

the first impulse still vigorous and undiminished. I^ 
may truly, indeed, be said, that there is scarcely g 
single branch of physical enquiry which is ^^ei: 
stationary, or which has not been, for many years 
past, in a constant state of advance, and ii)> whid^ 
the progress is not, at this moment, going on witl\ 
accelerated rapidity, , 

(384.) Among the causes of this hsppy and desir-r 
able state of things, no doubt we are to look, in the 
first instance, to that great increase in wealth and ci-i 
yilization which has at once afforded the necessary 
leisure and diffiised the taste for inteUectual pursuit!^ 
{unong numbers of mankind, which have long been 
and still continue steadily progressive in every prin^ 
cipal European state, and which the increase and fresh 
establishment of civilized communities in every dis- 
^t region are rapidly spreading over the whole 
globe. It is not, however, merely the increased 
number of cultivators of science, but their enlarged 
opportunities, that we have here to consider, which, 
in all those numerous departments of natural re-^ 
search that require local information, is in fact the 
niost important consideration of all. To this cause 
we must trace the great extension which has of late 
years been conferred on every branch of natural 
history, and the immense contributions which have 
been made, and are daily making, to the depart-- 
ments of zoology and botany, in all their ramifica- 
tions. It is obvious, too, that all the information 
that can possibly be procured, and reported, by the 
most enlightened and active travellers, must fall 
infinitely short of what is to be obtained by indivi-. 
duals actually resident upon the spot. Travellers, 



Sto DISCOURSE dN THE STUDY 

fedeed, may make collections, may snatdi a few 
heAtj observations, may note, for instance^ the dis- 
trflKT^ion of geological formations in a few detacbed 
points, and now and then witness remarkable local 
phenomena ; but the resident alone can make con- 
tinued series of regular observations, such as the 
scientific determination of climates, tides, magnetic 
variations, and innumerable other objects of that 
kind, requires; can alone mark all tJie details of 
geok^ical structure, and refer each stratum, by a 
careful and long continued observation of its fossil 
contents, to its true epoch ; can alone note the habits 
of the animals of his country, and the limits of its 
vegetation, or obtain a satisfactory knowledge of its 
mineral contents, with a thousand other particulars 
essential to that complete acquaintance with our 
globe as a whole, which is beginning to be under- 
stood by the extensive designation of physical geo- 
graphy. Besides which, ought not to be omitted 
multiplied opportunities of observing and recordii^ 
those extraordinary phenomena of nature which 
offer an intense interest, from the rarity of their oc- 
currence as well as the instruction they are calcu- 
lated to afford. To what, then, may we not look 
forward, when a spirit of scientific enquiry shall have 
spread through those vast regions in which the pro- 
cess of civilizatimi, its sure precursor, is actually 
commenced and in active progress ? And what may 
we not expect from the exertions of powerful minds 
called into action under circumstances totally differ- 
ent from any which have yet existed in the world* 
and oveif an extent of territory far surpassing that 
which has hitherto produced the whole harvest of 



^ 



or NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 351 

human intellect ? In proportion as tiie nmnber of 
those who are engaged on each department of phj- 
sicai enquiry increases, and ^e geographical extent 
over which they «re spread is enlarged, a i»opor- 
tionately increased facility of communication and 
interchange of knowledge becomes essential to the 
prosecution of their researdies with fUl advantage. 
Not only is this desiraUe, to prevent a number of 
individuals from making the same discoveries at the 
same moment, which (besides the waste of valuaMe 
time) has always been a fertile source of jealousies 
and misunderstandings, by which great evils have 
been entailed on science ; but because methods of 
observation are continually undergoing new im* 
provements, or acquiring new fiicilities, a knowledge 
of which, it is for the general interest of science^ 
shoidd be diffused as widely and as rapidly as possible. 
By this means, too, a sense of common interest, of 
mutual assistance, and a feeling of sympathy in a 
common pursuit, are generated, which proves a 
powerful stimulus to exertion ; and, on the other 
hand, means are thereby afforded oi detecting and 
p(»nting out mistakes before it is too late fi)r their 
rectification. 

(SS5.) Perhaps it may be truly remarked, that, next 
j to the establishment of institutions having either the 
j promotion of science in general, or, what is still more 
1 practically efficacious in its present advanced state, 
\ that of particular departments of physical enquiry, 
for their express objects, nothing has exercised so 
powerful im influence on the prc^ess of modem 
Iscience as the publication of monthly and quarterly 
Wentific journals, of which there is now scarcely a 



f 



352 x^iscouRss OH the stupt 

natkm in Europe whidi does not produce severaL 
The quick and universal circulation of these, places 
observers of alLcountries on the same level of per- 
fect intimacy with c^tdragie£g_dy ct s an d methods, 
while the abstracts they from time to time (if well 
conducted) contain of the most important researches 
of the day consigned to the more ponderous tomes 
of academical collections, serve to direct the course* 
of general observation, as well as to hold out, in the 
most conspicuous manner, modeb for emulative 
imitation. In looking forward to what may hereafter 
be expected from this cause of improvement, we are 
not to forget the powerful effect which must in 
future be produced by the spread of elementary 
works and digests of what is actually known in each 
particular branch of science. Nothing can ht more 
discouraging to one engaged in active research, than 
the impression that all he is doing may, very likely, 
be labour taken in vain , that it may, perhaps, have 
been already done, and much better done, than, with 
his opportunities, or his resources, he can hope ta 
perform it ; and, on the other hand, nothing can be 
more exciting than the contrary impression. Thus, 
by giving a connected view of what has been done, 
and what remains to be accomplished in every 
branch, those digests and bodies of science, whi<^ 
from time to time appear, have, in fact, a very import- 
ant weight in determining its future progress, quite 
independent of the quantity of information they 
communicate. With respect to elementary treatises 
it is needless to point out their utility, or to dweQ 
on the influence which their actual abundance, con* 
trasted with their past remarkable deficiency, is 



to e&ercifie over tbe fytxae. ^ }b only }xy 
condensing, simplifying, and arroaging, in Ijhe moal 
lucid possible manner, the acquired knoiv^ledge of 
past generati(»i89 that those to (Come can be enal;^^ 
to avail themselves to the fiill of the advai^^ed poiint 
from which they will start. 

(386.) One of the means by which an advai)ce4^at^ 
of physical science contributes greatly to fu^lerate 
and secure its further progress^ is the exftct know- 
ledge acquired of physical data, or thc^e normal 
quantities which we have more than once spoken 
of ui the preceding pi^es (222.); a kno:wledge 
which enables us not only to appretiate the accuracy 
of experiments, but even to correct j^eir results. 
As there is no aurer (criterion of the .^tate of science 
in any pge than the 4egree of qare bestowed, and 
discernment exhibited, in tlie choice of such data, so 
as to afford the simplest possible grounds for the ap- 
plication qf ^eories, and the degree of accuracy 
attained in jtheir determinfitioi[i, so there is scarcely 
any thing by whiqh scienqe can be mwe truly bene- 
fited than by researches directed expressly to this 
object, and to the construction of tables exhibiting 
the true nipxierical relations of the elements of 
theories, and the actual state of nature, in all its dif- 
ferent branches. It is oiily by such determinations 
that we can ascertain what changes are slowly and 
imperceptibly taking place in the existing order 
of things ; and the more accurate they are, the sooner 
will this knowledge be acquired. What might we 
not now have known of the motions of the (so-called) 
fixed stars, had the ancients possessed the means of 

A A 



354 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

observation we now possess, and employed them as 
we employ them now ? 

(387.) In any enumeration of causes which have 
.. contributed to the recent rapid advancement of 
^ , science, we must not forget the very important one 
of improved and constantly improving means of 
observation, both in instruments adapted for the 
(exact measurement of quantity, and in the general 
convenience and well-judged adaptation to its pur- 
poseg, of every description of scientific apparatus. 
In the actual state of science there are few observ- 
ations which can be productive of any great advantage 
but such as afford accurate measurement ; and an 
increased refinement in this respect is constantly 
called for. The degree of delicacy actually attained, 
we will not say in the most elaborate works of the 
highest art, but in such ordinary apparatus as every 
observer may now command, is such as could not 
have been arrived at unless in a state of ttie mecha- 
nical arts, which in its turn (such is the mutual 
re-action of cause and effect) requires for its existence 
a very advanced state of science. What an im- 
portant influence may be exercised over the progress 
of a single branch of science by the invention c^a 
ready and convenient mode of executing a definite 
measurement, and the construction and conumon 
introduction of an instrument adapted for it cannot 
be better exemplified than by the instance of the 
reflecting goniometer. This simple, cheap, and 
portable little instrument, has changed the face of 
mineralogy, and given it all the characters of one 
of the exact sciences. 



OV KATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 9dd 

(388.) Our means of perceiving and measuring mi- 
tiute quantities, in the important relations of weight, 
q)ace, and time, seem ahready to have been carried 
to a point which it is hardly conceivable they should 
surpass. Balances have been constructed which 
have rendered sensible the millionth part of the 
whole quantity weighed; and to turn with the 
thousandth part of a grain is the performance of ba- 
lances pretending to no very extraordinary degree of 
merit The elegant invention of the sphaerometer, 
by substituting the sense of touch for that of sight in 
the measurement of minute objects, permits the 
determination of their dimensions with a degree of 
precision which is fully adequate to the nicest pur- 
poses of scientific enquiry. By its aid an inch may 
be readily subdivided into ten or even twenty thou- 
sand parts ; and the lever of contact, an instrument 
in use among the German opticians, enables us to 
appreciate quantities of space even yet smaller. 
For the subdivision of time, too, the perfection of 
modem mechanism has furnished resources which 
leave very little to be desired. By the aid of clocks 
and chronometers, as they are now constructed, a 
few tenths of a second is all the error that need 
be apprehended in the subdivision of a day ; and 
for the further subdivision of smaller portions of 
time, instruments have been imagined which admit 
of almost unlimited precision, and permit us to ap- 
preciate intervals to the nicety of the hundredth, or 
even the thousandth part of a single second.* 
When the precision attainable by such means is 

* See a description of a contrivance of this kind by Dr. 
Toung, Lectures, vol. L p. 191. 

A A 2 



356 DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

contrasted with what could be procured a few ge- 
neratkHis ago» by the rude and clumsy workmanship 
of even the early part of the last century, it will be 
no matter of astonishment that the sciences which 
depend on exact measurements ^ould have made 
a prqportional progress. Nor will any degree of 
nicety in physical determinations ai^[>ear beyond our 
reach, if we consider the inexhaustible resources 
which science itself furnishes, in renderii^ the 
quantities actually to be determined by measure 
great multiples of the elements required for the 
purposes of theory, sa as to diminish in the same 
proportion the influence of any errors which may be 
committed on the final results. 

(S89.) Great, indeed, as have been of late the im- 
provements in the construction of instruments, both 
as to what regards convenience and accuracy, it is to 
the discovery of improved methods of observation that 
the chief progress of those parts oi science which de- 
pend on exact determinations is owing. The balance 
ef torsion, the ingenious invention of Cavendish and 
Coulomb, may be cited as an example of what we 
mean. By its aid we are enabled not merely to render 
sensible, but to subject to precise measurement and 
subdivision, degrees of force infinitely too feeble 
to affect the nicest balance of the usual construction, 
even were it possible to bring them to act on it. 
The galvanometer, too, affords another example of 
the same kind, in an instrument whose range of 
utility lies among electric forces which we have no 
other means of rendering sensible, much less of 
estimating with exactness. In determinations of 
quantities less minute in themselves, the methods 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 357 

devised by Messrs. Arago and Fresnel, for the 
measurement of the refractive powers (^ transparent 
media by means of the phenomenon of dif&actiony 
may be cited as affording a degree of precisicm 
limited only by the wishes of the observer, and tfeye 
time and patience he is willing to devote to his 
observation. And in respect of the direction of 
observations to points from which real information 
is to be obtained, and positive condusions drawn, 
the hygrometer of Daniell may be cited as an 
elegant example of the introduction into general use 
of an instrument substituting an indication founded 
on strict principles for one perfectly arbitrary. 

(390.) In speculating on the ^ture fHrospects of 
physical] science, we should not be justified in leav- 
ing out of consideration the probabSity, or rattier 
certainty, of the occasional occurrence (^those happjr 
accidents which have had so powerftil an influence 
on the past ; occasions, where a fortunate combiur 
ation opportunely noticed may admit us in an ia* 
stant to the knowledge of principles of which no 
suspicion might occur but for some such casual 
notice. Boyle has entitled one of his essays thus re^ 
markably,-^'^ Of Moidz great Ignoroanee rfthe Ukes rf 
na$uraimnff$ ; or that there is no (meThing inNatun 
whereof Ute Uks to humoM Uf^ are yet ^osrouglUy 
wfderkood, * The whole \mXxxry of the arts since 
Boyle's time has been one continued comment on 
this text ; and if we regard among the uses of the 
.works of nature, Aat, assuredly the noblest of all, 
.which leads us to a knowledge of the Author of 
.nature through the contemplation of the wonderful 

• Boyl0*a Woiia, Iblto, ToL ill. £«8»y X. p. 185. 

A A 3 



SBS DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY 

ineans by which he has wrought out his purposes 
in his works, the sciences have not been behind 
hand in affording their testimony to its truth. 
Nor are. we to suppose that the field is in the 
slightest degree narrowed, or the chances in iavour 
of such fortunate discoveries at all decreased, by 
those which have already taken place: on the 
contrary, they have been incalculably extended. 
It is true that the ordinary phenomena which pass 
before our eyes have been minutely examined, and 
those more striking and obvious principles which 
occur to superficial observation have been noticed 
and embodied in our systems of science ; but, not 
to mention that by far the ^eater part T»f na- 
tural phenomena remain yet unexplained, every 
new discovery in science brings into view whole 
classes of facts which would never otherwise hare 
fallen under our notice at all, and establishes rela- 
tions which afford to the philosophic mind a con- 
stantly extending field of speculation, in ranging 
over which it is next to impossible that he should 
not encounter new and unexpected principles. How 
infinitely greater, for instance, are the mere diances 
of discovery in chemistry among the innumerable 
combinations with which the modem chemist is 
famQiar, than at a period when two or three imagin- 
ary elements, and some ten or twenty substances, 
whose properties were known with an a^^roadi to 
distinctness, formed the narrow circle within which 
his ideas had to revolve ? How many are the in- 
stances where a new substance, or a new property, 
introduced into familiar use, by being thus brou^t 
into relation with all our actual dements of knoir- 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 359 

ledge^'has become the means of developing proper- 
ties and principles among the most common objects, 
which could never have otherwise been discovered ? 
Had not platina (to take an instance) been an object 
of the most ordinary occurrence in a laboratory, would 
a suspicion have ever occurred that a lamp could be 
constructed to bum without flame ; and should we 
have ever arrived at a knowledge of those curious 
phenomena and products of semi-combustion which 
this beautiful experiment discloses? 

^(391.) Finally, when we look back on what has been 
accomplished in science, and compare it with what 
remains to be done^ it is hardly possible to avoid 
being stron^y impressed with the idea that we have 
been and are still executing the labour by which 
succeeding generations are to profit* In a few in- 
stances only have we arrived at those general 
axiomatic laws which admit of direct deductive 
inference, and place the solutions of physical pheno- 
mena before us as so many problems, whose prin- 
ciples of solution we fuUy possess, and which require 
nothing but acuteness of reasoning to pursue even 
into their farthest recesses. In fewer, still havei.w^ 
reached that command of ab'stcact^zeaaoaing itsell 
"whidrts" necesdiuy for the accomplidiment pf_sq _ 
arduous a task. Science, therefore, in relation to 
our ficulties, still remains boundless and unexplored, 
and, after the li^Me of a century and a half from the 
sera of Newton's discoveries, during which every 
department of it has been cultivated with a zeal and 
energy which have assuredly met their frill return, 

* Jackson, The Four Ages, p. 52. London : Cadell and 
BaWes, 1798. Sto. 

A A 4 



360 DISCOURSE ON THE STUl>ir 

we remain in the sitoation in whidi he figured him- 
self, — standing on the shore of a wide ocean, frcmi 
whose beach we may have cuUed some of these inini- 
merable beautiful productions it casts up with lavish 
prodigality, but whose acquisition can be r^arded as 
no diminution of the treasures that remain. 

(392.) But this consideration, so far from repressing 
our efforts, or rendering us hopeless of attaining any 
thing intrinsically great, ought rather to excite ns to 
fresh enterprise, by the prospect of assured and ample 
recompeni^e from that inexhaustible store which only 
awaits our continued endeavours. '< It is no detrac- 
tion from human capacity to suppose it ino^Mible of 
Infinite exertion, or of exhausting an infinite sab- 
ject.'' * In whatever state of knowle^e we mi^ om- 
ceive man to be placdd, his progress to^'ards a 
yet higher state need never fear a cheeky but must 
continue till the last existence of society. 

(393.) It is in this respect an advantageous view 
of science^ which refers all its advances to the dis- 
covery of gcfneral laws, and to the inclusion of whtt 
is already knotrn in genei'alizations of still h%;)ier 
orders ; inasmuch as this view of the fsvUb^eCt fefHre- 
sents it^ as it really iS) ^Ssefotially mcam^etef and 
incapable of being fUIy elnbodied in any systenii or 
ehibrabed by any single mind. Yet it must be ire* 
collected thiLt, so far as our tixperidllce has hitherto 
gone, eVety advance towards generality haa at the 
same tihie been a step towards simplification. ^It is 
only when we are wandering And lost in the maatt 
ofpartjcuterSjQr entiuagled-gr^ftuitless attcmpla to 
work our way downwards ia -the-^thomy patka of 

• Jaduon, The Four Age%'p.'diX 



OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 861 



applicatioM; to which um luaiuuiug pa frera 
f>ftpip<»fpnt., ^hat rf^tllT'tJ^jr''**''^ complicated: •— the 
moment we contemplate it as it %' ah^aitain a po- 
sition firom which we can take a commanding view, 
though but of a small part of its plan, we never fail to 
recognise that sublime simplicity on which the mind 
rests satisfied that it has attamed the truth. 



INDEX. 



Acoumcs cultivated by Fy- 
tbagoras and Aristotle, page 
848. 

JEpinua, his laws of equi- 
librium of electricity, SS2. 

Aeriform fluids, liquids kept 
in a state of vapour, 321. 

Agricola, George, his know* 
ledge of mineralogy and 
metaUuigy, 112. 

Air, coikipressibili^ and elas- 
ticity of; limitation to the 
repulsive tendency of, 226. 
Weight of, unknown to the 
ancients,228. Firstperceiv- 
ed by Galileo, 228. Proved 
by a crucial instance, 229. 
Equilibrium of, established, 
2S1. Dilatation of, by heat, 

319. 

Air-pump, discovery of, 230. 

Airy, his ezperimoits in Dol- 
coath mine, 187. 

Alchemists, advantages de- 
rived from, 11. 

Algebra, 19. 

Ampere, his dectro-dynamic 
theory, 902. Utility of, 
203. 324. 

Analysis of force, 86. Of 
motion, 87. Of complex 
phenomena, 88. 

Anaxagoraa, philosophy of, 
107. 

Animal electricity, 337. 

Arago, M. his experiment 
with a magnetic needle and 
a plate of copper, ] 57. 

Archimedes, his practical ap- 
plication of science, 72. 



His knowledge of hydro- 
statics^ 231. 

Arfwedson, his discovery of 
lithia, 158. 

Aristotle, his knowledge of 
natural history, 109. Jffia 
works condemned, and sub- 
sequently studied with avi- 
dity. 111. His philosophy 
overturned by the disco- 
veries of Copernicus, Kep- 
ler, and Gitfileo, 118. 

Arithmetic 19. 

Art, empirical and scientific, 
differences between, 71. 
Remarks on the language, 
terms, or signs, used in 
treating of it, 7a 

Assurances, life, utility and 
abuses of, 58. 

Astronomy, cause of the slow 
progress of our knowledge 
of, 78. Theory and prac- 
tical observations distinct 
in, 132. An extensive ac- 
quaintance with science .and 
every branch of knowledge 
necessary to make a perfect 
observer in, 132. Five 
primary planets added to 
our system, 274. Posi- 
tions, figures, and dimen^ 

• sions of all the planetary 
orbits now well known, 
275. 

Atomic theory, 305. Advan- 
tage of, 306. 

Atomic weights of chemical 
dements, 306. 

Attraction, capillary, or asjpX' 



36^ 



INDEX. 



larily, investigated by La- 
place and Young, 234. 

Bacon, celebrated in England 
for his knowledge of sci- 
ence, 72. Benefits confer- 
red on Natnral Philosophy 
by him, 104. His Novum 
Organttm, 105. His re- 
form in philosophy proves 
the paramount importance 
of induction, 114. His 
pterogHuve of uwts, 181. 
Illustrated by the fracture 
of a. crystallized substance, 
183. His collective in- 

- stances, 184w Importance 
of, 185. His experiment 
on the wdgfat of bodies, 
186. Traveling instances 
o^ frontier instances of, 
188. His difference be- 
tween liquids and aiSriform 
fluids, 233. 

BartoBn, Erasmus, flist dis- 
covers the phenomena exhi- 
bited by doubly refracting 
crystsis, 254. 

Beccher, phlogistic doctrines 
of, 300. 

Bergmann, his advancement 
in ciystdlograpfay, 239. 

Bemoidli,, experiinents of, in 
hydrodynamical science, 1 8 1 . 

BioC, his hypothesui of a rota- 
toty motion of the particles 
of light about thdr axes, 
263. 

Black, Dr. his discoveiy of 
latent heat, 322. 

Bode, his curious lai» ob- 

' served in tiie progresrion of 
the magnitudes of the se- 

• veial pianetaiy oibits, 308. 

Bodies, natural constitution 

' «4221. Division of, mto 



crystallized and uncrystal- 
Hzcd, 242. 

Bones, dry, a magazine of 
nutriment, 65, 

Borda, his invention for sub- 
division, 128. 

Botany, general utility of ,345. 

Boyle, Robert, his enthusiasm 
in the pursuit of science, 
lis. His improvement on 
the air-pump, 230. 

Brain, hypothesis of its being 
an electric pile, 343. 

Bnunah's press, piindple and 
utility off 233. 

Brewster, Dr., his improve- 
ment on lenses for lights 
houses, 56. Hii researches 
prove that the phoiomens 
exhibited by polarized light, 
in its transmission through 
oystals, afibrd a certain in- 
dication of the most im- 
portant points relating to 
the structure of crystal! 
themselves, 263. 

CSsbot, Sebastian, his disco- 
very of the variation of the 
needle, 327. 

Cagnard, Banm de la Tour, 
utility of his experiment^ 
234. 

Causes and consequences di- 
rectors of the will of 
man, 6* 

Causes, proximate, discovety 
of, called by Newton verm 
catcs«, 144. 

Celestial mechanics, 265* 

Chaldean records, 265. 

Chemistry fiimishes caoies of 
sudden action, also fiilmin- 
ating compositions, 6S. 
Analogy of the complex 
pheaomcBAO^ witiitfioatof 



IKDSX. 



3SS 



]ihjBic8^92. Benefitiariging 
£rom the analysis of, 94. 
Axioms of, wialogous to 
those of geometry, 95. 
Many of the new eleixients 
of, detected in the investiU 
gation of leu'dual pheno- 
mena, 158, The most ge- 
neral law of, 209. Illus- 
tration of, 210. Between 
fifty and sixly elements in, 
211. Objecto of, 296. 
General h^ids of the princi- 
pal improvements in, 302. 
Remarks on those general 
heads, 304. 

Chemistry, Stahlian, cause of 
the tnistakes and confusions 
of, 123. 

Chladni, experiments of, in 
dynamical science, 181. 

Chlorine, disinfectant powers 
of, 56. 

Clarke, Dr., his experiments 
on the arseniate and phos- 
phate of soda, 170. His 
success in producing a new 
phosphate of soda, 171. 

Climate, change of, in large 
tracts of the globe, alleged 
cause o£, 145. 

Coals, power of a bushel of, 
properly consumed, 59. 
Quantity consumed in Lon- 
don, 60. 

Cohesion, an ultimate pheno* 
menon, 90. 

Cold, qualities of, 318. 

Compass, mariner's, S5. 

Condensation, a source of 
heat, 313. 

Conduction of beat, laws of, 
205. 

Copernicus, effect of his dis- 
coveries on the Aristotdian 
philoscipby, US. Objec- 



tions to his astronomical 
doctrines, 269. 
Crystallography, laws of, 123. 
289. A determinate figure 
supposed to be common to 
all tile particles of a crystal, 
242. 

D'Alembert,hisimprovementa 
in hydrodynamics, 236. 

Dalton, his announcement of 
the atomic theory, 305. His 
examination of gases and 
vapours, 819. 

Davy, Sir H., brings the vol- 
taic pile to bear upon the 
earths and alkalies, 339. 

Deduction, utility of, 174. 

De risle, Rom^ his study of 
crystalline bodies, 239. 

Dew, causes of, investigated, 
159. Effects of, on differ- 
ent substances, 160. Ol^ 
jects capable of contracting 
it, 161. A cloudless sky 
favourable to its produo* 
tion, 162. General proxi- 
mate cause of, 163. 

Drummond, lieutenant^ his 
improvement on lenses for 
lamps of Ughthouses, 56- 

Dynamics, importance of, 96. 
223. 

Earth, the orbit of, —diminu- 
tion of its eccentricity round 
the sun, 147. 

Economy, political, 73. 

Egypt, great pyramid of, 
height, weight, and ground 
occupied by it, 60. Accu- 
racy of the astronomical re- 
cords of, 265. 

Elasticity, an ultimate pheno- 
menon, 90. 

Electricity may be the cause 



n, 93. I^ier- 
uljt;''af, 3S9. Effects of, 
330. AcdTiU o^ 331. 
Equitibrium t^, 933. Fro- 
ductiTa of chemical decom- 
position, 338. 

Empirical lawi, ITS. Eiili 
Tenilting tmm, 1 79. 

Enck^ proEBBor, hia predic- 

cometBonunf timeiiii auc* 
cesaion, \5G. 
Englefield, dr H., hia uw- 
lydi ofa solar beam, 914. 

Equih^l 



e, 332. 






24T. 



a, professor, his oiHoioD 



Giperic 



knowledge of nature'i laws, 

ExperimenC, a means of ac- 
quiring eiperience, 76. 
UliUly of, ISl. 

Facts, the observation of, 1 1 B. 

FauJBs de St. Fond, imaginaT; 
craters of, 131. 

Fluids, lawB of the motion 
of, 181. Compreasibility 
of, 225. Consideiation of 

plicated than that of equi- 
librium, 235. 

Force, analysis of, 86. The 
cause of motion, 149. Ffae- 
nomenaof, SSI. Molecular 
forces, 245. 

Fourier, bsroD, hia opinion 
that the celestial regions 
hare a temperature, iade- 
pandent of the lun, ikot 



greatlj inferior to that «t 
which quidnlTcr co&gealaf 
157. His analjrui ^ tb» 
laws of conduction and ra- 
diation of heat, 317. 

Franklin, Dr., bis experi- 
ments on electridtf, 332. 

Fresnet, M., his mathknatical 
eiplanalioD of the pheno- 
mena of double re&sctioii, 
32. His improvement tm 
lenses for lamps of light- 
houses, 56. His ofomofta 
on the nature of light, SOT. 
His eiperiments on the in- 
terference of polarised liffbt, 
361. His tiKaryofpcau'- 
iiation, 262. 

Friction, a source of beat, S 1 3. 

Galileo, celebrity of, for hia 
kaonledge of sdence, 73; 
His. exposition of the Aris- 
totelian philosophj, 1 10. 
Hisrefulation of Aristotle'a 
dogmas respecting raotioa, 
his persecution in conse- 
quence of it, 113. Hi* 
knowledge of the aoceler- 
sting power of granty, 168. 
His knowledge of the 
weight of the a 



Galvani, utility of his dia- 
coveries in electridty, 335. 
His application of it ta 



Geology, 2S1. Its rank aa s 
sdence, 287. 

Geometry, axioms oi^ an ap- 
peal to experience, not car> 
p«neal, but mental, 95. 



TSUSXt 



367 



Gilbert, Dr.» of Colchester, his 
knowledge of magnetum 
and electricity, 112. 

Gravitation, law o^ a physical 
axiom of a very high and 
universal kind, 98. Influ- 
ence of, decreases in the in- , 
verse ratio of the distance, 
123. 

Greece, philosophers of, their 
extraordinary success in 
abstract reasoning, and their 
careless consideration of 
external nature, 105. Their 
general character, 106. Phi- 
losophy of, 108. 

Grinuddi, a Jesuit of Bologna, 
his discovery of diffiraction, 
or inflection of light, 252. 

Guinea and feather experi- 
ment, 168. 

Gunpowder, invention of, 55, 
A mechanical agent, 62. 

Haarlem lake, draining of, 6 1 . 

Harmony, sense of, 248. 

Head,captain, anecdote of,84. 

Heat, 193. Radiation and 
conduction of, 205. One 
of the chief agents in 
chemistry, 310. Our ig- 
norance of the nature of, 
310. Abuse of the sense 
ofth^ term, 311. The ge^ 
neral heads under which it 
is studied, 312. Its most 
obvious sources, 312. Ani- 
mal heat, to what process ' 
referable, 813. Radiation 
and conduction of, 314. 
Solar heat differs from ter- 
restrial fires, or hot bodies, 
315. Principal effects of, 
317. The antagonist to mu- 
tual attraction, 322. Latent 
he«t,S22. Specific heat,323. 



Herschel, sirWilliam, his i 
lysis of a solar beun, 314. 

Hippaichus, his catalogue of 
stars, 276. 

Holland drained of water by 
windmills, 61. 

Hooke almost the rival of 
Newton, 116. 

Huel Towauy steam-engine 
at, 59. 

Huyghens, his doctrine of 
light, 207. Ascertains the 
laws of double refraction, 
254. 

Hydrostatics, first step to- 
wards a knowledge of, made 
by Archimedes, 231. Law 
of the equal pressure of 
liquids, 232. General ap- 
plicability of, 232. 

Hypothesis, not to be deterred 
from filming them, 196* 
Conditions on which ihey 
should be framed, 197. 
Illustrated by the laws of 
gravitation, 198. Use and 
abuse of, 204. 

Induction, different ways of 
carrying it on, 102. Steps 
by whidi it is arrived at on 
a legitimate and extensive 
scale, 118. First stage of, 
144. Verificaticm of, 164. 
Instanced in astronomy, 
166. Must be followed into 
all its consequences, and 
applied to all those cases 
which seem even remotely 
to bear upon the subject of 
enquiry, 173. Natureofthe 
inductions by which quan- 
titative laws are arrived at, 
176. Necessity of induc- 
tion embracing a series of 
cases which absolutely in- 



wo 



jm9m^ 



dude tbe vrtKkle scule of 
. variation of wliich tbe quan- 
tities in queationiidmit,! 77* 

Induced electricity) 338. 

Inertia, 323. 

Iodine, discoTeryofy 50. Effi- 
cacy of, in curing goitre, 5 1 • 

Isomorphism, law H, 170. 

Kepler, effect of his discover- 
ies on the Aristotelian phi- 
losophy, 11 3. Nature of his 
laws of the planetary sys- 
tem, 178. Proofs of the 
Newtonian system, 179. 

Knowledge, physical facts il- 
lustrative of the utilily of, 
45. Difiusion of, bow 
to take advantage of in the 
investigation of n«jture^l SS. 

ItagraBge, his impiovemfints 
on Newton's theory of 
sound, S47. His astrono- 
mical researches, 275. 

Lamp, safety, 55* 

Laplace, his explanation of 
the residual velocity of 
sound and confirmation of 
tbe general law of the de- 
velopementof heatl]^ com- 
pression, 172. His astro- 
nomical research, 275. His 
experiments on the dilata- 
tion of bodies by heat, 319. 
His study of specific heat, 
323. Latent heat, 323. 

Laws, inductive, 171. Ge- 
neral, 198. How appli- 
cable, 199. Illustrated by 
the planetary systian, 201. 
Empirical laws, 178. 

LAvoisier, his improvements 
in chemical science, 302. 
Experiments on dilatation 
of bodim byjboat, 319. | 



€ific lieat, 828. 

Light, vefiaottoa oi, 30. 
Double refracdon of, si. 
Polarisation of, 254. 

XJgbt and virion, ignorance 
of tbe ancients xespecting, 
249. 

Lighthouse, 56. 

lightning, how to judge 
philosophict^y of it, 12a 
Returning str^e of, 121. 

Liquids, codiesion, attraction 
and repulsion of the par- 
ticles of, 227. Differ from 
aeriform fluids by their co- 
heaon,233. The FUweotiDe 
experiment on ;experiments 
by Canton, Peiions, Oer- 
sted, and others on, 235. 
Obscurity of Ifae laws of 
dilatation of, 320. 

Linnseus, his fcuMrledge of 
crystalline substances, 239. 

Logic, 19. 

LyeU's Principles of Geology, 
extract from, 146. 

Magnetism may be caused by 
electricity, 93. Offers a 
** glaring instance'* of po- 
larity, 326. Experimenta 
illustrative of, 327. 

Malus, a Prencfa officer at 
engineers, discovers the po- 
larisation of light, 132. 
258. 

Man, regarded as a creatnre 
of instinct, 1. Of reason 
and specubktion, 3. His will 
deteimined by causes and 
consequences, 6. Advan- 
tages to, from the study of 
science, 7. His neoessity 
to study the laws^of natare 
66. 



lb. 



INOXX. 



S69 



and the oppooite state of 
man in the aggregate, 67. 
Advantages conferred on, 
by the augmentatifm of 
physical resources, 68. Ad- 
vantages ftom intellectaal 
resources, 69. 

Mariott^ his la^ of equili- 
' brium of an elastic fluid 
recently verified by the 
Royal Academy of Paris, 
2dl. His difference be- 
tween soUax and other heat, 

, 815. 

Matter, indestructibility of; 
• Divided by grinding, 40. 
By fire, 41. Dilated by 
heit, 193. Inertia of; 202. 
Polarity of, one of the 
ultimate phenomena to 
which the analysis of na- 
ture leads us, 245. In- 
herent activity of, 297. 
Causes of the polarity of, 
299. Imponderable forms 
of, SIO. 

Measure, the standard, diffi- 
cult of preserving it unal- 
tered, 128. How to be as- 
sisted in measurement, 129. 
Our conclusions from, 
should be conditional, 130. 

Menai Bridge, weight and 
hdght of, 6a 

Meclumics, practical, 63. 

M^tre^ the French, 126. 

Microscopes, power of, 191. 

Millstones, method of making 
in France, 48. 

Mind, its transition from the 
little to the great, and vice 
ttfrjo, illustrated, 172. 

Mineralogy unknown to the 
ancients, 79. Prejudiced 
by the rage for nomencla- 
ture, 139. Benefited by 



the progress of chemical 
analysis, 293. 

Minerals, simple, apparent 
paucity of, 294^ Difficulty 
in claanng them, 295. 

Mitscherlich, his law of iso- 
morphism, 170. His ex- 
periments on the expansion 
of substances by heat, 243. 

Motion, 87. Simplicity and 
precision of the laws of, 
179. 

Nature, laws of, 37. Immu- 
tability of, 42. Harmony 
of, and advantage of study- 
ing them, 43. IVove the im- 
possibility of attaining the 
declared object of the al- 
chemist. How they serve 
mankind generally, 44. 
Illustrated by mining, 45. 
Economy derived from a 
knowledge of, 65, How 
to be re^uded, 100, 101. 

Nature, objects of, an enumer- 
ation and n<mienclature of, 
useful in the study of, 

^ 135. Mechanism of, on 
too large or too small a 
scale to be immediately 
cognisable by our senses, 
191. 

Newton, his proof of Gali- 
leo's laws of gravitation by 
an experiment with a hol- 
low glass pendulum, 160. 
His foundation to hydrody- 
namical science, 181. Fixes 
the division between statics 
and dynamics, 228. His 
investigation 6f the law of 
equilibrium of elastic ^Uids, 
231. His law of hydro- 
statics, 232. His founds^ 
tion of bydrodynamicsy 2S6. 

B B 



SK) 



Hisanalyris of loaiidt 947r 
HypodioU of lights S50. 
EtimiiMrtimi of a ioop4mb- 
Ue, S52. HiB faypotheas 
of fits of easy tnmwniwiion 
and vefleetioDy 85S. His 
oonbMMtiM& of mattwimi 
tieal ddU with phywical re- 
flcarpli,S71. HitPrindpia, 
S7S. Hv ta cci — I I I; his 
IpBonetiyy 87S* 

Nomenclatuie* importance of, 
to scieaoe, 136. More a 
cooseqiBeiioe tiMm a cause 
of extended knowledge^ 
138. Piqudicial to mi- 
neralogi 139. 

Norman, Robert, his disco- 
?ery of the dip of the 
needle, SS7. 

Numerical precisioD, necessity 
o^ in science, 1S9. 

Objects, and thdr mutual 
actions, subjects of con^ 
templadon, 118. 

Obsenration, a means of ac- 
quiring experience, 76. 
Passive and actiTC, 77. Re- 
corded observation, 120. 
Necessity of, to acquire 
precise phyncal data, 215. 
Illustrated by the barome- 
ter, 216. 

Oersted, his discoveries in 
electricity and magpietism, 
132. Of electro-magnet- 
ism, 340. 

Opacity, 189. 

Otto von Guericlce of Mude- 
burgh, his invention of the 
air>pump, 230. 

Parsoelsus, power of his 
dienical remedies ; hisuae 



of meKviy» dpinni» aad 
tartar, 118. 

Pascal, hia emcial i a at an cea 
proving the weighft of air, 
299. 

Pendulum, 186. 

Phenomena, aoalyab of, il- 
lustrated bymuaical soiiiida» 
the sensation of taste, 85. 
The ultioMte and inward 
process of nature in the pr»- 
ductimi of, 86. Analysis 
of complex phenomena, 88« 
Ultimate iftu!nonien% 90. 
How the analysis o^ is use- 
ful, 97. A transient phe* 
nomenon, how to judge oi^ 
122. Method of expl^ning 
one when it presents itaeU^ 
148. How to diMover the 
causeof one^lSO. Two»or 
many, theories^ maintained 
as the origin tit, in phjaics, 
195. Cosmiflal phanumwMij 
265. 

Philosophy, natnnlyUBfiiand- 
cd objections to the stndj 
of, 7. Advantages dcrivabki 
fromthestudyof, 10. Plea- 
sure and hap^ness^lhe con- 
sequences of the study of, I $• 

Phlogistic doctrines of Bee- 
^cherandStahl,300. 

Physical data, nec e ss i ty of, 
209. Great hnportanoe of, 
211. Illustrated by the 
erectMMi of obacrvalorics, 
813. Necessity of an exact 
knowledge of, 814. Mora 
precise tluui the obaervnlionB 
by which we acquire thmi 
215. 

Phy^^ axioms of; analysis 
of, 108. 

Planets, drcnngovial, 186. 

Platina, discovery o^ 306. 



nnoiz* 



871 



WUnjf hk kaomkd^ of qvarls 
and diamond, S89. 

Bieinnatict, SS6. 

Fblltical eoonomy, 79. 

Pftgiidices of opinion and 
aenae, 80. . Ccnditions on 
which suchan injurious, 81. 
niuatfated by the diTiaion of 
the nya of h^bt, by the 
SKxmattbe Ikoi&on, mod by 
vantino^piiBniy 8S« By the 
tmBiition of the hand firom 
heat to cold, 83. 

TrevQttt M., his theory of 
heat, 316. His theory of 
ledprocal interchanges, a 
proof of the radiation of 
cold, 318. 

Printing, the art of, 193. Per- 
fonnei by steam, 194. 

Probabilities, doctrine of, 217. 
Illustrated by shooting at a 
Deafer, 218. 

Phmt, Dr., his <ypinion of the 
atomic weights, 907. 

Pyrometry, 319. 

Pythagoras, philosophy of, 
107. 

Quinine, sulphate of, com- 
parative comfort and health 
resulting from the use of, 56 

Radiation of heat, hiws of, S05. 

Repulsion in fluids and solids, 
227. 

Rules, genera], for guiding 
and fiidlitating our search 
among a great mass of as- 
sembled lii^ts, 151. 

Rumford, count, experiments 
of, on gunpowder, 62. 

SaTsrt, M., his experiments 
on solids, 24S. His re- 
searches on sound, 249. 



Sdenee^ d>ttract,apiep«nuiAn 
for the study of physics, 19. 
Not indispcnsaUe to the 
study of i^ysicd laws, 25. 
Instances iUustiative o^ 27. 

Science, physical, nature and 
otgeds, immediate and coi- 
lataral, as regarded in ilsdtf 
and in its iqpplieatiini totbe 
practical purposes of lift, 
and its influence on society, 
85. State of, previous to 
the age of Galileo and B». 
con, 104k Causes of the 
rapid advance of, compared 
with the progress at an 
earlier period, 347. 

Science, natural, cause and ef- 
fect, the ultimate relations 
of, 76. 

Sciences and Arts, remarks on 
the language, terms, or 
signs used in treating of 
them, 70. Receive an im- 
pulse by the Baconian phi- 
losophy, 114. 

Sensation, cause of, 91 . 

Senses, inadequate to give us 
direct information for the 
exact comparison of quan- 
tity, 124. Substitutes for 
the inefliciency of, 125. 

Seringapatam, method of 
breaking blocks fiom the 
quarries of, 47. 

Shells found in rocks at a 
great height above the sea, 
supposed cause o^ 145. 

Smeaton, his experiments on 
bodies dilated by heat, 3 1 9. 

Solids, transparent, exhibit 
periodical colours when ex- 
posed to polarized light, 99. 
Influence of, on the Mind, 
101. 

Solids in general, nature of. 



S72 



INDSX. 



S36. Constitation of, com- 
plicated, SS7. Toughness 
of* distinct from hardness ; 
tenacity of, 238. Become 
lique6ed by the addition 
of heat, 321. 

Sountk, musical, illustrative 
of the analysis of pheno- 
mena, 85. Means of having 
a knowledge of, 89. Pro- 
pagation o^ through the air, 
246. Newton's analysis of, 
247. 

Standard measurement, neces- 

^ sity of, 125. Laws of na- 
ture used El such, illus- 
trated by the rotation of the 
earth, 136. 

Substances all subject to dila- 
tation by the addition of 
heat, 243. 

Sun, the character of the beat 
of, 315. 

Thales, philosophy of, 107. 

Theories, how to estimate the 
value of, 204. Best ar- 
rived at by the consideration 
ofgeneral laws, 208. Ex- 
pluiatory of the phenomena 
of nature; on what their 
application ought to be 
grounded, 209* 

Thomson, Dr., his opinion of 
the atomic weights, 307. 

Thermometer, air, 319* 

Thermo-electricity, 341. 

Time, division of, 126, 127. 

Torriceili, pupil of Galileo, 



his experiments proving the 

weight of atmosphere* 229. 

Torp^o, shodc of, 341, 342. 

Ulugh Begh, his catalogue 
of stars, 277. 

Vaccination, success of, as a 
preventive to small-pox, 
52. 

Vision and light, ignorance of 
the ancients respecting, 249. 

Volta, his discoveries in elec- 
tricity, 335. Electric pile 
of, 337. 

Voltaic circuit, 338. 

Water, effects of the power of, 

61. 
Whewell, his experiments, 

187. 
Wells, Dr., his theory of dew, 

163. 
Wind, effects of the power of, 

61. 
Wire steel, magnetized masks 
of, used by needle-makers, 

57. 

WoUaston, Dr.,hisverifi€ 
of the laws of double 
fraction in Iceland sp«r, 
258. His invention of the 
goniometer, 292. 

World, the materials of the^ 
290. 

Young, Dr., his experiments 
on the interference of the 
rays of light, 26a 

Zoology, fossil, 344. 



THE BKD. 



London: 

Printfd bj A. ft R. flpottifwoodc^ 
New .Street-Square. 



THE 

CABINET 

OP 

NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 

CONDUCTED BT THE 

E£V. DIONYSIUS LARDNEB, LL.D. F.R.& L.&E. 
Hat A. F.B. Asta F.L.& F.Z.& Hm. F.CF.a te Ae. 

AssisnD sr 
EMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN. 



A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE 

THE 8TUDY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 

BY 

J. F. W. HERSCHEL, ESQ. H.A. 

OF n, JOBM'B COU.BGB, CAIfBUDa& 



LONDON: 

ranrrBD vob 
LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND ORSSN 

PATBBNanBA-BOW ; 

AND JOHN TAYLOR, 

VTPBft GOWSftmSR'. 

1831. 



August, 1831. 



VALUABLE 



STANDARD WORKS, 

PRINTED FOR 

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN, 



A NEW GENERAL ATLAS op 
PIFTY-THEEE MAPS, with the 
Divisions and Boundaries carefully 
cojonred; constructed entirely from 
New Drawfaigs, and engraved Dy Sid- 
NBT Hall. In Seventeen Parts, any 
of which maybe had separately, 10s.6d. 
each. 

Polded ih half, bound in /. t. d, 
cloth 8 18 6 

Ditto half-bd. in Russia 9 

In the foil size, half-bd., 
in Russia 10 

Ditto, Proofs on India 
paper, hf.-bd. Russia 14 5 

" We have taken some pains to ex- 
amine this new Atlas, and we can safely 
state onr conviction of its general supe- 
riority to all other Atlases." — Sphynx 
(conducted by J. S. Buckingham, esq.). 

"The best and most recent autho- 
rities are in all cases consulted, and 
the maps are engraved in a masterly 
manner. — New Monthly Mag. 

For other favourable opinions of this 
Atlas, references may be made to the 
Literary Gautte, Gentleman's Maga- 
sine, John Bull, Atlas, Globe, &c. 

An ALPHABETICAL INDEX of 

all the NAMES contained in the above 
ATLAS, with references to the Number 
of the Maps, and the Latitude and Lon- 
gitude in which the Places are to be 
found. Royal Svo. 21«. in cloth. 

The Proprietors, being desirous of 
rendering the Atlas the most perfect 
of its^ind extant, supply this volume 
at the cost price. 



A System of universal 

GEOGRAPHY. ByM.MxLTBBEUN, 
Editor of the " Annales des Voyages." 
Parts 1 to 16, price 7s. 6d. each. 

" Infinitely superior to any thing of 
its class which has ever appeared. — 
Literary Gasette. 

In the Press, 

The ninth and LAST VOLUME ; 
containing the Description of ENG- 
LAND,SCOTLAND,and IRELAND; 
and a copious GENERAL INDEX. 

It has been fouiyl necessary to have 
the department of Great Britain en- 
tirely re-written for the English Edi- 
tion, on a scale commensurate with the 
importance which the English reader 
attaches to this portion of Geography. 

The EDINBURGH GAZETTEER, 
OE COMPENDIOUS GEOGRA- 
PHICAL DICTIONARY, brought 
down to the present time ; forming a 
complete body of Geographv, Physical, 
Political, Statistical, and Commercial. 
Abridged tram the larger work in 6 
vols. 2nd Edit, in 1 large vol. Svo. 
(with Maps,) 18s. boards. 

The EDINBURGH GAZETTEER 
OE GEOGRAPHICAL DICTION- 
ARY, brouKht down to the Present 
Time. 6 vols. 8vo. 51. 5s. boards. 

Also, as an Accompaniment to 
the above Works, 

A NEW GENERAL ATLAS, con- 
stmcted by A. Areowshith, Hvdro- 
grapher to the King, from the latest 
Authorities; comprehended in Fifty- 
four Maps, including the recent Disco- 
veries. In royal quarto, price 11. 16i. 
half-bd. or coloured, 21. 128. Od. 



Valuable Standard Works, printed for 



HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY. 



ARCHDEACON COXE's HISTORICAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS. 



MEMOIRS OP THK ADMINIS- 
TRATION OF THK Right Hon. 
HENRY PELHAM, collected from 
the Family Papers, and other Aa- 
ihentic Docnmenta. By the Rev. W. 
CoxK, M.A. F.R. S. F.S.A. Arch- 
deacon of Wilts. In2 ?ols.4to. with 
Portraits, SI. St. 

A few Copies are printed on large 
paper, uniform with the Author's pre- 
ceding Works, price 101. lOs. bds. 

MEMOIRS OP JOHN, DUKE of 
MARLBOROUGH. In 6 vols. 8vo. 
with an Atlas, 51. 5s. 



MEMOIRS OP HORATIO LORD 
WALPOLE. 2d Edit. InS voIa.8TO. 
11. 6s. 

MEMOIRS OF THv KINGS of 
SPAIN OF THE HOUSE OF BOUR- 
BON, from the Accession of Philip 
the Fifth to the Death of Charles the 
Third, 1700—1788. 2d Edit. In 5 voU. 
8vo. 31. bds. 

HISTORY OF THE HOUSE of 
AUSTRIA, from the Foundation of 
Che Monarchy, by Rodolph of Hapa- 
bnrgh, to the Death of Leopold II. 
1218 to 1792. 5 vols. 8vo. Price 
31. 138. 6d. bds. 



MR. SHARON TURNER 8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



The HISTORY of ENGLAND, 
from the earliest Period to the Death 
of Elizabeth. By Sharon Turner, 
F.A.S. R.A.S.L. ,In 12 vols. 8vo. 
Price 81. Ss. bds. * ¦ 

Also may be had, by the same 
Author, separately. 

The HISTORY of the ANGLO- 
SAXONS, comprising the History of 
England Arom the earliest Period to 
the Norman Conquest. 5th Edit. 3 
vols. 8vo. 21. 5s. bds. 



The REIGNS of EDWARD YI., 
MARY, AND ELIZABETH. Sd Edit. 
2 vols., 8vo. 11. 12s. bds. 

The- HISTORY of ENGLAND, 
DURING THE MIDDLE AGES; com- 
prising the Reigns from William the 
Conqueror to the Accession of Henry 
VIII., 3d Edit. 5 vols. 8vo. Price 31. 
boards. 

The HISTORY of the REIGN 
of henry the eighth. 3d Edit. 
2 vols. 8vo. 11. 68. boards. 



The life and DEATH op LORD 
EDWARD FITZGERALD. By T. 
Moore, Esq. 2 vols, post 8vo. with a 
Portrait, 21s. bds. 

ANNUAL BIOGRAPHY and 
OBITUARY, for 1831, being the 15th 
volume. Price 15s. 

*** Also may be had, the preceding 
14 volumes, 15s. each. 

The HISTORY of the RISE 
' of the MAHOMEDAN POWER in 
INDIA, till the Year 1612. Trans- 
lated from the Persian of Mahohed 
KA9IM Fkrishta. By John Brioos, 
Lient.-Col. in the Madras Army. 4 
I vob. 8vo. 41. 48. 



The HISTORY op THUCY- 
DIDES ; newly translated into En- 
glish, and illustrated with very c<mioas 
Annotations, &c. By the Stev. S. T. 
Bloomfield, D. D., Vicar of Bi»- 
brooke, in Rutland, &c. Author of 
" Recensio Synoptica Annotationia 
Sacrae," and Editor of a new edition 
of Thucydides (in the Original), 
with Notes critical and explanatory. 
In 3 vols. 8vo. with Maps, Ac, Si. 5*. 



<«¦ 



The general reader is here f^ 
nished with a version of the moat 
eminent of the historians of Greece, as 
literal and as persplcooos as emdition 
and industry combined can render it. 
Eclectic Beview. 



Limgman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, 



11 



MAMMMMAVWWnMIVMnA^MAMMMMMMi 



NOVELS, ROMANCES, &c. 



MRS. OPl£'s WORKS. 



DETRACTION DISPLAYED. By 
Amelia Opie. 12mo. 7b. 6d. 

ILLUSTRATIONS op LYING, in 
all itB Branches. 2 vols. 12mo. lOs. 6d. 
bds. 

MADELINE. In 2 vols. 12mo. 148. 
bds. 

The father and DAUGHTER. 
4b. 6d. bds. 



TALES OF THE HEART. 4 vols. 
12mo. 11. 8s. bds. 

NEW TALES. 4 vols. 12mo. II. Ss. 
bds. 

VALENTINE'S EVE. In 3 vols. 
12mo. 11. Is. bds. 

TEMPER; or DOMESTIC 
SCENES. In 3 vols. 12ino. 11. Is. 
bds. 



The TALBA; or, MOOR of 
PORTUGAL. A Romance. By Mrs. 
Bray, Author of " De Foix," " The 
White Hoods," " Fitz of Fitzford," 
&c. &c.* 3 vols, post 8vo. 11. 7s. 
boards. 

The STORY of a LIFE. Two 
post 8vo. Third Edition. 188. 

is. 

We involantarily follow, and 
soiile, and weep, and recover again, 
and pause in wonder at the skill of 
the magician, whose wand has snch 
strange power over oar faculties." — 
Monthly Review. 



BEATRICE; a Tale founded on 
Facts. By Mrs. Hofland, 3 vols. 
12mO. 21s. bds. 

" * Beatrice' is, we think, one of 
her most successful productions." — 
Lit. Gaz. 

TALES OF THE WARS of OUR 
TIMES. By the Author of " Recol- 
lections of the Peninsula," &c., 2 
vols, post 8vo. 11. Is. bds. 

SIR ETHELBERT, or the DIS- 
SOLUTION OF MONASTERIES. 
A Romance. By the Author of 
*' Santo Sebastiano," &c. &c. In 3 
vols. 12mo. 11. 48. bds. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 



INSTRUCTIONS to YOUNG 
SPORTSMEN in all that relates to 
Guns and Shooting. By Lieut.-Col. P. 
Hawker. 6th Edit. 8vo. with 30 
Plates and Wood -cuts. 18s. in cloth. 

" Cdt. Hawker is one of the best 
shots in England, and his ' Instruc- 
tions to Sportsmen ' the very best book 
we have on the subject." — Black- 
wood*9 Mag. 

DR. ARNOTT'S ELEMENTS of 
PHYSICS, OR NATURAL PHILO- 
SOPHY, General and Medical; Vol. 
II. Part I. comprehending the subjects 
of Heat and Light. 8vo. bds. with 
Wood Engravings, 10s. 6d. Also, a 
Fourth Edition of Vol. I. (2l8.) among 
the Additions to which is a Complete 
Exposition of the Nature and easy 
Cure of the Defect of Speech called 
Stuttering. 



ART OF FRENCH COOKERY. 
By A. B. Beauvilliers, Restaura- 
teur, Paris. 3d. Edit. I2mo. 7s. bds. 
printed uniformly with the " Domestic 
Cookery." 

DOMESTIC DUTIES; or. Instruc- 
tions to Young Married Ladies, on the 
Management of their Households, and 
the Regulation of their Conduct in the 
various Relations and Duties of Mar- 
ried Life. By Mrs.WlLLIAMPARKES. 
3d. Edit. 10s. 6d. bds. 

The good NURSE; or. Hints on 
the Management of the Sick and Lying- 
in Chamber and Nursery. Second 
Edition, with Additions, and Recom- 
mendatory Letters from Sir Astley 
Cooper, Dr.BABiNOTON, Dr.PARis, 
&c. Dedicated by permission to Mrs. 
Fry. With a Portrait of the Author. 
8s. bds. 



12 Standard Works, printed for Longman and Co. 

KEITH'S MATHEMATICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL 

WORKS, &C.&C. 



The elements of PLANE 
GEOMETRY. By Thomas Keith. 
3d Edit. 9vo. IOb. ed. bd& 

An introduction to the 
Theory and Practice op PIjANE 
AND SPHERICAL TRI60N0ME. 
TRY. 5tb Edit. 8vo. 14s. bds. 



A NEW TREATISE on the USE 
OF the globes. Designed for the 
lutrnction of Youth. 12mo. with 
Plates. New Edition, 0s. ({d. booad. 

A SYSTEM of GEOGRAPHY, for 

the Use of Schools. lUostrated by 
Maps and Plates. 6s. bonnd. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 



CONVERSATIONS on VEGE- 
TABLE PHYSIOLOGY; compre- 
hending the Elements of Botany, with 
their Application to Agricnltnre. % 
vols. 12mo., with Plates, 12s. 

"These instructive little volumes 
are composed by an author (Mrs. Mar- 
cct) already well known by similar 
works on other branches of science, all 
of whkh have been received with great 
and merited favour. The subject of 
her present undertaking is in interest 
equal to those which have preceded it, 
and her method of treating it as pleas- 
ing and popular."— fiin^. Review. 

By the same Author, 

CONVERSATIONS on CHEMIS- 
TRY. 11th Edit., 1 vols. 12mo., with 
Plates by Lowry, 14s. bds. 

In this Edition a Conversation on the 
Steam Engine has bc^n added. 

CONVERSATIONS on NATU- 
RAL PHILOSOPHY. 6th Edition. 
16s. 6d. bds. With 22 Engravings by 
Lowry. 

CONVERSATIONS on POLITI- 
CAL ECONOMY. 6th Edit., 12mo. 
Os. bds. 

ORIENTAL CUSTOMS; applied to 
the Illustration of theSacred Scriptures: 
being an Account of the Customs and 
Manners of the Eastern Nations, col- 
lected from the most celebrated Writers 
and Travellers, ancient and modern. 
By the Rev. Saicdel Burder, A. M. 
&c. 12mo. 8s. 6d. bds. 

WOMAN, IN her SOCIAL and 
DOMESTIC C HARACTER. By Mrs. 
John Sandford. l2mo., 68. bds. 



SELECT WORKS of the BRI- 
TISH POETS, FROM CHAUCER to 
JON SON. By Rorbrt SoiTTHBr, 
LL. D. 8vo., uniform with "Aikin's 
Poets. ">-30s. in cloth; or, neatly done 
np, gilt edges, 31s. 6d. 

SELECT WORKS of the BRI- 
TISH POETS, with Biograohical and 
Critical Prefaces; being a Library of 
Classical English Poetry. By Dr. | 
AiKiN. In 10 vols, post 18mo. 2l.; in i 
royal 18mo., to match the British Es- 
sayists and Novelists, 81.; and com- 1 
plete, in 1 vol. 8vo., for Sehocria, Ac. j 
18b. in doth ; or, neatly done np, gilt I 
edges, 20s. 

PEN TAMAR; or, the Histort i 
OF AN OLD Maid. Bv the late Mrs. 
H. M. Bowdler. Post 8vo. withi 
Plates, 2nd edit. 10s. 6d. boards. | 

GIBBON'S HISTORY or thr 
DECLINE AND FALL of thr RO- 
MAN EMPIRE; for the Use of Fa- 
milies and Young Persons. Reprinted 
fh>m the Original Text, with the care- ¦ 
ful Omission of all Passages of an Irre- 
ligious or Immoral Tendency. By 
Thomas Bowdler, Esq., F.R.S. 8.A. ' 
5 vols. 8vo. 31. 38. bds. 

By the same Author, 

The family SHAKSPEARE; 
in which nothing is added to the Ori- 
ginal Text; but those Words and Ex- 
pressions are omitted, which cannot 
with propriety be read alood in a Fa- 
mily. 10 vols, royal l8nio. 31. 3s. bds. , 
or in 8 vols. 8vo., the Fifth Edition, 
41. 14s. 6d. 

Complete! in 1 vol. 8vo., with Vig- . 
nettes after Smirke, &c, by Thompson. 
Nearly ready. 



CNnniiiDr ^ Co., Printen, London Homo Yard, St. Paul's.] 



13 



^ 



Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green. 



1""^ r 1 1 T i Tn nim Tfcni m>iuT,ui t 



a^AMMi«MMIte 



HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY, CONTINUED. 



MEMOIRS OP THK LIFE of SIR 
WALTER RALEGH, with some Ac- 
noant of the Period in which he lived. 
By Mrs. A. T. Thomson, Aathor of 
" Memoirs of Henry VIIL" In I 
vol. 8vo. with Portrait, 148. bds. 

MEMOIRS OP THB COURT of 
QUEEN ELIZABETH. By Locy 
AiKiN. In 2 vols. 8vo. with a Por- 
trait, from the rare Print by Crispin 
de Passe. 6th Edit. 11. 5s. boards. 

By the same Anthor, 

MEMOIRS OP THB COURT of 
JAMES THE FIRST. In 2 vols, 8vo. 
3d Edit. 11. 4s. 

ANNALS OF THE REIGN of 
GEORGE THB THIRD. By John 
AiKiN, M.D. In 2 vols. 8vo. a new 
Edition, broaght down to the Period 
of his Majesty's decease, price 11. 5s. 
boards. 

The HISTORY op thb CRU. 
SADES, FOR THK Recovery and 
Possession of the HOLY LAND. 
By Charles Mills, Esq. In 2 vols. 
8vo. 4th Edit, with a Portrait and 
Memoir of tt\,e Aathor. F'rice IL 5s. 

By the same Aathor, 

The HISTORY of CHIVALRY, 
OR KNIGHTHOOD and its TIMES. 
2d edit, in 2 vols. 8vo. price 11. 4s. bds. 

" This was' an appropriate under- 
taking for the able author of the Cru- 
sades, and he has executed it with 
equal learniug, fidelity, and elegance.'' 
Monthly Review. 



The political LIFE of the 
Right Hon. GEORGE CANNING, 
with a short Review of Foreign Affairs. 
By A. G. Stapleton, Esq. 3 vols. 
11. 16s. boards. 

" Written by a gentleman who filled 
the confidential and honourable post of 
his private Secretary." — lAU Gax» 

A MEMOIR OP the LIFE, 
WRITINGS, AND CORRESPOND- 
ENCE OF JAMES CURRIE, M. D., 
F. R. S., of Liverpool. Edited by bis 
&on, William Wallace Cdrrib.— 

2 v61s. 8vo. with Portrait, 28s. bds. 

THE HISTORY of the REIGN 
OF GEORGE III. By Robert Bis- 
sett, LL.D., Author of "The Life of 
Burke," &c. &c. A new edition, com- 
pleted to the Death of tlie King, 6 vols. 
8vo. Price 31. 3s. boards. 

The HISTORY of ROMAN LITE- 
RATURE, from its Earliest Period to 
the end of the Augustan Age. By John 
Ddnlop, Esq. 3 vols. 21. 7s. 6d. bds. 

By the same Author, 

THE HISTORY of FICTION. 

3 vols, post 8vo., 21.2s. boards. 

SKETCHES of the CHARAC- 
TER, MANN FRS, AND PRESENT 
STATE OF the HIGHLANDERS 
of SCOTLAND ; with Details of the 
Military Service of the Highland Re- 
giments. By Ma)or-Gbn. D. Stew- 
art. 2 vols. 8vo. third edit. 11. 8s. bds. 
with a Map. 



MR. HUNT'S ARCHITECTURAL WORKS. 



EXEMPLARS op TUDOR AR- 
CHITECTURE, adapted to Modern 
Habitations: with illustrative Details, 
selected from Ancient Edifices; and 
Observations on the Furniture of the 
Tudor Period. By T. P. Hunt, Ar- 
chitect. Royal 4to. with 37 Plates, 
21. 2s.; or with India Proofs, 31. 38. 

" Whoever wishes to ' talk cunning- 
lie' of old houses and old furniture, 
should consult this volume." — LAterary 
Gazette. 

By the same Author, 

ARCHITETTURA CAMPESTRE ; 
displayed in Lodges, Gardeners' 



Houses, &c. In Twelve Plates, with 
descriptive Letterpress, in Royal 4to. 
11. Is. bds.; or India Proofs, 11. lis. 6d. 
bds. 

HALF A DOZEN HINTS on PIC- 
TURESQUE DOMESTIC ARCHI- 
TECTURE; in a Series of Designs for 
Gate-Lodges, Gamekeepers' Cottages, 
&c. 2d Edit. 4to. 15s. bds. or 11. Ig. 
India Proofs, bds. ' 

DESIGNS FOR PARSONAGE- 
HOUSES, ALMS-HOUSES, &c. In 
Twenty-one Plates, with descriptive 
Letter-press, in Royal 4to. 11. Is. bds. 
or India Proofs, 11. lis. 6d. bds. 



Valuable Standard Works, printed for 



•M<«M*«W« 



h^«%'«M(««iW«»W*«l% 



TRAVELS, VOYAGES, TOPOGRAPHY, ETC. 



Sir EDWARD SEAWARD'S 
NARRATIVE op his SHIPWRECK, 
AND CONSEQUENT DISCOVERY 
OF CERTAIN ISLANDS in thb 
CARIBBEAN SEA. With a Detail 
of many Extraordinary and Highly- 
interesting Events in his Life, flrom the 
year 1733 to 1740, as written in his own 
Diary. Edited by Miss Jamb Pobtsr. 
3 vols, post 8vo. 11. lis. 6d. bds. 

"The most delightfol work which 
the present season has prodaced. It 
is a new Robituon Cnuoe, inspired 
with a more tender and toudiing iiiler- 
est, and carried on into circomstances 
of extraordinary excitement."— iif/iM. 

TRAVELS IN RUSSIA, and a 
Residence at St. Petersbargh and 
Odessa, in the Years 1827-29 ; intended 
to give some accoont of Russia as it 
is, and not as it is represented to be, 
&c. By Edward Morton, M.B., 
&c. 8vo. 14s. bds. 

The GUIDE to all the WATERING 
and SEA.BATHING PLACES, in- 
eluding the Scotch Watering Places; 
containing full and accurate Descrip- 
tions of each Place, and the Environs. 
With a Description of the Lalces, and 
a Tour through Wales. In a thick 
18mo. volume, illustrated by 04 Views 
and Maps, price lAs. bound. 

Thb ORIGINAL PICTURE of 
LONDON, corrected to the present 
time ; re-edited, and mostly written, by 
J. Britton, F. S. a. &c. With up- 
wards of 100 Views of Public Build- 
ings, a large Plan of all the Streets, &c. 
of the Metropolis and Suburbs, a Map 
of the Country twenty miles round 
London, and a Plan of the Situation of 
the Sanares, Public Buildings, &c. 9s.; 
with the Maps only, 6s. bound. 

JOURNAL OF A RESIDENCE in 
GERMANY, written during a Pro- 
fessional Attendance upon their Royal 
Highnesses the Duke and Dudiess of 
Clarence (their present most gracious 
Majesties'), during their Visits to the 
Courts of that Country in 1822, 1825, and 
1826. Bv William Bkattib, M.D. 
&c. 2 vols, post 8vo. 21 8. bds. 

" We do not remember to have ever 
perused a Traveller's Journal more re- 

5lcte with novel and amusing topics." 
iew Monthly Mag. 



RECOLLECTIONS of the-PENIN- 
SULA, containing Sketches of the 
Manneri and Character of the Spanish 
Nation. Ah Edition. 1 vol. 8vo. 
10s. 6d. boards. 

" It is scarcely j[)08sible to open the 
book without seemg useful and lively 
remarks, or descriptions tndefcriff- 
ably detcriptive." — Monthly Beview. 

By the same Anther, 

SKETCHES OF INDIA. By a 
Travellbb. For Fire-side TraveUers 
at Home. 4th Edition. 1 vol. 8vo. 
08. boards. 

NOTES AND REFLECTIONS 
DURING A RAMBLE IN GERMANY. 
New Edition. 1 voL 8vo. 12s. bda. 

SCENES AMD IMPRESSIONS in 
EGYPT and ITALY. I voL 8vo. 
12s. boards. 3d Edit. 

" Such is the merit and charm of 
the volumes before us, they place ns 
at once by the side of the author, and 
bring before our eyes and minds the 
scenes he has passed through, and the 
feelings they nggesied.'*— Edinburgh 
Rovww* 

A SPINSTER'S TOURin 
FRANCE, THB STATES op 
GENOA, &c. daring the Year 1827. 
12mo. 10s. 6d. bds. 

A TOUR IN Italy and sicily. 

By L. Simon D, Author of *'A Tour 
in Switzerland," *'A Tour in Great 
Britain," &c. In I vol. 8vo. 16s. 

A VOYAGE TOWARDS THB 
SOUTH POLE; containing an Ex- 
amination of the Antarctic Sea, to the 
Seventy-Fourth Degree of Latitude. 
By Jambs Wbddbll, Master of th* 
Royal Navy. 2d Edit. 8vo. with 
Plates, &c. Price 18s. bds. 

" Mr. Weddell's volnme deserves 
to find a place on the shelf of every 
library that pretends to a collection of 
Voyages and Travels."— QiMirter/y 
Review, 

NARRATIVE op a TOUR 
THROUGH THB MOREA, giving an 
Account of the presant State of thai 
Peninsula and its Inhabitants, indud* ! 
ing a View and Description of the 
Port of Navarino. By Sir William ' 
Gbll. In 8vo., with Plates, Wood ¦ 
Cuts, &c. Price 19s. bds. 



Lofiffman, Bees, Orme, Brawn, and Green. 



«^MMMMMMW«MM^^iM««MMl«MP«MMM^MI«l»«««MMP* 



aw^0*mmm0*0tm0wtt^090tm/t090m 



MR. LOUDON'S WORKS ON GARDENING, 
AGRICULTURE, &c. &c. 



HORTUS BRITANNICUS ; a Ca- 
talogue of all the Plants Indigenous, 
Cultivated in, or Introduced to Bri- 
tain. 

Part I. The Linnaean Arrangement, 
in which nearly 30,000 Species are 
enumerated : preceded by an Introduc- 
tion.— Part Ii. The Jussieuean Ar- 
rangement of nearly 4000 Genera; with 
an Introduction to the Natural System, 
and a Description of each Order. Edited 
by J. C. Loudon, F.L. H.G. and Z.S. 
In 8vo. price IL Is. boards. 

The Linnaeaif Arrangement and its 
Supplement are entirely the work of 
Mr. George Don ; the Natural Ar- 
rangement is founded on that of Pro- 
feasor Lindlby, with Additions and 
Alterations; and Dr. Grstille as- 
sisted in arranging tlie Cryptogamia. 

The magazine of NATURAL 
HISTORY, AND JOURNAL op ZOO- 
LOGY, BOTANY, MINERALOGY, 
GEOLOGY, AND METEOROLOGY. 
In 8vo. Nos. 1 to 20. (Continued every 
Two Months, alternately with the "Gar- 
dener's Magazine.'') Is. 6d. each. 

Also Vols. I., IL, and III., price 
21. 17s., bds. 

The Drawings by Sowekby, Har- 
vey, and Strdtt ; and the Engravings 
on Wood, by Branston. 

The GARDENER'S MAGAZINE, 
AND REGISTER OP RURAL and 
DOMESTIC IMPROVEMENT. Nos. 
1 to 33. (Continued every Two Months, 
alternately with the " Magazine of 
Natural History.") 38. 6d. each. 

Also Vols. I. to YI., price 51. Is. 6d. 
boards. 



An ENCYCLOP-fflDIA of PLANTS ; 

comprising the Description, Specific 
Character, Culture, History, &c. of 
all the Plants Indigenous, Cultivated 
in, or Introduced to Britain. Edited by 
J. C. Loudon, F.L.S. H.S., &c. " 

The Specific Characters, &c. by Lind- 
LEY ; the Drawings by Sowkrby ; 
and the Engravings by Branston. 
In 1 large vol. 8vo., with nearly 10,000 
Engravings on Wood, price 41. I4s. 6d. 
bds. ; in 9 separate Parts, lOs. 0d. each ; 
or in 3d Nos. 2s. 6d. each. 

An ENCYCLOP^AIDIA of GAR- 
DEN IN G ; comprising the Theory and 
Practice of Horticulture, Floriculture, 
Arboriculture, and Landscape Garden- 
ing. 1 large vol. Bvo. with upwards of 
700 Engravings on Wood, 21. bds. 

An ENCYCLOPiEDIA of AGRI- 
CULTURE; comprising the Theory 
and Practice of the Valuation, Tratas- 
fer. Laying-out, Improvement, and 
Management of Landed Property ; the 
Coltivatton and Economy of the Animal 
and Vegetable Productions of Agricul- 
ture ; a General History of Agriculture ; 
a Statistical View of its Present State, 
&c. New edition, in 1 large vol. 8vo. 
illustrated with upwards of 1100 En- 
gravings on Wood, by Branston, 
21. 10s. boards. 

No pains have been spared to render 
this edition as perfect as possible. The 
Publishers have gone to the expense 
of nearly 500 new Engravings, nearly 
half of which are new subjects ; the 
co-operation of upwards of forty in- 
dividuals has aljo been procured, and 
their suggestions have embraced almost 
every department of the work. 



PROFESSOR FLAXMAN'S ILLUSTRATIONS. 



A SERIES OF 75 COMPOSI- 
TIONS TO ILLUSTRATE THE ILIAD 

AND ODYSSEY OF HOMER, with 
Descriptions of their subjects, and ex- 
tracts from Pope's translation, upon 
each plate. The dresses, habits, ar- 
mour, implements of war, &c., are all 
of Classical authority. By Professor 
Flaxman. 2 vois. 21. 2s. each. 



1. A SERIES OP 111 COMPOSI- 

TIONS TO ILLUSTRATE DANTE. 

41. 4s. bds. 

2. A SERIES OF COMPOSI- 
TIONS TO ILLUSTRATE HESIOD. 

Folio, 21. 12s. 6d. bds. 

3. COMPOSITIONS from MS- 
CHYLUS. 21.28. 



Valuable Standard Works, printed for 



MR. BRIXTON'S ARCHITECTURAL WORKS. 



A DICTIONAKY opthb ARCHI- 
TECTURE AND ARCHEOLOGY of 
THB MIDDLE AGES ; including the 
Words used by Old and Modern Au- 
thors, in treating of Architectural and 
other Antiquities, &c ; Part I., with 
12 Engravings by J. Lb Kbux. The 
volume will contain at least 40 En- 

f ravings, and be completed in Four 
*arts, in the year 1831. Price » royal 
8vo. 128. each ; medium 4to. 21b. ; 
imperial 4to. 31s. 6d. Prospectuses 
may be had of the Publishers. 

By the same Author, 

PICTURESQUE ANTIQUITIES 
OPTHB ENGLISH CITIES; contain- 
ing 00 Engravings by Lb KbUX, &c., 
and 24 Woodcuts of Ancient Build- 
ings, Street Architecture, Bars, Castles, 
&c., with Historical and Descriptive 
Accounts of the Subjects, and of the 
Characteristic Features of each City. 
By John Britton, F.S.A., &c. In 
1 vol. elegantly half bound, urice 71. 4s. 
medium 4to. ; 121. imperial 4to., with 
Proofs of the Plates. 

The Sixth and concluding Number, 
containing Views in Glottcetter, Ro- 
chester, Chichester, Wells, Bristol, 
Norwich, Hereford, Worcester, Co- 
ventry, London, &c., is Just published. 

Thb HISTORY AND ILLUSTRA- 
TION op REDCLIFPE CHURCH, 
BRISTOL; with 12 Plates. Royal 
8vo. 16s. ; imp. 4to. 11. lis. fid. 

Thb architectural ANTI- 
QUITIES OP GREAT BRITAIN. 
In 4 vols. med. 4to. 211. ; or imp. 4to. 
321. half bound. 

CHRONOLOGICAL AND HISTO- 
RICAL ILLUSTRATIONS op thb 
ANCIENT ARCHITECTURE op 
GREAT BRITAIN. By J. Britton, 
F.S.A. &c., price 61. 128. small paper, 
and 111. large paper. 

•»• To correspond with the "Archi- 
tectural Ant^iiies,** of which this 
work forms the Fifth Volume. 

The Arcritbctural Antiquitibs 
may be purchased in 10 separate Parts, 
boards, Two Guineas each. Parts XI. 
and XII. at 21. 8s. each ; and Part 
XIII., which comnletes the Fifth Vol., 
or Chronological Series, U.'16s. 



Thb CATHEDRAL ANTIQUI- 
TIES op ENGLAND ; or, an Histo. 
rical, ArchitectaraJ, and Graphical 
Illustration of the English Cathedral 
Churches. Price 128. per No. in med. 
4to. ; and 11. in imperial 4to. ; tf Nos. 
are already published. Each sice to 
class with the ArchitectwreA ArMigui' 
ties qf Great Britain, 

The following are complete, and may 
be had separate, vis.: 

Salisbury Cathedral,yitit]x 31 Engrav- 
ings, med. 4to. 31. 3s ; imp. 4to. 91. 9s. 

Norwich, with 25 Plates, med. 4to. 
21. 10s. ; imp. 4to. 41. 48. 

Lichfield, with 16 Engravings, med. 
4to. 11. 18s. ; imp. 4to. 31. 3s. 

Yorh, with 35 Engravings, med. 4tol 
3i. 15s. ; imp. 4to. (U. 0a. 

Winchester, 30 Engravings, med. 
4to. 31. 38. ; imp. 4to. 51. 58. 

Oaiford, with 11 Engravings, med. 
4to. 11. 48. ; imp. 4to. 21. 2s. 

Canterbury, with 20 Engravings, 
med. 4to. 31.38.; imp. 4to. 51. Ss. 

Exeter, with 22 Engravings, med. 
4to. 21. 10s. ; imp. 4to. 41. 48. 

Wells, with 24 Engraviogs, med. 
4to. 21. lOs. ; imp. 4lo. 41. 48. 

Peterborough, with 17 Plates, med. 
4to. 11. 18s. ; imp. 4to. 31. 8s. 

Gloucester, with 22 Bngravlngf, med . 
4to. 21. 10s. ; imp. 4to. 41. 48. 

Bristol, with 14 Eneraviaga, med. 
4to. IL 48. ; imp. 4to. 21. 2s. 

Her^ord^nd Worcester CathedraU 
are in preparation, and wiU be com- 
prised in 3 Nos. to each. 

%• Of the above Worlcs, a email 
nttmber of copies are printed on saper 
royal folio, vith Proofs, and with 
Proofs and Etchings of the Plates. 

Thb HISTORY and ANTIQUI- 
TIES OP BATH ABBEY CHURCH. 
with 10 Engravings, by J. and H« Lb 
Kbdx. Roval 8vo. 11.; med. 4to. 
11. lis. 0d. ; Imp. 4to. 21. 2s. 



Longman, Eees, Orme, Brown, and Green, 



^*-^-*^,n^m v ^nm%^m% >»«^»»^w*^»%^^<»»^»»^»% w »^ 



^^^ 1^ » »% *% %%»» 



MISCELLANEOUS. 



g 



TRADITIONS of LANCASHIRE. 
By J. Ruby, Esq. M.R.S.L. 2d Edit. 
2 voU. demy 8vo., with 18 PUtes by 
Finden, and numerous Wood-cuts. 
21. 2s. bds. 

A few copies of the First Edition, 
with Proofs of the Plates on India 
aper, 41. 48.; or with Proofs and 

tchines on India paper, 41. 14s. 6d. 
may still be had. 

A SECOND SERIES op ths 
TRADITIONS of LANCASHIRE, 
uniform with the First, is nearly ready. 

BOOK RARITIES in thb UNI- 
VERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. lUus- 
trated by Original Letters and Notes, 
Biographical, Literary, and Antiqua- 
rian. By the Rev. C. H. Harts- 
UORNB, M. A. 1 vol. 8vo. numerous 
Wood-cuts, 11. lis. 6d. bds. 

PLAIN INSTRUCTIONS to EX- 
ECUTORS AND ADMINISTRA- 
TORS, shewing the Duties and Re- 
spoosibiUties incident to the due Per- 
formance of their Trusts; with Direc- 
tions respecting the Probate of Wills, 
and taking out Letters of Administra- 
tion, &c. &c. In 8vo. 3d Edition, 
enlarged, 88.bds. 

The WORKS of WILLIAM PA- 
LEY, D.D. with additional Sermons, 
&c. and a Life of the Author. By the 
Rev. Edmunu Paley, M.A. Vicar of 
Easing wold. A new Edition, 6 vols. 
8vo. 21. 14s. bds. 

By the same Author, 

SERMONS ON SEVERAL SUB- 
JECTS. 8th Edit., lOs. 6d. bds. 

SERMONS. By Ralph Ward- 
law, D.D.^Gla^ow. 8vo. 12s. bds. 

By the same Author, 

DISCOURSES ON THE PRINCIPAL 

PARTS OF THE SOCINIAN CON- 
TROVERSY. 8V0.. 15s. bds. 4th Edit, 
much enlarged. 

The principles of CHRIS- 
TIAN PHILOSOPHY. By John 
Burns, M.D. &c. 3d Edit. l2uio. 
7s. bds. 

LITERARY RECOLLECTIONS. 
By the Rev. R. Warner, F.A.S. 
2 vols. 8vo. 26s. bds. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN ENGLAND and 
FRANCE, from the French Revolu- 
tion of 1789 to that of 1830. By the 
Editor of Madame du Deffands 
Letters. 8vo. 7s. bds. 

By the same Author, 

A COMPARATIVE VIEW of the 
SOCIAL LIFE OF ENGLAND and 
FRANCE, from the Restoration of 
Charles the Second to the French Re- 
volution of 1789. 8vo. 138. bds. 

SUBSTANCE of SEVERAL 
COURSE OP LECTURES ON MUSIC, 
read in the Untversitv of Oxford, and 
in the Metropolis. By Wm. Crotch, 
Mu8. Doc. Prof. Mns. Oxon. Post 8vo. 
7s. 6d. bds. 

LACON; OH, MANY THINGS in 
FEW WORDS. By the Rev. C. C. 

CoLTON, late Fellow of King's College, 
Cambridge, and Vicar of Kew and Pe- 
tersham. A new Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 
148* bds. 

A TREATISE on the STEAM 
ENGINE ; Historical, Practical, and 
Descriptive. By John Farby, En- 
gineer. 4to. illustrated by numerous 
Wood-cuts, and 25 Copper-plates, en- 
graved by Wilson Lowry, from Draw- 
ings by Messrs. Fai'ey. 51. 5s. bds. 
Vol. II. is in the press. 

The SHIP-MASTER'S ASSIST- 
ANT, AND OWNER'S MANUAL; 
containing general Information neces- 
sary for Merchants, Owners, and Mas- 
ters of Ships, Ofltcers, &c. By David 
Steele, Esq. A new Edition, brought 
down to August, 1830. The Commer- 
cial Department by Dr. Kelly ; and 
the Legal Department by a Professional 
Gentleman. In 1 thick volume, closely 
printed, with Maps, Plates, &c. 21 s. 
bds. or 22s. 6d. bound. 

The MISCELLANEOUS PROSE 
WORKS OF SIR WALTER SCOTT, 
Bart., now first collected. 6 vols. 
8vo. 31. 12s. bds. 

The medical GUIDE: for the 
Use of the Clergy, Heads of Families 
and Seminaries, and Junior Practi- 
tioners. By Richard Reece, M. D. 
&c. A new Edition, being the Fif- 
teenth, considerably enlarged. 128. bde. 



8 



Valuable Standard Works, printed for 



^Mvmm^^*<^vtmm0tmtmt0*0*m^m0»fam^0^Mm0^^ 



MMMmMAMAMM 



WORKS ON BOTANY, GARDENING, &c. 



The ENGLISH FLORA. By Sir 
J. E. Smith, M.D. F.R.S. Pres. Lin. 
Soc. &c. New Edit., in 4 vols. 8vo. 
SI. 6s. 

** These volomes are composed with 
an intimate knowledge of the snbject, 
with an nndeviating aim at accaracy, 
and with an invariable respect for can- 
dour and for truth."— ^foirfWy Review. 

By the same Author, 
A COMPENDIUM of the ENG- 
LISH FLORA. 12mo. 7s. 6d. 



The same Work in Latin. 
78. 6d. Fifth Edit. 



Price 



A GRAMMAR of BOTANY, iUus- 
trative of artificial, as well as natural 
Classification, with an explanation of 
Jnssieu's System. In 8vo. with 277 
Figures of Plants, &c. 2d Edit. 128. ; 
or coloured Plates, 11. lis. 6d. bds. 

An INTRODUCTION to the 
STUDY of PHYSIOLOGICAL and 
SYSTEMATICAL BOTANY. In 
8vo. 6th Edit, with 15 Plates, 14s. 
plain ; or coloured, 11. 8s. bds. 

A GUIDE TO THE ORCHARD and 
KITCHEN-GARDEN ; or, an Account 
of the most valuable Fruit and Veee- 
tables cultivated in Great Britain : with 
Calendars of the Work required in the 
Orchard and Kitchen Garden daring 
every Month in the Year. By Gborok 
LiNDLBY, C.M.H.S. Edited by John 
LiNDLBT, F.R.S. &c. Assistant Secre- 
tary to the Horticultural Society of 
London. 1 large volume, 8vo. lOs. bds. 

An INTRODUCTION to the NA- 
TURAL SYSTEM of BOTANY ; or, 
a Systematic View of the whole Vege- 
table Kingdom: together with the 
Uses of the most important Species in 
Medicine, the Arts, &c. By John 
LiNDLKY,F.R.S.&c. 8vo. 12s. in cloth. 

By the same Author, 

A SYNOPSIS of the BRITISH 
FLORA, arranged according to the 
Natural Orders. 12mo. 10s. 6d. bds. 

OUTLINE OF THE FIRST PRIN- 
C1PI«ES OF Botany, with Plates, 3s. 



MUSCOLOGIA BRITANNICA ; 

containing the Mosses of Great Britain 
and Ireland, systematically arranged 
and described; with Plates. By W. 
J. HooKKR, LL.D. F.R.A. and L.S. 
&c. and T. Taylob, M.D. M.R.I.A. 
and F.L.S. &c. The 2d Edit, in 8vo. 
11. lis. 6d. plain, and 31. 38. coloured 
plates. 

THE BRITISH FLORA; com- 
prising the PHENOGAMOUS or 
FLOWERING PLANTS, and the 
FERNS. By W. J. Hooker, LL.D. 
&c. Royal 12mo. 12s. in cloth. 

The plan of the above work is similar 
to that of the first part of Dr. Hooker's 
" Flora Scotlca." The Mosses, and the 
rest of the Cryptogamla, will form a 
distinct volume, corresponding with the 
above, and with the " English Flora" 
of the late Sir James Smith. 

FIRST STEPS TO BOTANY, 
intended as Popular Illustrations ol 
the Science, leading to its Study as a 
Branch of GeneriU Education. By I 
James L. Drummond, M.D., Profes- 1 
sor of Anatomy and Physiology in the 
Belfast Academical Institution. 3d ' 
edit., 12mo., with cuts, 0t. boards. < 

" This answers more completely to ' 
the proper notion of an Introduction to ' 
Botany, than any work we have yet | 
seen." — Eclectic Bevieuf* \ 

CONVERSATIONS on BOTANY, ' 
with Twenty-one Engravings. The 7lh 
edit., enlarged, in 1 vol. 12mo., 7«. ftl. 
plain, or 12«. coloured. 

An ARRANGEMENT of BRI- 
TISH PIJINTS, according to the 
latest Improvements of the linnaean 
System. By W. Withering, M.D. 
&c. Seventh Edition, including the 
most recent Discoveries, and niiiBcnMs 
Annotations. By W. Witherino, 
Esq. LL.D. &c. 4 vols., Plates. Sl.lfla. 
boards. 

A TREATISE on the CULTURE 
AND MANAGEMENT of FRUIT 
TREES. By William Forsyth,) 
Gardener to his Majesty. 8vo. 7th Edit. \ 
with Plates and portrait. ISs. bds. I 



Longman, Bees, Orme, Broum, and Green, 
NATURAL HISTORY. RURAL ECONOMY, &c. 



A NEW SYSTEM of GEOLOGY, 
in which the great Revolntions of the 
Earth hnd Animated Katnre are re- 
conciled at once to Modern Science 
and to Sacred History. By Andrew 
Urs, M. D. F. R. S., &c. In 8vo. with 
7 Plates and 51 Wood-cuts. 11. Is. bds. 

" We regard this New System of 
Geology as one of the most valuable 
accessions lately made to the Scientific 
Literature of onr conntr}*." — Brande*9 
Journal qf Science* 

Thk book of NATURE; being a 
Popular Illustration of. the General 
Laws and Phenomena of Creation. 
By J. Mason Good, M.D. and F.R.S. 
2d £dit. 3 vols. 11. let. 

" — the work is certainly the best 
philosophical digest of the kind which 
we have seen." — Monthly Review, 

ThbLINN^AN SYSTEM of 
CONCHOLOGY. By J. Mawb. 
8vo. with 37 Plates, being 1 to each 
Genera. 11. Is. ; coloured, 21. 12s. 6d. 

ELEMENTS of AGRICULTURAL 
CHEMISTRY. By Sir Humphry 
Davt, Bart. 8vo. 4th Edit. 15s. bds. 

LETTERS TO a Yodno NATURAL- 
IST, ON THE STUDY OP NATURE 

AND NATURAL THEOLOGY. By 
J. L. Drummond, M. D. &c. 12mo. 
with Cuts, 10s. 6d. bds. 



An INTRODUCTION to ENTO- 
MOLOGY; or, Elements of the Na- 
tural History of Insects. ByW. KlRisY, 
M.A.F.R.S. & L.S., and W. Sfknce, 
Esq. F.L.S. New Edit. 4 vols. 8vo. 
with Plates and Portraits, 4L 

A MANUAL OF tbb LAND and 
FRESH-WATER SHELLS hitherto 
Discovered in Great Britain : arranged 
according to recent Authorities. By 
W. TuRTON. Fcap. Cold. Plates. 

CONVERSATIONS on MINE- 
RALOGY; with Plates, comprising 
upwards of 400 Figures of Minerals, 
including 12 l>eatttifuliy coloured Spe- 
cimens. Second Edit. 2 vols. 12mo. 
14s. bds. 

CONVERSATIONS on the ANI- 
MAL ECONOMY. By a Physician. 
2 vols. 12mo. illustrated by Plates, &c. 
lOs. bds. 

A TREATISE on the VALUA- 
TION of PROPERTY for the 
POOR'S-RATE. By J. S. Bayldon. 
78. 6d. bds. 



By the same Author, 

The art of VALUING RENTS 
and TILLAGES, &c. 3rd Edit. 7s. 



DR. BUTLER'S GEOGRAPHY AND ATLASES. 



A SKETCH of ANCIENT and 
MODERN GEOGRAPHY, for the 
Use of Schools. By Samuel Butler, 
D.D. F.R.S. &c. Archdeacon of Derby, 
&c. 9th Edit. 1 vol. 8vo. 9s. bds. 

In the present Edition the Author 
' has made some very important Addi- 
' ttons, chiefly in the modern part of it. 

GENERAL ATLAS of ANCIENT 
AND MODERN GEOGRAPHY, 43 
' Coloured Maps, and two Indexes. 
j 11. 4s. half-bound. 

*,* The Indexes contain the latitude 
I and longitude; and in that of the An- 
cient Atlas, the qvanHtiee are marked. 

ATLAS OF MODERN GEOGRA- 
PHY, consisting of 22 Coloured Maps, 
from a New Set of Plates. 128. 



ATLAS OF ANCIENT GEOGRA- 
PHY, consisting of 21 Coloured Maps, 
with a complete Accentuated Index. 
12s. half-bound. 

OUTLINE GEOGRAPHICAL 
COPY-BOOKS, in 4to.; intended as 
Practical Exercises on Dr. Butler's 
Atlases. 4s. each, sewed. 

OUTLINE MAPS of ANCIENT 
GEOGRAPHY, selected by Dr. But- 
ler from D'Anville's Ancient Atlas. 
Folio, IDs. 6d. 

A PRAXIS ON the LATIN PRE- 
POSITIONS, being an Attempt to il- 
lustrate their Origin, Power, and Sig 
nification. 3d Edit. 8vo. 7s. 6d. bd. 

A KEY to the Same. 6s. boards. 



10 



FeUuable Standard Works, printed for 
POETRY. 



POETICAL WORKS BY L. E. L. 



The VENETIAN BRACELET; 
the LOST PLELA.D; a HISTORY of 
the LYRE; and other Poems. By 
L.E.L. Foolscap 8vo. with a Frontis- 
piece, 10s. 6d. bds. 

" It is impossible to read a page in 
tlie volame before us tbAt does not 
bear the stamp of originality and of 
high poetical talents."— Gen««. Mag. 

By the same Author, 

The golden VIOLET, and other 
Poems. Foolscap 8vo. 10s. 6d. bds. 



The TROUBADOUR. 4th Bdit. 
Foolscap 8vo. 10s. 6d. bds. 

The IMPROVISATRICE. 6th Edit. 
Foolscap 8vo. 10s. 6d. bds. 

THE POETICAL WORKS of 
L.E.L. including the Venetian Brace- 
let, the Lost Pleiad, a History of die 
Lyre, the Improvisatrice, Troubadour, 
Golden Violet, and Miscellaneoos 
Poems. With uniform Titles and 
Vignettes. 4 yok. fcp. 8vo. 21. 28. 
extra bds. 



LALLA ROOKH. An Oriental 
Romance. By T. Moore, Esq. New 
Edit, with 4 Engravings, from Paint- 
ings by R. Westall, R.A. Foolscap 
8vo. 14s. bds. Another Edition in 
8vo. 14s. ; and Illustrations, by West- 
all, 8vo. 12s. 

By the same Author, 

The loves of the ANGELS. 
5th Edit. 8vo. 9s. bds. 

The EPICUREAN. A Tale. Fcp. 
8vo. 5th Edit. 9s. bds. 

I RODERICK, tiie LAST of the 
GOTHS. A Poem. By Robert 
SouTHEY, LL.D. &c. In 2 vols. 
Price I6s. 

By the 4ame Author, 
THALABA, 2 vols. 16s.; Madoc, 2 
vols. 168. ; Curse of Kehama, 2 vols. 
14«. ; Minor Poems, 3 vols. ISs. ; Pil- 
grimage to Waterloo, 10s. 6d. ; Tale of 
Paraguay, 10s. 6d. ; Carmen Trium- 
phale ; and Carmen Anlica, for 1814, 5s. 

A VISION of JUDGMENT. A 
Poem. 4to. 15s. bds. 



The POETICAL WORKS of W. 
WORDSWORTH, Esq. A New Edi- 
tion, including " Ttfe Excursion." 6 
vols, foolscap 8vo. Price 21. 5s. bds. 
In these Volumes will be found the 
whole of the Author's published Poems, 
for the first time collected in a uni- 
form edition, with several new pieces 
interspersed. 

The only complete Editions 
OF The REMAINS of HENRY 
KIRKE WHITE, selected, with pre. 
fatory Remarks, by Robert Soc> 
THEY, Esq. In 2 vols. Price 11. 48. 
And in 1 vol. 24mo. with engraved 
title and vignettes. Price 5s. bds. 

N. B. The property of the Family 
having been invaded, it is necessary to 
state, that these are the on/y Editiont 
which contain the Life by Mr. Sou- 
they, and the whole of the contents of 
the Third Volume. 

PSYCHE; or the Legend of Love; 
and other Poems. By the late Mrs. , 
Henry Tighe. In Svo. 12s. bds. ; 5th 
Edit, with a portrait of the Author. | 



Montgomery's poetical works. 



The PELICAN ISLAND, in 9 
cantos; and other Poems. By J. 
Montgomery, 3d Edit., in foolscap 
8vo. price 8s. bds. 

By the same Author, 
The wanderer of SWIT- 
ZERLAND. 10th Edit. 68. 

SONGS OF ZION, B.EINO IMI- 
TATIONS OF PSALMS. 3d Edit, 
in foolscap 8vo. Price 5s. 



( 



The WORLD before the 
FLOOD. 8th Edit. 98. 

The west INDIES and other 
POEMS. 7th Edit. 6s. 

GREENLAND, and other , 
POEMS. 3d Edition, 88. bds. j 

Also, VERSES to the ME' 
MORY OF R. REYNOLDS. Price 

28. 



mmm 



Tm BOmiOWER WILL M CHAROeO 
AN OVERDUE PEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE UERARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 