A GUIDE TO SYLLOGISM, 

OB, 

A MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



^Pi/<?Y 



LONDON: 

Printed by C.Richards,l(iOf St. Martinis -lane, Charing-crou, 



A GUIDE TO SYLLOGISM, 



OR, 



A MANUAL OF LOGIC ; 

COMPREHENDING - 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MANNER OF DISPUTATION NOW 
PRACTISED IN THE SCHOOLS AT CAMBRIDGE ; 

WITH SPECIMENS OF THE DIFFERENT ACTS. 

ADAPTED TO THE USE OP 

THE HIGHER FORMS IN GRAMMAR SCHOOLS, AND OF 
JUNIOR STUDENTS AT THE UNIVERSITY. 



BY 



THE REV. CHARLES WESLEY, B.D. 

Late of ChrisVs College, Cambridge. 



" A Syllogism is a form of reasoning which serves to compress much 
matter into a little compass, and helps to investigate truth with 
certain^."— £isAop Watson, 



LONDON : 
HENRY G. "BOHN, 4, YORK STREET, COVENT-GARDEN ; 

DEIGHTON & SONS, CAMBRIDGE ; J. PARKER, OXFORD. V 

M.DCCC.XXXII. 



^/ 




\N 



THE JTRIW YORK 

PUftLIC LIBRARY 

962178A 

AflrraR, uwox and 

TO^fiN FOLNDATiONS 
1 1938 L 



I- 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



AN ILLUSTRIOUS PERSONAGE, Twenty Copies, 

A. 
Dr. Allydyse 

J. Anderton, Esq. New Bridge-street 
J. A. Arnold, Esq. Lutterworth, Leicestershire 
R. Ashton, Esq. Brompton, tim copies 
Rev. J. Athawes, A.M. Trin. Coll. Cambridge 
J. Auterac, Esq. EensingtoD, two copies 

B. 

S. B., Fulham 

Rev. Dr. Barnes, Canon of Christ Church, Oxon. two 

copies 
L. Bathurst, Esq. Vale Place, Fulham 
Rev. Robert Baxter, A.M. Rector of Kingsthorpe and 

St. Peter^s, Northampton, and Elder Brother of 

St. Catherine's, two copies 
Sir William Beechey 
Rev. St. Vincent Beechey, A. M. 
Capt. Beechey 

J. Benson, Esq. Blackfriars, ttvo copies 
Rev. J, Beresford, A.M. Rector of Kibworth, two copies 
Mrs. S. Beresford, t%Do copies 
A. Bemays, Esq. Professor of German Literature, 

King's College, London 



Tl SUBSCRIBERS. 

P. Bignell, Esq. Banbury, Oxfordshire 

Rev. R. Biscoe, A.M. Student of Christ Church, Oxon. 

Rev. J. Britton, A.M. Ware, Herts 

W. Brookes, Esq. two copies 

H.W. Burgess, Esq. two copies 

C. 

His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, ten copies 
Earl Cowper, ten copies 
The very Rev. the Dean of Chester, six copies 
T. S. Capel, Esq. two copies 
S. Cartwright, Esq. tivo copies 
Re V. R. C attermole, B . D . 
Rev. Dr. Chisholm, Hammersmith, turn copies 
W. W. Clarke^ Esq. B. A. Wadham College, Oxon. 
Rev. F. T. Corrance, Rector of Great Glen, Leicester- 
shire 
Miss Courtoy 
Miss E. Courtoy 
Miss Craven 

D. 
Rev. T. Dale, A.M. two copies 
B. Dobson, Esq. Bolton-le-Moor 
Rev. W. M'Douall, A.M. Prebendary of Peterboroug- 
J. Ley Douglass, Esq. Leicestershire 
Sir George Duckett, Bart. /owr copies 

E. 

Rev. T. S. Evans, A.M. Kensington 

F. 

J. Fairbank, Esq. 

Rev. R. Firmin, A. M. Fingeringhoe, Colchester 



SUBSCRIBERS. TU 

W. n. Fleming, Esq. Buc^s 

Miss Fleming 

Mj^ L. Fleming 

J. Fletcher, Esq. 

J. Freeman, Esq. Spring Gardens, six copies 

H. H. Frere, Esq. 

Miss Fryer, Hanmiersmith^ ten copies 

G. 

Earl Gower, two copies 

Rev. Dr. Geldart, Regius Professor of Civil Law, Cam- 
bridge, twenty copies 

W. Gilbert, Esq. 

J. Gilbert, Esq. 

RcF. Dr. Graham, Master of Christ Coll. Cambridge, 
ttvo copies 

Mrs. Green, North-End, Fulham 

R. Green, Esq. Brook Green 

F. Green, Esq. Stoke Newington Academy, tivo copies 

E. E. Green, Esq. Eeppel-street 

H. 
Hon. Lady Halford 
Rey. Peter Hansell, A.M. Fulham 
Rev. T. Harding, A.M. 
J. T. V. Hardy, Esq. 
B.Hawes, Esq. 

B. Hick, Esq. Bolton-le-Moor, three copies 
W. H. Hodding, Esq. two copies 

C. Hoppe, Esq. two copies 

Rev. Thomas Hartwell Home, B.D. St. John's College, 

Cambridge 
Hon. Mrs. Howard, /(mr copies 



nil SUBSCRIBERS. 

Re7. J. H. Ho\vlett, A.M. Kensingtoa 

Rey. T. Hughes, A.M. Prebendary of Fetexborougb 

H. Hunt, Esq. Islington 

Rev. R. Hussey, A.M. Student of Christ Chureh, Oxon. 

H. Hutton, £sq. B. A. Wadham College^ Oxon. 

I. 

John Innes, Esq. Admiralty, ,/{«e copin 
Mis.lnneSy Jive copies 

J. 
Rev. J. Jackson, A.M. Addtson-road, Kensingtcm 
— . Jackson, Esq. 
Hugh Jackson, Esq. 
T. Jackson, Esq. Yorkshire, two copies 
Rev. R. H. Jackson, B. A. Sheffield House, Kensington 
C. Jackson, Esq. Barrow, Lincolnshire 

F. Jago, Esq. Hammersmith 

Rev. J. James, AJKf .{Prebendary of Peterborough, ttoo 

copies 
J. Jolly, Esq. 

Rev. T. Jones, A.M. Enfield 
W. Jones, Esq. North-End, Fulham, two copies 

K. 
Rev. H. Kebbel, A.M. 

G. Eollmann, Esq. St. James's, two copies 
Rev. Dr. Euper, two copies 

L. 

The Right Hon. and Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of 

London, ten copies 
Lr. Lang, Sheffield House, Kensington. 



SUBSCRIBERS. IX 

Rev. J.F. Latewaid,A.M. Rector of Peiivale, two copies 

Rev. J. Ley, A.M. Stadent of Christ Churcli, Oxon. 

W. Loat, Esq. and Family, three copies 

S. Loat, Esq. 

Mrs. Ludlam, North-End, Fulham, two cofnes 

M. 

G. A. Martin, Esq. Adelphi, ten copies 

D. Martin, Esq. Poet's-comer 

A Mathematician 

G. Maule, Esq. Solicitor to the Treasur} 

G. Maule, Esq. Junior, Christ Church, Oxon. 

Rev. J. Mayor, A.M. Rector of South Collingham 

G. Mills, Esq. North-End, Fulham, ten copies 

N. 
Rev. J. Nelson, A.M. Minister of St John's, Fulham, 
four copies 

0. 
Rey. Sir H.Oakeley, Bart. Ealing 
Rev. James Ord, A.M. Leicester, tivo copies 
James Ondge, "Esq. four copies 
Rev. G. Oshome, A.M. 

P. 
John Horsley Palmer, Esq. Governor of the Bank , 

two copies 
Mrs. Horsley Palmer, two copies 
W. Parkin, Esq. Kensington, two copies 
John Penn, Esq. four copies 
Rev. J. R. Pitman, A.M. Kensington, two copies 
T. H. Plumer, Esq. 



X SUBSCRIBERS. 

F. Pollock, Esq. M.P. two copies 

T. C. Porter, Esq. two copies 

Mrs. Porter 

Miss Porter 

Miss M. Porter 

Miss A. Porter 

The Venerable Archdeacon Pott, ten copies 

Rev. J. S. Pratt, A.M. Prebendary of Peterborough, 

tivo copies 
Mrs. Pratt 

Rev. C. Pratt, A.M. Rector of Packington 
Rev. J. Pratt, A.M. Rector of Paston 
Miss Preston, Kensington, (wo copies 

R. 

The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Rochester, 

two copies 
Lady Ravensworth, ten copies 
J. Railton, Esq. Eagle House, Brook Green, three 

copies 
C. C. Raper, Esq. Chelsea 

— Richardson, Esq. Covent Garden 

— Rothwell, Esq. Bolton-le-Moor 
Rev. Dr. Roy, Fulham 

Rev. Robert Roy, A.M. 

Rev. Dr. Russell, Head Master of Charter-House 
School, two copies 

S. 
Rev. A. P. Saunders, A.M. Student of Chr. Ch. Oxon. 
S. Schwenck, Esq. ttvo copies 
F. T. Sergeant, Esq. A.M. 



SUBSCRIBERS. XI 

Miss Shakespear, ttoo copies 

Rey. A. Short, A.M. Student of Christ Church, Oxon. 

two copies 
W. Silver, Esq. B. A. 
Mrs. Skelton 
Humphrey Skelton, Esq: 
Rev. Dr. Strong, Archdeacon of Northampton, ttM 

copies 
Sir Rohert Sydney 

T. 

Rev. J. Teeson, A.M. 

Rev. Dr. Toumay, Prebendary of Peterborough, two 
copies 

U. 
Thomas TJsman, Esq. B.A. Grove House, Tottenham 

V. 

— Valance, Esq. Blackfriars 

L. T. Ventouillac, Esq. Professor of French Literature, 

King's College, London 
Rev. D. Veysie, Censor of Christ Church, Oxon. ttoo 

copies 

W. 
John Wain, Esq. Vale-place, Fulham 
J. Walker, Esq. Bridewell Precinct, two copies 

— Ward, Esq. Ditto, two copies- 

G. Wartnaby, Esq. Harborough, Leicestershire, two 

copies 
Mr. G. Wartnaby, Jun. Kensington, two copies 
Rev. T. Wartnaby, A.M. Rector of Knossington, Lei- 
cestershire 



Xii SUBSCRIBERS. 



J. Wartnaby, Esq. Junior, Eltham, Kent 

Harry Wartnaby, Esq. 

— Watts, Esq. 

J. J. Wilkinson, Esq. 

Rev. J.Williams, A.M. Censor of Christchurch, Oxon. 
two copies 

Rev. R. Williamson, A.M. Head Master of West- 
minster School 

W. T. Wingrave, Esq. Bloooasbury 

Rev. W. Wood, B.D. Vicar of Fulham, ten copies 

J. Wood, Esq. Temple Bar 

R. Wood, Esq. Fellow of St. John's College, Oxon. 

Rev. J. Wood, A.M. Coulsdon 

Miss Wood, Stockwell 

Miss A. Wood, Ditto 

Rev. Dr. Woodcock, Canon of Christchurch, Oxon. 
two copies 



INTRODUCTION. 



The object of the compiler^ in arranging these pages, 
ia to lead the student, by the shortest path, to an acquain- 
tance with the more interesting and practical parts of 
Logic. It appears to him, that there are many persons 
who would decline the perusal of a treatise on Apprehen- 
sion, the Divisions of Nouns, and the different sorts of 
Predicables, who might be interested in examining the 
nature of Propositions, and the principle on which an 
Inference is conclusively drawn. 

He is confirmed in this opinion, by having often ob- 
served, that youths of an ingenious and intellectual turn, 
disinclined as they might be to undertake the perusal of 
a bulky volume upon Logic, are generally gratified when 
an argument is set before them, in the brief and lucid foim 
of a Syllogism. 



XIV 

To the improvement of such youths he is induced to 
hope that the following pages ai*e judiciously adapted. 
Nor let it be urged that the study is too difficult: if a lad 
is thought competent to understand Cicero^ and to enter 
on the study of the higher classics^ he may surely be 
taught the method of airanging his conceptions in con- 
foimity with logical precepts. It may safely be affirmed^ 
that the more he is accustomed to the wholesome disci- 
pline of so marshalling his thoughts^ the less likely will 
he be to fall into the errors of a hasty and defective judg- 
ment. He will see more readily what bears upon the 
question^ and^ in hb attempts at argument^ be less liable 
to encumber himself with unnecessary or irrelevant as- 
sumptions. The instrument he is furnished with^ though 
it cannot impait strength^ will yet^ in effect^ augment the 
natural powers^ as the poet represents the sharpness of 
the hatchet increasing the vigour of the woodman. 

Zq pa re rkxvy 
"Sri'iov kKTCLfivyfTiVf 6<l>kXKu d*&vdpbc kp(oriv. 

The work will be completed in fewer strokes, with less 
labour, and greater accuracy. 



XV 

The short sections which constitute the bulk of this 
manual comprise all that is necessary to a knowledge of 
Syllogism^ or^ indeed, of any form of argument recognized 
by Logic. Such students as may desire a further insight 
into the subject, will find, incorporated with the index at 
the end, what, in most books on Logic, is placed at the 
commencement. 

Many technical terms that are in frequent use, though 
not employed in the following treatise, will be found, with 
their explanations, in the index. 

It has been the aim of the compiler to render each sec- 
tion as short as perspicuity would allow, that the instruc- 
tor might be furnished with suitable portions for exercis- 
ing the memory of junior pupils. 

A few examples for practice have been added, and re- 
ferences to the rules and sections are subjoined, for the 
further assistance of the learner. 



xvi 

The Appendix contains a summaiy account of the 
manner of syllogizing in the schools at Cambridge ; and 
it is hoped that younger disputants^ who are about to ap- 
pear there> may derive some advantage from the following 
pages. 

To the Regii Professors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, 
and to the Rev. Dr. Grftham, Master of Christ's College, 
Cambridge, the compiler has to offer his most grateful 
thanks for the numerous obligations under which they 
have laid him. 

He has the honour also to confess himself indebted to 
the learned and accomplished author*^ of the *' Elements 
of Logic," not only for the advantage of his published 
writings, but for many acts of private courtesy. 



The preseot Archbishop of Dublin. 



A GUIDE TO SYLLOGISM, 

jrc, jrc* 



OF REASONING AND SYLLOGISM. 

1. An act of reasoning is performed by compar- 
ing two ideas together by means of a thirds that 
must agree with one of them. If this third idea 
agrees with the other two, those two, of course, 
a^ree with one another; if it agrees with only one, 
they, of course, disagree with one another.^ 

2. A syllogism (from (nXKoyliofuUf to reason) 
is an argument stated at full length, and in regular 
logical form. 

3. By an argument's being stated at full length, 
is meant, that the apph'cation of the third idea to 



* £. 6. In reasoning on the character of Caesar, if I wished 
to ascertain whether the idea of * a good man ' agreed with 
him, I might take, for a third idea, that of * Tyrant.' On 
finding this agree with * Caesar,' and disagree with * good 
man,' I should say that the ideas of 'Caesar* and 'good man' 
disagreed with one another ; or, in other words, that ' Cae- 
sar was not a good man.' The third idea, thus employed 
to assist us in forming a judgment, is called a middle term. 

B 






2 OF REASONINa AND SYLLOGISM. 

the two others is expressed in terms^ and that how- 
ever ohvious the application may he^ in the case of 
one of thejn> it is never^ on that account, taken for 
granted. 

4. By an argument's being stated in regular logi- 
cal form, is meant, its being so arranged, that the 
conclusiveness of it is manifest from the mere force 
of the expression, i, e. without considering the 
meaning of the terms. Thus, 

Eveiy Y is X, 
Every Z is Y, therefore 
Every Z is X. 
If you grant the two former assertions, (or premises,) 
you cannot deny the conclusion. 

5. Syllogisms are divided into Categorical, ( from 
Karriyopib), I affirm,) and Hjrpothetical, (from vv6- 
^etriQ, a supposition.) Categorical syllogisms are 
divided into Pure and Modal ; hypothetical syllo- 
gisms into Conditional and Disjunctive. Syllogisms 
take their names from the different kinds of propo- 
sitions employed in forming them. 

OF PROPOSITIONfiF. 

6. A proposition is a sentence that affirms or 
denies. It consists of three parts, viz. the subject, 



*> to 

«- *. c 



OF PROPOSITIONS. 3 

or thing spoken of; the predicate, or that which is 
said of it ; and the copula, which must he the suh- 
stantive verh^ with or without a negative particle^ as 
the suhject and predicate happen to agree or dis- 
agree. 

7. The subject and predicate are called Terms or 
Extremes^''^ because, according to logical order, the 
subject is placed first, the predicate last, and the 
copula in the middle. 

Sutj. Cop. Pred. 

Ex. — i Vice I I is I I detestable. I 

Svibj. Cop. Pred. 



I Virtue I I is not I I unrewarded. • 
8. The substantive verb alone is recognized by 
logic ; all other verbs are resolvable into the sub- 
stantive verb with a participle or adjective. 
Ex. — ^The summer approaches. 

Suifj. Cop. Pred. 



I The summer I I is I • approaching. I 
He does not know it. 

Suijj. Cop. Pred. 



I He I I is not I I aware of it. I 
9. As the copula is used merely to express the 
agreement or disagi*eement of the terms, it is> or 

• In speaking of a syllogism, the term " extremes " is 
often understood to imply the extremes of the conclusion, 

b2 



4 OF PROPOSITIONS. 

may be> always put in the present tense. ShoukL 
the tense of the substantive verb modify the sense of 
the proposition, this circumstance must be viewed 
as part of one of the terms.''^ 

Ex. — ^Troy is existent. 

Troy was existent, i.^. — 

Su^. Cop, Fred. 

I Troy I I is I I a place that was formerly existent. I 
10. An adjective or participle, though it cannot 
be the subject, may yet be the predicate of a pro- 
position ; but even then a substantive appears to 
be understood ; as, '* Life is short," " Art is long." 
In these two propositions, the word " thing " may 
be supplied to each predicate. — See Syncatego- 
R£M ATic Word, in the Index, 



* The variety of expression allowable in language will 
often occasion a proposition to appear in a fonn very dif- 
ferent from that recognized by logic. To that form, how- 
ever, all propositions are reducible; and the pupil should 
be accustomed to bring into it with readiness, propositions 
of a dissimilar construction. £. O. 

*' Of his kingdom there shall be no end." 
<' An end of his kingdAn is that which shall not be." 
*' In loftiness of thought Homer surpasses Virgil." 
'^ Homer is a poet who surpasses Virgil in loftiness of 
thought." 
*' It is the duty of youth to reverence age.'' 
'* To reverence age is the duty of youtii**' 



DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 5 

11. Propositions are either Categorical^ (and sub- 
divided into Pure* andModal^) or Hypothetical (and 
subdivided into Conditional and Disjunctive.) This 
division is according to substance. They are either 
Affirmative or Negative. This division is accord- 
ing to qttality (u e. the quality of the expression,) 
They are Universal or Particular. This division 
is according to quantity, ^ 

* A pure proposition is sometimes called *' propositio de 
inesse," because it simplj states that the predicate is, or is 
not, (metaphysically,) in the subject. 

f Another division of propositions is into Singular and 
Indefinite. A singular proposition is one of which the sub- 
ject is an individual, (either a proper name, a singular pro- 
noun, or a common noun with a singular sign.) £. G. ''Cae- 
sar overcame Pompey," " I am the person," "This fable is 
instructive." But as these propositions predicate of the 
whole of the subject, they fall under the rules that govern 
universals. It is to be observed, that if the subject of a 
proposition consist of a number of nouns coUedively under- 
stood, so that they are viewed as one single thing or body, 
the proposition is singular* £. 6. " All the books in Pto- 
lemy's library amounted to 200,000 volumes," i. e. all to- 
together. "Two and two make four." " Caesar, Pompey, 
and Crassus, constituted the first Triumvirate." When the 
word together can be added to the subject of the proposition, 
or when the word each cannot be introduced, that proposi- 
tion is singular. 

An indefinite proposition is one that has no sign of uni- 
versality or particularity affixed to it, but leaves us to 



6 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 

12. A categorical proposition declares a thing 
[icariyyopcl] absolutely, as '' I love," or " I am lov- 
ing." " Man is not infallible." These are pure ca- 
tegoricals, asserting simply the agreement and dis- 
agreement of subject and predicate. " The wisest 
man may possibly be mistaken." '* A prejudiced 
historian will probably misrepresent the truth." 
These are mo(fa/ categoricals, asserting the manner 
of the agreement and disagreement between subject 
and predicate.* 

13. A hypothetical proposition consists of two 
or more categoricals, united by a conjunction called 
the Copula. It asserts, not absolutely but, under 
an hypothesis or condition : such propositions are 
denoted by the conjunctions used in stating them. 
E. G. *' If man is fallible, he is imperfect^" This 

judge, from the nature of the connexion between the terms 
or Extremes, (No.7,) whether it should be reckoned as uni- 
versal or particular. See No. 19. 

* The modality of a proposition is usually considered to 
affect the copula. Logical writers have selected, as most 
worthy of remark, four modes of connexion between subject 
and predicate : — viz. necessary, possible, impossible, and 
contingent E. G. *' Man is necessarily an animal." " A 
globe may possibly consist of water." "It is impossible a 
man should be a stone." "John may, or may not, be 
learned." 



DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 7 

is called a conditional proposition^ denoted by the 
conjunction "if." "It is either day or night." 
This is a disjunctive hypothetical^ and is denoted 
by the disjunctive conjunction "either." 

14. An affirmative proposition is one of which the 
copula (No. 6.) is affirmative, ^negative propo- 
sition is one of whidi the copula is negative. There 
is an example of each in No. 7. 

15. A universal proposition is one of which the 
predicate is affirmed or denied of the whole of the 
sdbject. Its usual signs are *'all/* "every," "none," 
^c.;*^ or a universal proposition may have for its 
subject a proper name, or a common name with a 
singular sign. — See note to No. 11. E. G. " All 
tyrants are miserable," "No miser is rich," " Eng- 
land is an island." — A particular proposition is one 
of which the pi-edicate is affirmed or denied of only 
part of the subject. Its usual signs are " some," 

¦ ¦¦I - I ^m 1 M ^- I I I ¦ . I.I -^— ¦¦¦¦¦^ ¦¦ I ^. — .¦¦¦—¦ — ..—¦¦¦11^ II ¦» 

* To the signs of UDiversality might be added " who- 
ever," " each," " neither," ** always," " every where," &c. 
To tiiose of particularity, "a few," "not every,'* "some- 
times," " somewhere," &c. There are some particular signs 
which make a near approach to a universal affirmative, as 
" many," " very many," "almost all,*' "by far the greater 
part," &c. Some, on the other hand, come very near to a 
universal negative, as " few," "very few," "scarcely any," 
&c. 



8 DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS^ ETC. 

" many,'' ^^few," " several," " most," and '' all " or 
" every,** if the copula be negative. E.G. " Some 
islands are fertile." " Many worthy men have to 
complain of ill fortune." ''Most men are fond of 
novelty." ''All tyrants (or some t3rrants) are not 
assas»nated." "None but" means "some, and 
those only," or " one person, thing, or object, and 
that only:" it is, theref<»:e, the sign of a particular, 
or a singular, proposition. 

DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS, SYMBOLS OF QUANTITY 

AND QUALITY, ETC. 

16. In all universal propositions, the subject is 
distributed; an expression which signifies that a 
term is used in its fullest extent ; tha^ it stands for 
all its Significates, or the several things which it sig- 
nifi^ : so that there is not an individual to which 
the common term is applicable, that it does not em- 
brace. As, in the example, " All tyrants are mi- 
serable,** the common term includes Dionysius, 
Phraates, Nero, and every individual who is a ty- 
rant. In all particular propositions, the subject is 
undistributed ; it stands for only part of its signifi- 
cates, and the common term then embraces only a 
part of the individuals to which it is applicable : — 



DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS^ ETC. 9 

as, in the example^ ''Some islands are fertile/' the 
common term " island/' though applicahle to Ice- 
land and all harren islands^ does not emhrace them. 

17. There are four kinds of pure categorical pro- 
positions^ distinguished by the symbols^ A, E, I, O. 

Universal affirmative^ A. 
Universal negative^ E. 
Particular affirmative^ I. 
Particular negative^ O. 

18. The connexion between the extremes of a 
proposition is Necessary, Impossible, or Contingent. 

19. To determine whether an indefinite propo- 
sition should be viewed as particular or universal, 
we must look to the connexion between the ex- 
tremes ; i. e. .we must consider of the subject and 
predicate, whether they necessarily agree, or ne- 
cessarily disagree, or may, or may not agree. The 
nature of the connexion between the extremes is 
called the matter of the proposition. In necessary 
and in impossible matter, an indefinite is understood 
as a universal ; as, " Birds have wings ;'* i, e. all. 
" Birds are not quadrupeds ;" i. e. none. In con- 
tingent matter, i. e. where the terms sometimes 
agree and sometimes not, an indefinite is under- 
stood as a particular; as, '\ Food is necessary to 



10 DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS^ ETC. 

life ;"* t. e, some kind of food, "Birds sing ;" i. e, 
some birds sing. "Birds are not carnivorous ;" i, e, 
some birds are not^ or^ all are not. 

20. The rules for distribution are these : — 
1 St. All universal propositions, and no particular, 
distribute the subject 

2nd. All negative, and no affirmative, the predi- 
cate, f 

* The learner should observe that the term in question is 
** a thing necessatyto life,'* and not conclude, from the 
word '* necessary," that the connexion between the terms 
*< food " and *' necessary to life" is a necessary connexion. 
It is contingent ; because it happens that there are kinds of 
food which are not necessary to life ; as ft happens that 
there are birds which do not sing, and birds which are car- 
nivorous. Whereas it cannot happen that any creature 
without wings, or that any quadruped, should be a bird. 
It is necessary that a creature should have wings to con- 
stitute it a bird, and impossible for a quadruped to be 
one. 

f Thus the distribution or non-distribution of the subject 
of every proposition depends on its quantity; the distribu- 
tion or non-distribution of the predicate, on its quality : 
and note further, that if, in an affirmative proposition, the 
whole of the predicate should agree with the subject, the cir- 
eumstance is acHdefUal, and not implied in the form of ex- 
pression. In the propositions, " All men are rational ani- 
mals,'' and "All men are animals," the form of expression 
is the same; but in the one instance, it so happens, that 
tfae whole of tfae predicate agrees with the subject, which is 



OF THE OPPOSITION OF PROPOSITIONS. 11 

21. Two propositions are said to be opposed, 
when, having the same subject and predicate, they 
yet differ in quantity, or quality, or both. (See 
Nos. 11, 14, 16.) The use of the rules of opposi- 
tion is, that they immediately point out what we 
may infer with regard to the tnith or falsity of any 
other proposition which has the same subject and 
predicate as the proposition before us, but differs 
from it either in quantity, or quality, or both. 

22. There are four different kinds of opposition : 
— 1st. between the two universals A and E, differ- 
ing in quality only, and called Contraries. 2nd, 
between the two particulars I and O, differing also in 
quality only, and called Suhcontraries. 3rd, be- 
tween A and I, or E and O, differing respectively 
in quantity only, and called Subalterns. 4th, be- 
tween A and O, or E and I, differing respectively 
both in quantity and quality, and called Contradic- 
tories.^ 

not the case in the other. *' All rational animals are men/' 
but ''all animals are not men.'' In a just definition, the 
terms are always exactly equivalent, and therefore, conver- 
tUde. 

* Four things are requisite to form a just contradiction ; 
— viz. that we speak of the same thing 1st in the same 
sense ; 2nd, as to the same part ; 3rd, compared with the 



^ 



•^ 



N 



12 OF THE OPPOSITION OF PROPOSITIONS. 

23. The signs " no ** and " none " imply both 
universality and negation ; they are contradictory, 
therefore, to the particular sign with an affirmative 
copula. We cannot contradict '' some are," by 
" all are not." E. G. " Some monarchs are ty- 
rants," ^'All monarchs are not tyrants" — which are 
subcontrary propositions, perfectly compatible, and 
both particular. 

24. Of subaltern propositions, the universal is 
called subaltemans, the particular, subaltemate, 

25. In necessary matter, all affirmatives are 
true, (as, " All islands are surrounded by water," 
" Some islands are surrounded by water,") 
and negatives false, (as, ''No islands are sur- 
rounded by water," " Some islands ai*e not sur- 
rounded by water.") In impossible matter, all ne- 
gatives are tnte, (as, " No triangles are squares," 

same thing; 4th, existing at the same time. By omitting 
one of these conditions, is and is not may be compatible. 
£. G. The carcass of a man is and is not a man; for it is 
a dead man, t^ is not a living one. 2nd. Zoilus is and is 
not black ; for his face is black, and his hair is not black, 
but red. 3rd. Socrates h€U and has not a full head of hair ; 
for he has, if compared with Scipio, he ?ias not, if compared 
with Xenophon. 4th. Nestor is and is not old ; for he is, 
if you speak of his third age, he is not, if you speak of his 
first. 



OF THE OPPOSITION OF PROPOSITIONS. 13 

''Some triangles are not squares/') and affirmatives 
faUe, (as, "All triangles are squares,** " Some tri- 
angles are squares/*) In contingent matter, all 
waiver sals are false, (as, ''All islands are fertile,*' 
"No islands are fertile,*') and 'particulars true, (as, 
" Some islands are fertile,'* " Some islands are not 
fertae/*) 

26. In contingent matter, contraries are hotk 
false, but never hotk true ; subcontraries both true, 
but never both false; contradictories, always one 
true and the other false. 



14 OF THE OPPOSITION OF PROPOSITIONS. 



27. 



g :3 



fits 



S ^ 



0^ 
09 

:3 



S 2 a5 

3 i3 is 



U 



'/ifpuvnb 
m dfuo Suuafftp 



¦^fc 



^ 



^3 






%\ /jt 



9 




lit /!/tM> Suuajfftp 



0^ 

is 

• 
09 
09 



0) 
09 

:3 



03 

09 

o 



09 



•X3 






I -i I 



!25 HH d 



• The truth or falsity of propositions is here seen to de- 
pend on the matter. See No. 19. Propositions may he 



CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 15 

28. In subalterns, the truth of the particular, or 
subaltemate, follows from the truth of the 
universal, or subalternans ; and the falsity 
of the universal from the falsity of the particular.* 
The opposition between conti-adictories is so perfect, 
(since they differ both in quantity and quality, see 
No. 22.) that if any proposition is true, we may be 
sure its contradictory is false ; if false, its contradic 
tory true, &c. 

CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 

29. A proposition is said to be converted, when 
the subject and predicate are made to exchange 
places, as, "No triangles ai*e squares," "No squares 
are triangles." The use of conversion is to give a 
ready insight into what may be inferred from an- 
other proposition, that differs from the one before 
us, by the terms being transposed. This change in 
the position of the teims may be combined with 
that of the quantity, or quality, or both, or neither, 

framed in A, E, I, O, on the following subjects, and adapted 
to the scheme by way of exemplification. 

N. That islands should be surrounded by water. 

I. That triangles should be squares. 

C. That islands are fei'tile. 
* If aU islands are surrounded by water, it is plain that 
some must be so. If that any one triangle is a square be 
false, it mutt be false to say that all are so. 



16 GONTERSION OF PROPomTlOlVS. 

as the %ase may be. By conversion^ a facility is 
likewise afforded in effecting the reduction of syllo- 
gisms, a process that will presently be explained. 

30. The above is an instance of simple convei/"- 
sion ; the subject and predicate being merely trans^ 
posed ; but as this can be done only when the 
terms of a proposition are of exactly the same ex^ 
tent, two other methods are in use, which enable 
us to convert, consistently with truth, eveiy propo^ 
sition whatever: — viz. 1st. the limitation of the pre- 
dicate of the Exposita, (or proposition given,) from 
universal to pai'ticnlar, which is called conversion 
per Accidens, or by Limitation ; and 2ndly, the add- 
ing not to the predicate of theexposita, and then 
denying its agreement with the subject, which is 
called conversion by Negation or Oontra-position. 
But in the case of O, (the particular n^ative,) con- 
version by negation is effected by joining the nega- 
tive pai*ticle of the copula to the predicate of the 
exposita, and then transposing the terms, as if the 
proposition had been I. 

31. No conversion is employed for any logical 
purpose, unless it be illative; L e, when the truth 
of the converse is implied by the truth of the ex- 
posita. (No. 30.) 

32. Conversion is then only illative, when no 



CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 17 

term is distributed in the converse, which was not 
distributed in the exposita ; else, you would em- 
ploy a term universally in the converse, which, in 
the exposita, was used only partially. (For " dis- 
tiihuted" see No. 16.) 

33. The following examples will shew how every 
proposition (A, E, I, O,) may be illatively con- 
verted, by some one of the three methods above 
mentioned : — viz. 1st, simply; 2nd, per accidens, 
or by limitation ; 3rd, by negation or contraposi- 
tion. E, I, simply ; for E distributes both terms, 
(No. 16, 20.) and I, neither (No. 16, 20.) ; they 
are, therefore, of exactly the same extent (No. 30.), 
and simply convertible. 

(E) No triangles ai-e squares ; therefore 
No squares are ti-iangles. 

(I) Some islands are fertile places ; therefore 
Some fertile places are islands. 

E, A, per accidens, or by limitation; E, because 
the predicate being distributed as well as the sub- 
ject, and admitting, therefore, of the sign of uni- 
versality, (as is shewn by simple conversion,) it 
must, as a universal, include the particular. 

(E) No triangles are squares; therefore — 
Some squares are not triangles. 



18 CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 

(which follows from the truth of the simple con-r 
verse.) A is converted 'per accidens, or by limi- 
tation ; because^ since it does not distribute the pre- 
dicate (No. 20.), that predicate will not admit of a 
universal sign^ and therefore requires a particular 
one. 

(A) All birds are animals ; therefore 
Some animals are birds. 
You could not say, " All animals are birds." 

A, O, by negation; A, because the subject 
agrees universally with the predicate ; so that what 
disagrees with the predicate cannot agi*ee with the 
subject.* 

(A) All birds are animals ; therefore 
What are not animals are not birds. 
O, because^ since you consider it as I, neither term 
is distributed^ and the process is that of simple 
conversion. 

Cop. 

(O) Some islands lare not! fertile places; (first 
state this as I, by joining the negative to the pre- 

* It is the same thing to affirm some attribute of the sub- 
ject, and to deny the absence of it; thus (A) ** All birds are 
animals/' is equipollent to (E) "No birds are not-animals,*' 
which is of course simply convertible ; ** What are not 
animals, are not birds." 



CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 19 

Fred. 



dlcate^thus, "Some islands are I not-fertile-places,") 
thei'efore — 

Some places-not-fertile are islands. 

You could not infer from the exposita, ("Some 
islands are not fertile places/') that " Some fertile 
places are not islands." Such a converse, indeed, 
would accidentally be true, but it would not follow 
from the form of expression. This will be seen by 
substituting other terms. E. G. 

Some men 1 are not I poets ; you cannot infer 
" Some poets are not men," but you may infer — 
Some who are not poets are men. 

34. To assist the memory in applying the two 
former methods of conversion, (viz. simple, and per 
acddens,) Aldrich, who does not notice conversion 

by negation, gives the following mnemonic line ; 

f£cl simpliciter^ convertitur EvA per Acci. 
For the last, we may say, 

A sed, et O pariter, convertas usque Negando. 

Or, 

fAxO per Contra ; sic fit conversio tota. 
OF SYLLOGISMS. 

35. The validity of a syllogism depends on this 
axiom of Aristotle, " Whatever is predicated of z, 

c2 



20 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

term distributed^ (No. 16.) whether affirmatively 
or negatively, may be predicated in like manner of 
every thing contained under it." In the example 
at No. 4, X is predicated of Y distributed, and Z 
is contained under Y, (i, e. is its subject;) X is, 
therefore, truly predicated of Z. 

36. There are two canons of pure categorical 
syllogisms ; 1 st. Two terms that agree with one and 
the same third, agree vnth each other; 2nd, Two 
terms, of which one agrees and another disagrees 
with one and the same third, disagree with one an- 
other. On the former of these canons rests the va- 
lidity of affirmative conclusions ; on the latter, of 
negative, 

37. There are six rules for ascertaining whether 
the canons have been strictly observed or not. 

Rule 1st. Every syllogism has three, and only 
three, terms ; .viz. the middle term, and the two 
terms of the conclusion, or question.* The sub- 
ject of the conclusion is called the minor term;f 
its predicate, the major term; and the middle 

* These are commonly called Extremes, 

f Because generally of less eiitent than the msyor and 
middle terms. 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 21 

term is that with which each of them is separately 
compared^ in order to judge of their agreement or 
disagi'eement with each other.* 

Rule 2nd. Every syllogism has three, and only 
three, propositions; viz. the major premiss, in 
which the major term is compared with the middle; 
the minor premiss, in which the minor term is com- 
pared with the middle; and the conclusion/ in 
which the minor term is compared with the major. 

Rule drd. The middle term must not he amhi^ 
guous;\ which is the case whenever it is equivocal, 
or undistributed. An equivocal term is used in 
different senses in the two premises ; E.G. 
" Sage is a plant ; 

A philosopher is sage ; therefore 
A philosopher is a plant." 

If a term he undistrihuted^ as it then stands for 
a part only of its significates^ it may happen that 
one of the extremes may have heen compared with 
one part of it, and the other with another part : E.G. 



* If there were two middle terms, the extremes not being 
both compared with the same, could not be conclusively 
compared with each other. 

f If the middle term is ambiguous, there are, in reality, 
two middle terms in sense, though but one in sound. 



22 OF jSYLLOGISM^. 

" Apples are fruit ; 

Cherries are fruit ; therefore 
Cherries are apples." 

The middle term, therefore, must he distributed 
once, at least, in the premises ; i. e, by being the 
subject of a universal, or predicate of a negative. 

Rule 4th. No term must be distributed in the 
conclusion, which was not distributed in one of 
the premises ; because you would then employ the 
whole of a term in the conclusion, when you had 
employed only a part of it in the premiss ; and 
thus, in reality, introduce a fourth term. The vio- 
lation of this fourth rule is called an illicit process 
of the major or minor term ; E. G. 

*'' All apples are fruit ; 

Cherries are not apples ; therefore 

They are not fruit" Illicit process of the major. 

"All beasts of prey are carnivorous; 

fAll beasts of prey are animals ; therefore 

All animals are carnivorous." Illicit process of the 

minor. 



* This is A, and no a^rmatives distribute the predicate. 
The conclusion is £, and all negatives do distribute the 
predicate. (No. 20.) 

f This also is A, and does not distribute the predicate. 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 23 

Ride 5th. From negative premises you can infer 
nothing; for in them the middle term is pro- 
nounced to disagree with both extremes, not to 
agree with both, or to agree with one and disagree 
with the other : therefore they cannot be compared 
together; E.G. 

" A fish is not a quadruped ;" 

" A bird is not a quadruped/'* proves nothing. 

Rule 6th. If one premiss he negative, the con- 
elusion must be negative ; for in that premiss the 
middle term is pronounced to disagree with one of 
the extremes, and in the other premiss, (which 
must be affirmative by the preceding rule,) to agree 
with the other extreme; therefore, the extremes 
disagreeing with each other, the conclusion is nega- 
tive. To prove a negative conclusion, one of the 
premises must be negative, f 



*' animals." The conclusion again is A, and does distribute 
ihe subject y "animals.'' 

• In order to shew the disagreement between the terms 
** fish " and " bird," you must choose a middle term that 
agrees with one of them. E. G. " A feathered creature is 
not a fish ; a bird is a feathered creature ; therefore," &c. 
Or, <' No animal that inhabits the water is a bird ; a fish is 
an animal that inhabitB the water ; therefore," &c. 

f To prove that the sun is not a planet, you must not 



24 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

38. From these rules it is evident, first, that* 
nothing can he proved from two particular pre- 
mises ; and secondly,f that if one of the premises 
he particular, the conclusion must he particular. % 



take for a middle term '^ sphere/' which agrees with both, 
but a middle term that disagrees either with *^sun" or 
** planet." E. G. " Every planet describes an orbit j the 
sun does not describe an orbit ; therefore it is not a planet." 
Or, '^ The sun is a fixed star ; a planet is not a fixed star ;. 
therefore it is not the sun." 

• You will then have either the middle term undistri- 
buted, or an illicit process. E. G. ^' Some animals are sa- 
gacious ; some beasts are sagacious ; therefore, some beasts 
are animals." Undistributed middle. This conclusion is 
true, but does not follow from the premises. The argument 
is of the same construction as the following absurdity: 
^^ Some animals are black ; some hats are black ; therefore, 
some hats are animals." Again, *' Some animals are saga- 
cious; some beasts are not sagacious; therefore, some 
beasts are not animals." Here is an illicit process of the 
major. *^ Some carnivorous creatures are tame ; some beasts 
are not tame ; therefore, no beasts are carnivorous crea- 
tures." This exhibits an illicit process of both the major 
and minor term. 

f E. G. " All who fight bravely deserve reward ; some 
soldiers fight bravely ; therefore, some soldiers deserve re- 
ward," If you were to infer, " All soldiers deserve, &c." 
there would be an illicit process of the minor. 

X The following mnemonic lines, from Aldrich, may as- 
sist the student in applying these rules and remarks ; 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 25 

39. From universal premises you cannot always 
infer a universal conclusion ; E. G. " All gold is 
precious; all gold is a mineral; therefore some 
mineral is precious." But when you can infer a 
universal, you are always at liberty to infer a par- 
ticular. 

OF MOODS. 

40. The mood of a syllogism is the designation 
of it according to the quantity (No. 11.) and qua- 
lity (No. II.) of each of its three propositions, 
which are denoted by the vowels A, E, I, O, (No. 
17.). There are only eleven moods admissible, as 
conforming to the rules laid down at No. 37. See 
No, 44, below, 

OF FIGURES. 

41. The figure of a syllogism indicates the situ- 

L 

Distribuas medium (Rule 3.), nee quartus terminus adsit; 
(Rule 1 & 2.) 

Utraque nee praemissa negans (Rule 5.)) nee particUlaris ; 
(No. 38.) 
Sectetur partem Conclusio deteriorem; (Rule 6,& No. 38.) 
£t non distribuat, nisi cum praemissa, negetve. (Rule 4 & 6.) 
Logicians have attached to universal propositions an 
imaginary superiority over particulars, and to affirmatives 
a similar superiority over negatives. Hence the expression 
" pars deterior," meaning a particular or a negative propo- 
sition. 



26 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

ation of the middle term with regard to the ex- 
tremes of the conclusion, or major and minor term. 
(No. 37, Rule 1, and Note.) There are four fi- 
gures.* In the first, the middle term is made the 
subject of the major premiss, and the predicate of 
the minor : in the second, the middle term is the 
predicate of both premises: in the third, the sub- 
ject of hoth : in the fourth, it is the predicate of 
the major premiss, and the subject of the minor, 

42. The major premiss of a syllogism is usually 
pl£u;ed first, although, of course, the validity of the 
argument is not affected by the order of the two 
premises* 

43. Each of the moods alluded to in No. 40, as 
admissible, will not be so in every figure ; since, 
from the different position of the middle term, it 
may violate some of the foregoing rules in one 
figure, though not in another, f 



* The first figure is the most natural and clear, and is at 
once open to the application of Aristotle's dictum. (No.35.) 
The last is, in all respects, the very reverse of the first. 

f I, A, I, for instance, is allowable in the third figure ; 
because, in that figure, the middle term is made the subject 
of both the major and minor premiss. (No. 41.) It is, there- 
fore, regularly distributed in the minor proposition A, (No. 
20,) and as neither term is distributed in the conclusion h 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 27 

44. Although but eleven moods were stated to 
be admissible at No. 40, yet, since some of them 
occur in more than one figure, (as E, I, O, which 

(No. 16, 20,) there can be no illicit process. (No. 37.) But 
I, A, I, is iaadmissible in the first figure, because that figure 
demands that the middle term be made the subject of 
the major proposition I, and the predicate of the minor 
A. But I distributes neither term, and A, only the subject. 
(No. 20.) The middle term, therefore, being the subject of 
a particular, and the predicate of an affirmative, would be 
undistributed, contrary to rule, and no valid conclusion 
could follow. E. G. 

I. Some arrogant men are learned ; 

A. All arrogant men are disagreeable ; therefore 

I. Some learned men are disagreeable. 

The above is in the third figure, and valid. In the first 
figure, the .same mood would be inadmissible, for the rea- 
sons above stated. E. G. 

I. Some learned men are Englishmen ; 

A. The sages of Greece were learned men j therefore 

I. Some of them were Englishmen. 

So A, E, E, would, in the first figure, have an illicit pro- 
cess of the major ; thus 

A; Every fool is a sensualist; 

E. No true philosopher is a fool; therefore 

E. No true philosopher is a sensualist 

The major term, ''sensualist/' is not distributed in the 
major proposition, but is, in the conclusion. The same 
mood, in the second figure, is valid, because the major term 
" sensualist" is regularly distributed in the major proposi- 
tion; £. G. 



28 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

is found in all the four^*^) eax^h separate occurrence 
is reckoned as a new mood. From this recun*ence 
of the same symbols in different figures^ there are 
reckoned nineteen moods. 



A. Every sensualist is a fool ; 

£« No true philosopher is a fool ; therefore 

£. No true philosopher is a sensualist 

Again, A, A, A, is allowable in the first figure; 

A. All wicked men are miserable ; 

A. All tyrants are wicked men ; therefore 

A. All tyrants are miserable. 

But, in the third figure, it would have an illicit process 
of the minor ; 

A. All wicked men are miserable ; 

A. All wicked men are tyrants ; therefore 

A. All tyrants are miserable. 

The minor term, ** tyrants," is not distributed in the mi- 
nor premiss ; but is, in the conclusion. 

•A A A. Barbara. A O O. Fakoro. 

A A I. Daraptt Bramanttp. E A E. Cesare, Celarcnt. 
A E E. CamestreSjCamenes. E A O. Felapton, F«sapo. 
AEO. EIO. Fmo, Festino, Feriso 

All. Darii, Dattsi. Fresison. 

I A I. Dtsamts, Dimarts. O A O. Dokamo. 

A, E, O, is valid in the second figure, but useless, be- 
cause it has a particular conclusion when you might draw a 
universal one in Camestres. E. G. (A.) Every X is Y. (E.) 
No Z is Y. (O.) Some Z is not X. You might say. No Z 
is X. (A.) " Every man is a sinner. (E.) No glorified spi- 
rit is a sinner. (O.) Some glorified^ spirit is not a man 



» 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 29 

45. The vowels in. th^ four following mnemonic 
lines are the symbols which denote the quantity 
and quality of the propositions. The consonants 
serve to keep in mind the figure of the syllogism. 

Fig. 1. Barbara, C^larent, Darii, Ferioqvie prions; 
Fig. 2. Cesare, Camestr^s, Festino, Fakoro, se- 

cundae ; 
Fig. 3. Tertia, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, F^lapton, 

Uokamo, Feriso, habet; quarta insuperaddit 
Fig. 4. Bramantip, Cam^n^s, Dtmon's, Fesapo, 

Fresison, 

46. It will assist the experiment of syllogisms in 
the different moods> if the letters X, Y, Z, are 
used as representatives of the different terms. Let 
X be the major, Y the middle, Z the minor. 



UtFig. 
Y, X, 


SCHEME. 
Snd Fig. 3rd Ho. 

X, Y, Y, X, 


*th Fig. 

X,Y, 


Z, Y, 


Z, Y, 


Y, Z, 


Y, Z, 


Z, X, 


Z, X, 


Z, X. 


Z, X. 



You nUgkt say, " No glorified spirit," &c. The same may 
be remarked of A, A, I, and £, A, O, in the first figure, and 
of £, A, O, in the second, as well as of A, £, O, in the 
fourth. See No. 39. These five moods, being useless, are 
without names. 



30 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

By applying the moods Barbara, Celarent, tfc, 
to the terms thus designated by the letters X, Y, 7t, 
you may construct a short syllogism in every fi- 
gure, and perceive how its validity is derived from 
an accordance with the six rules laid down above. 
No. 37.* 



* Thus Barbara, in which all the propositions are uni- 
versal and affirmative, as the three A's denote. 

Bar- "Every Y isX; 

-ba- Every Z is Yj 

-ra. Every Z is X." 
Celarent, in which the major is universal and negative, 
the minor universal and affirmative, and the conclusion 
universal and negative. 

Ce- "NoYisX; 

-la- Every Z is Y ; 

-rent. No Z is X." 
Dartt, in which the major is universal and affirmative, 
the minor particular and affirmative, and the conclusion 
the same. 

Da- « Every Y is X; 

-ri- Some Z Is Y ; 

-i. Some Z is X." 
Ferto, in which the msyor is universal and negative, the 
minor particular and affirmative, and the conclusion par- 
ticular and negative. 

Fe- "NoYisX; 

-rt- Some Z is Y 5 

-o. Some Z is not X. 
Apply the other moods Cesare Camestres, &c. in the same 
way to the second figure ; Daraptt, &c. to the third ; Bra 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 31 

47.* Every proposition may be proved in the 
first figure^ and all the moods in the three other 
figures reduced to it. See No. 53 et seq. below. 

48. Four syllogisms^ exemplifjdng one mood in 
each figure^ are subjoined. 

manttp, &c. to the fourth; carefully remembering the 
force of the symbols A, E, I, O, (No. 17.) The position of 
the Letters X, Y, Z, in the scheme, secures the learner 
against any mistake in placing the terms of each figure. 

* It will be seen th9,t A, or the universal affirmative, can 
be proved only in the first figure ; as the second proves 
only negatives, (E, E, O, O,) the third only particulars, 
(I, I, I, O, O, O,) and the fourth only particulars or negar 
tives. (I, E, I, O, O.) The first figure requires the major 
premiss to be universal, and the minor affirmative ; the 
former, in order to distribute the middle term, and the lat- 
ter, to avoid the fault of negative premises, (No. 37. Rule 5.) 
or to produce an affirmative conclusion. (No. 37. Rule 6.) 
The second figure proves only negatives, because the middle 
term, being the predicate in both premises, would not be 
distributed, unless one premiss were negative, (No. 20. Rule 
2.) and therefore the conclusion must be negative. (No. 37. 
Rule 6.) The third prove» only particulars, because the 
middle term being always the subject in the minor propo- 
sition, and that minor proposition being always affirmative, 
the minor term, as the predicate of an affirmative, cannot 
be distributed in its premiss, and therefore cannot be dis- 
tributed in the conclusion. 



32 OF SYLLOGISMS. 

Barbara. Itg. 1. 

TERMS. 

Major (X) One who deserves punishment. 
Minor (Z) Every blasphemoos writer. 
Middle (Y) Every one who injures the public 
morals. 
Bar- Every Y is X ; All who injure the public 

morals deserve punishment ; 
-ba- Every Z is Y ; All blasjj^hemous writers in- 
jure tlie public morals ^ therefore 
-ra. Every Z is X; All blasphemous writers de- 
serve punishment.* 



* The regular expression of the copula, is and is noty maj 
always be preserved, if we disregard the clumsiness of the 
language ; thus, the syllogism above may be stated as fol- 
lows : 

Bar- All who injure the public morals are persons deserv- 
ing of punishment; 
-ba- All blasphemous writers are persons who injure the 

public morals ; therefore 
-ra. All blasphemous writers are persons deserving of pun- 
ishment. 
Pupils should be able to state a proposition readily in this 
strict fornl. 



OF SYLLOGISMS. 33 

49. Camestres. Fig, 2. 

TERMS. 

Major (X) What is ti*uly satisfactory. 

Minor (Z) Guilty pleasures. 

Middle ( Y) What is unattended with remorse. 

Cam- Every X is Y; Whatever is truly satisfac> 
tory is unattended with remorse ; 

-es- No Z is Y; No guilty pleasures are unat- 
tended with remorse ; therefore 

-tres. No Z is X. No guilty pleasures are truly 
satisfactory. 

50. Darapti. Fig. 3. * 

TERMS. 

Major (X) What is entitled to respect. . 
Minor (Z) What is often ridiculed. 
Middle (Y) True piety. 

Da- Every Y is X ; True piety is entitled to re- 
spect ; 

-rap- Every Y is Z ; True piety is often ridi- 
culed; therefore 

-ti. Some Z is X. Something often ridiculed 
is entitled to respect. 

D 



34 REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 

51. C«mcnes. Fig, 4. 

TERMS. 

Major (X) A useful study. 
Minor (Z) What is injurious to the morals. 
Middle (Y) What is worthy of encouragement. 
Cam- Every X is Y; All useful studies are worthy 

of encouragement ; 
-en- No Y is Z ; Nothing worthy of encourage- 
ment is injurious to the morals ; therefore 
-es. No Z is X. What is injurious to the mo- 
rals is not a useful study.* 

52. The four moods of the first figure are called 
feci; all the rest, imperfect When a syllogism 
in one of the imperfect moods is re-stated, and 
brought into the first figure, it is said to be reduced, 

OSTENSIVE REDUCTION. 

53. In reducing a syllogism,, it is allowable to 
convert the premises illatively, (No. 31,) or to 
transpose them. This liberty renders it always 
possible to deduce, in the first figure, either the very 
same conclusion as the original one, or another, 
from which the original one is deducible by illative 
conversion. 

* The method of statement in this figure is so clumsy 
fnd inverted, that it is seldom or never used. The propo- 



REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 3d 

54. The initial lettei*s of the imperfect moods 
correspond with those of the four perfect ones, B, 
C, D, F, and indicate into which of them the im- 
perfect mood is capable of being reduced. Thus 
Bramantip is to be reduced into Barbara, Cesare 
and Camesires into Celarent, Festino into Ferio, 
Sfc. 

66. The letter m, occurring in the name of an 
imperfect mood, indicates that, in reducing it, the 
premises are to be transposed ; s, that the proposi- 
tion denoted by the vowel immediately preceding, 
is to be converted simply (No. 33.); p, that it is to 
be converted per accidens or limitation (No. 30.); 
(except in the case of Bramantip, where p denotes 
that the conversion of A per accidens has already 
taken place ;*) k, that it is to be converted by ne- 
gation. (No. 30. )f 

sitioDS are easily reduced into the more natural arrange- 
ment of the first figrure. See No. 54. 

* E. G. Bram> All blasphemous writers injure the pub- 
lic morals ; 
-an- All who injure the public morals deserve 

punishment; therefore 
-tip. Some who deserve punishment are blas- 
phemous writers. 

The conclusion is the converse per accidens of the con* 

elusion of the Syllogism in Barbara, No. 48. 

f The Reductio ad impossibUe I have not thought it ne- 

d2 



36 REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 

56, A few examples of reduction may suffice : 
Camestres is reduced to Celarent, as the initial let- 
ter directs, by simply converting the minor, (as 
is denoted by the s in es,) and then transposing 
the premises, (as is indicated by the m in Cam,) 
The conclusion of the reduced syllogism is the 
simple converse of the conclusion of the original 
one. 

Camestres. See No,49, 

Reduced to Celarent. 

Ce- What is unattended with remorse is not a 

guilty pleasure ; 
-la- Whatever is truly satisfactory is unattended 

with remorse ; therefore 
-rent. Whatever is truly satisfactory is not a guilty 
pleasure. 

57. Fakoro is reduced to Ferio by converting 
the major by negation, (No. 30.) and considering 

cessary to explain. Its object is, to show that an absurdity 
would follow from supposing the original conclusion to be 
false. When this mode of reduction is adopted, Fakoro 
and Dokamo are called Baroko and Bokardo, K being then 
the sign of the Reductio ad impossibile. But conversion 
by negation is by far the easier and more expeditious 
process. 



REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 37 

the minor premiss affirmative ; i, e. attaching the 

negative to the predicate instead of the copula. 

(No. 30.) 

Fakoro. 
Redticed to Ferio. 

Fak- Every sincere Christian is charitahle ; 

-o- Some professors of religion are not charit- 
able; therefore 

-ro. Some professors of religion are not sincere 
Christians. 

Fe- He who is not-charitable is not a sincere 
Christian. 

Predicate. 



-ri- Some professors of religion are I not-charit- 
able ; I therefore 

-o. Some professors of religion are not sincere 
Christians.''^ 

* Faluiro may be considered as Festinoy and stated ac- 
cordingly, by placing an equipollent negative Proposition 
for the major, (No. 33, Note,) and viewing the minor as an 

aflSlrmative, 

Suiject. Predicate. 

Fes- I No sincere Christian I is i not-charitable ; I 

Predicate 

-ti- Some professors of religion are i not-charitable ; i 

therefore 
-no. Some professors of religion are not sincere Christians. 



38 REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 

The minor premiss is here considered affirma- 
dve^ because you take ^^not-charitable" as the middle 
term, and cannot separate the negative from it, 
without introducing a fourth term, contrary to No. 
37, Rule 1. 

58. Darapti is reduced to Darii by converting 
per accidens (No. 30.) the minor premiss. This 
is denoted by the p in rap. (No. 55.) 

Festino is reduced to Ferio by simply converting the tnar 
jor ; '^ He who is not charitable is not a sincere Christian," 
&c. 

So *Dokamo may be considered as DUamiSf and stated 
accordingly, by joining the negative to the predicate in> 
stead of the copula, in the major and conclusion; i,€. view- 
ing O as I j 

Predicate. 
Dis- Some desires are I not-blameable ; I 
-am« All desires are liable to excess ; therefore 

Pre^tieate. 
-is. Some things liable to excess are I not-blameable. I 
Disamis is reduced to Darii by simply converting the 
major, and then transposing the premises. 
Da- All desires are liable, &c. 
-ri- Some things not blameable, &c. ; therefore 
-i. Some things not blameable, &c. as at No. 59. 



REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 39 

Darapti. See No. 60. 
Reduced to Darii. 
Da- True piety is entitled to respect ; 
-ri- Something often ridiculed is true piety; 

therefore 
-i. Something often ridiculed is entitled to re- 
spect. 

69, Dokamo is reduced to Darii by converting 
the major by negation, and then transposing the 
premises. 

Dokamo. 
Reduced to Darii. 
Dok- Some desires are not blameable ; 
-am- All desires are liable to excess ; therefore 
-o. Some things liable to excess are not blame- 
able. 
Da- All desires are liable to excess ; 
-ri- Some things not blameable are desires; there- 
fore 
-i. Some things not blameable are liable to ex- 
cess. 
This conclusion is the converse by negation of 
the original one, (i. e, O converted into I,) and 
therefore, simply convertible into it. (No. 33.) 



40 OF MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 

60. Those syllogisms are called Modal^ that con- 
sist of modal propositions. (No. 12.) Modal pro- 
positions may be considered as pure categoricals, 
and stated accordingly. For this purpose, you 
should attach the mode to one of the terms ; as^ 
" The wisest man may possibly be mistaken.** 

Sul^. Cop. Pred. 

I " The wisest man I I is i I one who may possibly 



be mistaken." I *' It is probable that Livy was 
prejudiced ; i, e, 

Suij. Cop. Pred. 

I ''Livy 1 I was I » probably prejudiced." I 

61. When the mode expresses only the neces- 
sary, impossible, or contingent connexion of the 
teims, you may attach it to the subject, as '' Man 
is necessarily mortal ;" i, e, **All men are mortal." 
** It is impossible for a bad man to be happy;" i,e, 
"No bad man can be happy." 

62. It is often, however, most convenient to af- 
firm simply the agreement or disagreement of the 
mode with the dictum, or assertion itself; as " 1 
am possibly mistaken," 

Sukj. Cop. Pred. 

I " That I am mistaken I rTTl 1 possible." 1 



OF HYPOTHETICAL SYLLOGISMS. 41 

In these cases, the subject implies that an entire 
act of judgment has previously taken place. 

OF HYPOTHETICAL SYLLOGISMS. 

63. A syllogism is called Hypothetical, when 
it contains one, two, or three hypothetical pro- 
positions ; E. G. " If he is wise, he is happy ; 
he is wise ; therefore he is happy."- Or, " He who 
is wise, is happy; if he is a philosopher, he is wise 5 
therefore, if he is a philosopher, he is happy.*' Or, 
" If he is wise, he is happy; if he is a philosopher, 
he is wise ; therefore, if he is a philosopher, he is 
happy." See No. 13. The h3rpothetical syllogisms 
most in use are divided into Conditional and Dis- 
junctive. E. G. 

CONDITIONAL. 

If man is fallible, he is imperfect ; 
But he is fallible ; therefore 
He is imperfect. 

DISJUNCTIVE. 

It is either day or night; 
But it is day ; therefore 
It is not night. 
64. In a hypothetical' syllogism, the reasoning 



42 OF CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 

turns on the hypothesis^ and the conclusion is al- 
ways categorical.* 

The hypothetical premiss is called the major, 
and the categorical one, the minor. 

OF CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 

65. It is to be observed of a conditional propo- 
sition, that it contains two, and only two, categorical 
propositions, whereofone results from the other; that 
from which the other results is called the Antecedent;* 
that which results from it, the Consequent (Canse^ 
quensj The connexion between the two (ex- 
pressed by " if") is called the Consequence {can- 
sequentia,) 

Consequentia. Antecedent. Cimtequent. 

I"lfl I man is fallible, I 1 he is imperfect." 1 

66. The truth or falsity of a conditional propo- 
sition depends entirely on the conseqtience, or con- 



* When a hypothetical conclusion is drawn from a hypo- 
thetical premiss, the reasoning is, in effect, categorical. E.G. 

Predicate. 

Every conqueror is i either a hero or a villain ; f 

Caesar was a conqueror ; therefore 

Predicate. 

He was I either a hero or a villain. I 

* The antecedent is sometimes placed qfter the conse- 
quent. We might say, " Man is imperfect, if he is fallible.'' 



OF CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 43 

nexian between antecedent and consequent. Both 
antecedent and consequent may be false, yet if 
there be such a connexion between them, that the 
falsity^ of the antecedent depends on the falsity of 
the consequent, the whole proposition is valid. 
E.G. 

Antecedent. 



If I logic is useless,! 

Consequent. 

I it deserves to be neglected. I 
On the other hand, both antecedent and consequent 
may be true ; yet if there be no connexion between 
them, so that the latter does not depend for its 
truth on the former, the whole proposition h false ; 
i, e, the consequent does not follow from the ante- 
cedent. 

Antecedent. 



If I Virgil was a poet, I 

Cormeqttent. 



I he wrote the -^neid. I 
It is true both that Virgil was a poet, and that he 

* If you deny the consequent, '' Logic deserves to be ne- 
glected," the falsity of the antecedent, '* Logic is useless," 
must follow. This will appear from a categorical statement 
of the proposition. (A) " Whatever is useless is deserving 
of neglect." Convert this by negation. (E) " Whatever 
is not deserving of neglect is not useless. (No. 30.) Logic 
is not deserving of neglect; therefore it is not useless.'' 



44 OF CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 

wi*ote the JCneid^ but it does not follow that becatise 
he was a poet, he there/are wrote the jiEneid. 

67. There are two rules for drawing a conclu- 
sion fi*om a conditional proposition. Rule 1 . T%e 
antecedent being granted, the consequent may he 
inferred ; E. G. 

*' If A is B, C is D ; Maj or. " If rain has fallen^ the 

ground is wet ; 
But A is B; Minor. But rain has fallen; 

therefore therefore 

C is D." Conclusion. The ground is wet." 

These syllogisms, in which the antecedent is 
granted, are called Constructive, 

Rule 2. The consequent being denied, the ante- 
cedent may be denied. 
" If A is B, C is D ; " If rain has fallen, the 

ground is wet ; 
But CisnotD; therefore But the ground is not 

wet; therefore 
A is not B." Rain has not fallen." 

These syllogisms, in which the consequent is denied, 
are called Destructive. 

68. By denying the antecedent, or affirming the 
consequent, nothing can be inferred, because the 
same consequent may follow from other anteee- 



OF DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 45 

dents. '^Rain may not have fallen^ and yet the 
ground may be wet ; or fthe ground may be wet, 
and yet no rain have fallen ; because dew or an 
inundation would produce the same effect^ 

OF DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 

69. To what has been said of a disjunctive pro- 

* Here the antecedent is denied. 

f Here the consequent is affirmed. 

X Conversion by negation (No. 30) is applicable to (condi- 
tional propositions ; t. e. the contradictory of the consequent 
may be taken for the antecedent, and the contradictory of 
the antecedent for the consequent. 
" If rain has fallen, the ground is wet 

But rain has fallen ; therefore }- Constructive. 

The ground is wet.'* 



1 



« 



If the ground is not wet, rain has not fallen ; ) 



But rain has fallen ; therefore f Destructive. 

The ground.is wet." ) 

By this conversion of the major premiss of a constructive 
syllogism, (the minor, of course, remaining unchanged,) you 
will reduce a constructive syllogism into a destructive, be- 
cause you deny the consequent.You will reduce a destructive 
syllogism into a constructive, because you affirm the ante- 
cedent E. 6. 

'* If rain has fallen, the gound is wet ; ) 
But the ground is not wet; therefore/- Destructive. 
Rain has not fallen." J 

" If the ground is not wet, rain has not fallen ;) 

But t'.ie ground is not wet; therefore > Constructive 

Rain has not fallen.*' J 



i 



46 OF DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 

sition (No. 13) must be added, that it consists of 
two or more categoricals so stated, as to imply that 
smne one of them, at least, is true, and generally 
that but one can be true ; as, " It is either day or 
night." 

70. By denying one of the categoricals of a dis- 
junctive proposition, if there be but two, you may 
infer the truth of the remaining one ; as, ** It is 
either day or night : but it is not day ; therefore 
it is night." By denying one of them, if there be 
several, you may infer the truth of some one of the 
remaining oYies ; as, " It is either Spring, Summer, 
Autumn, or Winter ; but it is not Spring ; there- 
fore it is either Summer, Autumn, or Winter.' 
By denying all but one, you will infer the truth of 
that one ; as, " It is neither Spring, Summer, nor 
Autumn ; therefore it is winter." 

71. When it is implied that only one of the ca- 
tegoricals can be true, by affirming one, you, of 
course, deny the rest. As, *' It is either Spring, 
Summer, &c. ; but it is Spring ; therefore it is nei- 
ther Summer, Autumn, nor Winter."* 

* If both categoricals should be true, it is plain that the 
affirmation of one cannot imply the denial of the other; as, 
''Amphibious creatures live either on land or in the water." 



Iter/' 

\ 



N 
s. 

N 



THE DILEMMA. 47 

72. The dilemma'^ is a redundant conditional syl- 
logism, with two or more antecedents in the major 
premiss, and a disjunctive minor. 

73. Dilemmas are either Constructiye or Destruc- 
tive. Of the constructive dilemma there are two 
sorts. Simple and Complex. There is but one sort 
of the true destructive dilemma. 

74. The simple consti-uctive dilemma has but 
one coTisequent to each antecedent. The antece- 
dents being disjunctively granted, in the minor, the 

^common consequent is inferred. See No. 67. Rule 

Mqjor. 

1. 1 "If A is B, C is D; and if E is F, C is D. » 

Minor. Cktnchtsion. 



t€ 



I But either A is B, or E is F ; I I therefore C is D." I 
If a Christian be living, he is the Lord's servant; 
and if he be dead, he is the Lord's servant ; but he 



* As, in this kind of argument, there are generally, in 
the migor premiss, two antecedents, which, in the minor, 
become two assumptions, it is termed a dilemma, from Uq 
tmccy twoy and Xiififia, an assumption. It is called by the 
lexicographers, "Syllogismus ab utrslque parte feriens ad- 
versarium,'' and ** Argumentum comutum/' because most 
homed animals have two horns, and there are, in a dilemma, 
itvo instrumetits of attack, furnished in the two assumptions. 
So Cowlev, " Both the horns of fate's dilemma wound." 



48 THE DILEMMA. 

must be always either living or dead ; therefore he 
is always the Lord's servant." (See Ramans, xiv. 
8.)* 

75. The complex constructive dilemma has a 
difierent consequent to each antecedent. The an- 
tecedents are disjunctively granted^ in the minor^ 
and the different consequents disjunctively inferred. 

E.G. l"IfAisB,CisD,andifEisF,GisH;l 

Minor. Can- 

I but either A is B, or E is F ; I I therefore either 

cltuion. 

C is D, or G is H." I " If the Evangelists speak 
truth, Christianity is of God, and if they do not 
speak truth, the existence of Christianity is per- 
fectly unaccountable ; but the Evangelists either 
do or do not speak truth ; therefore Christianity is 
either of God, or its existence is perfectly unac- 
countable." 

76f The farue destructive dilemma has, like the 

* The conditionals of the major premiss may be united 
by the adverb ** whether,** so as to form one proposition; 
£. G. '' Whether a Christian lives or dies, he is the Lord's 
servant.'* 

f There is a form of argument incorrectly styled a de- 
structive dilemma, in which the consequents are wholly 



THE DILEMMA. 49 

complex constructive, a different consequent to each 
antecedent, in the major. The consequents are 
disjunctively denied, in the minor, and the ante- 
cedents disjunctively denied, in the conclusion. 
E.G. "If A isB, C is D, andif E is F, GisH; 
but either C is not D, or G is not H ; therefore 
either A is not B, or E is not F." — " If a witness 
be an honest one, he will not bear false testimony 

instead of disjunctively, denied in the minor. This is, 
however, a mere combination of simple conditional syllo • 
gisms, two or more being expressed together. It may con- 
sist either — 1st, of one antecedent with several consequents; 
or, 2ndl7, of several antecedents with one consequent ; or, 
Srdly, of several antecedents with several consequents. 
1st, If A is B, C is D ; if A is B, E is F; if A is B, G is H j 
but C is not D, £ is not F, G is not H ; therefore A is not 
B. 2ndly, If A is B, C is D ; if E is F, C is D ; if G is H, 
C is D ; but C is not D ; therefore A is not B, £ is not F, 
G is not H. 3rdly, If A is B, C is D; if £ is F, G is H; 
if I is K, L is M; but C is not D, G is not H, L is not M; 
therefore A is not B, E is not F, I is not K. Should you, 
in the first case, deny the consequents disjunctively instead 
of categorically, you will not thereby make the argument a 
dilemma ; for if aU the consequents be not true, the one 
antecedent must fall to the ground. E. G. " If A is B, C 
is D; if A is B, £ is F j if A is B, G is H; but either C is 
not D, E is not F, or G is not H ; therefore A is not B. 
But in the correct destructive dilemma there is always a 
disjunctive conclusion, 

E 



50 THE DILEMMA. 

designedly ; and if he be a competent one^ he will 
not do so undesignedly : but a witness who speaks 
false^ does so either designedly or undesignedly ; 
therefore he is either not honest or not competent." 

77. The dilemma may always be reduced into 
simple conditional syllogisms^ by adding a catego- 
rical minor to each antecedent and consequent of 
the major premiss of the dilemma. * On such a 
statement^ it will be seen that an opponent could 
not deny both the minors^ and that he must, there- 
fore, admit one of the conclusions. 

78. In a constructive dilemma, some one of the 
antecedents is assumed to be true ; and, in a de- 
structive, some one of the consequents assumed to 
be false ; but which, is left undetermined. 



51 



REDUCTION OF HYPOTHETICAL SYLLOGISMS. 

79. To reduce a hypothetical syllogism into a 
categorical form, you must view every conditional 
proposition as a universal affirmative, taking the 
antecedent for the suhject, and the consequent for 
the predicate. 



I 



Q 

bo 
.3 

o 






bo 

.a 

o 



I 



bp bo 

1 ^ 

.2 .9 

1 3 






I 



^ g g P 









o 

o 



bo 

o 



i 



Q 

bo 
.S 

•?* 

o 

a 

•s 

s 

CO 

••-I 
0) 

I s 

Q) O 
CO Cw 

I 

QQ 

a> 
I 



pq 

.r 

.A 



o 

a 
I 

.9 

a 

s 



CO 



rfi 



1 



CO «S 

- a 

pq" PQ 

•2 -^ o 

<j <1 ft 



__ •?* CO ^ 

a W Q 



Q i 



^ 

4i* 

e 



M W 



¦410 

O 

09 



52 ENTHYMEMES. 

Camestresma,y,oi coxase, be reduced to Celarent. 
But even desti*uctive conditionals may be stated in 
Barbara, if you view them as constructive ; which 
is done by converting by negation the major pre- 
miss. {See No. 68, Note,) This process of re- 
duction, however, is explained merely to show the 
applicability of Aristotle's dictum to every form of 
argument ; since the rules for hjrpothetical syllo- 
gisms are a sufficient test of their validity. 

ENTHYMEMES. 

80. The Enthymeme is a syllogism, with one of 
the premises omitted. This premiss is easily sup- 
plied by comparing the middle term with that term 
of the conclusion which is expressed only once. 
E.G. 

" Isaiah was a prophet ; thei'efore 
He was inspired.'' 

The middle term, of course, is that which does 
not enter into the conclusion, viz. "Prophet." 
— " Isaiah," or the minor term, is expressed twice, 
" Inspired," the major term, only once. Compare, 
therefore, the middle term with the major, thus sup- 
plying the major premiss ; E. G. 



OF THE SORITES. 53 

" Every prophet is inspired ; 
Isaiah was a prophet ; therefore 
He was inspired." 
If the minor premiss had heen suppressed, the 
minor term '^ Isaiah" could have occurred only 
oncen £. G. 

" Every prophet is inspired ; therefore 
Isaiah was inspired." 
You must, in that case, have taken the minor 
term '* Isaiah" for comparison with the middle, 
thus supplying the minor premiss.*^ 

81. By taking the two propositions of an enthy- 
meme for an antecedent and consequent, you may 
form it into a conditional syllogism ; E. G. " If 
Isaiah was a prophet, he was inspired." 

OF THE SORITES. 

82. A Sorites* is a hrief form of connecting 
several syllogisms in the first figure. In a sorites, 
the predicate of the first proposition is made the 

* This is the ordinary way of speaking and writing, and 
in this concise form we continually reason in our minds, 
iv dvfiff. Hence the term Enthymeme. 

f From ffiapdc, & pile ; because the propositions are piled, 
as it were, one on another. 



54 OF THE SORITES. 

subject of the next^ and so on^ to any lengthy till 
finally the predicate of the last of the premises is 
predicated, in the conclusion, of the subject of the 
first. 

A is B; Religion improves the morals; 

B is C ; What improves the morals is 

beneficial to the community; 

C is D ; therefore What is beneficial to the com- 

munity deserres encourage- 
ment; therefore 

A is D; Religion deserves encourage- 

ment. 

83. In a sorites, there ai*e as many middle terms 
as there are intermediate propositions between the 
first and last ; the subject of each intermediate pro- 
position being a middle term. A sorites may, there- 
fore, be drawn out into as many separate syllogisms 
as there are intermediate propositions. 

84. In drawing out a sorites into distinct* syl- 
logisms, you must take for your major premiss the 
first intermediate proposition of the sorites, and 

* By distinct and separate syllogisms, I mean those tw 
form, with major, minor, and conclusion, into which the 
sorites may be expanded. 



OF THE SORITES^ 66 

for your minor premiss, thejirst proposition of it; 
then draw your conclusion. The major proposi- 
tion of your next syllogism must he the second in- 
termediate proposition of the sorites^ and your 
minor proposition must he the conclusion of your 
preceding syllogism; thence draw your second 
conclusion. Proceed thus till you have formed as 
many distinct syllogisms as the soiites contains 
intermediate propositions^ and have arrived at the 
same conclusion. The sorites gives you only the 
^rst minor premiss^ viz. in its first proposition. 
All the other minor premises consist of the con- 
clusions of your separate syllogisms. All your 
major premises consist of the intermediate propo- 
sitions of the sorites. E. G. 



I ntermediate Prnporitiom. 



AisB, iBisC, CisD, DisEJ therefore 
A is E.** Here is a soiites with three intermediate 
propositions^ to he drawn out into three distinct 
syllogisms. 

Syll 1. Syll. 3. Syll. 3. 

BisC; CisD; D is E; 

A is B ; therefore A is C ; therefore A is D ; therefore 

AisC. AisD. A is £. 



66 OF THE SORITES. 

85. In a sorites, ^ejirst proposition alone (ex- 
cept, of coarse, the conclusion) may he particular ; 
because the first proposition is made the minor of 
the distinct syllogism (No. 84) and may be parti- 
cular, according to rule, (either Darti, or Ferio.) 
The intermediate propositions being all majors of 
the distinct syllogisms, must be universals. (Bar- 
bara, C^larent, Darii, Fmo.) 

86. The last premiss of the sorites (viz. the last 
intermediate proposition) is the only one that can 
be negative;**'^ because the last premiss alone never 
gives occasion to employ the conclusion of the dis- 
tinct syllogism as the minor of a subsequent one. 
Should any other premiss of the sorites but 
the last be negative, it would lead to a negative 
conclusion, (No. 37, Rule 6,) and that conclusion, 
being made the ibinor of the following syllogism, 
would violate the first figure, which does not admit 
of a negative minor premiss. (Barbara, Celarent, 
Darii, Ferio.) 

87. A hypothetical sorites consists of a series 
of hypothetical syllogisms. In the constructive hy- 



* Should a sorites appear to have a negative premiss before 
the last, the succeeding premiss will shew that the negative 
is, in reality, a part of one of the terms. 



OF THE SORITES. 67 

pothedcal sorites^ you proceed from the establish- 
ment of the first antecedent to the establishment 
of the last consequent. E. G. 
If A is B, C is D ; If it is the duty of a parent to 

take care of his children^ he 
should keep them, as much 
as possible^ from vice ; 
If C is D, E is F ; If he should keep them from 

vice, he ought to teach them 
what is virtuous ; 
If E is F, G. is H ; If he ought to teach them what 

is virtuous, he is bound to 

instruct them in religious 

knowledge ; 

Put A is B ; But it is the duty of a parent 

therefore to take care of his children ; 

therefore 
G is H. He is bound to instruct them 

in religious knowledge. 

In a destructive sorites, you go back from the de- 
nial of the last consequent, to the denial of the first 
antecedent; " G is not H ; therefore A is not B." 
" If Romish councils speak the truth, popery 
should be credited ; 



^^^^^g^^p^^^^^i^^"*^"*p ' »¦ w-trs ^¦ 



" V ' ^WB' 



58 OF INDDCTION. 

If popery should be credited, protestantism is 
fallacious ; 

If protestantism is fallacious, the Scriptures 
are not the rule of faith ; 

But the Scriptures are the rule of faith ; there- 
fore 

Romish councils do not speak the truth." 

OF INDUCTION. 

88. Induction**^ is a kind of argument, which in- 
fers, respecting a whole class, what has been ascer- 
tained respecting one or more subdivisions of that 
class; or the drawing a general conclusion from as 
many particular instances as can be brought in to 
bear on the point in question ; as if, on perceiving 
that the ox, sheep, deer, goat, and antelope, all ru- 
minate, you should infer that all horned animals 
ruminate. Inductive arguments, which are usually 
stated as enthymemes,f (No. 80.) are, of course, 
easily filled up, so as to become regular syllogisms. 

* The term " Induction " is sometimes employed to de- 
signate the process of investigating and collecting facts ; 
which is not a process of argument, hvXo. preparation for it. 

f The example given by Dr. Aldrich is inconveniently 
stated for reduction into a syllogistic form, a circumstance 



59 

EPJCHIREMA. 

89. One of the premises of a syllogism is occa- 
sionally confirmed by an incidental proposition, 
called a Prosyllogism. This proposition, with the 
premiss it is attached to, form an enthymeme. (No. 
80.) The incidental proposition is the expressed 
premiss of the enthymeme, and the premiss it is at- 
tached to is the conclusion. E. G. 
" All sin is dangerous; 
Covetousness is sin ; (for it is a transgression 

of the Law ;) therefore 
It is dangerous." 

which, perhaps, occasioned his error, (pointed out by Dr. 
Whately,) in directing the student to supply the minor, in- 
stead of the major, premiss of the enthymeme ; " Hie et ille 
et iste magnes trahit ferrum ; ergo omnis." The real sub- 
ject here is, "ferrum trahere,** the real predicate, "proprium 
hujus et illius et istius magnetis." The term expressed but 
once will be the major, "proprium omnis," which must 
therefore be compared with the middle, (No. 80.) viz. "pro- 

prium hujus, et illius, et istius magnetis." 

Middle Term. 

I " What belongs to this, that, and the other magnet, I is 

Mtyor Term. 

I what belongs to all ; I 

Minor Term. Middle 



I The power of attracting iron I is I what belongs to 

Term. 
this, that, and the other magnet ', I therefore 
Minor Term. Major Term. 



I The power of attracting iron ! is I what belongs to all." I 



60 EQUIVALENTS, ETC. 

The minor premiss is an enthymeme ; " Cove- 
tonsness is a transgression of the law ; therefore it 
is sin." A syllogism with such a premiss is called 
an Epichirema. (kiriy^eipiia, I undertake to prove.) 

EQUIVALENTS. 

90. Equivalent terms are allowable for brevity's 
sake, as the pronoun for the noun ; equivalent pro- 
positions are also allowable, as the illative converse 
for the exposita; (No. 30 et seq,) and such equi- 
valents as may be supplied by ranking species 
under genus, &c. 

IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 

91. The premises of a valid syllogism may ap- 
pear negative, contrary to Rule 5, No. 37. One of 
the premises should then be stated as an affirmative. 
(See Note to No. 33, " It is the same," &c.) 

'' No one is wise who is not virtuous ; 
No gamester is virtuous ; therefore 
No gamester is wise." 
The real middle term in this syllogism is, " not- 
virtuous," and it is in Celarent, 

" He who is not-virtuous is not wise ; 
A gamester is not-virtuous ; therefore 
He is not wise." 



IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 61 

92. From the variety of expression admissible 
in language^ the logical order of subject and predi- 
cate is often inverted ; and this will occasion the 
appearance of too many terms in the syllogism. 
All that is requisite^ in such cases, is to restc»'e the 
subject and predicate to their proper order. E.G. 
"No irrational agent could produce a work 
which manifests design ; 
The universe is a work which manifests design ; 

therefore 
No irrational agent could have produced the 
universe." 
Strictly considered, this syllogism has five 
terms, viz. 1. An irrational agent. 2. A being, 
aUe to produce a work which manifests design. 
3. The universe. 4. A work which manifests de- 
]sigi>. d. A h&ng, aUe to produce the universe. 

^ Middle Term. Copula 

I A~ work which manifests design 1 I could not 

andMqjor Term. 

be produced by an irrational agent ; I 

Minor Term. Middle 






I The universe I is 1 a work which manifests 

Term. 

design ; I therefore 

Minor T. Copula and Mtigor Term. 

i It I I could not be produced by an irra- 



tional agent." i 



62 IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 

93. The above iiTegularity is sometimes accom- 
panied with a transposition of the premises^ as in 
the following syllogism^ which appears to be in the 
second figure^ and faulty^ from an affirmative con- 
clusion. {Note to- No. 47.) 

" Every true patriot is disinterested ; 
Few men are disinterested ; therefore 
Few men are true patriots." 
It is^ in reality^ Barbara, with a transposition 
of the premises^ and of the terms of the major 
proposition; for you do not predicate of "few men," 
that they are "disinterested," but of '.' disinterested 
men/' that they are " few." 

" Disinterested men are few ; 
True patriots are disinterested men ; therefore 
True patriots are few." 

94. By the use of conversion and equipollent 
propositions, such irregularities as the following 
are easily reduced to form. 

" None but candid men are good reasoners; 
Few infidels are candid ; therefore 
Few infidels are good reasoners." 
The major premiss here is equipollent to " They 
who are not candid men are not good reasoners," 
which is the converse by negation of " All good 
reasoners are candid men." (No. 30.) State your 



IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 63 

major proposition in A accordingly. The minor 
premiss and the conclusion are equipollent to 
"" Most infidels are not candid ;" therefore " Most 
infidels are not good reasoners." This will he a 
regular syllogism in Camestres or Fakoro ;* or it • 
may he stated at once in Celarent, or Ferio. 
"They who are not candid (or uncandid) 

Copula 

1 ai*e not I good reasoners; 

Copula 

Most infidels I are 1 notcandid ; (or uncandid;) 
therefore 

Copula 

Most infidels I are not ' good reasoners."f 

* I have said Camestres or Fakoro, and Celarent or 
Ferio, because '' most" cannot designate absolute univer- 
sality, though the present case may be thought to amount 
to a moral one. (See Note to No. 15, and Uniyersality, 
in the Index.) 

f For the attainment of skill in syllogizing, as in every 
other intellectual process, true it is, that ''sapere^est et 
principium et fons.'' Without good sense and some com- 
mand of expression, it will often be very difficult for a stu- 
dent to state, inform, many arguments that are sufficiently 
conclusive. On the other hand, some proficiency in logic, 
as an art, is essential to the ready performance of this 
exercise, however simple it may appear. Though good 
sense and command of expression are indispensable, they 
are not, of themselves, sufficient. A study, then, which 
both tries the faculties of the mind, and calls into play the 
resources of phraseology, is surely to be considered as 
worthy of a place in the scheme of a liberal education. 



64 



EXERCISES. 

Add the proper Symbols to the following Pro- 
positions. 

1. All grief is mitigated by time. (No. 15.) 

2. Some troubles happen to all. (No. 15.) 

3. No deceit is justifiable. (No. 15.) 

4. Reverence is due to God. (No. 19.) 

5. Some virtuous men have been unfortunate. 

6. A dissipated character is not estimable. 
(No. 19.) 

7. Many ingenious men have not acquired a 
reputation. (No. 15.) 

8. The rose soon fades. (No. 19.) 

9. Alexander was the son of Philip. (No. 11, 
note,) 

10. Herodotus is not to be implicitly believed. 

11. Few men are acquainted with themselves. 
(No. 15, note,) 

12. Sin is necessarily destructive of h^piness. 
(No. 12, note.) 

13. Eveiy animal is either rational or irrational. 
(No. 13.) 

14. There is no one free from faults. (No. 15.) 

15. Rome was the mistress of the world. 



EXERCISES. 66 

16. "Tbouarttheman." 

17. Reading improves the mind. (No. 19.) 

18. The Chinese are an idolatrous people. (No. 
11, note.) 

19. Romulus and Remus were twins. 

20. If a man be a diligent student^ he will be- 
come learned. (No. 13.) 

21. Every mistake that a man makes is not a 
sign of folly. (No. 15.) 

22. All men have not great abilities. 

23. None but classical scholars can fully appre- 
ciate the beauties of ancient literature. (No. 15.) 

24. " None is lost but the son of perdition.'* 

State the Contraries and Contradictories of the 
following Propositions. {No. 21*) 

25. No men are immortal. 

26. No conscientious person is deserving of 
ridicule. 

27. All falsehood is dangerous. 

28. Every real Christian is charitable. 
^9. Dishonesty deserves to be punished. 

30. Nothing past can be recalled. 

31. All who know what is right are bound to 
practise it. 

6 



66 EXERCISES. 

> 

32. Not one of the enemy escaped. 

How, in respect of quantity, is the contradictoiy 
of each of the ahove propositions related to the 
contrary ? 

State the St^beontraries <md Contradictories of 
the following Propositions. 

33. Some evils are inseparahle from a state of 
mortality. 

34. Many apparent misfortunes are real blessings. 

35. Several writers of merit have not been 
popular. 

36. All do not admire the same things.— ^or. 

37. Some men are eager for novelty. 

38. Many critics are not candid judges. 

39. Few can distinguish between what is really 
good and evil. — Juv. 

40. All the hexameters of Virgil are not com- 
pleted. 



41. No miser is contented. 

What isthesymbol of this proposition ? (No. 17.) 
Is its pimple converse ti*ue ? (No. 33, or 34.) 

42. Some misfortunes are unavoidable. 

Add the symbol. What is the contradictory ? 
Is it true or false ? (Nos. 26, 27, 28.) What is the 



EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 67 

simple converse of the contradictory P Is it triie 
or false ? What is the contradictory of the simple 
converse ? How may this he changed into the 
exposita ? (No. 30.) 

43. No good man is a liar. 

Add the symhol. What is the simple converse ? 
Is it true P (No. 33.) What is the suhaltemate 
of the simple converse ? (NoSi 24, 27.) How 
might the exposita he changed into this P (No. 33.) 

44. All earthly things are perishahle. 

Add the symhol. What is the suhaltemate P 
Is it true P (No. 28.) What is the simple con- 
verse of the suhaltemate P Is it trae P How 
might the exposita he changed into it P No. 30.) 

EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM, ETC. 

45. Swearing is forhidden hy our Saviour; 
swearing is practised in our Courts of Justice; 
therefore something practised in our Courts of 
Justice is forhidden hy our Saviour. 

Is this fallacious P See the Church Ai'ticles ; 
also (Nos. 19 and 37, Rule 3.) 

46. Hypocrisy is injurious to the interests of 
reUgion ; ill-directed zeal is often taken for hypo- 
ciisy; therefore it is injurious to the interests of 
reUgion. 



68 EXERCISBS ON SYLLOGISM, ETC. 

Is the conclusion true ? Does it follow ? Why ? 
(No. 37, Rule 1.) 

47. Co^etou^ess is idolatry^ to worship graven: 
images is idolatiy ; therefore it is covetoasneasj* 
(No. 37, Rule 3.) 

48. No bribery is defensible; bribery is not 
idleness; therefore idleness is not defensible. 
(No. 37, Rule 5.) 

Is the conclusion true ? Does it follow ? Why f 

49. Mathematical study improves the reasoning 
powers ; the study of logic is not mathematical 
study ; therefore it does not improve the reasoning 
powers. (No, 37, Rule 4.) 

50. Whatever is sinful is productive of son'ow ; 
fraud and revenge are sinful, and poverty deprives 
us of many comforts; therefore fraud, revenge, 
and poverty are all productive of sorrow. (No. 37, 
Rule 2.) 

51. Some sins are not malicious ; calumny is a 
sin ; therefore it is malicious. (No. 37, Rule 6, and3.) 

52. All luxury is sinful; all luxury is agreeable 
to tlie bodily sense; therefore whatever is agi'eeable 
to the bodily sense is sinful. (No. 37, Rule 4.) 

53. No religious man is factious; St. Paul was 
a religious man ; therefore he was not factious. 

What mood and figure ? (Nos. 41, 45.) 



EXERCISES ON SYLLOOrSM^ ETC* 69 

54. Sdme vicious pastimes are permitted by 
law; every vicious pastime is disgraceful to a 
Christian; therefore something disgraceful to a 
Christian is permitted by law. 

What mood and figure ? How reducible ? 
Could you say, "Every thing disgraceful to a 
Christian is petmitted by law ?" Why ? (No. 37. 
Rule 4.) 

65» No mien are fi-ee from sin ; every one ftee 
from sin is the servant of God; therefore some 
servants' of Grod ^Ure not men. 

What mood and figure, and how reducible ? 

66, Whoever winneth souls is wise; all tfho 
preach the Gospd faithfully win souls ; therefore 
some who preach the Gospel faithfully stre wise. 

Has this mo6d any name P What conclusion 
might you draw ? (No. 44, note,) 

57. No wicked people enjoy peace of mind ; all 
who have gained riches dishonestly ai'e wicked 
people; therefore soMe wh6 hlive gdned riches dis- 
honestiy do not enjoy peace of mind. 

Is this valid p What is the name of liie mood P 
State the suhaltemdns of the conclusion. (No. 44, 
nate, and No. 24.) 



70 EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 

58. If Roman history is credible, the Carthagi- 
nians were a treacherous people ; Roman history 
IS credible ; therefore the Carthaginians were a 
treacherous people. (No. 67.) 

59. St. Matthew s Gospel is allowed to have been 
first written either in Greek or Hebrew ; Eh*asmus 
thought it was not first written in Hebrew; therefore 
he thought it was first written in Greek. (No. 71.) 

60. All pai-ts of Scripture are written for our 
learning; some dreadful narratives are parts of 
Scripture ; therefore some dreadful narratives are 
written for our learning. 

What mood and figure ? 

61. Every candid man acknowledges merit in a 
rival; every learned man does not acknowledge 
merit in a rival ; th^efore every learned man is 
not candid. 

What ai*e the quantity and quality of the minor 
pi*emiss and the conclusion ? (No. 15.) What 
mood and figure ? Reduce the syllogism. 

62. All earthly projects are liable to disappoint- 
ment; nothing liable to disappointment should 
engage our chief concern; therefore something 
that should engage our chief concern is not an 
eailhly project. 



EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 71 

Might you substitute the subalternans of the 
conclusion P In what mood and figure would the 
syllogism then be ? 

63. Immoral companions should be avoided; 
some immoral companions are intelligent; there- 
fore some intelligent persons should be avoided. 
(No. 19.) 

State the mood^ figure^ and mode of reduction. 

64. If the world were good, laws would be use- 
less ; but laws are not useless ; therefore the world 
is not good. (No. 67, Rule 2.) 

.66. If the world were good, laws would be use- 
less; but the world is not good; therefore laws 
are not useless. 

Is this conclusive ? Why ? (No. 68.) 

66. Make a disjunctive syllogism from 2 SamtLel, 
xxiv, 13. 

67. What sort of proposition is it in Luke xvi, 
30 ? Can you make of it a valid syllogism ? 
Which is the Conseqiientia P (No. 66.) 

68. If I am blest with opulence, I have reason 
to be thankful ; but I am not blest with opulence; 
therefore I have no reason to be thankful. (No.68.) 

69. If I am blest with opulence, I have reason 



72 EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 

to be thankful ; but I have reason to be thankful ; 
therefore I am blest with opulence. 

70. Every vicious amusement is unbecoming a 
wise man ; no philosophical pursuits are unbecom- 
ing a wise man ; therefore some philosophical 
pursuits are not vicious amusements. 

In what figure is this syllogism ? The mood ? 

71. If a proposition be a particular affirmative^ 
shew to what sorts of propositions it cannot belong. 
Prove this by a syllogism. (No. 71.) 

72. The Helvetii, if they went through the 
country of the Sequani^ were sure to meet with 
various difficulties ; and if they went through the 
Roman province^ they were exposed to the danger 
of opposition from Caesar; but they were obliged 
to go one way or the other ; therefore they were 
either sm-e of meeting with various difficulties, or 
exposed to the danger of opposition from Csesar^-^ 
De Bello Gallico, lib. i. 6. 

What sort of argument is this P (No. 75.) Re- 
duce it into simple syllogisms. (No. 77.) 

73. This man has been proved treacheraus; 
therefore he is not to be trusted. 

What sort of argument? supply the premiss. 
(No. 80.) 



EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 73 

74. If pain is violent, it should be borne with 
patience, because it will be of short continuance ; 
and if it be slight, it should be borae with patience, 
because it is only a small evil ; but pain must be 
either violent or slight ; therefore it should be borne 
with patience. 

What sort of argument ? (No. 74.) What do 
you call the two incidental propositions in the 
major premiss ? (No. 89.) 

75. No woman of great mind would submit to 
the indignity of being led in triumph ; therefore 
Cleopati'a would not. 

What sort of argument ? Supply the premiss. 

76. Our heavenly Father is merciful ; therefore 
we should be merciful.* 

77. Alexander was buried ; he who is buried 
becomes dust ; what becomes dust is earth ; earth 
is probably made loam ; what is probably made 
loam might probably stop a beer-barrel ; therefore 
Alexander might probably stop a beer-barrel. 
See Hamlet, ActY, Scene 1. 

* In supplying the deficient premiss, the strict form of 
syllogism will be better preserved, if we state the above 
propositions thus : •* To be merciful is a quality of our 
heavenly Father; therefore it should be ours." (No. 80.) 



74 EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM, ETC. 

What sort pf argument ? Into how many dis- 
tinct syllogisms may it be expanded, and why ? 
State it in this form. (Nos. 82, 83, and 84.) 

78. None but pious men are fit for the priest- 
hood; some ignorant men are pious; therefore 
some ignorant men are fit for the priesthood. 

Is this valid ? Why ? (No. 15, and Na 37, 
Rule 3.) 

79. None but the ti*uly penitent are pardoned ; 
the malefactor mentioned by St. Luke (ch.xxiii.) 
was truly penitent; therefore he was pardoned. 

Is this conclusion true ? Does it foUow from the 
premises P What major proposition does the con- 
clusion require P 

80. If man is responsible for his actions, he 
ought to live circumspectly ; if he ought to live 
circumspectly, he should consider what is his duty; 
if he should consider what is his duty, it concerns 
him to seek the will of God ; if it concerns him to 
seek the will of God, he ought to study the holy 
Scriptures ; but man is responsible for his actions ; 
therefore it is incumbent on him to study the holy 
Scriptures. 

What sort of argument P to which division does 



EXERCISES OT4 SYLLOGISM, ETC* 75 

it belong, and why ? (No. 87.) How could it be 
changed, so as to fall under the other division ? 
Would the proposition, in that case, be true ? 

81. All great poets are men of genius; Cicero 
was a man of genius; therefore he was a gi*eat 
poet. (No. 37, Rule 3.) 

82. Opulence is seen, in such a multitude of 
instances, to harden the heart and to engross the 
soul, that we might conclude, even without the 
authority of Scripture, that the rich enter with dif- 
ficulty into the kingdom of Heaven. 

What sort of argument ? (No. 88.) 

83. Whatever tends to withdraw the mind from 
pursuits of a low nature deserves to be promoted ; 
classical learning does this, since it gives us a taste 
for intellectual enjoyments ; therefore it deserves 
to be promoted. 

What name is given to such a syllogism as this ? 
Which is the prosyllogism ? Which premiss is of 
itself an enthymeme ? (No. 89.) 

84. A negi'o is a fellow-creature ; therefore he 
who injures a negro injures a fellow-creature.* 



* This kind of argument, though not foimal, is so ob- 
viously valid, that it were a waste of time to expand it into 



i 



76 EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM^ ETC. 

85. No virtaous man is malevolent; all de- 
tractors are malevolent $ therefore some detractors 
are not virtuous. 

86. He is brave who conquers his passions : he 
who resists temptation conquers his passions; there-^ 
fore he who resists temptation is brave. 

87. All the ships that sailed to Troy, contained, 
probably, 100,000 men; the ship of Nireus was 
one of these ; (II. B. 671.) therefore it probably 
contained 100,000 men. (No. 37, Rule 3. See 
Fallacije, in the Index.) 

88. Somebody must obtain the high prize in 
every lottery ; each individual who holds a ticket 
is somebody ; therefore each individual who holds 
a ticket must obtain the high prize. (No. 37, Rule 
3.) 

syllogisms. It will be found to rest upon the general prin- 
ciple, that whatever stands in any relation to an individual 
or species, bears tte same relation to a part of any class or 
predicable which comprehends that individual or species. 
E. G. " What stands in any relation to the species * Negro,* 
bears the same relation to the predicable, 'Fellow-creature,' 
which comprehends the species * Negro;* he who injures a 
* Negro,* stands in a relation to the species * Negro,' there- 
fore he who injures a * Negro,' bears the same relation to 
the predicable, * Fellow-creature,' which comprehends the 
species * Negro.* " 



EXERCISES ON SYLLOGISM, ETC. 77 

89. Sticks ai'e easily broken ; fagots are sticks ; 
therefore fagots ai*e easily broken. (No. 37, Rule 3. ) 
See Fallaci^e, in the Index. 

90. Books are a source both of instruction and 
pleasure ; the Iliad and Odyssey are books ; there- 
fore they are a source both of instruction an 
pleasure. (No. 19, No- 37, Rule 3.) 



* 



78 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 



Absolute Nouriy or Temiy See Term. 

Abstract Noun, or Term, See Term. 

Abstraction, the process by which we draw off, in 
thought, from a notion, any circumstances we do 
not purpose to consider. By this process generaliza- 
tion is performed. 

Accident, a predicable cmttingently joined to the es- 
sence of the species, and wliich may, therefore, be 
absent or present, the essence of the species remain- 
ing the same ; as, *^ A man walking ^^ *A man horn 
at Parish The former is called a separable acci- 
dent, because it may be separated from the indi- 
yidual ; the latter is plainly inseparable. Accident 
is predicated in Owtle, See Species. 

Accidental Definition, See Definition. 

Analogous Words or Terms, See Words. 

Antecedent, No. ^, 

Apprehension, Simple, one of the three operations of 
the mind concerned in argument. The notion of 
any object in the mind. It is either Incomplex or 
Complex, See Operations. 

Apprehension, Simple Incomplex, the notion of one 
object, as, "A pen," or of several objects confusedly 
and without any relation, as, " Pens.*' 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 79 

Apprehension, Simple Complex^ the notion of two or 
more objects between which there is some relation, 
as, " A pen in the hand." 

Argument, an act of reasoning expressed in language; 
popularly speaking, the means by which some point 
is proved. 

Canons of Syllogisms^ No. 36. 

Categorematic Word, or OATEGOREM,from Karrjyopkaty 
I predicate, a word that may be employed by itself 
as a term. Such words are aliso called Simple terms. 

Categories of Aristotle, or Ten Predicaments. Ge- 
neral heads, to one or more of which every term may 
be referred, viz. oMay itSffov, froJoVy irpdrrTi, TouTvy 
irAvxicy, 'irov, wdtty KtltrOaty ix^iv. Substance, quan- 
tity, quality, relation, action, passion, (or suffering,) 
place, time, i^tuation, possesion, (or covering.) 

Cause, Divisions of, Ist. Efficient, (d qu&y) either 
Principal, as the shoemaker y 5y «;Aom the shoe is 
made ; or Instrumental, as the aW, knifCy 6cc. with 
winch the shoe is made. 2Iid. Material, (ex qud,) 
either Proximate, as the leather of which the shoe is 
made ; ox Remote, as the sHn of which the leather is 
made. 3rd, Formal, (per qtuim,) either Proximate, 
as the shape or fashion of the ishoe; (because the ma- 
terial so shaped becomes a shoe ;) or Remote, as the 
natural form of the leather (viz. that which is essen- 
tial to its being leather) is the more remote form of 
the shoe. •'4th. Final; (propter quam;) denoting 
the end for which a thing is made or done ; either 
Proximate, as the proximate end for whioh a shoe is 
made, is ^e protection ef the foot; or Remote, as its 
more remote end is the comfort and health of the 
body. 



80 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Common Temiy See Term. 

Compatible Termsy see Term. 

Complex Term, the same as Proposition. 

Conclusion of a Syllogism, No 37, Rule 2nd. 

Concrete Noun, See Term. 

Conditional Propositions, Rules for drawing a con- 
clusion from, No. &7, 

Conditional Syllogisms, No. 65, et seq. 

Constructive Conditional Syllogisms, No. 67. 

Contingent Matter, Nos. 18 and. 19. 

Contradiction, in Logic, when any proposition is op- 
posed by another, di£fering from it both in quantity 
and quality, No. 32. 

Contradictory Opposition of Terms, See Term. 

Contradictory Propositions, Nos. 22, 23, and 27. 

Contrary Propositions, Nos. 22, 27. 

Contrary Terms, see Terms. 

Converse, Nos. 29, 31, 32. 

Conversion of Propositions, No. 29. 

Conversion Simple, No. 30. 

Conversion per Accidens, or by Limitation, No. 30. 

Conversion by Negation^ or Contraposition, No. 30. 

Copula, No. 6. 

Decomplex, or doubly complex. Word or Term. The 
same as Syllogism, No. 2. 

Definition, such an explanation of a term, as separates 
it, like a boundary, from every thing else. Defini- 
tion is divided into, 1st. Nominal, which explains 
only the meaning of the Term, by an equivalent ex- 
pression that may happen to be better known, as 
"Decalogue," " ten commandments ;" or 2nd. Real, 
which explains the nature of the Thing, These di- 
visions are again divided into Essential and Acci- 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 81 

dental ; and essential definition is further divided 
into physical and logical, (or vnetaphysical) 

Definition, Essential, one which assigns the consti- 
tuent parts of the essence or nature ; either the real 
parts of the essence, which are actually separable, as 
if, in defining '* Plant," you should enumerate the 
leaves, stalks, roots, &c. which is ^. physical defini- 
tion ; or the ideal parts, which are separable only 
in the mind, as when a plant is defined to be ** an 
organized being, 'destitute of sensation," which is a 
logical or metaphysical definition. N. B. A logical 
definition must always consist of the geniis and 
differentia. 

Definition, Accidental, commonly called a Descrip- 
tion; that definition of a thing which is given by 
assigning to it the circumstances belonging to its 
essence; viz. Properties and Accidents; (causes, 
effects, &c.) E. G. " Barometer," " A machine for 
measuring the weight of the atmosphere." *' Bal- 
loon," *' A silken ball, filled with gas, which causes 
it to rise into the air." " Lion," " The fiercest and 
most noble of quadrupeds," &c. 

Definition, three principal RvXes for, 1st. A defini- 
tion must be adequate, i. e. neither too narrow nor 
too extensive. If it be too narrow, you explain a 
part instead of a whole; if too extensive, a whole 
instead of a part, 2nd. It must be of itself clearer 
(i.e. consist of ideas less complex) than the thing 
defined. 3rd. It must be couched in just a suffi- 
cient number of proper words. Proper is here 
used in opposition to metaphorical, which class of 
words is excluded on account of their vague and 
indefinite nature. h 



82 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Description, see Definition accidental. 

Destructive Conditional Syllogisms, No. 67. 

Dictum of Aristotle, De omni et rnUlo, No. 35. 

Difference, Differentia, a Predicable expressing the 
distinguishing part of the essence of a species, 
" Rational" is the Difference of " Man." It is predi- 
cated in Qualequid, see Species. 

Difference, Generic, the difference of a subaltern 
genus, and which may be predicated of all the 
subordinate species comprehended in that genus. 
"Having sensation" is the generic difference of 
"Animal." 

Difference, Specific, the difference of an in/ima 
Species, and which may be predicated of all the 
individuals contained under it "Rationality" is 
the specific difference of " Man." 

Dilemma, Nos. 72, 73. 

Dilemma, Simple Constructive, No. 74. 

Dilemma, Complex Constructive, No. 75. 

Dilemma, Destructive, No. 7Q, and note. 

Discourse, the same as Reasoning. 

Disjunctive Syllogisms, Nos. 69, 70, 71. 

Distributed, j5fi?am7i^ o/, No.. 16. 

Distribution, Rules concerning. No. 20. 

Division, in Logic, is a metaphorical expression, and 
means the distinct enumeration of several things 
signified by one common name. You reverse the 
process of generalization, and add on, instead of 
drawing off, the differences by which things are dis- 
tinguished. Thus, " Tree" is logically divided into 
" Oak," « Elm," " Poplar." There is this difference 
between logical and physical division. (See Indi- 



INi)£X AND VOCABULARY 83 

viDUAL.) In the fonner^ycminay piedioate the divided 
whole of every dividing member. Thus, "Weapon" 
May be predicated of "«word," " Pike," " Gnn.** 
This cannot happen in the case of physical <division. 
** Gun" cannot be predicated of *' the Lock," " the 
Stock," or " the Barrel." 

DiYisioiff^IlulesrJbr'Ugioalj sae. three. 1st, Each of the 
parts, or any, short of all, must contain less (i.e. 
have aiianower signification) than the thing divided. 
"Weapon" could not be a division of the term 
" Srword." 2nd. All the parts together must be exactly 
equal to - the thing divided. In dividing the term 
"Weapon," into" Sword," "Pike," " Gun,"acc. we 
must not omit any thing of which "Weapon,'* can 
be predicated, nor introduce any -thing of which it 
cannot. 3rd. The parts or members must he opposed ; 
i. e. must not be contained in one another. "• Book" 
must not be divided into " Quarto," " French," = for 
a French book may be a quarto, and a quarto, 
French. N. B. You must always keep in mind the 
Principle of Division, with Mrhich you set out; E.G. 
whether you begin to divide books according to their 
size, language, matter, (Sec. 

Enthymeme, Nos. 80, 81. 

Epichirema, No. 89. 

Equivalents, No. 90. 

Essence, the nature of any being, whether actually 
existing or not ; " Snow" has an essence in summer ; 
in winter, it has existence also. 

ExposiTA, what. No. 30. 

Extremes, No. 7, and note, and No. 37, note. 

Fallacy, an argument, or apparent argument, profcss- 

H 2 



84 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

ing to decide the matter at issue, while it really does 
not. 

Fallacia -3EQUIVOCATIONIS, arising from the use of 
an equiyocal word ; E. G. " The dog is an animal ; 
Sirius is the dog ; therefore Sinus is an animal." 
See No. 37, Rule 3rd. 

Fallacia Amphibolic, or doubtful Construction; E. G. 
" Quod tangitur a Socrate illud sentit ; columna 
tangitur a Socrate ; ergo columna sentit" In the 
major proposition, " sentit" means " he, i, e, Socrates, 
feels." In the conclusion, the same word means 
" feels Socrates." See No. 37, Rule 1st. 

Fallacia Compositionis, when what is proposed in a 
divided sense is afterwards taken collectively; E. G. 
" Two and three are even and odd; five is two and 
three ; therefore five is even and odd." See No. 37, 
Rule 3rd. 

Fallacia Division is, when what is proposed in a 
collective, is afterwards taken in a divided sense ; 
E. G. "The planets are seven ; Mercury and Venus 
are planets; therefore Mercury and Venus are 
seven." See No. 37, Rule 3rd. • 

Fallacia FiGURf Dictionis, when, from any simili- 
tude between two words, what is granted of one is, 
by a forced application, predicated of another ; as, 
" Projectors are not fit to be trusted, therefore he 
who has formed a project is not fit to be trusted " 
— See Dr. Whately*s Logic, ch. iii. § 8. 

Fallacia Accidentis, when what is accidental is con- 
founded with what is essential ; E. G. " What you 
bought you have eaten ; raw meat is what you 
bought; therefore raw meat is what you hare 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 85 

eaten." In the major proposition, "What you 
bought" means as regards its Essence; in the minor, 
6is regards its Accidents. See No. 37, Rule 3rd. 

Fallacia a Dicto secundum Quid ad Dictum Sim- 
PLiciTER, when a Term is at one time used in a 
limited, at another, in an unlimited sense, as, " The 
Ethiopian is white as to his teeth ; therefore he is 
white:' See No. 37, Rule 1st. 

Fallacia Ignorationis Elenchi, an argument that 
indicates ignorance of the point in dispute ; an irre- 
levant conclusion ; as if any one, to shew the inu- 
tility of the art of Logic, should prove that men 
unacquainted with it have reasoned well. 

Fallacia a non Causa pro Causa, which is divided 
into Fallacia ^ non verApro verA^ and Fallacia A non 
tali pro tali. E.G. " A comet has appeared, there- 
fore there will be war." — ^** What intoxicates should 
be prohibited, and wine intoxicates." The abuse 
of it does. In replying, you should deny the false 
cause, or assign the true one. 

Fallacia Consequentis, when that is inferred which 
does not logically follow; as, ''He is an animal; 
therefore he is a man." 

Fallacia Petition IS Principii, {begging the Questiony) 
when that is assumed for giunted, which ought to 
have been proved ; as when a thing is proved by 
itself, (called Petitio statim,) " He is a man, there- 
fore he is a man ;" or bg it Sgwmym, as, " A sabre 
is sharp, therefore a cymetar is ;" or by any thing 
equally unknown^ as, "Paradise was in Armenia, 
therefore Gihon is an Asiatic river ;" or by any thing 
more unknown, as, " This square is twice the size of 
this triangle, because equal to this circle ;" or by 



86 INDEX AND VOCABUtARY. 

discoursing in a circle, i. e. when the disputant tries 
to prove reciprocally conclusion from premises, and 
premises from conclusion ; as, *' Fire is hot, therefore 
it bums ;'' and afterwards, '* Fire bums, therefore 
it is hot." 

Fallacia Plurium Interrogationum, when two or 
more questions, requiring each a separate answer, 
are proposed as one ; so that if one answer be given, it 
must be inapplicable to one of the particulars asked ; 
as, ^ Was Pisistratus the usurper and scourge of 
Athens ?" The answer " No" would be false of the 
former particular, and "Yes" would be false of 
the latter. This fallacy is overthrown by giving to 
each particular a separate reply. 

False, strictly, denotes the quality of a proposition 
which states a thing not as it is. 

Figures^ Nos. 41 and^; 

Generalization, the abstracting or drawing off, in 
thought, the points of dissimilitude between several 
objects which resemble each other in some part of 
their nature, and the assigning to them one common 
name expressii^ of the particulars in which they 
all agree. Thus, " Pigeon," « Wren," " Eagle," 
^ Cassowary," differ in shape, plumage, size. Sec. but 
agree in being all feathered creatttres. They come, 
therefore, under the general head of " Fowl," or 
" Bird." 

GENERIC Difference, See Difference. 

Generic Property, See PnopsiiTY. 

G£N<DS,aPredicableyexpressing the eammon or maAeidal 
port of the species of which it is affinned. " Atiimal" 
is the genus of " Man." It is said to be predicated 
in Qnid, See Speciss. 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 87 

Genus, Proximum, one that is the next remoYe from 
a species. ''Animal" is the proximum genus 
of " Man." " Liying thing" is the more remote 
genus. 

Genus, Subaltern, one that is a species, if viewed with 
reference to a higher or more coipprehensive genus; 
thus " Bird," the genus of nightingale, is. a species 
of animal. 

Genus, Summum, that which is not a species of any 
higher genus. 

HypoTHETiCAL Propositions, See Propositions. 

Hypothetical Syllogisms, No. 63, 64, 76, 87. 

Idea, the picture or representation of an ohject in the 
mind ; the result of apprehension. 

Illative, Meaning of, No, 31. 

Illicit Process, No. 37, Rule 4. 

Impossible Matter, Nos. 18 and 19. 

Indefinite Proposition, See Proposition. 

Individual, that which is incapable of logical division, 
(see Division,) and can he only physically divided 
into its /Mzrto. E.G. "Man," being a species, can 
be logically divided into individuals, as '' Homer," 
" Virgil," " Milton ;" but these, being individuals, 
can be divided only physically, viz. into their com- 
ponent parts. 

Induction, No. 88. 

Infer, to draw a conclusion from granted premises. 

Infima Species, See Species. 

Infinitant Particle, " Not." 

Judgment, a decision on the agreement or disagree^ 
ment of two objects. It is either affirmative or ne- 
gative. See Operations. 



88 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Logic, the science which analyzes the process of the 
mind in reasoning; the art which lays down rules 
to secure the mind from erroneous inferences. 
(From Xoyoc, reason.) 

Major Premiss, No. 37, Rule 2 ; No. 64. 

Major Term, No. 37, Rule 1. 

Matter of a Proposition^ what. No. 19. 

Middle Term, No. 37, Rule 1. No. 1, Note. 

Minor Premiss, No. 37, Rule 2. No. 64. 

Minor Term, No. 37, Rule 1^ 

Modal Syllogisms, Nos. 60, 61, 62. 

Moods, No. 40, No» 48. 

Necessary Matter, Nos. 18 and 19. 

Negative Term, See Term. 

Operations of the mind, concerned in argument are 
three; viz. Simple Apprehension, Judgment, Dis- 
course, (or Reasoning.) 

Opposite Term, see Term. 

Opposition of Propositions, Nos. 21, 22, 27. 

Opposition of Terms, See Terms. 

Pars deterior, what, No. 38, Note. 

Positive Term, See Term. 

Predicable, See Term Common. Every Predicable 
expresses either the whole essence of its subject, viz. 
the species ; otpart of its essence, viz. the genus or 
the difference ; or something joined to its essence, 
viz. a property or an accident. 

Predicate, No. 6. 

Premiss, a proposition employed to establish some 
conclusion. No. 4. 

Privative Term, See Term. 

Problem, the same as Question. 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 89 

Property, a Predicable expressing something neces- 
sarily joined 'to tlie essence- of the whole species ; 
whatever may be considered as the accompaniment 
or result of the differentia, " Risibility" is the pro- 
perty of " Man." Property is predicated in Quale, 
See Species. 

Property, threefold division of, — 1st, Universal and 
peculiar ; as, the faculty of laughter or of speech^ to 
man. 2nd, Universal, but not peculiar; as, the 
being a biped^ to man. Every mrni is a biped, but 
fowls are bipeds too. 3rd, Peculiar, but not uni- 
versal, as, the being a philosopher, to mun. Man 
alone can be a philosopher, but every man is not one. 
This third division, however, is more truly an ac- 
cident. 

Property, Generic, the property of a subaltern genus, 
and which may be predicated of all the subordinate 
species comprehended in that genus. " Voluntary 
motion" is the generic property of " Animal." 

Property, Specific, the property of an infima species, 
and which may be predicated of all the individuals 
contained under it. " Risibility" is the specific 
property of ** Man." 

Propositi© de inesse, what. No. 11, Note, 

Proposition, an act of judgment expressed in lan- 
guage. See No. 6. 

Fropositio's, Affirmative, Nos. 11 and 14. 

Proposition, Categorical, (pure and modal,) Nos. 11 
and 12. 

Proposition, Hypothetical, (conditional and disjunct 
tive,) Nos. 11 and 13. 

Proposition, Indefinite, No. 11, Note. No. 19. 



90 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Proposition, Negative^ Nos. 11 and 14. 
Proposition, Particular, Nos. i;i and 15. 
Proposition, Singular , No. 11, Note. 
Proposition, Contrary, Nos. 22 and 27. 
Proposition, Subcontrary, Nos. 22 andi27. 
Proposition, Contradictory , Nos. 22, 23, and 27. 
Proposition, Subaltern, Nos. 22 and 27. 
Proposition, Universal, Nos. 11 and 15. 
Prostllogism, No. 89. 
Prove, to adduce premises. which establish the truth of 

some conclusion. 
Quality of a Proposition, Np. 11. 
Quantity of a Proposition, No. 11. 
Question, the Proposition, to be proved ; called, after 

proof, the conclusion or inference. 
Reasoning, the act of proceeding from one judgment 

to another, founded on, or tl^e result of it. 
Reduction^ Ostensive, Nos. 52, 53, 56. 
Reduction of Hypothetical SyHttgismfi, No. 79. 
Relative Noun or Term, See Term. 

SiGNIFICATE, No. 16. 

Sorites, Nos. 82, 83, 84, 85, 86. 

Sorites, Hypothetical, No. 87. 

Species, a Predicable expressing the whole essence of 
several things ; as, " Man," A species of animal. It 
is said to be predicated in Quid, i. e. to answer to the 
question WhatP as, " What is ^at ?" Ansu^.^'A 
man.'' N.B. By adding the difference to th^ 
genus, you make up the species. 

Species infima, one that cannot be considered as the 
genus of any thing, and eon tains under it only indi- 
viduals. ^ Man," is an infima speqies, contaii^ng 
under it, Caesar, Aristotle, Thomas, &c. 



INDEX AfiD VOCABULARY. 91 

Species subaltern, the same as subaltern genus ; i.e. 
one that is a genus, if viewed with reference to the 
species into which it .is divisible. "Bird" is a 
subaltern species^ being a species of animaly and the 
genus of nightingale. 

Specific Difference, See Difference. 

Specific Property, See Property. 

Subaltern Propositions, See Propositions. 

SUBALTERNANS, No. 24. 

Subalternate, No. 24v 

Subcontrary Propositions, See Propositions. 

Subject, No. 6. 

Substance of a Proposition^ No. 11. 

Syllogism, No. 2, No. 35. 

SvLhooisMSyDivision^of, viz.Categorical,into Pure and 
Modal; Hypothetical, into Conditional and Dis- 
junctive. No. 6. 

Syllogisms, Irregular, Nos. 91, 92, 93, and 94, 

Syllogisms, Rules for ascertaining the validity of. 
No. 37. 

Symbols of Quantity and Quality, No. 17, No. 45. 

Syncategorematic Word, or SYNCATE60REM,((n;yica- 
TriyopEO), I predicate together with^) a word theut can 
form only part of a term. Such are the particles of 
a language, and substantives in an oblique case. 
Adjectives and participles axe generally accounted 
Syncategorems. 

Term, an act of apprehension expressed in language. 
Also, the subject or predicate of a Proposition, No. 7. 

Term, Absolute, one that is considered by itself, and 
conveys no idea of relation to any thing of which it 
is a part, or to any other part distinguished from it. 



92 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Term, Abstract, denotes the quality of a being, without 
regard to the subject in which it is ; as, '* Justice,'' 
" Height," " Wisdom*" Abstract terms are nouns 
substantive. 

Term, Common, such as stands for several individuals, 
which are called its Significates ; as "Man," "City." 
Such terms, and such only, can be affirmatively pre- 
dicated of several others, and they axe therefore 
called Predicables. 

Terms, Cmnpatible or Consistent, express two views 
which can be taken of the same object, at the same 
time, as, •* White and Hard." 

Term, Complex. The same as Proposition. 

Term, Concrete, denotes the quality of a being, and 
either expresses, or must be referred to, some subject 
in whichitis;as,«Fool," "Foolish," "High," "Wise." 
Concrete Terms are usually, but not always^ nouns 
adjective. 

Terms, Contradictory Opposition of^ when they differ 
only in respectively wanting and having the par- 
ticle "not," or its equivalent. One or other of 
such terms is applicable to every object. 

Terms, Contrary, come both under some one class, 
but are the most different of all that belong to 
that class ; as, " Wise" and " Foolish," both coming 
under the class of mental qualities. There are some 
objects to which neither of such terms is applicable ; 
a Stone, for instance, is neither wise nor foolish. 

Term, Definite, (finitum,) one which marks out an 
object or class of beings ; as, " Caesar," " Corporeal." 
Positive Terms are called definite. 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 93 

Term, Indefinite, (infinitum,) one which does not 
mark out, hut only exclude an object, as,"Not-C8Bsar," 
'' Incorporeal." Priwative and negative Terms are 
called indefinite. 

Term, Negative, denotes that the positive view could 
7iot be tsiken of the object ; it affirms the absence of 
a thing from some subject in which it could not be 
present ; as, " A dumb statue ;" (you could not say, 
''A speaking one.") "A lifeless corpse;" (you could 
not say, " A living one.") N. B. The same term 
may be negative, positive, or privative, as it is viewed 
with relation to contrary ideas. Thus " Immortal" 
is privative or negative, viewed with relation to 
Death, and positive, viewed with relation to Life. 

Terms, Opposite, express two views which cannot 
be taken of one single object at the same time ; 
as, " White and Black." 

Term, Positive, denotes a certain view of an object, as 
being actually taken of it; as, " Speech," " Aman 
speaking." 

Term, Privative, denotes that the positive view might 
conceivably be taken of the object, but is not; 
" Dumbness," " A man silent ;" (you might say, **A 
man speaking.") "Anunburied corpse;" (you might 
say, * A buried one.") 

Term, Relative, that which expresses an object viewed 
in relation to the whole, or to another part of a more 
complex object of thought, as" Half" and "Whole," 
" Master" and " Servant" Such nouns are called 
Correlative to each other ; nor can one of them be 
mentioned, without a notion of the other being raised 
in the mind. 



d4 INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 

Term, Simple. The same as Categorematic Word. 

Term, Singular ^ such as stands for one individual, as 
" Socrates," " London," " This man," " That city.'' 
Such tenns cannot be predicated affirmatively of 
any thing but themselves. 

Undistributed Middle, No. 37, Rule 3. 

Universality of a Proposition, A Proposition is me- 
taphysically or matJiematically universal, when the 
predicate belongs, without any exception, to every 
particular contained under the universal subject ; 
as, " All circles have a centre and circumference." 
It is physically universal, when it always agrees, 
unless in the case of some unnatural exceptions ; 
as, ^ All men are rational." It is morally universal, 
when it agrees in most instances, but not necessarily, 
or in the course of nature ; as, '* All the Cretans are 
liars." 

Words, any combination of, making one complex 

apprehension, is, inlogic, a simple word; as, '* I The- 
1 _2_ 3 

hope-of-reward I 1 is 1 I the-solace-bf-labour. I " Every 

Proposition consists of three simple Words, viz. 

subject, copula, and predicate. 

Words, VarioiLS divisions of the manner of employing ; 
whence a word is called Univocal, Equivocal^ Ana- 
logous^ of the first Intentiony or of the second Inten- 
tion. 

Words, Univocal, such as are confined to one mean- 
ing, and signify but one sort of idea; E.G. " Book," 
" Lance," " Tomb." 

Words, Equivocal, such as signify two or more ideas ; 
E. G. " Light," " Moor," " Pen," "Post." 



/ 



INDEX AND VOCABULARY. 95 

Words, Analogous^ such as signify iv/o or more things 
that hare no resemblance in themselves, hut stand in 
a similar relation each to its respectiye object ; E.G. 
" Hand," " Foot," " Sweet." As the human hand 
points to any object to which we would direct the 
attention, so does the hand of a clock point to the 
hour. As the /oof of an animal is the lowest part of 
it, so is the foot of a mountain with relation to the 
mountain, (Sec. 
Words, of the first Intention, such as are used in their 
vague and common acceptation ; thus '' Needle" 
signifies, in popular language, the little steel instru- 
ment used in sewing. 
Words, of the second Intention, those to which a more 
precise and limited meaning is given, proper to some 
particular art, science, or system ; thus " Needle" 
means, in the language of navigation, the little steel 
bar in the mariner's compass. 



APPENDIX. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 

The Respondent^ in a Disputation, being always 
supposed to maintain a true proposition, the argu- 
ment of the Opponent, whose province it is to sup- 
port the contradictory, must be presumed to be 
founded on some fallacy. 

If the respondent, upon trying his opponent s 
objection in the form of a categorical syllogism, 
should find that it offends against any one of the 
six rules in No. 37, by pointing out such a viola- 
tion, he overthrows the opponent s argument. 

Should the objection be hypothetical, the res- 
pondent must examine the connexion between an- 
tecedent and consequent, (No.66,) and whether the 

I 



98 APPENDIX. 

two rules at No. 67 have been observed. The detec- 
tion also of any violation of the rules for drawing 
a conclusion from disjunctive propositions (Nos. 
70, 71,) will destroy a fallacy so supported. 

Fallacies that consist in a violation of the express 
rules of logic are more palpable than those which 
depend on the ambiguity of the middle term ; by 
an ingenious application of which to the terms of 
the question, (No. 37, Rule 1,) fallacies are very 
generally introduced. 

Most frequently, therefore, the first business of 
the respondent is to examine the middle term of 
his opponent's argument ; and ascertain whether, 
in his comparison of it with the terms of his con- 
clusion, he has used it in exactly the same sense in 
both instances. The first and second intention of 
words, their being employed sometimes in a literal, 
and sometimes in a metaphorical, sense, with other 
considerations arising from the various meanings 
attached to the same, or similar, terms, afford a 
wide scope for the exercise of fallacy, and call for 
acuteness, both natural and acquired, to detect it, 
if skilfully concealed. 

The opponent has the choice of many points of 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 99 

attack ; for if he prove that the proposition advanced 
by the respondent appears at all inconsistent with 
any part of the system he is defending, or at va- 
riance with any received principle of truth, &c. or 
expressed in terms of too extensive a latitude, — by 
driving the respondent to explain such a difficulty, 
he has fairly executed his task. 

The Cambridge argument now practised by the 
opponent at a public disputation in the schools, 
generally consists of three constructive conditional 
syllogisms (No. 67.) The consequent (No. 66) in 
the first syllogism, is always, " Cadit quaestio." If 
the respondent should deny the consequence, (or 
conclusion,) then the consequent of the second syl- 
logism«will be, " Valet consequentia ;" on the con- 
trary, if he should deny the minor, (No. 64,) the 
consequent of the second syllogism will be, "Valet 
minor." If the respondent should deny the conse- 
quence of the second syllogism, the consequent of 
the third will be, " Valent consequentia et argu- 
mentum;" if he should deny the minor of the 
second, the consequent of the third will be, "Valent 
minor et argumentum." 

Whichever proposition the respondent has de- 



9^^\n'$iK 



100 APPENDIX. 

nied, (whether it be the minor or consequence^) the 
opponent^ in his next syllogism^ affirms to be valid ; 
taking for the consequent of his major proposition^ 
" Valet minor," or " Valet consequentia," as the 
case may be. 

Should the argument consist of only two syllo- 
gisms, the former will have for its consequent 
" Cadit quaestio," and the latter, either " Valent 
consequentia et argumentum," or " Valent minor 
et argumentum," according to the previous denial 
of the respondent Should it consist of more than 
three, all, except the last, will have their consequent 
in the same manner as the second ; either '' Valet 
consequentia," or " Valet minor." The consequent 
of the concluding syllogism is always, ''Valent 
consequentia et argumentum," or, '' Valent minor 
et argumentum." It is not, however, advisable to 
use more than thi*ee syllogisms in constructing an 
argument for a disputation. 

It is the duty of the respondent, at the close of 
each syllogism, either to concede or deny the minor 
proposition, as circumstances may require. If it 
be evidently true, he must, of course, concede it, 
but deny the consequence ; viz. that its ti'uth inva- 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPDTATION. 101 

lidates the question he is maintaining ; '' Concedo 
minorem^ et nego consequentiam." If the minor 
he false, or douhtful, he denies it, ("Nego mi- 
norem,") and the opponent, on the other hand, 
must endeavour to establish it by some unques- 
tionable medium of proof. 

The following examples, exhibiting arguments 
of three, four, and twp syllogisms, and shewing the 
mode of proceeding, as the minor or consequence 
may be denied in dijQTerent places, will facilitate the 
application of the above remarks. The Form of 
the argument being at present the point for consi- 
deration, unmeaning symbols have been substituted 
for terms. 

An Argument of three syllogisms, with the minor 

of the first denied, 

Opponens. 

MAJOR PROPOS. 

A ntecedent. Consequent. 

1. Si I A sit B, i I cadit qusestio ; i 

MINOR PROPOS.. 

Sed A est B ; 

CONSEQUBNTIA. 

Ergo cadit qusBstio. 

Respondbns. 
Nego minorem. 



102 APPENDIX. 

Pergit Dormnus Opponens ad syllogismum secundum, 

2. Si C sit D, valet minor ; 
Sed C est D ; 

Ergo valet minor. 

Respondens. 
Concedo minorem, et nego consequentiam. 

Pergit Opponens ad syllogismum tertium. 

3. Si £ sit F,valent consequentia et argumentum; 
Sed E est F ; 

Ergo vaJent consequentia et argumentum. 

An Argument of three syllogisms, with the minor 

of the second denied, 

Opponens. 

1. Si A sit B, cadit qusestio ; 
Sed A est B ; 

Ergo cadit qusBStio. 

Respondens. 
Concedo minorem, et nego consequentiam. 

Opponens pergit ad syllogismum secundum. 

2. Si C sit D, valet consequentia ; 
Sed C est D; 

Ergo valet consequentia. 

Respondens. 
Nego minorem. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 103 

Opponens pergit ad syllogismum tertium, 

3. Si £ sit F, valent minor et axgumentum ; 
Sed E est F ; 
Ergo valent minor et argumentum. 

An •Argument of four syllogisms, with the minor 
of the second denied* 

Opponens. 

1. Si A sit B, cadit qusestio; 
Sed A est B; 

Ergo cadit qusestio. 

Respondens. 
Concedo minorem, et nego consequentiam. 

Pergit Opponens. 

2. Si C sit D, valet consequentia ; 
Sed C est D ; 

Ergo valet consequentia. 

Respondens. 
Nego minorem. 

Pergit Opponens. 

3. Si E sitF, valet minor; 
Sed E est F; 

Ergo valet minor. 

Respondens. 
Concedo minorem, et nego consequentiam. 

Pergit Opponens. 
4 . Si G sit H, valent consequentia et argumentum ; 
Sed G est H ; 
Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 



104 APPENDIX. 

N. B. If the minor of the third syllogism had 
been denied, the consequent and conclusion of this 
last syllogism would have been, " Valent minor et 
argumentum." 

An Argument of two syllogisms, with the minor of 

the first denied. 

Opponens. 

1 . Si A sit B, cadit qusestio ; 
Sed A est B ; 

Ergo cadit qu8Bstio. 

Respondens. 
Nego minorem. 

Pergit Opponens. 

2. Si C sit D, valent minor et argumentum ; 
Sed C est D ; 

Ergo valent minor et ai'gumentum. 

Should the minor of a concluding syllogism be 
false, the respondent does not say," Nego minorem,** 
but proceeds at once to his reply. 

The antecedent, as may be seen in the preceding 
examples, is first enunciated in the subjunctive, or, 
at least, conditionally ; then affirmed, in the minor 
premiss^in the indicative mood, and the consequent 
accordingly established. 

It may happen, that the three conditional syllo- 
gisms admit of being reduced to the form of a single 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 106 

categorical syllogism; to the major^ minor> and 
conclusion of which they severally correspond. 
But even in instances of this kind, it is not neces- 
sary that the three conditional syllogisms should be 
placed in the same order as the three propositions 
of the categorical syllogism, if the opponent thinks 
that, by a different arrangement, his sophism will 
be the better concealed. 

The three conditional syllogisms of an opponent's 
argument, when they do not correspond with 
the three propositions of a categorical syllogism, 
would require, in order to be stated in form, to be 
expanded into two or more categorical syllogisms. 

In responding to an opponent, it is by no means 
necessary to unfold in one's mind the objections he 
has adduced into as many strict categorical syllo- 
gisms as will lead to his conclusion ; for this would 
often be a trifling and tedious process to the res- 
pondent ; though it is highly desirable to possess 
the skill that would enable him, if required, to go 
through it. 

Should the respondent, from the subtlety of his 
opponent's sophism, or any other cause, experience 
great difficulty in discovering the pith of the objec- 
tion, the Moderator usually assists him, by re- 



1 



106 APPENDIX. 

Stating the opponent's argument in a more lucid 
and int^Uigible form ; and sometimes directing his 
attention to the quai*ter in which the fallacy is 
hidden. 

It has been already stated to be the opponent's 
province, should the respondent deny the minor of. 
his syllogism, to confirm it by some medium of 
proof. This, in the Divinity-School, is generally done 
by an appeal to texts of Scripture ; which, it may be 
observed, are commonly cited without being called 
for by the respondent, as they often afibrd ground 
for critical animadversion on the part of the pro- 
fessor, and opportunity for a further trial of the 
skill and knowledge of the disputants. 

It is usual for the professor to call on the respon- 
dent for an interpretation into Latin of the more 
abstruse and diflScult texts of the New Testament, 
that may happen to be quoted by the opponent 
For citations from the Old Testament, the Vulgate 
is employed.* 

When the respondent has replied to the oppo- 
nent's objection ,the moderator occasionally demands 

* A copy of the Greek New Testament, and of the Vulgate 
version of the Old, are placed on the desk of the respon- 
dent's rostnim. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 107 

of the latter his own solution of the sophism he has 
constructed. 

The following is the form of a divinity Act, with 
a specimen of the style of argumentation, as prac- 
tised in the University of Camhridge. The com- 
piler, in conformity with the principles laid down 
in the preceding part of this manual, has, at the 
hottom of the page, unfolded each argument in a 
categorical form. 

The preliminaries of a divinity act, the formula 
of the prayers, the hahit of the respondent, &c. are 
detailed in the " Ceremonies of the University of 
Cambridge," edited by H. Gunning, Esq. 

Every one about to keep a divinity act first sub- 
mits to the Regius Professor three or four ques- 
tions, which should be on some important doctiine 
of the Christian religion, or leading article of the 
Protestant faith. The professor having selected 
one of these questions, the respondent (that is to 
be) makes it the subject of a Latin thesis : the de- 
livery of which ought not to occupy more than 
half-an-hom\* 

* The Church Articles supply suitable subjects for dis- 
putation. A good list of questions that have been already 
discussed is to be found in the Preface to Bishop Watson's 
Theological Tracts. 



108 APPENDIX. 

About ten days before the act is kept, the res- 
pondent should wait on the professor, in order to 
obtain of him the second question. This is always 
chosen exclusively by the professor himself, who, 
when the disputation is ended, delivers a thesis 
(called a Determination) upon it. It is the pro- 
vince of the respondent to answer the ailments 
brought against both questions.''^ 



* It is greatly to be regretted, that majiy clerg3rmen, after 
entering on the public duties of their office, should often 
neglect to cultivate the advantages conferred on them by a 
University education. Not that it is desirable, or even de> 
fensible, that a minister of the Gospel should employ much 
of his time either in classical or philosophical researches ; 
but some familiarity with theological Greek and Latin might 
fairly be expected of every divine, however arduous the du- 
ties of his parish may be. It is incredible how much time 
may be snatched for improvement out of the busiest and 
most laborious life. Erasmus wrote his '' Praise of Folly," 
while travelling on horseback into Italy ; *' ne totum illud 
tempus quo equo fuit insidendum, illiteratis fabulis terere- 



tur." 



' No one who has discontinued for many years a moderate 
cultivation of Greek and Latin, can proceed to the higher 
degrees at the University, without disagreeable anticipations 
of embarrassment and disgrace^ in the attempt to hold a 
public disputation. 

The writings of Limborch may be very useful to a&y one 
preparing for a divinity act. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 109 

On the professor having ascended his rostrum, 
he directs the respondent to begin : '' Agas, Do- 
mine/' The respondent then says, " Oremus," and 
pronounces the prayer "Actiones nostras," &c. 
He afterwards proposes the questions thus : 

" Quastiones sunt : (exempli gratia :) 

1. ' Ohlatio Ckristi semel facta perfecta redemptio 
est.^ 

2. *• Fides justificans non potest k bonis operibm dis- 
jungt. 

As the question on which the respondent has 
composed his thesis is always proposed first, he 
then says, ^^ De priori," and proceeds to deliver 
his thesis. 

When the thesis is concluded, the first opponent 
is directed by the professor to ascend the rostrum : 
^' Ascendat opponentium primus." 

The opponent then reads the two questions, as 
the respondent had done before, and proceeds to 
his arguments. 

To give as clear an idea as possible of the manner 
of opposing and responding, the discussion of the 
first argument is here exhibited in the form of dia- 
logue. 



110 APPENDIX. 

Opponens. 

Contra priorem. 

1. Si Divus Paulus Christum appellet, "Agnum 
nostrum pascbalem," cadit qusestio ; 

Sed DiTus Paulus Christum appellat, '^Agnum nos- 
trum paschalem;" 

Ergo cadit quaestio. 

Provoco ad priorem Pauli Epist ad Corinth, cap. 5^. 
com. 7«»o. 

Respondens. 

Concedo minorem, et nego consequentiam. 

Opponens. 

2. Si agnus paschalis non esset sacrificium piaculare, 
valet consequentia ; 

Sed agnus paschalis non erat sacrificium piaculare ; 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

Respondens. 
Nego minorem. 

Opponens. 

Provoco ad Exodi cap. 12«n"™'Comm. 13^'o- et H*®- 
unde apparet sacrificium paschale primitus institutum 
fuisse in id tantum, ut, sanguine foribus asperso, ange- 
lus vindex domos Israelitanim agnosceret, et illsesas 
prseteriret ; et in sseculis subsecutis observatum fuisse 
in id tantum, ut majorum suorum ex ^Egypto libe- 
rationem Judsei commemorarent. 

Si dominus respondens nunc concedat minorem, 
necesse est consequentiam neget : et opponens per- 
git ad syllogism um tertium. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. Ill 

3. Si igitur neque mors Cliristi sit saorificium pia- 
culare, valent consequentia et argumentum ; 

Sed igitur mors Christi non est sacrificium piacu- 
lare ; 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Respondens. 

Constat tum agni paschalis mactationem,tum Christi 
mortem, fuisse revera sacrificia. Hoc unum comparatio 
ab Apostolo instituta requirit. Esto, agni paschalis 
mactationem nihil piaculare. habuisse ; Christi tamen 
mors, quippe quae sacrificium sit, hactenus agni pas- 
chalis mactationi respOndet ; licet vim majorem habeat, 
quia sacrificium est piaculare. 

Si vero dominus respondens non concedat mi- 
norem in syllogismo secundo^ tunc moderatoris 
erit judicium suum interponere. Si ille existimet 
minorem valere,opponentem j ubebit ad syllogismum 
tertium pergere. Contra ea, si pronuntiet minorem 
non valere,tunc domino opponenti nihil restat^nisi ut 
det manus, et ad argumentum aliud novum pergat. 

In hoc argumento dubitari potest, agni Paschalis 
mactatio sacrificium piaculare fuerit, necne. Certe 
sanguis foribus aspersus vim mali avertendi habuit, 
ideoque effectum quendam piacularem. Sed agni 
mactatio, in saeculis posterioribus quotannis repe- 



112 APPENDIX. 

tita, nullam aliam vim habere videtur nisi comme- 
momtivam.* 

When the respondent has replied to the first 
objection, the professor either signifies his appro- 
bation of the answer, or suggests another more ap- 
propriate and satisfactory. He then directs the 
opponent to proceed to his next argument ; "Pro- 
bes aliter." 

Second Argument, 

Opponens. 

1. Si doctrina de redemptione humana hoc funda- 
mento nitatur, scilicet, necesse fuisse ut Divinse justi- 
tiaB pro hominum peccatis satisfieret, cadit qusestio. 

* The conditional syllogisms of which this objection 
consists, correspond with the three propositions of a regular 
categorical syllogism, and it may be viewed as CeZarenf with 
the premises transposed ; '' Christ was the paschal lamb ; 
the paschal lamb was not a piacular sacrifice ; therefore 
Christ was not a piacular sacrifice." 

Ce- The paschal lamb was not a piacular sacrifice ; 

-la- Christ was the paschal lamb ; therefore 

-rent. Christ was not a piacular sacrifice. 
In the major proposition, the middle term (the paschal 
lamb) is used in its primary and literal sense ; in the minor 
proposition, in its secondary and metaphorical sense. It is 
not, therefore, fairly compared with the terms of the con- 
clusion or question. This is, " Fallacia aequivocationis.*' 
After all, the truth of the msgor proposition admits of 
doubt. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 113 

Sed doctrina de redemptione humana hoc funda- 
mento nititar ; 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 

2. Si, ut hoc efficeretur, pcense peccatis humanis 
dehits in Christum translate fuerint,— unum inter 
omnes a peccati labe pumm, valet consequentia. 

Sed, at hoc efficeretur, &c. 
Ergo yalet consequential 

Provoco ad Esais cap. 53t*wn. com. 6^. et ad priorem 
Petri Epistolam, cap.S^o* com. 24^* 

3. Si vero justitise proprium sit, po^nas non nisi de 
nocentibus exigere, yalent consequentia et argumen- 
tum. 

Sed justitise proprium est, &c. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum.* 

* The punishment of the innocent for the guilty, says 
the opponent, being repugnant to the principles of justice, 
could not have satisfied Divine justice for the sins of men. 
The innocence and vicarious punishment of Christ being 
supposed to be conceded, the objection^ stated in form, will 
appear thus : 

Ce- What is irreconcileable with justice, cannot sa- 
tisfy Divine justice. 

-la- To inflict the punishment of guilt on the innocent, 
is irreconcileable with justice ; therefore 

-rent. It could not satisfy Divine justice. 

Under the moral government which Grod exercises here, 
the innocent very frequently suffer for the guilty. If, then, 
we allow the moral government and attributes of God, vicar 
nous punishment and the Divine justice will no longer be 

K 



1 14 APPENDIX. 

Responsum. 

£ Sacris Scripturis hoc unum colligendum est de re- 
dcmptionc humana; scilicet Cbiisti mortem hunc 
cffectum habuisse, ut homines a peccati poena libe- 
raret. Quod rationi satis consentaneum est. Vi- 
demus enim reram naturam a Diyino Opifice et Reo- 
tore ita constitutam, ut plurima nobis contingant bene- 
ficiaaliorum ope, qui ssepe incommoda Yolentes subeunt, 
in id tantum ut nos adjuvent. Nihil igitur objici potest 
contra doctrinam de redemptione humana in Sacris 
Scripturis traditam, quod non pari jure contra quoti- 
dianum rcrum humanarum et DivintB providentis 
ordinem adhibeatur. 



Third Argument. 

1. Si Divus Paulus doceat coenam Dominicam idem 
esse Christianis quod epulae sacrificales turn Judseis 
tum Ethnicis, cadit qusestio. 

Sed Divus Paulus docet, &c. 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 
Provoco ad 1 Cor. x. 16 — ^21. 

2. Si igitur coena Domini sit epulum ex oblatis, valet 
consequentia. 

Sed coena Domini est, &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

considered incompatible. The minor premiss of the cate- 
gorical syllogism will be denied, in this case, to he uni- 
versally true. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 115 

3. Si igitiu' oblatio Christi'sffipius repetatur, valent 
consequentia et argumentum. 
Sed oblatio Christi, &c. 
Ergo valeut consequentia et argumentum.^ 

* This argument may be stated categoricallyi thus, in 
three syllogisms. 

1. 

Bar- What a sacrificial feast was to the Jews and Hea- 
thens, is what the Lord's Supper is to Christians ; 

-ba- A feast upon propitiatory offerings is what a sacrifi- 
cial feast was to the Jews and Heathens ; there- 
fore 

-ra* A feast upon propitiatory ofiericgs is what the Lord's 
Supper is to Christians. 

2. 

Bar- A Christian propitiatory offering is the oblation of 
Christ ; 

-ba- What takes place in the Lord's Supper is a Chris- 
tian propitiatory offering ; therefore 

-ra. What takes place in the Lord's Supper, is the obla- 
tion of Christ 

3. 

Bar- What takes place in the Lord's Supper is frequently 

repeated ; 
-ba- The propitiatory oblation of Christ is what takes 

place in the Lord's Supper ; therefore 
-ra. It is frequently repeated. 

. The middle term of the first syllogism is here taken in 
different senses in the major and minor premiss. In the 
major premiss, it means what a sacrificial feast was, with 
regard to one particular^ (viz. communion with the Deity,) 

k2 



116 APPENDIX. 

Responsdm. 

Non docet Paulas coenam Dominicain prorsus idem 
esse Chiistianis qnod Judseis atque Ethnicis Epulae 
sacrificales. Affirmat quandam esse similitudinemi et 
Mc tantum parte, quod insit utrique sacrificandain 
communicatio cum numine. Nee compaiatio arctius 
premenda est. Apostolus non affirmat Christianos, in 
Euchanstia celebranda, et Ethnicos, in Epulis sacrifi- 
calibus, in hoc similiter agere, quod oblatis vescantur ; 
sed quod et Christiani vero cum Deo, et Ethnici cum 
idolis suis, reUgiosam communicationem instituant. 

Fourth Argument 

This and the following argument are against 
the second question, according to the rules for 
keeping a first opponency. 

Contra Secundam* 

1. Si fides lustificationem antecedat, cadit qusestio. 
Sed fides justificationem antecedit; 

Ergo cadit qusestio. 

2. Si opera qualiacunque ante justificationem per- 
acta rationem peccati habeant, valet consequentia. 

and thus, in that particular, it agprees with the major term ; 
in the minor premiss, it is taken simply, and thus, in 
another particular, (viz. its propitiatory character,) it agrees 
with the minor term. It is not, therefore, &irly compared 
with the terms of the conclusion. This may be referred to 
''Fallacia k dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter." 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 117 

Sed opera qualiacunque, Sec, 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

3. Si igitur fides qua justificationem consequimur, 
existere possitabonis operibus diguncta, valent conse- 
quentia et argumentum. 

Sed fides qua, 6cc. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum.^ 

* The opponent don tends, that as justifying faith pre- 
cedes justification, and all works before justification are 
sinful, therefore justifying faith may eidst apart from good 
works. The formal statement of this argument requires 
four categorical syllogisms. 

1. 

Ce- Works that have in them the nature of sin are not 

good works ; 
-la- All works done before justification have in them 

the nature of sin ; therefore 
-rent. No works done before justification are good works. 

2. 

Bar- Whatever is preceded by justification is preceded 

by what precedes justification ; 
-ba- Good works are preceded by justification ; therefore 
•ra. They are preceded by what precedes justification. 

3. 

Bar- What precedes justification precedes good works. 

(EquipoUent to the conclusion of the UuU) 
-ba- Faith precedes justification ; therefore 
-ra. It precedes good works. 



118 APPENDIX. 

Responsum. 

Cogitatione sola distingui possunt fides et opera 
bona. Fides fons est, opera bona sunt fluenta ; fides 
causa, opera bona effectus. Simul ac fides existat, 
justificatio incipit, nuUaque mora interposita, subse- 
quuntur opera bona. Ut sol igitur ante radios solares, 
ita fides ante opera bona ; sed fide existente, opera 
bona proveniant necesse est. Neque magis di^ungi 
possunt a fide, quam lux a sole. 

Fifth Argument, 

1. Si operanti inerces tribuatur non ex gratia sed 
ex debito, cadit qusBstio. 
Sed operanti merces, &c. 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 
Provoco ad Rom. iv. 4. 

4. 

Bar- Whatever precedes good works is distinct from 

them ; 
-ba- Justifying faith precedes good works ; therefore 
-ra. It is distinct from them. 

Faith may be separated from good works only in thought. 
Faith is the fountain-head ; good works, the streams that 
ffow from it. Faith is the cause ; good works, the e^Eect. 
As soon as there is faith, justification begins, and good 
works immediately follow^ As, therefore, the sun must 
hare existed before the sunbeams, so faith must be previous 
to good works. But if there be faith, good works are of 
necessity produced ; nor can they any more be separated 
from faith, than light can be parted from the sun. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 119 

2. Si vero justificatio, quam perfidem consequimur, 
sit ex gratia, valet consequentia. 

Sed justificatio, &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 
Provoco ad Rom. iv. 6. 

3. Si igitur opera bona, cum ea, quajustificamur, 
fide nihil commune habeant, valent consequentia et 
argumentum. 

Sed opera bona, Sec. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentumu^ 



* The reward of him who works, says the opponent, is 
shewn in Scripture to be not of ^race, but of debt. But 
our reward, viz. Justification by faith, is proved by Scrip- 
ture to be of grace ; therefore it cannot be the reward of 
him who works, nor is justifying faith connected with good 
works. This argument, in order to be formally stated, re- 
quires, like the last, four categorical syllogisms. 

1. 

Ce- ' That which is of debt is not of grace ; 

-la- The reward of him who works is of debt ; therefore 

-rent. It is not of grace. 

2. 

Ce- What is of grace, is not the reward of him who 

works. 
(Converse of the conclusion of the last syllogism, E,) 
-la- Justification by faith is of grace ; therefore 
-rent It is not the reward of him who works. 



120 APPENDIX. 

Responsum. 

Fatendum est, justificationem nostram Divina ex 
gratia sdmnmodo concessam esse ; non autem sequi- 

3. 

Ce- What is not the reward of him who works, has no 

connexion with good works ; 

Pnikate, 

-la- Justification by faith is ) not-the-reward-of-him- 

who-works ; I therefore 
•rent. It has no connexion with good works. 

4. 

Ce- 7*he instnimental cause of justification has no 
more connexion with good works, than justifica- 
tion itself has; 

la- Justifying faith is the instrumental cause of justi- 
fication; therefore 

-rent It has no more connexion with good works than 
justification itself has. 

The major proposition of the third syllogism is unduly 
assumed. That which is not the reward of works may yet 
have connexion with them in other rttpeds. Though jus- 
tification is a favour, not a reward of works, yet works may 
be required as a conditUm of justification; and in this re- 
spect they may be inseparably connected. This circum- 
stance does not diminish our debt of gratitude to Grod, to 
whose grace, as the efficient cause, all spiritual blessings are 
ascribable. 

They who object to call good works, ''Conditions of 
salvation," may term them, the necessary fruits of the faith 
whereby we obtain salvation ; although salvation itself must 
be accounted a gratuitous benefit of God. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 121 

tur, licet bona opera pro causa justificationis non ha- 
benda sint, nihil esse inter fidem et bona opera com- 
mune. Fieri enim potest, quod Sacrae Scriptune revera 
decent, ut opera bona sint conditiones salutis, quam 
tamen Diyinse gratis, quasi causae efficienti,acceptam 
referre debemus. 

Si nolis opera bona conditiones salutis appellari, tunc 
ea licet appelles, fructus necessaries fidei illius qua 
salutem consequimur ; cum tamen salus ipsa sit Dei 
beneficium gratuitum. 

The opponent^ when his last argument has been 
answered by the respondent, descends from the 
rostrum upon the moderator thus dismissing him ; 
" Satis disputasti." 



ACTS IN THE CIVIL LAW. 

Before keeping an Act in the Civil Law, the 
student submits, to the Regius Professor in that 
faculty, a few questions, that he may ^x on one of 
them as a fit subject for a Lalan thesis.*^ 

• 

* A candidate for the degree of LL.B. must submit to 
the Professor the question he means to write upon, at least 
one term before the act is kept A candidate for the de- 
gree of LL.D. must do the same at least two terms pre- 
viously to his act. 



122 APPENDIX. 

A second question is also chosen by the professor 
exclusively, who reads a Determination on it, when 
the disputation is finished. 

On the day of the exercise, the respondent 
having occupied his rostrum, and the professor 
being seated, the Father of the respondent's college 
directs him to begin : " Domine respondens, 
agas." 

The following is a copy of the printed questions proposed 
hy the Professor in his examination paper of the present 
year. Other questions in MS. are also given to each stu- 
dent, according to the nature of the subjects proposed for 
discussion in the Schools. 

1. Explain the nature and utility of syllogisms in general. 

2. Explain the nature of the syllogisms used in the law 
schools. 

3. State an instance of a Dilemma in favour of your first 
question from 

4. Prove your first question to be true by Induction from 

5. Form an argument in two hypothetical syllogisms, in 
favour of your first question, from 

6. - Form, in Latin, an argument in three hypothetical syl- 
logisms, against your first question, from 

7. Form, in Latin, an argument against your second 
question, in three hypothetical syllogisms, from 

Let the minor of the second syllogism be false. 

8. Make a short statement, in English, of your first 
question. 

9. Make a short statement, in LiUiny of your second 
question. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 123 

The respondent then proposes the questions^ 
placing that first on which his thesis is written. 

Except when an opponency is kept for a Doctor's 
degree, the Regius Professor is himself both oppo- 
nent and moderator. He produces as many argu- 
ments against each question as he thinks proper, 
in the form of syllogism already explained. 

It is the office of the respondent (as in the Divi- 
nity School) to defend each question by an appro- 
priate answer to the objections adduced by the op- 
ponent. 

If the answer of the respondent be satisfactory to 
the professor, he signifies his approbation, and pro- 
ceeds, in the capacity of opponent, to propose his 
next argument. But if the answer of the respon- 
dent be eiToneous or inconclusive, the professor 
(departing for the time from the character of op- 
ponent) points out to the respondent-the true solu- 
tion of the difficulty : and this he does, not only 
for the advantage of the respondent but, for the in- 
struction of the auditors frequenting the law-school, 
the majority of whom attend there expressly with 
a view to prepare themselves for responding in a 
disputation. 



124 APPENDIX. 

In the course of the act, the professor, at hh 
discretion, tries the ahility of the respondent, by in- 
terrogatories on such subjects 4s are connected with 
the question. 

The following is a specimen of the nature of the 
questions discussed, and of the manner of arguing 
against them. The student may easily collect, from 
the references,* the nature and force of the argu- 

QtuBstiones sunt: 

1. Decemviri creditorihus in debitores jus viUsatque 
necisnon dederunt. 

2. Romani primos ChrisHanos non ideb perseeuti 
sunty quia ccetus noctumos celebrahanL 

Contra priorem, 

1. Si in lege Decemvirali de debitore, poena caj^tis 
uon nisi de ultimo supplicio est accipienda, cadit 
quaestio. 

Sed in lege Decemvirali, 6cc. 
Ergo cadit quffistio. 

2. Si dominis in servos jus erat vit® atque necis, 
valet minor. 

¦ 

* A copy of the Corpus Juris Civilis, is placed on the 
rostrum of the respondent, and another on that of the 
opponent. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 125 

Sed dominis in servos, Sec, 
Ergo valet minor. 

3. Si ffiris convicti jure Decemvirali in servitutem 
redigebantor, valent consequentia et argumentum. 
Sed seris convicti, Sec. 
Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 

The opponent then refers the respondent to the 
following authorities in confirmation of his argu- 
ment, and it is the duty of the respondent to make 

his answer. 

Ins. 1 . 8. 1 . 
D. 1.5.5. 
Matt. 18. 25. 
Liv. Hist. 6. 14. 

Contra alteram, 

1. Si causa persecutionum quibus primi Christiani 
vexabantur, aut ab ipsa Christi religione aut ex 
quadam ratione civili petenda est, cadit qusestio. 

Sed causa persecutionum, &c. 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 

2. Si Romani omnibus fere gentibus suam religio- 
nem et suos ritus celebrare permitterent, valet conse- 
quentia. 

Sed Romani, &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

3. Si igitur necesse est ut qusedam ratio civilis eos 
excitaret ad Christianos vexandos, valet consequentia. 

Sed necesse est ut, Sec, 
Ergo valet consequentia. 



126 APPENDIX. 

4. Si ista ratio fuit metus ne quid detrimenti caperet 
respublica, valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Sed ista ratio fait, &c. 

Ergo Talent consequentia et argumentum. 

Tac. Annal. 1, 73. 

zii. Tab. 

Leg* Gab. 

SCT Marc. 

D. 47, 22, 1. 

D. 47, 11,2. 

In the progress of this argument, the opponent 
might> if occasion required, refer to the sacred 
Scripture, as well as to the authorities above men- 
tioned. 

The respondent's answer will be suggested partly 
from his own interpretation of these authorities 
cited by the opponent, and partly from his own 
view of the question in general. 



ACTS IN MEDICINE. 



A medical thesis may be composed on any prac- 
tical, physiological, or pathological question. It 
must be of such a length as not to consume more 
than half-an-hour in the delivery. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 127 

For the degree of M. B. the question must be 
submitted to the professor, for his approval, six 
weeks before the act is kept; and, for the degree of 
M. D., three months before. 

The respondent has to defend two questions, of 
which one is appointed exclusively by the professoi*; 
as in the case of a Divinity Act. 

The professor does not restrict the opponent from 
extending the number of his arguments, if he 
pleases ; but he must not produce fewer than five 
in all ; i. e, three against the first question, and two 
against the second. Each of these arguments may 
consist of two, three, or four syllogisms. 

There is but one opponent ; and if the act be 
kept for a Doctor's degree, the opponent is most 
frequently the professor himself. 

The forms of keeping an act in Medicine, cor- 
respond with those observed in keeping an act in 
the civil law. 

In a medical disputation, it does not always 
happen that the respondent maintains the position 
which the moderator holds to be true. The truth 
may appear on the opponent s side, and the decision 
be accordingly given in his favour. The following, 
however, are specimens in which the position main- 
tained is true, and the objections fallacious. 



128 APPENDIX. 

Qtusstiones sunt: 

1. VeruBsectio primum et pracipuwn remedium est 
Enteritidis, 

2. Bills i sanguine venoso secemitur, 

Opponens. 
Contra priorem, 

1. Si intestinoram inflammatio ab alvo diu astricta 
et suppressa ssepe oriatur, cadit qusBStio. 

Sed intestinoram Sec, sspe oritur ; 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 

Respondens. 

Concedo intestinoram inflammationem cum aire diu 
astricta ssepius conjunctam esse, et aliquando ex hac 
origine exortam. 

Opponens. 

2. Si alvum solvere et purgare primum et prscipuum 
sit higus mali remedium, valet consequentia. 

Sed alvum solvere, &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

Respondens. 

Concedo quoque maximi esse moment! ut alvus as- 
stricta solvatur. 

Opponens. 

3. Si igitur intestinoram inflanmiatio ab alvo 
astricta orta, optime curetur medicamentispurgantibus, 
valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Sed intestinoram inflammatio, &c. 
Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 129 

Respondens. 

In hoc morbo res maximi momenti est ut depellatur 
inflammatio, id quod optimd per vensBsectionem 
efficitur. Animadvertendum quoque medicamenta 
purgantia sspe yim suam non exerere, nisi post de- 
tractionem sanguinis. 

Opponens. 
Contra alteram. 

1. Si in omni alia glandula corporis, prsDterquam 
hepate, secretio humoris fiat e sanguine arterioso, 
cadit qusestio. 

Sed in omni &c. 
Ergo cadit qusestio. 

Respondens. 
Concede minorem et nego consequentiam. 

Opponens. 

2. Si in rebus obscuris investigandis confidere 
necesse sit comparationi similitudinis vel analogise, 
Yalet consequentia. 

Sed in rebus obscuris &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

Respondens. 
Concede minorem &c. 

Opponens. 

3. Si igitur ab hac comparatione concludendum 
sit, ut bilis d sanguine arterioso secematur, valent 
consequentia et argumentum. 

Sed ab hac comparatione &c. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 



130 APPENDIX. 

Respondens. 

Argumento domini opponentis refragatui quidem 
analogia, quum jecori, quod bilem seceniit, sanguis 
veuosus suppeditetur, (ex Vena Portarum scilicet,) 
simili modo quo caeteris glandulis sanguis arteriosus, 
ex arteriis suis. 



ACTS IN THE SCHOOL OF ARTS. 

The Preliminaries of these Acts are, of necessity, 
well known to all who are concerned in keeping 
them. No one can oppose or respond in the School 
of Alls, till he has resided seven Terms in the 
University. A paiticular introduction to the 
following questions would, therefore, be superflu- 
ous. 

Quastiones sunt: 

1. RectS statuit Newtonus in noTid suA sectione lihri 
primi. 

2. RectS sese habent Principia Calculi turn Differen- 
Halis turn Integralis, 

3. Recti stfltuit Paleius de Virtute, 

Contra primam. 

1. Si cum spiralis reciproca in antecedentia revel- 
vatur eadem velocitate angulari qua corpus in conse- 
quentia movetur, orbita in fixe spatio descripta fiat 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATION. 131 

linea recta in qua corpus motu uniformi ad centrum 
accedit, cadit qusBstio. 

Sed cum &c. **** fit &c. *** accedit ; 

Ergo cadit qusDstio. 

2. Si cum vis in spirali reciproca varietur ~, et 
virium differentia in orbita quiescente et in orbita in 
fixo spatio descripta varietur similiter ^, consequens 
sit totam vim in orbita in fixo spatio descripta variari 
—-, valet consequentia. 

Sed cum vis, &c. * * * * consequens est &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

3. Si vero cum vis varietur ^, corpus nequeat in 
recta linea ad centrum descendere motu uniformi, 
valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Sed cum &c. * * * * nequit &c. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Respgnsum. 

Differentia virium centripetarum et centrifugarum 
in orbita in fixo spatio descripta, eadem est ac in orbita 
quiescente. Sed in spirali reciproca vires centripeta 
et centrifuga squales sunt. Ergo in recta linea quae in 
fixo spatio describitur sequales sunt ; ideoque corpus 
nulla vi impulsum velocitate prima ad centruni 
uniformiter accedit. 

The first opponent produces two other similar 
arguments against the first question. 

Contra sectmdam. 

1. Si inter limites x=a, x=b f --^ haX hJ. ^^ ca- 
dit quaestio. 



a« — b* 



132 APPENDIX. 

Sed inter liiuites &c. 
Ergo cadit queestio. 

2. Si inter eosdem limites / a?*"" dx fiat 

valet consequentia. 
Sed inter &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

/^x « a« — ft* 1 — I 
— fiat — — ,seu— J— , seu 

0, valent consequentia et argumentum. 
Sed cum &c. 
Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Responsum. 



a" = 1 -f-A. I. a. n-\ — J-~-* n'-|-&c. 
ft«=l-f.A./.ft.«+*^-^ 'n»+&c. 
.*. a* — ft"= < A. La — A. /. ft > . n-f &c. 

^•.— p = ^ AX a — A. /.ft J H J — 5 »+&c. 

. • . — = A. *. fl— A. /. ft. 

o 

=:A. /. I 

Ergo valor fractionis cum n=.o non evanescit, 



n 
a. 



sed fit A. L t ideoque nulla discrepantia existit. 

The first opponent produces one other similar 
argument against this question. 



ON ACADEMICAL DISPUTATIO* . 133 

Contra tertiam. 

1. Si Dei voluntas sit virtutis regula, cadit quffistio. 
Sed Dei voluntas est, &c. 

Ergo cadit qusestio. 

2. Si Dei voluntas ideo nos astringat quia prsemia 
paenaeque vitse futurae ex Dei arbitrio pendent, valet 
consequentia. 

Sed Dei voluntas &c. 
Ergo valet consequentia. 

3. Si igitur, posito quod angelorum malorum prin- 
ceps summo rerum imperio potitus esset, voluntas 
ejus nos pari jure astringeret, valent consequentia et 
argumentum. 

Sed, posito quod &c. 

Ergo valent consequentia et argumentum. 

Responsum. 

Ut alia taceam, Deus homines felices vult ; ange- 
lorum malorum princeps, miseros ; huic utresistamus, 
illi ut obediamus, ratio et natura suadent. Priusquam 
angelorum malorum princeps hominum felicitatem 
velle possit, naturam suam se exuat necesse est. 

Against the third question one argument only 
is produced. 



FINIS. 



r 



? - 



HENRY G. BOHN, 

MOW OP 

No. 4, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, 

HAS JUST PUBLISHED 

A CATALOGUE 

OF 

A VERY CHOICE COLLECTION OF BOOKS, 

ENGLISH AND FOREIGN, 

Partly selected during an extensive tour on the Conti- 
nent, partly from fine private libraries in this country: 
the whole oflfered at very moderate prices. The 
Catalogue comprehends above 4,000 articles of the 
first quality, in every department of literature^ 
especially the fine arts, divinity, classics, and rare 
books, a great portion of them in rich old morocco 
bindings by De Rome, Desseuil, and Padeloup. 
Among the black letter and Aldine editions are many 
that have never before been heard of, and the Spanish 
collection is the best in this country. The price of the 
catalogue is 3s., but gentlemen sending their names, 
and the country trade applying free of postage, may 
obtain it gratis. It is particularly requested that the 
address be observed. 