This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



¦ph'O So4r.\3 



f^arbartr College l.it)rars 




FROM THE BEqUEST OF 

JAMES WALKER, D.D., LL.D. 

(Class of X814) 

FORMER PRESIDENT OF HARVARD COLLEGE 



' Preference being given to works in the 
InteUectual and Moral Sciences*' 



r 



Q 



ESSAY 



TOWAADg 



AN EASY AND USEFUL 

SYSTEM OF LOGIC. 



BY ROBERT JMLAKEY, 

AUTHOE OF " THE HISTOEY OV MOEAL SCIENCE>" &C. 



^LONDON: 
JAMES DUNCAN, 37, PATERNOSTER ROW; 

BELL ANB BEADFDTB, WILLIAM WBYTB AND CO., 

WAU6H AND INNEB, AND ADAM AND CHAELBB BLACK, EDINBUEGH ; 

AND M. OOLS, GLASGOW. 

MDCCCXKZIV. 



fh.lUOMI.I'i 



BBuria SEP 6 1911 



Printed by A. Baifoor and Ca. Niddry Street, Edinburgh. 



TO THE 



RIGHT HON. LORD VISCOUNT MORPETH, M.P. 



THIS TREATISE ON LOGIC 



IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, 



BY HIS 



LORDSHIP S MOST HUMBLE AND 



OBEDIENT SERVANT, 



THE AUTHOR. 



Aw^ 



PREFACE. 



I HAVE ventured to offer this small work to the 
public with the view of accomplishing two objects ; 
first, to endeavour to impress upon the reader's at- 
tention the constituted differences of evidence which 
exist in the various departments of human know- 
ledge, to which the higher kinds of reasoning are ap- 
plied ; and, secondly, to avoid as much as possible 
those crabbed and technical words and phrases, so 
profusely scattered over most of our elementary as 
well as popular treatises on Logic. 

The first object, that of pointing out the differ- 
ences in the evidence on which various subjects rest, 
must be allowed by all to be an important one. 
Many errors in judgment, in matters of great interest 
to mankind, take their rise from vague and incorrect 
notions as to the nature of the subjects which come 
under the mind**s contemplation. And in regard to 
the constant use of antiquated terms, in works which 
professedly aim at the strengthening and guiding of 



VI PREFACE. 

the understanding, we are fairly entitled to conclude 
that such terms ought to be limited to the smallest 
possible number, to prevent a gloomy and myste- 
rious air being given to that, which, in other respects, 
might be considered as both pleasant and perspi- 
cuous. 

I have avoided, as far as possible, all controversial 
matter. When a subject on which there still exists 
a diversity of opinion has crossed the path of my 
inquiries, I have unqualifiedly adopted the principles 
of one party ; not with the most distant idea of pro- 
nouncing a dogmatical verdict on the question at 
issue, but solely from the wish to prevent the reader'*s 
attention firom being drawn to topics which have only 
a remote connexion with the general principles of 
reasoning. 

The late Professor Stewart remarks, that a com- 
prehensive and rational system of logic has never yet 
made its appearance. If this opinion be correct, it 
would be the height of presumption in me to hope 
that I had been able to accomplish so great an under- 
taking. But if my views on this subject should have 
the efiect, even in the smallest degree, of directing 
the minds of those who possess more knowledge and 
talents than I have, to cultivate with care and as- 
siduity this branch of philosophy, I shall consider 
myself amply rewarded for my labour. 

Morpeth, Sth April 1834. 



CONTENTS. 



PART L 



CHAPTER I. 

Page 

Preliminary Observations .... 1 



CHAPTER II. 

On the Objects of a Rational Sjstem of Logic, and 
to what Departments of Knowledge it can be 
with propriety Applied IQ 



CHAPTER III. 

On the Nature of Mathematical Evidence, and its 
Influence when applied to other branches of 
Knowledge ; with a few Remarks on the Evi- 
dence of Natural Philosophy ... 25 



Vlll CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Pag« 

On the Mind 48 



CHAPTER V. 
On Morals 58 

CHAPTER VI. 
On Political Philosophy 61 

CHAPTER VII. 

On Religion — Natural and Revealed . . 66 

CHAPTER VIII. 

General Remarks on the Contents of the Preceding 
Chapters , . 75 



CONTENTS. ^ 



PART II. 



CHAPTER I. 

On AnalysiSj-and Synthesis o> Induction . . 81 



CHAPTER n. 
On Analogy . • . • • i . 93 

CHAPTER m. 
On Probable ETidence ..... 107 

CHAPTER IV. 

On Testimony IW 

CHAPTER V. 
On Language 1^4 

CHAPTER VI. 

General Remarks on the Fire Preceding Chapters 127 



X 


CONTBNT^ 






PART III. 






CHAPTER I. 


m 


On SyllogisDas 




P««e 

133 



CHAPTER II. 

On Technical Phrases in the Art of Logic . 159 

CHAPTER III. 

Miscellaneous Hints for the GoTemment and Im- 
prorement of the Understanding . . 162 



PART I. 



LOGIC. 



CHAPTER I. 

PBELtMINART OBSttBVA'TlONS. 

The science of Logic is commonlj defined to be the 
art of thinking correctly, or of making a proper use 
of our reasoning faculties, in our inquiries after truth ; 
and in pursuing a judicious plan of communicating 
that truth to others. 

This science, like some others, grounded upon 
human nature, has been greatly abused and misap- 
plied from its legitimate purposes. For a long pe- 
riod it was employed merely as an instrument for in- 
tellectual wrangling, and trifling disputation; for 

B 



S PHELIMINABT OBSEBVATtONS^ , 

the discussion of empty subtleties, rather than the 
development of useful truths. To be a logician in 
former times, was only synonymous with being a vain 
mental trifler ; an adept in the art of cavilling upon 
words; one, in j&ct, who disguised his own real 
ignorance under the garb of verbal equivocation. 
These times have, however, happily passed away, 
though not without leaving seme pernicious conse- 
quences behind them. Within this last century, 
logic has, in a great degree, been disengaged from the 
jargon of the schools, and reduced to a compara- 
tively clear and iiiteliigible system ; yet, notwith^ 
standing this, it has not altogether redeemed its cha- 
racter from &nner reproaches, but is still considerai 
by many, ev^i of those who cultivate philosophy and 
ge&»«l Jit^xatur^ as a science of doubtful utility, 
«nd> if «tttdied at all^ it is only in compliance wi|h 
the regularly established and prescribed routine of 
aoademieal education. 

In attentivelj perusii^ the different treatises on 
l^c, which have appeared m modem times, the 
jwtder moawt &il to have noticed the almost total 
wmnt «f any object in ceuunoB WMOgst them ; or 



XneifiLlMlNART OB88EVATION9. 3 

lather the wtat of proper explanations as to the 
art of reasoning) and the most usefiil rules fer 
making us acquainted with it. In method, also, 
these works are remarkably deficient ; and there are 
seaieely any rules that are univerBally received or re^ 
oognised. Logic is regarded by one writer as con-^ 
sisting in one thing, and by another it is r^arded 
as consisting principally of a different thing. Thus, 
the student is bandied about fitmi one system to an- 
other, and from one set of rules and principles to an*- 
other, till his attention becomes distracted, and instead 
of learning something which will prove useM to him 
in his future progress in knowledge, he is induced to 
pre up the subject as both fiitiguing and unpro- 
fitable.* 

There seem to be two principal causes which ren« 
der modem systems of logic both tiresome and com- 
paratively useless ; and these are, first, the employ- 
ment of a vast number of the (dd scholastic terms 
and phrases, derived from logicians of former times, 
which throw over the art such an air of difficulty 
and perplexity, that the reader, before he has well 
entered upon the study of his sutiject, is worn out by 



m FHKLIMINARY OBSEBVATIOM. 

t^e mere pressure of uncouth words, and is glad to 
make his retreat from such an irksome task with all 
possible expedition. The second cause, and one 
which is by far the most important, is, that our com^ 
mon books of logic may be said rather to treat of meta- 
physical systems than to unfold those rules, precepts^ 
and suggestions, which are instrumental in directing 
the judgment to right conclusions on the various im*- 
portant subjects with which it is necessary that man 
should be well acquainted. The generality of the 
books here alluded to, have been founded upon the 
principle, that before we could exercise our reasoning 
powers with energy and eflTect, before we could form 
right notions, and give method and consistency to our 
conceptions, it was absolutely necessary that we should 
be expert metaphysicians, should be acquainted with 
all the mental speculations of the day, and intimately 
and familiarly conversant with the anatomy and physi* 
ology of our own minds. But this, I apprehend, is a 
radical error in our common treatises on logic. The 
fact is too generally overlooked, that man comes iTorth 
from the hand of his Creator a reasoning being ; that 
lie learns to lay down premises, make illustrations, «nd 



PRELIMINARY OB8BRrATIOI9B. 5 

draw conclusions, much in the same manner, and 
with the same unerring certainty and readiness, as he 
learns to walk, to run, and to speak. The reasoning 
faculty of man is very early developed ; and those 
who have had opportunities of noticing the mental 
habits of children, must have frequently observed 
that they reason, and very sagaciously and cogently 
too, at a very early period of their lives ; even, in 
many cases, before they can articulate plainly a single 
word. 

But, besides the consideration that the faculty of 
reason discovers itself at a very early period of our 
lives, we have also another fact completely at variance 
with the position, that a minute and accurate analy- 
ds of our mental conceptions and faculties is highly 
necessary towards making us ready and forcible ge- 
neral reasoners; and the fact is this, that history 
teaches us, that those who have been most dis- 
tinguished for their general knowledge, and for the 
means of applying that knowledge to the common 
purposes of life, have had little or no acquaintance 
with metaphysics, or what is usually denominated 
** the philosophy of mind," The opinion that the 



6 PBBIilMIKARY OBS£RVATIOH0. 

impoitance of metaphysical knowledge, as an instrnir 
ment of general reasoning, .has been greatly over- 
rated in our common treatises on logic, does not, I 
think, rest upon history alone, for it is fully and 
amply confirmed by daily observation. We invari- 
ably find, that where mental philosophy is exdu- 
sively cultivated, the general powers of reasoning are 
enfeebled, and what is gained in subtlety is lost in 
strength. No man appears more unfit for argumen- 
tative discussion on the common and every-day topies 
which engage the attention of men of the world, than 
the profound thinker, or the man of mental abstrae* 
tion : and this is perfectly agreeable to the nature of 
things ; for a man who is daily and hourly observing 
the fleeting objects of his own consciousness, and 
whose sole pleasure it is to be conversant with those 
evanescent shades of difference which subast between 
the various powers and fiiculties of his own mind>-~- 
becomes unfit, by reason of the constant use of subtle 
and minute detail, to grasp, upon the spur of the 
moment, the great and leading lieatures of any inte* 
resting question, or to make a deep and lasting im- 
pression upon the minds of others by a powerful dis- 



FBELIHIKABT OBSEBVATIOI^. ^ 

play of argumentative skill. His power of mental 
analysis is too refined for objects of a formidable and 
gigantic nature ; and when he comes out into com- 
mon life to measure his strength with the rustic 
minds around him, be too often finds, to his greet 
mortification, that he is worsted and driven from the 
field by the athletic vigour of those who know no- 
thing but what nature has taught them, about the 
abstract nature of mind, or the recondite rules of 
mental philosophy. 

It is not, however, meant by these remarks to 
dirow the slightest discredit on the science of mind, 
considered merely as a science ; but to show that its 
impcNtance in leading to a habit of general and com- 
prehensive reasoning has been greatly overrated. It 
may justly be conceded, that this science, like many 
other branches of useful knowledge, especially sub- 
jects which relate to human nature, imparts addi- 
tional strength to our reasoning powers, only how- 
ever in the way of increasing our stock of informa- 
tion, and creating a habit of close thinking. But 
all real knowledge is more or less instrumental 
in the aecomplisliment of this purpose ; and there 



8 PBBLIWINARY OBSEBVATION«« 

does not seem to be the slightest foundation for gii^ 
ing any preference on this account td^ the philosophy 
of mind above many other branches of knowledge. 
A man may observe rules of diet and regimen calcu- 
lated to preserve his health and increase his strength ; 
he may even increase the latter to a more than usual 
degree, by the exercise of particular athletic games, 
without having any accurate knowledge of the ana- 
tomy or physiology of his frame ; and, in like 
manner, I conceive a man may learn to reason very 
cogently and correctly without being able to define 
what is meant by perception, abstraction, simple and 
complex ideas, mixed modes, and many other sub- 
jects commonly treated of by writers on the human 
mind. 

I have been led to make these few remarks upon 
the influence of an acquaintance with mental science 
on our general principles of reasoning, in consequence 
of an opinion widely circulated by the late Professor 
Stewart, and invested with all that authority which his 
great reputation could give it, that it was only from a 
successful cultivation of our own minds that we could 
ever hope to rear a useful and solid system of logic. 



PBrBLIMtNARY OBSKBVATIOKS: 9 

In the PreKminarjf Dissertation to his Philosophical 
Essays, he says, '^ in order to prepare the way for a 
just and comprehensive system of logic, a previous 
survey of our nature, as one great whole, is indispen- 
sably requisite/^ With all due deference to a writer 
so distinguished and so deservedly popular, I can- 
not help being of opinion that he has, in the instance 
now quoted, and throughout various parts of his 
works, made use of language which seems to indicate- 
that he had been led to entertain by far too lofty con- 
ceptions of the precise limits and value of general 
logic. And when this high standard was viewed by 
his mind, through the medium of those enthusiastic 
feelings he had in favour of that particular branch of 
knowledge he so successfully cultivated, we ought 
not to be surprised that he has a little overshot the 
mark, in forming an estimate of the relative value of 
mental philosophy in directing and strengthening 
our principles of reasoning. 

It appears to me, therefore, that a most accurate 
and comprehensive knowledge of all the powers and 
iaculties of the mind, and of all the different modes 
and forms in which they, act and react upon one an- 



10 PJBBXiIUINABY OBSBBVATI0K9. . 

olber^ has really very little to do with the reasoning 
powers of mankind, whai applied to the general ques- 
tions of interest whiofa engage their eox^tant and 
ev^-day attention. Let any perscm look at a jue- 
taphysical question, or any general analysis of the 
powers of the mind by any t^st^oaatic writer what* 
ever, and then endeavour, if he can> to perceive the 
application of this mental knowledge to the solution 
of questions on legislation ex rdigion. He will soon 
learn that he gains little or no assistance in such un* 
dertakings from his moital philosophy^ but that be 
examines the que8ti<»8, and draws the natural conelu* 
sions from them, by a process altogether difiWent 
from that by whieh a knowledge of the anatomy of 
his inind is obtamcdL 

There is no mental quality so extensively valuable 
and so generally admired and coveted as that of readily 
apprehending truth, and avoiding error* A quick- 
ness of mental perception, a Kvely and vigoroua ima- 
gination, and a ready and retentive memoiy, are 
highly useful and ornamental qualities ; but th^ are 
individually limited in their beneficial influ^Mie. 
The reasoning power, however, is of vital use* It is 



PRELXMINART OBSESVATXONS. 1 1 

the corner-Stone oF the inteOectual buildhig, grring 
grace and strength to the whole structnre; widiout 
it all die other iaculiies at the soul would be of little 
or no utility. All the differences in die mental qua- 
lifieations of men may he traced to the Tarious de- 
grees of original strength in this quality of the mind, 
or to die suocessfbl manner in whidb it has been cul* 
tiTated and imprnved. 

£very thing, therefore, connected with the premier 
aodeflfeetive relation of this poweritf the mind, must 
he considered of paramount interest. Howeter great 
may be the aggr^ate mass of our acquired informa^ 
tion, or the number of speculative Bjsbeais with 
wlrick we have made ourselves acquainted, their real 
and intrinsic importance sinks into nothing, when 
placed in tlra balance i^ainst a sound and vigorous 
judgment. And the reason of diis must, by a mo* 
menlfs eonsideiadion, appear d>vious. A proper use 
of our reaacning powers ia neoo8sar^;and vitally etm^ 
nected with our wdlbei^ and very esdatenoe. A 
man may be ignorant of vrnxty nice and intricate 
problems in ma^ematies» ai the true theory of the 
heavenly bodies, (x the laws of dectricity ; and yet 



12 PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS. 

his happiness and comfort, as a moral, social, and 
religious being, may not suffer in consequence anj 
sensible diminution. But men in all ranks and si- 
tuations in life are obliged to be just and equitable, 
prudent and discreet, to a certain extent, in all their 
transactions ; and must ever keep a steady and watch- 
ful eye upon those numerous individual relations 
which spring out of the duties they owe to themselves 
and others. Unjust quarrels, deep-rootied wicked- 
ness, rash advice, and iH-concocted enterprises, are 
the necessary consequences of a feeble or perverted 
judgment. Hence one single error in reasoning, on 
such interesting '.subjects as we have just, alluded to, 
may be the fruitAi) source of evils and trials to ua^ 
during the whole course' of our lives. 

There are two distinct classes of mankind, embrace 
ing indeed the vast majority, for whom every system 
of logic is professedly designed. The one class com- 
prehends all those who, from natural dullness and* 
stupidity, are incapable of giving the necessary de- 
gree of attention to objects around them, so as to dis- 
cover their relations and connexions one with another. 
Nearly all the erroneous opinions and sentiments of 



PBELXMINART OB8£:aV ANIONS. 13 

the world, on matters of moment, take their rise 
from a casual and precipitate consideration of matters 
which come before them, rather than from any strong 
principle of dislike to truth itself They judge rashly 
from an obscure and confused conception of the ma- 
terials on which their minds are called upon to pass 
judgment ; and the feeble love of truth, which dwdls 
in their bosoms, is too weak to keep up a constant 
habit of rational investigation ; and on this account 
they become inclined, on all occasions, to take things 
for granted, rather than enter into a long or laborious 
investigation respecting them. The other class of 
persons may be said to fall into the opposite extreme, 
and become victims to a vulgar scepticism. Gonsi'- 
dering the discrepancies of opinion among mankind 
as an infallible sign that there is nothing certain^ 
they dliscard every kind and degree of evidence: 
Truth loses all her charms in their eyes ; and they 
either become elated with some extravagant fancy, 
which takes firm hold of their understandings, or fall 
into a state of sottish obstinacy, out of which no ra- 
tional expostulations can rouse them. 

I4 ought not to be inferred from these remarks, that 



14 PBSLItflKABT OBSRBVATIONS. 

logic will prove an infallible remedy for mental blind- 
ness and imperfection of esvery degree ; on the con- 
trary, it should careftilly be impressed upon the mind 
of the reader what logical arrangements can and 
what they cannot perform. Many run away with 
the idea, that if they only learn logic, they are then 
in a fit state to understand all matters ; and by re- 
ducing every aigument to some particular verbal 
form, they begin to oonodve they are masters of the 
subject, and are capable of enlightening others also 
in the same department of knowledge. But this, 
though a Y&ry common, isnfn^erthelessamost delusive 
and &tal enmr. All that can be done by any raticmal 
system of logic, is merely to lay down a few plain 
rules for the govemmait of the understanding, and 
leave the rest to the natural resources ot the mind it- 
self. We ought to bear in our recollection that the 
moment we envelop any subject in the «tiff and for* 
mal drapery of logical rules, we run a great risk of 
bewildering both ourselves and our readers. Persons 
in general entertain fiir too high an opinion of the 
usefulness of even the most judieious systems of logic, 
in fiicilitating the acquisition of knowledge. The 



PRSLiaflNABY ob3j:rvations. 15 

influence of li^ic, from the very nature of the thing, 
in making us more readily comprehend those topics 
to which it can with propriety be applied, is not by 
any means very considerable. It will not constitute 
a short ox royal road to the knowledge of subjects 
connected with human nature. To make ourselves 
thovougbly acquainted with any branch of know* 
ledge, there is no dispensing with well-directed and 
assiduous attenticm ; and those who cannitt bring 
these qualifications of the mind into active operation, 
will ap^y in vain to any system of logic for assists 
anee. 



16 



CHAPTER IL 

on the objects of a bational system of looic» 
a;nd to what depabtments of know ledob it 
can be with pbopbiety applied. 

It ought to be the principal aim of a. sound and use- 
ful system of logic, to point out to us, in some de- 
gree, the imperfections and obstacles which are thrown 
in our way when studying subjects connected with 
human nature ; and to show us the reason why truths 
connected with these subjects do not receive so ready 
and uniform an assent as truths of a mathematical 
nature, or truths relating to experimental philosophy. 
In doing this, we ought to ask ourselves two q[ues- 
tions ; first, to what branches of knowledge logic can 
properly be applied ? and secondly, for what end this 
art of reasoning is required in reference to such, 
branches of knowledge ? 



OBJECTS OF A> RATIONAL SYdTKM OF LOOIC. 1»7 

Now it appears to me that the art of logic is con* 
fined, by its very nature, to subjects connected with 
human nature ; or, perhaps, to speak more plainly, to 
the following four branches of knowledge, namely. 
Mental Philosophy, Moral Philosophy, the Science 
of Politics in its widest sense, including jurispru- 
dence and the art of government ; and also Religion, 
both Natural and Revealed. 

These four branches of knowledge really contain 
every thing to which the science of logic can be ap- 
plied. For it must be observed here, that these 
divisions include every thing of a debatable or argu- 
mentative nature. They give rise of themselves to 
discussion ; their general principles are all liable to 
be viewed in different lights ; and from this cause 
men are led to entertain very contrary, nay opposite 
opinions on some of those important and vitally in- 
teresting topics. 

On account of the disputable nature of these 
branches of knowledge, we need the assistance of some 
rules to enable us to come to a certain conclusion re- 
garding their truth ; and also to be able to convey 
that knowledge, in as easy and familiar a manner as 



18 ON THE OBJECTS OF 

f 

possible, to others. We call these rules bj the name of 
logic ; and we require to have them collected together, 
and applied to the four divisions of knowledge alluded 
to, for the purpose of being better acquainted witii 
them, to see on which side truth lies, apd to havci 
fixed in our minds certain general and particular ideas 
relative to the several constituent parts. We are to 
bear in mind that we want these rules, not for help* 
ing us, if that w^re possible, to see the truth of a de- 
monstraticm, the contrary of which we cannot con-* 
ceive ; but to guide our minds in tliose departments 
of knowledge, where opposite facls, and opposite ar- 
guments, clash against each other ; and where the 
mind may become perplexed and confused, by the 
weighing and consideration of such conflicting mate- 
rials as are submitted to its contemplation. It is for 
this purpose that the art of logic is wanted. 

When we consider that the nature and operations 
q£ our own mind, our moral constitution, our politi- 
cal relations, and religious duties, must ever can^ 
stitute the most important sciences among man- 
kind, we will perceive the propriety and utility of 
making ourselves thoroughly acquainted with their 



A RATIONAL ST8TKM OF LOGIC 19 

leading feaHures ; because such a general aoquain- 
tanoe is intimately connected with our vital interests 
and obligations aa social and accountable beings., 
A knowledge of the nature of man in the di&rent 
rdUtions which we have just enumerated, is not like 
the knowledge of many things else, which is sometimes 
eagerly sought after, and highly prized by the lovers 
of literature and science, as a mere specimen of spe* 
culaiive imriosity, or argumentative dexterity. But 
a knowledge of our nature is, in almost every d^ee, 
influential upon our conduct ; and, therefore, its sue* 
cessful cultivation, and proper a^lication, become 
matters of serious concern to every man« If we con- 
duct our inquiries into human nature upon a ra- 
tional plan, and with rational objects in view, we 
will find there is scarcely any part of our inward 
frames, the examination or contemplation of which 
is exclusively adapted to communicate only barq 
amusement, or intellectiml recreation, fivery thing 
here is of importance, because every thing must have 
an influence on our conduct ; and this conduct must 
again possess an influence, in a greater or less degree, 
upon the happiness and wel&re of others. No one 



20 fm THE OBJECTS OF 

earries about with him sets of opinions on the nature 
and properties of his own mind, moral obligation, 
political science, and religious principles, as mere 
mental playthings ; but these opinions must produce 
important results upon the charapter, sentiments, and 
condition, of not only the solitary individual who 
adopts them, but of many others also who Ivfe within 
^e sphere of his iniluence» 

We ought therefore to be very careful not to in- 
culcate a. notion, into the minds of the young in par- 
ticular, that they may ramble carelessly and indif- 
ferently among the various branches of study con- 
nected with human nature, as they would ramble in 
the fields of natural philosophy, just as it might 
suit their taste, or accord with their fancies. 

One of the most fruitful sources of contention 
among men, on subjects of moment, is, from the dif- 
ferent views which disputants take of the nature and 
fulness of the evidence which any given branch can 
furnish to our minds. No logical rules can possibly 
lead the way to a satisfactory or universally admitted 
conclusion of any disputed question, when this con- 
sideration is not attended to. AU things become 



A BATIONAL ST8TEH 09 LOGIC. 21 

dim and <M)Dfu8ed ; and it not unfrequ^tly happens, 
that each disputant reduoes his arguments to the 
same logical terms, though for the purpose of sup- 
porting diametru^ly opposite conclusions. Thus, 
logic, instead of being used as an instrument for 
leading us to truth, becomes converted into a sophis- 
tical ^nd dangerous habit. Our errors are thus 
perpetuated from one generation to another, by rea- 
son of the different mistaken standards of evidence 
which are adopted to estimate the truth of certain 
subjects^ 

To remedy, in some measure, this erroneous me- 
thod of reasoning, we will endeavour to lay before 
the reader a brief and condensed view of the nature 
of the truths on which certain subjects are founded. 
We will afterwards shew, that logic properly so call- 
ed, can only be applied to four branches of knoW" 
ledge ; namely, the laws of mind, of moral obligation, 
of political relations, and of religion. In following this 
plan, it cannot be expected that we should lay down 
a regular system on each of these heads, and notice 
at length each and all the objections which dispu- 

tltnts have ur^ed against them, whether oollectivelj 
6 



22 ON THISK OBJECTS iflf 

or individually. The only thing necessary ibr the 
purpose intended is for us to see the land and degree 
of evidence which we can possibly have for any par- 
ticular subject ; so that, when we begin either to ex* 
amine it, or to dispute upon it, we may tiy its me^ 
rits by that standard of evidence which really belongs 
to it, and not by another which may have only an in- 
direct or incidental relation to it. This is a matter 
of great importance ; for if we carry about with us 
at all times correct ideas of the nature of a subject 
—a thorough knowledge of the principles on which 
it rests, and the kind and force of evidence which 
it is by its nature calculated to afford us, we will 
seldom be led far from the truth, or be apt to fall 
into those speculative errors, which arise from not 
correctly distinguishing the difierences in the reason- 
ing process among the various topics of hutnan in- 
vestigation. Every subject will be estimated by its 
own laws of evidence. When we treat of the tnind, 
we will not apply precisely the same rules of reason- 
ing which we employ in treating of natural and re- 
vealed religion ; nor when we come to examine the 
latter, will we estimate it by the principles of evi- 



A BATIONAL STBTiai O^ LOOIC^ 23 

deace whieh belong to the fonner. Thus every thmg 
will have its due situation in the mind, and it will 
resemble a well-ordioed dwellings where all confusion 
is avoided, and every thing occupies its own jNtppet 
place for use and^mfort. 

It will be necessary to explain here what is meant 
by such terms as, subjects connected wUh human 
nature f or, related to human nature, which will 
firequ^dy occur throughout this treatise. These 
phrases are meant to r^resent aU, or any part of 
the subjects to which, I think, the art of logic can 
rightly be applied ; i\a,meljj mental inquirieSf morals, 
politics, and religion. It is true, that all knowledge 
is connected with, or related to, human nature ; but 
the common way in which that knowledge is divided, 
and the usual phraseology employed to express these 
divisions, authorize me to make use of such general 
terms as the subjects or topics of human nature, for 
the purpose of avoiding tedious and unseemly repe* 
titions. With this explanation no confusion or 
ambiguity, it is presumed, can take place in the ap^ 
plication of these terms. 

Before entering upon the specific nature of the 



24 OBJECTS OF A RATIONAL SYSTEM OF XOOIC 

evidence belonging to those departments of know- 
ledge which the art of logic may be useful in deciding, 
it will prove of advantage to make a few remarks on 
the nature of mathematical reasoning ; and also to 
examine how far the argumentative faculties are ex- 
ercised in the various departments of natural philo- 
sophy. These observations will have the effect of 
clearing away some embarrassments and misconcep- 
tions, which might prove very troublesome in the 
subsequent parts of our journey^ 



25 



CHAPTER III. 

ON THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICAL EVIDENCE, 
AND ITS INFLUENCE WHEN AP1»LIED TO OTHER 
BRANCHES OF KNOWLED0E ; WITH A FEW RE- 
MARKS ON THE EVIDENCE OF NATURAL PHILO- 
SOPHY. 

There is a considerable difference between mathe- 
matical reasoning, and the reasoning we employ 
upon subjects connected with human nature. Many 
philosophers have imagined that it might be possible 
to unite them together, and have indulged the vain 
idea diat all our knowledge of mind, of our moral 
constitution, of our political relations, and of our re- 
ligious systems, would, by the gradual improvement 
of human art, and the simplification of the rules of 
logic, be rendered as clear as mathematics, and be 
completely assimilated to that species of evidence 
with which thid latter branch of knowledge furnishes 



26 ON THE NATITBE OF MATHEMATICAL EVtDSMCX. 

US. It would fill a volume to barely enumerate all the 
speculations of ingenious men on this subject. But 
a Careful examination of the matter will warrant us 
in affirming that these axe the dreams of philosophers, 
grounded upon a misconception of the abstract na- 
ture of the mind^ the extent of its powers, and the 
varied materials of what constitutes our general 
knowledge. The history of philosophy does not pre- 
sent us with a single solitary &ct, to induce us to 
think that thare has been any favourable, though 
silent influence exerting itself, during the more re- 
cent improvements in letters, to approximate the 
evidence in the investigation of subjects connected 
with human nature to mathematical deductions, 
or to lead us to believe that a sort of philosophi- 
cal millennium will soon arrive, when all our know- 
ledge relating to the mind of man, and to his con- 
stitution as a social and immortal being, will be 
as easily obtained, and as mechanically communicated 
to others, as a question in anthmetic, or a simple 
geometrical problem. On the contrary, nature, as 
well as observation, clearly points out to us that there 
isa fixed, onalteiable, and canstittttionaldiffflrBBce in 



oir vmfi TtATtru of mai^hbhatical xviBKrcs. 27 

tbe kind »f means we employ in the mvesdgation of 
truth fdtttive to silbjeets eonneoled mth human nu^ 
ture, ttiid those vhtch we adopt in mathematical de- 
monstmtioiis. This dii^noe it will be onr duty to 
p<»int out more hMj. 

The terms emplc^ed in mathematical reasonings 
are always of a fixed and definite ehamcter^ and are 
invuriably used in one sense. Thus tmemty are al-^ 
ways twenty^ a square is always a square^ and an 
angte always an angle; and it is this circumstance 
which adds so greatly to the fofce of the evid^ioe of 
^ science of number and quantity. If the terms in 
mathemaiios were as liable to variation as the terms 
we employ on subjects m(»re immediately connected 
with human nature, disputes and oontentionB would 
be as numerous and violent among mathematicians 
as among momlists and politicians. 

Mathematies may be termed a pure intelleetual 
sctenoe ; that ts^ it is so pure or complete in its own 
nature, that the contrary to any one of its affirmations 
can never be conceived by the human mind. No man 
can form to himself an idea how three and three 
cottM make ten, nor how half a eirde could con* 



2B ON THE NATUBE OF MATHEMATICAL BVIZnmCE. 

iain all the parts and properties of a wbole circle. 
These are Ikuppositions which our minds cannot con- 
ceive, however varied or long-continued the efiSnrts to 
conceive them. The mathematician, therefore, has 
no choice but to agree with the proposittmis submit- 
ted to his contemplation. He is like a man put into 
a path, and compelled, if he move at all^ to go 
straight forwaid, but without the liberty of turning 
either to the right band or to the left. In all other 
branches of knowledge, some differences, in the very 
nature of their fundamental positions, can be con- 
ceived by the mind. In natural philosophy, we can 
easily imagine various alteraticms or modifications of 
what are termed the laws of nature ; we could sup- 
pose many changes in chemical science, in electri- 
city, in magnetism, &c. ; and in morals we could 
imagine certain personal as well as general benefits to 
be connected with conduct which we are now led to 
t^ink very reprehensible and destructive ; and in po- 
litical matters, we can easily comprehend how some 
measures, which are now oonidde^^d founded in truth 
and wisdom, might be so modified, or entirely changed, 
as to produce effects the very contrary to those whieh 



ON TBS KATUBE OF MATHEMATICAL ETIBENCS. 29 

entitle them to be legarded as the result of a just 
and enlightened policy. All these varieties in the 
actual constitution of things, our minds can readily 
conceive ; but any alteration oc modification in the 
conceptions we form of numbers and quantity, we 
have it not in our power to imagine ; and, in this 
respect, the science of mathematics £»rms an excep- 
tion to all other branches <^ human learning. 

A very slight examination of the matter will soon 
enable a person to perceive the great difference which 
exists between the nature of subjects relating to hu- 
man nature, and those relating to mathematics. We 
will do well at all times to view with some degree of 
suspicion those jninciples and opinions which seem 
to be grounded exclusively upon the basis of a com- 
plete analogy between the firmer subjects and the 
latter. ^* It is true that all truth bears a common 
relation to the human mind ; but th^e is notwith- 
standing a very great difference between the manner 
in which we arrive at moral conclusions, for example, 
and that in which we arrive at conclusions in arith- 
metic or geometry. In moral science, nothing in 
the reasoning process can be affirmed as being good 



90 OK TVS NATvmx om iutm^MAtWAt* wmwcwu 

or bad, tr«« or false, without bavisg the tnd or Jim^ 
cause of certidn moral or immoral netiona pi^i^nt 
to our view ; and it is only the consideralioB of th^ 
final cause or end which regulates qur judgment aa 
to the amount of good or evil, truth or faladkoed» re- 
sulting firom any proposition. Now, in mathematies 
the ease is somewhat ^Uffereodl. All tho intermediate 
steps in a given propositicoi hecome olyeots of reaaon- 
ing ; are mariii4 with the stamp of truth ; may ba all 
empli^ed tn elements of reasoning in any oth^ i»ra- 
position ; and their individual peculiar nature is in no 
way altered oir modified by the eml w cm^lmom to 
which these inti»medi«^ st^ps load. Take, for oxana- 
pie, the 47th proposition of the First Book of Kvicltd's 
£l«mentB of Grcomi^y, ^ that the square of the 
hypothenuse is eq^al to the square of the other two 
sides.^ The process oif reascming which we empl^ 11^ 
this propoaitiim involves many references to oth^r famiha 
contained in dafivat^a, axioms, and proposiiianiy 
previouily escamincd; the truth of all which atands 
completely independent) and is as much an object of 
the mind^s pereeplsion and a inclusion of the under- 
standings aa the end or /osl retiift of the reaamiog 



ON THE NATURX OF KATHXBIATICAX. BVH^BMOB. 31 

process bj which the {ttopoiation itself becomes ester 
blished. A proeess of mathematical rfsasening may 
be compared to a flight i^ steps, whidi, thoi^rh doseiy 
and necessarily connected together, may become se- 
parately objects of the mind^s perception ; and these 
steps lead us in our progress fiom one ehamb« of 
truth, as it were, to another ; but they must all be 
considered, in the eye of abstract truth, as equally 
true and equally important. 

<^ Now we do sot, I conceive, find any thing pra- 
cisdy analogous to this in nM»al science ; good and 
evil are not things which can be dealt with by rule 
and compasses, or which can be represented l^ num- 
ber and figure. If a man rob his neighbour of his 
property, and afterwards take away his life, the vari- 
ous means which were used for these purposes, and 
the divers circumstances which accompanied these 
fiiul deeds^ become invested with truth and import- 
ance only because they are connected with the ends 
a final causesy the roblnng of the peracn, and the 
taking away of li&. These means and circumatan- 
ces may become objects of our mind^s contemplation, 
and topics of censttre and of diseussion ; but they only 



32 ON THE NATUBB OF MATHEMATICAL EVI^ENCEi 

do SO by virtue of their end or ultimate object^ which 
we denominate a highly criminal and vicious action. 
These means and circumstances may be altered in a 
thousand different ways, or may be either partially or 
wholly false ; but these considerations will not alter 
our opinions or feelings as to the wickedness of rob- 
bery and murder. In the science of morals, we can 
talk over and discuss the merits or demerits of cha- 
rity, love, hatred, theft, or murder, and the actions 
which these words are severally f made to represent 
may become individual* objects of our perception, 
without being necessarily connected with any given 
set of means and circumstances ; but in mathematics 
there is no proposition (barring the primary defini- 
tions) the truth of which can be made manifest with- 
out the assistance of some other truths, axioms, or 
propositions.**** 

These few remarks on the peculiar nature of ma- 
thematical evidence, when compared with the evi- 
dence which other subjects can afford, will perhaps 
prove a suitable preparation for discussing the ques- 

* History of Moral Science, vol. i. p. 315. 



ON THE NATir&E OF MATHEMATICAL EVIDENCE. S3 

tion in as brief a manner as possible, whether or not 
a deep and accurate knowledge of mathematiGS con- 
tributes to make men reason with more force, preci- 
sion, and effect, on subjects connected with human 
nature? This is a most important question when 
viewed in connexion with the education of youth, 
and I believe the general opinion entertained by liter- 
ary men is in favour of an affirmative answer to it. 
But I must confess I have long looked upon the ex- 
clusive attention paid to mathematical leamiag, as of 
questionable utility, in any establishment formed for 
the purpose of (communicating a general system of 
education. This exclusive attention constitutes one 
of the principal reasons why that kind of knowledge 
which comes home to men's business and bosoms, is, 
comparatively speaking, thrown into the back-ground; 
and is made to occupy a subordinate station in the 
scale of general information. But while tiiis is my 
own individual opinion, I am well awM'e there stand 
arrayed against me a mighty host of singularly ac-< 
complished and able men who ccmscientiously enter- 
tain the opposite doctrine. This consideration is 
sufficient to prevent me &om appearing dogmatical 



34 OV TRS NATVKS OF MATHEVATXCAL BVIBBNOB; 

on the snl^eot, or tnm setftiog my lemailcs on the 
^tti»tk»i Inefere the tettdev in any oAer ferm t&an 
xpMely 89 hittt& for t^ eaadtd and dkpossioiutte at- 
tention of th«eo who may feel interested in thi& dis- 
cussion. 

If we considn a meithevQatical pvopo»tiQii of any 
l^igtb, and pay attention to tlie operaliona of onx 
own minds, while it ia under c^atinnplation) wo wiU, 
I think, eleaiiy porpei^ thUi th^re i» very little in 
ooQUPaoQ^ bet«ef^. th^ jdaA we adopt for die sohislion 
of tbJ» propKw»tjpQ) md that process of the mied by 
which we affiw at logical ^ncJlnsi^ns m any brandi 
of kwwledgC! co«ffw«l«d with hnwrnk nature. In msh 
thematica we g^ ^njootbly cn» neither; ti)ini«g to. the 
right hand n^ie tft dh^ left.; there is i^ ftot noahtcifiiar 
tive f^ieam^. ^ th^ mmi ; we esiwot do oth^wise 
than give oimt 9Sem% to what i^ hefore us. There ia 
no weighiM^g) no hiibncing of ootUteral evid«)ce^ or 
con^eration of circMWstances, such a^s often. Qleg a«d 
isApede Ojuc progress in many of the othcK b«inoheaof 
hnowledg?* Tahi^. f^ exanfJe, a pditiQal p^^pos^ 
tion^ that, eve^ gxrrernment onght to- uphold the 
liberties and pmno^ the ht^pj^iess of the peo^ 



committed to its oste. Wbal a multitude of olj^ts 
«iidcircakBstttiices req^ttire to be eotiadered heire^ be- 
fore we can establish tbo truth of an axiom o^ this 
kind* We iiave first the moral obligation to do certain 
ihingB ; then we have, by long inc[uiries, to make 
aurselves well acquainted with these things— *the 
liberties and happiness of a people. 'Then comes 
the end or objeot of proearing these things — the 
good of thre communi<7 at liffge. External cireum^ 
stances of soil, climato^ situation, and a thousand 
other matters, any one of which may be sufficient 
to h'mit mid miodify the personal and civil tiberties 
and privileges of a people, all must come under 
the notice of the in^irer in tbe case befcve u^ ; and 
who will be bold enough to say that be can aocu^ 
rately (iefine, in any giv^ form of words, what is 
literally and fully meant by the happiness of a 
nation? In fact, let ns view the progress of the 
mind in demonstrating the trath of a political pro- 
position like iSio one above mentioned, and follow, 
step by step, the development of its truth, and we 
will clearly perceive that tliere is nothing in any one 
partr of the demonstration which resembles the po- 



36 ON THE NATUBE OF MATHSMATXCAXi JBVIDENCK. 

gress of our minds when illustrating the truth of a 
n£athematical problem. Nay, ho completely, dissi- 
milar are political and mathematical reasonings, in 
their very nature and essence, that a mere appeal to 
consciousness in both cases, should be sufficient to 
induce us to acknowledge that we arrive at truth in 
-morals by the employment of quite different original 
powers of the mind from those which we employ 
when we are demonstrating truths relating to num- 
ber and quantity ; or, at least, that there are some 
powers called into requisition in the former case^ 
which are never put forth, as far as we can perceive, 
in the latter. 

A strong predilection for mathematical investiga- 
tions, and a deep acquaintance with them, are ex- 
tremely apt to make us dissatisfied with the degree of 
evidence involved in other sciences. The mathema- 
tician, being long accustomed to the smooth and 
beaten track of his favourite study, enters upon the 
more rugged paths which lead to a knowledge of hu- 
man nature, with some degree of reluctance ; and he 
is frequently in the habit of making to himself com* 
parisons between the easy and happy mamier in 



ON THE NATTTBE OF MATHEMATICAL EVIDSNCX. 3? 

which truth is developed in the one case, and die dxT- 
ficult; with which he can arrive at it in the other. 
Thus a feeling is created, and trains of diought en- 
gendered in a thinking mind, which exercise a veiy 
striking and marked influence on its progress in ge- 
neral knowledge ; and men are thus insensibly led, 
a& it were, without, in fact, being at all aware of the 
secret power which so decidedly influences their 
choice, to give a marked preference to mathematical 
studies, over those which must by all be considered 
to possess a &r more deep and solemn interest to the 
human race, whether considered in relation to their 
state here or hereafter. It is very natural, there- 
fore, in siich circumstances, that the sciences of the 
human mind, of moral and political philosophy,, as 
well as the doctrines and principles of natural and 
revealed religion, should be viewed under a sombre 
and discouraging aspect ; should be made to occupy 
a low station in our estimation, and be considered to 
yield us less pleasure and delight in their cultivation^ 
because these important branches of human inquiry 
are founded upon evidence of a different description 
from that to. which we have given so decided a pre.^ 



38 ON TBB KATCHS OF VATRBKATICAL XVIDSNCX. 

firenee. How often do we hear mathematiciaiis be- 
wail the difficulties they meet with when thej wan- 
der from their own folds ; and how often do we hear 
them giving utterance to the pkasing but forlom 
hope, of seeing aU knowledge reduced to mathemati- 
cal certainty and precision? These, and similar 
aentimoits^ are quite current among literary men ; 
and they have their foundation in the generally pie* 
vaifing notion, that mathematical truths are con* 
nected by a firmer and more beautifully connected 
chain of evidence than that which binds the various 
departments of knowledge which come under the de- 
nomination cS human nature. 

This low and erroneous estimate which is formed 
of the rod value of subjects connected with man^s na- 
ture, and the subordinate station which they are thus 
made to occupy in the mind of a speculative inquirer, is 
one of tlie many fruitfid sources of infidelity. I can. 
safely say, that as &r as my^ own personal expe» 
rience goes, full nine-tenths of^ those whom I have 
met with, influenced more or less by sceptical opi- 
nions on religious subjects, have directly, and in 
plain terms, dedared their objections to arise from 



OIK 7HB MATimX 09 HATHEIIATICAL. XVXBBNOB. 99 

the want of that dqpwe and foiee of evidenee on ra^ 
%ious suhjeets, with which matfaeoMtical punuitdao 
abmidanttjr furnyi tjiem. And I fed confident, 
Gocild we collect under one point of view the whok 
mass of doubt and perplexity on theoiogieal topics, 
wbii^ abound among people of learning, and be able 
to analjae it, we would find it^ to a very great ex- 
tent, &iAj resirivdide into a notion ent^tained by 
such pcMKmi^ that the mdenoe on which religion is 
establiahed is notof such a ebsely cowatenated and 
coorawing description as that which is found in nia* 
theoMilaca ; and on tbisaeoBunt the whole volume of 
v^SgiQUS truth, it is affisned,. lies, fairly open, to 
doulM and uncertainty. The minds of such reason^ 
eis b«ttH»reii4aycd to a secret halnt of weighing and 
^madtng Ae value q( a. sobjeet by a standard to 
which it ought not tA be refitsied. And our daily 
esq^emnoe teai^ us^ that a. mental haUt of this 
kiiad i^ esfttflcmelgv difficult to be emdicated. If it 
has- hecDL kng eslaUishcd and unchecked, the proba* 
bQity ofa more just and benefieial mode of thinking 
^veie betng attained is. very sLender indeed. It be- 
hoves,, therefiwe, all those who have tbe instruction 



40 ON THE NATUBS OF MATHEMATICAL EVIBSNCB. 

of youth committed to their charge, to be habitually 
on their guard against an error of this description, 
which is calculated to produce a very bad moral effect 
upon young persons, as well as to impair the healthy 
exercise of their minds. 

If we examine mathematics in an intellectual point 
of view„ there appears to be something of a mechani- 
cal turn in the acquisition of its truths ; and it is by 
no means evident, that to excel in mathematical in- 
vestigations, the more lofty and elevated of our men- 
tal powers are required to be brought into exercise. 
There is a &ct besides, established by the history of 
philosophy in all ages and countries, which pointedly 
bears out this opinion ; namely, that we have daily 
instances of persons making themselves proficients in 
mathematical science at a very early age ; but we 
never find that a person becomes eminent in mental, 
moral, or political j^ilosophy, or religious knowledge, 
till more advanced in life. There is scarcely an in- 
stance of a writer on any of these latter branches of 
science, who has ever become distinguished till he 
was at or past the meridian of life ; but there have 
been many examples of a per&ct knowledge of the 



ON. THE NATUBE OP MATHEMATICAL EVIDENCE. 41 

sciences of number and quantity before the age of 
manhood. This is a fact founded upon the natural 
course of the human mind, and clearly teaches us, 
that higher qualities of intellect are required to rea- 
son upon, and comprehend questions on topics relat- 
ing to human nature, than are necessary in the solu^ 
tion of problems connected with the pure sciences. 
And it IS doubtless in conformity with the principle, 
which this mental fact goes to illustrate, that the 
practice has been adopted in almost all civilized na- 
tions, of filling high and responsible civil and ma- 
gisterial offices with persons pretty far advanced in > 
years. The public would have little confidence in 
the wisdom of a chief magistrate or judge at fourteen 
or fifteen years of age, even if he brought forward, as 
a recommendation for office, the mathematical skill 
of a Newton or a La Place. 

That an exclusive attention to mathematical rea- 
soning unfits a person for judging with accuracy on 
subjects of human nature, has now grown into a com- 
mon proverb, and is even admitted by many writers, 
who are, nevertheless, decidedly of opinion that a mode- 
rate attention to mathematical forms of reasoning tends 



42 ON THE NATURE 07 MATHEMATICAI* EVIDBNCB. 

to Strengthen the judgment^ and prepare it for every 
other inquiry. Now how are we to account tar these 
notions,if mathematics are so useful as is commonly as- 
serted, in making us reason more forcibly and correctly 
on other mattes? It is but fair to presume that if ma- 
thematical forms of reasoning were so beneficial, the 
more profoundly they were studied, and the more 
steadily and invariably they were adhered to, the 
mental advantages would be the greater and the more 
obvious. But there appears to me to be a great 
deal more than what meets the eye in the admission, 
that mathematical forms are apt to be abused or mis- 
applied. This extorted confession^ from somewhat 
reluctant witnesses, must have proceeded from a set- 
tled conviction, that the pure sciences were in some 
degree defective, in being made the foundation of a 
generally extended system of mental cultivation. 

There is an important fact to which we may ad- 
vert as strengthening the general position we wish to 
establish : it is this ; that we find that whenever 
authcnrs have been led, either from education or early 
predilection, to adopt the mathematical form of rea- 
soning in matters relating to the nature of man, such 



ON T^% NATUnS OF MATHEMA7ICAZ. BVi»BN€S. 43 

as the constituUon of his mind, the pnneiple9 of mo- 
rality or religion, such writers have almost univenNilly 
failed in their object. They have failed in all their phi- 
loscq[>hical efforts, not fi:<»n any lack of learning, «eal, or 
talent, but solely from the employment of instruments 
which were naturally incapable of aiHXimplidhing the 
purposes they intended. Their wntings have either mn 
into absurd and incomprehensible theories ; or have 
assumed such a crabbed and forbidding aspect, as to 
render thmn comparatively little known or regarded. 
We might adduce a multitude of instances in eoa&r- 
mation of what we have now alleged ; diis, however, 
is altogether unuecessary, as every reader who is nl; 
all conversant with even tb« outlines of philosophy, 
must be well aw^re. that this is iK»t a hasty or random 
asserti(Hi. 

Natural or experimental philosophy differs in many 
leqpects from mathemal^. The foundation of the 
fcmner is not the same as that of the lattor ; and, 
tl^refore, we find a dissimilarity between the kind 
and degree of evidence employed in each of these two 
depaxtments of science. Mathematics is a purely 
i«yfee]J^tual sdienoe, and the evidence derived from 



44 ON THE KATUKE OF MATHEMATICAL EVIDENCE. 

the contemplation of it is of the most decided and 
unchangeable nature. But natural philosophy is 
founded upon observation, analogy, and the testimony 
of others. It is not intuitively certain, but it rests 
upon the evidence of our external senses. 

From the observations in the preceding chapter 
on the subjects to which logic can with propriety be 
applied, it may be asked, do we mean to assert that 
the forms of logic are not useful, or cannot be strictly 
applied to natural philosophy ? The answer to this 
question, I apprehend, is, that in a certain qualified 
sense, the rules and forms of logic are of use in the 
various departments of natural as well as of mental or 
moral science. It may, however, be observed, that if 
there had never been any other branches of knowledge 
than such as are comprehended in' mathematics and 
natural philosophy, the science of logic would never 
have been thought necessary to arrange the objects 
and reasonings of which they are composed. From 
the very nature of the mind of man, and the mate- 
rials with which it makes itself conversant in experi- 
mental science, there is a natural aptitude in these 
materials to arrange themselves, without any length- 



ON TUB NATUBE OF MATHEMATICAL BVIPENCE. 45 

ened or intricate chain of reasoning, into that shape 
and form which is best suited for their full and per* 
feet comprehension by etery ordinary intellect. It 
is very obvious from the manner in which we culti- 
vate natural philosophy, that it ne^s very little of 
what goes under the denomination of logical skill. 
To apply the term logician to a person even inti- 
mately acquainted with chemistry or mineralogy, 
would be a complete departure from the ordinary use 
of language. In these, and similar branches of 
knowledge, we merely place nature in a certain situ- 
ation, and observe the result. No reasoning is here 
necessary. Mechanical adroitness, accurate observa* 
tion, patient attention, and a ready and retentive 
memory, are the qualities principally requisite for the 
successful prosecution of such departments of science. 
In those branches of physical knowledge in which 
matliematics are used to illustrate and unfold theiv 
principles more completely^ the reasoning powers arc 
fiiUy exerted; but then they are conversant with 
mathematical forms and terms, the precise nature of 
which we have just endeavoured to point out. Where 
mathematical skiU is not r^uisite, a very moderate 



46 OK THS NATtTBS OJT MATHEMATICAL SVlDBNCS. 

share of reasdning is need^ to t^mpreheud the na- 
ture atid use of the material objects around us. 

There is, however, one branch of knowledge, the 
medical art, which may be comprehended under the 
term physical science, on which it is necessary here 
to make a remark or two. It has long been noticed 
that the evidence on which this important depart- 
ment of human inquiry rests, differs in many essen- 
tial particulars from the evidence on which the other 
divisions of natural philosophy are grounded. This 
e&ception strengthens the general argument this 
chapter is meant to establish^ The mode of reason- 
ing necessary for comprehending and applying the 
principles of the healing art is precisely the same in 
its abstract nature with the mode required for the 
investigation of subjects connected with human na- 
ture. In medicine, there are scarcely ever two cases 
presented to the practitioner which are in all parti- 
culars alike ; and yet he mUst be guided in his me- 
thod of treatment by general rules as well as by a 
most scrupulous and pointed attention to the minute 
individual peculiarities which each ease presents to 
his view* Hence it is, that there is a more oonstnit 



0N THE NATUBE OP MATHBBCATICAL EVIDENCE. 47 

and vigorous exercise of the reasoning fiiculties re* 
quired in every medical man who attains to any thing 
like eminence in his profession, than is cWed int# 
requisition by those who prosecute the study of the 
other branches of physical science. 



48 



CHAiPTER IV. 



ON THE MIND. 



Of all the objects in nature calculated to excite the 
curiosity of mankind in the early ages of the world, 
the operations of the mind would certainly be the 
most likely to take the preference. To speculate on 
the determinations of the inward principle ; to watch 
all its movements ; to endeavour to gain an insight 
into its abstract nature or essence ; and to mark the 
outward visible signs which indicated the changes it 
effected in the bodily frame, must have formed the 
primary elements of all human intelligence. In no 
conceivable situation of human beings, however rude 
or destitute, can we imagine the laws of thought or 
mental emotion to have been entirely unknown or 
unregarded. On the contrary, a knowledge of these 
laws must have constituted the ground- work of every 



ON THE MINB. 49 

sjrstem of national and fiunily instruetion among 
mankind. 

It is from this cause that we find speculations re* 
spectiag the nature of <the mind among the very earliest 
fragments of human literature. In the most ancient- 
books of scripture, the intellectual part of our nature 
is considered an object of wonder and amazement, 
and its oreadon and mode of operation referred to 
the immediate power of the Almighty. Among the 
most learned of heathen nations, we trace the same 
i^irk of inquiry regarding the animating principle of 
man, pervading the whole of their literature as far as 
it has come down to us. The most highly gifted of 
the human race, in every nation where any thing like 
science has prevailed, have devoted their nights and 
days to a contemplation of the laws which regulate 
their own minds ; and if their effi>rts have not hi- 
therto been crowned with the most desirable results, 
they have at least reaped a rich harvest of honour 
and renown in consequence of their unwearied, 
though to some extent unsuccessful, philosophical 
labours. 

In a work of this nature, it is unnecessary to give 



so ON THE MINB. 

ar complete outline o( metaphysical scknce. All ihst 
is required is merely to make the reader aequainted 
with the leading principles and operations of his Ttg/a- 
tat constitution, that he may be prepared to ander-- 
stand and to appreciate the nature of die eyidetiee 
which they furnish, and the objections to which they 
are liaUe. 

In the following observations on the mind, we 
shall adhere to the common theory, that whidi re- 
gards it as composed of separate and distinct fiieulttea 
or powers ; this theory being more in unison with 
our ordinary language and modes of thinking on die 
subject, than the opposite theory, which maintains 
that all the various mental phenomena are merely 
difierent itaies of the mind or thinking prindple. 
There are five faculdes or powers whidi may, for 
eommon purposes, be viewed as comprehending all 
the operations of die mind, perception^ menunyf ma- 
ginatiim, abstraction, and reasoning. 

Perception. This power of the mind is usually 
considered by metaphysical writers as being the first 
which claims our attention in treating of mental phi- 
losophy. This anangement may perhaps have been 



ON THE MIN2>. fil 

suggested by popular custom ; for it perfiscdy accords 
with our every-day language in speaking of such mat- 
ters) to consider the simfde faculty o£ perceiving ob- 
jects as the first which manifests utself in the deve- 
Ibpment of our inward principles (J^Uiought. Many 
conltroversies have arisen, and volumes have been 
written, respecting the precise nature of the act of 
perception; but we shall leave these discussions to 
others who may be critically skilled in the science of 
mind, and endeavour to shape our remarks in accord- 
ance with die popular notions or ideas on the sub- 
ject. 

The objects of the mind'^s perception are of two 
kinds; those which relate to external thii^, and 
those which belong to the various principles of our 
inward nature. The former are furnished to us 
through die instrumentality of our bodily senses, 
seding, bearing, tasting, touching, and smelling; 
and the latter, by our sense of internal feeling, or as 
it is significantly and properly enough called, the 
fiiculty of c(m9Ctausness. 

By the operation of our bodily organs of percep- 
tion, we come to the knowledge of the numerous 



52 ON THE HINB. 

qualities of material objects, and their various proper- 
ties and relations one to another. By seeing we 
judge of colours, figures, dimensions, motion, rest, 
&c. ; by hearing, we discriminate sounds ; by tast- 
ing, the sapid qualities of bodies ; by toueh, hard- 
ness, softness, cold, heat, roughness, smoothness, 
and the like ; and by smelling, the di£Perent effluvia 
emanating from an almost endless variety of sub- 
stances. 

The second class of objects is composed of our in- 
ternal feelings or consciousness, and the operations of 
our own minds ; or the notions or ideas which are 
perpetually occupying us, when we are said to think 
of our own inward nature. These objects are as nu- 
merous and diversified as those a knowledge of which 
is derived from the material world. 

This simple power of perception is commonly con- 
sidered as the instrument by which we obtain smtable 
objects or materials for the occupation of our minds. 
These intimations of outward objects and their quali- 
ties, as well as our inward feelings, are said to be 
perceived by the mind ; a phrase which every one un- 
derstands ; but which has become, in the hands of 



OS THIS MXN]|, dd 

philosophers, a source of improfilahk and endless dis- 
cussion. 

Memory, This is another strikingly marked and 
well-defined power of the mind. It is of unspeakable 
importance to us. It consists in treasuring up past 
impressions, or notions, or trains of thought in the 
mind. No formal or lengthened 4efinition of this 
power is here necessary, as every one is well acquaint- 
ed with its province and mode of operation. 

There are certain circumstances which tend to 
deepen and more thoroughly impress upon our re- 
membrance particular objects or events, and produce 
a more vivid and interesting representation of past 
occurrences in life. These circumstances constitute 
what are called the laws of memoryf and have been 
objects of notice and interest among mankind from 
the earliest records of their history to the present mo- 
ment. , 

Imagination. This is another conspicuous faculty 
of. the mind, and is well known to every human be- 
ing of sane understanding. We are so constituted 
that we are not confined to mere realities ; but we can 
.conjure up a thousand representations and combina- 



54 ON THE MIND. 

tions of things whidi never had, and never can have, 
any real existence. This power is the fruitful source 
of many of our pleasures as well as inconveniences ; 
and hence its proper cultivation and guidance become 
of infinite importance to the well-being and hap]^« 
ness of nian. 

AbMtraction. This faculty of the mmd is employed 
in considering one thing apart from another thing 
with which it may be accidentally or necessarily con- 
nected. We can, for example, attend to the colour 
of an object, without at the same time thinking of its 
precise shape, its roughness or other properties. This 
is a faculty of great use and importance, as will be 
shown in the subsequent parts of this work. 

Reasoning, No particular notice need be taken of 
this power here. Its nature will be sufficiently point- 
ed out in the second part of this volume. 

It must appear obvious to the reader, that the 
knowledge of the human mind is founded upon the 
most powerful and incontrovertible evidence. We 
rest upon conseiomness or iniemal feelings which 
furnishes the highest kind of testimony. No one 
can rationally dispute the existence of his own feel- 



OK THB lUND. 55 

lags ; Of if he do, he must, as a natural consequence, 
be prepared to give, up all kinds and degrees of know^^ 
ledge as ddusive and uncertain. The doubts which 
have been attempted to be dtrown upon the whole 
science of mindi are the most unreasonable that can 
possibly be imagined. The preference which has 
been given to some other brandies of knowledge, and 
even to ^peculations of a mental nature, on account 
of the more convincing and forcible evidence th^ are 
supposed to afford, has arisen entirely from a miscon* 
eeption in reference to the nature of that evidence 
which accompanies the internal workings of our prin- 
ciple of thought. But while we stoutly maintain the 
claim of mental philosophy to be regarded as the very 
fountain of rational evidence, we are not at the same 
time insennble to the existence and operation of those 
causes, whidi tended, with the majority of readers, 
to shroud that philosophy in the tiiick veil of obscu* 
rity, and to cause her intimations to be received with 
coldness and distrust. 

The logical difficulties which arise to the prose- 
cution of metaphysical inquiries, may^i perhaps, be 
attributed to two principal causes. 



56 ON THS MIND. 

1 . Philosophers aim at too much. They are not 
content with the degree of knowkdge which has beeti 
allotted to them. They wish to pry into matters that 
are shut out from their cognizance. In treating on 
topics connected with the mind of man, we should 
always take into account the natural difficulties of the 
subject itself. It must be acknowledged on all hands, 
that to analyze the powers of thought is an arduous 
and intricate process ; and there must, on this ac- 
count, always be a considerable difference of opinion 
concerning those objects which come within the range 
4if our internal investigations. We cannot, therefore; 
in our pursuit of truth here, expect to go smoothly on 
without meeting with questions of an intricate and 
puzzling description. Bat these ought not to throw 
our minds off their proper balance, nor drive us to the 
sceptical conclusion, that all inquiries regarding our 
minds are useless and unsatisfiictory. This would not 
be to act the part of rational, but of irrational beings. 

2. What are called improvements in mpdern 
language have beena fruitful source of error and dif- 
ferences of opinion on mental subjects. We shall 
treat of the influence of language on all branches of 



ON THX MIMD. 5^ 

knowledge in another part of this work ; but we will 
just meniion, in passing, that in metaphysics these 
misnamed improvements have not by any means real- 
ized the expectations which many sensible and ceal- 
ous admirers of this science at one time anticipated 
from them. The &ct is, that a too minute analysis 
of the mind has been attempted by philosophers, and 
a facility of coining new terms and phrases has led 
them to set by fiur too high a value upon their specu- 
lations. Many instances could be adduced, from the 
history of mental philosophy, within these last hundred 
years, to show that numerous systems have been framed 
with plausible pretensions to originality and import- 
ance, which, upon mature examination, could be proved 
to rest upon nothing but a new verbal nomenclature. 
We can scarcely expect that time will remedy this evil, 
for the operations of our minds seem peculiarly liable to 
be the sport of mere dealers in new words and phrases. 
But we hope these two or three hints on the influence 
of language will not be altogether thrown away upon the 
reader, but will lead him to view, with wholesome jea- 
lousy, every theory of the mind, whidi comes recom- 
mended to his notice in the garb of a new phraseology. 



se 



CHAPTER V. 



ON M0RAI.8. 



We have the same kind and degree of evidence for 
the truth and obligation of several leading principles 
of morals^ as we have for the existence and laws of 
our inteUectual nature. Every man carries within 
him the seeds of good and evil, and no one can deny 
the reality and importance of moral distinctions, 
without doing violence to his own nature, and bring- 
ing swift destruction upon himself. 

It will not be necessary here to give a formal out- 
line of any particular system of morals, similar to the 
sketch of the mind which we have ventured to give 
in the foregoing chapter. A certain portion of know- 
ledge of the nature and powers of the mind seems 



ON VOKALS. 89 

necessftrily coQuected with the treatment of one of its 
most important faculties^-^hat of reasoning. But 
all l^t seems to be requisite in this chapter is to 
button the reader against forming erroneous opinions 
in reference to the nature of moral reasoning, and to 
point out tp him those recesses into which sophistical 
writers frequently drive their followers, and in which 
they occasionally take shelter themselves 

1. Sceptical conclusions on the science of morals 
are often drawn from the various conflicting opinions 
among mankind on the nature of virtue. Some 
classes of men call that a virtuous and p-aiseworthy 
deed, which others think wicked and dis^^racefiil. 
And it mu^t be acknowledged on all hands, that the 
difl^enccys i^ judgm^t on this important subject are 
very numerous, and of a strikingly marked duuac^ser. 

2. Erroneous opinions on moral obligation proceed 
from partial and contracted views of present enjoy- 
ment and advantage. This is a very fruitful source 
of disputation among mankind, and indeed every per- 
son is more or less liable to be misled by this almost 
universal tendency. 

3. The mind is frequently led to reason improperly 



60 ON MORALt. 

on the nature and extent of moral duty from our na* 
tural imperfection. The fact is sufSciently wdl esta- 
blished, that all men are morally depraved, and are 
prone to indulge their appetites and passions to their 
own injury as well as to the injury of others. 

To guard the mind, in some degree, against the 
influence of these causes of error in reasoning both 
on abstract and practical morality, we ought to ac- 
custom ourselves to take as comprehensive a view as 
possible of man^s moral nature and relations. If we 
do this we will perceive that the general principles 
of. morals are well founded, and almost universally 
admitted. This is a provision made for the continua- 
tion of our race. All men are obliged to act upon 
these principles of moral obligation, as being in fiiet 
intimately connected with their immediate happiness 
and well-being. 



m 



CHAPTER VI. 



POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 



By the tenn political philosophy, we must under* 
stand every thing connected with civil government, 
the administration of justice, the production and di& 
fusion of wealth ; and whatever is immediately pro- 
ductive of the social happiness and well-being of a 
people. A nation is to be considered in the light of 
a great family ; and whatever promotes the safety, 
peace, and comfort of that family, may properly 
enough come under the denomination of politics. 

It must be obvious to the reader that a vast field 
is here opened to the reasoning faculties of man. In 
no department of human speculation and inquiry, 
are there fiercer contentions, more contradictory 
opinions, and a more vehement desire after victory 
manifested, than in debates upon political science. 



62 POLITICAL WILOSOPHT. 

A person looking on political discussions from a 
distance, and unacquainted with the leading princi- 
ples of the science, would be apt to come to the 
conclusion, that all here was uncertainty, uproar, and 
confrision; that no one fundamental principle was 
beyond the reach of dispute ; and that truth seemed 
to make her escape from those engaged in the general 
and boisterous scramble to lay hold of her. Indeed 
thf &ct is undeniable, that many sober-minded per- 
9(ms give themselves up to a vulgar kind of scepti- 
icism on political matters ; and maintain that ^ere is 
nothing true, or at least indisputably true, m the 
science. 

But a moment^s consid^ation will be sufficient to 
t^ow any person9 that matters connected with the 
security and happiness of a nation are pre-emi- 
nently calculated ^o give rise to the highest e^err 
tions of intellect and the proudest efforts of logical 
skill. Eyexk the subordinate divisions of this depart* 
ment of knowledge aire calculated to call forth the 
highest powers of reasoning. The doubts which 
some are led to entertain as to the solidity of the 
principles on which political knowledge is grounded. 



POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 63 

nuiy fiiirlj be referred to causes unconnected with 
their abstract truth. We shall briefly allude to a 
few of the most important of them. 

1. liOgical difficulties arise from the very compli- 
cated nature of the science of politics. We have 
only» under the most fistvourable circumstances, a very 
liinited view of the consequences of any given mea« 
sure ; and it is often a veiy painful task to keep up 
such a degree of attention as will enable us to trace 
its beariiigs through the almost endless ramifications 
of society. The mind is apt to become confounded 
by the multiplicity of objects which at once solicit 
and demand its attention. 

3. A fruitful source of diflferenoe of opinion on 
political topics is, that the inteiests of mankind are so 
closely and personally connected with their discus* 
«u>a. It will, in nine cases out of ten, be a hopeless 
task to convince a man of the expediency or wisdom 
of any particular course of social policy, if his iuter^p. 
ests are likely to be deeply bjured by its adoption. 
He will resist all kinds and degrees of evidence. In 
maay other branches of knowledge, though all bear- 
ing more or less upon tlie interests of mankind, dis* 



64 POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 

cussions are conducted with- comparative calmness 
and disinterestedness; but political questions come 
more immediately in collision with the interests of 
particular classes of persons in the community, and 
their minds are thereby put into a state which unfits 
them for giving the requisite degree of patient and 
dispassionate attention to those distinct principles on 
which the truth and expediency of such questions 
rest. 

3. The want of that power of the mind which 
seizes hold of general principles, and handles them 
with dexterity and ease, is also a fruitfiil source of 
erroneous conclusions in the science of politics ; with- 
out this power no man can lay claim to the title of a 
politician in the proper sense of that word. If a 
perscm do not possess this faculty of the mind, his 
reasonings will, in almost all cases, proceed on some 
isolated and unimportant fact, and thus he will trifle 
away his life, disputing on every thing and under- 
standing nothing. 

4. The mixed nature oS political measures is the 
cause of much error to the best and ablest of men. 
Some measures are of a partially beneficial character, 



POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 65 

and on their first introduction, promise well for the 
happiness and comfort of the people at large ; but in 
the long-run these very measures are often found to 
be disastrous and ruinous in the extreme ; and we 
are thus obliged, after a season of fond anticipations, 
to retrace our steps and acknowledge our error. This 
makes us liable, for the Aiture, to distrust the con- 
clusions of our own understandings. 



66 



CHAPTER VII. 

ON REUOZON — NATURAL AVP RXrBAI#EJ>. 

We come now to examine the evidence of one of 
the most important branches of human knowledge. 
Whatever differences of opinion may exist among 
mankind as to the value and abstract nature of reli- 
gious principles and observances, one conclusion can- 
not fail to be admitted even hj that class of persons 
who vauntingly boast of being beyond the reach of 
any religious influence, namely, that if the general 
doctrines of religion be supported by such a degree of 
rational proof as their advocates allege, then theology 
must be confessed to be by far the most important 
inquiry which can occupy the mind of a human being. 
In the short space which the limits of this work 
can allot to the consideration of this vital subject, it 
cannot be expected that we should even be able to 



ON RJBMOION. 67 

give a bare enumeration of the principles of natural 
and revealed religion in all their ramifications and 
bearings. What is intended here, is merely to make 
a few general remarks which may guide the judgment 
of the reader when examining theological topics, and 
prevent him from entertaining &lse and enoneous 
notions in reference to the nature and degiees of evir 
dence by which they are supported. 

Religion, with us, obviously divides itself into two 
kinds ; natural religion, and revealed religiim. It is 
not our province to enter into nice and intricate dis- 
cissions as to the boundaries of each, or to ascertain 
the point at which the one begins, and the other ends. 
The division now made is agreeable to common 
usage; and, like all usages of a simikr kind, must 
have had its origin in clear and well-defined distinc- 
tions in the nature of things 

Natural religion includes our primary notions as 
to the existence and attributes of a superior intelli- 
gent power ; our impression of another state of exist- 
ence after death ; and the doctrine of fixture rewards 
and punidunents. The more circumstantial and 
minute our inquiries on this subject, the more clearly 



68 ON BELIQION. 

do we perceive that man comes into the world pos- 
sessed of the elementary principles of religious adora- 
tion and fear. To whatever spot of earth we direct 
our attention, we there see the emblems of a firm 
belief in some all-powerful and intelligent cause. 
We meet with priests and temples, rites and cere- 
monies, and a regularly established and organized 
system for the purpose of keeping up a religious in- 
tercourse with that being who is feared and adored ; 
and so common are these signs of religious worship 
in the different nations of the earth, that it may 
safely be affirmed, that there is not one well-authen- 
ticated exception to the universality of the practice. 
It is perfectly true th^t the objects of religious vener- 
ation have been in all ages, and are at this day, 
among heathen nations, exceedingly diversified and 
uniformly absurd; but still the vast importance 
which every country attaches to its own deity and its 
own peculiar mode of worship, fully warrant us in 
drawing the conclusion, that religion must have its 
foundation in the nature of man. 

Revealed religion may be regarded as including 
the doctrines and precepts of the Old and New Testa^ 



aN RBLIQION. 69 

ments. The fundamental principles of natural reli« 
gion are here more fliUy illustrated and established ; 
and the faint intimations of nature become invested 
with all the powerful vividness of reality. But in 
addition to the most complete confirmation of natural 
theology, the Scriptures contain some peculiar doc- 
trines and precepts of which the constitution of our 
nature gives us no intimation ; or at least, if there 
be any such intimation, it is of such a weak and 
evanescent kind, as not to exercise any practical in- 
fluence over our opinions and conduct. 

The evidences for the truth of natural and revealed 
religion are of the most conclusive description. For 
the sake of clearness we will follow the general and 
popular division of them into two kinds ; namely, the 
external and internal evidences. The external evi- 
dences for natural religion rest upon facts ; that there 
is a universal feeling or notion among mankind of a * 
superior power ; of another state of existence with 
rewards and punishments ; and that there are innu- 
merable rites and ceremonies to which these opinions 
give birth. The external evidences for revealed reli- 
gion are, that Christianity is to be considered as a 



70 ON KSLIGION. 

system resting upon promises, prefigured by types, 
intimated by propbecy, testified by miracles and con- 
firmed by events. The internal evidences of the 
truth of natural religion are derived from the fitness 
and suitableness of these universal rdigious opinions 
and ceremonies to promote, in some measure at least, 
the happiness and comfort of man. The internal 
evidences of the truth of revelation are almost un- 
limited; they may, however, be generalized under 
the following heads ; the superior value of its doc- 
trines ; the holy rectitude of its moral precepts ; and 
the transcendent glory of its prospects. 

The candid and intelligent reader will perceive 
at once, from this brief statement regarding the evi- 
dences of religion, that a considerable portion of them 
rest upon human nature as their basis. It would 
just be as irrational to deny the existence of the or- 
dinary thoughts and emotions which pass through 
our minds, as to deny the existence and influence of 
these religious principles. With respect to diose 
doctrines of revelation which seem to U3 to be un- 
supported by direct intimations from natural theology, 
they stand upon other grounds of evidence, such as 



ON BBLiaiON. 7^ 

follow from a proper estisiation of the supremacy of 
the deity ; and from the fact, that in every revela- 
tion from a creator to a created and finite being, 
some things must, of necesttty, become to them in- 
vested with a moral obligation to believe, independent- 
ly of any considerations whether such things accord 
with the suggestions of their reaiioi;! or not. In sup- 
port of such doctrines as are commonly said to, be 
above reason, human testimony also adds considerable 
weight. 

The objections to religious truth arise, 1st, from 
the oi)jeets of this branch of knowledge being more 
distant from our observation than many other topics 
of speculation. Religious principles are not very 
palpable to intellectual vision ; they are hidden un- 
derneath the materials of other departments of infor- 
mation more immediately connected with the physi- 
cal existence and well-being of the individual. Hu- 
man nature must undergo a certain degree of culti- 
vation in its bodily, mental, and moral capacities, be- 
fore rational religion can take root and flourish ; and 
as religious feelings and sentiments naturally spring 
up later in life than our other principles of know- 



72 ON BELIGION. 

ledge, the former are more apt to be neglected or 
checked in their growth by the rank vegetation of the 
latter, which have so far got the start g[ them. 

2. It is a very common remark, but not the less 
true or the less important because common, that more 
objections are urged against religion from the heart 
than the head. Religious restraints are more or less 
unpalatable to all men ; and this circumstance na- 
turally prompts our minds to demand a fuller degree 
of evidence than we would otherwise do, if such re- 
straints were not against the general current of our 
natural propensities. It would not be in accordance 
with strict truth to maintain, that all persons who 
entertain scruples as to the insufficiency of religious 
evidence are pre-eminently wicked and depraved ; 
but truth compels us to make a remark, which daily 
observation forces upon us, that we very commonly 
find infidelity and a certain degree of moral latitudi- 
narianism combined in one and the same individual. 
A total disregard of religious principles and observ- 
ances must have a withering and corrupting influence 
upon our moral affections and habits ; and when once 
these get into a disordered state, they do^ by a natural 



ON ^SLIOtON^ 78 

sympathy, exercise their influence upon ^e mind) 
weakening and perverting the reasoning faculties. 

3. Many persons <nreate logical difficulties for 
themselves on religious topics, £rom their absurd and 
extravagant demands as to 4he de^ee and kind of 
evidence they req[uire to produce conviction in their 
minds. They are often more unreasonable on this 
subject than on any other which comes under their 
notice. They demand to have the objects of religion 
actually placed b^ore their eyes, and every thing 
relating to them invested with the vivid realily 
which belongs to the objects of our external senses^ 
But- 1 hope there are few intelligent readers who will 
not have wisdom sufficient to guard themselves against 
such clumsy stumbling-blocks in their reasonings on 
theological subjects. 

4. No inconsiderable portion of scepticism on re« 
ligious subjects to be found in the world takes its 
rise from a supercilious contempt of, and a total in- 
difference to, the arguments by which these subjects 
are supported. People will not take the trouble to 
inquire, and pass a hasty judgment of condemnation 
from the most trifling logical difficulties. Were 



74 ON. HELIOION. 

they to devote a little more time and patient reflee- 
tion to the matter, they would find themselves amply 
rewarded by such a full body of evidence as ought to 
satisfy all but the wilfully and perversely blind. 
The evidences of natural and revealed telignm are 
innumerable and so diversified, that their examina- 
tion has given rise to some of the most splendid spe- 
eimens of logical skill to be found in the records of 
human thought. These evidences are at the same 
time, considered individually, perfect and independ- 
ent in their own nature. They resemble those little 
meandering rivulets which branch off in a thousand 
directions into remote and widely difierent regions ; 
but which, when all united together, form a foil and 
magnificent river, rolling with majestic rapidity, 
bearing down before it every opposing obstacle, and 
imparting fertility and beauty to the surrounding 
country^ 



7S 



CHAPTER VIII. 

'GENERAL REMARKS ON THE CONTENTS OF THE 
PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 

We have endeavoured to show in the preceding part 
of this work lo what subjects logic is to be applied. It 
must appear evident from even the common language 
of mankind, as well as from the nature of the thing 
itself, that the higltest kinds of logical skill are limits 
ed to subjects connected with human nature. These 
subjects, agreeably to their obvious and common di^ 
vision, we have attempted to elucidate in as brief and 
succiHOt a manner as possible. 

A correct notion of the evidence which these dif- 
ferent subjects affofd, and the difficulties which are, 
in some measure, inseparable from their elucidation, 
are indispensably necessary towatds framing ^any ra^ 
t]<mal system of logic. It will be found of no use to 



76 GENERAL REMARKS OK THE 

lay down rules for the guidance of our reasoning fa- 
culty, either in the discovery of truth, or in the com- 
munication to others of the truth already known, if 
correct ideas are not constantly kept before the mind, 
as to the precise nature of the subjects which come 
under our investigation. This is the key-stone to 
every useful system of intellectual education. If at- 
tention be not paid to the inherent peculiarities of 
evidence which various departments of knowledge pos- 
sess, the formal rules of logic will only be employed 
to bewilder the mind, and to propagate sophistry and 
error on the most vitally important subjects. 

But it must be obvious that no specific or particu* 
lar rules can be laid down to make us more readily 
acquainted with those different kinds and degrees of 
evidence which belong to each science ; and how far 
the consideration of these differences ought to influ- 
ence our conclusions in these sciences. This must 
always be a matter for the most patient and dispas- 
sionate attention. We must be at all times actuated 
by a sincere and ardent desire for truth ; and when 
this desire is joined to a moderate share of attention 
to the subject with which we wish to make ourselves 



CONTENTS OP THE PBECEDIN6 CHAFTEBS. 77 

acquainted, we will not be disappointed in our ob- 
ject. 

There is, however, one remark I would subjoin 
here, which, if attended to, will prove of use to the 
reader, namely, that we ought to accustom ourselves, 
when considering subjects connected with human na- 
ture, to look, as it were, beyond the mere reason- 
tng process in which we may be engaged. It is quite 
possible that we may puzzle and bewilder ourselves 
and others, by a too scrupulous attention to the pre- 
cise forms of abstract reasoning. This may, perhaps, 
appear paradoxical, but we may find numerous in* 
stances of the truth of the remark, both in the history 
of philosophy and in common life. We ought to 
suspect the soundness of any logical process, if it run 
counter to some of the most general and obvious con- 
clusions of the understanding, or to the feelings and 
sentiments of the heart. These general conclusions 
and sentiments ought to be our places of refuge 
against the wily and deceptive artifices of the mere 
quibbler and sophist. 

We have considered these subjects of human na- 
ture as constituting the materials^ so to speak, on 



which logic is to operate. In confonnity with this 
view of the matter, we have placed the precedii^ 
chapt)^^ under the general divisim o{ Part Ftrat of 
this treatise ; because^ as we have already noticed, we 
consider that without general knowledge of the topics 
for which Ic^cal skill is principally desired, the bare 
forip of the rules of that art can be of no possible 
utility, but pay, on the contrary, be pojsitively mi»T 
ehievous. Agreeably to the plan laid down, we come 
next to the Second Part of this work, which professes 
to consider the instruments which we employ in the 
reasoning process. To understand the nature and 
use of these instruments is of essential importance. 
It is, in fact, to be acquainted with all that is, or 
ever can be, meant by a system of logic. 



PART II. 



81 



CHAPTER I. 

ON ANALYSIS, AND SYNTHESIS OR INDUCTION. 

In the second part of this work we propose to treat 
of two of the most important instruments in reason* 
ing, which men are led, from the impulse of nature, 
to use — ^Analysis and Induction. 

By analysis we must understand the dividing and" 
separating a general truth or proposition into its el^ 
mentary or component parts. This is a mental pro- 
cess carried on to a great extent by all men, without 
their being in ordinary cases in the least degree con^ 
scious of its operation. When a beautiAil and exten- 
sive landscape bursts suddenly upon our view, the mind 
is taken up with the consideration of the whole taken 
together ; but after a certain time has elapsed, we 
begin to examine the different parts of which thi& 
landscape is composed ; to reflect upon and examine 



82 ON ANALYSIS, AND SlT^THBSIS OB INBUCTION. 

them, and to apportion out to each individual part, 
according to our knowledge and taste, its due propor- 
tion of influence in the general effect produced upon 
us. We examine the landscape by piece-meal ; 
beginning, in ordinary cases, with the most impor- 
tant parts, and descending downwards in the scale of 
prominency, till our observations have assumed a 
sufficient degree of minuteness to gratify the spirit 
of inquiry, or to grasp the xxim^tsl object of wjiiicfa we 
are in search. 

Those who can attend to the opera^io^s of their 
own minds, will readily perceive ^ vast use of this 
power of asalysis, and h^w neces^afry ils cakivation 
and exercise axe to our making any progress in many 
important branchea of human knowledge. Referring 
again, by way of iUustraiion^ to an, iAlteresting ht^ 
scape, we know that the artist who cauU furnish us 
with a represeDtation of it, must he greatly ia- 
debted to this power of analysis. He musit oafe- 
fully attend to the effects of the scene as a whole ; 
and . yet he must, U ev«ry step of hi^ peorfoNnan^e, 
be carrying on a most accurate and iD^inute process of 
analytical division. He- must give to every part of 



eN AKAhYBl^ AN0 SYNTH&»8 OB I2<DUCTI0N. S3 

the landscape a pr<qper degree of attention. The ge- 
nera} 99pecit is grasped as a whole by his mind ; and 
then it is paic^Ued out axBong the rocks, and prpmi- 
neiiQes^ and watei&Us, and woods, and buildings, &C.9 
in suitable pi^portions, according to the principles of 
art. Indeed) it is to this habit of analyzing his 
ideas of the sublime and beautiful in external nature, 
that he owes his skill ; for if he had no art to separ 
rate, his general eonceptioos into their component 
peu'ts, and apportion ou^ to each its suitable situation, 
as to dimensions, light, dbade, distance, colour, &c., 
his canvass would be one uniform representatioa of 
sbflfieless nonentities. 

And th^ caaie is precisely the same with one who^ 
Install of repv^senling a laadsc^pe on canvass, pre-* 
sents jp\x with a verbal description of it. No general 
language caa possiUy convey to you the most distant 
ci^nj^tiioii of the landscape, till the describer desciends 
intp part^uliirs, and divides the object which occu- 
piie^ t^s thoughts into its {several parts. He must 
ta^ ta yw ^ the oonieal*topped mountain ; the 
xvggldaad fmmn^9^. i^iV, oy«:haiigii»g the banks of 
the river ; .tj^e we^ipig widows shading the waters from . 



84 019 ANALYSIS, AND SYNTHESIS OR INDUCTION. 

jour view ; and the tremendous roar of l^e mountain- 
torrent, as it dashes from rock to rock. There must 
be individuality embodied in every part of his descrip- 
tion, that it may be understood and relished by those 
to whom it. is addressed ^ and when the whde has 
been analyzed into sufficiently minute portions, these 
are all summed up, as it were, by the mind, and 
united into one general and uniform representation. 

The same power of the mind we are here describ- 
ing is called into active exercise in all the efforts 
made in the current literature of all civilized nationar, 
to delineate human character, in its various forms and 
aspects. But here, as in painting and descriptive 
writing, general ideas must be resolved into their in- 
dividual parts, before our descriptions of eharacter can 
be rendered intelligible, or in unison with nature. 
In drawing a mental or moral portrait, we must be- 
gin with the leading and mere'*censpieuous traits of 
character, and gradually descend to- the more hidden 
and minute principles of action and passion ; filling 
up the sketch, as we proceed, with the little angular 
prominences and whimsacid eccentricities," which di* 
versify the wide and extended rangjs ef humaD na- 



ON ANALYSIS, AND SYNTHESIS OB INDUCTION. 85 

ture. In those writings descriptive of men^s habits 
of thinking, powers of mind, moral principles, pas» 
sions and sentiments, we immediate^ recognise the 
hand of a master, if the description display a minute 
and skilful exercise of the power of analyzing. We 
are never deceived in this matter, but promptly pro- 
nonnce the pcnrtrmt to be admirably drawn, when 
all the parts which constitute the picture pass in re- 
view before our minds, and become invested with an 
evident unity of design and iq[>pearance. 

In subjects of an abstract and prrfound nature, 
the mind follows the same plan to arrive at truth. 
The process employed in abstruse sciences has fre- 
quently been illustrated by a piece of machinery. 
Let us take the steam-engine &r an example. We 
wish to make ourselves well acquainted with its na- 
ture and mode of operation. If we wish to obtain 
this in&imation by the analytic method, we take the 
engine to pieces, and examine its parts separately. 
When we have seen the action and use of all the 
parts of which it is composed, compared them toge- 
ther,, and seen their mutual dependance and relation- 
ship^ we then discern the nature and use of a steam- 



86 ON ANAby«ia» ANI> frYIITHEf is OB INDUCTION. 

ei^ine. We bav« mmvelUd the mystery, and can 
now diflfiover 1^ cause of diose. pb^omena wbieh so 
often puvzkd as. 

Be&re proceeding taxihex^ however^ we would eail 
the attention of the reader to a few rranarks in refe- 
rence to the power of analysis. The analytic melhed 
is nei^er used alone, but gei^rally conjoined with die 
synthetic method. They are often alternately em« 
ployed by die mind ; and these altemationa ane, in 
the majority of instances, so quick and rapid, that 
we ^nnot peneeive them, even by the i^rongest ef- 
forts of consciousness. The manner in which we ex- 
ert these feculties is this. We first take the general 
proposition as a whole, divide it into its elemeiktaiy 
parts ; we dien sum up all these parts again, to foim 
alresh the original proposition. Thus we employ 
both analysis and synthesis. These two oparadosis 
are stricdy distinguidiable from eaeb other, fiom the 
point at whkfh t^ey set out in the reasoning process. 
If we begin at the top, and descend downwaid, it is 
analysis ; if at the bottom, a^d ascend upwards, it is 
induction. 

Analysis by itself would never, however, lead vm to 



OM AWAtYfllS, AKP gyNTMSSIS OR I19QUCTI0N. 8? 

truth. And here ve mu^ l^tice « peculiarly im- 
pdftfuit p^ineslple) msdfig oyt of %he mwbanism of 
the under^tAp^iog, ip velatipn ^ thU m^ymj^ pro- 
cess. W^r? we tp g9 QQ lo anfilyi^ eveiy object pie- 
seotiad to oi»T minda, we would nev^r g^i apy nefirer 
the trulh. Thi9C« i$ a Umit heyQi¥l whifih our di- 
vimn of olg^ta siuet ceiMse ; hut ^k Inm^ cftiaii^Qt 
be ^^ec^bcaUy pois^ out 1^ any pr^^ rulfS or 
precepts of logic. 11>i4 di^crim^tii^^ pi»w€ir is un- 
der %h& cootrol of the superi^ families of the npiiad ; 
and coxam^uly goes hy the nau^e (^jH4gmenti, ia9l€9 
&c. To be entirely de9lifei|te pf thi* pow^r^ i« to be 
euiirely dees^tij^ of iBteUoctua} a^uQii^u ; «94 W the 
contxajry, to posfi9«3: thi^ power^ a&d tPs lnQW h^ jt^ 
regulate it pffopeffly^ 9W9^itu^ the dis^i^pguj^HMg F^ 
peftues i»f a ralioiial bei^. 

Let tt9 sup$ii9S9 that a paiuter« wh^i^ h^ eud^^J^ours 
to represent a laud^^pe, should dkect Im utt^u^jw 
so jBsduutely to e^ry thi^ which ^o^ope^ lh« ru?fti 
scene hefere hipa> a3 td dwell upw* every Iwf of a 
tree, every fa^e <^ gi^j^? 9^d eyery minute object 
which came withiu th^ spbeirie of bis yisiou« h^ could, 
never by thia mean* complete a picture at aU. The 



88 OS ANALYSIS, AND SYNTH88IS OR INDUCTION. 

analysis would be too minute, and carried beyond its 
legitimate boundaries. Again, should a man, when 
he wishes to make himself acquainted with a piece of 
machinery, such, for instance, as the steam-engine 
already referred to, dwell with fastidious and scru* 
rinizing minuteness^ on the nature, configuration, and 
properties of all the fibres of wood which compose the 
firame-work of the machine, or the grains of metal, 
or the shape and number of the nails which have 
been employed in the construction of the boiler ; if, 
in fact, he were to attempt to analyze every thing re- 
lating to the object of his inquiries, he might so em- 
ploy himsdf for a thousand years, and be no nearer 
a correct understanding of the nature and power of 
the engine, than the first day he commenced his in* 
vestigations. Thus it appears that an unlimited ana- 
lysis can lead to nothing. But this power is wisely 
placed under the control of the judgment ; and 
while she occupies her supremacy, the power of ana- 
lysis is carried just to that point which is necessary 
to make us perceive the truth of the general proposi- 
tions of which the mind is in search. 

These two powers of analysis and synthesis enter 



ON ANALYSIS, AND SYNTHESIS OB INDUCTION. 89 

into every process of reasoning, however limited or 
unimportant. We are almost every moment of our 
lives employing them. These operations, however, 
are frequently so subtle and rapid, that it can only 
be from long attention to the inward workings of our 
own minds, that a haUt can be permanently formed 
of readily recognising their existence and influence 
upon our intellectual movements. From the writings 
of logicians and metaphysicians, the reader might be 
led to imagine that the analytic and inductive me- 
thods of reasoning are purely matters of artj and only 
of very recent invention. But this is a great mis- 
take. The division of our general conceptions or 
ideas into their component parts, and the power of 
again uniting them into their former state "" of aggre^ 
gation, are faculties intimately blended with the 
very earliest movements of the mind of man, how- 
ever rude or unenlightened it may be. We recog- 
nise the application of these intellectual instruments 
in the savage, as well as in the philosopher, as far as 
their respective degrees of knowledge require that ap- 
plication. 



90 OM ANALYSIS, AND 6TNTH£»^ OB INDUCTION* 

These remiu^s will be sufficient to illustrate the 
analytic method of reasoning ; we come now to the 
synthetic loethod) or that of induction. We here re- 
verse the order followed in analysis. In seeking 
knowledge {qx ourselves, dr in communicating it to 
others, by the synthetic plan, we 'begin with the 
simple and elementary parts of which general truths 
or propositions are composed. In abstract sdeocC) 
we commence with intuitive or self-evident trutha or 
axioms, and advance by regular steps upwards, car^ 
rying evidence and conviction along with us; so that, 
at every interval of our reasoning, we have a clear 
view of the ground which we have immediately gone 
Qver, and the reasons which, at every point, have 
coj«manded pur assent, 

, In naturiil philoscqphy the i^nthetic method is 
generally, adopted. In making experiments and ob- 
servations upon various objects, we notice the result ; 
£(nd by comparing apd judging, we come to the 
knowledge of those quantities or properties of bodies 
which are common to many apparently different sub- 
stances. As we follow up this process, we come to 



ON AMAZ«V9I9» AN9 9YNTHESH; 0& INDUCTION. 91 

geoeralise still more, until we arrive at what we call 
the ultimate principlea of bodies, or general lawa of 
nature. 

What g^eially passes under the denomination of 
method^ is simply the exercise of these two powers of 
analysis and induction. Our all-wise Creator has as- 
signed them a conspicuous place among our intellec- 
tual principles. There is in man a love of order and 
arrangement, which manifests itself at a very early 
period of life. At the first dawn of reason, ere the 
mental powers have acquired almost any strength, 
we find the young child begin to make selections of 
material objects, and to arrange and classify them ac- 
cording to a particular standard fixed in his mind, as 
to colour, size, &c. Some faint traces of this power 
are discernible in the inferior creation ; but it is 
vastly pre-eminent in man. It gradually ^develops 
itself as he advances to manhood ; enables him to 
divide and methodize his thoughts and sentiments ; 
and becomes of vital importance in the proper dis- 
charge of these numerous duties which fall to his lot 
to perform. 

Neither analysis nor induction, viewed singly, can 



92 ON^ ANALYSIS, AND SYNTHESIS OB INDUCTION. 

be regarded as instruments either for the discovery or 
promulgation of truth. Another power is absolutely 
necessary, — that of analogy ; and to it, therefore, we 
shall call the attention of the reader in the succeed- 
ing chapter. 



93 



CHAPTER II. 



ON ANALOGY. 



We have, in the preceding chapter, pointed out at 
some length the importance of the two operations of 
the mind called analysis and synthesis. But we 
must here observe, that these faculties would be of 
very little use to us, if we did not possess the power 
of reasoning from analogy. If we required to analyze 
every object which came before us, and to resolve it 
into its general principles, before we could pronounce 
with certainty any thing respecting it, our actual 
knowledge would be exceedingly circumscribed indeed. 
Here, however, another operation of the mind is 
brought into play, which relieves us from an incon- 
ceivable degree of trouble, enlarges our knowledge, 
and expands our reasoning powers to an almost inde- 
finite extent. This process is analogy. If we ana- 



94 ON ANALOGY. 

lyze a portion of matter into its elementary parts, we 
firmly believe that another, possessing the same ex- 
ternal appearances as the former, is composed of like 
materials. If we see a man following a certain line 
of conduct, and bringing upon himself and others 
poverty and disease, we immediately draw the con- 
clusion that the like will happen to others if they 
tread in the same steps. In these respective instances 
we do not institute an inquiry into every individual 
object upon which we reason and decide ; but we 
dfaw our conclusions from what we have actually ex- 
perienced, and apply them to objects of a similar 
nature, which we may, nevertheless, never have sub- 
mitted to personal examination. 

The term analogy Is generally used, both ih com- 
mon language and in systems of logio and philosophy, 
to denote a certain degree of relation, agreement, or 
resemblance in some points, between two or more 
objects, whidh in other respects have little in common, 
or possess altogether different properties or qualities. 
It must be obvious from the immense variety of the 
works of creation, that the objects which bear a rela- 
tion or resemblance to one another must be numerous 



ON ANALCMiY. 95 

beyond the possibility of calculation, and we will find 
that analogy or resemblance is of every degree, from 
nearly complete identity to direct opposition or con- 
trariety. 

A great portion of the reasoning of mankind is 
founded upon analogy. It is in constant and univer- 
sal use, and is employed alike by the rustic and the 
philosopher. It is one of those instrunients which 
the Almighty has placed in our hands to secure our 
comfcBTt and wdfare, and to develop for our infbrma- 
tion the laws of nature ; but, like all other gifts from 
the same munificent soinrce, it requires to be judici- 
ously applied to the proper and legitimate purposes 
for which it was given. 

In almost every department of human knowledge 
analogical reasonings are employed to a great extent, 
and are found to be of great utility. In the science 
of comparative anatomy, for example, it is of singu^ 
lar importance to trace out the resemblances between 
the structures of different animals, their organs of 
sensation^ digestion, and motion ; and from this ana- 
logical inquiry we may draw useful conclusions for 
the government of our own conduct and constitution. 



96 ON ANALOGY. 

and the promotion of our interests. For example, 
we make experiments with certain kinds of food on 
the digestive organs of dogs, and from these we infer or 
draw concluaums that such and such effects will re- 
sult to ourselves from taking these same kinds of 
food ; and these experiments have often led to the 
formation of rules of diet and re^men of considerable 
importance to our bodily health. Many highly 
beneficial discoveries in medicine may be traced to 
experiments and observations made upon the inferior 
animals, founded upon the resemblance between their 
functions of life and our own. 

In chemical w^ience we may perceive the wonderful 
effects produced by the operation of the principle of 
analogy. Many of the most splendid and important 
discoveries in this science were the result of analogi- 
cal reasonings. It was from this source that Dr. 
Priestley proved the compound nature of atmospheric 
air ; and it is related that it was in consequence of 
hints which he had given, when on a visit to Paris, 
to Lavoisier, founded entirely upon analogical con- 
jectures, that the latter philosopher was induced to 

commence experiments, with the view of proving the 

1 



ON ANALOGT. 97 

compound natuie of water, and of ledueing it to its 
constituent elements. Indeed the whole hifirtory of 
tUs veiy important and useful d^artment of human 
knowkdge exhibits very striking and incontestable 
-jptoobj how much of the art owed its existence to 
mere hints and conjeetures, founded, in many cases, 
upon very slight resemblances or analogies. 

In the science of astronomy we find that analogy 
hut been die prine^pal instrument in conducting us 
to important disooveries and improvements. The law 
of gravitation, as unlblded by Sir Isaac Newton, was 
discovered by a train of anabgieal reasoning, founded 
on one of the BM>8t triflkig circumstances which daily 
present themselves to our notice* While Sir Isaac 
sat ruminating under a tree in his garden, an apple 
happened to drop from it, and hit him on tl^ head. 
He conceived that the same law which determined 
the && of the a]^e might possiUy be that which 
moved the heavenly bodies in theif orbits. This led 
to infuiry^ and inquiry ended in a hll and settled 
QO&victiait, that the law which regulates the motion 
of terrestrial bodies is the same which regulates the 
movements of the sun, moon, and whole planetary 



98 ON ANALOGY. 

system. And it is by observing the motions of the 
planets which belong to our solar system, and by 
comparing their annual and diurnal motions with the 
corresponding motions of the earth, that we come to 
the well-grounded conclusion that these planets are 
the habitations of various orders of living beings ; for 
we are confident that the sun imparts both Kght and 
heat to the planets as well as to our globe ; and a& his 
influence gives birth to the various animated beings 
with which we are conversant, ^^ analogy,'^ says La 
Place, << induces us to believe that his influence pro- 
duces similar effects on the planets ; for it is not na- 
tural to suppose that matter, of which we see the 
fecundity develop itself in such various ways, should 
be sterile upon a planet so large as Jupiter, which 
like the earth has its days, its nights, and its years, 
and on which observation discovers changes that indi- 
cate very active forces. Man, formed for the temper- 
ature which he enjoys upon earth, could not, accord- 
ing to all appearance, live upon the other planets ; 
but ought there not to be a diversity of organization 
suited to the various temperatures of the globes of 
this universe? If the difference of elements and 



ON ANALOGY. 99 

climalies cause such variety in the productions of the 
earth, how infinitely diversified must be the produc- 
tions of the planets and their satellites. The most 
active imagination cannot form any just idea of them, 
but still their existence is extremely probable.^^ 

It would be impossible in this chapter to advert to 
all the advantages which analogical reasoning has 
conferred, and is daily conferring upon science. But 
these advantages are not exclusively confined to mat- 
ters of abstract speculation ; they influence us also, to 
a wonderful extent, even in our common and every- 
day occupations, opinions and language. Nearly 
the whole of our knowledge of human nature is found- 
ed upon analogy ; though it is commonly, but very 
erroneously, attributed to experience. We conclude, 
that any given line of conduct will be pleasant or dis- 
agreeable to our fellow-»men, merely because we con- 
ceive them to be of a similar construction with our- 
selves in body, mind, and moral feelings. When we 
confer benefits upon our neighbour, we conceive that he 
will feel grateful, because we presume that his nature is 
similar to our own; and for the same reason, when we 
inflict an injury upon him, we conceive that he will feel 



100 ON ANALOGY. 

and express indignation.* The food which i» palatable 
and nourishing to us, or that which is unpleasant and 
pernicious, we know will produce like eiects up<m 
other people, solely because we gvound our conclu- 
sions upon the analogical hypothesis that theie k a 
perfect similarity among aU men in the orgaas of di- 
gesti<m and general powers of Hfe. 

The whok structure of metaphorical language is 
grounded on the resemblance or analogy which the 
imagination conceives to exist am^g difievent ob- 
jects. We say diat virtue is fair and beautiful, that the 
mind is strong and robust, active and livdy, jnrecisely 
because we omccive there is somediing in the moral 
and mental qualifications analogous to' ^ mattfial 
objects which we dothe with these attributes. Me. 
taphmcal expressions will always be found moat nu- 
merous in the writings, of those authors who are led 
from the habita of their minds into extensive compa- 
risons, and a minute examination of the works of na- 
ture. The poet is a welUcnown instance of this. 
It i& firom metaphors and nmiles that a gfeat deid of 
the pleasure whidi poetry aibrda us is derived. We 
clothe the objects of nature, both animate and inani- 



ON ANALOOT. 101 

mate, with various properties aad attributes ; but all 
these must in true poetry bt fouuded upon some real 
or apparau analogy or resctnblanoe, otherwise we de* 
rive no pleasure from poetical metaph<M8 ; but, on 
the coDtnnry, nothing so readily disgusts us and puts 
us out of humour with our author, as when his si* 
miles and metaphors do not suggest to our minds 
some natural or fancied resemblance to the objects 
whiefa they ar^ designed to represent.' 

But though analogy is one of the most powerful 
and geneiml operations to which the mind resorts, and 
the ex^nsise of it seems indispensable to our com- 
(oHy nay^ to our very existence, yet it is not placed be^ 
yond the reach of misapj^ication. Analogy ftequently 
leads us into gross ertotH^ both in speculation and 
praetiee ; and we ought at all times in using it to 
exetvise a vigHant circumspection over all conclusions 
which seem to rest exclusively on analogical reascm- 
ings ; and more especially if these conclusions in- 
volve sulijects of deep interest to our present or fu- 
ture welL-being. Were we able, in the majority of 
oases, to trace the remote or hidden springs of those 
actions which hurry the unthinking and profligate part 



102 ON ANALOGY. 

of mankind to a eonrse of life destructive of thenr 
virtue^ their comfort, and existence, we would find 
that a-great part of their misfcHrtunes might be fairly 
attributed to erroneous or fenciful analogies, or mis* 
calculations, as to the effects of any given line of coii- 
duct. 

In our abstract and. speculative opinions, we are 
also greatly affected by erroneous or doubtiul resem- 
blances ; and no one can take up a book on controver- 
sial topics of any description without noticing that 
the differences of opinion may, in nine cases out of 
ten, be attributable to some false analogies incidentally 
introduced, as it were, into the discussion, and made 
the ground-work of the whole matter of dispute. To 
give an example of this kind of influence on our spe- 
culative conclusions arising from erroneous analogies 
will perhaps prove more strikingly illustrative of the 
truth of these remarks than any general observations 
which could be made upon the subject. The quotation 
I am about to give relates to the long and keenly 
contested question on liberty and necessity ; and the 
. extract is the more valuable as having come from the 
pen of a very able and accomplished American writer. 



ON ANALOGY. 108 

the Reverend Jonathan Edwaxds. Of course it would 
.be altogether out of place here to express any opinion 
on the questions under dispute ; it is simply our 
duty to notice how false analogies may impose upon 
the strongest minds, and vitiate a long chain of close 
and argumentative reasoning. <^ There is a vast 
di£Perence,^^ says he, ^< between the sun^s being the 
cause of the lightsomeness and warmth of the atmo- 
sphere and the brightness of gold and diamonds, by 
its presence and positive influence, and its being the 
occasion of darkness and frost in the night by its mo- 
. tion, wherAy it descends below the horizon.'^ " If 
the sun were the proper cause of cold and darkness, 
it would be the fountain of these things, as it is ike 
fountain of light and heat ; and then something 
might be argued from the nature of cold and dark- 
ness to a likeness of nature in the sun ; and it might 
. be justly inferred, that the sun itself is dark and cold, 
and that his beams are black and frosty. But, from 
; its being the cause, no otherwise than by its depar- 
ture, no such thing can be inferred, but the contrary ; 
it may justly be argued, that the sun is a bright and 
hot body, if cold and darkness are found to be the 



104 ON ANALOGY. 

canseqtieRoe i£ its witiidnivtte&t ; and tiio mere eoa- 
Btantlj and aeeessairily those eCeets «fe eeonmed wkh 
and eoaiifiod to its abeence, tiie mcNre aMi^ly does it 
argue tiie sun to be the fimntaiA of l^t and beat. 
80, inasmudi as nn is not the fintit of any positive 
ageney oir influence of the Most Higb^ butt on the 
oontraiy, arises frcon die withhdiding of his aotion 
and energy, and under eertain eiieamstanees neeeo- 
sarily follows on the want ^ his influenee ; this » 
no argument that he is sinfnl, or his operation evQ» 
but, on the contrary, that he and his ageney are al- 
together good and holy, and that he is the fountain 
of all holiness. It would be strange arguing uideed^ 
4tet because men never commit sin, but only when 
Ood leaves them to themselves, and necessarily sin when 
he does so, their sin, therefore, is not from themselves^ 
but from 6od^ and so Ood must be a sinftil being ; as 
strange as it would be to lurgue, that because it is al- 
ways daric when the sun is gone, and never dark when 
the sun is present, aU &rkness, therefore, is finm the 
sun, and his disk and beams must needs be Uadc.'^ 

Now the whole of this aigument from analogy 
is founded upon the assumed principle, that there is 



ON ANALOGY. 105 

' a rtsemUance of the sun, r created and dependent ob- 
jeet, to the Almighty ereator of that same object, and 
of every thing dse. But a mementos consideration 
will convioee ust that there can really be no resem- 
blance between the princi^e on which the movements 
and energies of a dependent creature rest, and the prin- 
ciple on which depends the active power of the Being 
who made that creature. The two olqects have no- 
thing in common ; that is, the sun wants the essen- 
tial attributes of ^f-moium^ wt//, and intelligence, 
which must be considered as inherent qualities in the 
divine nature. 

We cannot fail to view with wander and admira- 
tion that subtile power of mind> which, in geneiml 
esses, balances so nicely, and promptly too, the dif- 
icrent degrees of evidence which result from different 
degrees of analogy existing among various olgects. 
Where the iinalqgy ox resemblance between two or 
more objects is almost perfect, the mind readily, and 
upim the spur of the moment, reasons upon both, 
and draws nmilar ccmclusions from them ; and when 
this analogy or resemblance becomes &inter and 
more imperceptible, then we advance in our reason- 



106 ON ANALOGY. 

ing with more hesitation, and our eonchisions are en- 
compassed with a greater portion of doubt and ui»- 
certainty. How surprising is this power of the mind, 
and how subtile and dexterous its movements.. 

Now, looking at the great importance of analog]^, 
both as it influenees our abstract and speculative 
principles and reasonings, and as it bears upon oisr 
practical conduct, we ought to be perpetually upon 
our guard to employ this mighty engine in a proper 
manner. In this consists the greater part of thftt 
which generally goes under the denomination of 
judgment. Let us be cautious in drawing analogi- 
cal inferences and conclusions from certain sets of 
lacts or circumstances, which are not in all particulars 
alike. It is from the neglect of this precaution that 
we are so frequently involved in difficulties and per- 
plexities in our reasonings, and are thus led into 
error on many important subjects. In all our specu- 
lations we will do welt to keep this precaution steadily 
in our mind'^s eye, and we will thereby be prevented 
from fiiHing into many mistakes of moment to us, 
both as it regards our abstract principles and owe 
actual comfort and happiness. 



107 



CHAPTER III. 



ON PROBABLE EVIDENCE. 



The evidence derived from probability is, in many 
cases, precisely the same as that obtained from ana- 
logy, of which we have already treated in the pre- 
ceding chapter. We say such and such a thing will 
probably happen, when there is a resemblance or ap^ 
parent identity of circumstances in both instances. 
That portion of the evidence of probability which 
assimilates itself to analogy, depends upon the prin- 
ciple that nature is uniform in all her operations, 
and that like causes will produce like effects. 

It is better, however, to keep the evidence obtain- 
ed from probability distinct from that derived from 
analogy, though in a variety of cases the former 
seems Identical with the latter. Probability, when 
applied to mathematics, is quite distinct from analogy, 
and constitutes a separate division of that science, 



108 ON PBOBABIS EVIDEINGK. 

which goes under the denomination of the doctrine 
of chances. This is a department of human know- 
ledge exceedingly interesting and useful ; but the 
principle on which this kind of probability rests, 
cannot be applied to our reasonings on topics eonnect- 
ed with human nature. It ean therefore be of no 
service to enlarge upon this species of mathematical 
evidence^ seeing that its rules are not susceptible of 
any applkation to sulijects of a different nature. 

In usix^ the woid prDbMlityf as synonymous with 
analogy^ we may say, f«ir example, that our whole 
moral conduct is r^ulated by the rules and piinci- 
jdes of probable evidence. We labour for fixid and 
clothes, without being assured that we shall live to 
enjoy them ; and when we do obtain them, we use 
them without being previously assured that they 
will prove beneficial to us. We enter into great 
and important undertakings without having any other 
assurance that they will prove advantageous than 
that which > probability furnishes ; and we rear and 
edueate our offspring, with the hope iriiieh pro* 
bability inspires that they will outlive us, and may 
perhaps be of assistance to us in the season of need. 



109 



CHAPTER IV. 



ON TESTIMONY. 



We have seen in the preceding chapters the neces* 
sity and use of analysis, synthesis, analogy, and pro^ 
bability, both for abridging our labour, and guiding 
us to truth. But all these instruments oi reasoning 
would be of very limited utility, unless they were 
used in conjunction with another, namely human 
testimony. This lessens our mental labour in a won- 
derful degree. We rely with perfect confidence on 
the statement of credible persons in reference to cir- 
cumstances and events, which happened at times 
and places far removed from the limits of our own 
personal experience. The evidence derived from it 
enters largely into the greater part, nay, forms al- 
most th« entire mass of information which can be ac* 
quired in the wide range of human inquiry. 



110 ON TESTIMONY. 

The rules and principles of evidence arising from 
human testimony are so numerous, and of such vast 
importance, when viewed in relation to other subjects, 
that they constitute of themselves a considerable 
branch of human knowledge ; and the examination 
and application of these rules and principles give rise 
to some of the most splendid and powerful exhibitions 
of reasoning. Looking, then, at the magnitude and 
vitally interesting nature of this subject, a full and 
complete outline of it cannot be expected to be given 
here. Neither would this be of any use, if it could 
be accomplished. All that can be done is, to impress 
upon the readcr'^s attention the importance of testi- 
mony, and to offer a few observations which may in 
some measure assist him in his general reasonings on 
the subject. 

All evidence which arises from human testimony 
is made up of two ingredients ; the reasonableness of 
the matter or thing related ; and the character of the 
witnesses by whom it is related. 

In considering the testimony in favour of any fact 
or occurrence, we are naturally led, by a strong prin- 
ciple in our nature, to look narrowly at the reasona- 



ON TEOTIMONY. Ill 

bleness or probability of such a &ct or occurrence ; 
and to r^ulate our belief in either by conclusicms 
drawn from our every-day experience of what falU 
under our own personal observation. If the fact re- 
lated be in itself impossible, then no degree of testi- 
naony can ever establish it as a truth to the satis&c- 
tion of our minds. 

But the principle here laid down, that our own 
experience modifies or regulates our belief, has, by 
some writers of credit, been called in questicm ; for 
they have maintained that our reliance upon human 
testimony is most complete, when our experience is 
least ; and this, it is said, is evinced by the fact, that 
children, whose experience is very limited, believe 
any thing you tell them. But this is something like 
a quibble. There are two kinds of belief; implicit 
and rational belief The fact is established beyond 
all controversy, that our rational belief, in every thii^ 
founded upon human testimony, is vastly influenced 
by our experience ; and that it is among people who 
have the least knowledge of the world or of mankind, 
that the most perfect specimens of implicit faith are 
to be found. 



112 ON TESTmONY. 

We must) however, be careM not to lay too mudi 
stress upon this priuciple. If we were to believe 
nothing but what is in accordance with our own 
personal experience, our knowledge would be extreme- 
ly limited indeed. We ought to acknowledge the 
existence of that j^nciple in our nature which se^ns, 
with the force and rapidity of instinct, to examine a 
statement of facts grounded upon human teatimony ; 
but, at the same time, it is our duty to acquire the 
habit of making a right application of it, in the many 
important affairs of life. 

The leading points for the guidance o( the under- 
standing in matters of testimony, are the following, 
namely, whether Ae pmrsona relating the facts or 
circumstances to be believed, Bxe possessed of powers 
of mind capable of perceiving the truth ; whether 
they were eye or ear-*witnesses of what they relate ; 
whether the narmtors are honest, (aidifial, and un- 
prejudiced persons ; whether their testimony is cor- 
roborated by other persons worthy of ciedit ; whether 
the fiu$ts or ciicumstances lay exposed to open in- 
vestigauon at the time they todc place ; whether the 
witnesses betray an indiscreet zeal for the establish- 



ON TEStmONY. .113 

ment of their story, or bring forth just as much evi- 
dence as will exactly suit the matters affirmed to be 
true ; whether there be an outward visible appearance 
of honesty and simplicity of mind about them ; 
whether the narrators belong to different nations, 
sects, and situations in life ; and lastly, whether the 
other little incidental circumstances commonly con- 
nected with the relation of the main facts be of such 
a chamcter as not to throw any doubt over the te»- 
ttmony of the witnesses. 

But all logical rules relative to human testimony 
must necessarily be of a y&ty general and imperfect 
description. Rational evidence, derived from this 
source, depends upon numerous minute circumstances 
which elude all our powers of generaUiation. The 
reader ought to consult some good treatise on evi- 
denee; and if possible to make himself acquainted 
widi tiie leading rules relative to testimony laid 
down by writers on civil and criminal law. These 
will pvove of vast importance to him, even on many 
topics which may apparently be lemoved from the 
subjects of judicial investigations. 



114 



CHAPTER V. 



ON liANOUAGE. 



Language is intimately connected with the reason- 
ing faculties. Indeed, of so much importance has 
the right use and proper definition of words appeared 
to many logicians, that they have considered all 
sound reasoning to be grounded upon them. How 
far this opinion is correct will be shown in the sub- 
sequent parts of this chapter. 

Words of some description or other are used by 
all mankind, and are to be viewed in two different 
lights: 1st, To represent their own individual 
thoughts ; and, 2d, To convey ideas to others. A 
correct definition of our terms is of vital importance 
in our communications with our fellow-men ; for 
though we may use words to represent our ideas to 
ourselves according to any plan we think proper, yet 



ON LANGUAGE. 115 

when we come to reason with and discourse to others, 
we must pay the most scrupulous attention to those 
verbal or written signs, conventionally agreed upon 
in the language which we employ, in order that we 
may convey to them an accurate representation of our 
conceptions, feelings, and sentiments. 

Some writers on logic have given numerous and 
minute directions relative to the definition of our ge- 
neral terms of reasoning ; but the benefits to be de- 
rived from a close attention to these directions, will 
not, I am afraid, prove of great importance. It is, 
however, necessary that the reader should have his 
mind deeply impressed with the importance of gene- 
ral definition ; and for that end, a few remarks will 
be made to point out where this alleged importance 
is founded, and to aid the suggestion to the mind of 
those practical rules, which will, in some measure, 
enable us to avoid glaring errors of judgment, by the 
use of improper words. 

If we do not learn to contract a habit in our gene- 
ral reasonings, of examining very scrupulously the 
precise meaning of words, we &>hall run the risk of be- 
ing plunged into fallacies at almost every step. In 



116 ON tANOtTAail. 

the greater number of subjects connected ivith human 
nature, iiiete are certain common terms used, the 
meaning of which ought to be carefully determined, 
before we can safely come to a conclusion respecting 
the proposition before us. The substance of the 
usual directions of logicians on this subject may be 
comptefaended under the following heads* 

Ist, We must be careful not to make use of words 
which have no ideas attached to them. All writers 
are occasionally under the temptation to fill up a 
sentence, cnr end a paragraph, with words to which 
they have no definite conceptions attached. This 
happens more frequently in argumentative pieces of 
writing, than in statements composed of mere mat- 
ters of fact. The reader is thus apt to be led to ima- 
gine that he understands the subject under Consider- 
ation, when in reality he is ignorant (^ it. In all 
systems of philosophy and religion, both andent and 
modem, we find abundant reason to be perpetually 
on our guard against the ambiguities of words. And 
it not unfrequently happens, that in proportion to 
the length of time that particular technical jdirases 
have passed current among the learned, the difficulty 



ON LANO0A6B. 117 

o£ affixing to such phrases concise and accurate ideas 
is to a great extent augmented. 

Sd, There are many objects, the essence or nature 
©f which is identically or nearly the same, which have, 
h€>weyer, different terms attached to them. Not at- 
tending to this consideration may involve us in 
matiy important errors in our reasonings. The ap- 
plication of common terms to a variety of ohjects is a 
contrivance of the mind, exceedingly useful to a cer- 
tain extent; requiring, however, on very intricate 
and interesting subjects of thought, to be used with 
great caution. Many violent and long-continued 
disputes among the learned have taken their rise from 
this source. 

3d, Another error in reasoning arises from a cause 
precisely the opposite of that last mentioned ; namely, 
suj^osing the nature or essence of two or m<»:6 objects 
to be precisely the same, because they have the same 
t^mds affixed to th^m. The fallacies c^ judgment 
which flow from this source are as numerous as ^se 
which flow from the preceding. 

Though a conect dcfini^n of words be of vital 
iBiportanee in our general oouzie (tf reasmui^, we 



118 ON LANGUAGE. 

must be particularly careful not to overstep the legi- 
timate boundaries of verbal criticism. That we 
may become habituated to a sound and effective em- 
ployment of our reasoning powers, we ought at all 
times to evince an anxious desire to make ourselves 
more acquainted with the ideas, or mental concep- 
tions, involved in any proposition, than lirith the 
exact meaning of the words in which that proposition 
may be couched. There is not a more disingenuous 
and un^tisfactory method of reasoning, than for a 
disputant to endeavour to escape from the force of the 
arguments urged by his antagonist, by taking shelter 
under a captious demand for verbal definition. Men 
would never grow any wiser if there were not some 
limits made to definition by the native good sense 
and candour of mankind. In such a simple proposi- 
tion, for example, as virtue is honourable^ a man may 
be puzzled by a demand for verbal definition, till 
he is at a loss to know either what he is saying or 
thinking. 

We ought always to look upon definition as a two- 
edged instrument, capable of cutting both ways. 
When judiciously managed, it is of the greatest im- 



ON LANOUA6E. 319 

portance. in our general reasonings ; but its misappli- 
cation will prove equally injurious to our progress in 
truth, whatever branch of knowledge we are cultivat- 
ing. Nor can there be any definite or infallible 
rules laid down for the regulation of the understand- 
ing in its use of words. This is evidently beyond the 
reach of any system of logic whatever. All that can 
be done is, to Ornish the mind with a few very gene* 
ral hints on the importance of attending to the mean- 
ing of words, and then to leave the rest to the natu* 
ral operation of the mind itself. The inherent power 
in our intellectual nature of making a right applica- 
tion of words is very strong, when not weakened or 
misdirected by false or too refined principles of verbal 
criticism. Of the abstract nature of this power we 
know nothing ; nor would it, perhaps, be of much 
consequence to the right management of our reason- 
ing faculties, if we did. We are guided on this, as 
on many other occasions, by the unerring hand of in- 
finite wisdom, manifested in the peculiar structure of 
our minds. 

To remedy the defects of language, as an instru- 
ment of reasoning by a system of logic, two things 



120 ON LANGVAGB. 

would require to be aecomplished ; namely, that we 
should always, when called upon for a defimtioii of 
our terms, be aUe to csaploy such explamtery words, 
as would be altogether removed from, the slightest am- 
biguity; and seeondly, that we should prove both 
when, and how, to enter into a rigid examinatiim of 
the ideas attached to the terms of which any given 
prq^tion is composed. But tliese objects^ in Aw 
absolute ferm, are perfectly unattainable. No words 
ate used to ^plain or qualify tibe meaning o£ others, 
that are not diemselves as liable to ambiguity as the 
words to be exj^ained. And aa to any rules of kgic, 
capable of instructing us when we are to call for ver- 
bal deflnltioas, and when not,, the thought is pcscfiect- 
ly chimerical ; as we have tdxeady said^ all that can 
be done in this ease, must be limited to mere general 
hints and easual observations. No rule can be fiam- 
ed to ^ow US when w<b are to give a definition, or 
when to demasid one fisom those with whom we are 
reasoniii^. This must be left to our own gosd sense 
and candour. We heartily despise the n(wm, in an 
intellectual point of view, who shuts his e»m against 
a rational appeal to his understandmg, seMj because 



iftiere may be some deviation in the speak^'^s knguage 
from the authorized mode of pronunciation ; so in 
like manner ought we to lightly esteem the person 
who wishes to entangle us, at every step of our rea^ 
soning, by demanding captious and trifling verbal 
definitions. The one habit is just as indicative of a 
little and narrow mind as the other ; and both habits 
must effectually destroy that candid and dispassion- 
ate frame of mind on which our progress in real 
wisdom vitally depends. 

That theory must appear totally untenable, I con- 
ceive, even to the most superficial inquirer, which 
maintains that words, and words alone, are the ele« 
ments with which reason is conversant. Let us take, 
for example, the simple affirmation, that John is an- 
gry. What does this mean ? Do not all mankind 
know what is meant by this proposition, the moment 
it is enunciated ? But let a person call for a defini- 
tion of anger, and there will arise in a moment abun- 
dant matter for interminable disputes. Anger is de- 
fined by one lexicographer, as ^< an uneasiness upon 
receipt of injury ;"" by another, ** the effect of un- 
meriied provocation.'^'' Are we any wiser by these 



122 ON Ulnovage. 

definitions, considered as mere definttums f Not in 
the slightest d^ee. Now suppose, in our great 
anx^jr for excessive perspicuity, that we call in a 
philosopher, who is generally allowed to be £» supe- 
rior to a mere compiler of words, and see how he will 
explain anger. He will tell you, ^^ that anger .is an 
emotion of instant displeasure which arises firmn the 
feeling of injury done, or the discovery of injury in- 
tended, or in many cases, from the discovery of the 
mere omission of good offices to which we conceived 
ourselves entitled, though this very omission may, of 
itself, be regarded as a species of injury.''^* Have 
we gained any thing by this philosophical definition 
of anger ? I am afraid not. But suppose there still 
remained, notwithstanding this strenuous endeavour 
Ip attain verbal accuracy, a desire to question the 
truth of the position, that John is angry ; here 
are provided ample materials for lengthened discus- 
sion. We might ask what is an emotion ; what is 
meant by imtant^ and dispkaaure^ and omustoai, and 
^ood offices, and species^ and injury, and many other 

^ Brown's Lectures oa the Philosophy of the Miii4* 



ON LANGT7A6E. 123 

terms «mplo7ed in this philosophical definition of 
anger. In fact, we might thus persist in defining 
' for a century, and get no farther than the point from 
which we set out. We may clearly see, by this ex- 
ample, how totally insufficient are all mere definitions 
of general terms to satisfy the mind, when it either 
will not or cannot attend the thing signified. 

Let us, however, take another example firom a 
comnoon piece of colloquial language, which nobody 
would think involved any ambiguity, from the mere 
words in which it is couched. ^^ How do you do to 
day ?^ « Pretty well, I thank you.'' Suppose that 
the answerer to this question were further interro- 
gated as to what he meant by being *^ pretty well ;'^ 
he would tell you that he was in tery good htalik. 
But what is good health f There have been many 
discussions on this point ; and it has hitherto proved 
as difficult for medical men to point out the precise 
and infallible symptoms of perfect healthy as it has 
been for metaphysicians to define the abstract nature 
of truth. But let us lode at the matter according to 
the strict rule^ of verbal definition. Health is de- 
fined, by one writer, to be ^^ soundness of body ;'' 



124 ON LANGUAGE. 

and by another, ^^ freedom from sickness ^ We may 
not rest satisfied with these definitions ; and may 
possibly think of resorting for information to a phy- 
sician, who is engaged in constant endeavours to re- 
store people to this state called health. And surely 
we may reasonably presume that he will tell us what 
health is. Well, then, we ask him ; and he informs 
us, with minute and scientific precision^ that, '^ as 
long as the various functions of the human body, the 
voluntary as well as the involuntary motions, are 
performed with ease, and sufier no interruption, we 
usually pronounce it in a state of health ; in the con- 
trary case, we call it diseased. I shall advance a step 
farther, and assert, that when we do not feel ourselves 
encumbered with the weight of our own frame, and 
when we are not disposed to reflect, with uneasiness 
and solicitude, upon its physical condition, then we 
have a right to consider our health as being in a per- 
fect stateJ*^* Are our scruples^ arising from the im- 
perfections of language removed by this definition ? 
Many will be inclined to consider that we might as 

* Br. Willich's Lectures on Diet and Regimen. P. 50. 



JON LANQUAOE. 125 

well have remained contented with the first answer, 
'« pretty well, I thank you, Sir,'*' 

Hence arises the inutility, for purposes of general 
reasoning, of all refined etymological speculations on 
language ; such, for instance, as those of Mr. Home 
Tooke, and others. As matters of curiosity, they 
may be tolerated, but for guiding the mind in a ju- 
dicious logical definition and arrangement of lan- 
guage, they are manifestly insufficient. Nay, it 
would not be affirming too much to maintain, that 
both theory and fact go to prove, that such specula- 
tions weaken the judgment, and greatly circumscribe 
its expansive power. An enthusiastic etymologist 
scrutinizes an argument, like a traveller with micro^ 
scopic eyes, where the inequalities of the ground he 
treads upon are magnified into yawning caverns, and 
the motes that flutter in the sunbeams, into lofty 
mountains. 

Some logicians have given us catalogues of parti- 
cular words, of an ambiguous nature, used in several 
branches of knowledge, with the view of assisting us 
in avoiding fallacies in reasoning. But these cata- 
logues only point out the general insufficiency of all 



126 ON LANGUAOK. 

language when apfplicd to subjects c^ human nature^ 
and the necessity of directing our mind^s eye, cm all 
oocasicms, to the ideas for which tbej stand. With* 
oat this precaution all formal rules of definiti(Hi will 
prove of little use; f<Hr the truth i% that all the 
words employed in every branch of human inquiry, 
will be found, if the principles of veibal deSnition be 
carried beyond their proper limits, to be equally eal-- 
Gulated to involve us in logical doubts and perplexi- 
ties. Let the reader, then, remember the very stril* 
ing and judicious remark of Mr. Hobbes of Malmes> 
bury, and regulate his understanding by its true 
import, and he will not depart far from the truth, 
namely, ^ ikai wwrds are the counters of wise men^ 
hit tie money offools.^'* 



127 



CHAPTER VI. 

GKNEKAL KEMARKS OS THE FIVE PRECEDING 
CHAFTEB8. 

The contents of the five foregoing chapters are in- 
tended to make us familiar with the kind of instru^* 
ments we employ in reasoning. These instruments 
are Aimished to us by nature ; they are principles of 
our minds, distinctly and accurately defined. In all 
kinds and degrees of reasoning we make use of them. 
The frequency with which each instrument respec- 
tively is handled, depends upon the nature of the 
argumentative process, joined to the relative strength 
and useiulness of the different powers, arising either 
from their original nature or from mental cultivation. 
To have an accurate knowledge, then, of these in- 
struments, their nature and use, is an indispensable 
qualification for general reasoning. But such know* 



128 GENKRAI* BBKARKS ON THE 

ledge IS only useful for this end, when employed in 
conjunction with a knowledge of the subjects on 
which these instruments are to be used* A know- 
ledge of the instruments, and a knowledge of the 
materials on which they are to operate, act and re-act 
upon one another. Their proper and judicious man- 
agement is what goes under the denomination of 
sound and comprehensive reasoning. The variou$ 
proportions in which these two kinds of knowledge 
are blended in ratiocination, constitute that almost 
infinite variety of mental character which we see 
developed everywhere around ns. 

We have already hinted, in considering these ele^ 
mentary principles of reasoning, that no preeise or 
in£eillitde rules can be devised to ^ow the reader how 
to employ these instruments of reasoning, or where 
he is to use one particular instrument and where an- 
other. This must be a matter to be left entirely to 
the native powers of the mind itself, aided hy general 
rules &r their cultivation. 

In taking a retrospective view of the preceding 
chapters^ in the second part of this work, we cannot 
fail to perceive that the process of reasoning is very 



FIVE PKBCEDINO CHAPTERS. 129 

complex. It reqmres the agency of many separate 
powers for its completion. First, we have simple 
perception, then we have abstraction, or the consider- 
ation of the general proposition, apart from other ob- 
jects. We have next the very subtile and refined 
processes of analysis and synthesis. Analogy and 
probability sometimes precede and sometimes follow 
these. We require to fix in our minds not only the 
meaning of our own language, but the language in 
which the proposition under notice may be couched. 
Then come nice calculations regarding the evidence 
of testimony. Many other ingredients go towards 
comprising a process of reasoning ; but those which 
we have enumerated are the principal. How won- 
derful does all this appear to us ! The rapidity of 
our mental operations exceeds all human conception 
or calculation. We here and there obtain a glance 
of the internal structure of our inward principle of 
thought ; but it is only to make us feel the truth of 
the scriptural declaration, that << we are fearfully and 
wonderfully made.**' 

But the wisdom displayed in this our mental con- 
stitution is not less wonderful than its mechanism. 



-y 



130 GENERAL BEMARKS* 

Had the operations of reasoning been slower than 
they are, our stodc of knowledge woidd have beeo 
greatly diminished ; and the geoeial firame-work of 
our physical and mental systems would have been 
completely deranged. CoBsideiing how extensiTe» 
nay almost bomidless, the field of knowledge is> and 
how inadequate the longest life, and the most exalted 
intelleetual endowments, to explore all its parts and 
define its limits ; we see a peculiar fitness in omr lea* 
soning powers being exerted with great promptitade 
and imerring effect Our very existence also depends 
npon the wisdom of this providential anrangcineBt ; 
for we are often placed in circumstances which reqmre 
for our safety the examination of premises and the 
drawing of conclusions with the seeming rapidity of 
Kghtning. Sndi operations elude all our attempts 
at any thing like a minute examination^ and we must 
, content ourselves with acquiescing in the sentiment 
of the Psalmist) << that such knowledge is too wen* 
derful for yasJ" 



PART III. 



133 



CHAPTER I- 



ON SYLLOGISMS. 



The third principal division cS this work embraces 
what has been considered as the mechanical part of 
logic. Many writers have maintained that this is 
the only subject which, with propriety, can be called 
logic ; while others again have considered it only in 
reference to its practical efficacy in guiding and 
strengthening our general powers of reasoning. 

Without entering into any controversy on this sub- 
ject, I venture to obseive> that there is a clear and 
palpable distinction in the nature of things between 
the natural instruments we use in reasoning, pointed 
out i9 the preceding part of this volume, and those 
rules of art which have been framed with the view of 
affording, in some measure at least, a test or stan- 
dard of the right application of these purely mental 



134 ON SYLLOGISMS. 

instruments of ratiocination. This distinction, if 
kept distinctly before the mind of the reader, will not 
only enable him to conduct his reasonings on most 
topics with additional accuracy and vigour, but also 
to extract many useAil hints from various treatises on 
logic which have been framed upon the pure princi* 
pies of mechanical art. 

In accordance with our plan, we come now to a 
part of logic which has produced more keen disputes 
than any other, the nature and advantages of syllo- 
gisms. This mode of treating of general reasoning 
was invented, it is commonly affirmed, by Aristotle. 
It is to be found in his Analytics or Treatise on 
Logic, a work which regulated the opinions of the 
learned for nearly two thousand years. The whole of 
his theory of reasoning is founded upon his ten cote- 
gart'es or classes of subjects, which comprehend, ac- 
cording to his conception, every conceivable object of 
knowledge in the obtaining of which reason is em- 
ployed* From the celebrity which these ten catego- 
ries have obtained, and from the frequent references 
made to them in books of science, both ancient and 
modem, we shall simply enumerate them, without, 



on STU^OOISMS. 186 

bowever, entering at preient into any dumianon on 
their niiture or merits. 

The following are Abe Un categories or daases into 
which all our thoughts tx ideas may be resolved. 
All substances are comprehended under the^rj<; 
and what are termed the mccidenta or fualUies of and 
relaiions am<Mig these suhstances, are arranged under 
the other nine heads. 

l$ty Substamcb; which is either material or 
spiritual. - 

2df Quantity ; which is divided into three spe* 
cies, namely, that which is unconnected, as num- 
ber ; that which is connected, as time and motion ; 
and that which is permanent, as space or extension, 
vastness, profundity, &c. 

3dy Quality ; which is regarded by the Ghrecian 
sage as comprehending four distinct kinds. 1. The 
qualities or dispositions of mind or body which are 
acquired by constant repetition, as the knowledge of 
the sciences, virtue, vice ; the arts of painting, writ-* 
ing, dancing, sculpture, &c. 2. The natural qua* 
lities, sudi as the faculties of soul and body, the 
understanding, the will, memory, imagination, the 



im 



OV SYLLOGISMS. 



five external senses^ the power of bodily motion ^ &c. 

3. Sensible qualities, as hardness, softness, weight, 
coldness, heat, colours, sounds, smells, and tastes. 

4. Form or figure, as round, square, spherical, 
cubical, Sec. 

4f A, Relation, or the relative connexion of one 
thing with another, as a parent with a child, a mas- 
ter with his servant, and a king with his subjects ; 
also resemblance, equality, greatness, smallness, &c. 

Sthf Action. This is either personal, as walk- 
ing, dancing, knowing, loving; or external, as to 
strike, to cut, to break, to unfold, to stir up. Sec. 

6thi To SuFFEB ; as to be beaten, to be broken, 
to be unfolded, to be stirred up, 8cc. 

7<A, Whebe ; that is every t^ing connected with 
questions in regard to place or situation ; as to be at 
Rome, London, Paris, in the street, library. Sec. 

8thf When ; that is such answers as we give to 
questions in relation to time ; as. How -long is it 
since he died P One hundred years. When did he 
do it ? Yesterday. 

9tA, Situation ; as standing, sitting, before, be- 
hind, right, left, &c. 



ON SYLLOGISMS. 137 

10th, To HAVE ; that is» any thing for personal 
comfinrt &Ai convenience ; such as to be clothed, to 
be anned, &c. 

Leaving the ten categories to the consideration of 
the reader, we shall now make a few remarks upon 
the syllogism. In doing thi^, however, all that is 
here intended is, Jirsty to make a few observations 
upon that process of reasoning which gives rise to the 
syllogism ; — tecondly, to show the reader some of the 
different kinds of syllogisms ; and, thirdly , to give a 
brief statement of the advantages arising from a know- 
ledge and application of the syllogistic theory. 

The process of reasoning has, by some logicians, 
been looked upon as simply a process of comparison^ 
When we compare two things of dissimilar qualities 
together, we cannot affirm or do any thing respecting 
them, without endeavouring to find some interme- 
diate ideas to reconcile, as it were, to the mind, these 
dissimilar or contrary qualities. But, it may be 
asked, by what process is this effected ? And how do 
these intermediate ideas come to discover the rela- 
tions of things qS an incongruous and opposite na- 
ture? No rational answer can be given to these 



138 ON STiiLOGTSMS. 

questions, except this, that such is the co«istittttu>n of 
our nature, that when two ideas are presented to our 
attention, from whieh no reasoning condnsion can be 
adduced, it so happens that when one or more inter- 
mediate ideas are presented to our minds, and con- 
templated by them, in conjunction with the other two 
ideas, we instantaneously, as.it were, draw a logical 
inference from the whole. 

It is from this cause that these writers who have 
argued in favour of the use of syllogisms have founded 
their doctrine on the principle, that every act of rea- 
soning assumes the form of a syllogism. They con- 
sider reasoning to be merely an operation of the mind, 
which deducts some unknown propositions from other 
propositions which have been rendered familiar by a 
previous exercise of reasoning, or are intuitively cer- 
tain. In every simple process of reasoning, two mem- 
bers or parts are employed ; and these members or 
parts must of themselves be obvious to the under- 
standing, and we assent to their truth immediately 
upon their enunciation. In a syllogism, the premises 
are assumed to be self-evident truths ; and if this 
were not the case, we could never draw any logical in- 



ON SYLLOGISMS. 139 

ference from tbem. In the majcNr of a sjHogism, the 
connexion between the snbjeet and the predicate could 
not be observed by the mind, by a mere attention to 
die ideas themselves which compose the major; for 
this proposition requires as much proof as the con- 
clusion drawn from it. In this case the mind must 
find out fresh matter to trace the connexion wanted, 
and fumish another syllogism to establish the first 
point in the general one. And should it so happen, 
that this second syllogism is not found sufficient to 
establish the truth of the first, we must have recourse 
to a third, and a fourth, and so on, till it be disco- 
vered. We go on in this manner, till we arrive at 
perfect intuitive truths, and here we are compelled to 
rest satisfied. 

From these r^arks, it is maintained, therefore, 
that every single process of reasoning is founded upon 
intuitive propositions ; and if this be not the case^ 
syllc^sms must be employed to lay the foundation. 
By this view of the matter, every train of reasoning 
consists of a greater or lesser number of syllogisms. 
These may not, in many cases, be put into a ibrmal 
shape ; but it is entiiely from the natural connexion 



140 OV SYLLOOIfiMS. 

which subsists among the propositions, that the force 
and cogency of general reasoning proceeds. 

To show the nature of the syllogism more clearly, 
we shall here give an example. Let us take the pro^ 
position, and form it into the shape of a syllogism — 
that man otight to practise Justice. Now, we want 
to discover the relation which ought to subsist be- 
tween man and justice ; for the mind does not per- 
ceive this relation, as the proposition at present 
stands. By considering the matter a little, we soon 
learn, that for man to be under an obligation to 'do a 
thing, he must have the sagacity to perceive, and the 
power to execute it. A creature must have the fa- 
culty of distinguishing good from evil, as well as the 
liberty of choosing either, otherwise he lies under no 
obligation to perform the one or refrain from the other. 
Now, these are the middle terms or ideas^ which 
must be compared by the mind with the first term in 
the proposition, namely man ; and when we have 
made this comparison, we find that it may be affirmed 
of him, that he is a being who can distinguish good 
from evil, and that he has the liberty of choice in his 
actions. We have here, then, two distinct judg- 



ON SYLLOOI6MS, 141 

ments that man can distinguish good from evil, and 
that he has the power of himself to do either ; and 
a third judgment immediately suggests itself, that 
man ought to practise justice. The argument may 
now be put into the shape of a syllogism, thus :^- 

Every creature possessed of reason and liberty ought 

to practise justice ; 
Man is a creature possessed of reason and liberty. 
Therefore man ought to practise justice. 

In this syllogism three distinct parts or proposi- 
tions are involved ; and they are so arranged as to 
agree with the mode which our minds naturally fol- 
low in the arrangement of our ideas in reasoning. 
The first two propositions are denominated the pre- 
mises, because they go before, or lay the foundation 
for, the other proposition, which is called the conclu- 
sion, in consequence of its naturally growing out of 
the premises. But there is a matter here which the 
reader will do well to consider thoroughly, and make 
himself master of. The two terms man and justice, 

which express the two ideas whose conneidon or rela* 
1 



142 ON SYIiLOaiSMS. 

tion we wish to fidd out, are called the extremes ; and 
the intermediate idea, by which this connexion or 
relation is discovered, namely, a being possessed of 
reason and liberty y takes the name of the middle term. 
Now we axe to understand that before the premises of 
a syllogism can be established, the terms called the 
extremes^ and the middle term, must be compared 
together ; for out of this comparison proceeds the very 
essence of the syllogism. The conclusion is the pro- 
position which arises from the extremes being con- 
sidered either in connexion with, or separated from, 
that which appears the result of this compariscm. 

Reasoning in common life has been affirmed to be 
nothing more than merely ascribing the general 
qualities of things to their objects in matters with 
which we are concerned. We refer a particular ob- 
ject to some general head or class, which general 
head or class possesses some fixed attribute or quality. 
We then ascribe that attribute or quality to the par- 
ticular object we have placed under the general as- 
sortment of things. Thus^ if I scrutinize the charac- 
ter of my friend John, and find it to be virtuous, I 
then begin to reflect that a virtuous character is 



ON STI.L0GI8M8. 143 

worthy of esteem and reward ; and I draw the con- 
clusion, that the conduct of John is worthy of esteein 
and reward. This is the common process which the 
mind follows in fcHrming judgments of this descrip- 
tion. If we wish to arrange the process of reasoning 
in the form of a syllogism) it will stand thus : — 

Every virtuous man is worthy of esteem and reward ; 

John is a virtuous man. 

Therefore John is worthy of esteem and reward. 

These few remarks apply to syllogisms in general. 
But we come now to speak of the different kinds or 
sorts of syllogisms. There are four general assort- 
ments, which take their rise from the particular situ- 
ation which the middle term holds in the syllogism. 
1st, That in which the middle term is the subject of 
the major proposition, and the predicate of the minor. 
2d, That in which the middle term becomes the pre- 
dicate of both premises. 3d,' That in which the 
nuddle term becomes the subject of both premises. 
And, 4th, That in which the middle term is the pre- 
dicate of the major proposition, and the subject of 



144 ON SYLLOGISMS. 

the minor. These four different classes or assort- 
ments become divided again according to what lo- 
gicians call their modes^ which are determined by. the 
quantity and quality of the proposition framed into 
syllogisms. By quantity is meant the consideration 
of propositions as they relate to universah or particu- 
lars ; and by quality^ whether these propositions be 
of an affirmative or negative description. All the 
possible modes of syllogisms may be found by ascer- 
taining how many combinations may be made out of 
these four general kinds. The number will be sixty- 
four, which, multiplied by four, will give two hundred 
and fifty-six. 

Each of these figures has rules peculiar to itself; 
but there are some rules which are common to all 
syllogisms ; and Aristotle enumerates the following. 
1st, Every syllogism must have only three terms or 
propositions. 2d, The middle term must be taken i 
universally in one of the premises. 3d, If one of thei 
extremes be particular in one of the premises, it must 
also be particular in the conclusion. 4th, The con* 
elusion must be particular, if either of the premised 
be particular ; and negative^ if either of the premises 

I 



. ON SYLLOei9H8. 1 4S 

be negative. 5th, No term can be taken untveraalty 
in the conclusion, if it be not taken universally in 
the premises, 

'Without drawing out these general remarks on the 
nature of syllogisms to a greater length, we shall now 
advert to a few only of the different kinds of syllo- 
gisms. These will be sufficient for common purposes, 
as well as to illustrate the leading principles of the 
syllc^istic theory. 

There is a kind of syllogism in which the number 
of propositions is more than three. This syllogism 
is technically called a sorites ; which means a number 
of propositions piled up one upon another, in which 
the predicate of the first proposition is made the sub* 
ject of the second, and so on, till in the conclusion 
the predicate is attributed to the first subject : thus, 

Man is an animal. 
Every animal is a body. 
Every body is a substance. 
Therefore, every man is a substance. 



Now this particular combination of propositions, 

H 



146 ON 8TLI10018M6* 

it must appear obvioiis to the reader, may be con* 
tinued to almost any length we ^sire, without weak- 
ening the premises or grounds on which the conclu- 
sion tests. The reason of this is, that this kind of 
compound syllogisms may be divided into as many 
simple ones as there are middle terms in the sorites. 
When such a division takes place, and the simple 
syllogisms fellow one another, the last in the series 
becomes the conclusion of the compound syllogism or 
sorites. This method, therefore, of constructing syl- 
logisms is nothing more nor less than joining together 
sev^al sample syllogisms, and consequently the sori- 
tes must stand upon the same ground, in respect to 
logical stability, as do the indivUual parts of which 
it is composed. 

Therfe is another kind of syllogisms, called by lo- 
gicians entkymeme ; where one of the parts is omitted, 
and is left for the mind to supply upon the spur of 
the moment. This happens when one or more of 
the premises is a self-evident truth, and familiar to 
the mind of every one. Such, for instance, is the 
following i 



ON SYLLO0IS9IS. 147 

Every man must breathe. 
Therefore the king must breathe. 

This syllogism has the appearance of being imper- 
fect, as having only two pri^ositions ; but this is not 
the case. It is really complete ; for the minor pro* 
position, tx^try king is a man^ is omitted, and the 
reader is supposed to supply the ellipsis in his own 
mind. 

False syllogisms are called paralogisms ; and a 
&lse syllogism, the error or fiJlacy of which is not 
very readily perceived by the mind, is called a so- 
phism. The following kinds of sophisms are gener- 
ally treated of by writers on logic. 

Ignoratio eknchij or a mistake of the question, is 
a term applied to a proposition which has no neces- 
sary connexion with the subject in dispute. If, for 
example, a man should wish to establish the posi- 
tion, that God is infinitely good and merciful, and 
begin by demonstrating His (unniscience, this would 
be a deviation from the question under consideration ; 
for God^s omniscience may be granted, and yet His 



14B ON sYhhoaisM. 

goodness and mercy may still remain subjects of dis- 
cussion. In like manner, a man may argue that all 
religion is a delusion ; for he has seen some persons 
who have made loud professions of piety and devotion 
in public, who were, nevertheless, very profligate and 
wicked in their general conduct. This also is an tg^ 
noratio elenchi, or a mistake of the question ; for a 
hypocritical professor of a ^stem is here made the 
test or standard by which the nature and truth of 
that system is to be estimated. 

Petitto principti, or begging the question, is a 
term employed to denote the taking for granted the 
proposition you wish to prove. If a man w^re to 
maintain that a certain act of his was not in the least 
immoral, because it was not contrary to the acknow* 
ledged rules of morality, nor to commands of Scrip- 
ture ; he would here be begging die question, and 
assuming in the outset the very thing he was desirous 
to prove — ^the harmless nature of the act. This mode 
of reasoning is also sometimes called arguing idem 
per idem. 

Arguing in a circk is when the premises are de- 



ON 6¥LI<00ISMfil* 149 

monstrated by the oenclusion, and the coficlusion by 
the premises. If, for instance, it.be affirmed that 
the authority of any particular church proves the 
truth of the sacred Scriptures, and the Scriptures the 
authority of that church. This would be arguing in 
a circle* 

Non causa pro causa^ the assigning of a false 
cause for any effect. Thus when a person ascribes 
certain events to good or ill luck, to the influence of 
the planets or the like. 

Fallacia accid^nttSf arguing from what is local and 
incidental to what is general and essential. If, for 
example, a person were to maintain that a 'bank-note 
of any country is of a value as universal and absolute 
as a piece of gold, this would be a fallacia acctdentis ; 
for paper money has only a local, but gold a general 
value. And further, if a man were to say that any 
particular amusement is dangerous or immoral be- 
cause it is liable to be abused, this is arguing from 
what is particular and accidental, to what is general 
and essential. 

Sophisms of equivocation are those which are 
formed by the employment of ambiguous terms, or 



150 ON SYLLOGISMS. 

terms which are of doubtful meaning. The following 
is an old example. 

He that says you are an animal says true ; 

He that says you are a goose, says you are an animal ; 

Therefore, he that says you are a goose says true.* 

We have here given as full an account of the dif- 
ferent kinds of syllogisms, as will prove of considera- 
ble assistance to the reader in gaining an insight into 
their general nature and application. The catalogue 
might haye been greatly extended ; but this might 
have rendered the work uninteresting without any 
corresponding benefit. 

The utility of the syllogistic theory has been long 
and keenly contested. Even at the present day a 
considerable diversity of opinion prevails as to its na- 
ture and the extent of its usefulness. But the dis- 
pute, though still undecided, is now carried on with 
more calmness and judgment than in bygone times ; 
and perhaps the day is not far distant, when an 

* Bentham'8 Comp. Log^c. 



O^ 0TI)LOO10K8. 151 

unanimous and settled optniwi will be entertained by 
all speculative thiiik^rs, as to the true nat^e of the 
lineal writings <tf Aristotle, and the portion of ]^aise . 
to which they are justly ^ititl^. 

It would be contrary to the plan of this work to 
enter into any lengthened account <^ the controversy 
on this subject ; but brfore quitting this chapter, I 
will take the liberty of making a few remarks on the 
general importance of the syllogism, as an instru- 
ment of reasoning. 

It was long contended by the friends of the syllo* 
gistic method, that it was a valuable instrument for 
the discovery of truth. This was stoutly denied by 
its adversaries. The disputants are now, however, 
almost completely agreed, that it is of no use for the 
discovery of unknown truths; but its friends still 
maintain that it is very useful as an illustration of the 
uniform nature of all kinds of reasoning, and as . a 
test to try the soundnjess oSfH kinds of arguments. 
- In an able work recently published by Arehbibhop 
Wbately, on the use of (lie syllogistic theory, the 
author observes, that " Logic, which is, as it were, 
the grammar of reasoning, does not bring forward the 



162 ON-8lriiIi06I8Mft. 

regular syUogism as a di^ncit mode of argumentation, 
designed to be substituted for any other mode ; but 
as the form to which all correct reasoning may be ul- 
timately reduced; and which, consequently, serves 
the purpose (when we are employing logic as an ariyj 
of a test to try the validity oi any argument ; in the 
same manner as by chemical analysis we develope and 
submit to a distinct examination the elements of 
which any compound body is composed, and are thus 
enabled to detect any latent sophistication and impu* 
rity.'** 

Now, I must confess that I cannot see the truth 
of these remarks. Allowing, with the author, that 
the syllogism is the form into which all reasoning is 
resolvable ; yet he distinctly observes,— and the obser- 
vation is forced upon every one who will for a mo- 
ment think of the nature of the syllogism,— ^that in 
all cases, we must take the premises for granted, be* 
fore we can obtain the conclusion derivable from a 
syllogism. The difficulty in this case is, to see how 
an instrument of this kind can be useful as a test to 

* Elements of Logic, p. 19* 



ON SYLLOGISMS* 153 

try the validity or soundness of any argument, where 
the fundamental premises, on whidi the argument is 
grounded, must be taken for granted ; and when the 
conclusion which must arise from thislqgical test is 
obtained without any reference whatever to* either the 
truth or falsehood of these same premises. 

Let us, for the sake of clearness, try the principle laid 
down by the Archbishop, by adducing two syllogisms. 

All tyrannical governments are bad. 
The Turkish government is a tyrannical go- 
vernment. 
Therefore the Turkish government is bad. 

Again, 

AU animals walk on four legs, 
. Man is an animal. 
Therefore man walks en four legs. 

These are perfect syllogisms; and the reasoning 
18 the same in both, considered as mere reasoning. 
If we take the premises in both syllogisms for grant- 



154 ON STLL0OI8MS. 

ed, as we are bound to do before we can be entitled 
to ftaw the conclusions, then these conclusions must 
be both true, that the Turkish government is a bed 
government, and that man walks upon four legs. 
Now is this the way to try the validity of any argu* 
ment, or to detect *^ any latent sophistication or im* 
purity^ in a piece of lengthened and general reasoa- 
ing? 

It appears to me, that the Archbishop has fiiUen 
into error regarding the nature and importance of the 
syllogism, from instituting certain analogies between 
it and some other departments of knowledge, such 
as chemistry, grammar, and arithmetic. He com- 
pares the analysis of a piece of reasoning, to the che- 
mical analysis of any material substance ; he ima- 
gines that the logic of syllogisms bears the same 
relation to general reasoning that gnunmardoes to 
language; and the technical terms in which the 
syllogistic process is couched, are viewed as resem- 
bling the arbitrary signs affixed to arithmetical quan- 
tities. A very slight attention, however, to those 
analogical illustrations will be sufficient to convince 
the reader that they are by no means perfect. Iiet us 



OK 8YLL0016M8. 155 

take cheimstr)r for an example* A chemist may 
analyze any given substance into what be considers 
its elementary parts ; but it by no means follows, 
tliat these parts^ individually, can be employed to re^ 
present, with inialliUe certainty, the properties and 
uses of these same elementary parts when united in* 
to one substance. Every material body is composed 
of elementary parts ; and these parta are indispensa^ 
bly neeessary to make that body what it is. No one 
dementary part can be dispensed with in the combi* 
nation ; otherwise the sensible properties of the gene- 
ral body would be so altered or modified, as entirely 
to destroy its identity. Now, in reasoning, this is not 
the <»se, according to the views held by Archbishop 
Whately. All reasoning, he maintains, is composed 
of the same materials, namely, syllogisms. Reasour 
ing is not, in this case at least, like a substance sub- 
jected to chemical analysis, divided into its elemen- 
tary parts ; because there are no parts ; for if it be 
reasoning, it must be the syllogism, and nothing 
more. Chemical agency consists merely in separating 
one thing from another ; setting either apart, or 
combining them with other things, with which they 



156 OK STLX.OGI8M0. 

have a greater or less affinity. But to institute an 
analogy between this prooess and the analysis of a 
piece of reasoning, we might ask what other elements 
compose this piece besides the syllogism ? The an- 
swer, according to Archbishop Whately's theory, must 
be, that there are no other parts at all. Reasoning 
is a simple homogeneous matter ; and therefore it can 
only be a test of itself. The syllogism must be the 
argument, and the argument must be the syllogism ; 
and, therefore, the syllogism must be the true stand- 
ard by which we must try the validity of the syllogism. 
I readily admit that it is by no means a fitir or 
useful mode of reasoning to lay too much stress upon 
slight discrepancies in analogical arguments, where 
they are brought forward as mere auxiliaries, to make 
us understand and perceive the feioe of a complex ar- 
gument. But in the instance before us, the case is 
different. Archbishop Whately letaa a whole sys- 
tem upon these imperfect analogies ; and it becomes 
us, therefore, to examine most minutely the grounds 
on which his positions rest. He makes very fiee 
with chemical illustrations throughout his work ; and 
the following is a very pointed one : <« The diemist. 



ON STLLQOI8MS. 157 

(to pursue the illustratiQii,) ke^ by Iiim his tests 
and his method of analysis) to be employed when any 
substance is offered to his notioe» the oompositioii of 
which has not been ascertained, or in which adultera^ 
tion is suspected. Now, a fallacy may apdy be com-* 
pared to some adulterated compound ; it coni»sts of 
an uigenious mixture of truth and fidsehood, so en-* 
tangled, so intimately blended, that the fidsehood is 
(in the chemical phrase) held in solution ; one drop 
of sound logic is that test which immediately disunites 
them, makes the foreign substance visible, and preci- 
pitates it to the bottom.^* 

The conclusion of a syllogism is said to depend 
upon the premises ; these premises must be taken 
for granted ; and whether they are trae or fidse does 
not impair the force, or alter the nature of the con- 
clusion, considered merely as a conclusion. Yet this 
form of argumentation, acknowledged by its advocates 
as existing independently of either truth or falsehood, 
is the grand chemical solvent for detecting every 
kind and degree of error ! This certainly must ap< 

? Dr. Whately's Logic, p. 31, 3d edit 



158 ON STLIiOGISMe. 

pear, in the eyes of onsimon sense, to be rather a pa- 
radoxical and startling position. 

These remarks, which might have been greatly ex- 
tended, have not been made with the most distant 
idea of passing any censure upon the logical work of 
Archbishop Whately, but solely from a wish to cau- 
tion the reader against too ardent an admiration of 
the syllogistic mode of reasoning, as if it were fitted 
to render him a comprehensive and candid reasoner. 
The whole history c^ literature fiimishes incontestable 
evidence of the insufficiency of the Aristotelian logic 
to produce, of itself, either acuteness of mind, or lo- 
gical dexterity. The strictures of Bacon, Locke, 
Reid, Campbell, and Stewart, have not b^n counte- 
racted by any subsequent statements which the advo- 
cates of the system of logic have hitherto advanced. 
And judging from the nature of the system itself, 
there is not the most distant prospect of the doctrine 
<^ syllogisms ever becoming such a general and use- 
ful branch of education as its supporters fondly an- 
ticipate. 



159 



CHAPTER IL 

ON TECHNICAL PHBA8S8 IN THE ABT C^V. LOGIC 

There are several technical phrases used, both in ge* 
neial writing and conversation, with which it is ne- 
cessary that every young student especially should be 
familiar. There are also certain terms in common 
use, descriptive of certain kinds or classes of argu- 
ments treated of by logicians. These technical phrases 
or terms are not now used so firequently as formerly ; 
but still they do very frequently occur, pardcularly in 
those writings where profound and abstract questions 
are discussed. It becomes necessary, therefore, tliat 
the reader should be made acquainted with their na- 
ture and use. We shall here give an explanation of 
some of them, without, however, assuming any pre- 
tensi<ms to give more than a &w specimens. 



l60 ON TECHNICAL PHBAABS IN THE ABT OF LOGIC. 

A priori. — ^This term means, that we reason from 
the cause to the effect. Thus, we say that the Deity 
must be infinite in his power, in his wisdom, and in 
his benevolence ; therefore^ the universe, which is the 
work of his hands, must be of infinite extent, of ad- 
mirable contrivance, and productive of general felicity. 

A posteriori means, that we argue from the effects 
to the cause. For instance, the fiibric of nature 
gives, in every department which is accessible to our 
inquiries and observation, evident proo& of contriv* 
ance, and benevolence of design ; therefore^ we are 
entitled to infer that there is an all-powerful, intelli* 
gent, and benevolent cause of all things. 

Reductio ad absurdum^ is a term for a certain kind 
of argument which proves the truth of any condu- 
sion, by showing the folly or absurdity of a eontrary 
proposition. This species of argument is of frequent 
use in mathematics. 

Argumentum afortiorif proves the conclusion by 
showing the truth of the inferior proposition to that 
on which the conclusion depends. 

Argumentum ex concesso, shows the truth of the 
conclusion by proving the truth, of anotj^er proposi- 



ON TECHNICAL PHRASES IN THE ABT OF LOGIC. 161 

tion, on which it was agreed to decide the original 
question in dispute. 

Argumentum adjudiduniy an address or appeal to 
the judgment ; a rational and sound argument. 

Argumentum adjldemy an argument founded upon 
any kind of testimony. 

ArgumetUum aji ignorantianif is an argument 
grounded upon weak or faulty principles. 

Argumentum ad hominem, an argument embracing 
a personal appeal to a man^s professed principles, of 
whatever nature these principles may be» whether 
true or &Ise* 

Argumentum ad verecundiamy an argument drawn 
from an authority which we are ashamed to dispute. 

Argwmemtum ad populum^ an address to the pas- 
sions or feelings of the mob. 



162 



CHAPTER III. 

SriSCELLANBOVS HINTS FOR THE GOVERNMENT AND 
lUPROVEMENT OF THE UNDERSTANPING. 

Reading. — ^A proper and judicious system of read- 
ing is of the highest importance. Two things are 
necessary in perusing the mental labours of others ; 
namely, not to read too much, and to pay great at- 
tention to the nature of what you do read. Many 
people peruse books for the express and avowed pur- 
pose of consuming time ; and this class of readers 
forms by far the majority of what are termed the 
reading public. Others again read with the laudable 
anxiety of being made wiser ; and when this object is 
not attained, the disappointment may generally be 
attributed, either to the habit of reading too much, 



GOVEBNMENT AND IMPROVEMENT^ SscC. 163 

or of paying insufScient attention to what &Ils under 
their notice. 

Every man of experience and observation in the 
world, must have met with many instances where 
individuals of a literary taste peruse volume after 
volume with a keenness and avidity which might 
indicate that they would be largely benefited thereby ; 
yet the fact is, that such people seldom grow any 
wiser. The knowledge they thus voraciously devouif 
is never regularly concocted or digested in their 
minds. Nothing, therefore, is of greater importancp^ 
towards a man^s advancement in real knowledge, than 
to avoid falling into an error of this kind. When a 
book is put into your hands, you should read it with 
care and attention, and always to the end ; should it 
be but a book embracing the illustration of abstract 
principles, you ought never to read too much of it at 
once ; try to seize the leading views of the author, 
and make them objects of your own contemplation. 
Canvass them thoroughly in your own mind ; and 
when you have made them familiar to your under* 
standing, you will then find you have made some 
progress in knowledge, and not contented yourself 



164> OOVSBNMENT AND IHPBOVEMENT 

with merely ootming over a few Written characters, to 
which you have attached no distinct meaning. You 
will soon experience the advantages of limited read- 
ing. You will soon find, when an opportjunity occurs 
to measure your strength with others, that you will 
be better prepared for the intellectual conflict; and 
ynJl acquit yoursdf with more credit than those who 
devour every book which falls in their way, without 
the exercise of any discrimination, or without any 
vigorousr effort of judgment to understand the subject 
of which the author treats. The words of Hobbes 
^e worthy of remembrance on this sul^ect, << If,^ 
says he, ^< J. bad read as much as n^y neighbours, I 
would have been as ignorant.^ 

Writing. — The habit of committing our thoughts 
to writing is a powerful means of expanding the 
mind, and producing a logical and systematic arrange- 
ment of our views and opinions. It is this which 
gives the writer a yast superiority as to the accuracy 
and extent of his ponceptions over the mere talker. 
JVo one can ever hope to know the principles of any 
art or science thoroughly who does not write as well 
413 jread upon the subjept. 



OF THE tmBEBSTANBniO. 16& 

Oiie of the gieat^t and most prevaletit stumbling- 
blocks to new-beginners in composition, is the almost 
universal desire they show to write something istry 
fine. They take up their pens, and expect that 
thoughts of singular sublimity will be showered down 
upon their noiinds for their own exclusive honour and 
distinction. They look- upon their pen as a magi- 
cian^s wand, with which they can conjure up at will 
truths the most interesting and vitally important. 
These extravagant and mistaken notions lead timid 
minds to despair, and those of a firmer and more 
resolute character, to midnight obscurity. 

In writing, therefore, the general rule we should 
always keep before the mind'^s eye is, that our written 
words be a simple transcript of our thoughts. The 
language ought to be as plain as possible ; and, in 
tnost cases, dmply that in which our ideas were first 
suggested to our minds. This rule will be found of 
infinite value on those subjects of inquiry where in- 
tricate processes of reasoning are required. For want 
of observing it, many minds of great original strength 
and acuteness, have run a most unprofitable course, 
and been constantly over-shooting the mark by an 



166 OOVBBNHSNT AND IMPBOVBHENT 

anxious desdre to clothe their ideas in what they con- 
sider sublime and elevated language. 

General Principles. — Another fruitful means of 
strengthening the judgmcsit, and making progress in 
knowledge, is to systematize your information. Learn 
to make yourself master of the principles of a science. 
This is of great moment, even considered in the light 
of a saving of time ; for when the principles are un- 
derstood, the foundation is laid, and the rearing of 
the superstructure becomes comparativdy easy and 
pleasant. A man who knows the principles of any 
department of knowledge has greatly the advantage 
over one who may have ten times the number of facts 
belonging to the science in question, but who is des- 
titute of a thorough knowledge of the leading truths 
into which they are resolvable. In several branches 
of information, it is not by any means a bad plan to 
become as early as possible acquainted with the theory 
after a limited number of facts has been well under- 
stood and rivetted in the mind. This is a very good 
method for those to follow who do not wish to be 
adepts in any science, but only to have a general ao- 
quaintance with its nature and principles. 



OF THS TTNBi^srrAnfDiNa. 167 

It is remarked hj Mr. Hume, *^ duit die differ- 
ence between a common man and a man of genius is 
chiefly seoi in d&e shaUowness or depth of the pin- 
cifdes upon wfaidi they proceed.*^ Neyer were more 
judidoas words than diese uttered in referenoe to the 
mind of man. We every day behold the prodigious 
power which die habit of seizing general principles 
gives to the individuals who possess it ; and the mark- 
ed and pointed inteQectual inferiority of those who 
have it not Ilie degree in which this power is 
found in the individual becomes the standard by 
which we measure his mental qualifications ; in 6ct, 
it may foe considered as the intellectual barometer by 
which to estimate the inward capabilities of all men^ 

Independence of Mini. — Learn to make whatever 
falls under your notice in die works of others your 
own, by contracting a habit of canvassing principles 
and views widi strictness and judgment; and by 
looking at the discoveries of others with your own 
eyes. Do not adopt sentiments by implicit diota« 
tion. This independence of mmd is of essential im- 
portance to the fuU and vigorous exerdse of your own 
powers ; and will dirow such an air of respectability 



168 GOVBENMKNT AND IMFROTBMENT 

over your mental qualifications, that a comparatively 
small portion of information will attract more notice, 
and be more highly appreciated than a much greater 
portion would be, were you servile or slavish in adopt- 
ing, without due personal examination, the opinions 
and systems of others. 

But there is one error to which this independence, 
this desire of originality, is apt to lead ; and that 
is, to a cavilling and disputatious trifling. This is 
truly a serious defect in a man''s mental character ; 
and when it becomes deeply rooted, it is not only 
very difficult to be eradicated, but in nine cases out 
of ten, it totally destroys a man'*s mind, as far as use- 
fulness goes, and renders nugatory the most impos- 
ing mental acquirements. When a man sets out in 
every examination or dispute with a fixed and un- 
swerving determination to say or think nothing but 
what is new, he will most assuredly, in the gene- 
rality of cases, fail in his object, and will exhibit him- 
self to his hearers or readers in the light of a dull 
proser or a trifling quibbler. We firequently meet 
with persons of very extensive learning, who, when a 

general principle is propounded to them, instead of 
5 



OF THS UNinSRSTANBING. 169 

embracing it as a whole, and acknowledging its great 
importance, immediately exert their ingenuity to set 
it aside, by descanting upon the importance of isolated 
facts or trifling exceptions. There is nothing of a 
rational or substantial nature to be expected 6com 
such minds. They wander through the fields of 
knowledge like children taken abroad to look at the 
face of nature, but who content themselves with pay- 
ing exclusive attention to the small weeds and flowers 
whidi promiscuously fall in their way, instead of 
viewing the more stupendous operations of nature, so 
profusely exhibited in all her works. 

A Love of Truth. — This is a most important ha- 
bit to cultivate, and it claims an alliance with the 
heart as well as the head. It must be grounded on a 
virtuous disposition ; for no vicious person can be a 
lover of truth. We ought always to remember that 
our reasoning faculties were not given us to exercise 
them as mere whim or fancy might dictate ; but to 
be the active instruments of guiding us to truth, and 
promoting our happiness as rational and immortal 
creatures. To enter into verbal or written disputa* 
tions for Ae mere sake of argument is a pernicious 

X 



lyO OOVERNICENT AN9 lUPBOTXMEMT, frc 

pnetice. It wiD, if esntlnaed fiir avy kogth of time, 
make u pcmm altogether insemoUe to truth, and 
will tmhinge the whole fabric of hia mind. Unless, 
thereftre^ a Iofc of truth ooeupies a ocaupieuout sta- 
tion among our mental excellenoes, we shaU make no 
progress in real knowledge.. Our minds will preset 
an unseemly and disardedy asseoddage of contradic- 
torjr systems and opinions. It will be without older, 
symmetry, or gmce ; and the donds of prqudice will 
hai^ over the chaotic mass, just admitting as much 
light through the har^ medium as to mdce diie scat- 
tered fragments of* truth darkly visible. 



THE SND. 



ERRATA. 

Page 4,/>r « founded " reoJ « grounded." 

38, for "connected" read "concatenated." 

45» for " shape and form " read " shape or fonn." 

Ihfir "finite being" read " finite beings.* 



Jtkst Pabliihed, in Two Vols. Bvo, neatly bound in doih^ 
Price £1, 1*. 

A 

HISTORY 

OF 

MORAL SCIENCE. 

By ROBERT BLAKEY. 



CONTENTS OP THB WORK. 



I. Preliminary Observations^ showing the nature 
of Moral Science, and the inducements to prosecute 
it. II. A brief sketch of Moral Philosophy ^ from 
the earliest ages, down to the fifth century of the 
Christian era. III. The same subject continued, till 
the time of Mr. Hobbes. — ^There are also Criticisms 
and original Essays on the Works of the following 
Authors ; vi^. Mr. Hobbes^ Leviathan^ De Cive^ and 
Treatise on Human Nature ; Dr. Cudworth's Trea- 
tise concerning eternal and immutable Morality^ edited 
by Dr. Chandler, Bishop of Durham; Mr. Locke'*s 
Treatise on the Human Understanding; Arch- 
bishop King''s Origin of Evil ; Bishop Cumberland'^sf 
Laws of Nature ; Mr. WoUaston'^s Religion of Na- 
ture delineated ; Dr. Samuel Clarke'^s Moral Specu- 
lations ; Mandeville's Fable of the Bees ; Pope and 
Bolingbroke^s Moral Works ; Shaftesbury's Charac- 
teristics ; Dr. Hutcheson's Treatise oh the Passions^ 
and a Moral Sense; Mr. Rutherford'^s Essay on 



Virtue, <$^. ; Dr. Buder^s DisserUUiou on Virtue, and 
Sermons ; Mr. Hume's TreatUe on Morah ; Dra. 
Hartley and Priestley'*s Works, containing the Theofy 
of Vibrations and the Association of Ideas ; Dr. 
raley'*s Moral and Political Philosophy; Dr. Fer- 
gusson^s Institutes of Mor/il Philosophy ; Lord 
Karnes^ Essays on the Principles of Morality and 
Natural Religion, 4-c. ; Dr. Smith's Theory of Moral 
Sentiments; Dr, Price's Review of the principal 
Questions in Morals; Mr. Godwin's Political Jus^ 
lice ; Mr. GKsbome's Works ; Mr. Cogan 's Treatise 
on the Passions, and other Works; Professor Stewart's 
Outlines of Moral Philosophy ; Dr. Brown's Lectures 
on the Philosophy of the Human Mind; Dr. Dewar's 
Moral Philosophy; a brief notice of Foreign Au- 
thors ; with a concluding Essay, giving a condensed 
view of the whole ; and remarks upon the mob a lit y 

OF THE SCRIPTURES. 



CRITICAL NOTICES OF THE WORK. 

" Mr. Blakey's volames are a valuable addition to the prac- 
tieal science of mind. We recommend them to the lovers 
of moral 8cience.'*->-^/i^eiMBian. 

** In perspicuity of style, in accuracy of deduction, in the 
neatness and compression with which the substance of the 
several works examined by Mr. Blakey has been written, few 
books on the subject can be compared with the present." — 
Tt^e Mercury. 

*' A more instructive or interesting work can hardly be 
imagined; and we eamesdy recommend the student of moral 
philosophy, who feels the necessary brevity of a course of 
lectures too contracted to admit him to an acquaintance with 
the many glides to moral truth, whose names he may hear, 
and to whose opinions he may be referred, to provide himself 
with a copy of the book under notice." — Atlos^ 



" This work has every recommendation to popularity; 
and as far as we have been able to examine it, we must say 
that the author appears to have executed his difficult an4 
laborious task witn great talent and impartiality."-^iVeu'- 
€xistie Chronicle, 

" The work will be useful to those who wish to know 
what the different moral and metaphysical writers, with 
wbose names only they are at present acquainted, have said, 
without the trouble of reading their voluminous works." — 
Sun, d 

*' To meet a desideratum which not only toe jj^eneral and 
intelligent, but the learned and philosopnic|l feader must 
feel, Mr. Blakey has here produced a work orgf4at utility.'* 
-^Literary Gazette, 

<* Without affecting a critical knowledge of this abstract 
subject, we may safe^ commend these impartial and candid 
sumnoaries to the favourable attention of such of our readers 
as may desire a useful map or guide-book to facilitate their 
prog'ress to the regions of ethicu science.** — Leeds Mercury, 

<' On the whole, we can saf«ly recommend these volumes 
as treating of a subject which has occupied the attention 
of mankind in all ages ; and which, to the young student, 
without some such guide to point out, as it were, the leading 
features of the science at one view, is beset with difficulties 
tending* to involve the mind in the mazes of scepticism, if not 
infidelity." — Newcastle Courant. 

*' The work is executed with considerable ability, and will 
be read by all who desire to obtain an acquaintance with 
the elements of moral science, and with the sources whence 
a more extended knowledge of the subject may be derived, 
with great advantage.*'-*<'iV'et& Monthly Magazine, 

" In these two volumes we have found much, very much, 
that will repay the reader for the time necessary to a careful 
and studious examination of them. Mr. Blakey has, by the 
publication of these his labours, rendered no trivial service 
to the explorers of moral science, and seekers after truth. 
He is no fanciful or falUcious guide. He leads the ethical 
student no wi]l*o*»the- wisp-dance through <a morass of mor^ 
bid speculation.' The light that breaks through his pages i$. 
a clear and finely burning flame." — The True Sun, 



" We bave not tbe pleasure of an acquaintance with the 
inteliigfent aathor of these tivo elegant. volumes; but from 
a slight examination of his labours, we must pronounce him 
to be a diligent student, a correct thinker, and a person of 
the best moral feeling. His work will be most valuable to 
students at college, and also to those who wish, by a small 
portion of reading, to form some accurate idea of the various 
systems of mental science which have obtained from the 
peripatetic school downwards.** — Evangelical Magazine, 

** As a synopsis of what has been written on ethics in this 
country, it is certainly a useful book, and will afford a means 
of acquiring that knowledge with little labour, which to 
have sought in the many volumes written on this subject, 
would be found scarcely to repay the trouble."— Co WeW^ 
Magazine and Monthly Review. 

" Mr. Blakey's statement of the opinions of these various 
authors deserves the praise of honesty. He never perversely 
distorts an opinion, in the blindness of prejudice, or to Serve 
a purpose. He generally treats the intentions and talents 
even of those he difF^i*s from, with justice and liberality.*' — 
Monthly Repository/, 

" We take our leave of the work with many thanks to 
the author for the treat he has afforded us. His work would 
have been to us invaluable when passing through our course 
of moral philosophy, and we woula strongly recommend it to 
every student. It brings together a mass of important in- 
formation not easily to be met with elsewhere, and will help 
the student to form a correct and intelligent opinion wita 
regard to the various moral systems which may be brought 
under his notice. We should think the work well adapted 
also for popular libraries, for the discussions are conducted in 
as popular a form as they can possibly be made to assume. 
The work deserves to take, and> we doubt not, will soon 
take its place amidst the permanent and standard literature 
of the kingdom." — Edinburgh Christian Instructor, 

** Without any reference to the views of Mr. Blakey hinn 
self, as to the formation of a system of moral ethics, there 
can be no hesitation in fixing a high standard of value to his 
work, as an historical comment on the most important themes 
of ethical science, from the earliest periods to the preseul^ 
timesJ*-^ Cki'istian Remembrancer* 



^* We have great pleasure in bearing testimony to the 
general fidelity and candour which characterise our author^s 
statements ; to the comprehensive yet condensed view he 
has given of the various systems noticed and commented on ; 
and to the truly philosophic spirit in which all his inquiries 
are conducted, showing a mina at once uncommonlv capable 
of such investigations, and intimately familiar witn the re- 
gions of contemplation to which they lead. We can with- 
out iiesitation, therefore, recommend a careful perusal of the 
work." — Presbyterian Review, 

" A correct and condensed view of the principal theories 
in moral science, has long been felt to be t^ desideratum by 
those who have been engaged in prosecuting such in- 
quiries; and we readily acknowledge, therefore, that a debt 
of gratitude is due to Mr. Blakey for the able and interest- 
ing^ work now before us. It is well conceived, and ad- 
mirabljT executed, displayins^ an intimate acquaintance with 
the various opinions which he records ; and, what we reckon 
a peculiar merit of the work, the Author, instead of con^ 
tenting himself, as most historians of philosophy have done 
before him, with a dry detail of the sentiments of others, 
enters into a careful, and, in some instances, lengthened dis- 
cussion of the most interesting questions connected with the 
science." — Eclectic Review. 



LONDON: 

JPUBUSHRD BY JAMES DUNCAN, 37, PATERNOSTBR ROW; 

JiBLL AND BRADFUTE, 12, BANK STREET, EDINBURGH; 

AND 41. OQLE, GLASGOW. 



Lately Published, Svo, price Is. hoards^ 

AN ESSAY, 



THE CONNEXION BETWEEN OUR NOTIONS OF MORAL 

GOOD AND EVIL, AND OUB CONCEPTIONS OF THE 

FREEDOM OF THE DIVINE AND HUMAN WILLS. 

By ROBERT BLAKEY. 

Edinbnrg^h : Adam Black ; and Longman and Co. London. 

<< Mr. Blakey's book on Moral Good and Evil is an admi- 
rable one." — World, 

" This is an elaborate work, on a subject of the highest 
moment. The writer is evidently a. man of considerable 
thought and discrimination. The subject discussed is pecu^ 
liarly important ; it is one which has been clouded and mysti-' 
fied by many writers ; and it is interesting to have a ladd 
and superior v(^urae, professiedly discussing the subject in a 
manly, honest, and energetic manner. We recommend this 
work as one of much thought, and as possessing a solid and 
valuable character." — Pulpit, 

" Between the human species and the brute creation, there 
is this grand mark of distinction, that while the latter are 
blindly led by a compulsory instinct, the former is conscious 
of an intellectual responsibility ; and this responsibility is so 
closely connected with the notion of moral freedom, that 
we neither act, nor speak, nor think, without a tacit con- 
ception of the praise or censure which our thoughts, words, 
or actions are calculated to elicit. This connexion is admir- 
ably traced by Mr. Blakey." — Christian Memembrancer. 

** Mr. Blakey has taken up an often-agitated metaphysi* 
cal question, which he has treated in an easy and popular 
manner, conveying many important suggestions, and much 
sound argument, in terms that may with perfect ease be an- 
deratood by all who understand the language in which he 
writes.* — JEdinburgh Christian Instructor, 

"A profound and excellent work," — Cobbetfs Political 
Register. 