This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

https://books.google.com

S0C5. <?

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

LECTURES

ON

LOGIC,

THE SCIENCE OF EVIDENCE

GENERALLY,

Embracing both
DEMONSTRATIVE AND PROBABLE REASONINGS,

DOCTRINE OF CAUSATION.

Delivered at Bristol College in the Year 1830.

FRANCIS W. NEWMAN,
LATE FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, <»«FOIlD.

OXFORD,
J. H. PARKER;
J. G. AND F. RIVLNGTON, LONDON.
1838.

^HARVARcT
UNIVERSITYI
LIBRARY
JUL 21 1961

3i 3/r

BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD.

TO
J. H. JERRARD, D.C.L.
FELLOW OF CAIUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND LATE PRINCIPAL OF
BRISTOL COLLEGE.
My Dear Sir,
As it was under your patronage, and in the way of
carrying out your plans, that I delivered these Lectures,
I am happy to be allowed to inscribe them to you, not
withstanding my strong sense of their deficiencies. I am
now induced to commit them to the press, solely from
my being unacquainted with any manual, which within
moderate compass would bring before my pupils the
topics here treated. If they can be of service in pro
moting clearness of thought and reasoning, my end will
be attained. You have given ybur, mind peculiarly to the
improvement of Education, and are aware that it often
consists chiefly of details ; on which account 1 venture to
hope you will not be ashamed of your name appearing
in this connection.
I have the honor to be.
My dear Sir,
Yours gratefully and sincerely,
F. W. N.
Bristol, November 1S37-

The contents of the following pages were delivered
in the form of Lectures at Bristol College. That part
of them which treats of the doctrine of Causation, may
appear to many ill-placed in a treatise on Logic, or,
the Science of Evidence. It was brought in, by way
of preface to that which needed to be said on
Hypotheses, on a priori Argument, and on Con
tingent Matter; and indeed seemed to the Author
unavoidable.

He was not however aware, that so

large a space would be occupied by the subject.
It swelled under his hand ; and after it was finished,
though he was dissatisfied at its length, yet he was
unable to see how it might be profitably much
shortened.

Not being disposed to omit it entirely,

he preferred to leave the whole as it was.

CONTENTS.
Sect. I. Acceptation of the terms Logic and Metaphysics.
Utility of Logic. Causes that have retarded the Science.
page 1 — 13.
Sect. II. Aristotelic Division of the subject. (1) On Terms.
Definition—Faults of Definition—On investigating Defini
tions—Relative extent of Terms—Logical Division. 14—32.
(2) On Propositions. A E I O. Mutual Relation of Proposi
tions. Verbal Truths—Mathematical Truth. 32—55.
(3) On Syllogisms—Hypotheticals.
55—6G.
Sect. III. Induction—Experiment and Observation—Presump
tions—Prejudices.
66—88.
Sect. IV. Analogy.
88—97.
Sect. V. Causation—Vocabulary employed—Arguments a
priori and a posteriori. Hume's Question. Uniformity of
the Laws of Causation—Uniform Sequence—Have Second
Causes substantive existence?
97— 120.
Sect. VI. Will, an Originating Cause—Reasoning from Mo
tives—Reasoning in Contingent Matter generally. Chance—
Calculations of Chances—ComhinedReasonings. 120— 1 42.
Sect. VII. Hypotheses—Their rules and cautions. 142— 159.
Sect. VIII. Specific Information—Argument from Authority.
159—173.
Sect. IX. Veracity of Informants.
173— 192.

I
i
i
I
I

I

LECTURES ON LOGIC.

Sect. I.
INTRODUCTION.
It has been the lot of most departments of human
knowledge to go through a preliminary state, in
which the true science was so obscured by indistinct
doctrines, or so stretched beyond its own limits by
pretenders, as to prejudice the world against it en
tirely. Astronomy was once Astrology, Chemistry
was Alchymy, Natural Philosophy in general was
Magic, Medicine was Witchcraft, Geology was Cos
mogony, History was a confused heap of legends,
genealogies, and superstitious tales, Geography and
Chronology were fanciful schemes, framed upon arbi
trary opinion and theory, with little or no basis of
facts.
When the mist that hung over all these has cleared
away, that in which Metaphysics and Logic are in
volved, seems in great measure to maintain its place.
It is the reproach of modern metaphysicians, as of
the ancient philosophers, that one school refutes the
tenets of another so rapidly, that to bystanders all
appears like the shifting scenes of a theatre, baseless
and visionary, not able to repay the pains of him
who shall labour through the multifarious works
B

2

LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS.

composed on the subject. The very names, Meta
physics and Logic, are enough to scare many. Their
vagueness inspires disgust. So little about them is
supposed to be consistent with common sense, as to
make the definition well relished, that " when a man
talks what nobody understands and what he does not
understand himself, that is Metaphysics."
Acceptation of the words, Logic and Metaphysics.
I have joined together the two names, Logic and
Metaphysics, because they have been united, and
often confused, from the earliest times. Both words
are, in their derivation, so vague, that it is hard to
say that they ought to mean any particular thing.
Logic is derived from Ao'yoj, a word of immense
applicability; meaning Speech, or Intelligence, or
System, or Rationale, or Good Sense. Instead of
Logic, the classical writers often say Dialectics, which
means " the science of Discoursing," from 8(aA.eyof««,
to converse. This is equally vague. As for Meta
physics, it is derived from the words /xera rd pu<nxd,
" After the Physics;" by which some say that Aris
totle intended to allege, that it was a topic to be
studied after Natural Philosophy; others, that he
merely happened to write that treatise after the
other. But I have no intention of inquiring how
any of these words ought to be used, at least by
reference to their etymology.

FIELDS OF SCIENCE.

3

Fields of Science.
The first point of importance towards getting a
clear view of any science, is, to have accurately
described its Object Matter, and its Purpose.
By the Object Matter [objecta materies] is meant
the phenomena which any particular science contem
plates. Thus Numbers are contemplated by Arith
metic, Magnitudes by Geometry, the Countries of
the Earth by Geography, the Heavenly Bodies by
Astronomy, Human Duties by Morals. We meta
phorically name these the fields of the respective
sciences. They might be called the Objects; (as in
the case of sight &c, that which is seen is called the
Object, and he who sees is called the Subject;) but
the word Object is ambiguous, being applied also to
mean the scope, aim, purpose of a thing: to avoid
which ambiguity, the word Matter is added.
When there is neglect to settle accurately the field
of a science, it encroaches on ground that does not
belong to it ; whence rises confusion and error, and
discredit to the science itself. Thus in the Pytha
gorean system, Arithmetic was made to dictate con
cerning the Natural Properties of things earthly and
heavenly; while Aristoxenus of Tarentum would
make Music the basis of Physiology. In most culti
vated nations, except the Greeks and Romans, who
had no Order of priesthood, the most extensive and
injurious encroachments have been made by Religion
on various other sciences ; so that the teacher of
Religion is supposed to preside over Medicine, His
tory, Legislation and Politics, Morals and Meta
b 2

4

PURPOSE OF LOGIC.

physics. Among the Greeks and later Romans, the
Rhetorician unduly obtruded himself on the field of
Politics and Law, nay, of the whole assemblage of
the sciences. In all such cases the result is a cor
ruption of both the invading and the invaded science.
As Bacon expresses it concerning Religion and Natural
Philosophy; "from the unsound mixture there arises
" both a fanciful philosophy and a heretical reli" gion."
But to fix the nature of a Science, we must know
not only its Field, or Object Matter ; but the pur
pose which it has in exploring that field. For several
sciences often range through the same field. Chemis
try and Medicine both treat of Plants and Minerals,
of Liquids and various Animal Substances; but the
one is seeking to learn absolutely the principles of
their commixtion, the other is studying their effects
on Human Health. The different purpose, or End
in View, causes things that are very subordinate in
the one science, to be of paramount importance in
the other ; and alters the whole method of treating
the subject.

Field and Purpose of Logic.
It is now my business to explain, what is the
Object Matter and what the End in View, in the
science which I have in hand; and which, in con
formity to usage, I have called Logic; although I
have much preference for a name invented, I believe,
by Mr. Jeremy Bentham; viz. The Science of
Evidence.

PURPOSE OF LOGIC.

5

When we take a review of various sciences, though
at first they seem to have little in common, closer
inspection shows that the methods of proceeding are
in many very much alike; insomuch that a person
who has made progress in one, often finds others to
be easier on that account. For in all, there is an
investigation of truth. Something is being found
out ; something is being proved ; something is being
refuted ; some plausible mistake is being accounted
for. It will occur to inquire, whether the mode of
proof and the character of the evidence is the same
in all, or different; and how far different. Indeed
it may be asked, what it is that constitutes proof:
and whence or how proofs are likely to be drawn.
Neither is this to be confined to regular sciences: it
applies to all the miscellaneous knowledge and pass
ing arguments afloat in the world. The Object
Matter then of Logic is, no particular set of phe
nomena parallel in character to that which other
sciences contemplate, but is, Proof or Evidence as
such. And in discussing Evidence, the End in View
is to investigate the laws of Evidence ; to lay down
when and why it is that we say, A thing has been
proved : Its evidence is good : It is therefore to be
believed.
Under the term Metaphysics, (and indeed Logic,)
is often understood something quite different; viz.
an inquiry into the Intellectual Powers, or Pheno
mena of the Mind at Large. Such a science will
discuss the nature of Attention and Retention, Ima
gination, Invention, Judgment, Association, and such

6

PURPOSE OF LOGIC.

like : or again, the Affections, Sentiments, and Active
Powers of man. The name Psychology has been well
used in modern times to distinguish this branch of
inquiry. We have at present nothing to do with
such topics, except so far as they must be adverted
to in order to exhibit the nature of Proof. And if
any one urge, that our science in this case should
rather be called Syllogistics, while the term Logic
should include an inquiry into the intellectual powers,
and Psychology into the affections; I have no parti
cular objection, except that the word Syllogism has
been so confined by the Aristotelians to a particular
form of proof, (as will be hereafter shown,) that the
new name might help to increase the existing con
fusion.
In the celebrated treatise on Logic by the Arch
bishop of Dublin, the able writer has kept so close to
the scholastic system, as to restrict his science to
Demonstrative or Perfect argumentation ; the infal
lible deducing of one proposition from others sup
posed to be true. In this way, Probabilities are
excluded, as well as in numberless cases the inquiry,
why we believe the statements from which we are
deducing others. But I can see no adequate reason
for admitting such a restriction. In result, a new
treatise is wanting to include the important subjects
hereby omitted, and instead of seeing Aristotle and
Bacon woven into a single system, the student is led
to suppose them fundamentally in opposition.
But Logic, explained, as above, to be the Science
of Evidence generally, cannot be struck off by the

UTILITY OF LOGIC.

7

powers of the mind reflecting on itself and ignorant
of all things besides ; and therefore neither will it be
that dry and formal thing, which the mere Aristotelic
Logic is accused of being. But it is naturally an
aftergrowth to other knowledge. Nor would Bacon
have attained so much discernment concerning its
general principles, had not his mind been already
largely imbued with details of knowledge in nu
merous departments. But so far as he has invented
a formal system, he has brought us no advantage.
While a sound Logic was not likely to arise, until
knowledge had made some ^progress, it yet did not
need that any systematic science should have arisen ;
since it deals with popular knowledge and historical
criticism, as truly as with Astronomy or Chemistry.
Utility of Logic.
The first effect of Logic is to fortify the knowledge
that has already been attained, against the assaults of
unreasonable scepticism ; such as was the folly of
those ancients, who impugned the truth of the senses,
as well as of all our moral impressions. It thus
secures our basis; and strengthens the foundations of
religion itself. Its next effect is, perhaps, to point
out objections to certain received arguments or me
thods of reasoning; to show weak points which need
to be mended; whereby it either leads to a strength
ening of the part, or to an abandonment of it as
untenable. Either result tends to a perfecting of
science. Finally, by commenting on past mistakes,
and showing the mode of avoiding them, it holds out
beacons of warning to future sciences, to keep them

8

CAUSES THAT HAVE

from running on the sand-banks, from which the old
ones have been with so much effort heaved off. The
result of the study ought to be, to fortify the mind
alike against too easy Credulity and too stiff Incre
dulity; (errors that always go together;) to habituate
us to analyze our own reasonings, and rest more on
the Evidence of truth, than on mere Prepossessions ;
also by revealing the sources of error and the means
by which even powerful minds are often entangled,
to inculcate candour and modesty as to our own judg
ments, forbearance towards those whom we judge in
error.
Causes that have retarded Logic.
It is not difficult to see the causes that have re
tarded a just development of the science. Retracing
all the modern sciences to Grecian times, Bacon has
remarked on the puerile character of the Greek mind,
which with abundant ingenuity and activity, was
wanting in sobriety and practical seriousness. Yet
it would be hard to say that Democritus and Anaxagoras, Plato and Aristotle, might not under happier
influences have achieved the highest triumphs of
science. The state of society and of politics was perhaps
a stronger cause, why neither Logic nor any special
science made solid progress. There was no sense of
justice pervading the community, strong enough to
make party evidence suspected and abhorred. A
Greek court (or jury) seldom met to investigate
truth, but either to be amused and give the award to
the cleverest speaker, or to deliver a verdict already
settled. In Athens mere rhetoric almost of necessity

RETARDED LOGIC.

9

overbore truth, and the rhetorician was supposed to
be a statesman and teacher of politics. The dispu
tatious spirit corrupted Logic, and introduced an
inordinate attachment to mere enigmas and captious
questions. It must likewise be remembered that
through the scarcity and dearness of books, ancient
literature was generally intended for mere recitation ;
an author could not, as now, calculate on readers ;
and large libraries did not exist, habitually to pur
chase works of ponderous erudition. This was in
itself enough to make literature superficial. Very
few could attain solid knowledge, and those who
possessed erudition could not easily make it available
to others, nor gain much credit for it. It was in
vain that Cicero inculcated by example and precept
the necessity of real acquirements to prevent elo
quence from becoming frothy. Men can more easily
estimate fine and flashy ornament, than sterling
truth; and (in spite of the superior solidity of the
Roman character) Philosophy, having fallen into the
hands of the rhetoricians, whose business was to teach
how to dispute on either side, came off no better than
from the Greeks. In the Aristotelic school, while
Logic was defined to be " an instrumental art, direct
ing the mind in the knowledge of things," it ceased
to be an instrument at all, being pursued as an end
in itself. The remark of Bacon, Ars inveniendi
adolescit cum inventis, was illustrated by contraries.
Because they did not desire and pursue so as to
attain separate truth, they did not make progress in
the art of reasoning. In fact, they added nothing of
value to the system as left by their Founder. This
b3

10

CAUSES THAT HAVE

remarkable man, justly named thefather of criticism,
is a sufficient example to refute the idea, that the
Greeks were all puerile and superficial : yet, for more
reasons than one, his writings are not calculated to
stamp on his disciples the impress of his own mind.
He was essentially a system maker; and such persons,
in whatever field they appear, (whether as Calvin in
Christian doctrine, Wesley in church government, or
Bentham in politics and morals,) throw round their
followers trammels to which they would not them
selves have submitted. His ambitious thought is
well expressed by his own words: " If I can give a
good outline and rough draught*, any common
person will be able to fill up the deficiency." And
thus he has practically doomed his disciples (almost
down to Dr. Whately) to appear as " common per
sons," whose credit, like that of the working mason,
all goes to the architect.—Again, it is hard to say
whether it is from a defect in his mind, or whether it
is that his writings were meant only as notes to
lecture from ; but certainly he is miserably barren of
illustration where it is most needed, and he seldom
gives its due prominence to that which is most im
portant. All truths seem to lieflat upon his pages ;
they want a variety of colouring to bring them out,
and show them in their due proportions and distances.
Hence a reader may fancy that he has thoroughly
mastered a treatise of Aristotle, while perhaps he has
not at all attained the spirit and purpose with which
it was penned. Afterwards sometimes when he thinks
he has discovered something new, a few short sen

RETARDED LOGIC.

11

tences show him that Aristotle had perceived and
remarked it long ago; though the reader had not
understood it before.
Of all persons, the European Schoolmen were least
likely to imbibe what was good in Aristotle, and reject
the evil : indeed (if I may speak with the second
hand acquaintance which I have of them) they seem
to have doted on his least valuable parts; to have fed
on mere forms, and overlooked his philosophical
truth. The reaction produced by Bacon has wonder
fully advanced the sciences, and has given materials
for perfecting Logic as a science : but Bacon de
spaired of building on Aristotle's foundation, and
thought to sweep away his whole fabric as rubbish.
The rival schools seem in consequence to have torn
Logic in twain, while the Baconians are often charge
able with misunderstanding Aristotle, and underrating
his merits.
Another cause which, since the middle ages, has
perverted Logic, is its unnatural union with Theo
logy.—The Aristotelic philosophy was translated
from Greek into Arabic, and from Arabic into Latin.
The Schoolmen, instead of studying nature, studied
Aristotle; and adhering slavishly to the Greek idiom,
contrary to the genius of Latin, produced a bar
barous technical jargon, intelligible only to the ini
tiated. Thus Logic was removed out of the cogni
zance of common sense. This was bad enough. But
when the science was taken up by divines, and incorporated with various Christian doctrines, many of
them were held to be inexplicable without it, (perhaps
incapable of being stated soundly without it,) espe

12

CAUSES THAT HAVE

cially the doctrine of transubstantiation, which sepms
to have received its final methodical shape from the
hands of the dialecticians of the twelfth century;
thus the errors of the schools were consecrated by
religion. Other doctrines might be named, only that
it might lead me off my proper ground. Hence the
reformers, as Luther, generally treated Aristotle as
the stronghold of religious error, and abounded in in
vectives against the Schoolmen, while unable to divest
their own selves of the spirit of the system.
Even among Protestants, the divine is often too
apt to make Logic practically a part of divinity. In
explaining the evidences of Christianity and of natu
ral religion, &c. &c. a variety of arguments become so
current, that they are unawares looked on as the
religion itself; as are likewise the logical doctrines
advanced to support them. I believe this has caused
much injury to the science, and still retards it.
Thus have I stated what Logic is, what are its
uses, and what causes corrupted it, until in latter
days it has been thrown aside. I will close this
Lecture by observing, that, like Arithmetic and Geo
metry, it is a science of pure mind. It does not
stand upon experiments or observation as its basis :
hence it may seem peculiarly fitted to have been
perfected among men, who, like the Hindoo sages,
and many of the Greeks, united great mental activity
to much inactivity of research ; having that kind of
laziness, which would waste hours in speculating how
things must be, when a few minutes might suffice to
show how they are, if the man would take the trouble
to look. But experience shows, that even the sciences

EETAEDEP LOGIC.

IS

which are grounded upon introspection are never
perfected by such intellects. With them, Geometry
and Algebra evaporate into enigmas and conceits,
quite as much as Logic ; while Morals pass into
Mysticism, and often turn into immorality. It is
the practical intellect, such as that of Bacon, Newton,
Locke, Franklin, Paley, which is most likely to per
fect even theoretic science.

14

ARISTOTELIC DIVISION

Sect. II.
Aristotelic Division of the Subject.
The Aristotelians regard three operations of the
mind as essential to conducting an argument; Ap
prehension, Belief*, and Reasoning ; which respec
tively take cognizance of Terms, Propositions, and
Syllogisms.
By a Term {terminus) is understood not only a
noun substantive, but any collection of words gram
matically equivalent ; and any set of words which
might stand collectively as nominative case to a verb:
as, To be thought a traitor [is grievous].
By a Proposition, they mean a sentence which con
veys an assertion or a denial: and they name Propo
sitions affirmative or negative, accordingly. This
difference is called by them the " Quality" of a propo
sition; so that if the question be put, " What is the
quality of such and such a proposition?" the reply
is, " Affirmative;" or, " Negative."
By a Syllogism, they mean a collection of three
propositions; of which the first two being given, the
third can be assuredly inferred from their com
bination: so that in fact, in believing the third, we
believe no more than is already implied in the first
* It is called by them Jxtdicium, but as it is meant to express
the reception of a proposition, without reference to the grounds
for receiving it, I think Belief expresses the meaning more
nearly.

OF THE SUBJECT.

15

two. These two are named Premisses, and the third,
the Conclusion. As,
{Caesar was a conqueror ;
Every conqueror is a scourge to (Syllogism.)
mankind ;
(Conclusion) Caesar was a scourge to mankind.
Some objection lies against the way in which the
" three operations" of the mind are spoken of. First,
it is plain that other operations are needed; as Atten
tion, and Memory. No man could get through a
Syllogism, if he forgot the first premiss, while dwell
ing on the second. Again, Belief has nothing to do
with the process of reasoning; for the conclusion
follows from the premisses, as well if they be false as
true; and reasoning from premisses known to be
false is a matter of daily and important use. It may
however be replied, that, for the moment, we as it
were concede the premisses as if believed, while we
draw the inference. What is perhaps more to the
point, although Belief has nothing to do with Syllo
gism, it has somewhat to do with Logic: for Logic
is not confined to mere syllogizing.
There is then a triple source of error to which the
mind is liable, when reasoning by help of words: viz.
an indistinct apprehension of Terms, a false belief
concerning Propositions, and mistaken inference in
Syllogisms. It is common to say " false inference"
for " mistaken inference;" but rigid logicians try to
confine the word " false" to Propositions.
The Aristotelians speak as though they could
remedy all three defects ; and in the third they are
triumphant, if only the student will himself avoid

16

ON TERMS.

the two first. But for the first they can give only
some useful hints, and the second they do not even
attempt.— To teach a person to avoid false beliefs
would be indeed an arduous affair for a science to
take in hand. Yet for this Bacon has done some
thing, in opening to us certain heads of Prejudices
or common Fancies (idold). It is well to observe,
that some have rather strangely confined the word
" Metaphysics" to one point; viz. the inquiry why
we believe any thing about the outer world. I
conceive it is a part of Logic to inquire, both why
we believe our senses, and why we believe human
testimony; in each avoiding to go so deep as to write
on Physiology or Ethics. So much refers to the
belief of propositions which are not conclusions of
reasoning. Next; to teach us distinctness of appre
hension is impossible; but to train us to habits of
close inquiry into the meaning of our words, is highly
possible; in which however it is probable, that Geo
metry and the study of a foreign idiom are more
useful than the scholastic Logic. As for the third
error, it is so very rarely" committed, that we want
no science to guard us from it ; and it may be safely
said, that the scholastic rules on this subject are in
every practical sense utterly useless.
On Terms.
To avoid indistinctness in the use of terms, it is
often necessary to check ourselves, and inquire what
we mean by them; and this is, to ask their definition.
* I mean, after a syllogism has been reduced into form. This
will become plainer in the sequel.

DEFINITION.

17

A definition is a kind of paraphrase; but to be of
logical use, it should have entire precision. If it be
vague, it makes worse the defect which it is brought
to remove. If it be harder (to a particular person)
to understand, than the word which is to be defined,
it is (to that person) useless: and that it may be of
general utility, it must be easier to the generality
than the thing defined.
Definition and Explanation differ. The latter is
often best given by means of ■ Description. If a
foreigner whose tongue we did not understand, and
who talked English imperfectly, were to ask the
meaning of the word Rat, the most useful expla
nation might be by describing its properties; that it
ate our corn, lived in the fields or in the barns, and
was of such and such a size—because in explanation
we want to convey not so much an accurate notion of
the outermost edge and limit of the field, as a vivid
apprehension of the chief parts of it; and we trust to
a person's own experience and sympathies to hit on
the thing exactly intended. Hence description be
longs to the poet, who appeals to our sympathies;
definition to the mathematician and natural historian,
whose first aim is precision.
Definition (say Logicians) teaches the Essence of a
Thing. They should rather say, The Essence of a
Word, or Term. Things have no essence, but every
part of a thing is as essential as every other part to
its being what it is. It is quite unmeaning to speak
of the essence of an individual object, as of John or
Thomas or of Buckingham House: but it is not
unmeaning to speak of the essence of a word, as of

18

DEFINITION.

the words Man and House. By the essence is in
tended all the particulars, the possession of which by
any individual object is necessary and is sufficient to
justify us in bestowing on such object the name of
Man or House : and to rehearse such particulars is to
define those names or words.
Through the imperfection of language, few terms
are absolutely fixed in their meaning. Words are
adopted with reference to the ordinary state of things
among the people who use them; or rather,. they are
relative to the notions of things which happen to be
most familiar. Hence on a sudden change of circum
stances or influx of new ideas, a thousand questions
may rise which had not previously been thought of,
as to the applicability of words. A Pellew islander,
suddenly brought to London, may justly have de
bated within himself whether it was correct to speak
of horses by the name which he had previously ap
plied to rats. So long as the rat was the only
quadruped known to him, it is probable that he had
not laid down in his own mind what the name meant,
whether the true English (in short) was rat or qua
druped. Whatever leads to a wider range of thought,
makes a larger and more discriminating vocabulary
important. Hence in scientific treatises it becomes
necessary to define, and sometimes arbitrarily to
limit, popular terms, as well as to invent new ones.
This is peculiarly the case in Geometry and the
exact sciences, as in so many instances their business
is to demonstrate propositions by means of the defini
tions of words.
Words may be defined any how, without offence to

FAULTS OF DEFINITION.

19

mere Logic, if only the person who uses them keeps
always to the sense which he has once affixed to
them. But this will not justify any one in widely
and wantonly deviating from common usage. It is
inflicting too much on the memory of his readers or
hearers; and in spite of all his vigilance, he will
himself be liable to fallacy by slipping back into the
popular meaning. Every needless deviation from
this is an evil. We ought to try rather to clear up
popular notions of words, and explain to persons
what they mean by them in their brightest moments:
but it is better to adopt a new word entirely, than
endeavour to wrest an old word to a strange sense.
I say, it is better; meaning, of course, if the object
proposed be to attain mere perspicuity. The case is
otherwise, when a sophist desires purposely to darken
his subject : or, (to suppose a less disgraceful case,)
when men's feelings are to be wrought on, or allayed.
Certain words are consecrated by habit and associ
ations, others are become odious : and as the mass of
mankind are swayed by these, and will not remember
new definitions, men are often forced to contend for
the possession of a word, and erect mere definition
into what may seem undue importance.
Faults of Definition.
A fallacy is sometimes virtually contained in the
very definition of a term; viz. if parts of a definition
are inconsistent with other parts: it is then self-contradictory. Or again, especially in Mathematics, a
part of the definition may be superfluous, so as to
endanger an assumption that the superfluous parti

20

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

culars necessarily accompany the others; when this
ought to be proved, not assumed. Again, sometimes
there is a tacit assumption of the existence of realities,
such as the word represents. On this account there
are many words, which ought not to be freely intro
duced and used until after the establishment of cer
tain truths; inasmuch as the very word may imply
such a truth, and (without closest attention) lead to
fallacious reasonings. Thus in defining Physiology
to be " the science which treats of the actions oc
curring in living bodies," nothing is assumed. But
if we define it to be " the science which treats of the
operation of the Vital principle in bodies," some
unwarrantable notion may hereby be secretly intro
duced, with the term Vital Principle.
On investigating Definitions.
It is chiefly in Science, that words are invented to
correspond with previously settled definitions. Much
oftener, the word is made first, and has a vague
popular sense ; and our business is to hunt for the
definition. The Aristotelians teach two methods of
doing this. The first is by putting together known
details; as by considering a variety of individual
cases, to which we know that the word is applicable.
For example, if we are asked the definition of the
word City, it will occur to us that London, Edin
burgh, Bristol, Oxford, York, &c. are all called cities;
and by comparing them together, we may endeavour
to find what are the particulars which have entitled
them to this name. Of course we shall here neces
sarily involve the question, What is the difference

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

81

between a City and a Town : which will suggest to
us to examine the case of individual places which we
know to be called Towns, such as Guildford, Reading ;
and enquire why they are not called Cities. I may
here add, that the particular question is a difficult
one ; and perhaps can only be answered by the past
history of the places, if at all. This method however
of discussing a definition is to be called the Inductive;
as it is identical in principle with the process called
Induction, of which we shall afterwards speak. The
object of the enquiry is one of truth and reality,
not of words, when historical questions are mingled
with it.
If I were asked for a specimen of investigating
definitions, I should not know to what to refer so
well as to Buttmann's Lexilogus. In a large number
of instances, his arguments are not only ingenious
and valuable as elucidating the Homeric phraseology
and manner of thought, but are highly interesting
and improving as specimens of close and honest
reasoning.
The second method of investigating a definition is
called by the Schoolmen Division : though practically
the two are not separated. According to this, we
first make some large and rough statement, obviously
correct: as though one were to say that a City is
" the abode of human population:" and next endea
vour to limit this suitably, by asking what sort of
abode. The Schoolmen teach us to " divide" thus :
" Abodes" are of (suppose) two sorts ; fenced and
unfenced. Let us enquire under which of the two
" City" falls. Perhaps we reply, under the former ;

22

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

which we will name a Town. Well then, " Towns"
are to be again divided; suppose into those which
possess and those which do not possess a municipal
government; and again it is asked under which the
City falls, and we reply (perhaps) that it possesses
such government : and so on until we have ade
quately limited the term.
Now I say, this does not really differ from the
former method. For how is any one led to constitute
such divisions at all, except by looking to particular
cases ? and how, again, is he to reply, when asked to
which of two heads the word City belongs, except by
looking to separate Cities, and using an Induction ?
and how, lastly, is he to know whether the word has
been " adequately" limited, except by trying whether
all (or all that he can remember) which are called
Cities are admitted by his definition, and whether all
are excluded by the definition, to which the name of
City is popularly refused? And, in fact, the pre
tended Division would seem ridiculous to any one
but to a Dialectician; as it does not at all conduce to
the end in view.
After this, however, it may seem needless to add,
(what has been dignified with the title of " Rules of
Definition,") that a definition should neither be too
vague, nor too limited ; should neither admit indi
viduals that ought to be excluded, nor exclude such
as ought to be admitted. In fact, this is no more
than saying, that it ought to be true.
It will often appear, through the imperfection of
language, as though various equally good and true
definitions could be given of the same word. If the

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

23

sole test of the goodness of a definition were, that it
must exclude aright, and admit aright, then " a
cooking animal" would be a good definition of the
word Man. It is certain that all men are capable of
learning to cook, (may we not add, actually do live
on cooked food?) and as certain, that no animals but
men do this. Yet a little thought shows, that when
we call a being a Man, we do not mean to fix atten
tion on the fact of his cooking propensities. For
though when we are reminded that mankind has this
peculiarity, we readily assent, yet possibly the thought
was new to us. We must then reject the definition
as improper. In fact, if travellers were to furnish
full proof that certain animals exist which really do
cook their food, it would never enter our minds that
they ought to be called Men. There is then a great
difference in the nature of the evidence for the two
following propositions :
Man is a child of Adam.
Man is a cooking animal.
inasmuch as the former merely expresses b what we
mean (or what ordinary people mean) by the term
Man ; while the latter tells a truth concerning the
children of Adam. If this be the case, " child of
Adam" rightly expresses the definition ; which is the
b If any reader uses a different definition of the word Man, he
must be so good as to look on this as hypothetical, and as used
only for illustration. If, for instance, by Man he understand
merely " Rational Animal," then it is a Real truth and matter
of fact, that Man is a child of Adam."

24

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

essence of the word : while cooking is but a charac
teristic of the species.
It will however be observed, that in this most
familiar instance, there is no real and universal
agreement as to the meaning of terms. Many French
philosophers disbelieve the Scripture account of our
derivation from Adam ; and in their mouth the word
" Man" is not unmeaning, though different from the
sense which we put on it. The old Logicians con
sider " rational animal" as a good definition of man ;
yet it is hard to prove, that elephants do not reason,
and it brings us into niceties of distinction which the
popular mind assuredly does not follow. Indeed, if
Gulliver's story of the reasoning Houhnyhymns (or
horses) were for a moment believed by a credulous
person, it would not occur to him to call such crea
tures men, even while he believed them to be rational
animals. Hence " reason" is at most only a charac
teristic found to distinguish men from other animals ;
and does not express the essence of the word Man.
The above will show what extensive fallacy may
be hidden under the showy plan of setting out with
defining Terms ; (inasmuch as the definition is to
be arrived at only by a close and sometimes difficult
analysis of other people's meaning:') unless we care
fully keep in view that words are ever varying. We
may indeed point out different senses in which a
word is used, and then state in what sense we mean
to take it ourselves. And this is often of the very
greatest service, inasmuch as the false arguments
which deceive half the world, are constantly based
on ambiguous words.

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

25

Terms of science, which the writer invents, there
is no great difficulty in defining. In Mathematics
also it often happens, that numerous definitions are
equally good, at least equally logical. Forin Geometry,
or in the pure Calculus, no results are admitted by
help of observation and testimony ; but only by
reasoning from the definition. Hence a sphere (for
instance) has no characteristics but such as are neces
sarily connected with the essence ; while the charac
teristics of Man or Horse are not necessarily thus
connected, but only uniformly : by which we mean,
that as far as observation extends, they are found
connected. But in Geometry, if we chose to assume
some of the characteristics of a Sphere (suppose, its
equation to 3 rectangular coordinates) as the essence
of the term, we could hence demonstrate as a charac
teristic what we had previously named the essence.
But this is not the case with ordinary words.
Thus we are led to consider, besides the Essence
[or true meaning^ of a Word, likewise, the Charac
teristics—not of the word, but of all the individuals
contained under the word. It is sometimes conve
nient to employ three appellations'1, Characteristics,
Properties, and Accidents, in contrast to each other.
The first expresses what is possessed by all the
individuals to which the word applies, and by none
beside. The second expresses what is possessed by
d The Schoolmen say Specific Property for that whioh I have
called Characteristic, and Generic Property for that which I name
simply Property. In common language, Peculiarity is also used
for Characteristic.
C

26

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

all, but by some beside. The third expresses, what is
possessed by some only ; or not always by all. Thus:
It is a Characteristic or Pecu }to be capable of forming moral
liarity of Man
judgments,
... a Property
to be gregarious.
. . . an Accident
to have six fingers on the hand.
The utmost confusion of thought is produced by
logicians, when they speak as though the Essence
belonged to the very same subject as do the Charac
teristic, the Property, and the Accident: whereas the
Essence belongs to the Word or Name, but the other
three to the individuals contained under the word.
Nevertheless, when a word has been used with much
laxity, and it becomes desirable for scientific pur
poses to fix its meaning anew, the best method is
to select all the characteristics, or indeed the proper
ties, known to belong to the objects which are popu
larly connected with the word, and employ the word
as representing them all together. Thus the Essence
becomes the aggregate of the Characteristics or Pro
perties. So if we wish to define Sugar, we may say,
its Essence consists in the combination of sweetness,
whiteness, a crystalline arrangement, and a certain
chemical combination: all of which are Properties:
but it is a Characteristic of Sugar to unite them all :
and this we may make the Essence of the word
Sugar. Yet nothing hinders but that we may after
wards discover new characteristics, not included in
the definition thus made.
Physiologists define Life by recounting its main
Characteristics: but no one supposes that the subject

INVESTIGATING DEFINITIONS.

27

is thus exhausted, and that all that regards Life may
be deduced out of such a definition. When such a
notion is entertained, the mind is mischievously set
on eliciting Truth out of words, and not out of
things.
An important controversy in morals turns on the
distinction between Essence and Characteristic. It
is allowed by all, that Virtue, taken in the long run
and on the largest scale, tends to produce happiness ;
and Vice to produce misery : so that all regard it as
a characteristic and useful test of Virtue, to tend
towards happiness. But the utilitarian doctrine far
ther teaches, that this is the essence of the word
Virtue ; insomuch that when we call an action vir
tuous, we mean that it is " useful on a large scale."
The opposite school is confident in alleging, that
though we know murder to be a very hurtful practice,
yet when we say that; a murderer is a wicked man, we
mean and feel more than that " such acts do not tend
to general happiness."
Not very unlike is the controversy about the Sub
lime and Beautiful. The same qualities in a horse
are generally beautiful and useful, at least tend to
speed; yet when we admire a horse's beauty, Mr.
Burke is certainly right in insisting that we mean
something else than its utility or its speed. Indeed
here it may be added, that numberless blemishes in
beauty are conceivable, that neither should diminish
its speed in the particular case, nor have any tendency
to do so generally.

c 2

28

RELATIVE EXTENT OF TERMS.
Relative extent of Terms.

Of Terms or names, some embrace a far greater
number of individuals than others: not only so, but
some will embrace all the individuals that fall under
another, and more beside. Thus Fish contains all
which Salmon contains, and many more. In such
case, the more comprehensive name is by Logicians
called " Genus ;" the less comprehensive, " Species."
Thus Fish is a Genus, under which fall a variety of
Species, as Salmon, Herring, Flounder, &c.
I say, Logicians thus use the words Genus and
Species: and accordingly they will equally call Ani
mal a Genus, of which the words Beast, Bird, Fish,
&c. are Species: for all that they look to, is the
relative extent of one to the other. In this way, a
term (as Fish) which is a Genus compared to some
others less extensive, (as Salmon, Herring,) is a
Species, in comparison with the more extensive term
Animal. Thus a series of terms is conceivable, like
a genealogy, of which the highest is the most exten
sive, and the lowest the most confined ; and of which
each is to that immediately below it as Genus to
Species.
But it is right to add, that the Natural Historians
have beaten the Logicians out of the field, by fixing
the words Genus and Species, so that they are be
come no longer merely relative terms. Thus no
naturalist would think of calling Beast a Species, and
Animal its Genus: but the word Species is peculiarly
applied to such a class of animals as either are sup
posed, or might be supposed, to have descended from

LOGICAL DIVISION.

29

common parents. Thus Dog, Cat, Horse, Cow, &c.
are Species absolutely, without naming any Genus:
again, the Leopard, the Lion, the domestic Cat, are
all Species under the common Genus Cat. For the .
greater facility of science, a series of terms has been
invented, ascending and in part descending, from
the term Species.
{Species, Subgenus, Genus, Family, Tribe or Section or
Division, Order, Class, Kingdom.
Species, Variety, Subvariety, (Race or Breed.)
But to go into details on this subject, would be to
trespass on the domain of Natural History.

Logical Division.
If we speak of dividing a thing, the obvious mean
ing is, to effect a real or mental distribution of phy
sical parts; as of a Man into Head, Body, and
Limbs. This is sometimes called Physical Division.
If we speak of dividing a word, as Man, logically,
this naturally implies distributing the individuals
contained by it under subordinate heads; as Man
into Civilized and Savage. Thus a Genus is resolved
or divided into certain component Species. Obvious
rules for such division are, that the parts be exclusive
of each other ; and that the parts together make up
the whole: in other words, that every individual
contained under the original term, be also found
once, but once only, under those which are substituted
for it.
But it is well just to advert to another kind of

80

LOGICAL DIVISION'.

Division, (sometimes called Metaphysical.) On con
sidering that all that are contained under a Species
are also contained under its Genus, though not all
that are contained under the Genus are under the
Species; it appears that there is more meaning in the
word that is Species than in the word that is Genus
to it; as more meaning in the word Fish, than in the
word Animal. Thus a Fish is an Animal and some
thing more. This " something more" is called the
Specific Difference, because it distinguishes Fishes
from other Animals which are not Fish; (that is,
from all the Cognate Species.) And now it is said,
that Genus is made up of Species and Specific Dif
ference ; and divisible into the two. Thus if ration
ality be the Specific Difference between Man and all
other animals, Animal is said to be divisible into Man
and Rationality. But in fact it is not here an animal
that we are dividing, (as in Physical Division,) nor
are we classifying the individuals contained under the
word Animal, (as in Logical Division;) but it is the
definition of the word animal which is undergoing a
physical division : for such division goes upon the
supposition that we may define Man as meaning
Rational Animal, superadding the Specific Difference
to the Genus.
This is the only definition which the Aristotelians
admit as radically valid.
The truth is, that as
Genera or Classes may be formed arbitrarily, no
definition is conceivable at all which might not be so
resolved. Thus if " Man" be defined Child of
Adam, it may be alleged that " Kinsman of Adam"
is Genus, while " Child" points to a specific dif

LOGICAL DIVISION.

31

ference. True, Adam had no other kinsfolk; but
this is accidental only. Again, " Child of an Animal"
might be called a sort of Genus, and " Adam" might
show the specific difference. Once more: If we
define a Mayor as being " the President of a Muni
cipality," one logician may tell us that " Officer of a
Municipality" is the Genus, and that " President'1
marks the Specific Difference: while another may
contend, that " President of an Association" is the
Genus, and that the Specific Difference lies in the
word Municipality. But the definition certainly
marks out neither genus nor specific difference, but
ingenuity is to be tasked to resolve it, as best we
may; perhaps awkwardly, and uselessly. Yet in the
Aristotelian system much stress is generally laid on
this point, for which reason I have thought right
briefly to explain their nomenclature.
Thus if they ask, What is a thing, (or rather, a
term, a name) ? they expect that the reply will be by
stating the Genus. What is Man? Answer: An
Animal. Again, What sort is he? Answer by the
Specific Difference, Rational. Thus to t/, the quidditas of the Schoolmen, is the Genus ; and to wolfo ti,
the quale quid, is with them the Specific Difference.
Various other points of Latin nomenclature have
been introduced by them, with which it is not worth
while to trouble ourselves.

ss

PROPOSITIONS.
On Propositions.

I have already stated, that Propositions are divided
by Logicians into two classes, affirmative and negative.
But this division has reference only to the mode of
making an assertion, and not to the substance or
meaning. For the very same assertion may be dif
ferently worded, so as to become, as we please, af
firmative or negative. Sometimes by a slight change,
such as that of " not deserving" into " undeserving,"
" not just" into " unjust," a proposition passes from
negative to affirmative : sometimes it is accompanied
with an entire alteration of the structure.
On this account it would seem that the present
division of propositions more properly belongs to
Grammar than to Logic; since Logic must look to
the meaning of an assertion, and not to the mode of
conveying that meaning. Of course every propo
sition admits of numerous changes of form, without
altering the substance of the meaning; both by inter
changing synonymous words, and by minor gram
matical alterations; or even by translation into a
foreign language, with which we need not now con
cern ourselves. But there is one form to which
Logicians generally choose to reduce their propo
sitions : viz. so that there may be three portions, of
which the central and connecting part is a tense of
the verb To Be; the first part being then that of
which something is said, and the third part that
which is said of it. Thus,
William | was | brave.
The king | is | apprehensive of it.
Some courtiers | were | disposed to flatter.
Few men of principle | are | willing to give their names.

l'JIOI'OSITIONS.

33

In such cases, we call the first part The Subject, the
second part The Copula, and the third part The
Predicate. The Subject and Predicate are of course
Terms; the word Term {terminus) being indeed
hence derived ; because they are the extremities or
opposite ends of a proposition.
It will be readily seen, that all propositions that
are not already of this form, are easily reducible to
it: as,
CThe consul bad learned. The consul | had been | apprized.
< The enemy drew nigh. The enemy | was ] drawing nigh.
(_Few exceed this height. Few | are | higher than this height.
Farther, in place of the various tenses of the verb
To Be in the Copula, we may manage to substitute
uniformly the present tense. Thus instead of in
quiring whether " Hannibal was ever defeated in
Italy," we may inquire if it was ever true to say,
" Hannibal is defeated in Italy." Instead of the
assertion, that " a revolution will take place," we
may allege, that it will be hereafter true to say,
" A revolution is taking place,'1 or, " is past." Thus
the idea of time is removed from the Copula, and
thrown on the sentence at large, or on the assertion
which introduces it.
The same method may be used with various ad
verbs that appear in the Predicate : as, for,
C Philosophers | are I sometimes mistaken.
( The orators | were | probably bribed.
it is allowable to set down,
{It is sometimes true that : Philosophers | are | mistaken.
It was probably true that : The orators | are | bribed.
c3

34

l'JMJPOSITIONS.

Propositions so qualified are called by the School
men Modal, and those which are not encumbered by
any qualification Categoric. But we are not likely
to use these terms any more ; especially as they are
not understood beyond the pale of the Schools.
The first and second person in grammar can of
course be evaded by introducing the name of the
person. Hence the Copula is always reducible to
the word Is or Are. Putting S and P for Subject
and Predicate, every proposition is said to have the
following form : S is P.
When however the particle not is detached from
the Predicate and united to the Copula, the form
is as follows : S is not P : and this is what Logicians
call a Negative Proposition.
To obviate misconception, let it be kept in mind,
that language is not essential to belief. A Proposition
is but a representation of an act of belief, which act
may subsist without the representation, just as the
notions which words represent may subsist without
the words. Even a brute animal has numerous
mental propositions, so to say. Thus a dog on
meeting a person who yesterday gave him a bit of
meat, recognizes him: which shows a belief that may
be expressed by the proposition,
This | is | he who yesterday gave me meat.
Nor need we restrict the remark to propositions in
which the Subject and Predicate are co-extensive and
interchangeable. There is no doubt that a dog dis
tinguishes by the eye an animal of his own species,
as also one of the human species, from other objects.

PROPOSITIONS.

35

Thus, when a lost dog supplicates a person never
before seen to become its master, it shows an under
standing and belief of the proposition,
This personage | is | one of the human species.
But whether an act of belief be or be not repre
sented in language, there must in all cases be some
thing about which we have the belief, and some thing
which we believe about it : and these are Subject and
Predicate.
When however language is employed instrumentally, it is requisite, before an act of belief is possible,
first to know what the arbitrary symbols mean.
Persons have grievously perplexed this plainest of
truths, by the vague dogma, that " we believe many
things which we cannot understand." If this mean,
that we can and do believe many propositions, with
out knowing numerous matters connected with the
phenomena spoken of; it is no doubt true. Thus we
believe in the circulation of the blood, (i. e. the pro
position, that, " The blood circulates,") without un
derstanding the cause of the circulation : but assuredly
not without knowing what the proposition means.
It is common to say, that " we believe our own
existence, without understanding it." This probably
means, that each of us believes the proposition, /
exist, without understanding how we exist, how life
is sustained, &c. but certainly no man believes the
proposition, except in the sense in which he under
stands it ; and if he have no understanding of it, he
has positively no belief in it. He may indeed trust
the authority which promulgates it; but this is not

36

PROPOSITIONS.

to believe the proposition itself. Thus if a credible
witness were to inform us, that " the electric balance
is at an equipoise," the words being unintelligible to
us, we should not believe the proposition itself, but
another proposition, viz. that " he has told us some
thing true."
It is a perversion of words to call this a Belief of
the proposition at all ; but if it is to be so called, we
should imitate the precision of the Romish doctors,
and call it " Implicit Faith." According to their
nomenclature, if the Church teaches a dogma, a man
who rightly understands and believes it, has Explicit
Faith ; but a man who misunderstands, but means to
believe what was intended, has Implicit or Virtual
Faith in that which he ought to have believed.
Many of them hold that this has all the merit of
explicit faith ; but none can deny that its effects are
widely different. If I tell a man that " his house is
on fire," and he believes me, he will probably run
for the engines: but if he do not understand, he may
have " implicit faith," in so far as he believes that
" whatever I say is true," but he will remain quite
inactive. In fact, it is only confusion of thought or
love of some hypothesis, that could lead any to say
that he believed at all, until the proposition was
understood : and when he supposes that he under
stands, he then believes, not the real meaning, but
the meaning which he attaches to it.
Besides the general division of propositions ac
cording to Quality into the two forms; S is P, and,
S is not P : there is a second division of them accord
ing to Quantity, as Logicians term it ; that is, ac

PKOPOSITIONS.

37

coi'ding as the words All or Some are understood
to belong to the Subject. The statement, " Men
are mortal," we understand to mean that " All
men are mortal :" but if it be said, " Women are
easily deceived," the sense probably is, that " Some
women" or " Most women are easily deceived." Ac
cordingly, propositions are named Universal and
Partial.
In common use, a distinction is drawn between
Universal and General; as when we say, that a pro
position is generally true, though not universally.
But in the phraseology of the Schoolmen, whatever
is short of being Universal is called Partial, whether
it be expressed by Most or Many or Some or A very
few. If a mind were to be regulated by the sole laws
of pure dialectics, as taught in the syllogistic system,
it must resolve not to understand the difference of
Many and Few: or rather, the words themselves are
too vague to be admitted. Thus a pure syllogizer
would look on the two statements, that " Most men
are liars," and " Very few men are liars," as mean
ing the same identical thing; both being merged
under the vaguer proposition that " Some men are
liars."
Negative propositions may of course be either
Universal or Partial : but in the universals the word
All might sometimes involve ambiguity. Thus to
say that
All men | are not | perfect :
for, All men are imperfect :
would be obscure, and seem rather to mean that Not

PROPOSITIONS.

38

all are perfect. Eastern languages indeed, and the
New Testament Greek, use this form : as,
Xloira ffattfe til 6t*m*Mnnu—
All flesh shall not be justified :
for, No flesh shall be justified.
After this remark, it will be seen, that logical pro
positions resolve themselves into four different forms:

Univeisals
Partials

Affirmative.

Negative.

All X is Y

No X is Y

Some X is Y

Some X is not Y

These four are technically denoted by the letters
A

E

I

O

Some sentences appear in a deceptive form, owing
to the addition of the adverb Only, or the phrase
None but; as, " Only natives could bear the fatigue,"
or, " None but natives &c." These we may exchange
into the forms, " All who are able to bear the fa
tigue, are [none but] natives." But the remark is
here introduced only to obviate questioning and
possible perplexity.
For a like reason I add, that when a proper name
is the subject of a proposition, or a word accompanied
with the definite article or demonstrative pronoun,
(as, Socrates, Bacon, The historian, That country,)
the proposition is named Universal by the Schoolmen.

PROPOSITIONS.
This is disagreeably and inconveniently opposed to
popular usage; in which such a proposition is named
Particular, in contrast to Universal and General.
But, argue they, it is universal, because, when we
say Socrates, we mean " all that the word Socrates
implies." And to their technical system it is found
convenient so to look at the matter: but as we need
not embarrass ourselves with the subject, this will not
be any more adverted to by me.
Mutual Relation of Propositions.
Any four propositions related as in the table just
drawn up, (when any sets of words are substituted
for X and Y,) have certain contrasts and connexions
of meaning, dependent on their form alone; which
the Aristotelians call their Opposition.
1\ It is manifest, that to assert the universal, is to
assert the partial, and something more: so that to
assert A or E, is to assert I or O.
Hence to deny even the partial, amounts to deny
ing also the universal ; that is, to deny I or O
involves a denial of A or E.
Such is the relation of subordinates ; I and O being
named Subordinate to A and E.
2°. To assert a universal affirmative is to deny a
partial negative : as, to allege that " All men are
sinners," is to deny the assertion, that " Some men
are not sinners." Such propositions are called Con
tradictory to each other. So also of the universal
negative and partial affirmative. Thus A is contra
dictory to O, and E to I.

40

PROPOSITIONS.

Two Contradictories can be neither true together
nor false together ; but if one is true, the other is
false ; and if one is false, the other is true.
In the demonstrations of Euclid, what is named
Indirect proof (or Reductio ad Absurdum) consists
in proving the falsehood of the Contradictory in
place of the truth of the proposition itself: as,
instead of showing that " any two lines of such a
nature are equal,1'' he will show that it is false to
allege that " some two lines of such a nature are
not equal."
It is important to remember how we arrive at a
conviction, that two propositions are contradictory :
viz. not by considering the matter (or topic) treated,
but the mere form. As this very plain subject has
been obscured by false philosophy, it is requisite to
elucidate it in a manner that would otherwise be
superfluous to any tolerably clear head. When we
pronounce that the proposition, " All dogs may be
trained to hunt," is contradictory to, " Some dogs
cannot be trained to hunt;" we do not ground our
assertion on any peculiarity in the nature of the dogWe do not lay claim to the experience of sportsmen.
We should not appeal to a huntsman or to a natural
historian to confirm what we say. We should not
even recur to a dictionary to settle the meaning of
the words. But it is manifest that if 'dogs were
changed to wolves, and hunt to bark, it would not in
any way affect the case. The contradiction is as
certain, and as manifest, if even X and Y be substi
tuted for dogs and hunt. Nothing ought to be said,
or can be said truly, in defence of our assertion, that

PROPOSITIONS.

41

the two propositions are contradictory, than that
human language is an arbitrary thing; and that
words and grammar have been so constructed, as
that when we assert the one, we intend to denote the
same state offacts, as when we deny the other.
Let us suppose a Gnostic teacher, full of the
absurd mysticism of his sect, to set before us two
sacred truths, (as he viewed them:)
{AH the /Eons existed from eternity.
Some of the /Eons had no existence till after Adam.
Expounding (as we should expound) after Adam to
mean not from all eternity, we should pronounce the
relation between the propositions to be that of A to
O; and consequently that they contradict each other.
If the philosopher alleged that we misunderstood
the term " eternity
if he somehow qualified its
meaning so as to prevent our reducing the propo
sitions to A and O ; if (for instance) he alleged
that eternity only meant " ancient times," so that
after Adam was not equivalent to not from eternity ;
the propriety of his remark would need to be judged
by those learned in the doctrines of his sect. A mere
logician would have no right to pronounce upon the
subject. But if our Gnostic fully admitted that our
reduction of the second proposition was legitimate,
what would be thought of his folly or madness, in
endeavouring to uphold them simultaneously, and to
overbear our modesty by descanting upon our igno
rance of the matter treated on? He might doubtless
find a vast field for declamation concerning the
mysterious nature of JSons, the incomprehensibility
of eternity, human ignorance, the need of revelation,

ritorosiTiONs.
the importance of humility, the inferiority of Logic
to Divine Knowledge, and the presumption of those
who would judge the revelation of God by their own
puny intellects. And through such misplaced re
marks he might deceive nine hearers out of ten, by
conveying an entirely false apprehension of our ob
jection. He supposes or pretends that we are laying
claim to an extensive or precise acquaintance with
the Object Matter of which he treats. No such
thing: the Form is the seat of the contradiction.
As well might the huntsman or the natural historian,
in the case before supposed, browbeat the student
who should pronounce, that if it was true that " All
dogs can be trained," it is false that " Some cannot be
trained as the mystic thus overbear by the weight
of his subject one who really professes no acquaint
ance with it. Whether things earthly or heavenly,
present, past, or future, be treated, matters not, after
the form has been settled. The mere logician then
decides at a glance, unerringly and without appeal.
Were it otherwise, no mystic could ever be con
futed, though he contradicted himself ever so often ;
nor could we ever assail a false religion at all.
A Mohammedan, a Brahmin, a Buddhist, could all
talk in this high strain, and abash us by an appeal
to our ignorance and littleness. If (on any topic) it
is not lawful from the truth of Ae to infer the false
hood of 0, then on such topic the human mind can
apprehend nothing at all ; and if for a moment any
e In strictness, it is no inference at all, but only another way
of saying the very same thing. He who alleges A and 0
simultaneously, does but say and unsay.

PROPOSITIONS.

43

religion could be supposed of such a kind, it would
be impossible to know what any of its assertions
meant, or what we meant in saying that we believed
them : the subject would be manifestly such as the
mind could take no cognizance of whatever. And as
we would not endure such dogmatic assumptions from
others in the cause of what we believe to be error,
neither must we use it ourselves in the cause of truth.
But it is important to distinguish physical from
logical contradictions. That a man is at London,
and that the same man is simultaneously at York,
are physically contradictory, but not logically, until
it shall have been shown that a man cannot be in
two places at once; without which the two propo
sitions are not reducible to any form of logical
contrast. Again, if one witness deposes that a man
was at London at such a time, and another that he
was at York twelve hours after; we may popularly
say that the witnesses contradict each other; because
we know of no method of locomotion rapid enough
to verify both statements. The difficulty is physical,
the contradiction (if such) only physical. Here
would be room for the intervention of a miracle:
divine power might effect it : the question is not one
of Logic, but of Religion, of Morals, of Historical
Experience, &c. Whereas in the case of logical
contradictions, miracles are unavailing, since it is the
form, not the matter, which is refractory. A mis
understanding of terms often produces apparent con
tradiction. When an uninstructed person hears a
mathematician speak of Asymptotes, or lines which
never meet, though they perpetually approach each

44

PROPOSITIONS.

other, and come nearer moreover than any distance
that can be named ; he generally pronounces that
this is impossible, or self-contradictory. The reason
is, that he understands lines to " meet" when they
appear to the eye to meet. But the mathematician
addresses the mind, not the eye, and if between two
lines there were conceived to intervene one billionth
part of the least visible distance, he would no more
allow that the lines had met, than if they were as far
apart as the earth and sun.
The only attempt that can be made to reconcile
logical contradictions, is, by supposing ambiguities of
expression. For, " All X is Y," is not truly contra
dictory to " Some X is not Y," if there is some
change of sense in the symbol X or Y, in passing
from one proposition to the other. But until we
have ascertained the accurate meaning of the terms
in each case, both propositions remain a dead letter
to us. If their truth is guaranteed to us by any high
authority, we need an interpretation from the same
authority. Suspicion has now been thrown on the
ordinary sense of the words; or rather, it is fully
ascertained that one or other (we know not which)
of the four terms does not bear its ordinary sense;
while as yet we know not what sense instead it does
bear. For the present therefore the two propositions
are (as it were) in a foreign dialect, and are waiting
for translation.
This leads me to remark on the term Nonsense:
which is properly applied to sentences which do
not perform the office of a sentence, viz. convey
meaning to the mind. (They may contain valuable

PRO POSITION'S.

46

truth, but till the understanding knows what it
is, they are nonsense.) The source of this is,
1st, ignorance of words; as, if any technical or
foreign names are contained : 2dly, metaphors ill
understood, or other figures of speech : Sdly, bad
or misunderstood grammatical inflexion or syntax :
4thly, when one part of the sentence apparently
unsays another part. While any such apparent diffi
culties exist, it is perfectly useless to enforce the
proposition by authority, human or divine. Inter
pretation is first imperatively needed.
3°. Analogous remarks to those made on Contra
dictories, are applicable to the Universal Affirmative
and Universal Negative. These are named by Logi
cians, not Contradictory, but only Contrary to each
other. They cannot be true together, but may be
false together.
But the Partial Affirmative and Partial Negative
are entitled Subcontrury. These can be true together,
but cannot be false together. The appellations Subcontrary and (with the above definition) Contrary,
are unknown beyond the immediate precincts where
Aristotle is studied.
4°. Propositions are said to be reverted, (in Latin
it is called Conversio,) when the Subject and Pre
dicate are interchanged. Only the Partial Affirmative
and Universal Negative can be thus reverted without
affecting the sense : as,

of the sentence ; so that no peculiarity in the Object

VERBAL TRUTHS.

46

Matter can justify a man in holding one of these
propositions and denying its reverse ; when the re
verse is merely the same thing said in a different
way. Finally, it may be remarked, that a diagram
is not without its use, to represent the four kinds
of propositions, by which (at a glance) their mutual
relations are seen, and also, as will be said below, all
the laws of Syllogism.
A

E

All X is Y

No X is Y

I

0

Some X is Y Some X is notY

Cl1>)
®0

On Verbal Truths.
In speaking of definition, we remarked, that the
truth of a definition was a question not of fact, but of
words, except in so far as the inquiry is involved
how men use certain words. Thus to allege that
" a mayor is the chief magistrate of a corporation," is
but a verbal truth. But the remark would apply to
many propositions beside, which do not appear in the
exact form of a definition, though they are yet proved
to be true by the mere definitions of certain terms
which they contain. Thus, that " thought is an ope
ration of the mind;" that " ugliness is not beautiful;"
that " the sublime is not ridiculous ;" that " tall men
are not short;" these are truths which all will admit;

VERBAL TRUTHS.

47

but no one proves them by appealing to experience :
no one appeals to metaphysicians to establish the
first, to painters for the second, poets for the third,
or tailors for the fourth. The appeal is not to facts
or history, but to the meaning of words. If there be
any question at all, it is one of Lexicography: What
means Thought ? Ugly ? Tall ? Short ? &c.
Another species of Verbal Truth is verified by the
mere form of a sentence. We have just seen, that
" the truth of any proposition implies the falsehood
of its Contradictory." This very thing is a verbal
truth, verified by the definition of the word Contra
dictory; but we may propose the same thing differ
ently thus :
" If it be true that All X is Y, it is false that Some
X is not Y:" and the proposition is now verified by
its form, in conjunction with the sense of the words
true, false, &c. Sometimes the form may be purely
grammatical. Thus the proposition,
" He who is a prisoner, is under imprisonment :"
" He who is dead, must have died :"
would be verified rather by a Grammar, than by a
Dictionary. But in any case, there is this difference
between Real Truths, and Verbal or (as they are
also called) Identical Truths: that the notion con
tained bv each of the two symbols X and Y are
identically the same in the latter case ; while in the
former case, X and Y are representatives of notions
quite distinguishable by the mind, which yet (as a
matter of fact) are found in company. Thus, " Man
is mortal" is a real truth, if a truth at all, because the

48

VERBAL TRUTHS.

mind can conceive of a man (or child of Adam) with
out simultaneously conceiving of mortality as com
prehended in the definition. That " a horse is an
animal,'" may be verbal or may be real, according as
it is understood. To the popular mind, it is probably
verbal; because by horse they understand any one
of a well-known class of objects, and by an animal
any one of a certain larger class that contains the
former; each word having been originally constituted
upon a generalization through which the mind passed.
But perhaps a philosopher means by the word " ani
mal," that which lives by help of respiration: and if
so, it is a real truth to allege that a horse is an
animal ; since the popular idea of horse does not
involve that of respiration. Respiration is rather
a property of the Class, than a part of the essence
of the Word.
Examples of Verbal Truths.
The whole is equal to the sum of its parts.
If the universal be true, the partial is also true.
Five times four is twenty.
There is no effect without a cause.
Every son must have had a father.
There is no action without an agent.
If he has been murdered, some one has murdered him.
Equal and opposite forces neutralize each other.
It is often a source of most subtle fallacy, when
a verbal truth is mistaken for a real one, or the
converse. And owing to the ambiguities of words,
the same proposition is sometimes each, according
as they are understood. A very common sophism

VERBAL TRUTHS.

49

among the dialecticians, was, to assume under the
guise of a verbal truth one which is no truth at
all: as,
A man who has got drunk is a drunkard :
where the grammatical derivation of the word drunk
ard imposes on the mind.
A well-known jocose saying may usefully fix on the
memory the importance of attending to this subject.
Treason never prospers : What's the reason ?
Why, when it prospers, none dare call it Treason.
On hearing the first words, Treason never prospers,
we take them for the assertion of a real truth, and
expect a proof to be offered from history, and the
fact to be accounted for from analogous topics.
But the latter part sets about verifying the pro
position by the definition of the word Treason ;
putting such a sense on the word as verifies the
proposition independently of all history. Thus the
truth becomes merely verbal. When Verbal truths
are thus nugatory or deceptive, we often call them
Truisms: which title is also given to very obvious
Real truths, when they are proved by some elaborate
process.
Yet it must not be supposed that Verbal truths
are always useless. They are often serviceable to
remind men of the meaning of their words, especially
when words have been invested with a moral import
for good or bad. Verbal truths therefore serve the
same purpose (and are susceptible of the same
unfair use in the cause of fallacy) as definitions;
being indeed either definitions in disguise, or deD

50

VERBAL TRUTHS.

ductions from definitions. For example, an orator,
who was pleading for the English poor under the old
Poor Law, might have taken advantage of the sym
pathy felt by his audience with Slaves, and their
horror of the word Slavery, by reasoning as follows :
" English laborers are bound to the soil, and are
forced to work for taskmasters at wages which those
taskmasters appoint: now those who are in such a
state are Slaves; nothing else than Slaves: I say
then, that while England is boasting of her freedom,
the mass of her laborers are held under Slavery."
Here the proposition in Italics is verbal, and is
introduced to justify the transition from the pre
ceding to the following mode of stating the same
thing. It can do no more than alter the mode of
statement ; yet the change is not unimportant ; for
the word Slavery will often produce an effect which
could not else have been attained. Yet in part this
may be taxed with fallacy; for while the imposition
complained of is manifestly inconsistent with Free
dom, yet the burning of mind against Slavery of
which advantage is taken, has been produced by a
state of things infinitely worse than and essentially
different from any thing to which English laborers
are subjected, or are tending.
By way of farther illustration, I will put forward
several other propositions.
1°. " Motion takes place in the direction in which
an unimpeded force acts." If we have no means
of testing the direction of the force nor the fact
of its existence, but by the motion and its initial
direction, the proposition is a verbal truth. If how

VERBAL TRUTHS.

51

ever the force be a pressure whose existence and
direction is ascertainable separately from the motion
of that which is acted on, the truth is real.
2*. " Men always act upon the strongest motive
which at the time urges them." If we have no mode
of ascertaining what is the strongest motive at any
particular time, except by observing which prevails,
the proposition is a truism ; equivalent to saying, that
" They always act according to the motive according
to which they do act." If any absolute measure of
the strength of motives is resorted to, the proposition
is beyond doubt highly disputable, perhaps entirely
false.
3°. " The will of God is holy, just, and good."
This is of all truths the most intensely important,
if the words holy just good have an absolute sense,
drawn from the ordinary apprehensions of men's con
sciences. But if we have no test or measure of their
sense, except by an appeal to " the will of God," the
truth evaporates into a truism which a worshipper of
Moloch would hold.
4°. " The same causes under the same circum
stances uniformly produce the same effects." This
is an assertion, which in the material world has been
so extensively verified, as to lead modern philo
sophers to an almost unhesitating belief of it.
But in the mental world, where the Causes that
are at work have (or seem to have) a self-adjusting
power within certain limits, it becomes almost im
possible to estimate the intensity of the causes,
except by the effects; and the proposition is in
perpetual danger of being turned into a truism ;
d 9.

52

MATHEMATICAL TRUTH.

viz. when we so interpret or modify our apprehen
sions of the cause by looking to the effect, as to
verify it forthwith.
On Mathematical Truth.
It will now be very evident, that the simplest
truths of Arithmetic are verbal. Thus that " two
and two make four." For if we substitute in the
place of two and four their definitions, the sentence
becomes, " One and one and one and one make one
and one and one and one:" which is Identical. And
we farther observe, that even those which are less
obvious are equally identical. For although the
truth that 269 + 384 = 653 is less obvious than that
2+2 = 4, it is really resolvable in the same way.
So also the Multiplication Table is nothing but a
series of identical propositions, or verbal truths : and
the like holds of a Table of Powers and Roots, or of
Logarithms.
Demonstration in such cases consists in a perpetual
substitution of one set of words for another which
is equivalent, until the matter is reduced to some
proposition that is manifestly identical. It tends
to simplification, if a proposition is broken up
into several. Thus instead of substituting terms
manifestly equivalent, we may substitute such as
have been already proved equivalent ; (which are
therefore manifestly equivalent to the practised
mathematician, though not to the beginner.) Or
again, instead of reducing the proposition to be
demonstrated, to a proposition manifestly identical,

MATHEMATICAL TRUTH.

63

it may be reduced to one already proved identical.
Did we not thus use subsidiary propositions, our
labor would be enormously multiplied ; as we should
have to go through the same process a thousand
times, instead of once for all.
It ought not to excite astonishment, that so much
pains is needed to establish mere verbal truths, when
we consider how much thought is requisite to perform
a sum of long addition, to one who has no technical
rule to help him. When therefore words of so very
complicated meaning are introduced, as Root, Expo
nent, Integral, Differential, it is not wonderful that
much close attention and persevering thought is
requisite to demonstrate propositions that involve
them.
Nor yet must it be forgotten, that there is a large
exercise of other powers of mind, (as Judgment and
Invention,) when it is required, not merely to follow
a computation or proposition already finished, but to
find out something required. The mere faculty that
understands identical propositions to be identical, (or
the clearness of head which perceives that such and
such a set of words means the same as another set,)
would never have enabled any one to invent a rule
for extracting the square root ; much less for invent
ing solutions of higher problems, in which all the
resources of the mind are frequently drawn-on.
Yet while the faculties exerted by the original
mathematician are not. to be depreciated, the truths
which he elicits are for no other reason certain and
eternal (as they have been proudly called) than
because they assert nothing about matter of fact.

54

MATHEMATICAL TRUTH.

They merely exact that human language shall be
consistent with itself, and deduce, that if so, then
such a phrase is identical with such another phrase.
Of course the case is different with Natural Philo
sophy ; as Astronomy, Optics, Chemistry, &c.
These deal with real truths ; but truths which no
one has any right to call eternal ; since things exist
as they do exist, only by the will of the Deity.
Geometry forms a separate case ; and it is a cu
rious enquiry whether its propositions are identical.
Against this opinion it may be urged, first, that it
has to do, not with mere words, but with something
that seems undeniably to have an existence separately
from our minds, viz. Space : a word which can no
more be defined than can The Sun or The Moon.
Secondly, it does not appear as yet that geometers
even pretend to prove all their propositions from their
definitions; inasmuch as the theory of Parallels re
quires some unproved assumption.—Yet to both of
these arguments a specious reply may be made. To
the former it may be answered, that though we cannot
speak of Space as a creation of the mind (like Num
bers), yet neither can we speak of it as a creation of
the Deity (like the Sun and Moon) ; for that we are
unable to conceive of Space as ever having been non
existent. To the latter it may be answered, that
though no geometer has settled the question of
Parallels to the satisfaction of the rest, yet none
regard it as a matter to be proved by experiment ;
as in fact no experiments could prove it, since magni
tudes soon become too small to be valued by sense.
In this difficulty, I am disposed to agree that the

SYLLOGISMS.

55

want of received proof concerning Parallels is no
objection against admitting Geometry among the
Pure Sciences. Yet as Space and its properties
appear undeniably to be learned by sense, the argu
ment seems to me to preponderate for naming it a
Mixed Science, and believing that its propositions
are real and not verbal truths.
On Syllogisms.
What is a Syllogism, I have already explained.
Its validity depends entirely on the two (verbal)
truths, that, " What is true of the universal, is true
of the partial and, " What is false of the partial,
is false of the general." Thus the syllogism,
{Laws made in barbarous times are likely to be barbarous:
All old laws were made in barbarous times :
Therefore, All old laws are likely to be barbarous :
stands on the same principle of evidence, as,
{All men are mortal :
(A)
Therefore, Some men are mortal : (I)
The only difference is, that the very word All so
manifestly includes Some, that even a logician would
not think it needful to state it. Whereas, although
we may familiarly reason thus,
{Laws made in barbarous times are likely to be barbarous :
Therefore f, Old laws are likely to be barbarous :
• It is more familiar to use the inverted order : thus, Old
laws are likely to be barbarous ; for, they are always made in
barbarous times.

£6

SYLLOGISMS.

it is yet conceivable that some might doubt and
question whether " old laws" were necessarily in
cluded under the description of " laws made in
barbarous times." Sometimes, therefore, it is ex
pedient to state both premisses.
There seems however no ground for imagining a
new faculty of the mind (Discursus or Ratiocinatio)
to take cognizance of Syllogism, different from the
faculty required to deduce I from A, nor does the
operation seem different. Nor in ordinary cases do
we feel it requisite to state both premisses of the
syllogism ; as the Conclusion itself tells us what
premiss is meant to be supplied.
Thus, if any one argue,
{Wisdom is not to be expected from extreme youth :
Therefore, The faults of young monarchs are to be pardoned :
we see at a glance, that he means to allege,
Faults springing from folly are pardonable at an age from
which wisdom is not to be expected :
and although it is not yet in Aristotelic form, no
person would either mistake or object to the form ;
but if any rejected the conclusion, it would be in
consequence of doubting or denying the truth of the
premisses.
We generally omit that premiss which is the more
obvious, and state that which is more questionable,
or least known : in order that thus the attention may
be fixed on the weakest parts of an argument, if
there be a weakness; but on what would be called
its turning point, if all be sound. Thus perhaps one
might say,

SYLLOGISMS.

5?

STo slaughter thousands is murder by wholesale ;
Therefore, Napoleon was a wholesale murderer :
because we all know that he slaughtered thousands.
But it would be less natural to say,
{To light a duel is as bad as murder;
Therefore, Richard Coeur de Lion was as bad as a murderer ;
because no duel of his is notorious, though perhaps
historians may know of some. If so, one ought to
state it,
( Richard Coeur de Lion fought a duel :
t Therefore, He was as bad as a murderer :
and thus the implied principle is left to be gathered.
To say the truth, in cases so simple each way is
too intelligible to be found fault with ; and these are
merely illustrations. It is however a common fallacy
to throw into the back-ground, and assume, as if in.
disputable, some proposition that will not bear ex
amination : meanwhile perhaps parading in full
syllogistic form other parts of the argument, to draw
off attention from the weak point. This constantly
throws as it were dust into men's eyes. The confusion
produced by reciting syllogisms at full, if there be
several, is so great, that no one would use two or
three full syllogisms close together, in a common dis
cussion, who was not a pedant or a sophist. Since
therefore both the omission of premisses, and their
frequent insertion, may be used as instruments of
deceit, it must be left to the judgment and good
sense of individuals when to insert both, or which to
insert. As a general rule, we can only say, Insert
d3

SYLLOGISMS.

58

that premiss, which the hearers will be less likely to
insert of themselves : and if the hearers be ignorant
of both, or need to be reminded of both, then insert
both. In the latter case, it is better to dwell sepa
rately on each, and expand the thought by illustration,
that they may have time to take it in, and digest it,
before drawing the conclusion.
The Aristotelic syllogism is put into such a form,
that the three propositions composing it contain but
three distinct terms, each term being taken twice
over : so that one term (called the Middle Term) is
common to the two premisses. In this way there
arise three figures (as they are called) depending on
the position of the Middle Term. In the first
figure is proved any sort of conclusion : in the second
figure only negatives: in the third only partial con
clusions. Thus,
Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig. 3.

All YisZ
\\
All X is Y
Therefore
All X is Z

No Z is Y
j
All X is Y
Therefore
No X is Z

All YisZ
11
Some Y is X
Therefoie
Some X is Z

That premiss which contains the term (Z), the
predicate of the conclusion, is called the Major Pre
miss, (for a very insufficient reason,) and is generally
placed first by the Aristotelians : the other follows it,
and is called the Minor. In the first figure the line
connecting the Middle Term (Y) slopes from left to
right ; in the second figure it occupies the right

SYLLOGISMS.

59

hand side of the syllogism, in the third the left hand.
The Schoolmen add a fourth figure, not recognized
by Aristotle, in which the line slopes from right to
left ; but they allow that it is unnatural, nor does it
appear ever to be used.
Technicals methods have been devised of detecting
false syllogisms, but they appear wholly useless in
practice, because a mere child can generally without
rule detect false syllogisms, when they are put into
form. The real difficulty is, to put an argument into
syllogistic form. When men are wanting in clearness
of head, and one defends, another attacks, an argu
ment ; their quarrel generally is about its true form
and meaning as an argument ; while they are per
fectly agreed as to the laws of syllogisms. In fact,
the vast majority of disputes arise, either out of
ambiguous words, or premisses not admitted to be
true ; in neither of which cases can the laws of
Syllogism bring any help.
If in any case there be doubt whether a syllogism
S The School System is certainly a curiosity in its way. . To
exhaust the subject, (as Aristotle loved,) all the possible com
binations of four propositions (AEIO) taken 3 and 3, are sup
posed : which gives 4 x 4 x 4 or 64. Then it is shown, that all
but 12 of these are inadmissible. The 12 taken in 4 figures are
48 : but again, half of these are proved inadmissible, and 5 to
be a needless narrowing of some of the rest. There remain 19
that are regarded as sound : and then, pains are taken to reduce
the 19 to 4, and to show that the 4 are at bottom the same;
viz, the assertion that " what is true of the universal is true of
the partial, &c." So that after all this trouble, we fall back
on that, which would have saved our work, if we had begun
with it.

SYLLOGISMS.

60

is valid, it may instantly be obviated by help of a
small diagram, in which the propositions shall be as
it were depicted. Thus if we are discussing the
syllogism,

All Z is Y
All X is Y
Therefore
All X is Z

Draw a circle to represent Y, and put both Z and X
within this circle, as the premisses direct: and it
immediately appears that X and Z may be entirely
exterior to each other, (or No X be Z,) although
either may be in whole or part within the other;
but if so, it does not follow from the premisses.
The same method is not only universally applicable,
but is in principle philosophical : as we may suppose
individuals dispersed over a plane, and grouped toge
ther in circles as above.
A few however of the Aristotelic rules are interest
ing; as the following: A syllogism cannot have two
negative premisses ; nor two partial ones : also if one
premiss be negative or partial, so is the conclusion.
It must now be clear that the validity of a syllo
gism (the premisses being granted) depends entirely
on the form, not on the matter: as it is equally valid,
if symbols X Y Z be substituted for them. Never
theless, Objections may be of two kinds; viz. either
by calling in question the truth of a premiss, or by

SYLLOGISMS.

61

denying that the conclusion follows logically from
the premisses. An objection of the former sort is
called extralogical ; because mere logic (or rather
mere syllogistic rules) cannot decide it.
Sometimes it appears as though the controversy
were logical, when it is really extralogical. Persons
will say, " I admit your fact, but I do not admit its
force as an argument;" when they really mean, " I
admit your expressed premiss, but deny that which
is implied and suppressed." The difficulty of re
ducing lengthy arguments into syllogistic form some
times leads even practised logicians into error. With
deference to so high an authority, I must say, that I
think the Archbishop of Dublin has mistaken as to
the famous sophism of Achilles and the tortoise.
Achilles runs a race, and gives the tortoise the start
of a stadium ; and it is supposed that Achilles runs
ten times as fast as the tortoise. The sophist argues
thus: " When Achilles has finished the stadium,
the tortoise is rs in advance ; when Achilles has run
through the tb, the tortoise is rhs in advance; when
Achilles has run the ihs, the tortoise is ttut in ad
vance ; and so on for ever ; therefore Achilles will
never catch him." Dr. Whately considers it a suffi
cient refutation of this, to say, that no one is able
to reduce it to syllogistic form. But surely his
business was to reduce it to such form, and to show
us that, when reduced, it offended some of the Aristotelic rules. He mistakes it for a logical fallacy,
whereas it is extralogical, depending on a false pre
miss suppressed, which it is the business of the
logician to bring to light, and of the mathematician

62

SYLLOGISMS.

to confute. The false premiss is this ; that the sum
of the series rs + tto + tbot + &c, ad infinitum, which
the tortoise runs before he is caught, is infinite;
whereas it is just = i- So entirely is the fallacy
extralogical, that if the velocities of Achilles and
the tortoise were so adjusted that the series should
be 5 + 7+ i + 5 + &c, (whose sum is infinite,) the
conclusion would be most true. Yet the difficulty
which Dr. Whately sees in reducing the argument to
syllogistic form would not be lessened.
Refutation is carried on in two ways; (1) by
Objections against the argument, of which I have
spoken, as of two kinds ; (2) by Antisyllogism ;
which is, to prove (by an independent chain of reason
ing) the Contradictory of the conclusion that is to be
refuted. A common case of this is, when it is said
that an argument " proves too much i. e. from the
conclusion can be deduced something notoriously
false : so that we oppose a direct disproof of it to
the direct proof of it that has been offered us. This
is like opposing one man's oath to another's; and the
question might recur, Which is to be believed? But
if the proof is long, tangled and difficult, while the
Antisyllogism is short and plain, the latter easily
wins the day. Thus no child is ever deceived by
" Achilles and the tortoise," because it is so easy
to antisyllogize, by saying that when Achilles has
run two stadia, he has far outstripped his competitor.
So in numerous difficult moral and metaphysical
arguments, where men of common but sound intellect
cannot point out fallacies, they yet manage to anti
syllogize so concisely and satisfactorily to themselves,

SYLLOGISMS.

63

as to despise the sophisms for flimsy trash. Yet
Refutation is more complete, jf both methods are
combined. In fact, if it has been found difficult
to point out fallacy, yet easy to antisyllogize, he
who ably exposes the source of the error is gene
rally instructive; because the difficulty is almost
certain to have arisen from some weak concession
which we have made, or some inconsistency in our
own scheme ; so that it has really been an Argumentum ad hominem, founded upon some error which
we are holding unawares.
In the practice of reasoning, we use far greater
condensation (with much advantage) than any thing
which the Syllogistic form would suggest. Thus we
often descend at a single step from two or more
universals to their partials. Example :
r It is fit that youth should be guided by age :
J Therefore, Young kings should not trample under foot the
\_
counsel of aged ministers.
Here we descend from the general term youth, to
a part of it, viz. young kings ; and from the general
term age, to a part of it, aged ministers. But
farther, there is an a fortiori argument, that if they
ought to be guided, much more ought they to show
respect, (which is less, and in a certain sense a part
of the other,) and be very far from treating their
counsels with contumely. Doubtless all this might
be brought into syllogistic form ; but it would lose
in energy, perhaps in clearness; while in such re
ductions, liberties with the words will generally be
taken, quite as large, (and not more warrantable,)

64

HYrOTHETICALS.

than are requisite for drawing the conclusion out
right.
Mr. Locke has attacked Syllogism as nugatory ;
on the ground that as the conclusion is implied in
the premisses and adds nothing to them, it is wholly
needless. This is true so far, that to state the pre
misses and omit the conclusion, would be generally
found to be an intelligible mode of reasoning. Thus,
" The barrister argued that his client was a Peer,
and that Peers had a special exemption." We supply
his conclusion, " Therefore his client should have
the exemption." But the merit of reasoning (in syl
logistic form or not) consists in finding and combining
the premisses in a particular way : for the same
truths are often known to hundreds, while but one
thinks of so grouping them as that certain conclu
sions result. Were it otherwise, he who knows the
definitions of Geometry, would straightway be master
of the whole science.
Hypotheticals.
In conducting a lengthened argument, (as in Geo
metry,) it is useful to fix on intermediate propo
sitions, which we may make stages or resting-places
in proceeding towards the last result, even if they
have no intrinsic value. This is the method uni
formly employed in science, and is properly didactic.
But when persons have no leisure nor disposition
for a systematic lecture, and when they have some
knowledge of the subject, at least of many of its
elements, and we cannot quite tell how much, it is

HYP0THET1CALS.
necessary often to pursue a reverse order. To illus
trate this ; Suppose an intelligent person, unversed in
Geometry, were to ask some proof that a Cone is
i of the Cylinder of the same base and height ; it
would be requisite to feel our way backward with
him, thus : " Will you admit that a triangular pyra
mid is i of the parallelepiped of the same base
and height? because, if you will, I can prove the
other." Ferhaps he will reply, " No, I do not see it:
but however, I will concede it for the present ; and
do you show me how the other follows from it."
When this has been done, he will return and de
mand a proof of what he conceded : and again, we
have to sound him, whether he allows that parallele
pipeds of equal base and height are equal ; and if he
concedes it for the moment, we get another step
backward : and so on, until we reach something, the
truth of which is manifest to him.
In the language of symbols, we show that M is
true, if N is true ; that N is true, if P is true ; and
P is true, if Q is true ; and so on, until we come to
one (as Q), of which we can say, " But Q is allowed
to be true: therefore P, therefore N, therefore M ;
which last was to be proved." This is named by
Aristotelians the Constructive Hypothetical.
If on the contrary we brought in some proof that
M is false, we should infer that neither can Q be
true. This they call Destructive Hypothetical : it
is, To refute a Hypothesis, by showing that false
conclusions may be deduced.
The term Hypothesis has however a peculiar and
restricted sense in modern philosophy ; and what the

66

HYPOTHETICALS.

Schoolmen call Hypotheses, we rather name Assump
tions or Postulates, when engaged with a Construc
tive argument.
Other forms of Hypothetical are also laid down by
Aristotelians, of which none is popular except the
Dilemma : which is when one of two (or more)
Assumptions is undeniably true, and the same con
clusion follows from each or every one.

INDUCTION.

67

Sect. III.
INDUCTION.
Since all Reasoning of an affirmative nature pro
ceeds from what is more to what is less general, the
question will naturally arise, How can the mind ever
arrive at a knowledge of general propositions? For
(except authoritative teaching) all Specific Informa
tion gives us acquaintance only with particulars;
while, unless the case is such as to implicate divine
revelation, authoritative teaching is unavailable ; for
how does the teacher get his knowledge ?
The question might be divided into two parts: viz.
How are we guided to construct general propositions?
and, How do we verify them, when constructed ?—
Though these are different questions, they are per
petually interfering with each other.—It is possible
that a proposition might never be absolutely verified;
yet it is not therefore wholly useless. It might,
through want of some qualification, be in strictness
false ; yet the occasions in which the omissions were
of importance might be so rare, that in the great
majority of cases it should be true. Such proposi
tions may indeed be of immense practical value, even
while we do not imagine that they are always true.
Another cause which prevents some propositions

68

INDUCTION.

from being ever regarded as absolute truths, lies in
the laxity of words found in them. Many words
have reference to degree of number or quantity, so as
to vary in sense according to laws that cannot be
defined. Old and young, great and small, many and
few, heavy and light, and a thousand others, enter
into propositions that are too valuable to discard ;
while perhaps no mere verbal alteration will give
great precision. Thus we are led to admit a dis
tinction of truths into Probable and Absolutely
True ; by which is understood, that the former are
oftener true than false ; perhaps so much oftener as
to make us willing to stake much upon their truth.
But meanwhile we also inquire, what modification
will make them yet more strictly true.
The Method of Verification proceeds upon the
doctrine of Chances, as exemplified in numerous
common actions of life. A farmer about to buy
wheat, takes samples of corn at random from dif
ferent parts of several bags. Goldsmiths examining
coin from the mint, similarly select their samples.
If all those examined prove unimpeachable, it is
inferred that the unexamined are equally sound.
A Spartan captive, when asked whether his com
panions who fell in the battle were braver than he,
replied, that it must be a clever arrow that picked
out the brave men.—Just so, if we wish to try the
truth of any general proposition, we employ our
selves in deducing particular cases, and bringing
them to some practical test. A single instance of
falsity suffices to disprove the alleged truth, at
least in its universality. If then the proposition

INDUCTION.

69

be not too far removed from the sphere of Specific
Information, confutation of a false generality is
seldom very difficult, when the mind is definitely
set to the task. Wherefore conversely, if after many
attempts to convict a proposition of falsehood we
fail, the probabilities are greatly in favor of its
being absolutely true.
It is possible indeed that propositions may be
so untangible to us, as that we cannot bring them
to any real trial at all. As the reed to the wind,
they bend before the assailant, and thus avoid being
rooted up. In such the mystical and transcendental
mind delights, as an element in which it may ex
patiate and indulge itself without fear of refutation.
But the very circumstance disables us also from
gaining any assurance that the vision is true. As
virtue is known to be such, by withstanding tempt
ation and undergoing ill usage, so truth is known
by keeping its ground unflinchingly in spite of
objections and arguments obviously formidable, per
haps apparently likely to overwhelm it. And when
its candor shuns no attack, its triumph under dis
advantage ascertains its own character. But a man
may safely and lazily dogmatize about the seven
heavens, the natures of the angels, and other super
human matters, where no one can confute him.—
A most essential quality then in a Theory, (as we
may call our proposition while but partially verified,)
is, that it should admit of numerous deductions of a
practical kind, such as, if false, we should be likely
to detect : and if it be in a matter where mathema
tical calculations are of avail, a Theory which will

70

INDUCTION.

stand such a test as that of number and measure,
is very soon accepted as incontrovertibly verified.
We must in all cases beware lest our samples be
unfairly taken. If they are limited in their nature,
this ought generally to suggest a limitation in the
proposition itself. Thus if we have been engaged in
verifying the assertion that " extended countries that
are under one government necessarily fall under
despotism;" should a review of our examples show
that they are confined in any way, as, to nations
practising polygamy, to those under debasing super
stition, to countries of uniform surface, or to those
corrupted by luxury and vice; it may then be in
quired whether these particulars are already implied
in the proposition, or need to be introduced. A man
engaged in determining the quantity of salt in sea
water, is examining specimens from various seas in
different parts. But on finding that all the specimens
were taken from the surface, he modifies his state
ment by saying, " Water taken from the surface of
the sea," instead of saying, " Sea water—contains
such or such a weight of salt."
As a general rule concerning Samples is, to take
them as unlike as possible, the same here applies. A
man who wishes to test the statement, that " All
bodies expand with heat," will do well to take bodies
as unlike as possible to each other, solids, liquids,
and airs, hard and soft, crystallized and uncrystallized ; and expose some to considerable heat, others
to much cold. A few well-chosen samples will thus
convey vastly more valuable instruction than shoals of
instances ill digested.

INDUCTION.

71

Without these precautions no amount of experience
is of any avail ; with them, a younger man who has
seen life in various contrast, may often have more
real experience than an octogenarian. From that
false verification which is got up by ill-chosen samples,
proceeds most of the dogmatism and other faults attri
buted to " practical" men. It is indeed the strong
hold of all quackery, to doctor and patient, farmer
and merchant, historian and statesman. An old
woman cures fever by a charm. A merchant rejoices
if gold is flowing into the country. A legislator
maintains the game laws, under which England has
flourished. All of these wise persons have some
thing to plead, on the score of experience; and
against experience what can be said ?
But it must be remembered, that there is no end
to the successive modifications which our general
truths may possibly need ; for they are never by this
process proved absolutely true. At best it is shown
that they are almost always trustworthy. But it may
happen, that after a thousand successive instances of
truth, the next instance turns out false : nor is there
any absolute security against this. Had not Water
been the liquid on which thermometrical experiments
were naturally first made, a thousand instances
might have been found of liquids expanding with
heat, before a case was found of a liquid (below a
certain temperature) contracting with heat. Yet
when this case arises, it does not make vain all the
former experience, nor entirely set aside the general
proposition ; but is added to it as an exception.
The progress of modern Astronomy may be a type

72

INDUCTION.

of the progress of all general propositions. That the
heavenly bodies moved in perfect circles, was the
dogma of the Aristotelian school ; a dogma that
reigned for 1900 years, because men lazily dispensed
with verifying their propositions. When disproved,
it was modified into the statement that the orbits are
ellipses ; a sort of less perfect circle ; and again,
perturbations were recognized in the elliptical orbit.
Nay, the very Newtonian law of gravity is not exempt
from possible farther modification ; but, as has been
suggested, it may ultimately be found to need some
change, that shall make it embrace the phenomena of
molecular attraction and repulsion.
Such is generally the order of discovery. It begins,
perhaps, with a guess ; a rough statement at least,
that will often be very wide of the truth ; afterwards
comes an approximation, which may still be very
inaccurate, yet which has been corrected with some
regard to the facts : next, we have a more sifting
examination of well-chosen facts, now that we begin
to see what will prove the cases most likely to fail,
and therefore the severest test ; and by help of such
examination, a valuable and trustworthy truth is at
length attained. Yet after all, room is left for fresh
correction, especially when new fields of nature, new
worlds of action or thought, open upon us. This
may make former experience in comparison appear
narrow, and show that many things ought to have
■been accompanied with limitations that were not
thought of. Perhaps, that has been said of light,
which ought to have been said of sunlight. That
has been said of vegetation, which is true only of

INDUCTION.

73

European vegetation. What has been said concern
ing mankind, proves to be true only of heathens.
The method of verifying general propositions,
which has been explained, is generally called, The
Method of Induction. The word is perhaps unhappy,
as indeed it is taken in several vague senses ; but to
abolish it is impossible. It is the Latin translation
of ht&ywyr], which word is used by Aristotle as a coun
terpart to auWoyurpos. He seems to consider it in a
perfect (or dialectic) and in an imperfect (or rheto.
rical) sense. Thus if a Genus (G) contained four
Species (A, B, C, D), Syllogism would argue, that
what is true of G, is true of any one of the four; but
(Perfect) Induction would reason, that what we can
prove true of A, B, C, D, separately, we may
properly state as true of G, the whole genus. This
is evidently a Formal argument, as demonstrative as
syllogism. But the imperfect or rhetorical induction
will (perhaps) enumerate three only of the species,
and then draw the conclusion concerning G, which
virtually includes the fourth : or, what is the same
thing, will argue, that what is true of the three, is to
be believed true likewise of the fourth.
Looking to the derivations of enaytoytj, and Inductio, they seem to agree better with the imperfect
than with the perfect acceptation; as meaning" to
draw upon,1' or " overdraw." When we know A, B,
and C, we draw (liri) in addition the D, as belonging
to the same class. If this be not the derivation, I do
not know how to account for the word.
Yet assuredly great injustice is done to the argu
mentative force of the Baconic Induction, when it is
E

74

INDUCTION.

represented barely to be an imperfect enumeration ;
as though we asserted something to be true of all of
a class, because it is true of some or of many; for it
is not the number of the samples, but the mode of
taking them, that is chiefly of importance. On this
it is that the argument from the Chances depends :
an argument based, not on our knowledge, but on our
ignorance, and therefore always fallible, yet to practi
cal purposes true. If we have no reason to suppose
the samples unfair, we presume that they are fair :
but if any uniformity be detected in the principle on
which they are chosen, suspicion of their unfairness
enters. As far however as I am acquainted with the
works of Aristotle, I am led to believe that he did
not see this, and thought rhetorical Induction to be
merely " an imperfect enumeration."
What then is the doctrine of Chances, on which all
our verifications depend ? It amounts to little more
than alleging that it is hard to pick out, blindfold,
black balls from the midst of equally numerous white
ones ; and equally hard, out of a multitude of true
and false propositions, blindfold to pick out the true.
We conclude, that if, in numerous trials, all which we
pick prove true, the proportion of the false to the
true must be very small. There is no end to the
useful applications of the doctrine of Chance. By it
the errors of observation are corrected. There being
no reason to believe that an observer will always err
in one way, the mean of half a dozen observations is
probably correct. Even the errors of instruments
are thus also checked. A beautiful example is in
reference to the errors of graduation. Thus on the

INDUCTION.

75

great circle at Greenwich, the degrees are read off
simultaneously at six different parts of the circle ;
and the errors of graduation neutralize each other in
taking the mean.
We may now contrast this method of Verification,
with the Syllogistic process. It involves the syllogism
no doubt, and by help of the last proposition con
cerning the Chances, all might be thrown into a
syllogistic form. But there is an enormous practical
difference, in this, that the one sets the mind more at
work upon words, and the other upon things. The
Aristotelian is acting the lawyer, who tells what the
law is ; the Baconian is as the historian or legislator,
who considers what it ought to be. The former
looks on his general propositions as immoveable and
eternal ; the latter is always ready to modify them,
and if he draws syllogisms from them, it is as often
to test the general principles by the conclusion, as to
learn the particular from the general. History shows
that the tendency of the Aristotelic philosophy was
to produce a speculating unpractical lazy mind, that
fancies generals to be more easily known than par
ticulars, and is averse to inquire into matter of fact ;
lazy, as unwilling to be subjected to the labour of
pulling down and remodelling what was imperfect.
But in Induction we simultaneously consider, whether
the proposition in question is true, and if not, whether
by any modification it may approximate to truth.
As regards the facility of avoiding error in the two
cases: In Verifying general propositions we are
seldom in danger of syllogistic error; because the
syllogisms are short and simple ; but the great
b2

76

EXPERIMENT AND OBSERVATION.

difficulty is to avoid unfair samples of the case : In
Syllogizing, when the reasoning is complicated, a
chief danger is from ambiguous words ; against which
the Aristotelic rules most imperfectly secure us.

Experiment and ObservationTo get fair samples is comparatively easy, where
Experiment as well as Observation is open to us. Of
the important difference between these two, the
ancients were most inadequately aware. Aristotle
was a great observer, but he was not an experiment
alist. Even Archimedes, the greatest proficient in
the exact sciences of early times, would seem to have
been equally unapt at experiment. He never reached
a step in Mechanics beyond the doctrine of the
Lever, which admits of being thought out, without
any help but such observation as nature forces upon
all. Nor was it until the days of Galileo that the
value of experiment was exemplified. Newton (it is .
observed by Sir John Herschel) turned Astronomy
into a science of experiment, by connecting Celestial
and Terrestrial Mechanics ; and this accordingly be
came the grand sera of its advance. This also is the
great point which Bacon has added to Aristotle.
The latter assuredly knew Induction to be of essential
importance, though I doubt whether even in theory
he knew how, by a discriminating selection of in
stances, the apparent fallacy of the rhetorical In
duction is obviated. But he could not clear his way
through numerous received dogmas, the falsehood of
which he did not suspect ; and he was led to corrupt

EXPERIMENT AND OBSERVATION.

77

physics by a sort of mystical jargon. Bacon is dis
tinguished chiefly for his emphatic sense of the
neglect of Experiment, and its various applicability.
" His philosophy,'''' says Sir J. Herschel1', " was
characterized by his keen perception, and his broad
and spirit-stirring, almost enthusiastic, announcement
of its paramount importance, [viz. of the inductive
method,] as the Alpha and Omega of science ; as the
grand and only chain for the linking together of
physical truths, and the eventual key to every dis
covery and every application." Well-chosen and
varied experiments enable us to detect what is acci
dental, and sort out properties and characteristics.
The experimentalist generally endeavours to form a
probable opinion, as to what circumstances of the
experiment act independently,though in combination,
to influence the result ; and then repeats it with a
change (if possible) in one only of these circumstances.
In the celebrated experiments of Dr. Wells on Dew,
we learn that he exposed various substances in suc
cession to catch the dew, substances differing in
nature, (as glass, metals, paper, &c.) in shape, in
polish, in texture; again, under cover, under a cloudy
sky and under a clear sky: according as he guessed
that these things might affect the result. It is hence
manifest that experiments are far more valuable
when the first steps of natural science have been
taken, than before; as it rarely happens that the
rude and wholly unpractised judgment can devise
them suitably. Yet viewed as an argument, they
h Study of Nat. Phil. p. 114.

78

EXPERIMENT AND OBSERVATION.

need not rest on a previous basis, but may be ap
pealed to as the very first steps of the science.
In many cases it is not possible entirely to remove
some of the causes influencing the result, so as to see
how the others act alone ; but we can yet diminish
them greatly. By diminishing one of them gradually,
we obtain results which constitute a scale of intensity,
usefully illustrating the disturbing force of that one
circumstance upon all the rest. Thus a complicated
problem is taken as it were to pieces, and we learn
how each part of the result is due (wholly or chiefly)
to some part of the circumstances.
That which Dr. Whately has named " the Argu
ment from Approximation" is of this kind. His
example will best explain the phrase. In Mechanics,
we examine the case of a body moving by impulse,
and find that it stops sooner or later, and generally
very soon. The ancients, as the vulgar, supposed
the impulse to be simply expended, and that the
nature of impulsive force was such as necessarily to
decay with time. The modern experimentalist ob
serves, that collision and friction rapidly lessen the
motion; and by a graduated series of trials, finds
that the diminution of motion so corresponds with a
diminution of these disturbing causes, as to lead to
the probable conjecture, that if we could entirely
remove these, the motion would be uniform, recti
linear, and eternal. It is by a sort of Approximation
that we are guided to this result : which yet stands
urgently in need of afterverification, because our
senses are not keen enough to deal thoroughly with
the subject by direct experiment. Such verification

EXPERIMENT AND OBSERVATION.

79

is fortunately practicable and most satisfactory, be
cause the law to which we have been guided, is so
readily applied to the most accurate mathematical
computations.
In departments of knowledge where we cannot
experiment, two methods may be employed to guard
against deception. 1. To make the most of observ
ation, by extending its sphere as much as the case
will admit. Thus does the natural or moral and
political historian extend his research to the most
remote tribes of the globe, in search of examples
suited to test the propositions he is examining.
2. To investigate d priori what cases will be severe
tests ; and then watch for their arrival. The latter
method generally implies some previous science ; and
this it is, which makes the observations of the man of
science so valuable, because (besides greater accuracy)
they are better chosen. In moral reasonings these
last sometimes form what are called d fortiori argu
ments: as though one were to say, " Nothing will
make the degenerate Romans fight: at least they
have borne to be massacred by thousands in prefer
ence." Such also have been called Crucial instances ;
a name borrowed from the Schools, and fixed upon
us by the authority of Bacon.

80

PRESUMPTIONS.

Presumptions.
I have endeavoured to explain the systematic
method by which the educated and the cautious
intellect endeavors to verify or modify propositions.
But, prior generally to this, there is a ruder sort
of work, more or less common to all men, which
must be noticed for a more complete view of the
subject.
We have even in common with brute
animals a certain instinctive principle, which we call
Association ; without which perhaps reasoning would
never exist, or rather, human life could certainly
never subsist. A child which has burned its fingev
in the candle, associates the light and flame with the
pain that it feels, and learns another time to avoid
the danger. A dog that has been shot, runs away
from a gun. There must manifestly be in the mind
something equivalent to the assertion, that what has
happened once may happen (or, fear says, will
happen) again : and such instinctive fears are ob
viously necessary to guard us in the dangers that
beset life.
Such also is the nature of what is called A Pre
sumption. We may indeed say, It is a Presumption
that the second candle will burn as painfully as the
first. More widely : Where we see external simi
larity, there is a presumption in favor of internal and
entire similarity. A child that has never before seen
a rocking horse, mistakes it at first for a real horse.
Again : Where there is a similarity in that which

l'HF.SUMI'TIONS.

81

most strikes the mind, we have a presumption that
there is a general similarity.—But in all these cases,
we only mean, that we are predisposed thus to believe,
until farther evidence be offered.
These are not properly reasonings ; or, at best, are
most immature reasonings ; but there is a difference
between Presumption and mere Association, in the
latter being instinctive and involuntary, not the fruit
of deliberate thought. Yet neither is so bound on
us, that we cannot shake them off. They are sus
ceptible of correction, of confirmation, or of actual
obliteration, by a farther experience ; and as the
Judgment is more cultivated, Association becomes
more subjected to its dictates. But the principle
of Association undisciplined, is the fruitful parent
of every superstition, from vulgar fears of unlucky
days and colors, spilling salt, and screech owls, to the
mysticism which found religious properties in num
bers, and to the monstrosities of heathen polytheism.
Presumptions are unverified propositions, which
are nevertheless valuable. We know that they are
not proved ; yet in human life we are often satisfied
to be on the safe side of error ; and the presumption
gives us a reason for judging which is this. To
verify it by trial, may involve too great a cost of
suffering, expense, or inconvenience. Armed strang
ers appear on the coasts : the presumption is that
they are pirates : it is not expedient to try it by the
shortest method; but if they will remove, we are
pleased even to be left in ignorance. But on such
a presumption we should act, as though it were
certainly true.—In short, the universal effect of a
e3

82

PRESUMPTIONS.

presumption is, to throw the burden of proof on
the one side instead of the other ; the importance of
which is often very great. In English law we regard
it as a valuable principle, that a man is counted
innocent, till he is proved guilty. How could any
one long escape condemnation, whose previous cha
racter was so bad, as to allow our setting up the
presumption, that he was guilty of every thing,
except where he proved his innocence ?
We must here bring forward an important rule
concerning Presumptions, identical with what was
above said on Theories : for a Theory is little else
than a half-verified presumption. It is, that when we
must needs choose one of several presumptions, we
should choose that which will be easiest of confutation,
iffalse. If none such can be found, that is, if they are
all transcendental, reasoning is useless and knowledge
impossible. For example : if we are inquiring which
of the following presumptions we will follow ;—that
mechanical forces and masses of matter retain the
same nature as far as the moon and no farther ; (as
the Greek philosophy held;) or else throughout
boundless space;—we find, that if we take the former,
we can never know any thing of astronomy, not even
that the sun is where it seems to be, or near. But if
we take the latter, it will probably be detected if
false. Thus we can but have to abandon it when
disproved ; while if, in spite of much exposure to
trial, it stands, then we shall have learned a truth.
Precisely the same reasoning has been applied in
a most interesting field by Mr. Lyell, in his Elements
of Geology. The question is, Are we to presume

PItEJUDICK AND PRESUMPTION.

83

that the geological monuments before our eyes were
effected by causes, the same or nearly the same as
those which now act ; or else by causes quite different
in nature or intensity? In past ages the prevailing
school of geologists, (as once astronomers,) decided
on that alternative, which could neither be proved
nor disproved by any practical test ; which is equi
valent to disclaiming all knowledge, and giving
boundless licence to speculation. Mr. Lyell is the
uncompromising advocate of the principle, that we
must use our utmost endeavors to reconcile the
opposite presumption with existing monuments. For
thus it will be at length either disproved, or else
received as true, because it cannot be disproved.
At any rate, we shall learn, up to what point it holds
true, and where it begins to fail ; that is, how far
knowledge may go, and where utter ignorance must
begin.
Prejudices and Presumptions.
A large proportion of what we call our " know
ledge," really consists of presumptions: so does a
large proportion of our " principles,"—religious, na
tional, or sectarian Nothing so gives a turn to the
whole character and mind, as to have these right or
wrong. Their influence is often unsuspected, in
philosophy and in religion.—The presumption with
a Mohammedan may be, that every Christian is a
cheat ; and so indeed do opposite factions of all sorts
conceive unworthy prepossessions of each other. But
again : with us, it is (through the happy influence of
Jewish History) always a presumption, that other

84

PREJUDICE AND PRESUMPTION.

men are of one blood and one nature with ourselves;
held even by those who care little for religion. The
Greeks and Romans would have considered the pre
sumption quite the other way : insomuch that they
were indisposed to make full enquiry, whether slaves
have all the passions, feelings, and powers of men.—
In science also, we now are habituated to assume the
stability of nature: not only so far as we have veri
fied it; for we are ready to carry it far beyond actual
observation. If telescopes were invented to enlarge
the sphere of vision 10,000 times, an astronomer
would have the entire burden of proof laid most
heavily on him, who should assert that the mecha
nical laws of nature which here obtain, fail in the
remotest regions of space. But the Greeks, as I
observed, were so prepossessed with the belief that
the laws of nature, as here acting, did not reach
beyond the moon, that the whole burden of proof
at first rested on the modern philosophers who said
that they did. Nay, the ancients clearly had their
doubts, whether the laws of nature even in this world
did not change with time: which change they called
corruption of all things.
To such mistaken presumptions the term Prejudice
is generally applied.—But the question will arise, why
we do not call all presumptions prejudices, seeing
that all are alike unverified. For it would seem, that
till it be known which are true, all ought to stand on
the same footing. But the difference is this. So soon
as we mistake a presumption for a proved truth, it is
to be called a Prejudice ; because we have forgotten
its true nature. Every man must needs have count

PREJUDICE AND PRESUMPTION.

86

less unverified propositions in his mind, which yet
have a presumption of truth ; but the candid, cau
tious and enlarged mind is open to have them proved
or disproved, when opportunity offers. The rash,
lazy and dogmatic forgets that they are unproved,
and neglects opportunities of bringing them to the
test. This is the prejudiced man. The evil habit
of mind mounts into bigotry, when he is so enamored
of his thoughts, as actually to avoid with detestation
whatever he suspects might tend to undermine them.
The contrary habit is of all the most difficult and
important to the attainment of truth ; viz. duly to
discriminate the measure of proof by which each
presumption is supported ; some being bare pre
sumptions, others much stronger, others nearly veri
fied. This seems to be what Mr. Locke meant, by
saying, that the love of truth consists, in holding no
proposition more strongly than the evidence warrants.
There is here, it must be allowed, a difficulty. Per
haps in strictness there is no temper of mind inter
mediate to' Latitudinarianism and Bigotry, to those
who do not narrowly search into their own opinions,
and their reasons for holding them. Nay, it requires
much anxious thought, to arrive at a decisive intel
lectual proof of various points of morality ; as, that
Truth ought not to be violated, even for the best
ends: or generally, that Ends will not sanction
' By this term I here mean the state of mind, in which a man
has nothing but " dry light;" knowing that propositions are
true, and choosing truth with preference; yet not loving any
truths even after they are ascertained to be such ; nor likely to
grieve, if they were all ultimately disproved.

86

PREJUDICE AND PRESUMPTION.

Means. Yet are we to call a man bigoted, who,
when intellectually unable to refute a sophistical
argument urging him to lie, turns against it in
disgust, and banishes it from his mind ? Indeed this
conduct seems often the only defence of weak or
unexercised intellects, and in many temptations is
the safeguard, and the criterion of virtue in all.
Hence it is in the weak-minded, or in the religious
and sensitively moral chiefly, that bigotry prevails;
and yet oftener seems to prevail, when it does not
really. It is one thing to be satisfied that we have
an antisyllogism stronger than the adversary's argu
ment, or to see that there is somewhere a fallacy on
his part ; and quite another thing to be able to set it
out clearly : nor is human life long enough to refute
all the finespun follies of others. On this ground,
conduct which at first sight may appear bigoted, has
often a real justification. But the truth is, that few
trouble themselves at all with the analysis of their
opinions, or care to know what is the strength of
evidence for and against them; so that positive belief
and positive disbelief are the principal states of their
minds; while they dread what is intermediate, under
the name of a Sceptical turn.
The error of Scepticism is perpetually a result of
the very thing on which we have been remarking.
If any one has habitually regarded various prejudices
as of equal certainty with the most important and
sacred truths, any thing that accidentally undeceives
him as to some of the former, may make him all at
once doubt every thing ; for the very reason that he
is not accustomed to discriminate degrees of evidence.

PREJUDICE AND PRESUMPTION.

87

But besides this universal scepticism, there is often
a partial scepticism, the fruit of inexperience in
particular departments. Many a man, of strong
sense as to the affairs of daily life, thinks astronomers
fools, and physicians quacks. And many persons
accustomed to study the world of Matter, find so
much uncertainty concerning the world of Mind,
as to be in danger of scepticism concerning morals
and religion. It is not right to turn these results
to the discredit of any special study or occupation,
but rather to take them as marking the ill effect
of too exclusive a devotion of the mind to any separate
trains of thought.

88

ANALOGV.
Sect. IV.
ANALOGY.

It was above remarked, that the modern scientific
world held with great strength the presumption of
the stability of the laws of nature. The phrase is
one which deserves fuller analysis. In one sense,
it is in fact a mere truism. For if nothing be
acknowledged as a law, which proves to be mutable,
the proposition verifies itself. Some have proposed
the following as a mysterious truth which we know
by intuition, that " Like causes produce like effects."
But the same remark holds here also. This may be
so explained as to make it a truism ; viz. if we
measure the causes by the effects; as is generally
done by the advocates of " philosophical necessity."
But if otherwise, it is sometimes a truth learned by
experience, in other cases (as far as has been hitherto
shown) not a truth all.
The progress however of the sciences has led to a
most extensive verification of the permanence of the
mechanical laws of the universe, and (in the opinion
of perhaps the soundest physiologists) "the perma
nence of the distinctions which constitute Species.
Add to this, the permanence of the properties which
belong to definite combinations of matter, or to sub
stances which we regard as Simple. But it is quite
fallacious to speak as though any assumption con
cerning the stability of nature were essential to our
reasonings; and much less do we know of such
stability otherwise than by experience, and so far as
experience testifies.

ANALOGY.

89

But in all those subjects in which we have arrived
at a conviction of this stability, and where we are
able to portion out the objects of contemplation into
natural classes, an important result is produced upon
our reasonings. It enables us to concentrate attention
and experiment on a few points, and diminish the
number of our trials, without proportionate risk of
error. Hence also arises a contrast between Induc
tion and Analogy, which needs to be thoroughly ex
plained.
Again it must be lamented, that we find ambi
guities of sense, and discrepancies between old and
new philosophy, in the use of terms. But as the
distinction is one of realities, and not very subtle,
such ambiguities need not greatly embarras us.
From the properties of one piece of Iron, to infer
the same properties in another piece of Iron, and
in every other piece, is called Induction : but from
the properties of the Iron to infer like properties
in Copper, is called Analogy. We take liberty to
call Iron and Iron the same substance, while Iron
and Copper are only called like substances; and
to reason from like to like, is called Analogy, not
Induction. Yet in strictness one piece of iron is not
the same as another; it is only very like; and in
scientific language Homogeneous. We speak also of
our induction, as direct evidence; yet in strictness it
is indirect, though closer home than the analogical.
So likewise, he who argues from the effects of
medicines on several men, to prove their effects on
other men, or on mankind, is said to reason by
Induction : but to argue from the case of men to

90

ANALOGY.

brutes, or from one species of brute to another
species, would be called Analogy.
In truth, both arguments are based upon a con
cealed Principle, ou which their validity depends ;
which principle itself needs verification from other
sources. In the case of the Induction, it will be,
that "homogeneous substances have like properties;"
or, " animals of the same species have like physical
peculiarities
or some other such : and the con
siderable cogency which such reasonings possess, is
entirely due to the fact, that these general principles
have been already verified as truths of science. If
otherwise, the reasoning is worthless.
The former of these propositions needs more ex
amination. It may be asked, What do we mean by
Homogeneous ? and how do we know that Iron and
Iron are homogeneous? We call two bodies homo
geneous, when we find that all their most obvious
properties are the same. If the colour, the weight,
the hardness to the touch, or other peculiarity, the
character of the grain when broken, the sound when
struck, the smell, the taste, are all alike in the two
substances, (appeal having here been made to all the
five senses,) we pronounce the bodies homogeneous,
Then follows the presumption, that " those which
have all their most obvious properties in common,
have also their more hidden properties in common :™
which is verified as a truth in so many cases, as to
make it in all others also highly probable. Of course
it cannot be absolutely proved, because the terms
" more obvious" and " more hidden" are not precise
enough.

ANALOGY.

91

But what is to be said, if in one of the substances
a property is actually discovered which the other has
not ? for this will test the sense in which we use the
term Homogeneous. If the quality (as, suppose, Mag
netic power) appears permanently to exist in the one
and never in the other ; or to be communicable by
known means to the one, but incommunicable to the
other ; we should probably consider them Heteroge
neous. This appears to prove our acceptation of the
term Homogeneous to be such, as to make it a verbal
truth, that things homogeneous have like properties.
If so, the presumption on which the Inductive Argu
ment rests must be stated thus : " Where all the
most obvious properties are in common, the sub
stances are Homogeneous," or, have all the properties
in common.
This presumption is so weighty, (because in so
many instances verified to the fullest extent of in
quiry,) that it is but little to say, that the burden of
proof is by it thrown on him who denies it. Accord
ingly, in physical reasonings it is taken for granted
that Iron is Iron, and Lead is Lead, until some
discrepancy suggests that the substances are not
pure, or some other diversity: and if the same
experiment, under the very same circumstances, is
repeated, this is generally to guard against errors
of observation and other casual sources of mistake,
and not as though it were doubted whether the
substances which we name Homogeneous would al
ways give the same results.
It is the possession of some general principle, which
has at least a presumption of truth, that adds plausi

92

ANALOGY.

bility to an argument. Every example gains tenfold
weight ; being looked on (as Aristotle11 observes) as
a credible witness to matter of fact: while a laborious
collection of details often seems and is a mere heap of
confusion.
In the case of Analogy, the concealed principle
which connects like and like is seldom so cogent,
(that is, so well grounded,) as that which connects
things believed to be homogeneous; and chiefly for this
reason, that the word like admits of so much vague
ness. Suppose that after discovering the magnetic
properties of iron, any one had proceeded to infer
that the same must be possessed by copper: the
form of the argument is the same, as to infer that
iron will melt with great heat, because we have
succeeded in melting the copper. Yet it is evident
that such analogical arguments, standing alone, will
seldom establish more than presumptions. The gene
ral proposition here assumed is, that " like substances
enjoy the same properties;" which is full as often
false as true.
There is at any rate one great point of value in
analogical arguments; in the useful direction they
give to inquiry. Perhaps most of the great dis
coveries to which philosophers have been led, may be
referred to the guidance of analogy. And things
which we begin with considering as only alike-, we
k He divides speeches into two kinds ; those which abound
with examples, (which is the rhetoric of the old school,) and
those resting on arguments or topics. If we can get a plausible
topic, and back it up by even one good example, this, he seems
to think, tells best.

ANALOGY.

93

sometimes end in pronouncing the same or homo
geneous. When Newton first compared the fall of
an apple and the motion of the moon, it was with
him an analogy ; that is, he thought he saw a like
ness, where we have since learned to see an identity.
The satellites around Jupiter were rightly regarded
as a solar system in miniature ; and the argument
from analogy hence drawn is said to have had great
weight in recommending the views of Copernicus.
But we now look on all the planets as being of one
species and family, at least as regards all mechanical
forces actuating them.—But analogy, as was being
said, suggests a thousand inquiries, many of which
prove useful. Our earth has an atmosphere, seas,
mountains : do the like things belong to the
moon and planets ? The ants live in communities :
have they separate houses, private property, soldiers,
slaves, cattle?—There is so much interest in dis
covering analogies, that they seem to repay the labor
of inquiry ; and prove a great stimulus to reflection,
as well as help to the memory. How uninviting do
many departments of science appear! The philologist
surprises persons by the delight which he can find in
turning the pages of a dictionary in a language
unknown to him. The analogies which he discovers
are his reward. " It is the part of the educated
man," says Aristotle, " to discern similarities." Such
being the propensity of the mind, analogy is like a
hound, always on the scent, and on the alert for
every indication of game.
It is frequently analogy which guides the expe
rienced to what are called good guesses. When it

9*

ANALOGY.

has been proved that Light is reflected and refracted
according to certain laws, we guess by analogy, that
the same is true of Heat ; nay, that Double Refrac
tion and Polarization may be found in Heat. What
they have in common is, radiation from a centre;
and this is supposed enough to constitute likeness.
But although single analogies are not a cogent
argument, the multiplication of them will merge in
a perfectly unexceptionable Induction; viz. when we
can constitute a general proposition, adequately sup
ported by fact. To infer that iron may be melted,
because brass may be melted, is analogy: or to infer
the same, because lead, or because tin or silver, can
be melted, is still analogy. But to reason that iron
may be melted, because brass and copper and lead
and tin and silver will all melt, is no longer 1 analogy,
but induction.
In the latter case, the classification which prevails
in nature guides us to see, that the real proposition
driven at is this: that metals will melt with adequate
heat ; while iron is contemplated only as one out of
this class : and brass, copper, tin, lead, silver, are the
samples by which we verify the general proposition.
Both the analogy and the induction are liable to
1 The moderns obstinately and most justly refuse to recognize
distinctions which depend on form, and not on the spirit and
meaning of an argument. But according to the Aristotelians,
it is still analogy, so long as the conclusion stated is the single
case of iron ; but if the conclusion be " metals," then it it
induction. But the difference is verbal : for he who says metals,
herein includes iron ; while he who says iron, means to come at
his conclusion through the generic term metals.

ANALOGY.

95

refutation by the same topic. Suppose it had been
found that gold would burn, but would not melt.
An objection would then be made, that the analogy
(or the induction) proved too much; for the argument
would equally apply to gold ; and yet in the case of
gold is false. But if no such exception can be found ;
if all metals but the hardest had been actually melted,
and if the harder were found generally to take more
heat ; no man would hesitate to infer, that only more
heat was wanting to melt the very hardest. Again :
from the peculiarities common to Species as such in
numerous animals and vegetables open to our ex
amination, to conclude like things of other species
which are not equally open to examination, is also
called Analogy : but when the field of research is
widened to the full extent of our knowledge, it
differs only in name from Induction.
An illustration of combined analogies is in the
argument for the undulatory theory of Light and
Heat. In waves of water we can see undulations ;
in the case of sound, we can see the impulses it
causes in elastic substances ; and though we cannot
see, we can both feel and weigh the air, and fully
ascertain its existence. Waves and Sound have the
same laws of reflection and interference as has Light :
and the latter phenomenon, interference, is so pecu
liar, as to impress the mind forcibly. That two
lights should make darkness, appears at first unin
telligible, and almost incredible. But when we see
two waves interfere, so as to produce at intervals
waves of double highth, and at intervals smooth

96

ANALOGY.

water; and when we find the same phenomenon to
exist in sounds ; we are struck with the conviction,
that light must also be an undulation, like the waves
of water and like sound. Yet here it is not merely
the likeness of the two things compared that is
important, but the peculiarity of the phenomena :
and the more difficult the lock to be opened, the
more pleased are we with our key, when we find it.
Hence this argument connects itself with what we
shall have to say concerning Hypotheses.
On the whole, Analogy is to be regarded as a step
towards satisfactory proof, much in advance of first
presumptions, if skilfully applied ; though if the
excessive vagueness of the word like be not checked,
arguments from analogy may be of the wildest and
silliest kind. But presumptions are strengthened by
apt analogies, and the mind is so far predisposed by
them to believe, that it seems equitable to exact a
less amount of direct verification, where it is difficult
to be had. Yet the conviction which such arguments
command, is generally that which has been called an
otiose assent; or that of a man, who finds his mouth
shut from objecting, but will stake no practical loss
or harm upon the belief of its truth. Moreover, the
last condition must be well attended to: for no
reasoner is so vexatious, as he, who, when direct
topics are at hand, persecutes one with analogies.
For, just as it is to pay respect to them in defect of
other evidence, they will not weigh a straw against
it : and he who flourishes with analogy and metaphor
to the neglect of what is more obvious, is like the

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

97

tailor at Laputa, who measured the stature of his
customer with a sextant, and computed his waist by.
the girth of his thumb.
In conclusion, it is well to remark, that the strength
of certain analogical arguments does not rest on
analogy as such ; but they have more of cogency
than the name gives one to suppose. The celebrated
Analogy drawn by Butler between Natural and
Revealed Religion is, if I mistake not, of this nature.
He points out similarities between the two, that are
not on the surface, nor found without close thought,
and yet which bear a sifting enquiry. The question
arises, How to account for these similarities? only
two hypotheses seem to the point. Either it is a
chance event; if Christianity be a chance system,
struck out by ignorant fishermen, on the basis begun
by an ancient Jewish legislator : else, it arises from
the fact, that both systems own the same author.
Thus the power of the argument is to be referred to
the head of selecting Hypotheses; on which we are
to speak below.
Cause and Effect.
It has been already observed, that there is in us
an instinctive principle, which we name Association,
which leads us to expect, that an event which we
have once seen to follow another, shall follow it a
second time. If a sulphureous smell and darkening
of the atmosphere has once preceded an earthquake,
the same smell and darkness cannot recur without
giving a painful presentiment that another earthquake
is coming.
F

98

CAUSB AND EFFECT.

It is natural to the mind to draw this inference,
though experience may again correct the inference.
But when it is not thus corrected, we become con
firmed in the belief. We become convinced that the
connection of the two events is not accidental, so as
sometimes to exist and sometimes not, but is some
how in the nature of things ; nay, we feel justified
in saying, not only that B did follow A, but that B
could not but follow A : and looking to the future,
we judge not only that B will follow A, but that it
must follow. When we have proceeded to this point,
the mind has fully formed the notion of Cause and
Effect. Yet I believe that it is not by mere observ
ation without consciousness that we arrive at this
notion ; and I must endeavour to trace more accu
rately what I apprehend to be the process followed
by the mind in this matter.
We are conscious of inward power, by which we
can act on outward objects ; first conceiving a desire,
next an intention, until by an exertion of strength
we effect our purposes. On this consciousness pri
marily depends our idea of causation. We feel that
we are capable of acting so as to become causes, and
to produce effects ; and we infer the same of other
men and other animals : whence generalizing, we may
state Living Force as the most obvious sort of Cause
with which men gain acquaintance. Our apprehen
sion, it will be seen, of such causation, depends on
our consciousness of will and of effort. When a man
raises a weight, he believes that the cause ®f the
weight's rising is in himself and not in it, for no
other reason but because he is conscious that the

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

99

beginning of motion is in himself. For if he will to
raise it, it rises ; and if he will it not, it rises not.
This argument applies directly only to one's self, and
by transference to all who have, in common with
one's self, the power of willing to do or not to do; and
of putting forth or not putting forth the effort on
which the result depends. When we are contem
plating objects which we suppose not to possess will,
of course these considerations are inapplicable.
Our voluntary actions are sometimes determined
by habit, sometimes by a direct active exertion of
will : just as we see numerous objects without look
ing at them, while at others we direct the eye with
attention. We are conscious that when we exert
will actively, there is great variety and irregularity
in all that we do. That which we do from habit has
a uniformity and sameness which is not found when
we act with deliberate purpose. If we were therefore
to see a man do the same actions every day without
any deviation, and utter the same words, we should
doubt whether he possessed active powers of Will at
all. So when we look on the starry heavens, and find
them night after night performing similar courses;
or if they deviate from month to month, yet at the
end of a year recurring to the same track ; perhaps,
as we see no mark of will, we may at first dispense
with discussion upon cause and effect. For as there
must be some stop to defining the terms of our
definitions, so must there be some stop to assigning
causes of causes. A simple and uninformed mind
is satisfied to stop very soon ; an unsound speculative
mind is not satisfied to stop soon enough. A savage
f2

100

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

is most clearly m conscious that he is the cause of his
own deliberate actions ; but what is the cause of his
existence, he possibly does not inquire. He is as
sured that the Sun is the cause of day ; (probably
from observing that he can produce a sort of dark
ness by sheltering himself from the Sun ;) but what
is the cause of the Sun's motion, he does not ask.
That which is, is. It is its nature to move ; as the
nature of the earth to be still. It seems as needless
to ask the cause of the one, as of the other. And if
a cause could be assigned, (as, that a vortex of ether
carried the Sun round,) the new question rises, What
makes the vortex move round ? and thus nothing is
gained. In short, it is only where such irregularity
of motion and rest and other changing phenomena
are observed, as to produce appearances of Will and
of Life, that the idea of causation obtrudes itself
forcibly on the untutored mind.
It is interesting to observe how all the phenomena
of the world were regarded by the lively energetic
ra It may be replied, that men are conscious, or fancy they are
conscious, of many things that do not exist. A man who has
lost his leg, is conscious of a pain in his toe. A lunatic is con
scious of imaginary crimes. Even without morbid feelings,
want of close introspection may make a man attribute to the
acting of his Will, that which is really produced by Habit or by
Physical causes j and he may think that he is conscious of this.
I am not now assuming that the judgment of the untutored
mind is right, but I am tracing the course which it actually
follows. At the same time, when any one disputes the truth of
that, of which the mass of mankind believe themselves conscious,
the burden of disproof lies on him. Universal consciousness
must be presumed true, except where it can be proved mistaken.

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

101

minds of the ancient Greeks, rude and uninformed,
but quick of perception, full of inquisitiveness, and
ready of imagination.
The flowing of tides and currents, the blast of the
wind, the shock of the earthquake, the fall of the
thunderbolt, were of course imputed to the immediate
effort of muscular power in some great being. The
motion of the Sun and Moon were not too regular to
be imputed to the same cause ; though we should
perhaps be attributing too much to their philoso
phizing and too little to their poetry, if we here laid
stress on the fact that they supposed the chariot of
the Sun to be drawn by four horses every day. It is
however clear, that for every natural phenomenon
which seemed to need to be accounted for, their
universal practice was to suppose some living being,
whose efforts produced it. Hence they invented a
deity to cut out every grotto and plant every grove,
to shout on the mountain top, or bellow up the cone
of .<Etna. Putting aside the sportiveness of imagin
ation, which wantoned in the inventing of fantastical
beings, it is clear that the sort of causation which
first offers itself to the uncultivated mind, is that
which depends on life and on will ; to which , accord
ingly, in the first instance, we are disposed to refer
all events that seem to need being accounted for at
all.
More accurate research teaches us to ask the causes
of many things which the less observant intellect
passes by. It is soon evident that mere will is not
sufficient to generate at all times the same power in
our limbs. The straining of a sinew makes a strong

102

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

man weak : and it thus is shown us that intermediate
causes exist, linking that which we have hitherto
called a cause, to its effect. The number of these
intermediate links, it concerns us not to determine.
But this point is of much importance, that we are
now led to a new sort of causation, in which Will has
no share. For if any one in defence of a hypothesis
were to maintain that the power of a muscle to
contract is a cause similar in kind to the actings of
the will, it is easy, when once set on this argument,
to adduce numberless instances of causes perfectly
different from the latter. All substances have quali
ties, on the action of which we can count. Thus, gum
and glue are adhesive, and by help of them we can
stick paper or wood together. If it be questioned
whether the cause be in the gum or in the paper, we
may reply, in both ; for there is an adaptation of the
one to the other. It is wasting ingenuity to discuss
which is active and which passive. It is enough that
we can pronounce that "power resides in that which
has no life and no will." A yet more striking case is
in the inanimate forces which produce motion. If
the stone which so early attracted the interest of
philosophers and the amazement of the vulgar,—the
loadstone,—be moved about under a thin tray, it will
cause corresponding motions in steel filings placed in
the tray. Here it is the will of the experimenter
which primarily causes the motion, but the properties
or powers residing in matter are the secondary causes.
No peculiarity seems more to distinguish the human
mind from the faculties of brutes, than the disposition
to search after causes ; a tendency which is increased

CAUSATION.

103

by cultivation. But, as was said, an unsound mind
does not know where to stop ; and in many acute
persons the passion for the investigation of causes
is so keen, that they are apt to forget first thoroughly
to ascertain the truth of the fact, for which they want
to account.
Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas !
Charles the Second is said (I know not on what
authority) to have puzzled the savans of his day by
the question, " Why a dead fish is heavier than a live
one." And large books are written, nay, long jour
neys taken, to ascertain the abode of the " lost ten
tribes;" omitting first to establish that they have
ever been lost at all. Thus the mind wastes its
powers and efforts, by neglecting the precaution
of making good its ground, before passing beyond.
Most sham sciences deal largely in chains of causes
to account for that which does not exist, and owe
their power to deceive very much to keeping the
mind thus fully employed.
Vocabulary of Causation.
This is perhaps the place for remarking on the
vocabulary used by philosophers on these subjects.
I. When a series of causes exist, each giving rise to
the next and ending in some phenomenon ; all but
the first are named intermediate or second causes.
The term second causes is however peculiarly used
in theology, in contrast to the Deity. Considering Him
as the universal First Cause, all others are called
second causes. But when we are satisfied to rest in

104

CAUSATION.

less arduous speculations, human will is fairly con
sidered a first cause to which we may trace events.
Again, when it is notoriously hopeless to find the
cause of a cause, we rest in it as an ultimate fact.
Thus if a volcano overwhelm a city, we may reckon
it as (emphatically) the cause of the whole series of
following events. Similarly, the force of gravity,
joined with a primitive impulse, is the cause of the
planetary movements ; and this must be received as
the last step in the series of causation.
II. But the human intellect, once set on specu
lating, loves not thus to stop; and justly regarding
the whole material universe as a result of the Cre
ator's will, takes another step farther back, and
assigns reasons which may be supposed to have
actuated him, as Causes of the natural laws of the
universe or peculiarities of individual objects. But
it has been a source of much confusion and frequent
false philosophy, to speak thus. To discriminate
causes from reasons, the former have been called
Efficient Causes, (or, Physical Causes,) the latter
Final Causes. Efficient cause, appears to be re
dundant ; as though one should say, Causing cause ;
for which reason Physical Cause may be preferable.
A yet more unenglish use of the word Cause, is,
when it is said by the Schoolmen that Wood is the
Material Cause of a Door. By "final cause"" is
n The term Final Cause, has taken too deep root to be exter
minated : but the popular terms Reason, Intention, appear to
express the thing well enough : as will also the End in View.
The Aristotelians speak also of the Fortnal Cause; an expression
which cannot be understood without an insight into their pecu
liar views.

CAUSATION.

105

understood, that " some end in view" exercises an
influence over the mind, and acts upon it efficiently;
The term " Motive" indicates a similar apprehension.
The final cause is in reality the desire of producing a
certain effect.
The Aristotelic school is accused of having cor
rupted natural philosophy by introducing final causes
into it ; on which point Bacon often attacks them.
The truth seems to be, that such considerations are
excellent in place, but presumptuous and foolish
when premature. To speculate on the purposes and
motives of the Deity is an easy task to every foolish
person; and the lazy mind readily betakes itself to this
method, rather than to inquiry into fact. Men even
of education in modern times have persuaded them
selves, that the tendency of population to increase
depends on the proportion which the existing popu
lation bears to the land, and diminishes with its
density. And why ? Because else it might happen
that more mouths would be born, than there is bread
to feed them with : which (they judge) is incompati
ble with the attributes of the Deity. Now there is
nothing wrong in reasoning from his goodness ; but
it is wrong to think that we have such an insight Into
his mind, as to be able to predict how he will act.
Much more is it wrong, to shut our eyes to facts
that lie the other way ; nay, and neglect inquiries
that are within our reach, and that might settle the
question. Thus it is not the study of final causes
that corrupts natural philosophy or history, any
more than it corrupts morals or religion : but in all
these subjects it is good when well used ; and this
v3

106

CAUSATION.

is generally rather at the end than at the beginning
of our inquiries. And in all these subjects it is always
a dangerous mode of reasoning, because it so flatters
our vanity and idleness, by enabling us to dispense
with examination.
" It is common with philosophers of a certain
class," observes Dr. Prichard", " who pride them
selves upon being strict logicians, to disavow and
treat with contempt all reasonings which refer to
Final Causes, or, otherwise, to the apparent ends
and purposes for which particular arrangements
appear to have been adopted and contrived by
Nature, or rather by Providence. For this they
quote the authority of Lord Bacon, who can never
have intended that such a construction should be
laid on his words. It must be confessed, that the
doctrine of final causes has been on some occasions
strangely abused, and misapplied in a most ridiculous
manner : as, for example, by a writer on anatomy,
who fancied that the os unguis, a bone near the
inner angle of the orbit of the eye, was purposely
made by Nature thin, in order that it might the
more easily be perforated by surgeons in the ope
ration for fistula lachrymalis. But the perversion
of sound reason in the hands of weak and ignorant
persons is neither a new thing, nor does it carry any
weight on the score of argument. We may safely
conclude, that the theory of final causes, or the
inquiry into the beneficial results which arise from
the arrangements of Nature, will never be laid aside
0 On a Vital Principle, p. 68.

CADSATION.

107

in physiology, or in the study of the organized works
of creation. For we cannot advance a single step
without its aid; and it affords, when skilfully pur
sued, a species of evidence entirely convincing and
conclusive; as far as arguments derived from the
most striking and extensive analogies can be con
clusive. Cuvier throughout his works has made a
most happy use of it."
These remarks were elicited from the esteemed
writer by a very interesting example of this nature,
in which Cuvier had inferred (from Final Causes)
that " animals destitute of the power of self-motion
are without sensation :" an inference confirmed by
their want of nerves; from which circumstance La
marck drew the very same result as Cuvier had
otherwise drawn. But we may add, that the fanciful
anatomist above reproved, would have committed a
far more serious fault, if instead of accounting as he
did for the thinness of that particular bone, he
had undertaken to prove that the bone was thin,
either while neglecting to examine it, or in a case
where examination was impossible. If the fact ac
counted for is otherwise proved, the argument of
final causes, even when ill founded, is comparatively
harmless.
But the last words quoted from Dr. Prichard may
be further commented on. " Such evidence," he says,
" is convincing and conclusive, as far as arguments
derived from the most striking and extensive analo
gies can be conclusive." This is the very point.
The mere beginner has no right to deal with the
argument: it belongs to an advanced stage of the

108

CAUSATION.

science. Extensive observation has already esta
blished the fact, that all organized beings are re
markably adapted to their situation, and provision
made for their wants and dangers. It is the previous
knowledge of this as a general truth, which justified
Baron Cuvier in reasoning from it to the particular
case. Thus his argument is rightly resolved into
induction or analogy.
Again: if the anatomist could truly allege that
the construction of the human frame showed in a
thousand instances a provision made to facilitate
surgical operations, no one would call it absurd to
assign such a reason for the thinness of the os
unguis: nor would it even seem very rash to assert
(previous to a knowledge of the fact) that such bone
must needs be thin, if the great importance of the
operation had already been established, and that the
thinness of the bone was nearly an essential condition
of success.
Enough has been said to show, 1. that reasoning
from final causes is good or bad according as it is
used ; 2. that its force, when good, is to be referred
to some other head, as to induction or extensive
analogy. Thus it is not to be looked on as any new
kind of reasoning.
III. Another use of the word Cause is in the
expressions Immediate or Proximate Cause, and Pre
disposing Cause. A variety of circumstances may
help tpwards a result, which yet could never have
produced it; and without which the result might
have happened. These are named Predisposing
Causes: while that true (or efficient) cause, which

CAUSATION.

109

(as far as can be ascertained) is most closely followed
by the result, is named the Immediate Cause. Thus
it might be said that the immediate cause of the
British American Revolution was the imposition of
a tax on tea; but the predisposing causes were the
vexatious restrictions to which we subjected their
commerce. In human life it is obvious that the im
mediate causes of events are often of very secondary
importance; for if the predisposing causes are very
powerful, any trifle may serve as a spark to fire the
train.
IV. The terms Occasion and Condition are like
wise used in connection with causes ; but not with
great uniformity. A Condition, as opposed to a
Cause, means something essential to a result, yet not
capable of producing that result; perhaps even quite
unconnected with it. Thus food and sleep are " Con
ditions" of health, but not causes of it. Dr. Whately
has the following singular illustration ; that it is a
" Condition" of a man's dying on the Tuesday, that
he had been alive on the Monday. Yet in truth
this sense of the word Condition is generally awk
ward, and cannot easily become popular, because the
other meaning (State) so preoccupies it ; and the
adjectives Essential, Necessary, Requisite, will nearly
always enable us to dispense with it. Thus we say a
Prerequisite.
It is not uncommon to hear it said, that Christi
anity was the occasion of many wars and other
miseries, but ought not to be called the cause of
them. By this is intended to imply, that it was
passive and not active; it had no tendency to pro

110

CAUSATION'.

duce such results, but others took it up, and made it
an instrument. But perhaps the term Occasion
cannot be subjected to any limitation precise enough
to be of philosophical utility.
V. Lastly, the words Cause and Reason are often
opposed, the former being a thing or event, which
draws after it a physical effect; the latter being a
proposition, which warrants a logical inference. Thus
an effect may be our reason for believing in a cause,
equally as a cause may be our reason for expecting
or counting on an effect. The contrast of cause and
reason has been illustrated thus : " It twinkles, be
cause it is a star :" this tells the Cause. Again :
" It is a star, since it twinkles:" this tells the Reason.
Yet we cannot tie up language to this strictness.
We are accustomed to employ the word Because as
equivalent to By reason that ; inasmuch as a Reason
is looked on as the cause (being at least a means)
of knowledge. Thus, " It is a star, because it
twinkles :" is elliptical for, " / know that it is a
star, because,'''' or by reason, " of its twinkling."
It has been above remarked, that Reason is also
employed for the End in View. If it be said, that
the reason of our lower limbs being so disproportionate
to the upper, is, that we are meant to be bipeds and
not quadrupeds ; this states the Intention or end in
view. But if we allege a reason for believing any
thing, this does not imply an Intention, but a
Warrant or valid ground.
It is in the effort to evade these ambiguities that
a philosophical nomenclature is formed ; yet it is
hopeless that either the vulgar or even the philoso

ARGUMENT.

Ill

phers themselves should ever attain the habit of
confining one word to one meaning. The chief ob
ject really gained is, the habit of closely investigating
our own meaning whenever we are about to draw an
inference ; and the ability to speak with great pre
cision on the occasions when we are particularly
afraid of being misunderstood.
Arguments k priori and a posteriori.
It has been remarked above, that we may with
equal propriety adduce a Cause as a reason for ex
pecting an Effect, or an Effect as a reason for be
lieving that a particular Cause preceded. Whenever
the events in which a Cause consists, and those also
which will be its Effects, are thoroughly ascertained,
both modes of reasoning are equally logical. Thus
in the exact sciences, as in Astronomy, the argument
is not less perfect by which an Eclipse is predicted,
than that by which the mass of the Moon is ascer
tained. But in a majority of instances it seems to be
easier to argue from Effect to Cause, than from
Cause to Effect. If several billiard balls are rolled
on a table, and the ball A strike B and next strike
C, this is an event which only a practised eye could
have anticipated. But after it has happened, it is
obvious to infer that the resistance which B exerted
on A, is that which caused A to rebound and strike
C. So in the conflict of political parties, it may be
difficult to foresee which will prevail, and the general
turn which affairs will take : but perhaps not dif
ficult, with ordinary diligence, to trace out the causes

112

ARGUMENT.

of the result, after the result has happened. To
reason then from Cause to Effect is generally re
garded (and rightly) as far more unsafe, than the
converse ; unsafe, because it requires more extensive
and accurate knowledge, and far greater powers of
mind to combine aright all that knowledge so as to
make it available. This mode of arguing towards
the future is generally denoted by the Latin term
a priori reasoning; and is contrasted with a poste
riori.
If however, in the case of the billiard balls, the
problem were proposed thus : " Given the positions,
directions, and velocities with which A, B, C, collide,
to find their previous velocities in certain positions
this, although an a posteriori question, is not at all
easier than the a priori. The same is apparent in
all questions, where absolute accuracy is demanded.
Again : if an Englishman were suddenly transported
into China, and had imparted to him the fullest
knowledge of the present state of things, suppose as
to political struggles; he would find it as hard to
infer what causes, last year, produced what he sees,
as what effects, next year, will follow from what he
sees. It is not then to be supposed that there is any
greater natural facility in reasoning from Cause to
Effect than from Effect to Cause ; but the principal
difference consists in this, that he who argues a
posteriori has generally more facts to argue from.
He not only has information of the present, but some
record of the past ; while of the future there is no
record at all to help the a priori reasoner. In astro
nomy there is no record of the past beyond about

hume's question.

11S

two thousand years ; hence he who wishes to reason
back to an earlier period, evidently has a problem of
the same nature and difficulty as one who is reasoning
onward to the future.
On Hume's Question.
Mr. Hume's speculations have given celebrity to
the question, " Why it is, that because the sun has
risen to-day, we expect it to rise to-morrow ?" which
question Dr. Brown has renewed ; and, with deference
to his ingenuity, 1 must profess that I think he has
done his best to puzzle and mislead his readers. Ac
cording to him, the recurrence of an event 1000
times gives no better reason for expecting it once
more, than its occurrence on one occasion gives for
expecting it a second time : which is true in some
cases, but not in most to which it has been applied.
He alleges that only Intuition guides us to our
result. I have already adverted to the instinctive
principle of Association, which leads us to expect a
second time a union of circumstances which has been
experienced once. This is all that I can conceive Dr.
Brown to mean by Intuition : yet the principle,
though instinctive, is by no means irresistible, but
is capable of being either modified or overcome.
Something may be said for Mr. Hume in this matter,
but nothing, as I think, for Dr. Brown. It is pro
bable that men in general do take up their expect
ations, merely as a result of habit ; which is Mr.
Hume's view. If a child finds a bag with marbles
in it, and takes out 100, which all prove white,

114

hume's question.

he is perhaps confident that all the rest are white,
though it should contain ] 000. Yet white ones may
have been laid at the top of the bag, and the rest
may be red. Now the majority of men expect the
sun to rise and the seasons to recur, in future as in
time past, with no better grounds than the child had
in the other case. For which reason also their con
fidence in the stability of nature is so easily shaken,
and they are so credulous about miracles. If a
peasant reads of a time when the sun did not rise
in England for thirty-six hours, he perhaps easily
credits it ; nor is it any effort to his faith to believe
that the sun stood still in heaven at the command of
Joshua. The facility of his belief shows that he is
not irresistibly impelled to suppose the course of
nature invariable. Why is it harder to convince the
man of science ? Because he is satisfied that the
observed uniformity of the seasons is reasonably im
puted to a cause that has substantive and permanent
existence ; and such a cause he will henceforward
presume to exist, until it shall be testified not to
exist: just as a man whom we saw alive yesterday,
we presume to be alive to-day, unless we have learned
of his death. Now we are unable to conceive of any
power capable of controlling the causes which regu
late the heavenly bodies, except the great Creator
himself. Hence the man of science is less easily
persuaded; and needs full assurance that there is
adequate reason for believing such an interference,
before he will give way. The miracle is hard to his
faith, which was easy to the peasant. But it could
not be thus, had not an amount of experience pre

LAWS OF CAUSATION.

115

ceded, leading his mind to the formation of a general
Law : which explanation Dr. Brown's notion excludes.

Uniformity of the Laws of Causation.
But it is asked, whether that which follows is
linked to that which precedes by any invariable law,
such as to enable a mind perfect in intelligence, (yet
constituted as our own minds,) infallibly to infer the
one from the other. In the more obvious cases of
mechanical movements, no one will doubt this. After
a sportsman has brought to the ground his flying
game, no one questions, that could the following
data have been set before a perfect mathematician,
the success of the shot might have been infallibly
predicted; (1) the bird's course and velocity at every
instant; (2) the position and construction of the gun,
quantity and nature of the charge ; (3) the instant of
firing; (4) the resistance of the air. We are then
persuaded, that if the same causes were to act ten
thousand times over, the same result would follow.
This persuasion does not depend on any mysterious
intuition, but by observation in numerous simple
cases. Experience shows that mere time affects no
change in the qualities of bodies, and gives us every
reason to disbelieve that there is Will in their parti
cles. If the magnet attracted iron by means of the
action of its will, perhaps to-morrow its will might be
altered ; but no such indication of arbitrary power in
the magnet to attract or not to attract is ever de
tected.
It was once doubted, whether the whole material

116

LAWS OF CAUSATION.

world was guided by unchanging laws. The motions
of the heavenly bodies are referred by ancient philo
sophers either to Necessity or to Nature; (there
seems no practical difference;) but Showers and Fine
weather, Lightning and Earthquakes, they often
refer to Chance. The meaning of this seems to have
been, that the result did not follow from any thing
else, strictly as effect from cause, by any law acting
invariably; but that the same antecedent events
repeated in the same way, might be followed by
different results. Enlarged experience has gradually
established the opposite belief in the modern world ;
and that, even where the powers of life are concerned.
Probably no physiologist will doubt, whether it be
a strictly determinate problem (in the language of
mathematicians) to investigate the effect of a given
medicine administered to a given individual. Little as
we are likely ever to understand how medicines pro
duce their effects, there is so vast a mass of evidence
that the results follow by a uniform law, that we feel
justified in referring all anomalies to difference in the
prior circumstances.
In the full and rigid notion then contained in the
words Cause and Effect, it is essentially implied that
the Cause infallibly draws the Effect along with it ;
that is, if the same Cause be repeated ever so often,
all the circumstances being the same, the same Effect
will follow. There is difficulty in stating this per
spicuously, because the word Same lays one open to
controversy. In strictness it seems inaccurate, if
several blows are given with a hammer, to say that
the first blow is the same with the second blow : yet

UNIFORM SEQUENCE.

117

if all the blows be in the same direction and with
the same velocity, we may say that (so far as the
blow can be a cause of any thing) the blows are one
and all the same cause; for they differ in nothing
but in time. And this may be sufficient to avert
objections. But farther, we must beware of turning
our statement into a truism ; if we neglect to dis
criminate between the most rigid and the more
popular senses of the words Cause and Effect. Thus
if any one ask us, " Why we believe that Effect
follows Cause in the material world by uniform
laws
we might be tempted to appeal to the very
definition of Cause and Effect to prove it. But this
would turn it into a mere Verbal Truth, and evade
the real question : for the interrogator doubtless
means to ask, " Why we believe that in the material
world all events follow one another by uniform laws,
so as to be referable to a series of Causes and
Effects.,Uniform Sequence.
That a Cause, to be a Cause, must be such, that
that which we call its Effect shall uniformly follow,
is manifest. But that such uniform sequence is all
that we mean by Causation, is by no means manifest.
Yet this is reiterated a hundred times by Dr. Brown
in his much-applauded " Inquiry;" without giving
(that I can find) any proof of it but his own bare
assertion. " Power" (says he) " is only a shorter
synonymous expression of invariableness of ante
cedence." If this were ever so true, it is hard to see

118

UNIFORM SEQUENCE.

wherein is the importance of this proposition or this
discovery, to deserve a labored essay of 400 pages,
and stir up so much controversy. But his assertion
seems to me to be a simple untruth. It necessarily
confounds Premonitory Symptoms with Causes. For
example, it is known that dying persons are often
affected with a gurgling in the throat, vulgarly
called the death-rattle. Let it be supposed that
universal experience showed that death uniformly
followed this sound in less than twenty-four hours,
and that the powers of life distinctly declined without
rallying from the moment it commenced. Should we
then instantly pronounce the sound the Cause of
death ? Certainly I, for one, should not. It would
not suffice me to be able to say that Death does
uniformly follow the sound : I must also be able
to say that Death must (abstractedly, and by the
very laws of nature) follow. To define what we
mean by this Must and Could, is impossible; but
I certainly feel that / mean something beyond mere
" uniform sequence," though I cannot answer for Dr.
Brown. Perhaps he would prefer to maintain that
the Rattle is the cause of Death, rather than give up
his theory. I judge this by the defence he has made
against Dr. Reid's remark, that " Night is not the
Cause of Day, though it uniformly precedes." Dr.
Reid clearly meant, that Premonitory Symptoms are
not always Causes: but Dr. Brown has merely
evaded the remark by a sort of special pleading
about Day and Night.
Another awkward question would be, How soon
must the after-event follow, to justify us in calling

SECOND CAUSES.

119

the former a Cause ? If this be left vague, we are in
endless confusion. Thus, since all men die after
speaking, Speaking is made out to be a cause of
Death. But it is obviously impossible to define any
time ; and the effort to fritter away our notion of
Power into mere Antecedence must even on this
ground alone be renounced.
Have Second Causes any substantive existence ?
There is, however, another idea, similar to this,
which some have held, from an excessive fear of its
being forgotten, that all second causes are originally
dependent on the First Great Cause. They allege
that in strictness He is himself the immediate agent
of every thing ; that no matter therefore is " endued
with power" to influence other matter, but that on
each particular occasion where it seems to do so, the
Supreme Being is pleased to act to such a result.
Thus food has no real tendency to feed, nor wine to
intoxicate ; but when food is duly administered, he
chooses to feed as ifhy it.
Such a view is not to be ridiculed ; for it is
prompted by pious intentions, and has been held by
some great names ; but it certainly does not tend to
piety. Pushed to its just results, it seems to convert
the Deity into a mere soul of the world. It really
divests him of all will, in representing his will as sub
jected to that of his meanest creatures; for according
to it, any wicked man at pleasure sets the Deity at work
to perform the man's base purposes. The tendency
of such an opinion is through Pantheism into Atheism.

120

WILL.

Moreover, in another point of view, the tendency is
to universal scepticism ; by representing that none of
the things which seem to be, are ; and that the only
real agent is one, whose agency we infer by means of
apparent but unreal agencies. For we arrive at a
knowledge of the great First Cause only by reason
ing upward from the second causes ; and whatever
goes to deny the reality of the second cause, saps our
belief of the First.
It must then suffice us to rest in believing, that for
his own wise purposes it has pleased him to impress
permanently upon matter certain laws which now act
without him ; act uniformly and determinately, so
that after any phenomenon of the material universe has
happened, (be it an eclipse, an earthquake, or a
thunderstorm,) we may say, It could not but be:
provided only its scale of action be too large to be
affected by the efforts of living creatures.
Will, an Originating Cause.
But now we have to turn to another side of the
subject. It having been so extensively ascertained,
that in the material world the results are inevitably
determined by the antecedents, the speculating mind
pushes on farther, and desires to extend the same to
all results whatever. Such is the doctrine of Philo
sophical Necessity. It represents what is called a
Motive, as having, when held up before the mind, a
Causative power, determinately impelling the will,
which is swayed by opposite forces and necessarily
carried off by the more powerful. A peach presented

WILL.

121

to the eyes of a greedy boy, thus constrains him to eat
it up. The argument is clearly stated by Aristotle p,
but his reply is by no means satisfactory, though
he appears perfectly to have discerned the fallacy.
Mr. Dugald Stewart has exposed it, as I think,
unanswerably, and in very few words. He says that
the proposition, " Men always act upon the strongest
" motive," is a mere truism, if that motive is to be
called strongest in each particular case, on which
they do act in that case : but if any absolute measure
of the word strongest be employed, the proposition is
evidently false : for what is the strongest to-day, may
prove the weakest to-morrow. In short, a " Motive"
is not a Cause, because its power to sway the will is
not wholly independent of the will itself; but the
will determines, which of many motives shall prove
strongest.
The plausibility of the opposite argument depends
on this, that the active power of the will lies only
within certain limits. Motives are readily conceiv
able so numerous and attractive, that but a small
fraction of human minds would resist them : nor is it
in our power by an act of the will to invest objects at
pleasure with lovely or hateful qualities. Moreover,
habits of mind act almost according to mechanical
laws, when once formed ; and so far, go to destroy
the active powers of the will : this gives speciousness
to the argument for Necessity. But after the utmost
concessions have been made, no more can be inferred,
than that some motives are so universally powerful,
that almost none can resist them ; and here we find
' Nicom. Ethics, book iii. ch. 5.
a

122

WILL.

little scope for blame, much for praise ; or conversely,
much for blame, and little for praise. Such are the
actions which Aristotle refers to the excesses of virtue
and vice. Some vices are so atrocious, or so gross,
and have so little temptation to a mind not horribly
depraved, that almost all will be swayed by the enor
mously superior motives for avoiding them. Thus
no son is praised for not strangling his aged father ;
but he who does it is abhorred. Contrariwise, no
one would be much blamed for stealing to save his
wife and family from starving ; but he who refrained
would be highly commended, if he were believed to
have strong affection with it. These examples how- \
ever have really nothing in them to oppose the belief,
that Will is not merely passive : for in fact there
are no temptations so overwhelming, but that some
human virtue has been found to resist them. There
will remain a thousand other motives of less cogent
influence, and between which the human will freely
moves, neither wholly determined by them, nor per
fectly independent of them. Herein lies the diversity
and the trial of moral character ; and here is found
scope for approbation or condemnation, for a peaceful
conscience or remorse. Fully to explain this topic
belongs to Ethics, not to Logic ; and perhaps too
much has already been said : but it seemed necessary
to bring out strongly the difference of causation in
the material world, from the actings of Motives on
the will. Bp. Butler has directed one chapter of his
" Analogy," (which is in my opinion the most mas
terly chapter in the book,) against the doctrine of
Fatalism. His attack on it is very indirect, and pro-

WILL.

128

ceeds on the most cautious grounds, with the smallest
possible assumptions ; and is for this reason so pecu
liarly unanswerable. He satisfies himself with prov
ing, that if his view of the matter be not true, yet a
man who acts as if it were true, will be likely to act
wisely; while if the doctrine of Fatalism be true, yet a
man who acts on the belief of its truth, will act as a
fool. And with this result he dismisses the subject.
Although I apprehend that a motive cannot justly
be named a cause, as it does not inevitably influence
the will ; yet the will itself may be rightly entitled a
cause of a man's own actions, so far as they are purely
voluntary. We thus have two kinds of Causes; the
one sort self-originated, or self-adjusting; the other
sort themselves effects of something that preceded.
And the axiom, that the same causes produce the
same effects, cannot be held as a certain truth as
regards the former.
The distinction which we are drawing, was familiar
to Aristotler, who perpetually refers to two classes of
Events or Actions, which he calls Necessary and
Contingent. Under the Contingent he principally
considers human action. But it appears that he
supposed some parts of the material world, as Winds,
Showers, &c. to fall under the same head.
* 'h Ji TMauT>j
att^aiim. All the Socratic School seem to
have been very clear on this point. Plato and Cicero probably
meant no more than this, by the phrase from which we shrink,
that man is a sort of little god ; viz. as a First Cause of his own
actions. The Christian Fathers, and especially of the Greek
Church, are reproved by Calvin for holding the same view.
Even Augustine, according to him, was here in error.
G 2

124

MOTIVES.
Reasoning from Motives.

It was stated that the term a priori reasoning was
applied to the argument from Cause to Effect. We
may now add that the same name is (naturally) given
to the argument from Motive to Action. This sort of
reasoning must obviously be yet more unsafe, if it stand
alone ; since the motives do not even determine the
action. Nevertheless in each case the negative argu
ment is felt to be stronger than the positive. We
distrust the reasoning which alleges that something
will happen, because we see causes or motives; much
more than that, which says it will not happen or did
not happen, because there are no perceptible causes
or motives. For though it is not certain that an
event will take place, though there be numerous
motives and predisposing causes ; yet without these
we feel it incredible that any events of magnitude
can happen. Thus the a priori topics, though un
availing to establish matters when they stand alone,
are often powerful to confirm, and formidable as ob
jections. In theology we cannot dispense with argu
ments from final causes, which really are a priori
investigations whether motives are imputable to the
Supreme Being that could lead him to such or such
conduct. Before miracles can have power of con
vincing, we need to believe the Veracity of the Divine
Being: which is demonstrated by a negative argu
ment : " He cannot lie ; because there is no im
putable motive." To this we give way. But if any
argue, that he will do so and so, because of motives
and character which we feel justified in attributing

MOTIVES.

125

to him ; the vanity of the inference is apparent.
Indeed it would imply that we are equal to him in
wisdom, if we can dictate the particular line of action
that he will follow.
The case is the same in judging of our fellowcreatures. We may in numerous instances judge
with much certainty of their characters from their
actions; but we can" seldom predict their actions
from their characters. This remark helps us to
draw the line, as to the class of doctrines on which
divine revelation is indispensable. However rare the
attainment, it is not above the human faculties to
attain from nature a just knowledge of the character
of the Divine Being. It may be gathered from his
works, as we may learn the character of a legislator
and a sovereign from his laws, institutions, and edicts.
But how the sovereign will act towards individual
culprits, if the law have stated nothing, we can but
/ guess. And whether the Deity will or will not give
us any life after this, whether he will forgive or
punish, make us happy or leave us to be miserable ;
on all these points we can guess, but nothing more,
I unless he send to tell us.
I
Finally, it will be observed, that less direct evi
dence suffices to establish facts which have an a priori
probability. Else we should as readily believe a base
story propagated against a man of known virtue, as
against a notorious villain. And so stands the case
as regards marvellous tales, affecting the supernatural.
We certainly must not entirely judge of professed
miracles by the doctrine which they are attesting;
yet neither can we leave this out of the consideration.

CONTINGENT MATTER.
We should be right in demanding more evidence for
a common ghost story, than for a miracle of high
moral and religious import : and we are justified in
believing on comparatively slight evidence a tenth
miracle attributed to a man, whom we already believe
to have wrought nine. The d priori improbability
has here been broken down.
On Reasoning in Contingent Matter, generally.
Adopting the Aristotelic term, Contingent Matter,
it may now be asked whether the sort of probability
attainable in it, differs from that attainable in neces
sary matter. Even in the latter, it was shown that
no induction was more than a highly probable argu
ment : but still it appears that truths do exist in the
material world ; for by induction we obtain proposi
tions with absolutely no exceptions whatever, since
at least no research succeeds in detecting them. But
in Contingent Matter it might seem doutbful whether
any such propositions exist: for human will is «>
capricious or so self-determining, that none stand uni
versally. Not even the love of life, the dread of
pain, tenderness for offspring, nor any other motive
that can be named, acts with entire uniformity :
hence it would seem that no accumulation of ex
perience, no successive approximations and corrections,
will ever reduce the knowledge of human nature to
one of the exact sciences. Nearly similar remarks
seem to apply to Medical knowledge, so far as
human caprices influence the physical state of indi
viduals.

CONTINGENT MATTER.
Nevertheless there is a strong analogy between the
study of those branches of Nature which the ancients
referred to Chance, and the proceedings of human
life. That which we call " knowledge of the world"
and of " human character," which enables the states
man to foresee the times that are coming, or to choose
fit instruments for his purposes ; is an acquirement
very similar to the foresight of weather attained by a
practised seaman. Neither knows by what process his
mind arrives at its conclusions ; and to others it may
seem a sort of divination. Nearly the same remark will
apply to the prognostics of a physician.—But again,
when Meteorology is taken up systematically as a
science of observation, accurate registers are kept of
the depth of rain, of the moisture, heat, atmospheric
pressure, magnetic and electric conditions, &c. ; re
sults are hereby attained which no one would other
wise have guessed at. Not that such registers will
enable the philosopher to predict the weather to
morrow or next day, (at least in an insular climate,)
but it establishes various results as to the mean state.
And though this mean state may have a " secular"
variation, as we know that in the course of ages the
climates of particular districts change, yet it is
generally eo gradual, that the experience of the past
is available for reasoning towards the future. The
unscientific observer (for example, the experienced
seaman) is too much embarassed by the hourly
changes, to disentangle the monthly and annual
changes ; so that generally his wisdom serves only
to enable him to see danger a few hours before it
comes, and is seldom capable of looking far onward.—

128

CONTINGENT MATTEH.

Now what the Meteorological Registerand Tide-gauge
are to the philosopher, such are Statistics (or moral
and political registers) to the Statesman. Though
individual wills are free, yet each man has a character
of his own ; that character seldom changes very
rapidly ; and far more certain is it, that the character
of a nation does not ordinarily change rapidly. The
actions of individuals may be compared to the daily
showers and heat, the annual actions of the mass to
the mean annual rain or heat ; and the few attempts
already made to compile tables of this nature, show
how strikingly the analogy holds. For one eccentric
mind, there are twenty ordinary ones ; where one
breaks suddenly into a new course, twenty keep on
their old course : thus there is a stability in the mass,
for good or for evil. In the Moral Statistics of
France by M. Guerry', it is alleged that " Every
year sees the same number of crimes reproduced in
the same order, in the same districts ; every class of
crimes has its particular and invariable distribution,
by sex, age, and season : all are accompanied in like
proportions with accessory facts, indifferent in ap
pearance, and of which nothing as yet explains the
return.'" Possibly the writer may be suspected of
exaggeration : yet it is only what we might expect,
if no new agencies were at work, rapidly to change
the character of the people, that there would be
certain mean states on each side of which the registers
would slightly oscillate.
It cannot be doubted that all enlarged legislation
has been hitherto mere guess work, in comparison to
> Quoted in the Western Journal, Jan. 1836.

CONTINGENT MATTER.

129

what it might be, and perhaps will be, when Statistics
are greatly advanced. The chief art of the Statesman
has lain in foreseeing sudden squalls ; in knowing
when to venture boldly to sea, and when to run for
port. It has been a series of temporary shifts and ex
pedients, with almost nothing based on principle.
Many have displayed great sagacity in gaining im
mediate advantages over rivals, and in carrying their
selfish ends of momentary aggrandisement : few, very
few have known how to do real good to their subjects,
or have been aware how the current of events was
drifting them. Hence often they have been like a
navigator who puts to sea against the trade-wind,
opposing his puny force and skill to an overwhelming
natural agent. An upright mind, a pure heart, may
furnish a legislator with sound moral principles; but
no machinery can be devised that will " work well,"
which is not based on an accurate knowledge of the
physical and moral state of a population. It is won
derful to think how modern is this discovery.
Yet no statistical enquiries supersede that other
and more individual faculty, which has to study in
dividual character. Could we by extensive inquiry
ascertain that the average probity of lawyers is (as
the world seems to think) exceedingly low, this would
not justify us in judging of individuals by this stand
ard : but when we had more direct means of knowing the character of an individual, we should of
course use those means. But prudence consists in
having both sound views as to the average qualities
of men, so as to give us a clue how to deal with
individuals perfectly unknown ; and also discernment
c3

ISO

CONTINGENT MATTER.

as to the individuals with whom we come more im
mediately into contact. These two branches nearly
mark out Theoretic and Practical prudence ; neither
of which will enable us to dispose with the other.
The observations which we have been making have
referred to one branch of Contingent Matter, namely,
that with which the Statesman is chiefly concerned.
But it will be obvious that all the topics are applica
ble alike to every other kindred subject. And the
general conclusion is, that in the view of a Logician,
all problems which have to do with matter really
Contingent, are perfectly similar in kind with such
as are abstractedly Determinate, but by reason of
our limited knowledge, Indeterminate: viz. when we
cannot learn all the data, and are forced to omit the
consideration of minor disturbing forces. In this
case we of course get chiefly average results.
But if this were all, our knowledge would remain
very imperfect, since we cannot tell the limits of
error, or of deviation from the mean state ; an en
quiry sometimes even more important than the other.
To obtain these, the disturbing forces, entirely left
out before, must be supposed to exert their greatest
action: just as in enquiries concerning the Tides, we
learn the highest and lowest water mark, as well as
the average state. A large number of the enquiries
set on foot in Contingent Matter admit of a limit on
each side. The strength, stature, speed, and longevity
of men may be increased or diminished by art, but
obviously the limit of possible increase is not very
distant. Nearly the same thing applies to the powers
of the mind, (but not so obviously,) if reference be

CHANCE.

131

made to the age and nation in which an individual
appears : that is to say, very few rise above their
contemporaries through more than a moderate in
terval. As to moral qualifications, less can be said
on this head: perhaps we shall never get any mea
sure of them such as will enable us to pronounce.
This however is visible ; that there is a certain rela
tion and proportion between the means used for
improving the moral condition of a population, and
the result obtained; and without rashness we may
say, that omitting a small percentage of mankind
who most unexpectedly rise far beyond their fellows,
the characters of the rest vary to no great distance
on each side of the average mark which would cor
respond to the means used for influencing them. So
much is stated, merely to show what sort of analogy
would exist between investigations of this nature, and
those which have less to do with the mind and will.
But the whole science, if such it is to be called, is as
yet quite in its infancy.
This is the place to remark the use of the word
Moral in the phrases Moral Impossibility, Moral
Evidence, and such like. It implies that in conse
quence of the arbitrary actings of Will, less uni
formity exists in the Moral than in the Material
world ; yet that the Impossibility (or the Evidence)
is such as alone can be looked for in Contingent
Matter.
Chance.
The ancients were used formally to class Chance
among the causes of things. The moderns have

132

CHANCfc.

been so shocked and disgusted by the use of the
argument which Atheists have made, that many re
ligious persons consider the very word an offence,
perhaps an impiety. Yet there certainly is an in
offensive use of it : as if any one, who trod on his
neighbour's foot, should say, " I beg your pardon,
I did it by chance-" he would not intend to deny the
Divine superintendence, but merely to assert that he
did it without design.
That living agents do ten thousand things without
design, we well know ; and we know also that we
may try to do a thing fifty times, and succeed but
once; and this is popularly called Chance. When
any matter of great importance is involved, it is un
doubtedly most comforting to be allowed to believe
that the Divine hand has directed it. A certain man
drew a bow at a venture, and killed King Ahab.
Another has been through hair-breadth dangers, and
come off safe. A third has avoided drowning, by
some accidental detention. It is certainly impossible
to attribute to the Most High a perfect foreknow
ledge of all these things, and yet deny that he ex
ercises any sort of superintendence over them, with
out impairing the belief that he is concerned for our
welfare, and thus damping the vigor of real piety.
But let it be observed, that this remark will apply
alike to the things which happen by Chance and
those which happen by Design. It is to the full as
necessary that the burning of a martyr be under his
superintendence, as the death of one who is acci
dentally shot by his friend. I cannot go into the
question at large, without quitting my proper sub

CHANCE.

133

ject : but must content myself with adding, that the
whole question seems to resolve itself into the deep
mystery of Prescience and Predestination.
While also we allow that it would be an imperfec
tion in the Supreme Being not to attend to the
occurrences, in which those are interested for whom
he professes his most special care; we may propose
the question, whether there are not numberless other
points, in which it might be a degradation to suppose
that he can be interested. Take a case of deviation
from the order of nature established by him. If a
monstrous birth of some animal is produced, incapa
ble of living; would it tend to pious notions, to
insist that this was by his determinate counsel and
fore-arrangement, and not by Chance? Or when a
river carries rocks into the plain, is it requisite to say
that the great Disposer of events had a special object
in settling one block of stone here, and one there ;
next year to be carried away ? Doubtless he may
have had some definite object : but in defect of proof
that he had, have we any right to allege that he
had ? Or is it not more cautious and more reverential
to say, that, generally, he arranged and determined
certain laws by which the surface of the earth should
be eraded and renewed ; that the stones and earth
must be carried down somehow and somewhere ; but
that as to the particulars, we cannot say that he
preferred one way to another? Would it not be
rather an imperfection, than a perfection, in his
character, if he could not help interfering to decide
matters so trivial, that it would be beneath any
rational creature to interest himself about them ?
>

134

CHANCE.

However this may be, it would seem dear, that
we are not justified in so enforcing the doctrine of
a Special Providence, as to invalidate the mathema
tical doctrine of chance, as applicable to throwing the
dice, to taking balls out of a bag, or samples of
wheat; the utility of which doctrine daily experience
witnesses, and on which (as has been explained) the
Verification of general propositions entirely depends.
A theologian who in such matters wars against science
by texts of Scripture, is in danger of helping the
cause of infidelity.
Having said thus much, I must add, that I think
there is nothing in the Scripture, soberly expounded,
to enforce such a view.
It is not unimportant to observe, that an improba
bility dependent on the doctrine of Chances, though
obviously involving no physical difliculty at all, may
be as untenable to the mind as any of the things
called physically impossible. For a man to fly in
the air, or breathe water, we call physically impossi
ble, as being violations of the" Laws of Nature:"
yet are they quite as credible as that some com
binations of throws should be made by dice. To take
an illustration from another subject, which may be
more forcible to those whose minds are not exercised
in mathematical ideas of Chance : If two travellers
gave similar stories of the countries they had visited,
agreeing in numerous details of the manners and
customs, houses, costumes, food, scenery, &c. which
they professed to have seen ; we might indeed possi
bly disbelieve them: we might say that they had
copied each other, or had drawn from a common

CHANCE.
source ; but no one would say that by independent
invention they had hit on the same tale. The
supposition would be so outrageous, that any phy
sical miracle (as a divine revelation to each) would
be believed in preference. In fact, in the case of
a miracle, the violated " Law" of nature is only
proved to be a law at all, by assuming the incre
dibility of analogous combinations of chances.

Calculations of Chances.
For many important commercial purposes, espe
cially Life Annuities and Insurances, the mathema
tical doctrine of Chances is indispensable. But some
able philosophers have thought, that in numerous
other arguments where chances are involved, it is
possible to turn mathematical computations to account.
La Place was, I believe, the first to adventure this.
By his powerful engine of calculation, (called by him
the Analytical Calculus of Probabilities,) he first
addressed himself to astronomical questions of this
nature ; and I am not aware that the most eminent
modern astronomers question the justice of his rea
sonings. Among other points, he made it a matter
of computation, whether the inclination of the orbits
of the larger planets be attributable to chance or to
a definite cause; and finds that it is ten million to
one in favor of the latter. It is somewhat hard to
get at the bottom of the meaning. It being granted
that we may without impiety speak of double flowers
and other monstrous productions, as those of Chance;
(meaning that the Deity chose to leave some of these

136

CHANCE.

minor matters to rise out of physical agencies ; and
that he determined to determine nothing by any
special act of his will ;) the question then is, whether
the small inclination of the planetary orbits is of this
character or not ; and La Place's result is, (if I
understand,) that it is reasonable to believe that the
Deity had some specific intention in this case. If he
do not mean this, I cannot tell what he meant. He
next applied the same principles to human testimony.
To explain this, let it be supposed that of ten
assertions made, one is false ; and that a mathema
tician then endeavors to calculate the probability
that a story is true, which has passed through twenty
mouths. This may suffice just to give an idea of the
manner in which La Place unhappily endeavoured to
throw discredit on the Scripture narratives of mira
cles ; adding the improbability that the story could
have been correctly reported to the improbability
of the tale itself. Our Visitor, Mr. Conybeare, has
likewise proposed a new use of the doctrine of
Chances in Lectures delivered within these walls :
Lectures, whose increasing circulation shows how
they are appreciated by the public. I am sorry that
the only call that I have to notice his book is to say,
that I have not been able to satisfy myself that
numerical calculation will help us in reasonings con
cerning philology.
It is however certain, that in philological specula
tions we are encompassed with considerations de
pendent on Chances. I will venture one illustration.
On finding the Greek word xoiXoj to mean Hollow,
probably no one is disposed to make a remark. But

CHANCE.

137

if it be pointed out that Koil and Holl are somewhat
similar, he will reply that it is a chance similarity,
and not very strong either ; but no more than may
be expected or fancied in numerous instances. Next,
show him xagSi'a and Heart; and he will make nearly
the same answer. Then show him Cornu and Horn ;
and he will begin to think there is something in it.
Lastly, put the following table before him :

Cornu—Horn
KotXifAos—Halm
xoTkos—Hole
{Canvas
—Hollow
Germ. Hauf xin$ {"Hunt
xecfiiet—Heart
_ . < Hound
Hemp] Cams )
[Germ. Hund
/ c Germ. Kopf
xtfiXx 4I or Haupt
Hard
Cranium—
■xgrvs \
xx^rvs
Gtrm. Hart
Caput—Head
Germ. Hirn

and if his mind have had any exercise in etymological
enquiries, he will inevitably abandon all idea of the
coincidences springing from chance. The separate
instances are all possible, but the combination is
impossible. The mind deduces here a general pro
position, that " The northern languages often have
initial H, where the southern have initial K which
is verified in too many samples to be rejected : and
the argument thus ultimately comes back to an
Induction.
The numerical estimate of a chance, will vary in
the very same phenomenon with the measure of
information which we may have. Thus if a man

138

CHANCE.

have two dice, of which one is loaded so as to fall
with the six uppermost, and he ask two spectators
what is the chance of his throwing sixes ; the one
answers, it is as one to thirty-six, who does not know
that the die is loaded ; the other, who knows it,
replies, as one to six. Now as our knowledge of
natural causes is infinitely deficient, it would seem
that the computation is not to be depended on,
except where the chance is excessively infinitesimal ;
giving so abundant a refutation to the idea of mere
chance, as that we may suppose enormous omissions
in our data, and the result remain as before. And
these seem to be the cases in which common sense
s unices to decide.
The doctrine of Chance, having been pressed into
the service of Atheism, is regarded by many with
extreme dislike. I think however that it is perfectly
unavailable for the purposes of modern Atheism ; in
short, that the Atheist who holds a train of causes
reaching back through all eternity, having no begin
ning and imputable to no design, is just the very
man who has no right to speak of Chance at all.
Suppose this had been La Place's doctrine ; (as in
fact perhaps it was;) and consider what he could
then mean by his result about the planetary orbits.
When we attempt to analyze the assertion, it seems
to imply, that just as we say, it is an equal chance
which side of the die shall turn up ; so we may say,
it was an equal chance in what place the orbits of
the planets should lie. But this is impossible, if the
series of causes had no beginning. Chance pre
supposes uncertainty and equal possibilities this way

COMBINED REASONING.

139

or that way. Where nothing is, nor ever was, con
tingent on futurity, it seems as unmeaning to talk of
chance, as to ask the possibility of a past fact, or the
probability of a known truth. The mind can only
attempt it, by looking back to a time when it was
alike possible that the fact might happen, and that it
might not happen ; or alike credible that the propo
sition might prove false, and that it might prove
true. If La Place can look back to a time when
it was as possible that the planetary orbits should
take one plane as another, he implies the temporal
nature of the physical causes which have made this
world what it is ; and makes it necessary to refer the
existing system to something else than the uncon
scious agency of matter. If he can not look back to
such a time, all pretence for a calculation of chances
is excluded ; and the mind is shut up into the vague
but overwhelming idea of an Eternal Necessity.
Thus I say, that the Atheist, who so deals in
Chance as a cause of events, is the very person who
has no right to talk of Chance at all. It does not
seem possible even to make a statement, such as to
be, I do not say true, but intelligible, by which, on
his system, Chance should be a cause of the universe.
Combined Reasonings.
Every instance in which a general proposition
comes out true, might in a certain sense be called
an argument to prove this general proposition ; and
thus every Induction would be a system of combined
arguments. But it is not usual so to regard them.

140

COMBINED REASONING.

Contrariwise, various independent chains of reasoning
may terminate in the same conclusion, while it is
hardly possible to arrange them as an Induction at all.
The combined reasonings may in fact give such force
to the conclusion, that we hold it as far more strongly
proved, than the premisses from which it is derived.
Yet here again, as in Induction, the doctrine of the
Chances is the whole ground of our conviction.
Suppose a number of witnesses separately to depose
various facts disgraceful to the character of a certain
party. Each witness separately may be regarded as
capable of lying; and we may have no very strong
conviction of the truth of any one particular depo
sition. Yet if no conspiracy were conceivable, nor
any cause of general hatred and malice, we might be
unable to resist the conclusion, that the individual
accused was not the virtuous man that we had
thought him. This is no Induction. It is not a
Verification of a general principle; for the result
does not include the premisses as particular cases,
and indeed no one of the details is separately sub
stantiated. It does therefore seem to be funda
mentally a new species of argument.
There is then a sense in which it is true, that
" many bad arguments amount to one good argu
ment ;" if by bad be understood merely weak. Just
so do many pence gradually amount to pounds;
though in this case it is by addition, in the chances
by multiplication. But as many losses will not make
one gain, so neither will many bad arguments make
one that is good ; if by bad we mean an argument which
makes as much for the adversary as for one's self.

COMBINED REASONING.

141

It is certainly a very common fallacy in popular
addresses to make a great parade of numerous topics,
all converging to the same result, when the whole is
worthless. The plausibility of it turns on this; (1)
that the reasoner seems to have a great deal to say
for himself; (2) that the multitude of men are soon
tired in the effort to sift all the particulars, and are
led to take for granted that each reason confidently
alleged is good as far as it goes, and really adds
credibility to the whole. Its unsoundness may con
sist not only in the nullity (or even unfavourable
tendency) of many of the arguments advanced, but
in the suppression of all that is to be said on the
other side.
There are besides serious d priori objections in
some particular cases to arguments of this nature.
Suppose a person enforcing some point of practical
and universal duty, confessing that he had no one
powerful argument, but resting it on a combination
of weak arguments. We should feel the absence of
any single convincing one to be a positive objection
against him, and such as to throw great discredit on
the whole. Not all minds are able to grasp numerous
topics at once, and weigh their collective value ; yet
all are called to morality : and it seems incredible
that popular duties can rest on so subtle a basis.
Nearly the same will apply to political arguments,
where the primary rights and comforts, or liberties,
or duties of men are involved.
It is chiefly in the reasonings which engage the
attentions of the studious, in philosophical, historical,
judicial, and literary questions, that combination of

142

HYPOTHESES.

minor arguments is seen in unimpaired force. Paley's
Horae Paulina? exhibits a variety of coincidences
between the Epistles attributed to St. Paul and the
Acts of the Apostles, such as, taken separately, would
have little weight; but united, form an unanswerable
argument for the authenticity of both, and for the
reality of the facts.
Mr. Agar Ellis's Remarks on Lord Clarendon is
another example, of the powerful argument resulting
from a combination of small matters. Occasionally
also our Courts of Law exhibit remarkably the force
of what is called Circumstantial Evidence.
Sect. VII. Hypotheses.
In giving some account of the scholastic Logic,
I made mention of " Hypotheses" in a sense different
from that in which I shall now use it. I then spoke
of what we popularly term Assumptions, (and in
Mathematics, sometimes Postulates;) propositions
which are assumed or begged for a while, with
the understanding that they shall be afterwards
discussed and proved more at leisure. I now speak
of that which we popularly term Hypotheses ; namely,
the causes supposed, invented or adopted, to account
for known phenomena.
I cannot introduce what I have to say, better than
by an extract from a work already quoted5:
" It has been laid down by Sir Isaac Newton as
the first rule of philosophizing, that we are to admit
no more causes of natural things, or of the phenomena
■ Prichard on a Vital Principle, p. 21.

HYPOTHESES.

143

of nature, than such as are both true, and sufficient to
explain their appearances. This has been received as
one of the fundamental laws of reasoning by natural
philosophers; and a deduction has been made from
it, that whenever a philosophical theory is proposed,
or an attempt made to account for particular pheno
mena, it is incumbent upon us in the first place to
give some direct proof that the cause assigned is
a thing which really exists, before we proceed to
enquire whether it is sufficient to explain the ap
pearances which are to be accounted for. On this
ground, we are forbidden to infer the existence of
any agent whatever, from the circumstance, that it
afFords, when once supposed, an explanation of the
phenomena ascribed to its agency. But though this
construction has been put upon Newton's expressions,
it was not the purpose which he had really in view ;
as any body may be convinced by referring to the
remarks, which, in his Principia, {lib. 3. initio,) follow
the passage I have just cited." * * * * "It must be
acknowledged by every body, that a theory which
has in its favor both of the requisites above de
scribed, fully and completely, is entitled to the
highest regard ; and must be placed on a very
different ground from that of a mere hypothesis,
be it ever so probable. The theory of gravitation
is perhaps the best example which the whole compass
of natural philosophy affords, of such a theory, com
plete in every respect, and strictly deserving the
title of a philosophical doctrine. In that instance,
the principle proposed for the explanation of pheno
mena is first ascertained beyond all doubt, as a

144

HYPOTHESES.

matter of fact, and it is afterwards shown to be
competent to the explanation of all the phenomena
ascribed to it. But there are few examples of rea
soning on the laws of nature so successful, and we
are often obliged to rest satisfied with theories which
cannot lay claim to so high a title." * * * p. 26.
" Different opinions have been maintained by logi
cians, and writers on the inductive philosophy, as to
the value of hypotheses, which have but a low
degree of previous evidence. And yet I think it
must be admitted, by all those who will candidly
reflect on the subject, that there may be cases to
which a simple hypothesis shall obtain a high degree
of assent. Such hypotheses, when successful, have
been compared to a variety of analogous things : to
the key that fits and opens a lock, to the clue or
solution of an enigma, and to the key of a cypher.
Now in either of these cases ;—if the lock has been
very difficult to open, very complicated in its con
struction ; if the riddle was such, as could be ex
plained in no other way ; if the cypher could only be
interpreted by a single key ;—the discovery would
carry with it such a degree of evidence, as to require
no additional aid."
In expressing the fullest agreement with the doc
trine of this extract, I will add, that it appears to me
to deal too tenderly with the opposite opinion; an
opinion which seems to me not only a glaring mistake,
but to make it impossible to establish truths of
incalculable importance. For instance, how is it
ever possible to arrive at a belief in God from a
contemplation of nature, if I must jirst prove that

HYPOTHESES.

145

gods and divine agency do exist, before it is allowed
me to adduce divine agency as a cause of what I
see? Such a dogma shuts the door entirely on all
theology, and forbids us to learn of the existence
of any agents, except those whose existence is pal
pable to the senses. It was very natural for Bacon
and Newton, after philosophy had been so spoiled by
introducing occult causes, plastic virtue, celestial
spirit, and such-like words without meaning, to be
very jealous, and perhaps overjealous, on this head.
But even in contending against such fictions, it was
not needed to run to the opposite extreme of scepti
cism.
But if I mistake not, those who maintain the
doctrine in question, must exceedingly overrate the
number of agents of whose existence we have or
can have (what they call) direct evidence. It is but
an analogical evidence that we possess concerning ten
thousand things, the existence of which we do not
doubt. Analogy leads us to refer works that look
like what we know to be the works of man, to human
operation. English sailors, who find rude pottery
and plumes of birds made up into a head-dress in
an unknown island, consider them to be the work
of some inhabitants, of whose existence hitherto they
have had no direct evidence. Yet this analogy so
satisfies the mind, that perhaps we quote it as direct
evidence. But if a savage were to find a watch, still
going, it would seem so to surpass the productions of
man, that he probably would think it the work of a
god. Just so do we impute to divine agency the
origination of species, and for the very same reason.
H

146

HYPOTHESES.

Neither argument is to be impugned on the ground
that " we have no direct evidence of such agency ;"
but the former is faulty, in concluding too hastily
that the work transcended the powers of known
agents; and till this hypothesis fails, we have no
business to have recourse to unknown ones.
Again, it is analogy which suggests that light is a
pulsation of something similar to that which we see
in water ; nor can it be said that we have any direct
evidence of the existence of " ether ;" but he would
be a pertinacious antagonist of the vibratory system,
who should maintain that no amount of argument
from the agreement of the hypothesis with the various
and complicated phenomena would suffice to establish
the existence of the ether.
A Hypothesis must be such, as, when granted,
suffices to account for the phenomena: and if pos
sible, it must be the only conceivable hypothesis that
will account for them.
First: "the Hypothesis must be such, as, when
granted, will suffice to account for the phenomenon."
This implies some acquaintance with the laws of
causation. It may (in an extended sense) be called a
known law of causation, that human intellect and
power is equal to build cities and pyramids; sink
moles and breakwaters; shut out the sea by dams.
Yet if a work exceed a certain magnitude, we reject
the hypothesis of its being human, because human
power appears inadequate as to degree.
The historian Herodotus delivers four opinions
concerning the rise of the Nile in summer. The first,
that it is caused by the summer winds, which hinder

HYPOTHESES.

147

the Nile from entering the sea. This he refutes by
alleging that they do not always blow, yet the Nile
always overflows : moreover, that other rivers having
a like direction with the Nile, and smaller in volume
of water, do not overflow. Secondly, it was alleged
as the cause, that " the Nile is a part of Ocean, who
flows round all the earth." He replies, that such
obscurity cannot be brought to the test of truth or
falsehood ; and he knows nothing of " River Ocean"
except in Homer's poetry. Thirdly, the melting of
snows in Ethiopia. Our author denies that there is
any snow in so hot a country, where (says he) there
is not even rain. Fourthly, comes his own hypothesis,
that the sun is carried far south in winter by the
north winds, and in consequence the springs of the
Nile are burned up " by that god;" which in summer
does not happen. It will be observed, that the first
hypothesis is rejected, as inadequate in degree, and
as known sometimes not to exist in fact. The third,
as never existing. The second, because there is no
known parallel to the supposed law of causation. His
own account of the matter professes to adopt a known
fact, perfectly as uniform in its occurrence as the
phenomenon to be accounted for; and b)' known
laws of causation, to show that it is adequate to the
result. It will however be observed, that he does
not so much account for the Nile's overflowing in
summer, as for its not overflowing in winter.
If certain shells and petrified animals be discovered,
and a hypothesis be proposed, that a certain " plastic
power" of the earth produced them ; we hesitate
about this, because we have considerable ground for
h2

148

HYPOTHESES.

disbelieving the alleged power to have ever existed.
The whole presumption lies the other way ; for
though we have much acquaintance with the earth,
we have never detected her in the act of exerting such
plastic power. In this and in other hypothetic
agencies, as vital principle, nervous fluid, electric
power, immaterial principle, we have so vague an
idea what is the thing intended, or what powers it is
capable of exerting, that it appears like a barren
name, which can do every thing or nothing. It
therefore only serves to disguise our ignorance.
Secondly ; " the Hypothesis must, if possible, be
exclusive of other hypotheses." It is clear that our
argument becomes in this case purely syllogistic':
for we first show that the present phenomenon may
have been caused by our Hypothesis; next, that it
cannot have been caused by any thing else. Unless
then it is to be believed entirely without a cause, the
Hypothesis is demonstratively established.
It is but rarely that we can thus exhaust the num
ber of hypotheses, so as to produce absolute demon
stration. But we suffice ourselves with refuting those
which men of sound mind and acquainted with the
subject, are likely to adduce. Again, it constantly
happens, that objections lie against all the hypotheses
that present themselves: but if there is strong reason
for thinking that one or other must be true, it
becomes a question of comparison ; viz. which hypo1 An Aristotelian might refer the argument to the head of
Disjunctive Hypothetical; thus : '* The cause sought for must be
either A, B, or C ; but we can prove that it is not B nor C;
therefore it is A."

HYl'OTHESES.

149

thesis has fewest or weakest objections. But two
hypotheses, inconsistent with each other, each ade
quate to the result and otherwise apparently unob
jectionable, destroy each other's force ; the mind
being left in the same uncertainty as though each
were objectionable, until something can turn the
scale. To illustrate it familiarly, when two keys
open one lock, we do not know which is the true ;
and a suspicion will arise; that numerous other keys
may open it equally well.
If however it can be shown, that one or other of
the contending hypotheses must needs be true, the
question is most usefully narrowed. Where it is
otherwise, the most specious systems are frequently
overturned by farther discovery.
If a hypothesis solves a great many phenomena,
and leaves only the more tangled and obscure or
subordinate ones unsolved, there is a high pre
sumption in its favor, so long as we can refer the
difficulties to our own ignorance or mistakes. But
when our knowledge becomes more distinct and
searching, this apology is not allowed. Astronomical
variations, that in the days of Kepler would have
been thought no objection to the doctrine of Gravi
tation, (it is remarked by Sir J. Herschel,) would
now be sufficient to overturn that doctrine, if they
could not be solved by it. On the contrary, as they
can, it is a vast confirmation to us, since the theory
has stood the trial.
If a hypothesis be framed in order to embrace
several phenomena, and is afterwards found to ac
count for other phenomena likewise, which were

150

HYPOTHESES.

previously unknown ; this is justly considered a high
confirmation, because the chances against such a
coincidence seem very great, if it be merely acci
dental. Yet we have remarkable illustrations, how
near error may come to truth, and how plausible its
face. The corpuscular and the vibratory theories
of light cannot both be true : yet both were invented
with reference to the primary phenomena of reflected
and refracted light, and both have proved capable
(with certain modification) of explaining other most
remarkable phenomena since discovered.
Human life is full of cases admitting double solu
tions ; and no fallacy is more common, than that of
supposing a hypothesis true, because much can be
said in its favor. Many are so affected by the
arguments which can get a first hearing, that they
are unable to give attention to the claims of the
opposite side. But whenever two hypotheses fight
hard and long together, the suspicion must be
admitted that neither is strictly true, but something
intermediate to both, embracing that by which each
is strong, and divested of its weaknesses.
It excites a just suspicion that something is wrong,
when we find the same or similar phenomena ac
counted for at different times by different hypotheses;
even though the hypotheses should seem, separately
viewed, to be adequate. A poor patient in con
sumption is said to show wonderful ingenuity to the
very last, in assigning causes for getting a little worse
and a little worse. One day he remembers that he sat
in a draught for a few minutes ; another time he was
too late in going to bed; again, the day was un

HYPOTHESES.

351

usually cold ; or he ate something wrong. The
bystander sees that so uniform a result does not
proceed from causes so varying. So in national
distresses, it is a war, a bad harvest, a foolish min
istry, a particular monopoly, and other passing
things, on which the grinding habitual want of the
poor is laid in successive years ; when more probably
the cause is deeper seated, in bad moral character,
bad or unjust institutions, and oppressive laws.
Necessary Cautions or Rules respecting the adop
tion of Hypotheses, are the following. (1) Not to
multiply them needlessly. For this would give so
much scope to mere fancy, that no knowledge would
be attainable. If on entering my room, I find three
chairs out of place, one agent is sufficient to have
done this; and on the face of the matter, it would be
unreasonable to suppose three. But if they be placed
as if three persons had been sitting together, the
case is altered : for I have to choose between these
two hypotheses : either, Three persons have been
really thus sitting together; else, Some one has
placed them, accidentally or purposely, so as to give
this appearance. If I cannot conjecture any motive
for doing it, and if the phenomenon seem too formal
to be the result of accident ; the latter hypothesis is
improbable : while if it is notorious that as many as
three persons may readily have had access to the
room, (as readily as one,) no objection lies against the
former hypothesis.
If my desk were broken open, and three pieces of
money were taken out, it would not occur to me to
suppose that three different persons had taken them;

HYPOTHESES.
for one could do it quite as well. Else there would
be no end to the multiplication of supposed agents.
One might have brought a chisel, a second a hammer,
a third have broken it open ; three more may have
taken the money ; and so forth. (2) A second Rule
might be laid down, (which is virtually included in
the first,) that an agent previously admitted to exist,
is to be preferred in a hypothesis (caeteris paribus)
over another not yet thus admitted.
If I must
suppose one person at least to have had access to
my desk and break it open, I need not invent three
more to take the money. Thus we include in our
caution all that Bacon or Newton could justly desire,
in rejecting mere hypothetical existences so long as
they can be dispensed with.
The strong repugnance of the whole Baconian
school to this particular error is not unjust, nor un
called for ; as it is a most fruitful source of folly
and superstition. If a person's toe is pinched by his
shoe, he may impute it to the queen of the fairies
pricking him ; and if his milk boils over, some other
mischievous imp has poured it away. Polytheism
generally points to the same origin. Each pecu
liarity of nature the Greeks attributed to a different
celestial agent, when one was sufficient. The Ori
entals equally had their genii presiding over different
departments of nature.
Such reasoning was not
faulty on the bare ground that hypothetical beings
ought not to be introduced at all; but that many
ought not to be introduced where one sufficed ; nor
even one, if the agents previously ascertained to
exist suffice. It has been observed, that if a single

HYPOTHESES.

153

instance could be produced of a race of horses having
degenerated into asses, this would convince all the
world that asses universally are nothing but degene
rate horses. The reasoning would be as follows.
There are two hypotheses ; that the Creator origi
nally established two separate species, Horse and
Ass ; or that he created one species, Horse, capable
of degenerating into Ass; either of which hypo
theses suffices to account for the existence of asses.
But since we are forced at any rate to admit the
latter hypothesis, in accordance with our (supposed)
fact, we dispense with the former as needless.
So again, it is unreasonable to invent a " plastic
virtue" in the earth for producing shells, (such
" virtue" having no prior evidence,) when there is
already a known cause, daily witnessed, that pro
duces them; viz. the birth and growth of animals
that live in them. If animal shells were wholly
unknown, the hypothesis would not be in itself
absurd ; but the process of " shell making" (or cochlization) might be believed analogous to crystalliza
tion, &c. But after all allowances, it is difficult to
repress amazement that philosophers should for ages
have fancied that heated slime could generate ani
mals. It is to be supposed that they reasoned thus :
first, they too hastily believed the alleged fact, that
insects are produced by carrion and by the slime of
the Nile : next, having, as they thought, learned that
such a slime had a vivifying power as regards insects,
it seemed rational to suppose that it might also
produce marine animals, or at least abortive attempts
in the way of shells and skeletons. Heathens
h3

154

HYPOTHESES.

carried it farther, generally believing that each
nation of men sprang out of the soil in which they
were indigenous.
Similar superstitions attach themselves even to the
productions of man. The Greeks believed that
Mercury made the harp, Apollo the bow, Ceres
the plough, and Vulcan all metal instruments ; admi
ration, poetry, and superstition combining to make
them pronounce such works divine. In extenuation
we may say, that they already believed the existence
of these deities, and their occasional kindnesses to
individuals. But even among ourselves we may see
a tendency to refer to supernatural operations things
which manifestly fall within the known powers of
man : and it needs much soundness of mind to hold
a due balance in this matter.
But it may be asked, When we fully believe
already in the existence, power, and presence of a
Divine Being, why should we deliberately set him
aside as a physical agent ? Why is it not as allowable
a hypothesis, that " God did this or that;" as,
" Man did it ?" And the question deserves a reply.
There is a theological sense, and an important
sense, in which he is the doer of every thing ; as
having given to all things the power which they
possess, while foreseeing all the effects. With this
subject we are not now concerned. But when it has
been found to so large an extent, (in fact to the full
extent of observation,) that matter is regulated by
uniform laws, which give no indications of the actings
of Will, analogous to our own, we cannot suppose him
in particular instances to interpose as a direct agent

HYPOTHESES.

155

like ourselves, without being forced to speculate on
his purposes in so doing. This may at first sight
appear presumptuous; but it is inevitable, unless we
will annihilate all knowledge soever, by referring
every thing to his absolute and inscrutable choice in
each particular case. And this in a philosophic,
that is, in a consistent, mind, would soon come back
to atheism, by a denial of his having any purposes or
personality, and merging him in the principle that
actuates matter, so soon as it appears that we can
weigh and measure and predict his doings; and the
only mode of saving religion, is then by a suppres
sion of all close thinking. It being therefore
inevitable to canvass his possible purposes for work
ing a miracle, we are constrained to set aside nearly
all the cases which come under science at all, as
being such as he would not have interfered in.
Doubtless it was in his power to create by a word
the crust of the earth as it now is ; with shells and
bones, and variously disposed strata, having all the
appearance of being brought about by the action of
water, fire, and chemical combinations, on substances
variously brought together. But as we feel unable
to assign any purposes in this, except to puzzle
geologists, and this is utterly unworthy of him, all
such notions are put aside, as rather impious than
pious. In every department of natural science the
same thing perpetually recurs. So soon as the exist
ence of the divine Being is granted, some reason
must be given, why he is excluded from our hypo
theses ; and this always turns upon our apprehension
of his moral character. If to almighty power were

156

HYPOTHESES.

joined the caprice of a fairy or evil passions of a
genius, it would not be absurd to impute to such a
being the most fantastic or mischievous miracles.
At the same time, the above may account for the
fact, that Natural Philosophy and all close reasoning, is
apt to bear an irreligious aspect to those who view it
superficially. For while we appear often to admit
Chance as a cause of things, we seem to grant to the
divinity only an honorary existence, such as Epicurus
gave his gods ; living in blessed tranquillity, but too
shadowy to stir bulky matter. It also appears like
" the spirit of unbelief" to strain every nerve to
account for facts in an ordinary way, before we will
have recourse to an extraordinary hypothesis. Yet
without this caution, we are presently overrun with
false miracles, legends, and ghosts : and it cannot be
doubted, that the too large credulity of the early
Christian Church in these things, (due partly to the
low state of science, partly to the breaking down of
the improbability of miracles by their comparative
frequency in the apostolic age,) materially contributed
to the general subsequent darkness.
(3) A third Rule for hypotheses often given is again
only a modification of the former ; that the simplest
hypothesis, ceteris paribus, is to be preferred. For
by the simplest, we generally mean, that which has
fewest independent particulars ; and each of these
particulars might be called a separate hypothesis.
This may be illustrated by the Copernican theory.
The phenomenon to be accounted for, is, the revolu
tion of the stars in twenty-four hours ; and (if our
attention be confined to this single fact) each hypo-

HYPOTHESES.

157

thesis equally well solves it, whether the stars are at rest,
and the earth revolves, or the earth is at rest, and the
stars revolve. But the revolution of each separate star
is to be looked on as a separate hypothesis, until it be
shown that one cannot revolve without the other. Now
if there were only 3000 stars, we are making 3000 hy
potheses to account for the phenomenon, and are leav
ing unaccounted for what is most surprising at all, the
precise coincidence of the period of their revolution.
This would be so monstrous, that all who supported
the immoveability of the earth, were driven to regard
the stars as studs fastened within the solid surface
of the heavens. There are thus two points in the
hypothesis ; the existence of such sphere, and its
revolution ; while the Copernican theory needed but
one concession, the revolution of the earth. The
example shows, that the three rules which we have
given, merge in one another, for we might object to
the crystal sphere, that its existence being as yet
hypothetical, it must not be needlessly introduced.
In some cases it is hard to decide wherein consists
simplicity of a hypothesis ; because of our ignorance,
how far the particulars that seem to be independent,
are really connected. But when certain causes are
proved to exist, and it is shown what their action
ought to be ; and next, phenomena are pointed out,
exactly agreeing hereto ; no conceivable complexity
is an objection, but rather the contrary. For the
existence and action of the causes is not the hypo
thesis; but the circumstance that a known pheno
menon is due to those known causes. Thus if any
one demonstrate that the earth's revolution (an un

158

HYPOTHESES.

doubted fact) ought to diminish gravity at the
equator, and: the protuberance of the equatorial
matter, (another ascertained fact,) ought to do the
same ; it is not regarded as a disadvantageous com
plexity to the hypothesis, that these two causes
conspire to make a pendulum beat slower at the
equator; even if we have not learned that the two
causes may be resolved into one. And for this obvious
reason, that so far from being anxious to get rid of
one of the causes, (as in the case of hypothetic
existences,) we should found an objection against the
theory, if the effects of both causes did not appear.
In mathematical reasonings, the argument from
simplicity often takes this shape ; that in assuming
a hypothetic law, we introduce the fewest number of
" arbitrary constants" which the phenomena ' will
allow. Thus no one who could account for the
resistance of fluids by assuming it to be equal to au2
(v being the velocity), would think of assuming it
= a«l+/3u6, even if the latter equally well agreed with
the truth. It would however stand over for farther
inquiry, till one or other should be disprovedEven in these exact sciences, it is difficult to settle
what we mean by " simplicity." Perhaps a mathe
matician might think au+(3u* a simpler law then cue",
though it has one more " arbitrary constant." The
chief use of these remarks is to point out the advisableness of referring the argument from " simplicity"
to one of the two preceding heads ; to which I be
lieve it can always be reduced, when it has real weight.
(4) A fourth Rule may seem needless; that a
hypothesis must not reproduce difficulties equal to

SPECIFIC INFORMATION.

159

those, for which it is invented to account. As a type
of such useless inventions, we may refer to the sage
story of the Hindoos, that the earth rests on the
back of an elephant, and the elephant on the back of
a tortoise. Alike unsatisfactory are the causes, them
selves unaccounted for, which the historian Gibbon
assigns for the spread of Christianity ; among which
we find him give a prominent place to the liberal
zeal of the Christians, contrasted with the narrow
ness of the Jews ; their abhorrence of idolatry, their
extraordinary moral virtues, their deadness to the
business and pleasures of the world, and the directing
of all their ambition and patriotism into the channel
of the Church. The important difference between
the English and the Hindoo reasoner is, that the
elephant and tortoise are imaginary, while the causes
alleged by Gibbon are real facts. Yet as facts, they
remain as extraordinary and unprecedented, as the
phenomenon under discussion.

Sect. VIII.
SPF.C1FJC INFORMATION.
Thus far we have been engaged with the laws of
Reasoning, by which the mind passes from one judg
ment to another ; from that which is better known,
to that which is less known. We are now better
prepared to inquire, how the first truths are learned,
from which we pass to others. It might seem that it
would have been more orderly to treat this question
first, as the natural arrangement of Terms, Proposi
tions, Syllogisms, might seem to dictate. But as we

160

SPECIFIC INFORMATION.

proceed, it will appear how we have been forced to
deviate from that order.
Of truths which we receive as the foundations of
reasoning and not as the result of reasoning, there
are two classes. The former are such as are called
merely Verbal; which assert nothing about facts,
except so far as the meaning attached to words is a
fact. These are ascertained to be true (or agreeable
to themselves) by" inspecting the meaning of the
words, or the definitions. But Real Truths are not
merely agreeable to themselves ; but agreeable to
matter of fact, and must therefore be ascertained by
means of those instruments, by which the mind
becomes acquainted with that which is exterior to
itself ; viz. by the Senses.
It will however be convenient to take a larger
range than this expression might imply ; so as to
include not only the things testified by our own
naked Senses, but all truths which we receive by
Specific Information. If otherwise, we get too much
off the ground of Logic, on to that of Physiology.
For our present purpose, it seems convenient to in
stitute various classes of informants, on whose testi
mony we believe without reasoning. That is to say,
we may reason concerning their veracity and trust
worthiness ; but this being established, we receive
their information as a matter of fact. Such an in* If by the word Intuition is understood (what its derivation
suggests) Inspection, or the fixing of the mind (on the words),
then Verbal Truths may be said to be known '* by intuition."
But I prefer avoiding this word, because it has received a vague
and rather mystical sense.

SPECIFIC INFORMATION.

161

formant is a Telescope. Opportunities in plenty occur
for trying with near or known objects whether it tells
truth ; but its character being once established, we
believe its information even where we cannot readily
check it : nay, we employ it to test the veracity of
another instrument, hitherto unproved. The same
will apply to all philosophical instruments.
A
Stethoscope, a Chronometer, a Thermometer, has
its character for veracity, and the experimentalist
always anxiously inquires within what limits he may
trust its information.
We may regard the eye as an informant, in the
very same sense as a telescope. From the dawn of
existence we learn to test and check the veracity of
this sense, by help of touch ; and afterwards the
separate senses check each other. Just as in the
case supposed, of two travellers giving a like report
of innumerable details in a foreign country, in which
both would be believed, because they could not have
accidentally hit on the same tale, provided only that
we could be secure against any collusion or drawing
from the same source; so is it with the sight and
touch, or with the sight, hearing, and touch. By
unnumbered trials during every waking hour of life
we gain a most elevated opinion of the veracity of
these three informants ; so that we unscrupulously
believe any one of them singly. No one doubts
whether there be moon and stars in the sky, though
we can neither hear nor touch them, nor feel any
thing from their presence : it is enough that we see
them ; nor do we desire confirmation of this testi
mony. Just so, when the astronomer sees by his

162

Sl'ECIFIC INFORMATION.

telescope satellites revolving round Jupiter, he be.
lieves the fact as unhesitatingly, as the vulgar believe
what is seen by the naked eye. Indeed a child will
learn, by a very little experience in the use of a
magnifying lens, that it distorts an image seen
through its edges or obliquely ; but that he may
put full confidence in its information when used to
advantage. No one will say that credit is given to
such instruments without reason ; nor yet does it
seem possible to assign a reason, other than the enor
mous improbability that they should agree with the
senses and with each other in all the cases tested,
and then prove fallacious when we most wish their
help. And this is the identical argument for the
veracity of the senses themselves.
The difference of the vulgar and the philosophic
dependence on any such informants, consists in the
greater care with which the philosopher discriminates
the limits within which they are trustworthy, and
the effect of unusual circumstances in embarassing and
deceiving them. Hence without approaching the
absurdity of universal scepticism, he is led to reject
and disbelieve the testimony of sense in particular
cases. In this matter some ancient sects ranged them
selves under childish extremes. While the Platonics
undervalued the truth of the senses, and some
branches of them went into the mysticism of an
interior world, with a tendency to deny the sensible
world ; the Epicureans, in a contrary zeal to uphold
the veracity of the senses, ridiculously maintained
that the sun is no larger than it looks ; words to
which it seems impossible to affix any sense, unless

SPECIFIC INFORMATION'.

163

Virgil's poetry help us to some idea ; who says, that
Polyphemus's eye was as large as an Argive shield,
or the lamp of Phwbus. A true philosophy teaches
us great reliance in our senses for common purposes
and under common circumstances, while it also in
structively shows numberless cases where they cannot
be trusted.
Physiology moreover points out, that their appa
rent want of veracity is to be imputed to our mis
interpretation of them. Their indications are faithful
(in a healthy state,) but we commit what would be
called by an astronomer " errors of reading off."
When the shadow is thrown truly on the dial, we
note its place inaccurately. All this is undeniably
true. It is notorious that we see distance not by
direct information of the eye, but by a process of
reasoning upon the facts furnished to us by the eye ;
aud when we misjudge the distance, it is not pro
perly the eye which has deceived us ; it is the mind
which argued erroneously. We are apt to suppose
that our senses give us information of temperature
and of motion ; but it can be proved that they only
tell us of the changes of temperature, of the more or
less rapid accession and loss of heat, and of relative, not
absolute, motion, under numerous circumstances. Yet
I apprehend, interesting as this is to the physiologist,
it is a difference of no importance to the logician.
Except where we are able to disentangle the fact
furnished by the eye, from the reasoning superadded
by the mind, we are forced to regard the last result
as furnished immediately by the eye. If a witness

164

SPECIFIC INFORMATION.

were to depose as a matter of fact, that " a person
was within arm's length of him" when something
happened, it would be most unreasonable to expect
him to discriminate that which he really saw, from
what he inferred. He says and thinks that his eyes
told him how far off the person was ; and probably
this is all that he knows about it.
This leads to remark, that Memory is an informant
equally important with any sense; and is verified in
a similar manner. A boy hides something in a secret
place; and remembers that he so hid it. On going
afterwards to look for it, he finds it safe ; this is a
check and test that his memory was a veracious
informant. By much similar experience, most per
sons learn what measure of credit is to be given to
their own memory ; and though the limits are very
vague, within which they will trust it, in clear cases
a man identifies his memory with his senses. " Do
you want to persuade me out of my senses?" is the
indignant exclamation of one, whose memory others
are trying to overwhelm by contrary evidence.
Just as we refer a general result to the testimony
of the eye, mixing its perceptions with the inferences
of the mind ; so do we in the case of memory. A
general impression is left : we know the substance of
what was said, while perhaps unable to depose a word
accurately. The mind has perhaps translated the
speech, and several successive acts of memory have
taken place. In consequence the difference between
man and man as to accuracy of memory is immense,
vastly surpassing any difference as to the senses.

SPECIFIC INFORMATION.

165

Indeed some regular story-tellers are said to go on
gradually exaggerating, till they believe half of their
own lie.
If we have written down a transaction, the case
becomes a little more complicated. The original
witness of the senses is then passed on as it were
second hand, and memory is no longer required to
depose what took place ; but negatively, that it does
not remember any thing to the contrary ; and posi
tively, that we wrote it ourselves. And if memory
be here uncertain, it is checked by examination of
the handwriting; and perhaps the very paper and
ink confirms it. Again, Memory has to testify the
negative fact, that we never wrote down lies. It is
a remarkable phenomenon, with what strength all
men can remember negations of this kind, when they
remember nothing positive.
The testimony of our fellow-men may logically be
classed as coordinate with the testimony of a tele
scope; which again is coordinate with that of the
senses. We have to prove the veracity of all alike;
and having proved their character in the general, on
the credit of this we believe particular statements which
we have no opportunity of testing. Of course the
mode of testing their veracity is widely different ; and
on this I shall have more to say.
It is not the sensations only of others which we
thus receive by transmission. The judgments also of
men in their own science are often received as facts of
evidence. A sailor tells us that a squall is rising ; or
that a certain ship is a pirate ; a physician pronounces
that a patient will recover; a counsellor, that a cause

166

ARGUMENT FKOM AUTHOKITY.

will not stand in the courts. Even when * general
truths are involved, as well as special auguries, they
are allowed to stand on the credit of the witness, in
defect of better means of judging; and when we have
no time or skill or means to enter on the enquiry
independently. But if the details can be obtained
and laid open to inspection and leisurely criticism,
it of course conduces to accuracy.
It is almost needless to add, that our conviction of
the facts testified by Specific Information, depends
on the confidence of the allegation, as well as on the
character for veracity which we attribute to the
informant. But this is one of the cases in which
combined arguments are so powerful. Though the
ears might be half-stunned by noises, and the eyes
dazzled by cross lights ; let us be ever so conscious
that either may deceive us ; yet while they agree in
the same conclusion, we believe them both.

Argument from Authority.
It is right to discriminate between the argument
from authority, and the argument of testimony;
which are sometimes closely allied.
The evidence of a surgeon or physician on a
matter falling within their science, is received by
a jury just as any other fact from an ordinary
witness. It is supposed that their depositions would
be confirmed by the rest of the faculty, could these
have had the same opportunities of observing. They
* Ai~ it
Arist. Eth. Nic.

rut \fnnifin mit atxvthlxrat farm xxi yti/uuh

ARGUMENT FROM AUTHORITY.

167

are looked on as men who have another sense or
instrument : we hear their statements, as sailors hear
the announcements of their fellow, who has climbed
to the mast-head to look out, or as blind men receive
the testimony of one who has sight. So long as it is
apprehended, that they do but depose to that, which
is notoriously within the compass of the science to
decide, their evidence stands on the same footing as
the evidence of other men's senses.
If the evidence given rest on the extraordinary
talent of the individual, but is such as the rest of his
own faculty could not confirm, we no longer count it
evidence to fact, but a matter of opinion. While any
body of scientific men are unanimous in their judg
ments, provided that they be not directly opposed to
common sense and knowledge, the rest of the world
pays the like deference to them, as the blind to those
who can see : and it seems to be hopeless and foolish
to contend against them. But when this unanimity
does not exist, or when two men of like science are
at variance, the less experienced of the two cannot
receive his abler brother's decision as a matter of fact
and of evidence, but he may bow to it as a matter of
authority.
A person unversed in philosophic observations and
experiments might say, that he believed the doctrine
of gravitation on the testimony of astronomers, and
he received the corpuscular theory of light on the
authority of Newton. In such language it is im
plied that the former doctrine stands on so firm
a basis, that the ordinary human faculties, going
through the common course of instruction, gain an

168

ARGUMENT FROM AUTHORITY.

eye for the discernment of it, and give a uniform
witness to it. The latter theory is represented as
resting, not on the common sense of mankind, but on
the superiority of one remarkable man.
The difference between the two Is immense. We
have the most unhesitating trust in the average good
sense and soundness of mind of men taken as it were
at random out of the mass—insomuch that it would
seem wise to disbelieve the testimony of our own
senses in supposable cases, where the combined
testimony of others opposed. But causes innume
rable and unintelligible daily arise to lead the ablest
men astray in individual cases. Even where the
natural sciences are concerned, the argument from
authority is no doubt in particular schools greatly
abused. The followers of a great man are so en
slaved to their master's peculiarities, that they love
his errors as much as his points of excellence. Yet
in modern times, this seldom outlasts one generation.
The enormous accumulation of facts, (witnesses that
cannot be bribed to speak nor to be silent,) form
a barrier which enthusiam cannot penetrate.
In moral, political, religious tenets, it is unhappily
far otherwise. These are subjects on which it is the
duty of every man to hold, not opinions merely, but
principles; and on which it were easy, but is unlawful,
to surrender responsibility to a set of literati. While
all do to a certain extent (at least in theory) agree on
these points, yet there is no school so agreeing with
itself, as to be able to set forth a grammar and elements
of the subject. We cannot very decidedly say, what
is learned from what, even when we agree as to the

ARGUMENT FItOM AUTHORITY.

169

truth. Much less is it possible to pretend to put
together our views into such a systematic shape, as
shall command conviction of others. Hence it is
possible for mischievous and absurd error to run to
great lengths anc1 abide a long time, without any
efficient confutation ; I mean, without that which has
any force of confutation towards those who need it.
This is a state of things, in which it seems a
balance of difficulty, whether to lean much or little
on " authority." To reject it, looks like trusting too
much to self ; to adopt it, is trusting to chance, if
not to self. For what authority are we to follow ?
If we are guided by our birthplace, and such-like
circumstances, it is giving the matter as it were to
Chance: and it were an abomination to say, that
every man " ought" to bow to the idol whom his sect
shall have been used to worship. If we try to select
for ourselves, the question recurs, whether this is not
trusting self, as much as if we went without such
authority. Doubtless it is often easier to know a
good man from a bad one, than to discriminate true
opinions from false; and in religious and moral
truth, this goes a great way. But on the other
hand, there are few who have the opportunity of
acquaintance with men of opposite ways of thinking ;
so as to judge well on this head : and the impression
is apt to be, that " those of our party are generally
very good, and the bad are an exception ; but those
of the other party are mostly bad, and the good are
the exception." Thus in the vast majority of in
stances, mere chance and locality determine what
authority a man shall follow : and perhaps nothing so
r

170

ARGUMENT FROM AUTHORITY.

perpetuates error and bigotry, with so much certain
mischief and so little advantage, as this leaning on
Authority : for it is the peculiarities of strongminded men which most impress themselves on their
disciples ; and their peculiarities are very often their
defects. Neither is the case much mended, when the
appeal is made to the wisdom, not of an individual,
but of a school ; so long as rival schools exist. For
almost every school was originally founded by very
few individuals, whose energies or whose authority
has stamped on it, ever after, the impress of their
minds.
The unfair and invidious use made in controversy
of the argument from Authority, is sufficiently de
noted by the name which the Schoolmen have be
stowed on it: argument addressed to bashfulness.
The object of using it was not to convince, but to
stop an opponent's mouth, if he were " bashful"
enough to quail before the name of Aristotle or
Augustin ; or again, to hold him up to odium, if he
were " impudent" enough to reject their authority.
Assuredly it is the ordained system of this world,
that while the faculties are immature, youth should
look up to its elders : so that in a certain sense, the
deference to authority might be called a part of
Nature. But this rather operates in not attempting
to form opinions, than in adopting opinions. If a
father happens to be a strong Whig, it would be
ridiculous to tell his young son, that, in deference
to authority, he must hold Whig principles too.
Common sense would rather say, that while he is
young, he must not wish to hold any principles at

ARGUMENT I'JIOM AUTHORITY.

171

all ; and when he grows older, if he is called to hold
some, he must ask information from all sides.
It is observed by Bacon, that his system of Induc
tion in a manner equalizes intellects. An ordinary
mind, led on step by step, as facts point, can reach
securely and at an early age, eminences of knowledge,
to which the highest intellects of former times could
not soar. Had he foreseen that Newton would
follow him, he probably would have used language
less strong. But though it by no means equalizes
intellects, it certainly diminishes the occasions and
pretence of appealing to authority ; as indeed does
the art of writing. Where this art is unknown,
personal experience is almost alone available, and is
the peculiar prerogative of years. In half-civilized
life, old men have a monopoly of wisdom ; a coun
sellor and an aged man are synonymous terms. In
such a state, bare authority (aiirb; ?<p»)) is of course
more cogent, than when the experience of past ages
becomes available to the present; and when years
are necessary only to let the mind ripen, and not also
for a knowledge of facts. There will always be abun
dant reasons for treating with respect the judgments
of those older than ourselves ; but when it is noto
rious that there are old men on all sides of various
questions, it is fighting against nature and truth to
press the topic of authority, as though it could be
adapted to convince. In defect of all other means of
judgment, " Authority" will establish a strong pre
sumption ; and when we are coming to an opposite re
sult, it inculcates caution ; it enjoins a reconsideration
of the argument ; but after this, it has done its office,
i 2

172

ARGUMENT FROM AUTHORITY.

The disputatious use made of it to silence one
whom it cannot convince is the more unjustifiable,
because in most cases where it is so employed, the
means are wanting for testing the wisdom of him
to whom it appeals. In the arts and sciences, wisdom
is not very hard to test. All know that Cook was a
great navigator and Haller a great physiologist : but
whether a particular statesman or a particular divine
possessed wisdom proportional to his fame, is often
quite uncertain.
A reader of Aristotle is at first surprised at the
stress which he lays on the authority of lawgivers.
Probably this was occasioned by the peculiar circum
stances under which many codes of laws were be
lieved to have been received in Greece. In modern
Europe the law is generally the work of the stronger
party; under circumstances which would make it
an infatuation to appeal to legislation as the acme
of human wisdom. But the Greek legislators, such
as Lycurgus, Epimenides, Solon, Pythagoras, were
very generally private citizens, who were invited
to settle public affairs by a belief of their wisdom ;
and in most cases their decisions proved highly
satisfactory, so as to remain valid, by the sanction
of public opinion. It is therefore probable, that
whatever principles all these legislators held in com
mon, Aristotle considered to be not only the fruit of
the collective wisdom of philosophic minds, but also
an expression of the general good sense of the nation,
of which they were the organs.

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

173

Sect. IX.
VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.
There are two general topics for believing the
deposition of an informant: (1) because he (or it)
has hitherto (under like circumstances) told truth :
(2) because those who are most like him do generally
(under such circumstances) tell truth.
The former topic would cceteris paribus be the
stronger: and in regard to instruments of human
production is vastly so. Thus, if a sea captain is
testing his longitude with two chronometers; the
one is new, but was made by Earnshaw or Ramsden ;
the other has been tried before, and proved good ; he
would certainly rather believe the latter than the
former, in spite of the topic that " Most of Earnshaw's are good." In fact, no one would count much
on an unproved instrument, be the maker who he might.
So among men, the word of an Englishman would
gain more credit than that of a Hindoo, if both alike
were unknown; but if the veracity of the Hindoo
had been often proved, while no testimony could be
brought of the past veracity of the Englishman, the
Hindoo would be believed in preference.
But it is possible that the two instruments, whose
information is put in contrast, may be differently cir
cumstanced. That which has the higher character may
be more exposed to perturbing causes, (heat, wet, agi
tation, &c.) and on this account may be the less
believed ; unless it has previously been exposed to
similar trials, and proved true in spite of them. So

174

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

also in comparing the evidence of human witnesses,
one may be under temptations to falsehood, which
the other is not under ; as, when a man (of previous
good character) is accused of a crime, his denial adds
little to our confidence that he did not commit it.
If his character does not of itself persuade us that he
is innocent, neither does his denial.
Let us see how multiplied testimony affects a case.
The master of a ship finds his best chronometer
deviate considerably from three inferior ones ; which
three nearly agree with each other, the range of their
disagreement being considerably less than the devia
tion of the other from their mean time. He has no
means of accounting for their errors. Which of them
will he believe? I apprehend he will reason thus.
Whatever cause (as heat or agitation) should have
affected one of the three, would probably affect the
other two, and in the same way ; hence their agree
ment is no stronger argument than the testimony of
one; and the best instrument is to be believed, in
preference to the united testimony of the three. If
however he can in part account for their errors, the
case is altered. Suppose they have been all exposed
to increased heat, and the three worse instruments are
slower than the other : he may justly attribute the
slackening to the heat, and suppose the best instru
ment by the superiority of its construction to have
resisted the perturbing cause. But if the best instru
ment happened to be slowest of all, he would pro
bably suppose some accidental cause to have deranged
it ; and would now believe the three in preference.

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

175

For if accidental causes had deranged the three, and
not one uniformly acting cause, he could not expect
so near agreement between them.
Apply this to human evidence. The testimony of
one intelligent witness may outweigh that of three or
of three hundred, in cases where it is easy to suppose
a common cause to bias all of these last. Where there
is room for this to act, the weight of testimony is not
increased by multiplying witnesses. But where no
room for the supposition can be found, then the
weight of their testimony is increased with their
number, according to the doctrine of combined
chances.
Thus far we have shown the analogy that subsists
between trusting to the indications of an instrument,
and trusting to a man's testimony. But of course,
each investigation soon takes a separate path. The
philosopher or mechanic needs his own peculiar art
to help in judging of the goodness of a telescope or a
watch ; and a knowledge of human nature is requi
site for judging of human evidence. Thus Logic
may seem to borrow a chapter from Ethics. But the
knowledge wanting is not of a scientific kind; and, in
fact, details are needing that no system of Morals
could supply. Thus the man who would form a
useful member of an English jury, might turn out
a great blunderer in judging of Hindoo evidence.
I can only attempt a slight sketch of the topics
which force themselves on our consideration, in
approaching the subject of human evidence. We
may divide the case threefold, according as the wit

176

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

nesses have a bad character, a good character, or no
character at all.
■I. It is an old error in England, to suppose that
evidence ought not even to be taken from one who
bears a bad character for veracity. This is due
chiefly to old custom and to mistaken religion. One
would wish it were an equally respectable cause,
which so long led to the rejection of the evidence of
slaves in the English colonies !
But a skilful use may be made of the worst evi
dence, with proper pains. Indications of truth may
frequently be attained from two sources ; (1) the
manner, (2) the matter of the evidence.
First, the manner. None know so well as bar
risters, the value of a cross examination, when prac
tised, not so as to bully the witness, but to seek to
elicit truth. A judicious observer detects numberless
marks of simple honesty or of fraud, in the tones,
gestures, freedom of narration and of reply. The
very blunders of an honest witness under perplexing
questions, if they betray no substantial error, will
add to the conviction of his veracity, by showing
that he is not artful enough to preserve studied
consistency. Contrariwise, inconsistencies may ap
pear that indicate forgery. A man's belief in his
own story is often denoted by the emotion accom
panying it, if it be a matter personally and deeply
interesting : and the same even will apply to written
documents. I need not add, that few can with
advantage thus examine any but their fellowcountrymen, or persons with whom they are become as

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

177

it were naturalized. Thus also an inexperienced
reader might mistake the studied artifice of a rhe
torical writer, for the overflowings of real feeling.
Next, the matter. However ignorant, credulous,
inaccurate, or malicious, witnesses may be, the matter
testified may be such, as to convince us (or make it
highly probable) that they speak truth. 1°. It may
be a thing about which they could not have been
deceived. If it happened in their own family or
house, or beneath their own eyes: if it must have been
such as forcibly to impress the mind : it might then be
imputed to wilful lying, but not to carelessness.
2°. Perhaps they could not have forged the thing, if
ever so disposed ; as, (a) for want of knowledge, if
their story was false. Thus Herodotus alleges that the
Phenicians deserved no credit, who said that in sailing
down the Red Sea to go round Africa, they at last
had the Sun to their north. We, for this very rea
son, believe that they went, if not round Africa, yet
deep within the tropics. Again, Pytheas professed
to have explored the northern shores of Britain, and
found the island to be longer from north to south
than from east to west. Strabo explodes the whole
voyage as chimerical, and rebukes this idea : but
nothing goes farther with us to gain belief for him.
(/3) Sometimes we judge that they could not have
forged, if there are many witnesses, who seem to
have had no opportunity of collusion, or who seem
to be too many and too separated to conspire. Or
(y) while all other sort of forgery is impossible, we
may find direct proofs that there has been no con
spiracy. This is furnished by their discrepancies ^
i8

178

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

for if these be on the face of the narrative, such
would have been avoided, by any who wished to
pass off an untrue tale as true ; and if they are only
superficial, they need not impair the correctness of
other points. If many of the discrepancies disappear
on closer examination, this is a yet more decisive
mark of truth.—Yet in all these arguments, we need
to consider the possibility of a common source,
whence might be drawn that which several informants
have in common : in which case (if they have no
other known sources of knowledge) their authority
is no more than its authority. By way of illustra
tion, we may quote national traditions, legends, my
thological tales. The discrepancies generally prove
that there is no intended collusion, the agreements
prove a common origin, but not necessarily that that
common origin is truth of fact. Sometimes the basis
is truth, sometimes it is the fancy of an old poet,
and the character is but imaginary : else we must
believe endless tales about the gods and heroes of
Greece. But, 3°, The matter attested is sometimes
such as the witnesses would not have forged, if they
could. Either (a) because it was too refined and too
difficult for others to see. Thus Paley lays stress on
those coincidences between the Epistles of St. Paul
and the Acts of the Apostles, which are not found
without close attention, and which not one reader
in a thousand (perhaps no reader before Paley him
self) discovered. Such coincidences it is not worth
while to forge. (j3) Because there is no conceivable
end to be gained. Thus Niebuhr, while generally
distrusting Livy, puts great confidence in such sen

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

179

tences as these : " This year, a dictator was created
to drive a nail into the temple :"—" Under these
consuls, Fidense was invested, Crustumeria was taken,
Praeneste revolted from the Latins to the Romans."
For the author could not here have been led away
by rhetoric, party spirit, or other causes which bias
him; and apparently he must have copied these
condensed sentences from some old journal. A simi
lar topic (the very baldness and dryness of concise
narration; or rather registering of facts) recommends
the old English chroniclers as authentic historians ;
and to a very great extent marks the style of the Old
Testament history. (y) A third reason for believing
that the witnesses would not lie, is sometimes, be
cause the crime may be too atrocious. Perhaps they
will tell many lies, but not such a lie as this. Also
(8) it may be a thing discreditable or hurtful to them
selves, or against, their cause and party or preposses
sions. Thus we believe Livy, when he tells of the
Roman aristocracy assassinating a tribune, and so
proud of the crime, that those who did not participate
feigned to have had a hand in it ; while the historian
himself speaks of it with horror. We believe Cla
rendon, when he speaks to the discredit of the king's
cause and character : and the most incredulous of
men would believe the tales recorded by the Jewish
historians to the discredit of their own nation.
Such are the principal topics available, even when
we distrust ever so much the accuracy and veracity
of witnesses, and which are a fortiori applicable in
other cases.
II. Witnesses of high character. Good character

180

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

for veracity, is generally only relative to the matter
testified. As observed above, cases exist, where a
lie is so atrocious and so wanton a crime, that a
witness of indifferent character is thought incapable
of it. A very ordinary Englishman speaks truth,
when the fortune and life of another is at stake ; and
we demand no higher guarantee of his veracity, than
the negative one, that he has no interest in falsehood.
Doubtless there is such a thing as absolute veracity,
but it is only in regard to intimate friends that we
are often able to appreciate this ; and our testimony
to such a quality in them is not very cogent to
persuade others of it, because our very friendship
may have biassed us. Our conviction must depend,
(1) on an insight into his principles and sentiments ;
(2) on experience of his conduct. If there is in him
an elevation of soul, a hatred of meanness and con
cealment, a general uprightness and generosity, a
consistency of goodness which fears no investigation ;
if moreover it is based on a high principle of religion,
as in imitation of Him who cannot lie ; on the one
hand : on the other, if we have seen him submit to
trials and losses rather than violate truth ; and this,
in cases where the violation seemed practically harm
less, —where he had the precedent of others, perhaps
great or good men,—where it would not be thought
disgraceful by the world at large ;—or where truth
drew after it painful exposures or losses to those in
whom he was interested :—such are the elements on
which our opinion of his veraciousness will depend.
But not very much can rest on this one unsupported
topic, since a man's reputation is soon broken down,

VERACITY OP INFORMANTS.

181

if we lay too great a load on it. One marvellous
story (for instance) we may believe on his bare word:
but if he tell three or four, it is too much to bear
without collateral evidence. Again, the world is too
wicked and too suspicious to make it desirable to rest
much on the reputation of an individual : this is not
the way to get the tale believed. Some have so
loose principles, as to suspect all virtue of hypocrisy,
and believe that every man has his price. Them
selves perhaps accustomed to justify lying in " ex
treme cases," they are not sure whether the case in
question may not have been viewed as an " extreme
case" by the witness, much as pious frauds during
many ages of the Church. Besides; goodness ensures
only one element, the disposition to tell truth. Good
sense and soundness of mind, accuracy, caution,
sobriety, and other qualities, are often needed ; and
it can never be improper to look for some manifest
ation of these in the evidence itself.
It is then generally expedient to superadd, even in
the case of witnesses of the very best character,
topics borrowed from the other two heads. 1 proceed
therefore,
Thirdly, To those whom I have described as having
no character, and whose character is to be (if possible)
made out by us, by help of their own depositions.
Of course, if we succeed in this, we may afterwards
treat them as belonging to the heads already spoken
of.
A large majority of literary documents urgently
need to have their characters thus made out ; and
this is the most important part of the Art of Criti

182

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

cism. The actors and the writers have passed oft'
the stage of life ; we cannot seek their personal inter
course, nor gain access to their intimate friends ; we
cannot cross-examine them, nor use the ordinary
methods of investigating their veracity- But analo
gous methods are yet available. Litera scripta
manet; and we have ample time to try them. It
is not one nor twelve men that sit as judges over
them, but the whole body of the literati perhaps of
several nations, if their testimony be of weight and
extensive interest. The accumulated intellect of
many generations is sometimes made to bear on the
inquiry. A superficial reasoner may treat this with
contempt, as an extravagant and ridiculous expendi
ture of thought and pains, about what is for ever
past and gone : perhaps the experience of a great
book-maker, registered in sacred writ, may be quoted,
that " of making many books there is no end, and
much study is a weariness to the flesh." This pro
bably is a rebuke on literary pursuits, when made
an end in themselves, instead of a means to solid
advantage and instruction to the heart, as well as to
the head. Indeed it cannot be denied that in the Art
of Criticism, as in most antiquarian researches, there
is much to provoke ridicule from the ignorant. It
is largely built on apparent trifles, such as are those
minutias, which distinguish the dialect, the ortho
graphy, the characters, the writing materials of dif
ferent tribes and ages. These are as important in
such inquiries, as are the tones and manner of a
witness, or the minor details which juries often
so laboriously and commendably investigate. And

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

183

rightly viewing the subject, after allowing that undiscriminating zeal carries many antiquaries beyond
the mark, we yet must remember, that it is some
times only by the result that this is learned. If
we are severe in exacting that each separate course
of investigation shall answer the question, " Cui
bono?" beforehand, numerous useful inquiries will be
smothered, before they have time to bear fruit.
Those who reap the benefit of the researches of
laborious critics, are not always grateful for them,
nor sensible how valuable an office both to the world
and to the Church of Christ is performed by the
faithful and able antiquarian. If historical remains be
ill treated, if the respective value of different authorities
be not ascertained, falsehood usurps the place of
truth, a false color at least is given to facts, and the
study of history misleads rather than informs. If
due criticism of old documents be neglected, spuri
ous works are easily obtruded on us as genuine ; the
Scriptures themselves may be corrupted or corruptly
translated ; apocryphal books incorporated with it;
and in numerous ways the mind not of individuals
only, but of nations, may receive a bias dangerous
and mischievous.
After this digression, I proceed to present, in as
orderly a form as I am able, the principal heads of
examination. There seem to be four chief requisites
for the witness :
1°. Access to adequate sources of knowledge.
2°. Ability to use them with discrimination.
8°. Habit of accuracy.
4°. Disposition to tell truth.

184

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

1 °. His sources of knowledge. (a) If the witness
tells us what they are, we are sometimes able to
consider whether they are adequate. When Livy
tells that the documents of Roman History perished
in the conflagration of Rome by the Gauls, so that
he manifestly knew of no other source of knowledge
concerning the 365 years said to have preceded, than
tradition : it is for us to consider what is the value
of tradition. Moreover a man's own account of the
sources of his information will often betray lax
notions of evidence, credulity, and want of good
sense; or again, may show the opposite qualities.
(/3) If he does not tell us his authorities or means of
knowledge, we must try to conceive and invent
them ; else we might believe a man who should
write a history of the Moon. Thus one who pre
tends to know too much, is discredited. Ctesias
pretends to such^a minute knowledge of the affairs of
ancient India and Babylon, that perhaps this cause
alone would suffice to confute the whole as a romance.
Again, by contrast : when we set Thucydides's con
fessed inability to learn the numbers engaged and
the numbers slain in battles, some of which he wit
nessed ; against Livy's accurate acquaintance with
the same at remote periods ; we gain some insight
into the trustworthiness of the narratives.
Sometimes specimens may be had of the documents
relied on ; which forms a valuable check on the author.
The superstitious reverence gained in heathen lands
by priests and conjurors is connected with this topic.
Because of their obviously superior knowledge of
things visible, a large knowledge is also attributed

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

185

to them of things invisible. It is often very difficult
to the uninstructed, to apprehend what sources of
knowledge are " adequate" to the case in hand.
2°. Ability to use them. This must depend,
(a) upon general soundness of mind ; freedom from
credulity or incredulity : qualities displayed, partly in
treating the particular subject of evidence, but also
in numerous other ways. Some are credulous on
special subjects, but of sound mind on others : as,
probably, John Wesley was credulous about ghosts
and spiritual influence. Herodotus was credulous as
to stories reported to him, (in part through a con
sciousness how many marvels unknown to him the
world contained,) but is a very sound and competent
witness of all which came under his own senses.
Numerous other causes produce Credulity or Incre
dulity, which I shall have presently to name as
affecting the disposition to tell truth : since the
same cause which makes men unwilling to tell,
makes them unwilling to believe; and conversely.
(|3) Again, the ability to use good information often
depends largely upon previous knowledge, perhaps
of the language of some people, their habits, laws, &c.
There are reasons for valuing a " history of Eng
land" written by a Frenchman, especially those parts
of our history concerning which party spirit biasses
natives. But herein we should purchase exemption
from that bias, by a certain sacrifice; as numerous
other points would probably be mistaken by the
foreigner. Allowing that the foreigner might be a
good compiler of history, we should expect his
annals or journal of his " own times" spent among

186

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

us to be full of mistakes; and undoubtedly travellers
do make great blunders from unavoidable ignorance.
(y) In cases of scientific facts, scientific knowledge is
generally requisite to record them with accuracy :
insomuch that the description of any disease drawn
up by an unprofessional observer, would seldom be
instructive to a physician. Yet natural intelligence
and aptitude may go a great way.
8°. Habit ofAccuracy. This is brought to the test,
sometimes by precise and definite trial, sometimes
by minor marks, (a) The most obvious thing is to
examine a writer's agreement with himself, not only
where he is likely to study accuracy, but in lesser
matters. Thus when Livy describes the Romans as
fighting in legionary armour and order, prior to the
time when this armour and order was, by his own
account as well as that of others, introduced, we see
that he is less accurate than modern novelists.
(/3) Sometimes we are able to bring the matter into
comparison with personal or recent examination. The
credit of Herodotus has in this way much risen ; as
the state of modern Egypt, and the caravan stages
in Africa, and much that is recently learned of
barbarous tribes in regions described by him, agree
far more nearly with facts of modern research than
could have been supposed. To compare the dis
tances of places mentioned by Herodotus or Xenophon with modern measured distances, throws light
on the sort of accuracy to be expected from them in
other such cases. (y) The consistency of a witness
with the testimony of other approved witnesses will
be examined when possible. Thus in describing the

VERACITY OF INFORMANT?.

187

march of Hannibal over the Alps, Polybius describes
a particular place as " wholly bare of trees :" while
Livy, in other respects closely following him, here
inserts the tale of their splitting the rocks with
vinegar, " after cutting down lofty trees," and burn
ing them. (8) Consistency with what is natural and
with a priori probability, is a topic not to be
omitted, when treating of the marks of accuracy :
though sometimes it cannot be used. The most
unlikely stories are sometimes true ; and sometimes
that which at first sight is the more likely version
of a tale, is nothing but an arbitrary correction.
Griesbach has much used the topic, that a reading
which is unlikely to be invented, because it is so
hard or uncouth, is more probably true than an
easier reading. But this principle may be pushed
so far as to violate all common sense, (s) If inaccu
racies be detected, it is well to consider whether they
are in connexion with a rhetorical spirit, love of fine
writing, and tendency to exaggerate when it will
turn a period or point a tale. If so, this gives
insight into the peculiar kinds of inaccuracy we are
to expect in the writer, (r) Again, the inaccuracies
may result from false notions current in any age and
country. Belief in witchcraft, magic, or other super
stitions, not only produce credulity, but lead to a very
inaccurate statement or distortion of facts. (?) Laziness
may be detected in special cases, such as to infuse a
suspicion that the same cause has acted largely.
Thus when Livy quotes certain " linen books'11 in a
library at Rome, by hearsay, merely because he
would not take the trouble of going to examine

188

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

them, it is argued that he has probably much neg
lected the sources of information really open to him.
(>j) The peculiarities of individuals may also be
studied. Thus in Copyists, sometimes carelessness
predominates, sometimes servility: nor is it always
easy to distinguish them ; for the servile copyist
purposely and sedulously adopts the error of his
predecessor. But when a class of Copyists are fairly
suspected of servility, (as the Jewish,) a gross error
ought to be imputed to this cause, when it exists in
many MSS. A slight error found in many MSS. is
fairly attributable to the author. Some copyists
have a trick of correcting, (the opposite of servility,)
carried far beyond what they had any right to think
slips of the pen.
4°. Disposition to tell truth. This depends partly
on a man's principles, absolutely ; and partly on his
bias, in particular cases.
Principles. («) Some, like Plutarch, give us to
understand, that the chief object of their tale is not
the truth of it, but the moral : a principle perfectly
akin to that of pious frauds. When any writer,
like St. Chrysostom', defends falsehood for the good
of the Church and for other good ends ; he of course
destroys his own character for veracity, and in a
measure, the character of all who seem likely to be
influenced by similar principles. ((3) Some, like Thucydides, exhibit naturally and unconstrainedly, on
fitting occasions, such just sentiments and such a
love of truth, as greatly to prepossess us in favor of
their veracity : especially when this is joined with
Y In his book concerning the Priesthood.

VERACITY OF INFORMAXT8.

189

a discriminating moral judgment on most points.
(y) Some, like Sallust, draw overstrained pictures, and
are evidently aiming to act the philosopher and
censor of morals. This detracts from his authority,
especially since his own profligacy is well known.
Nearly the same may be said of Juvenal. They
doubtless wilfully draw as black a picture as they are
able. (8) Habitual reverence for a certain authority
is a matter closely to be watched over; since, while it
affects the medium through which every thing is
seen, both coloring and distorting facts; its action is
so uniform and tranquil, and the picture resulting is
often so consistent with itself, that suspicion of the
unfairness will possibly not enter the mind of him
who accepts the testimony. This head principally
includes what is also called a Religious Bias, or a
Scientific Bias : yet as it is perhaps systematically,
knowingly, and even professedly adopted, I have
classed it with the Principles of action.
Bias. Under this head I must include the causes
which produce Credulity and Incredulity, as well as
those which produce wilful falsehood or suppression ;
because the two things so run into each other, as to
be hardly separable.
We may have reason to suspect, (a) Personal In
terest or Credit, to be lost or gained. (/3) Fear of
offending those in power, or desire of pleasing them.
The air of a court grievously corrupts truth. Many
even love to please and flatter the great for the mere
sake of the thing itself, or from inveterate habit.
This we may call Courtier-like Spirit. (y) National

190

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

Partialities. Here we may contrast the Greek histo
rians, full of the crimes of their own nation, with
Livy, who always argues a case to prove the Romans
in the right, who seems to think no other nations to
compare to them in virtue, and ceases to extol their
excellencies only in times too recent to allow of gross
fiction. (8) Family Friendships. Polybius is un
biassed, except when treating of his patrons, the
Scipio family, and perhaps the Achaean towns, his
native state. What is called Esprit de Corps will
rank under the same head. (e) Party Spirit or
Faction, is a stronger passion, often inducing a
perversion of truth that at first looks like deepseated malice. But as it acts intensely only on
particular occasions, and betrays itself by its incon
sistencies, it is not so formidable an enemy to truth
as undue reverence to some one authority. (?) The
Moral Temperament of the author is sometimes not
to be overlooked ; often depending on the school in
which he has been trained : whether gloomy or
cheerful, severe or mild. Nor must we omit to
mention the Love of the Marvellous and romantic.
(ij) There is also a Bias resulting from an excited
state of mind, closely connected with the last head ;
and which is most delusive when it overspreads a
whole age or nation. Thus the Greeks at the close
of the great Persian invasion were so possessed with
overwrought feeling, that vast exaggerations may
have passed for realities.
On hearing so large a recital of causes which bias
testimony and distort the truth, it may seem as though

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

191

nothing could be depended on. But they are only so
many perturbing forces, the power of which generally
ranges within narrow limits. When we have access to
original testimony, it is comparatively seldom that false
testimony is capable of assuming great plausibility :
or if at all, it is on the less important subjects and
times. As it is with the errors of instruments and of
observations, so with the errors of human witnesses.
When multiplied, their tendency is to neutralize each
other ; since not all are biassed one way. Often too,
the existence of some bias is the very thing which
above all accredits the testimony ; if it seems to be a
concession extorted by truth. The chief difficulty is
in secular perturbations, (to speak as an astronomer
might;) when a whole age has imbibed the same
spirit, or even a succession of ages reaching down
to our own days has been infected with a common
bias, leading to a detracting and calumniating of
those, whose writings have not come down to us, and
whose lives are known to us only by their adver
saries. A fallen dynasty meets not much mercy from
the historians of the triumphant party, nor persons
■who have been named Heretics from a universally
triumphant Church. Large allowance is often requi
site, where we cannot hear both sides; and sometimes
it is right to suspend the judgment entirely.
Lastly, it would be very unjust to regard a person's
testimony as invalid, because he may be supposed
subject to a particular bias. Every person is liable
to stand in positions where a bias may be naturally
suspected, and especially those who have most oppor

192

VERACITY OF INFORMANTS.

tunities of access to information in many affairs.
Yet if it have been shown in particular cases, that
the bias has not been permitted to interfere with
truth, we do not allow suspicion to be thrown on
his veracity in other cases, on the mere ground of the
possibility of it so acting.

THE END.

BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD.

This book should be returned to
the Library on or before the last date
stamped below.
A fine is incurred by retaining it
beyond the specified time.
Please return promptly.

Wwvwww^^

