PRODROMUS, 



AN INQUIRY 



FIRST PRINCIPLES OF REASONING; 



AN ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN MIND. 



BT 

SIR GRAVES CHAMNEY HAUGHTON, 

K.H., M.A., F.R.S., &c. &c. 
MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE, &c. &c. 



HI. I, MEN ARE AS THE TCIXUR, IN WHAT THEY DO NOT UNDERSTAND." BVRI* 



LONDON : 
W". H. ALLEN & CO., LEADENHALL STREET. 



MDCCCXXX1X. 



111 




LONDON : PRINTED BY RICHARD WATTS, 

C rowii Court, Temple Itir. 



C". c /f 

( 



CONTENTS. 



DEDICATION. 
PREFACE. 



REFLECTION. 
GENERAL NOTE. 



INTRODUCTION . p. 3 

OF THINGS 

OF STATES 11 

OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS . 50 

Of Entity and Quiddity 50 

Of Habit, Habitude, Custom, and Use .... 57 

Of Knowleilye and Wisdom 58 

Of Principle . GO 

Of Fortune, Chance, and Providence . . , . . Go 

Of Matter, Substance, and Body Go 

Of Nature GO 

Of Necessity 72 

Of Infinity 73 

Of Individuality 76 

Of Relation (Abstract] 77 

Of Relation (Personal] 79 

Of Correlation (Abstract and Personal] .... 81 

Of Quality 83 

Of Property 90 

Of Peculiarity 91 

Of Quality, Property, and Peculiarity 92 

Of Cause and Effect 94 

Of Reason and Consequence 127 

Of Motive and Act, and Motive and Result . . . 134 

Of Origin and End 1 35 



CONTENTS. 

) 



OF STATES 

OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTI- V continued : 



CULAR TERMS ) 

Of Agency and Act p. 135 

Of Source and Product 136 

Of Causation and Causality 1 37 

Of Matter ; Space, Time, Movement, and Force . . 142 

Of a Body, and a Space 143 

Of a Time 146 

Of a Movement 150 

Of a Force 151 

Of Power 154 

Of Motion 161 

Of Form 162 

Of Number 165 

Of Quantity 171 

Of Weight 172 

Of Magnitude 172 

Of Proportion 174 

OP SCIENTIFIC REASONING 175 

Of the Laws of Nature 176 

Of Attraction 177 

Of Attractive and Repulsive Forces 179 

Of Affinity 183 

Of the Vis Inertise, $c 184 

Of the Vis Vitae, &lt;^c 187 

OF THE MIND 190 

Of Sensation, Consciousness, and Intelligence . , 191 

Of the Faculties 194 

Of Reason 197 

Of Insanity 197 

Of Ideas 198 

Of Abstract Ideas 205 

Of the Association of Ideas 205 



CONTENTS. 

OF STATES-continued: 

OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES ... p. 208 

Plato s 210 

Aristotle s 211 

Gotama s 215 

Jina s 216 

Zoroaster s 217 

Locke s 219 

Kant s 221 

F. W. Schelling s 233 

CONCLUSION 235 

APPENDIX : 

NOTE (A) 239 

NOTE (B) 240 

NOTE (C) 251 

NOTE (D) 253 

NOTE (E) 256 

NOTE (F) 258 

NOTE (G) 263 



TO 
THE EIGHT HONOURABLE 

THE EARL OF MUNSTER, F.R.S. 

CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE, 



MY DEAR LORD, 

THE warm interest which your Lordship has 
shown in promoting the advancement of literature, 
by your first establishing, and subsequently foster 
ing with the greatest care, a Society for translating 
and publishing inedited Oriental MSS., which has 
made your name known throughout this country and 
the rest of the civilized world, leads me, in addition 
to the many obliging attentions I have received 
from yourself during an intercourse of several 
years, to place under the protection of your Lord 
ship s name the following Observations on the 
nature of language the noblest instrument at the 



DEDICATION. 

disposal of man ; and to which he is as much in 
debted for his privilege as a reasoning being, as 
he is to Providence for having made him a rational 
creature. I am induced to hope, that the public at 
large may be roused to feel the high importance of 
the subject, as well as the value of correct notions 
wi^h regard to it in physical science ; and that 
every man of reflection may become aware of the 
true nature of that upon which, as the adjunct of 
reason, is founded the moral excellence of the human 
race. 

I remain, 

My Dear Lord, 

With every sentiment of respect and regard, 
Your Lordship s 

Very devoted humble servant, 

GRAVES C. HAUGHTON. 



PREFACE. 



THIS little work must not be mistaken for an idle 
disquisition about words. So far from this being 
the case, its object is, to consider the very founda 
tion of human reasoning, and, consequently, of 
human knowledge. The current of metaphysics 
runs remarkably slack at present in this country ; 
and perhaps the occasion is only the more favour 
able for sounding the depth of the abyss, and dis 
covering the amount of its utility to mankind. 
Whether a period of the world so peculiarly de 
voted to pleasure and the practical business of life 
is one fitted for fixing the attention of the minds 
of men upon their own misconceptions, will be best 
learnt from experiment : but should it turn out, 
that they are so absorbed in their devotion to party 
politics, railways, steam-engines, sonatas, and secta 
rian controversy, as to preclude all other subjects, 
these pages must, of course, share the fate of every 



11 PREFACE. 

thing produced out of season. In that case, they 
must wait for another revolution of the cycle, before 
they may be read. It is much more natural that 
mankind should prefer what brings them present 
applause, without much labour of thought, than 
devote themselves to studies that are in some 
measure against the ordinary tendencies of their 
minds : though some, like the good man in Moliere, 
who was so surprised when informed that he had 
been all his life talking prose, will, perhaps, be 
astonished to learn, that, though they absolutely 
detest the name of Metaphysics, they never draw 
an inference, however obvious, that is not the result 
of a metaphysical process, equalling in difficulty 
the generality of the remarks that I have prepared 
for their consideration. 

I have endeavoured, notwithstanding, to make 
what I had to say as simple and clear as was in my 
power ; and I have, in consequence, sacrificed ele 
gance to precision and perspicuity. 

The English are, in an eminent degree, gre 
garious thinkers ; and whatever is catered for their 
understandings is generally taken up, or neglected, 
by all. Should curiosity, however, lead any one to 
open this volume who has never turned his atten 
tion to metaphysical pursuits, let him not throw it 
down in despair ; as it is particularly intended for 



PREFACE. m 



the relief of those whose tender consciences may 
occasionally accuse them of being ignorant of so 
important a branch of knowledge. Now, the 
perusal of this little work will save him a world of 
thought, and also of regret, for his ignorance. This 
will surely be a strong inducement to the lover of 
truth to persevere in reading it through. But if 
he be of a bold and inquisitive turn of mind, he 
will find in it a guide, by the assistance of which 
he may explore all the dark and mysterious laby 
rinths of metaphysics. Let him, however, beware 
how he separates himself from it, while led on by 
the fascination of the moment ; for such are the 
charms of some of those exquisite specimens &lt; 
misapplied genius, that he may utterly lose himself, 
and stray far from all human relief. Should such 
a result take place, his case is desperate ; 
having no means of extricating himself, he will be 
reduced to the situation of Milton s fallen angels, 
who are represented as reasoning on these very 
subjects 

And found no end, in wand ring ma/es lost." 

Under every disappointment in this country, I 
feel I have still an unfailing resource in the truth- 
inquiring spirit of Germany ; and I do not despair 
of a patient hearing from its philosophers, ever 



IV PREFACE. 



though I do not bow the neck to their metaphysical 
Baals and Molochs ; and may appear before them 
with the disadvantage of having been rejected by 
the sanctimonious worshippers of the golden calf, 
at home. The motto of Germany is FIAT JUSTITIA, 
RUAT CCELUM ; and I therefore feel confident, that 
if I have discovered any thing useful, it will be 
accepted in a friendly spirit, and gain an immediate 
hearing : for its literary courts are always open ; 
its judges on their seats ; and it matters not whe 
ther the appellant be one of the sons of the father 
land, or a barbarian ; as he will, in either case, be 
judged impartially, and obtain the same justice as 
a native of the soil, even though he may have 
come, like another Anacharsis, from the Scythian 
wastes of France or England. 

Should any one be of opinion that the truths I 
have brought to light have been previously dis 
covered, he should point out where the various 
topics have been discussed with system, or investi 
gated with the exactness and fulness they deserve. 
He should remember, that, in this instance, as in 
many others of human knowledge, the remark of 
Solomon must, from the greater age and activity of 
the world, gain fresh strength every day. If it 
were true in his time, that " there is nothing new 
under the sun," it must be much more so after the 



PREFACE. V 

lapse of two thousand five hundred years ; and 
during a period that has been stored, by the inven 
tion of printing, with the memorials of other men s 
thoughts, to an extent that would have formed at 
least one exception to the remark of that wise 
monarch. 

The mention of Solomon s name recalls to my 
mind a story relating to him, that is current among 
Mahomedan nations, and which, I think, will help 
to illustrate the design of the following observa 
tions. Pious Moslems are of opinion, that much 
of the glory of the Hebrew sovereign s reign re 
sulted from the great ability and skill of his prime- 
minister, Asaph ; whose knowledge of the occult 
sciences was so profound, that it enabled him to 
control the gins (genii), a race remarkable for their 
stupidity and malevolence. The fear these beings 
had of Asaph was such, that during his lifetime 
they refrained from every act of annoyance to man 
kind. Solomon, however, was resolved that his 
subjects should continue to benefit by the terror 
which his vizier had inspired ; and, on Asaph s 
death, he had him embalmed, and then placed in the 
treasury ; where he was dressed, and set up, resting 
on his staff. The gins, who were ignorant of his 
death, stole from time to time to the treasury, and 
peeped in slyly at the window, to see what their 



VI PREFACE. 

tyrant was about ; when observing him always in a 
vigilant attitude, they invariably fled, lest he should 
punish them for their impertinent audacity. In 
this state of ignorance they remained for a long 
time : but, at last, it happened that some white 
ants, so well known in the East for their destructive 
ravages, found their way into the treasury; and 
attacking Asaph s staff, he fell upon the ground : 
upon which the gins, finding out the trick that had 
been practised upon them, began to vex and 
harass the human race, as they had been in the 
habit of doing before. Now, reader, what is the 
whole host of metaphysicians that have formerly 
existed, but so many Asaphs, merely preserved for 
the purpose of imposing upon mankind ? and what 
are all their abstract words, but the staves upon 
which they rested their arguments while living, 
and which still continue to prop up their systems 
now they are dead ? and, finally, what are these 
few pages, but so many white ants, that will, I trust, 
destroy their props, and let those arch deceivers fall 
to the earth, never to be set up again, as bugbears 
to our race ? 

To the judicious sentiment of Locke, which is 
contained in the Reflection placed at the head of 
the following remarks, I wish to draw the reader s 
particular attention ; because it is not merely most 



PREPACK. Vll 

just, but, occurring as it does at the close of his 
great work, it seems to have loomed upon his mind 
as the consummation of all his speculations, and 
even to be a condemnation of the work itself, or at 
least to intimate that he had arrived at a convic 
tion that language itself was the parent of much of 
the error it was employed to expose. The opinion, 
therefore, of so masterly a mind is worthy of the 
highest consideration, and I have accordingly given 
it its present conspicuous place : for though it ap 
pears exactly shaped to suit the following observa 
tions, it did not present itself to me till after they 
were written ; and the same remark applies equally 
to the quotation with which this work concludes. 

Having been long engaged on a work which is 
intended to demonstrate the necessary connexion, 
relation, and dependence of Physics, Metaphysics, 
and Morals, I found the whole of these topics a 
perfect chaos, from the deceptive character of lan 
guage ; and I felt, accordingly, that there was no 
chance of giving a profitable direction to my labour, 
without bestowing a thorough consideration upon 
that indispensable instrument of thought. The 
following remarks were accordingly written by way 
of preliminary observations. As it may be some 
time before that work is ready, I have thought it 
as well to send forth this little messenger, to ascer- 



Vlll PREFACE. 

tain what degree of chance exists for its meeting 
with a favourable reception. It is my hope that I 
shall be able to lead the reader 

" Through Nature, up to Nature s God ; " 

and bring home to him, with irresistible convic 
tion, the inconsistencies and absurdities of mate 
rialism. With this view, I have laboured to clear 
away the rubbish that has been heaped up so high 
from antiquity to the present time, as scarcely to 
allow us more than a glimpse of truth. Berkeley 
has well said, that " we first raise a dust, and then 
complain we cannot see : " but he neglected to analyse 
the nature of this dust, or mankind would have 
been in possession of the means of laying it, when 
ever it clouded their vision. 

Should any unforeseen circumstance prevent the 
accomplishment of my entire plan, I feel I shall not 
have lived in vain, if the completion of this portion 
of it shall help to liberate The Human Understand 
ing from some of its strongest bonds of self-delusion 
and absurdity. 



PRODROMUS 



REFLECTION. 



" THE consideration, then, of Ideas and Words, as the great instru 
ments of knowledge, makes no despicable part of their contemplation, 
who would take a view of human knowledge in the whole Extent 
of it. And, perhaps, if they were distinctly weighed, and duly con 
sidered, they would afford us another sort of Logic and Critic, than 
what we have been hitherto acquainted with." 

LOCKK S Essay concerning Human Understanding, 
Book IV. Ch. xx. 4. 



GEN KKAr, NOTE. 



THE following disquisitions are strictly confined to the objective 
view of nature. 




INTRODUCTION. 

1. WERE we to hear of an astronomer who should 
place full reliance on his observation of the stars, 
though he had never verified his instruments, nor 
depended for their verification on a competent 
assistant, we should not merely be extremely sur 
prised, but reject with contempt the results of his 
labours. Nay, sensible men would even require that 
a scientific observer should be well acquainted with 
the principle upon which such instruments were 
constructed, and assure himself that no possible 
cause of error lay in so essential a point. But, if we 
are thus particular in the means of obtaining accu 
racy in the results of physical inquiries, it is strange 
that we are so indifferent and negligent in the 
examination and verification of the only instrument 
we can employ in philosophical inquiry ; that is, in 
ascertaining the value and scope of the words we 
reason with. The cause is simply, I believe, that, 
as we have employed language by rote from infancy 
upwards, and have always depended upon it in the 
common routine business of life, we are led on, 
gradually, to use it in higher matters ; till at last we 
place such reliance upon it, that we should almost 

B 2 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

be considered insane to doubt its general accuracy. 
It is my object, however, to show, that partly from 
disdain for such investigations, and partly from their 
supposed difficulty, we have proceeded in a round 
of error, till at last we have, by our neglect, arrived 
at conclusions so irreconcileable with common sense, 
that the mass of mankind regard with something of 
scorn the aerial castles of metaphysics. And, if the 
labours of the mathematician meet with better suc 
cess, we must rather attribute it to the certainty 
that attends his calculations, when the data are right, 
than to any means he possesses of avoiding error in 
his reasoning : it will be found however, as might 
be expected, that the moment he theorizes, he falls 
into the same inconsistencies as the metaphysician. 
The analytic chemist, too, will be seen to be in greater 
difficulties than the mathematician, whenever he 
attempts to reason on the invaluable facts his experi 
ments and acumen bring to light ; inasmuch as he 
has to account for the most mysterious results, in 
words, which are, to him, only so many counters, of 
which he has not previously fixed either the relative 
or absolute value. We have acted with regard to 
language as the alchymists did with respect to mi 
neral productions we have made use of it in a gross 
way ; and if we have been able to make any dis 
coveries in philosophy by its help, it is more owing 
to chance than system. But I believe, that if we 
imitate the chemists of our own times, we shall arrive 



INTRODUCTION. f) 

at results altogether new and unexpected : it, is 
only by analysis that we can hope to discover truth ; 
and it is solely by that process that chemistry has 
taken its station as an exact science, next in order 
to astronomy. 

2. I trust I shall be able to render intelligible, 
to every person of ordinary education and capacity, 
what I feel to be of such great importance. The 
truth has been often seen by glimpses ; but I am 
not aware that any one has undertaken to give a 
definite and comprehensive view of the subject ; 
and far less has any one attempted to solve the 
enigma,, easy as I believe it to be. It is therefore 
my intention to make language give evidence against 
itself, and render up its secret to compel it to 
confess the manifold impositions it practises on the 
human understanding, and to acknowledge, that, 
notwithstanding all its disguises, and its supposed 
riches, every word may be shown to mean nothing 
more than THING, or STATE ; and that even the last 
of these two terms is a mere sound a symbol 
boldly invented by the intellect 1 , for the purpose of 
reasoning. I shall enter upon the consideration of 
these two classes of words, after a few preliminary 
remarks. 

( ) The term intellect is uniformly employed, throughout these 
pages, for the thinking agent, or self. See the remarks on the 
Intellect, 158. 



G INTRODUCTION. 

3. All words are but of two kinds ; to which 
the terms Concrete* and Abstract have been given. 
The first class comprehends the names of all objects 
that come under the cognisance of one or more of 
the five senses ; that is, all which we can taste, touch, 
smell, hear, or see. Whatever, therefore, is not to be 
distinguished by any of our senses, nor derived by 
indubitable inference such as, God, Soul, and 
Power 3 is called Abstract. This subdivision points 
out with accuracy the mode in which this investiga 
tion should be pursued : and I shall, accordingly, 
commence with the consideration of Concrete Terms, 
or those words which designate real things ; that is, 
things perceived by the senses, and those we de 
rive by indubitable inference 4 . It might at first ap 
pear, that the expression Concrete and Abstract, 
having a scholastic air, might be altogether replaced 
with advantage by ( Conceptions and Perceptions; the 
latter having the great advantage of being referrible, 
by our intelligence, to the verbs to conceive and to 
perceive: but, though these are undoubtedly better 

( 2 ) I limit the word Concrete here to nouns that imply the names 
of real things; and I except, for my present purpose, all adjectives: 
yet I believe the whole of this class of words, not derived from 
verbs, to have been originally the names of things ; just as we now 
employ rose, pink, copper, &c. for the names of colours. 

( *) For the peculiar sense in which the word Power is here 
employed, see 123130. 

( 4 ) The reader will find in 165, the reason why I have not in 
this place alluded to Ideas. 



INTRODUCTION. 



for all familiar purposes, the former are not without 
their use, as being more comprehensive. For in 
stance, under Concrete we can include both what 
we perceive, and what w^e infer, as being both ma 
terial and immaterial ; such as, Bodies, as well as 
God, Soul, or Power; but this cannot be said of 
Perception. Yet, if we make this exception, we 
shall find Perception and Conception the more use 
ful and significant terms ; and I shall therefore gene 
rally use them, from preference, throughout this 
work. As the point of view, in which these two sets 
of terms are employed, is quite different, we shall 
find, that if we attempt to include such immaterial 
things as God, Soul, or Power under Perceptions or 
Conceptions, it must be under the last, as they are 
only discovered by inference ; for all Inferences, 
Phrases, Opinions, Conjectures, Notions, Proposi 
tions, Statements, Arguments, &c. ( 30.) are strictly 
Conceptions. It is, therefore, worthy of remark, 
that the term Conception has here the advantage 
over that of Abstract Terms ; and, thus, more than 
balances that possessed by Concrete terms over Per 
ception. Both sets of terms will, therefore, be found 
occasionally preferable the one to the other. Con 
ception admirably represents both Abstract Terms, 
as well as the Inferences, Phrases, Opinions, &c. 
which have been just enumerated ; in short, every 
tiling we have already heard or conceived of our 
selves by the means of language, and which are trea- 



INTRODUCTION. 



sured up by memory ; a proof how much of the 
highest intelligence depends upon this faculty, which 
is the very basis of thought, and without the posses 
sion of which, in a high degree, no man can shine as 
a just and profound reasoner. An examination, 
indeed, of the most original productions of the 
human mind will show how much they are depen 
dent upon preconceptions 5 : and if this is the case 
with them, the discourses of ordinary minds will 
appear to be little more than parrot-like repetitions, 
slightly modified for the occasion. 

(s) See the Note to 85. 



OF THINGS. 

4. I have already said, that Concrete Terms 
relate solely to what is made known to us by our 
senses, or by indubitable inference. But, besides 
these, there are many sensations which we are 
almost invariably in the habit of mistaking for the 
things which produce them. Thus the sensation 
of heat is commonly mistaken for the something 
which excites it ; and this is fully felt and acknow 
ledged by chemists, and other writers on natural 
philosophy, who have consequently been obliged to 
introduce the word caloric, to prevent the confusion 
of thought that must follow from the use of the 
word heat in two opposite senses : but no one ap 
pears to suspect that the same kind of mistake is 
made with regard to light, though such is the fact. 
All the beautiful illumination, seeming to be caused 
throughout nature by the sun, is but a sensation ; 
and if there were no eyes in the world, every thing 
would be dark ; yet that which produced the sensa 
tion of light in us would still remain. When we 
say we see a light, or a flame, or a colour, we make 
the same mistake as the person who thinks heat and 
caloric to be one and the same thing. So does he, 
who supposes that what makes the air vibrate is the 



10 OF THINGS. 

sound he hears ; and, he who thinks that the odour 
he smells is identical with that which passed from 
the flower he holds in his hand, or that the taste he 
relishes so much is in the morsel he is pressing 
against his palate, falls into a similar error. These 
subjects are merely alluded to here, that the reader 
may not commit the mistake of classifying under 
Concrete Terms, what are really Abstract: for 
Sights, Tastes, Smells, Sounds, and Feelings, are all 
Abstract Terms ; and the things that produce these 
effects on our senses, whether they be material 
or immaterial, are alone represented by Concrete 
Terms. This is as much as I believe it is necessary 
to say on the subject of what is Concrete ; and I 
shall therefore proceed to the next division of the 
inquiry, namely, to Abstract Terms, which are all 
included under the word State. 



OF STATES. 

5. Every Abstract word implies either a State 
or an Action. Thus, goodness is the State of a man 
who is goocl^ that is, a good-mart s-state ; and vibration 
and movement are Actions of bodies which vibrate 
and move. If any one wished to generalize further, 
he might say that all Abstract Words imply a State ; 
for we can speak of a state of action, and so talk of 
THE STATE of vibration, or THE STATE of movement of 
a body, still the distinction will be found to be use 
ful in practice, as will be seen when I show what 
Abstract Words are in reality : but I must first recal 
the reader s attention to the way he has been in the 
habit, of employing them. He will remember, that 
he talks of goodness, virtue., and other Abstract States, 
as something as palpable as the class of Concrete 
words already alluded to ; and he accordingly says, 
when occasion requires, IN goodness, FROM goodness, 
BY goodness, &c., just as he would employ IN, FROM, 
BY, &c. in speaking of a house, or any other tangible 
object : though I shall shortly prove to him, that this 
indispensable and necessary use of language, in the 
common business of life, is the root of the most 
glaring fallacies, when we have occasion to reason on 
the fundamental principles of things in general. 



12 OF STATES. 

6. Having thus far introduced the reader to 
this branch of the inquiry, I wish to inform him, 
that it is my intention to show, that though we can 
TALK of goodness, virtue, blackness, whiteness, &c., we 
cannot THINK of them. If any one will take such a 
word as goodness, and decompose it, he will find it 
to contain good and ness. If he will do the same 
for other compound words implying a State, he 
will always find that he has an adjective, and an 
unmeaning termination 6 . In a similar manner, any 
word implying an Action, such as movement, may be 
reduced to the verb move, and to ment, a syllable of 
no sense. Hence it is clear that any word implying 
a State is derived from an adjective, or a verb neu 
ter ; and every one signifying an Action, from a verb 
active. Nearly every word in English ending in 
tion is derived from a Latin verb, and the termina 
tion tio 7 , which is void of sense. We thus see that 

( 6 ) The apparent significancy of such terminations as ness, ship, 
hood, head, &c., will, if they are referred back to their original forms, 
be found to be quite delusive : for instance, ship does not mean a ves 
sel, nor head the upper part of the body ; and so of the rest. See this 
subject further pursued in NOTE (A). 

(") Some will perhaps prefer restricting the termination to io, in 
stead of tio ; as the abstract nouns formed with this affix always incline 
in their formation to that of the past participle, and not to the present 
tense. For example, secretio, actio, &c., are more connected with se- 
cretus, actus, &c., than with secerno, ago, &c. The reader can choose 
which form he likes best : my object, on the present occasion, is not 
with etymology, but simply the elucidation of a general principle of 
language, for which I endeavour to find the readiest means. 



OF STATES. 13 

these States and Actions have no existence, except 
as words ; and, consequently, that there are no such 
things as abstract ideas, but only abstract words. 
Did Abstract Ideas exist in the mind before such 
terms were brought into use, we must equally admit 
that it had in it the Ideas of saltness, sandiness, 
sponginess, ropiness, and similar words, before we 
knew of salt, sand., sponge, rope, or any other thing 
we may in time discover, or fabricate. Should this 
assertion, that we only employ Abstract Words, and 
have no Abstract Ideas, create a doubt, let any one 
try to form to himself the Idea of saltness, sandiness, 
sponginess, or ropiness, without any reference to salt, 
sand, sponge, or rope : and, if he still fancy that he 
can, let him try to conceive the Idea or image of 
these qualities, without calling to mind the sounds 
that express them, or the things from which they 
have been abstracted. He will, I believe, discover 
this to be impossible : and, to prove that there is 
no fallacy at the bottom of the assertion, let him, 
by way of contrast, try to call to mind a house, a 
horse, a dog, or any other object that has been made 
known to him by one or more of his senses ; and let 
him do this without any reference to the names 
they bear in his own or in any other language ; and 
he will, I think, find that he can do it without any 
difficulty. His dreams, too, may be called in to 
the proof of this fact. In them, he sees and feels 
such things as he may have seen and felt in his 



II OF STATES. 

waking moments ; but his Abstract Ideas have dis 
appeared, though no one will deny but that it is 
quite possible to dream of salt, sand, a sponge, a 
rope, &c. It is no doubt very startling, to have this 
fact brought home to us, perhaps for the first time ; 
nor can such a rooted prejudice that is, an opinion 
founded before judgment has been exerted be at 
once eradicated from our minds : but it is only ne- 
nessary for any one to consider it with the attention 
it merits, and he will not fail, however liable he 
must be, from habit, to continual relapses, to feel 
its full force. 

7. Let the reader, therefore, never forget, that 
all Abstract Terms must come under the same law 
as saltness, sandiness, sponginess, ropiness, &c. ; and 
that if these must be admitted to have arisen after 
the knowledge of salt, sand, sponge, rope, &c., so 
must all others be equally dependent upon the 
knowledge of some previous concrete thing to 
which ness, ship, hood, &c. have merely been added. 
Those, therefore, who hold out for Abstract Terms, 
that is, who are realists, must be prepared to de 
fend saltness, sandiness, &c., or to surrender up 
every Abstract Word employed in language ; for 
they must, one and all, stand or fall together ; and 
this fact must never be lost sight of, throughout the 
following remarks. 



OF STATES. 15 

8. As to such simple words as cannot be de 
compounded, they will be found to be either adjec 
tives used nominally., as a good, a white, c. ; or they 
are verbs, such as a run, a knock, a jump. When 
such words are brought into use by convention, 
they are understood with the greatest facility in 
their new character ; for if the language possess an 
article, the placing of it before any term is a signal 
to the understanding of the new office the word is 
meant to fill : and if it have not this defining par 
ticle, the prefixing a possessive pronoun, or a noun 
in the genitive case, will at once cause the mind to 
class the word with other nouns, as in such ex 
amples as HIS run, HIS knock, HIS jump, c., or a 
MAN S run, a MAN S knock, c. By this process any 
verb may be converted into a noun, as we see in 
such expressions as msfiat, ms fac-simile, &c. ; and 
the intention of the speaker is comprehended, even 
by a child, at the very first employment of such 
Terms. A fact that throws some light on the faci 
lity with which we comprehend forms of speech 
we may not have heard before ; analogy being, in 
all such cases, the leading-string of the understand 
ing. But it. may be objected, that there is in En 
glish, and, perhaps, in most other languages, many 
words which cannot be either decompounded, or 
traced to their originals. This is undoubtedly 
true ; but they will be found to be words of the 
first necessity in language, and for which the com- 



16 

pound form can be generally substituted, as in the 
case of heat and hotness in our own language, and 
of vita and vitalitas in Latin. But, though we are 
now unable to trace such words to their remote 
etymons, their existence can in no way impugn the 
force of the observations already made ; for the 
demonstrative clearness of the real nature of such 
as we can trace, leaves no doubt respecting those 
of the same class which are obscure. 

9. It must be evident, that in all the foregoing 
examples, and also in all others that can be pro 
duced, we might, with equal certainty of being 
understood, particularly after a little use, have sub 
stituted the word State, and thus have got rid of the 
whole multitude of Abstract Words ; and, instead of 
speaking of goodness, virtue, vibration, movement, &c., 
have talked of the good-state, the virtuous-state, the 
vibrating-state, the moving -state 6 , &c. Had this been 
so, we could not have been deceived, as we now 
are ; for whenever we made use of the latter expres 
sions, we should never have been led into the error 
of supposing such words as goodness, virtue, vibra 
tion, movement, &c. as having a real existence ; which 

( 8 ) The reader will observe, that it would be as unnecessary, as 
incorrect, to subjoin the word Action to an active verb, and to speak 
of the vibrating action. Here, the generic term State is the right word ; 
but, if we substitute vibratory for vibrating, that is, the adjective for 
the participle, we may then speak of the Vibratory Action ; because 
no adjective contains in itself any reference to Action. 



OF STATES. 17 

is the case, at present, with all reasoners ; and even 
with myself, as often as I speak without calling my 
mind, by an effort, to the consciousness of this fact. 
One decided advantage which must have resulted 
from this last and more philosophical employment 
of the forms of speech, would have been, that where 
we spoke of the good-state, the virtuous-state, the 
vibrating -state, the moving-state, &c., we must in every 
instance have referred these States to some individual, 
or to a body in which they were conceived to exist, 
But, as it is, we make real and independent entities 
of these Abstract Words ; and they are as much a 
stumbling-block to the right use of reason, (when 
their real nature is not remembered,) as were the 
quiddities of the schoolmen. But here arises the 
obvious and important question, namely, if all 
Abstract Words can be traced up to be the State of 
some thing, how did mankind arrive at the word 
State, or such other terminations, significant or 
otherwise, that are its equivalent : for State, in our 
language, is the generic term for actions, acts, results, 
relations, qualities, properties, offices, &c. ? To this, 
the answer is, that the reason has already been partly 
given, in what has been said of the manner in which 
any word can be instantly made to pass for a noun 
by prefixing an article (definite or indefinite) to it; 
or by employing a possessive pronoun, or its equi 
valent, a noun in the genitive case. This, however, 
only shows hoiv we are enabled, by analogy, to refer 

c 



18 OF STATES. 

all other Abstractions to a class already established ; 
but does not explain by what process the mind came 
originally to use an Abstract Term. This part of the 
question, therefore, deserves to be treated more fully. 

10. If we attentively consider language, we 
shall find, that without the aid of Abstract Terms 
we could never carry on a connected chain of rea 
soning. Children, who in general, up to the age of 
eight or ten, are extremely sparing in the use of 
such words, are not capable of reasoning at any 
great length ; and their longest discourses are con 
fined to narrations. Among all races of men that 
we know of at present, Abstract Words are in use ; 
but," of course, much more sparingly in proportion 
as their minds are less cultivated. Hence we see that 
it is a universal principle of our nature to have 
recourse to their aid : indeed, we should be but as 
little children, in thought, without them. I have 
already shown, that it is by analogy that we class 
any new Abstract Term with those we had previously 
acquired : it was by the very same process that we 
classed the first Abstract Nouns with those that are 
Concrete. This was one of the noblest steps in 
language ; for which it effected what the invention 
of Algebra did for the science of numbers. But 
while it gave man an almost unlimited power in 
reasoning on common subjects, it led him into the 
grossest errors, as soon as he began to reflect on the 



OF STATES. 19 

nature of the things he supposed to be represented 
by those very Abstractions. 

11. The term State we have received from the 
Latin language ; in which it, and a very large class 
of similar words, have the same termination in the 
nominative case as the past participle. Thus, in the 
Saxon portion of our language, past participles are 
used as Abstract Nouns ; as, for instance, the word 
stroke, derived from to strike ; so in French, dcstinee 
is a past participle, employed for the modern notion 
of fate. It is therefore evident, from the universality 
of such substitutions, that we are driven to their use 
by the very frame of our intellect. But when we have 
traced every Abstraction to a State, and, being unable 
to go higher, demand of ourselves what we under 
stand by the term, we shall be brought to see how 
mysterious the nature of language really is ; and with 
what a delicate tact we must pursue the inquiry, if 
we hope to arrive at a just conclusion. In Latin, 
the word STATUS must, from its derivation, have ori 
ginally implied a standing or station ; and in Greek, 
STAsis 9 is not merely synonymous with the English 
and Latin, but the three languages all derive the 
word from roots of common origin, meaning to 
stand. In the cognate and copious Sanscrit, the 
word STHITIS might, by its derivation, be expected to 
express the same meaning ; but it is rather used in 



c 2 



20 OF STATES. 

that language with the sense of stay, staying, &c. ; 
and for the signification of State in its Abstract sense, 
the word BHAVAS, implying existence, nature, derived 
from the root BHU, meaning being, or to be, is pre 
ferred. In the Arabic language, State is expressed 
by the term HAL ; which originally meant a turn, 
being derived from HAW ALA, it revolved. 

12. If we consider the foregoing words with 
attention, we must be convinced that, of them all, 
BHAVAS is not merely the best, but the only one 
which is the philosophical representative of what 
nature intended : for if we ask ourselves what is the 
real sense of State in such phrases as the state of 
things, the state of action, Sic., we must feel that 
we mean the existence (being-ness) of things or 
action. Here, again, we are compelled to ask our 
selves what is intended by Existence ; and then we 
find we have got to the utmost bounds of human 
thought, and that Existence implies THE STATE OF 
THAT WHICH is ; an answer completely in a circle, 
that demonstrates that we can go no further. It is 
obvious, that that which is, is nothing more than 
what is made known to us by sense ; namely, 
Existence ; that is to say, visible nature. Now, it is 
impossible that man in his primitive condition 
could have felt the force of these conclusions, and 
that, too, before he had the very instrument with 
which he could have arrived at them ; namely, 



OF STATES. 2\ 

language. This inevitable inference must convince 
us, that we must look to some other reason, that 
will account for the universality with which such 
terminations, as are the representatives of State, 
namely, ship, hood, ness, &c., have been brought 
into use. Previously, however, to entering on this 
point, it must be remembered, that the word State, 
which they all represent, is itself a mere fiction : for 
though we can think of something standing, or that 
has stood, yet the use of either of these two expres 
sions, or of State, as a reality, is merely a bold and 
daring assumption of the intellect. This is the 
grand point to which I wish to draw the reader s 
particular consideration ; nor can I hope that any 
thing I have said, or have to say, will be compre 
hended in its true light, till he has mastered this 
point : for though I may possibly be able to supply 
him with food for his thoughts, the profitable nou 
rishment of his mind must depend upon his own 
efforts and the degree of attention which he bestows 
on what he reads. To borrow an expression 
employed by tyros, in Euclid, the present is " the 
asses bridge" of Metaphysics ; and every exertion 
should be made to pass over it cleverly, however 
uninviting it may appear at first sight. Let him 
reflect, therefore, that the understanding, being defi 
cient in what would enable it to reason fluently, and 
feeling itself arrested in its course by the want of 
something that should correspond to the real things 



22 OF STATES. 

in nature, made known to it through the senses, is 
led, by the very frame of the intellect, to make this 
jump ; the necessity of which is abundantly proved 
by the fact, that the same effort has been made by 
mankind in every condition in which they have been 
found, that they might be able to say, IN a fright, IN 
a hurry, &c., as they would, IN a field, IN a house, &c. 
This otherwise inexplicable fact points out to us, in 
conjunction with what I have already said, that the 
terminations ship, hood, ness, &c., as well as their 
corresponding representatives in other languages, 
never did mean State or existence ; and that if they 
ever had any meaning at all, it was entirely super 
seded by the new use to which they were applied. 
That this is highly probable, is evidenced by the 
circumstance, that those words which are derived 
from verbs, such as sleep, anger, love, &c. all contain, 
covertly, to our understandings, the force of State ; 
for we can in each case substitute for them the 
sleeping-state, the angry-state, the loving-state 10 , &c., 
without the least danger of being misunderstood ; 
and that, too, though the form of expression is not 
usual. If, therefore, as I have said, these termina 
tions never did mean that for which they now alone 
stand, it is the nature of our intellect that leads us, 
by a sort of instinct, to their use ; just as the nature 

( 10 ) In the Chinese language, position determines the office any word 
is to fill. An Abstract Word, therefore, is merely known by the place 
it holds in the sentence. 



OF STATES. 



of the equally helpless infant guides it unconsciously 
to seek for nutriment from the mother s breast. 

13. Having done all I can to explain the nature 
of the word State, which is the very basis of all 
Abstract Language, I now proceed to make a 
few remarks on the consequences that result from 
language being both simple and Abstract ; and, 
which fact having been quite overlooked, or neg 
lected, has given rise to the grossest errors, even 
among the most profound thinkers the world has 
ever produced. 

14. All language, then, has two forms of expres 
sion ; the one simple, the other Abstract. Children 
always employ the first ; and those who reason much, 
almost invariably the last if it be possible to do so. 
Thus, a child would say, Alexander is good ; but the 
Abstract reasoner, in all probability, would praise 
the goodness of Alexander. There is scarcely a short 
proposition that cannot be expressed in Concrete as 
well as in Abstract Language ; but it would be 
impossible to put together a sentence of a few lines 
without some direct or covert use of Abstractions. 
Even the words when, where, how, &c. are only ellipti 
cal forms of phrases in which an abstraction exists : 
WHERE means, in what place; WHEN, in what time; 
HOW, may mean what degree, manner, reason, cause, or 
means ; and the same remark may be applied to all 



24 OF STATES. 

! 

other adverbs. Language has made considerable ad 
vances to perfection before such words as when, where, 
&c., are made the representatives of phrases. The 
reader will now remember, that there are two modes 
in which he may express himself; namely, the simple 
one of children, and the more abstruse one of dialec 
ticians. Both are more or less used on all occasions, 
however, by every one ; and if every author s style 
were analysed according to this division, it would 
afford a singular appearance of incongruity. But 
the most remarkable circumstance is, that the com 
bination of the two produces a singular confusion 
and jumble in our reasonings, and is the fruitful 
source of error; as will be evident by referring to the 
passages quoted from Algazel and Hume, in 80, 
85, 86, 88. Even the sagacity of Newton committed 
the same mistake : for, when he accounted for the 
reflection of light by supposing that its particles 
were reflected (bent back) from their direct line 
by attractive and repulsive forces, (which he con 
ceived to reside in all material bodies, and a little 
beyond their surfaces,) he fell into the common error 
of mixing that which is concrete (light) and Abstrac 
tions (forces) together. Had any one asked this 
most cautious of philosophers what he meant by 
these attractive and repulsive forces, Newton would 
at once have felt that he had turned mere States of 
Being into realities, and had thereby begged the 
whole question : that the same is done by all other 



OF STATES. 



mathematicians will not, therefore, excite surprise. 
See 120, 123, 147. 

15. The main object of this inquiry is, to show- 
that we ought to learn to put their just value on 
Abstractions, but never to forget that they are but 
Terms; and, that to fully comprehend what they 
really are, we must become like little children, in 
the use of language, and restore every Abstract 
Expression, we are desirous to analyse and under 
stand, into that form in which a child would employ 
it. Thus, when we speak of cohesion, vibration, &c., 
we must refer them to the things in which they alone 
have an existence, namely, to bodies (solid, fluid, or 
aeriform) ; and then we shall discover, that all we can 
say, is, that bodies cohere, vibrate, &c. : but as for 
those creations of our fancy, called cohesion, vibration, 
&c., they have no existence, except as sounds ; and 
have been solely brought into use that we might not 
be arrested in our course of reasoning, but be able 
to say, BY, THROUGH, WITH, IN cohesion, vibration, &c. ; 
just as we say, BY, THROUGH, WITH, IN a house, field, &c. 
It is by these most useful non-entities that we are 
enabled to make our discourse, as it were, of one 
piece : but, unhappily, we have so far deceived our 
selves in so doing, as to make that which refers to 
something real, and that, which though it puts on the 
mask of reality, means nothing, but by an unconscious 
and remote reference to the word from which it 



26 OF STATES. 

is derived, of precisely the same value. These Abs 
tractions serve the same purpose in thought that 
ciphers do in calculation : they are but signs of a 
conventional value, and bearing a given relation to 
one another, which the intellect feels by a peculiar 
tact with which it is endowed, and which consti 
tutes the thinking principle. To assign the means 
by which it is enabled to do so, is as impossible, as 
to comprehend the nature of the memory by which 
such signs are preserved for its employment. 

16. In drawing the reader s attention so strongly 
to the question of Abstract Terms, I do so from the 
conviction, that nothing but a constant vigilance of 
mind can prevent us from being misled by what we 
have been accustomed to consider, from the dawn of 
reason, as something real ; and which is only incon 
venient, as in the present case, when we would raise 
the veil of nature, and penetrate into her inmost 
sanctuary. For such is the force of habit, that the 
delusion of language, in which we have been nursed 
from our infancy, and which, in fact, from its univer 
sality, being found in every class of men, literary 
and illiterate, and every state of society, civilized 
and savage, we may consider as one by which we 
were intended to be deluded ; and from which we 
can only release ourselves by an occasional effort of 
reflection, such as I am anxious to effect, on the pre 
sent occasion, in the mind of the reader. He ought, 



OF STATES. 27 

therefore, not to think this inquiry either useless or 
irksome ; as I shall have often to remind him of the 
necessity of bearing in mind the neglected truth it 
enforces ; arid he will be fully conscious of its value, 
as he proceeds. 

17. When we ask ourselves what we mean by 
Abstract Terms, it is clear, that if we have not pre 
viously reflected on the subject, it will require a little 
effort to discover that they must imply States of 
bodies ; but not any thing which we can handle, or 
discover by the means of our senses. Again, if we 
ask ourselves what are the States of bodies, we must 
immediately perceive that they are forms of speech. 
These Forms of speech, therefore, which we call 
States, Relations, Qualities, &c., could never have had 
any existence, but for the aid of language, either 
oral or written. Thus, if we saw a White horse, we 
could never separate, or abstract from it, the idea of 
colour. All this we can do by the help of language, 
and we can talk (but not think) of Whiteness with 
out reference to any object whatever. It is evident, 
therefore, that there is no such conception in the 
mind as that of Whiteness, or any other colour or 
quality separate from the image of some object in 
which it is found; and that such words are merely 
symbols which we employ to reason with, and that 
they are consequently simply conventional terms. 
When, therefore, metaphysicians speak of Abstract 



28 OF STATES. 

Ideas, it is evident that they make use of a Term 
that has no meaning, because such words denote 
nothing that has any real existence. If, then, we 
wish to have a definite notion in the place of what 
is called an Abstract Idea, we must find the Con 
crete Image from which it is drawn or abstracted. 
For instance, to understand what is meant by White 
ness, I think of a swan, snow, or some other object 
which is commonly White, and I have then a clear 
conception of that colour : but even then I cannot 
separate it from the thing with which it is conjoined ; 
and I consequently discover, that every Idea I have, 
is one which, to exist, must have a Concrete, that is, 
a Real existence in nature ; and that when I talk of 
a General or Abstract Idea, I do so in compliance 
with common usage ; for a General or Abstract 
Idea is the same as no Idea at all. To feel the im 
mense importance of this conclusion, let us remem 
ber, that when we speak of extension, length, breadth, 
&c., which are commonly called Abstract Ideas, to 
understand what they really designate, we must call 
up the Image of something that is extended, broad, 
and deep as a lake, for instance. Now, these words 
have, by the foregoing reasoning, no existence what 
ever, not even mentally ; being mere symbols, pre 
served by the memory for the purpose of reasoning. 

18. Some may suppose, that, after the fierce dis 
cussions that raged among the schoolmen under 



OF STATES. 29 

the names of nominalists and realists which began 
at the commencement of the twelfth century, and 
only terminated with the new subjects of difference 
that were engendered by the Reformation it must 
be unnecessary to allude to a subject that has ceded 
to the general feeling that the realists were in error ; 
and that, as a consequence, all, or nearly all, are of 
the side of the nominalists, and therefore believe 
that these Abstract Words have no reality in them 
selves. Could I believe that all those who laugh 
at the most glaring of the absurdities of the realists 
were truly nominalists, and, as such, reasoned con 
sistently according to this opinion, these remarks 
had doubtlessly been spared, as unnecessary. But 
I believe the matter of fact to be quite otherwise, 
and that every man is, by nature, by practice, and by 
habit, a realist: and for the truth of this assertion, 
I appeal to the effect the foregoing remarks have 
produced in the reader, be he a professed metaphy 
sician, or merely a lover of metaphysical disquisition. 
It is, therefore, with the view of correcting, if possi 
ble, this natural bias of the mind, that I have taken 
the pains of making the matter as simple and clear 
as I can. The nominalists, including their leader 
Roscellinus, and their later advocate, our country 
man William of Ockham, have left the subject still 
in dispute. The general arguments for and against 
the belief of General Ideas were insufficient to con 
vince either side, a result, 1 think, that could 



30 OF STATES. 

hardly have followed, had the nominalists attempted 
the analysis of the terms by which such Ideas are 
supposed to be represented. This effort would have 
been the eocperimentum crucis, that would not merely 
have silenced their opponents, but their doing so 
would have conferred a lasting benefit on philoso 
phical investigation. They should have done with 
General Ideas as Saint Thomas Aquinas did with 
the dread-inspiring automaton of Albert the Great, 
and with one blow have proved their artificial origin 
by laying open fheir internal structure : this would 
have destroyed their magic influence for ever. 
Roscellinus, though the first among the moderns to 
broach the notion, seems to have come nearer the 
exact truth than Ockham ; as " he maintained, with 
respect to the General Ideas of genera and species, 
that they were mere sounds (flatus vocis), by means of 
which we denoted the common qualities which we 
observe among the various individual objects." But 
Ockham considered, that " though they had not a 
subjective, they had an objective existence in the 
soul 11 ." But to have made the matter quite clear, 
Ockham and his followers should have shown what 
this mysterious process of Abstraction is; namely, 
the manner in which such Ideas are formed. Had 
he attempted this, he would have been obliged to 
have substituted the word term for Idea, and thus 

(") Manuel de I Histoire de la Philosophic, traduit de I Allemand de 
Tennemann, par V. COUSIN, Tom. I. 249, 270. 



OP STATES. 31 

have put an end to the controversy. He would 
only have had to show, that such words as rope, 
stone, &c., might be altered into -ropy, stony, &c., 
and, by a further process of sublimation, converted 
into ropiness, stoniness, &c., by the mere addition of 
the unmeaning syllable ness ; and thus have brought 
down, what they called, Philosophy, from her stilts, 
to the level of the human understanding ; showing 
her to be little more than a shadow, tricked out in 
the gorgeous apparel of high-sounding but empty 
words. 

19. The Realists would certainly have been 
thrown into great difficulties, if science had anti 
cipated its course, and appeared in their days with 
the Generalizations, Divisions, and Sub-Divisions of 
modern times. If they could not settle the ques 
tion, whether a Genus had a real existence or not, 
what would they have said to the higher Generali 
zation of Genera into Orders, and of these again into 
the remoter one of Classes ? But in all such dis 
putes, the human intellect appears to be spell-bound 
for a certain period ; and being unable to pass over 
the narrow circle it had marked out for its own 
activity, is driven round and round, without the 
possibility of making a single movement in advance, 
till it is all at once set at liberty from its folly by 
some new absurdity, which, in its turn, becomes the 
subject of those bitter contentions that seem neces- 

J 



32 OF STATES. 

sary in human affairs to create that degree of in 
terest which shall prevent a stagnation of mind. 
That classification is a purely artificial process 
would seem to be sufficiently obvious. We be 
gin with the Individual or Variety, as John, Fohi, 
and Obi, among men ; for every Individual is 
strictly a Variety : we ought, then, to class these 
into Species, as the bearded, the beardless, and the 
woolly-headed race. We then see that they likewise 
have a certain general resemblance ; and we collect 
them together, under the term Genus, which we call 
homo or man. Afterwards, we find we can go 
beyond this ; for certain Genera have a remote rela 
tionship : so we connect them under the word Order, 
and call them Primates: and, finally, we carry our 
Generalization to a climax, by placing all these Orders 
under a Class, to which we give the name of Mamma 
lia. The distribution of Species into Sub-Species, as 
is done in some cases, is a proof that such classifica 
tion is not quite correct. It seems to have been 
formed inversely to the true order ; that is, by begin 
ning with the class, and descending to individuals or 
particulars. That which is now called a Sub-Species 
should have been species, as the first generalization 
of Individuals or Varieties ; and what are called 
Species should have been termed Genera, c. It 
has been well remarked by an eloquent writer 12 , that 

( - ) Cours di&gt; I Histoire de la Philosophic, par V. COUSIN, Tome I. 
Lecture 20. 



OF STATES. 33 

it is not language, however complete, that will ren 
der science perfect ; but science, when it is com 
pletely constituted, that will perfect language. But, 
with regard to the particular question of Abstrac 
tion, the reader must see that mankind are habi 
tually in error, and that nothing but a careful 
effort can release us from its delusive influence. 
Were we to hear of any one who in summing up 
the figures that represent so many things apples, 
for instance of which he was anxious to know the 
amount, should so far delude himself as to suppose 
the figures were really apples, we should be cer 
tainly warranted in pronouncing him insane. What 
shall we say of ourselves, however, when we consi 
der mere sounds to be real things ? In the case 
I have just put, the madman has really something 
before him which he merely mistakes ; but in our 
own case, we cannot even assign the things that 
we think are represented by our sounds. If we 
judge the man to be mad who should mistake the 
figures for the fruit they represent, we must surely 
admit that we, at the least, are most unreflecting, in 
supposing that the words which we employ merely 
as signs in reasoning, are the representatives of 
things called Ideas, that never existed. 

20. I think I cannot produce a more appro 
priate specimen of the effects of realism on the 
most acute minds, than will be found in the following 



34 OF STATES. 

extract from a Hindu metaphysician, when dis 
cussing the opinions of other writers about nature : 
" According to some, time is cause ; time is the 
five elements ; time destroys the world ; time 
watches when all things sleep ; time is not to be 
surpassed. There are but three categories, the 
discrete principle, the indiscrete principle, and 
soul ; and by one of them time must be compre 
hended. Time, then, is a discrete principle ; for 
nature, from its universal creative power, is the 
cause of time ; spontaneity merges into it (nature) ; 
and time, therefore, is not cause ; matter is spon 
taneity. Nature alone, therefore, is cause ; and 
there is no cause of nature". 13 This subtle reasoner 
never once suspected that time and spontaneity are 
mere Abstractions, and that in the use made of the 
former it is actually personified. The instance is 
very valuable, as it shows how deeply rooted and 
universal this fallacy is in the human mind ; and 
how much mankind have been deceived by lan 
guage ; as well as what a small chance exists of 
escaping from its delusions. Examples equally 
glaring might be produced from the most eminent 
metaphysicians of Europe. Such paralogisms as 

( 13 ) Sarikhya Karika, p. 173 ; a work of great interest, as well as 
antiquity, and admirably elucidated and edited by my friend, Professor 
Horace Hayman Wilson. This work having been published by the 
Oriental Translation Committee of Great Britain and Ireland, is now 
accessible to every one who takes an interest in the history and pro 
gress of the human mind. 



OF STATES. 35 

these, however, have been dignified, from the most 
ancient times, as profound philosophy ; and though 
the novice in metaphysics is confounded when he 
looks into metaphysical works, and feels reasonable 
doubts respecting such reasoning, he naturally at 
tributes his imperfect comprehension of what seems 
so consistent, to his ignorance or inaptitude for dis 
quisitions of so abstruse and recondite a nature. 
The truth of this assertion will be rendered evident 
by the remarks made upon Hume ( 85, 86, 88). 

21. The effect of Realism on our minds, in 
leading us to convert these airy nothings into enti 
ties, cannot be more plainly exhibited than in the 
universal use of them as faculties of the mind. 
Thus we speak of our Will, our Judgment, our 
Fancy, our Imagination, our Understanding, &c., as 
realities that form part of our intellect ; though we 
can, in truth, only say that we, that is, our intellec 
tual nature, wills, judges, fancies, imagines, under 
stands, &c. But this subject is of too much im 
portance to be more than alluded to here ; and it 
will, accordingly, be more appropriately considered 
hereafter. (See 156 163.) 

22. Among the most striking instances of the 
influence of Realism, the reader need only be re 
minded of the deification these Abstractions have 
met with in antiquity. Statues, temples, and altars, 

D 2 



36 OF STATES. 

were raised to Youth, to Beauty, to Truth, to Vir 
tue, to Cheerfulness, to Sleep, to Madness, to Fury, 
&c., without the slightest suspicion being enter 
tained that their votaries were merely honouring 
so many conceptions of their own brains, and 
thereby offering a tribute to their love of the 
beautiful and the good ; or that by such acts they 
endeavoured to avert from themselves the calami 
ties implied by some of the most appalling of these 
words. In India, even at this period of the world, 
we find that the Hindus, whose religion and lan 
guage bear so remarkable a resemblance to those 
of Ancient Greece and Rome, consider every epi 
demic as a malignant deity, that must be propi 
tiated by religious rites ; and small-pox, measles, 
cholera, &c., are served as gods who can be made 
to bend from their wrathful purpose by proper 
offerings. How many there are in these days that 
would start at the reproach of heathenism, who 
would be the first to reprove those who should 
bend to a stock or a stone ; and yet who are mo 
mentarily in the habit of making a few articulate 
sounds the gods of their idolatry, by referring all 
the mysterious operations in nature to a few words 
of their own creation ! These are not, to be sure, 
gods that they have made with their own hands ; 
but they are idols they have formed with their 
tongues, and which they substitute, on all occasions, 
for the Author of Nature, by referring every result 



or STATES. 37 

exhibited in the working of this universal frame to 
Attraction, Affinity, Cohesion, &c. Like children 
at a puppet-show, who never ask how the puppets 
are moved, they would seem, by their silence, never 
to raise their minds to an inquiry as to the agents 
that are equally necessary, in both cases, to put all 
in motion, even though they be hidden from sight. 
They appear content with what satisfies them for 
the moment ; and would, in all probability, take 
it extremely amiss, or perhaps as irrelevant, that 
any one should inquire what is meant by these 
terms. Words similar to these have satisfied their 
predecessors as well as these do themselves ; and 
they have likewise received the sanction of great 
names ; though these have given way, in succession, 
to those of some more fortunate rivals, which are 
in their turn to make place for others. Such are, 
and ever must be, the consequence of not examin 
ing for ourselves the words, or instruments of 
thought, with which we measure all things ; and 
of blindly following those who have themselves 
received their first notions in science without any 
effort of reflection, and who think it enough that 
the master has said so. 

23. Perhaps few subjects will show better the 
strong hold that Abstractions have upon our nature, 
and tl\e influence they exercise over our minds in the 
conduct of life, than our attachment to such tilings 



38 OF STATES. 

as the Church, the State, the Constitution, a Prin 
ciple, &c. When we ask ourselves what we mean 
by these terms as objects of affection, we shall at 
once be brought to see how much we are swayed 
by mere words. Not one of them designate any 
thing that has a real existence, except as a sound : 
still, we are ready to sacrifice our lives for them at 
a moment s notice. Indeed, a consideration of this 
question will lead to the belief that language itself 
is a main part of what we call by the name of 
mind. (See 156 163.) Without language, not 
one of these conceptions would have had an exis 
tence ; nor could one drop of the torrents of blood, 
that have flowed from such causes, have been shed. 
I fear that the truth in these cases is, that man is 
but too fond of any motive that may afford a plau 
sible pretext for letting loose, in what may be con 
sidered a legitimate way, the bad passions that 
belong to his nature. The demon of War, and its 
civil representative, Persecution, are ever dear to 
his heart ; nor can he, on any occasion, while these 
favourite modes of gratification present themselves, 
deny himself the pleasure that attends their indul 
gence, except they are silenced by their arch leader, 
Avarice, and her base, but legitimate offspring, 
Lucre. Nothing but the hope of gain can tempt 
him to cultivate the arts of peace, and turn his 
sword into a sickle. Unfortunately, however, when 
the love of gold has become the ruling passion of 



OF STATES. 3 1 J 

any community, from that moment every generous 
and noble sentiment is extinguished, and neither 
wisdom nor virtue possess any power in their own 
right. 

24. The atrocious conduct of Calvin, in causing 
Servetus to be burned alive though he was himself 
a Protestant reformer, who vindicated liberty of 
conscience is a modern, and a melancholy instance 
of the truth of the foregoing remarks ; and leads to 
more than a suspicion, that the toleration so ear 
nestly inculcated by Arminius was little more than 
a pleading for exemption for himself and followers 
from fire and fagot. The same germs are uni 
versal in human nature, and require but favourable 
circumstances for their growth. Though the dis 
positions of men may be different, yet religious zeal 
and fanaticism have a strong tendency to bring all 
to an equality, when their feelings are once roused 
into activity ; but particularly in what they are 
taught is a good and holy cause. The history of all 
ages will confirm this fact. Heretics were first 
burned in England, by Henry IV., to please the 
bishops who had assisted him in dethroning 
Richard II. 14 Science has been accused of pro 
moting irreligion ; but after these, and similar 
examples, it may be safely asserted, that the mild 

(") Walpoliana, Vol. I. p. 7*!. 



40 OF STATES. 

spirit of the Gospel, which inculcates Peace on 
earth, and good-will toward men, has been essentially 
served and benefitted by pursuits which have 
smoothed down the asperities of our nature, and 
enabled the mass of mankind to re-act on such of 
their religious instructors as had forgotten that 
Christianity is a religion which enjoins every man 
to love his neighbour as himself. 

25. If the abuse of Abstract Terms has a bane 
ful effect upon philosophical investigation, we must 
never lose sight of their extreme value in the ordi 
nary use of reason. Here, indeed, it is impossible 
to be too grateful for their existence ; as they exalt 
man even above his own exalted nature, giving him 
a sort of unlimited command over the past, and, in 
some respect, over the future also. If, through 
them, he has been successively swayed, and led to 
entertain doctrines, opinions, and theories which 
have been noxious to his well-being, it is by their 
aid, and that of letters, that he discovers whatever 
may, under the guidance of reason, be conducive to 
his present and future happiness. It was with a ge 
neral feeling of this truth, which few will, I be 
lieve, be inclined to question, that I uttered the 
following sentiment some years back : " Those 
Abstract Relations, in proportion to the extent and 
accuracy with which they are comprehended by 
any individual, raise him, in the scale of reason, 



OF STATES. 41 

almost as much above the rest of mankind, as man 
is elevated above the brute." 15 But if the tendency 
to Realism is one of the injurious consequences of 
using Abstract Terms, it cannot but be admitted, 
that the personifying such words is one of the finest 
resources of fiction. Here, at least, we are not mis 
led, but enter willingly and consciously into the 
pleasing delusion. Not only are Abstractions some 
of the choicest ornaments of Poetry, but, when per 
sonified, give it an animation and a movement that 
leads the understanding a willing captive to the in 
ventions of Fancy. Its fascinating effects must have 
been felt by every lover of the Muse ; and before 
I bring a few examples by way of illustration, I 
must remind the reader of the celebrated opening 
of Rasselas, where a writer of remarkable gravity 
and severity has employed it in prose with the 
happiest effect. In poetry, it constitutes the riches 
of every language that by its genius admits of its 
existence. Though Shakspeare has been sparing 
in this figure, he may be quoted for some charming 
instances ; as when he says 

She never told her love, 

But let Concealment, like a worm i the bud, 

Feed on her damask cheek : she pined in thought ; 

And with a green and yellow melancholy, 

She sat, like Patience on a monument, 

Smiling at Grief." 

( 15 ) A Short Inquiry into the, Nature of Language, prefixed to the 
Author s Bengali; Sanscrit, and English Dictionary, p. vii. 



42 OF STATES. 

And again : 

" Night s candles are burnt out, and jocund Day 
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops." 

And in the following instance : 

" Grim visag d War hath smooth d his wrinkled front." 

26. The personification of Sin and Death in 
Milton s Paradise Lost is too well known to re 
quire to be more than alluded to ; but the follow 
ing passage, from the same poem, may be adduced 
as an example of the aid which genius derives from 
this figure of speech : 

" When strait behold the throne 



Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread 

Wide on the wasteful deep ! With him enthron d, 

Sat sable- vested Night, eldest of things, 

The consort of his reign ; and by them stood 

Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name 

Of Demogorgon, Rumour next, and Chance, 

And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroil d, 

And Discord, with a thousand various mouths." 

27. But of all our best Poets, none, with the 
exception of Spenser and Collins, considering how 
little he has written, has oftener employed per 
sonification than Gray. The following lines are 
from him : 



OF STATES. 13 

" These shall the fury passions tear, 

The vultures of the mind, 
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear, 

And Shame that skulks behind ; 
Or pining- Love shall waste their youth, 
Or Jealousy with rankling tooth, 

That inly gnaws the secret heart ; 
And Envy wan, and faded Care, 
Grim-visag d, comfortless Despair, 

And Sorrow s piercing dart. 

Ambition this shall tempt to rise, 

Then whirl the wretch from high, 
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice, 

And grinning Infamy. 
The stings of Falsehood those shall try, 
And hard Unkindness alter d eye, 

That mocks the tear it forc d to flow ; 
And keen Remorse, with blood defil d, 
And moody Madness laughing wild 

Amid severest woe." 

28. Collins s Ode on the Passions is too well 
known to require more, after the instance just 
given, than to be recalled to the reader s remem 
brance, as affording one of the most complete and 
perfect instances in our own, and perhaps in any 
language, of the happy and vivifying effects of per 
sonification. Its use in allegory has often been had 
recourse to ; and the well-known Choice of Her 
cules, from the Greek of the celebrated sophist 



44 OF STATES. 

Protagoras, may be quoted as one of the most feli 
citous efforts of genius in prose composition, di 
rected to a great moral end. The poem of Cupid 
and Psyche, by Mrs. Tighe, is a most delightful 
production, abounding in such soft and tender 
graces as could only spring from the gentle and 
delicate mind of a female. Bunyan s Pilgrim s 
Progress, as an allegory in prose, exhibits what 
may be effected by the enthusiasm of untutored 
genius, when it concentrates its efforts in solitude, 
and works in the rich mine of the imagination. 
The writer, trusting solely to his native strength of 
intellect, and to but one book, which he had made 
the sole object of his waking thoughts, during the 
most energetic period of a life that had been roused 
into activity by all the opposing elements of per 
secution and injustice, has produced a work of such 
unrivalled merit in its class, for originality and in 
vention, as must make it a popular favourite, as 
long as the English language is understood, or its 
literature valued. 

29. It now remains only to say, that all we have 
at any time to talk or think of may be summed up 
by the terms PERCEPTIONS and CONCEPTIONS. To 
the first belong all objects we PERCEIVE, when we 
see, hear, smell, taste, or touch. To the last, all the 
Combinations, Relations, and other States of the 
objects or things we perceive, and of which we are 



OF STATES. 45 

enabled to think, or CONCEIVE, by the mysterious 
operations of the intellect, aided by the almost 
equally mysterious mechanism of language, which 
it had previously prepared by and for the process 
to which we give the name of thought. To this 
last class must likewise be referred those essences 
which we derive by strict inference, when we ob 
serve the design, harmony, and operations of 
nature, such as God, Soul, and Power. The two 
most general words in language must therefore be 
THING and STATE ; the first comprising every thing 
that is Concrete, and the second every Term that 
is Abstract, or, in short, that can be included under 
the word State. 

30. The foregoing views demonstrate, that all 
reasoning is effected solely by means of words, 
either single, or linked together in those chains 
which we call Conceptions ; but that no single word, 
STATE even, not excepted, can be a conception, in any 
other sense than as a sound preserved by the me 
mory. It must, however, not be forgotten, that 
many single words are really compounds : thus the 
word altitude (ALTITUDO) is such, being compounded 
of ALTI, high, and TUDO, state, that is, %A-STATE; " 



(&gt;) This rule will equally apply to other words, derived from the 
Latin, ending in tude, such as gratitude, magnitude, &c., as well as to 
all other Abstractions : for whatever may be their termination, it 

imply 



46 OF STATES. 

so likewise the Terms came and effect are repre 
sentative signs of the Conceptions, that Cause is 
that general STATE which necessarily includes in itself 
the notion of an EFFECT ; and, reciprocally, that an 
Effect is that general STATE which necessarily includes 
in itself the notion of a CAUSE. If any one is willing 
to extend this view, and think that every Abstract 
Term may be considered as the abridged represen 
tative of a compound notion, I will not differ with 
him. He may say, for instance, that goodness, or 
virtue, implies the STATE of him who is good, or vir 
tuous ; and vibration, or movement, the STATE of 
action of that which vibrates, or moves. Indeed, the 
consideration of the languages of America, which 
are in that state which they must have assumed at 

imply State. The words benevolence, reverence, prudence, observation, 
reflection will be sufficient to serve as examples. The word transub- 
stantiation implies the STATK-of-substance-transcending (-appearance), 
that is, substance the state of which is really different from what it seems 
to be to the senses. I beg the reader to bear in mind, that my object 
is not, as I have before intimated, with etymology. For instance, 
when I say that the tude (TUDO) of the foregoing words implies State, 
I merely mean that this word (State) is the best our language affords for 
the purpose ; for I have already pointed out, in 11, that the Sanscrit 
word BHAVAS, meaning existence, or being, in general, is its true repre 
sentative. If effects, therefore, bear evidence of their causes, it 
marks that the Hindu mind had a just philosophical turn, even 
in its infancy a fact demonstrated by the whole structure of the 
Sanscrit language : and certainly it is no small glory to this ancient 
race, that theirs is, perhaps, the only language in which the Prin 
ciple of Abstraction is exactly expressed by the word that ought to 
be employed. 



OF STATES. 47 

their birth, as is proved by the uniformity of plan 
that reigns throughout them all, however they may 
differ from one another in the sounds they employ, 
would add very much to the belief, that even Con 
crete Terms are but the elliptical forms of longer 
sentences that were employed to represent the most 
common objects of life. All, therefore, that I mean 
to contend for is, that while the Concrete Words, 
house, dog, horse, &c., may be changed or broken up 
into letters, there still will be Houses, Dogs, Horses, 
&c. remaining in nature ; but that if we decompose 
the Abstract Terms goodness, greatness, whiteness, 
&c., there will then remain nothing that they re 
presented ; for with them must likewise disappear, 
by the same process, the main word ; that is to say, 
the word State, in the examples just given : and it 
consequently follows, that if there were no lan 
guage, there could be no Conceptions. In short, 
Abstractions may not inaptly be compared to those 
crazy potentates found in mad-houses, who assume 
all the airs and attributes of royalty, without any 
subjects for their support, and who hold their rule 
by an ideal title. So these Abstract Terms, when 
sifted, have neither subject nor object which they 
represent ; and are, indeed, what Roscellinus termed 
them, mere sounds. Abstract Terms, therefore, are 
accurately represented by the term Conceptions; 
which include, as has been already stated ( 3), all 



48 OF STATES. 

the Phrases, Inferences, Opinions, Conjectures, No 
tions, Propositions, Assertions, Statements, Argu 
ments, &c., we have already heard or conceived of 
ourselves by the means of language. Not the least 
remarkable circumstance that attends the considera 
tion of language, is the fact, that the limited capa 
city of children, at a very tender age, is sufficient 
for its attainment, and even for its tolerably correct 
employment ; and, that idiots are able to acquire it 
with sufficient facility, so as to be no way embar 
rassed to explain themselves though some lan 
guages, the Basque for instance, are extremely com 
plicated in their structure : while parrots, though 
highly intelligent, are unable to do more than re 
peat by rote the sounds they imitate ; thus forming 
a striking distinction between Man in his lowest, 
and the Brute in his highest state. 

31. It is worthy of remark, that it is, r as I said 
before, by turning language against itself that we 
make it give evidence on its own nature, and thereby 
unfold much of the mystery that veils its great 
parent, the human intellect. From an indistinct 
feeling of this truth it was, that I said, formerly, 
that " we must thoroughly comprehend the nature 
of this first offspring of the human mind, before 
we can hope to arrive at any legitimate conclusion 
as to the laws that regulate the phenomena of mind 



OF STATES. 49 

itself 1 The inference to be deduced from the 
preceding inquiry is as follows : 

32. Whatever realty exists, must occupy SPACE ; 
and whatever does not do so, is only a STATE, that is, 
a symbol invented for the purpose of reasoning. 



( IT ) A Short Inquiry into the Nature of Language, prefixed to the 
Author s Dictionary of the Bengali, Sanscrit, and English Languages. 

( 18 ) Or, in popular language, Whatever in not Body or Spirit is only 
a WORD. 



OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR 
TERMS. 

33. I now proceed to examine in detail those 
primary Terms which metaphysicians have been 
in the habit of taking as self-evident truths ; and 
which form, consequently, the data and axioms of 
metaphysics : but I must first make a few remarks 
on the distinction between Abstract, General, and 
Particular Terms. So little attention has been 
bestowed on the classification of the words with 
which we reason on the most important points, 
that no distinction is commonly made between 
Terms, whether they are Abstract, General, or 
Particular. Yet this want of clearly-defined no 
tions on the subject must lead to much confusion 
in reasoning. 

34. It matters not whether a word imply a 
Perception or a Conception ; that is, whether it be 
Concrete or Abstract : it may in either case be ren 
dered General or Particular. General Terms are 
consequently both Concrete and Abstract. Good 
ness, gracefulness, perfection, &c., are Abstract 
Terms, employed in a General sense ; and they 
may be equally used in a Particular sense, at plea 
sure : thus we may speak of The goodness of the 



OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 51 

Deity The gracefulness of a sivan The perfection of 
nature, &e. ; and when we do so, these words have 
then a General sense : but when we say, He has a 
goodness of heart peculiarly his own The swan has a 
gracefulness that belongs to no other aquatic bird- 
Nature has a perfection that art can never attain, we 
must see that these words, which are simply States 
of Being, can be rendered both General and Par 
ticular. In a similar manner, the name of every 
Particular material thing may be rendered General, 
by either prefixing the definite article to it, or by 
employing it in the plural. We may speak indif 
ferently of the horse, the dog, the oak, the diamond, 
&c. ; or we may generalize, by speaking of horses, 
dogs, oaks, diamonds, &c. Indeed, it appears to me, 
that as often as we speak of any thing in an inde 
terminate or indefinite manner, we still do no more 
than generalize ; and so the expressions, a horse, a 
dog, an oak, a diamond, c., have scarcely any dif 
ference from those with the definite article, except 
that the figure is less noble and impressive. The 
only exceptions in our language to the foregoing 
process of generalization is found in the words God 
and man. Neither of these can be rendered general 
by prefixing the. The first is always rendered 
definite and particular by so doing; as when we 
say, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We can 
also prefix the definite article to the name of God ; 
as when we sav, the Almighty, the Omniscient, or t/t&lt;&gt; 



52 OF STATES. 

Omnipotent God, &c. ; which likewise, it will be 
admitted, have a Particular, and not a General sense, 
when so employed. There remains one mode of 
generalization to be yet explained ; which is more 
perfect, perhaps, than that afforded by preceding 
examples ; as, when we substitute shipping for ships, 
literature for letters, cavalry for horsemen, &c. ; thus 
leaving no doubt on the mind in what sense we are 
to understand such terms. The reader, however, 
must not confound this common and natural use 
of language with the artificial Abstractions and 
Generalization of naturalists, such as have been 
alluded to in 18. 

35. The object of the foregoing remarks is to 
convince the reader that every Abstract Term may 
be used either in a General or a Particular sense, 
and that every Concrete Word may be equally em 
ployed in the same way. But he must carefully 
remember, that though we speak of horses, dogs, 
&c., they have no more reality, when employed 
in a General sense, than is the case with Abstract 
Conceptions. This caution is the more neces 
sary; as the individual objects being real, we are 
apt, unconsciously, to refer the General Term to 
the Particular object from which it is taken, and so 
to mislead ourselves. The distinction here pointed 
out, that even a word that signifies something ma 
terial becomes a mere non-entity when employed 



OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 53 

in a General sense, is of the highest importance, as 
a help to the understanding in the comprehension 
of the nature of Abstract Terms. The reader can 
not but feel that there can be no such thing as a 
General tree, or any other object ; and that the 
word tree is therefore a mere sound, and nothing 
more, when used in such a General sense ; because 
it then refers neither to a Particular oak,ash y fir, or 
other tree. Now, if this be so with what has real 
representatives, how much less (if the comparison 
be admissible) must it be the case with what are 
merely Abstract, and which have no representatives 
in nature ? 

36. Having thus shown, in treating of Abstract 
and General Terms, that all the words implying 
States of Being may be either considered under a 
General or a Particular point of view, it remains 
to say, that when they are employed in the first of 
these divisions, they are then used, absolutely, with 
out any reference to a contrast or comparison ; but 
when we speak of a Particular State, it may be con 
templated with reference to the same kind of State 
existing in a higher, lower, or equal degree in some 
other subject. Thus we can suppose that the ambi 
tion of Alexander was greater than that of Parmenio, 
by the celebrated reply he made to the latter, 
when Darius proposed a division of the contested 
empire of Persia. But \\hen Hie Poet says, 



OF STATES. 



" Ambition first sprung from your blest abodes, 
The glorious fault of angels and of gods ;" 

it is evident that he has employed the word Ambi 
tion in an absolute and general way, free from all 
degrees of comparison ; as is clear from the omission 
of the article, definite or indefinite. The same may 
be said for the word " Fame," in the following pas 
sage ; which differs from the sentiment contained 
in that just quoted : 

" Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise, 
(That last infirmity of noble mind,) 
To scorn delight, and live laborious days." 

Here the religious persuasions of Milton have led 
him to undervalue one of the most ennobling motives 
to action that can exist in the human breast. What 
is either Ambition or the desire of Fame, but the 
love of notice, exciting us to deserve the admiration 
and approbation of our fellow-beings ? And is such 
a universal passion, evidently implanted in our 
bosoms by the hand of God himself, to be called an 
infirmity ? This can only be said of its abuse : and 
the same can be said, if we allow any other feeling 
to obtain an undue ascendancy. 

37. The next step is, to give the reader an 
opportunity of judging of those Abstract Terms 
that constitute the fundamental notions of meta 
physical reasoning : and he should give his whole 



OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. ;V&gt; 

attention to this most important subject ; as he will, 
I am certain, be quite convinced, if he still should 
require any further proofs, of the deceptive influence 
exerted by language, in leading the understanding 
astray : but he must never forget the result of what 
he has just read ; namely, that 

38. Evert/ Abstract Term may be either General or 
Particular ; and every General Term may be either 
Abstract or Concrete : but that a word which is Abstract 
or General is nothing but a SOUND, dependent for its 
existence merely upon language. 



( 56 ) 

Of Entity and Quiddity. 

39. There is a fortune among words, similar to 
what we see amongst men : some are destined to be 
long retained in favour ; whilst others are discarded, 
never to be recalled again. This is strikingly exem 
plified in the words Entity and Quiddity. The first 
of these continues to be considered of unexcep 
tionable value ; but the last, having been discounte 
nanced by Locke, has sunk into insignificance, and 
even contempt. Entity, implying being-siATE, or 
being-ness, stands for any thing that is real ; and is 
certainly a harmless word, as long as it is not made 
to pass for something real by its own nature. Quid 
dity, derived from the QUIDDITAS of the Schoolmen, is 
deduced from QUID, what ? and therefore implies 
what-sfATE, or what-ness : though they used it for 
Essence ; it being held, by the Realists among them, 
that every abstract relation had a real Essence, 
through which it had its being: but Locke s rea 
sonings having shown the absurdity of the notion, 
which indeed had been long questioned, the word 
sank into complete disuse, except occasionally to 
whet the wit of modern metaphysicians. Locke, 
however, seems to have been in a great measure a 
Realist himself; and his whole work on Human 
Understanding is built upon the belief in Abstrac 
tions. These two words are humourously alluded 
to by Butler : 



OF ENTITY AND QUIDDITY. 57 

" He could define all acts, 
And knew their natures and abstracts ; 
Where entity and quiddity, 
The ghosts of defunct bodies, fly." 

40. The Arabs would appear to have represented 
this word by MAHIYAT ; which is of very singular for 
mation,, being contrary to the general structure of 
their language : it implies what-is-it-ness. In the 
Sanscrit language, the word TATTWAM, meaning that- 
STATE, or that-ness, seems its exact representative. 
These analogies are curious, as showing the limited 
resources of the human mind, and the similarity of its 
mode of proceeding under any difficulties it has to 
surmount. Quiddity and Entity, though they have 
now T parted company, seem to have represented the 
Essence and Form which we occasionally hear con 
trasted with one another. 

Of Habit, Habitude, Custom, and Use. 
41. These words are very commonly employed 
indifferently, the one for the other : if however \ve 
discriminate, we shall at once see that they are 
distinct in the notion the mind entertains of them, 
and ought consequently not to be confounded toge 
ther. When any act has been repeated a few times, 
we perform it again, unconsciously, from Habit. 
Habit therefore always produces an act of some kind 
or other. If we repeat such acts frequently, we 



58 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

become, from Habit, habituated or accustomed to 
them ; and Habitude and Custom consequently are the 
result of Habit. When, however, we are exposed to 
some inconvenience for a continuance, we become 
less and less sensitive to its annoyance ; and we are 
at last so used to it, that we become almost indifferent 
to its existence, and even unconscious of it; and 
we are then said to be reconciled to it from Use. 



Of Knowledge and Wisdom. 

42. The words Knowledge and Wisdom are very 
often employed indiscriminately for one another. 
They ought, however, to be carefully distinguished. 
Knowledge simply implies every thing we have 
learnt, either by instruction, observation, or experi 
ence. Hence a man may be very knowing and very 
learned, and still never be able to pass for a wise 
man. To make a wise man, it is necessary that he 
should have reflected upon what he has learnt ; for 
it is only through having considered any fact, in its 
various points of view, and in its relation to others 
to which it has an affinity, that a man can be said to 
know it to any useful end. It is solely by the same 
process that he arrives at those general conceptions 
that store his mind for every emergency : and he 
who can only trust to what he remembers of other 
men s thoughts, to supply him with the means of 
meeting any exigency, will rarely find himself 



OF KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM. 59 

prepared to effect a happy result. There is no man 
that is not wise in some things ; for every one has 
more or less reflected on what most nearly concerns 
himself: but there are infinite degrees of Wisdom. 
Generally speaking, however, it is only to the highest 
efforts of reflection that we give the name of Wis 
dom. Indeed, it seems, from the force of Realism, to 
be taken in an absolute sense, free from all compari 
son. Where it exists in a high degree, it is felt to be 
something almost divine ; as in the instance when, by 
the help of personification, we speak of The voice of 
Wisdom; or as something Real, when we recall to 
mind the celebrated sentiment of antiquity, Wisdom 
is the sole imperishable possession 19 . In the well- 
known and melancholy sentence, where it is said, 
"For in much wisdom is much grief, and he that 
mcreaseth knowledge mcreaseth sorrow**" we must 

( 1;i ) 2.o(p{a juov; TWV KTIJ/UQTWV aflai/arwv. 

(*&gt;) ECCLKS. ch. i. ver. 18. In the Hebrew original, the first word i&gt; 
the correct translation of hukmuli ; but the second would be more 
correctly rendered science, which is the true meaning of duiith. This 
passage is remarkable, as being in direct opposition to the opinion ot 
Cicero, " I T iui igitur essemus beati cognitione reram et scientiie 
(Frmj. Hortciix. &lt;/e Trinitatr) ; as well as to the sentiment of Virgil. 

" Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas." 

As to the sentiment itself, it may probably have arisen from the 
difficulties attendant upon study and composition in those days: 
of which some notion may be formed, if it be true, as is said, that 
Zoroaster committed his doctrines not to paper-but to cow-hides, 
on which he inscribed them with a knife. But in these days, when 
tin- art of printing has made study so easy, it is a different matter, 
and it can be almost said, that In vlw runs &gt;.;/ rwl. 



60 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

not suppose that Wisdom and Knowledge are placed 
purposely in contrast, but that they are merely put 
in a sort of opposition for the sake of the diction, a 
figure that is common in the Hebrew language, and 
to which the appellation of parallelism is applied. 
Knowledge must, by its very nature, consist in an 
acquaintance with particulars ; Wisdom, with gene 
ralities. The first, therefore, is to be obtained, as I 
have before said, by instruction, observation, or 
experience ; but the last, only by reflection. The 
Ancients were wise with, comparatively, little know 
ledge ; and the Moderns are extremely knowing, 
with very little wisdom. Those who devote them 
selves to study and observation, have but little time 
and opportunity for reflection ; and the converse 
may be said, with equal truth, of those who are 
given to reflection. The state of mind required for 
each is different ; and, perhaps, the kind of mind, 
likewise. After what I have said on the nature of 
abstract words, it is hardly necessary to repeat, that 
there is neither Wisdom nor Knowledge ; and that 
we can only say, that such a man is wise ; or, that he 
knows something more or less perfectly than some 
one else. 

Of Principle. 

43. Principle is a word in the mouth of every 
one ; and yet it is not, perhaps, always understood 



OF PRINCIPLE. (j| 

as exactly as its importance merits. In morals, it 
means those first notions which are the regulating 
points of all good conduct. Thus, not to steal, to 
lie, &c., are all Principles, which it is the duty of 
every good man to obey. When, therefore, any one s 
conduct is thus regulated, we speak of him as being 
" a man of principle " ; and when he sets the pri 
mary notions of morals at defiance, we equally say, 
u he is unprincipled." Principle, therefore, im 
plies a mind that has arrived at certain primary 
conceptions, either by the means of instruction, or 
by a spontaneous effort of reason, or by both. We 
must feel, consequently, that it is the pure offspring 
of reason ; and that its birth and value are only 
appreciated in proportion as its parent obtains 
dominion in the affairs of mankind ; and as its own 
offspring, good conduct, is duly respected. Even 
in subjects that do not relate to morals, we find 
the word Principle commonly employed ; because 
whatever is the object of reason, must contain, in 
itself, some Principle, or leading notion. Thus every 
law and every argument must be referrible to a 
Principle, which is their guiding reason ; or they 
will be nothing but nonsense. Principle, therefore, 
though a mere word, is one of singular importance, 
as it is the polar star of the moral and intellectual 
man. Indeed, among the various Abstractions that 
have been deified, it is singular that Principle has 
been overlooked. Perhaps the reason is, that it is 



62 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

only found in languages that have arrived at a high 
perfection ; and that its value is, consequently, only 
felt in those advanced stages of civilization in which 
men are too wise to be so grossly duped by a mere 
word. Yet it is to it that the Legislator must look, 
as the buoy to which all actions must be moored ; 
and without which, mankind will ever be at the 
mercy of the storms and hurricanes of their pas 
sions. 

44. Principle is alone the true bond of society, 
that binds every man firmly to his neighbour, and 
enables him to reckon upon his word with the same 
certainty as upon another self. When, therefore, 
communities possess this link in perfection, which is 
stronger than any that could be formed of adamant, 
they will arrive at a degree of internal strength and 
prosperity at present unknown : but, unfortunately, in 
the hollowness and unsoundness that inevitably lurk 
in the rapid growth of civilization, cupidity and lust 
but too often assume its appearance, and then spread 
more ruin and misery than could flow from open 
hostility to this uncompromising safeguard of so 
ciety. The importance, therefore, of Principle can 
not be too early inculcated on the minds of child 
ren ; and even one conquest of self, in the infantine 
period of life, will be of inestimable advantage to the 
future man, by giving the child a confidence in his 
own strength of mind, that will grow with his 



OF PRINCIPLE. 



growth, and which nothing can afterwards shake or 
weaken. Unhappily, however, the truth is quite 
overlooked by the generality of mothers, in their 
blind admiration of their offspring ; expecting, in 
their utter ignorance of human nature, that good 
conduct must be the natural attendant upon what, 
they are pleased to think so perfect ; and forgetting 
the profound injunction of Solomon, when he says, 
" Tram up a child in the way he should go ; and when 
he is old, he will not depart from it" If the mother, 
therefore, neglect to instil good Principles, the 
schoolmaster s efforts will be next to useless ; be 
cause bad habits are with difficulty eradicated, and 
the future man will be but the enlargement of 
the child in mind and body. And be it remem 
bered, that a very slight incision made in the tender 
sapling becomes a yawning and unsightly defor 
mity in the full-grown tree, and must continue as 
long as it exists. The stubborn oak, too, may, by 
early training, be made to retain any form into 
which it is bent. Moreover, all education should be 
directed to meet the peculiar propensities of the 
individual ; the knowledge of which requires some 
degree of discernment. The self-willed and selfish 
libertine may be seen in the pampered pet of home ; 
and the remorseless villain is generally shadowed 
out in the cruel and apathetic brat. Nearly every 
instance of moral excellence may be traced to the 
mother s fostering care ; for she, and not the father, 



64 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

is necessarily the child s companion, guide, and 
example. 

45. The word Principle is often employed, 
though perhaps without any necessity, for an element 
in physics. Thus we speak, at one moment, of Che 
mical Principles, and, perhaps, at the next, of the 
Principles of Chemistry, using the word Principle 
in two opposite senses : yet it appears to me to be 
a pity to employ this, or any other term, for more 
than one purpose ; as it cannot but lead to con 
fusion of thought, and, consequently, to the produc 
tion of error. Like all other words that do not 
admit of an obvious analysis, it fails to impress its 
own meaning on the mind of the hearer. Were 
we without it in our language, we might supply its 
place equally well by such words as leading notion, 
prime notion, &c. In morals, a Principle and a 
Rule appear to be alike ; but in reasoning, the 
Principle is as the soul, and the Rule as the body 
which it guides and enlightens. When, therefore, 
we are doubtful of the intention of any Rule or 
Argument, a reference to the Principle upon which 
it has been constructed becomes the sole means 
by which we ascertain how either is to be under 
stood. 



( 65 ) 

Of Fortune., Chance, and Providence. 
46. In all periods of the world, and among all 
nations, certain general words have been in current 
use, to account for the events and vicissitudes of life. 
In antiquity, Fortune played a great part ; and is still 
appealed to, though it has ceased to be worshipped 
as a deity. Chance, in the present times, has the 
same office ; though when employed by one who 
believes in an Intelligent Ruler of nature, it amounts 
to a contradiction of his own convictions. Of such 
words, the most unexceptionable is Providence ; for 
though an abstract term, as it appeals to the fore 
sight of the Deity, it is only expressive by the 
reference it contains ; which is indeed so strong, 
that the word is generally understood as represent 
ing the Deity himself. Nor does it, as in the 
former terms, necessarily preclude the just infe 
rence of reason, that every event must have had an 
immediate cause. The observations I have made 
on Fortune and Chance might be extended to Fate 
and Destiny ; but I feel it is unnecessary to say 
any thing further on this subject. 

Of Matter, Substance, and Body. 

47. These three words are often employed for 
one another, without much attention to the peculiar 
force of each, particularly when they are opposed 



66 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

to spirit ; but contrasted with one another, they have 
distinct senses. Matter is that general term which 
we employ when we speak of the substratum of 
things, without any allusion to their peculiar na 
tures : it is generally opposed to mind. Substance 
implies Matter existing in some peculiar state or 
condition : thus, wood, stone, &c., are Substances : 
it may be opposed to essence. Body, however, refers 
distinctly to form, and is made up of Substance. 
Thus, a tree, a pebble, &c., are Bodies. Its oppo 
site is spirit ; though, should soul be used, it then 
relates exclusively to human kind. It therefore 
follows, that 

48. Matter is the substratum of Substances, and 
Substance of Bodies. 

Of Nature. 

49. Perhaps no word is used so frequently, and 
so indiscriminately, as Nature ; nor is there one that 
leaves so many vague notions on the mind. Were 
we only to attend to such meanings of words as 
result from investigating their etymology, nothing 
would be easier than such a process ; but words 
acquire distinct senses, from their primitives, by 
convention. The term ( Nature we have received 
from the Latin, through the French. In its original 
language, it belongs to a class of words which 



OF NATURE. 67 

imply the act of what the root signifies, as well as 
the result of its action, and which terminate in 
TURA and URA ; such as, STRUCTURA, PRESSURA, C/ESURA, 
&c. NATURA, therefore, as derived from NASCOR, / 
am born, would seem to mean that which is bom, or 
produced. In Greek, Nature is represented by the 
word Qvffig, which is formed from the verb &lt;pvu, I 
bring forth ; or Qvopau, I am born, and the termina 
tion fig, that always expresses the State of whatever 
the root implies ; and in this case, therefore, means, 
state of bringing forth, or of being born; but popularly, 
Nature, Birth, Growth, &c. In the Sanscrit lan 
guage, Nature is represented by the word PRAKRITIS, 
derived from PRA, the same as the Greek and Latin 
PRO, and KRI, to make, which seems to be the very 
original of the Latin CREO, / make ; while TIS is the 
same as the Greek &lt;rig just spoken of. Now, as this 
termination always implies the result of the action 
or state of whatever the root may signify, we must 
see that PRAKRITIS conveys the notion of fore-make, 
or that which was first formed, that is to say, Nature. 
In these words we must feel that nearly the very 
same sense is implied by all, namely, formation, 
production, &c., however different the roots or lan 
guages may be from one another, in which they 
exist. Such words as NATURA, (fivtrig, and PRAKRITIS, 
were all brought into use long before man began to 
reason on the mysteries of life ; and, consequently, 
required to be turned from their original meanings, 

F 2 



68 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

for the new purposes to which they were applied. 
This was as inevitable as unfortunate. Mankind 
will do any thing with their old materials, particu 
larly in the hurry of conversation or the heat of 
argument, rather than make something new that 
would suit the occasion exactly ; and, once em 
ployed, a word is sure to be used again, when the 
same necessity recurs ; and it is finally fixed in its 
new character by habit and convention. This is 
always an unfortunate result in language ; for the 
multiplicity of meanings of any word is certain of 
introducing obscurity and vagueness in its employ 
ment : and of this fact, the variety of senses, and 
the consequent confusion of thought, that results 
from the use of the word Nature, is itself a sufficient 
proof. 

50. If we examine the various senses of the 
Abstract word, Nature, we shall find that they amount 
to about four, in its original and common use ; but to 
these we must add one more, when it is employed, 
as it frequently is, in a comprehensive sense. The 
first and obvious signification of Nature is that which 
implies appearance ; as when we say, How lovely is 
Nature ! on looking at any pleasing object, such as a 
landscape, a flower, c. The second sense is that of 
contrivance, or disposition of parts ; as when we are 
impressed with the conviction of contrivance in the 
adaptation of animals and their organs to the pur- 



OF NATURE. 69 

poses of their being. Thus we say, It is the Nature 
of a fox to be cunning ; of a cat, to scratch when 
angry ; and of a dog, to be affectionate. So we say, 
Wings are fitted by their Nature for flying, and Legs 
for walking. The third sense in which Nature is 
employed, is that of materiality ; as when we ask the 
question, Of what Nature is it ? meaning, Of what, 
substance is it formed ? that is, Is it of wood, stone, 
shell, &c. ? 

51. The employment of Nature as an Agent, 
which is its fourth sense, could only be tolerated in 
those languages that admit of personification by the 
genius of their construction. By this figure, Nature 
is represented as an Agent busy in the production 
and support of this universal frame of being. In this 
sense it is considered by some as an imaginary being. 
But still a question fairly arises, as to what extent 
mankind are justified in attributing Agency in the 
phenomena beheld around them. That there is 
agency in action, no one can doubt ; and though 
they have borrowed a word that, by its origin, does 
not imply agency, but its results, their doing so 
cannot overturn the inference derived from their 
observation. Thus, though the words for soul, in 
Sanscrit, Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic, originally sig 
nified air or breath, their having been thus turned 
aside from their original sense does not destroy the 
existence of the thi-ny they may represent more or 



70 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

less aptly. A ship has not the less a real existence 
because it is called a man-of-war ; and so of any other 
thing. It could not be expected, in the infancy of 
society, that a name for so subtile an Agent should 
have been specifically invented for the occasion ; and 
in those languages which admit of personification, 
its want was not felt, as the multitude use personified 
words in a real sense, and never doubt of their 
actual existence : hence, Nature stood, and conti 
nues to stand, in their minds, for a kind of beneficent 
Being, that is not merely the operative Agent in the 
universe, but lends her assistance as often as the cor 
poreal necessities of animated beings require her aid. 
Thus we say continually, Nature came to his assist 
ance ; Nature made a great cure : and we say with 
equal indifference, either Nature or Instinct teaches 
the bird to make its nest, &c. ; Nature sometimes fails 
in her works; and similar expressions 21 . 

52. A fifth meaning may be assigned to Nature ; 
as when we sum up all we can conceive under the 
expression God and Nature. In this last case, the 
word has the collective sense of all the others, and 

( 21 ) These observations being written while absent from books of 
reference, I have not been able to consult the large edition of 
Dr. Johnson s Dictionary, where I remember he sums up, from Boyle s 
Essay, the various senses of the word Nature. They may, however, be 
acceptable to the reader, as the result of independent thought. They 
will, however, be given in the Appendix, NOTE (C), with some re 
marks of my own. 



OF NATURE. 7 I 

implies Appearance, Contrivance, Agency, and Ma 
teriality. These are, I believe, all the principal 
senses of the word, though undoubtedly others 
exist ; but the only one which really concerns the 
reader is that of Agent. 

53. It may be interesting, to compare these 
views with those which Cicero puts into the mouth 
of Balbus, the Stoic, in his work On the Nature of 
the Gods 22 . 

" Some think that Nature is a certain irrational 
power, exciting in bodies the necessary motions : 
others, that it is an intelligent power, acting by 
order and method, designing some end in every 
cause, and always aiming at that end, whose works 
express such skill, as no art, no hand, can imitate : 
for they say, such is the virtue of its seed, that, 
however small it is, it falls into a place proper for 
its reception, and meets with matter conducive to its 
nourishment and increase ; it forms and produces 
every thing in its respective kind, either vegetables, 
which receive their nourishment from their roots, 
or animals, endowed with motion, sense, appetite, 
and abilities to beget their likeness. Some apply 
the word Nature to every thing ; as Epicurus, who 
acknowledges no cause, but atoms, a void, and their 
accidents. But when we (the Stoics) say that na 
ture forms and governs the world, we do not apply 

( 2 -) Translated by THOMAS FKANCKUN, D.l)., Book II. |&gt;. 111. 



72 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

it to a clod of earth, or a piece of stone, whose parts 
have not the necessary cohesion 23 ; but to a tree, an 
animal, in which there is not the appearance of 
chance, but of order, and a resemblance of art." 

54. The first signification of Nature in this pas 
sage is just the equivalent of what is commonly 
called Power ; as will appear in the following views. 
In its next sense, in which it is personified, it 
approaches very near to that which we call Provi 
dence ; and, in the last, it is employed very much 
in the general and arbitrary way we hear it used in 
familiar conversation. 

Of Necessity. 

55. Few w r ords have had a greater influence over 
the minds of men than that of Necessity; so much 
so, that it might be almost considered to be supe 
rior to the Deity himself. By the help of Realism, 
it has been converted into a reality of the first im 
portance. Indeed, it is not always clear whether 
the Deity is not oftener controlled by Necessity, 
than obeyed. Put into plain English, this mighty 
word means nothing more than unyielding or un 
ceasing STATE, that is, Unyieldingness, or Unceasing - 

( 23 ) There is evidently some error in the original ; which commen 
tators have endeavoured, in vain, to clear up. The context requires a 
word implying design or reason ; structure, for instance ; as a clod, or 
a piece of stone, exhibit cohesion as much as vegetables or animals. 



OF NECESSITY. 



ness; being derived, through the French, from the 
Latin NECESSITAS, a word which in ancient mytho 
logy was personified as the mother of the Fates. 



Of Infinity. 

56. It has been shown in 5 12, that Abstrac 
tions must be referrible to some Concrete Term that 
has at least suggested the notion that led to their 
formation. When, however, we ask ourselves what 
is the Concrete Thing that has suggested the notion 
of Infinity, that is, of endless- STATE, or endlessness, 
we can only reply, if we dare venture so far, that it 
is derived from what is infinite. Should it be again 
demanded of the person who might make such an 
answer, what the thing is which is infinite, he would 
be brought into great difficulty ; for he could not 
point out, or produce, any thing which is infinite. 
He might possibly say, that the universe is infinite ; 
but as he had never seen the whole of the universe, 
he w^ould fairly beg the question, and fall into an 
absurdity at the same time : for if it could be called 
a whole, it would be definite, and not indefinite, 
which every thing infinite must be, by the same 
reason that the moment a thing can be said to be 
definite, it is finite, either in number or quantity. 
The notion of Infinity, therefore, is a mere effect of 
those conceptions that depend upon our putting 
sounds together, and is, consequently, a non-entity ; 



74 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

for even in imagining a space to be succeeded by a 
space, and that by another, and so on, we can never 
arrive at the notion of Infinity ; and wherever we 
leave off, though we have added one system of stars 
to another, mentally, we have, at the best, only 
reached, even in imagination, to what is finite. But 
we can take the question up under another point of 
view, that will leave us no room to doubt the fore 
going conclusions. Every thing of which the human 
intellect is cognisant, can be considered as repre- 
sentable by a definite number. Thus we must sup 
pose the number of the planets and satellites of our 
system to be of a certain definite amount, be they 
thirty, forty, or whatsoever number any one might 
fix upon. But if we were to assert, that though they 
did not exceed fifty, yet that they were indefinite, 
because their number was unknown to us, we should 
certainly be deemed insane ; for every one will 
allow, that they must be equal to a certain number, 
if they exist at all. Now, what are we to think of 
the number of all the other heavenly bodies is it 
definite, or indefinite ? He who shall answer that 
they are definite in number, will then have tacitly 
admitted that they are not infinite; and he who 
shall be of opinion that they are indefinite, will 
have acknowledged that they have no existence. 
Here, then, is a dilemma, from which we cannot 
escape ; and we shall arrive at a similar contradic 
tion between reason and sense, as often as we push 



OF INFINITY. 75 

any question in nature to an extreme. In every 
point of view, therefore, Infinity is a mere sound. 
We here see a ease that points out most clearly to 
us that the intellect is the helpless captive of a chain 
of words it has forged for its own use, and which 
never can be permanently burst asunder ; since, at 
the very moment that reason and reflection break a 
few of the links, they re-unite of themselves, by the 
mere effect, of habit. With these very chains, how 
ever, man presumes to think he can measure and 
survey all things ; and, in the war of words, dares 
to strike down every adversary, who, from want of 
equal dexterity or opportunity, has not been able to 
forge shackles for himself of equal weight and size. 
So proud, too, is he of these bonds, made by his own 
ingenuity, that he looks down with sovereign con 
tempt upon those who are not equally encumbered ; 
and, as the reward of the fallacies with which he 
has, in his own conceit, fortified his understanding, 
he becomes the theme of admiration and idolatry 
with those who are, in fact, less benighted than him 
self ; and who are really his superiors, inasmuch as 
they are conscious of the darkness in which all 
things are involved ; for to have no opinion, is better 
than to have one that is false. Hobbes has remarked, 
" As men abound in copiousness of language, so they 
become more wise or more mad than ordinary 
From these observations it follows, that 

( 24 ) Leviathan, Part I. chap. 4. p. 15. 



2-i " 



76 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

57. Infinity is an abstraction., abstracted from 
nothing ; and therefore a pure assumption, suggested 
to us by SENSE, and unsupported by REASON. 



Of Individuality. 

58. No question, not even Infinity itself, has so 
much puzzled mankind as that of Individuality. The 
greater effort we make to gain a clear conception 
of its nature, the more we feel bewildered ; nor can 
any exertion of the mind enable us to grasp the 
phantom that we propose for our comprehension. 
It is in vain that we attempt to renew our efforts, 
and to exert all the attention of which we are mas 
ters ; it absolutely escapes from us, as we seem to 
approach it ; and, yet, maliciously, to dance before 
us, like some visionary spectre, which the day-dream 
of the maniac has conjured up for the purpose of 
tormenting its victim. Nor is it very difficult to 
assign the cause, where we are seeking for a sub 
stance, when there exists only a shadow ; in short, 
for something, where there is nothing but a sound. 
As an Abstraction, Individuality can have no exis 
tence ; and when we resolve it into its elements, it 
simply implies individual-^ A.^^ ; which State, as I 
have shown ( 5 12), being nothing more than a 
figment of the intellect, we have, of course, been in 
pursuit of what is as unreal, as the Will o the Wisp, 
which misleads the benighted wanderer. To keep 



OF INDIVIDUALITY. 77 

our understandings, therefore, in a sane state, let us 
always remember, that though we can think of indi 
viduals, we can only talk of individuality. 

Of Relation (Abstract}. 

59. My great object in the present work being 
not merely to make the mass of mankind think for 
themselves, but to think justly, the reader must bear 
with me if I occasionally split a subject "to very 
rags," in attempting to lay it open to the view of all. 
There are many words that we are in the habit of 
using, and which we employ with the nicest accuracy 
in reasoning, by that delicate intellectual tact with 
which we are endowed through our organization, yet, 
of which, if we were called upon at a moment s notice, 
we could not give the slightest account. The words 
Quality and Relation are two of these : and indeed 
I may say, I never met with any one, but who, even 
after exhibiting great talent in using them, while 
discussing some metaphysical point, seemed quite as 
if he was deprived of his understanding upon being 
suddenly asked what he conceived to be the nature 
of Quality or Relation. For the obscurity of the 
first word there seems to be some excuse : but this 
cannot be said to be the case with regard to Rela 
tion ; for it clearly expresses the state of the things 
that we conceive to be related, that is, their related- 
STATE, or rehitedncss. For instance, I see a horse 



78 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

and a man utterly unconnected with one another. 
I can at once, by an effort of my mind, cause them 
to be related, or, abstractly speaking, bring them 
into relation with one another. I can think of them 
both as animals : there is an immediate relation 
between them in my mind, by attributing Animality 
to both, without any alteration in their previous con 
dition. Or, I can fancy the Man to have bought 
the Horse : there is then the relation of Possessor 
and Possessed in my mind. Now the reader will, 
from these familiar instances, clearly see, that the 
word Relation is only a mental conception ; and that 
even if the Man and the Horse, just supposed, were 
really placed in the imagined states, though the 
Relations would then be actual, they would only be 
the result of a mental operation which depended 
on language for its existence. For let us suppose 
the Man and the Horse to be viewed in reality in 
the imagined cases by a man born deaf and dumb, 
and who had never been taught to read or write ; as 
he could never classify them in his mind as Animals, 
he could have no means of attributing a common 
nature to them, because he would only see the Man 
and the Horse, and he could likewise never think of 
the relation of Possession ; for a Relation not being 
like an image, he could not, from want of lan 
guage, conceive any thing of the kind : and further, 
in the last case, though he might be sufficiently 
aware, by long experience of the value of money, 



OF RELATION (ABSTRACT). 79 

that the Man had bought the Horse, the notion of 
Ownership would be unknown to him, for the reason 
already assigned ; namely, that from his ignorance 
of language he had not the slightest conception of 
such an Abstract Relation ; and the utmost he could 
possibly conceive, would be, that the Man was the 
owner of the Horse. The reader will see, from these 
familiar illustrations, that Relations are but Abstract 
States, formed by the means of language : and he 
must remember, from what has been already said 
( 5 12), that Abstractions, that is, Abstract Rela 
tions, are mere figments, invented by the intellect 
for the purpose of reasoning, just as algebraic signs 
are mere symbols by which Relations of number 
or quantity are compared. All he has to do with 
this, or any other Abstract Term, that may perplex 
him for the moment, is to reduce it to its original, 
which he will always find to be either a verb or an 
adjective. Relation itself, therefore, is to be referred 
to the verb to be related ; and the reader will re 
member, that every Relation necessarily supposes a 
mind capable of conceiving two or more tilings or 
acts, as being related to one another, either tempo 
rarily or permanently. 

Of Relation (Personal}. 

60. Language not merely enables us to form 
Abstract Relations, but to bring the whole social 



80 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

world into a union that could never have existed 
without it ; for by it man has been enabled to invent 
terms that bind the whole fabric of society together. 
Thus we have Sovereign and Subject, Master and 
Servant, Husband and Wife, Father and Child, Land 
lord and Tenant, and a multitude of other terms that 
have been invented to express the Relation we stand 
in reciprocally to one another. By the existence of 
these, we are reminded of our duties, even without 
the aid of morals. Though these words are general 
terms applicable to persons, they are as purely con- 
ceptional as those that are abstract ; for it would be 
as utterly impossible to prove their existence or 
reality, as it would be that of whiteness, goodness, 
greatness, &c., though they are of quite a different 
class of words. They are not the names of persons, 
but their supposed States or conditions. Were we 
to see an individual who was unknown to us, we 
might be informed that he was a Sovereign, a Mas 
ter, a Husband, a Father, and a Landlord 25 ; but we 
could not be certain of the fact, though he might 
combine all these Relations in the mind of the per 
sons from whom we had received our information : 
but if we were told that he was a man, we should 
smile, because our senses, in all probability, would 

( 25 ) In addition to the foregoing Relations, he might be a brother, an 
uncle, a grandfather, a nephew, &c. ; yet no one would be foolish enough 
to suppose that he had so many individual natures, as he stood in rela 
tions to others in the minds of those who spoke about him. 



OF RELATION (PERSONAL). 81 

previously have rendered the information unneces 
sary. This points out to us, that words implying 
Relations are of a class differing from that which 
includes the names of Things. Were we desirous of 
applying the sense of the foregoing words to persons, 
in terms that do not express Personal Relationship, 
we must make use of those that stand for Agents. 
Thus for Sovereign, we can employ Ruler-, for Fa 
ther, Begetter ; and for Landlord, Land-Letter ; and 
so on for others. 



Of Correlation (Abstract and Personal}. 

G1. Though many words express Relation, there 
are only a few, strictly speaking, that possess Corre 
lations ; but the others have each an opposite, with 
which they stand in contrast. Thus Goodness im 
plies Badness, Elevation, Depression, c. The word 
Cause equally suggests its Correlation, Effect; and 
the mention of this last, likewise, immediately calls 
up the notion of Cause. Hence we see that they 
are necessarily connected. The same is the case 
with all personal Relations. They have every one 
a specific Correlation. Husband has Wife ; Father, 
Child; &c. Some, indeed, must, from their being 
connected with sex, have double Correlations; as 
Father has both Son and Daughter \ Uncle, both 
Nephew and Niece ; c. The mention of any Relation 
must call up one of its corresponding Correlations : 



82 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

the same is equally true of the Correlations, which 
must do the same. Should we, however, consider 
Effect, Son, Wife, &c. as Relations, then Cause, Father, 
Husband, &c. are their reciprocal Correlations ; but 
it is more usual to call (if I may employ the expres 
sion) the major the Relation, and the minor the 
Correlation. I think, as I have included Abstract 
and Personal Correlations under one head, it will be 
as well to enumerate here such Relations, Abstract 
and Personal, with their Correlations, as seem of 
most importance. 

ABSTRACT. 
Relations. Correlations. 

Cause. Effect. 

Reason. Consequence. 

Motive Act or Result. 

Origin. End. 

Agency. Act. 

Source. Product. 

62. These are all the Abstract Relations that at 
this moment present themselves to my mind ; but 
the following are some that are Personal. 

PERSONAL. 
Relations. Correlations. 

Parent. Offspring. 

Sovereign. Subject. 

Master. Servant. 

Landlord. Tenant. 



OF CORRELATION (ABSTRACT AND PERSONAL). 81 

63. These Personal Relations and Correlations 
might be carried to a great extent ; but the instances 
here given will be sufficient, as examples : yet the 
Terms, though accurate, are not sufficiently precise, 
because they might be applied to such words as 
Goodness and Badness, which are the mere contraries 
of one another. The two classes, therefore, would 
be much more exactly defined by the terms major 
and minor Relations ; for the reason that Cause is 
always superior to Effect, Source to Product, &c. So 
Offspring, Wife, Servant, Tenant, &c. are subordinate, 
but not opposite to their Correlations, Parent, Hus 
band, Master, Landlord, &c. Metaphysicians having 
had a vague feeling that Abstract Relations pro 
duced their Correlations, and forgetting or ignorant 
that they were but Abstractions, they were led to 
mix up the question of physical power with that of 
cause and effect, and, consequently, arrived at con 
clusions altogether absurd and irreconcileable with 
common sense. See 94. 

Of Quality. 

64. I have now to give an account of the most 
important word employed in metaphysics. Quality 
is the very rock of metaphysical systems : when exa 
mined, however, it will be found to vanish into " thin 
air," and to leave us nothing as a residuum. We 
have derived this word from the Latin, through the 

G 2 



84 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

French ; and it was brought into use in the former 
language by Cicero, in explaining the metaphysical 
notions of the Greeks. The Greek word for it being 
irotorw, he naturally made an equivalent; which gave 
him QUALITAS, derived from QUALIS, implying, like 
vrolog, what ? or, what manner ? Thus far every thing 
is very good; for even the two words, from which 
the Greek and Latin were formed, have a closer 
relationship than is commonly supposed. But when 
we come to inquire what the exact sense of these 
two Abstract Terms is, we find we can represent 
them in English by the words what-manner- STAVE, 
or what-manner-ness 2G , both of which, though a little 
bald and strange, only require time and use to 
make them pass current for the same end as the 
orthodox word Quality. The Arabs, in translating 
Greek works, were in the same difficulty that 
Cicero had been ; and strained the genius of their 
language a little to form the word KAIFIYAT % from 
the adverb KAIFA, how ? Hence their compound im 
plies how-ness, instead of what-manner-ness ; but the 
difference is so very slight, as to be of no practical 
consequence. The word so formed is still in current 

( 26 ) The reader must feel that the argument deals with the nature 
of these Abstract Terms, and not with this or that shade of meaning. 
Perhaps iroTo? and QUALIS, if referred to their probable Sanscrit origi 
nals, might be rendered what-like, instead of what-manner : in this case 
the sense will be what-like-ness. 

( 2r ) Meninski, in his Lexicon, explains the word KAIFIYAT by 
" Qualitas, modus, (quasi, quomodeitas)." 



OF QUALITY. 85 

use in the Turkish, Persian, and Hindustani lan 
guages ; and very probably in those of some other 
Mahomedan nations. Now, most likely, the reader 
has not only never doubted of the reality of Quali 
ties, but possibly never took the trouble of inquiring 
into the exact meaning of the word. In all proba- 
bility, he will be a little surprised at the influence 
mere sounds have exercised over his understanding, 
when he feels their exact import; and he will, 
perhaps, be likewise convinced of the delusiveness 
of the division, made by metaphysicians, of Qualities 
into primary and secondary. We can have no 
notion of Qualities, except through the words that 
represent them. Thoagh we may talk of redness or 
whiteness as separate and real existences, yet, if we 
would understand what they mean, we must think 
of some objects that are Red or White ; for when we 
recall them to mind, we remember the images, 
that is, the particular pictures, or figured repre 
sentations, they raised, which were either Red or 
White : but it is evident we have no Conception of 
Red or White that is not coupled with some material 
thing, or arising from its action on our optic nerve. 
Still, objects are neither Red nor White ; it is only 
something reflected from them (photogen 2 *), which 

(-) The word light implying merely a sensation, some new term is 
necessary, to distinguish the cause from the effect, just in the same way 
as with respect to caloric and heat. See 4. 



86 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

stimulates the retina, and makes it feel in the way 
we call Red, White, &c. 

65. When we speak therefore of Qualities, we 
must always bear in mind, that we do so by a mere 
form of speech indispensable to reasoning; but, that 
they have no more foundation in truth, than the 
phrases sunrise and sunset; which we still use, and 
must continue to do, though we are now convinced 
that the sun neither rises nor sets, and that such 
appearances are made by the rotation of the earth 
on its axis. In the same way, though Sensible Qua 
lities are mere words, we must never forget, when 
we employ them, that we merely mean to say, that, 
through the stimulation of the brain and nerves, the 
percipient feels hot, cold, &c., and his retina, Red, 
White, &c. : for Sensible Qualities must necessarily 
be in the subject or percipient ; yet they, as well as 
those that are Intellectual, are commonly held to be 
in the object, or thing contemplated. It would be 
just as rational to say that the pain or pleasure we 
feel from cold or heat exists only in the object pro 
ducing it, as to assert that the cold or heat we feel, 
on placing our hand on something cold or hot, 
exists only in the thing that has absorbed caloric 
from us, or communicated it to us ; for heat and 
cold are mere sensations, and so it will be allowed 
are pleasure and pain. When, therefore, I put my 
hand on a jug filled with boiling water, and reason 



OF QUALITY. 



on the subject, I am conscious that the jug is not 
Hot, but that my hand/eds hot by the transfer of 
caloric from the jug to it; and it is the same with 
all other Sensible Qualities, which exist, therefore, 
only in the organs of sense of the individual who 
perceives them. 

66. Whenever our sight makes known any 
colour to us, it must be bounded, that is, have what 
is called a Form, if the object is small enough to be 
seen at once ; but if not, it extends to the whole 
range of vision ; which is necessarily round, because 
it is so limited by the orifice of the eye, through 
which the rays of colour are admitted. We never, 
therefore, can see any colour without the certainty 
that it belongs to some object, that is, that there 
some real thing before us which we see with c 
eyes- for even when we look at the expanse of 
heaven, its azure hue (the blue sensation made on 
our retina) only arises from the absorption in t 
atmosphere of all the other rays, except 
which is reflected to the eye. Here, therefore, the 
real thing before us is the air; which we have 
much right to say we see, in this instance, as whe, 
we think we see a house or any other object that 
stands before us, and at which we look ; for : 
every case we see nothing at all, but only feel the 
particular kind of stimulation caused by one or moi 
Ls of light transmitted to us. All, therefore, we 



88 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

can really and truly say, is, that our retina feels 
white, red, &c. ; and that these colours have certain 
shapes, upon which we found the belief that certain 
objects are then before us, which we likewise learn 
from sound, touch, taste, or smell. But the whole 
of these sensations can do no more than confirm one 
another ; and then we have, altogether, five witnesses, 
instead of one : still, we can offer no proof that the 
whole five may not be all deceptive. The reader, 
however, must now see that these five kinds of evi 
dence being only our own feelings, we have no 
other proof for the reality of nature than the fact 
that we can feel in five different ways. Yet this 
simple truth is, from the trickery of language, 
represented, or rather misrepresented, by certain 
Abstract Terms we call Sensible Qualities or what- 
manner-nesses ! 

67. With regard to Intellectual Qualities, they 
exist only in the intellect of the person who draws 
the inference ; and they are necessarily in Relation 
to his own opinions, whether borrowed or self- 
acquired ; and they will consequently vary with his 
knowledge and his fortunes, as well as with the 
exigency of his situation at any particular moment. 
Thus a peasant lad would think every thing, in the 
house of the farmer for whom he worked, great, 
fine, excellent, &c. ; but should he have an opportu 
nity of seeing the superior riches and conveniences 



OF QUALITY. 89 

found in the mansion of his master s landlord, his 
notions would be very much modified. He, in all 
probability, would think every thing he had previ 
ously seen, paltry and contemptible, in comparison 
with what his new experience had made known to 
him ; and even his last notions would be quite 
eclipsed, were chance to introdace him to the sight 
of the splendour and magnificence of a palace. But 
to the eye of a philosopher, the utmost magnificence 
might raise nothing but a smile of pity for the glit 
tering gewgaws, with which the highest earthly 
rank attempts to dazzle the minds of the common 
herd of mankind. In the same way, what one in 
dividual, or one state of society, may think worthy of 
the highest approbation, may be looked upon, by 
another, as utterly base, and injurious to the best in 
terests of our race. Thus suicide was once re 
garded as heroic, and worthy of a great man, when 
deserted by fortune ; yet 

To act a lover s or a Roman s part " 

would scarcely meet with any applause in these 
days. There are, however, certain Intellectual Qua 
lities, which, as unvarying truths, must always be 
good or bad; because the universal reason of man 
kind must ever approve or disapprove of them, in 
reference to the immutable fitness of things, and the 
inexorable claims arising out of human society. 
The eternal distinction between Right and Wrong 



90 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

can never vary. ; Truth, too, must be always one and 
unchangeable ; and Justice must ever be what it is 
now, and what it has been ; nor can Honour ever 
shrink an atom from the scrupulous and voluntary 
fulfilment of its engagements, whether tacitly or 
openly made ; that is to say, through the duties 
incumbent on us by our peculiar position in society, 
or by our formal pledges to mankind. These obser 
vations lead to the inference, that, 

68. Qualities are either Sensible, or Intellectual. 



Of Property. 

69. The analogy between the terms Quality 
and * Property is so strong, that a few words will be 
quite sufficient to explain the meaning of the latter. 
The word Property has also been borrowed from 
the French ; and is a corruption of the Latin PRO- 
PRIETAS, derived from PROPRIUS, own, proper, &c. The 
Property, therefore, of any substance implies the 
own-si: ATE, or own-ness, of that substance ; neither of 
which, the reader will admit, is so pleasing in sound, 
though they are both equally cogent in sense, with 
the word ( Property. To these remarks I might add, 
that the Arabs appear to have turned the Greek 
thorns, which had led to the Latin PROPRIETAS, into 
KHASSIYAT ; so that all three have exactly the same 
sense. This word, like KAIFIYAT, is still in common 



OF PROPERTY. 91 

use. Like the word Quality, a Property may be 
either Sensible or Intellectual. Thus Length is the 
Sensible Property of a string, as it can be discovered 
by both sight and feeling ; but the Properties of the 
circle being only discoverable by the intellect, are 
purely Intellectual. From these remarks it is evi 
dent, that 

70. Properties, from their nature, may be eitlwr 
Sensible, or Intellectual, 



Of Peculiarity, 

71. The term Peculiarity is so familiar, and so 
obvious in its meaning, that, except for the sake of 
completing the whole view regarding Qualities and 
Properties, it might very well have been omitted. 
The Peculiarity of any thing is that which distin 
guishes it from others of the same class. As I shall 
immediately have to contrast Qualities, Properties, 
and Peculiarities with one another, the exact import 
of the last term will be sufficiently apparent, when 
brought into juxta-position with the two former: 
from which it will be seen, that Peculiarities, like 
Qualities and Properties, may be both Sensible and 
Intellectual. A Peculiarity, in short, is nothing more 
than a Quality that is of rare occurrence. Thus 
whiteness in a crow is a Peculiarity made known to 
us by sight, and is, therefore, Sensible ; but timidity 



92 OP ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

in a lion would, if observed, be an Intellectual Pecu 
liarity ; because such a Quality could only be ascer 
tained by an effort of the intellect. Peculiarity is 
likewise used to express any unusual Form as well 
as STATE. The hump of the Indian cow is regarded 
as a Peculiarity in Europe; and the want of it 
would be considered a Peculiarity in India. 

72. Peculiarity, therefore, implies Unusualness, 
both of Quality and Form, in reference to the ex 
perience of the observer. 

Of Quality, Property, and Peculiarity. 

73. Having explained the nature of a Quality 
and a Property, I mean now to define the exact 
manner in which they should be employed. By a 
Quality we always mean something adventitious; 
and which, though removed, in no way destroys the 
object in which it is commonly held to exist. Thus 
a flower may lose its fragrance, yet it will still 
remain a flower ; but by a Property we invariably 
intend that which is essential to the very existence 
of the thing; roundness, for example, in a ball. 
Thus, to exemplify these terms, we may assert, that 
the colour of a wheel is its Quality ; roundness, its 
Property ; and to be of metal, when it is usually of 
wood, its Peculiarity. Here we see the extreme 
propriety of the word Property ; which, meaning 



OF QUALITY, PROPERTY, AND PECULIARITY. 



93 



own-ness, implies that it belongs to the thing itself, 
and that without the possession of which it would 
cease to be what it is : hence, likewise, its applica 
bility to express our own possessions * . All those 
attributes of bodies which metaphysicians call Pri 
mary Qualities are really nothing more than their 
Properties : these are, Figure, Length, Breadth, Ex 
tension, Impenetrability, &c. : for let us take away any 
one of these essentials, and the thing ceases to be. 
This fact is a proof that they reasoned not merely 
erroneously, but actually without any precise know 
ledge of the terms they employed. Nay, so incon 
siderate were they, that they even included Motion 
wdRest, both implying States; and also Number, 
which is a Relation among the Primary Qualities : 
and perhaps the following extract from Berkeley s 
Essay on Human Knowledge will not be out of place 
as demonstrating the inconsistencies of metaphysical 
writers : Some there are," he says, who make a 
distinction betwixt primary and secondary Qualiti. 
by the former, they mean extension, figure, mot 
rest, solidity, or impenetrability and number : 
latter, they denote all other sensible Qualities, as 
lours, sounds, tastes, and so forth."- -The reader must 
see that in this division of Qualities into Primary 
and Secondary, besides its absurdity, it altogether 
lits those that are intellectual. When we reason 



That is. our own-sTATK or -,*/. 



94 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

respecting the Qualities of any object, we fancy we 
have very definite notions about it ; but were we to 
talk of its what-manner-nesses, though the term is 
much more significant, we should be at once aware 
that nothing could be more vague than our expres 
sions ; and that, consequently, our conceptions on the 
point must be most incomplete. With regard to 
Secondary Qualities, the notion is equally incorrect 
as that of the Primary division. For both I have 
substituted Sensible and Intellectual. It is worthy of 
remark in this place, as giving some insight into the 
nature of the human intellect, that people who have 
received a very slight education often apply the 
words Quality, Property, Peculiarity, &c. with the 
nicest accuracy, by a sort of contrivance in the frame 
of the intellect, that saves all effort on the part of 
the speaker ; and yet the profoundest thinkers 
are in danger of falling into great inconsistencies, 
the moment they attempt to define and classify 
these or other Abstract Words. See the remarks 
in 112. 

Of Cause and Effect. 

74. In the whole range of metaphysics, there is 
not any subject that has been so much perplexed by 
philosophical inquirers, nor one in which language 
plays a more delusive part, than in that of Cause and 
Effect ; and yet I think I shall be able to demon- 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 95 

strate, that there is not any inherent difficulty in the 
question, if it be properly considered. 

75. It might have been presumed, that the very 
assertion that these words are related or connected 
(which is made by every one who speaks of the 
relation or connexion of Cause and Effect) might 
have saved so much misconception. But this would 
be to suppose that people felt 30 the force of the 
words they employ. Both these terms are merely 
Abstractions of that class, which is called Relations 
and Correlations ; and they, consequently, distinctly 
claim connexion with one another. Hence the Terms 
Cause and Effect are necessarily connected; for it 
is impossible to think of the word Cause, without 
its suggesting the notion of Effect ; nor of Effect, 
without its calling up the conception of Cause. Those, 
therefore, who deny a necessary connexion between 
Cause and Effect should abstain from employing 
these Terms ; for it is as preposterous and incon 
sistent, as it would be to speak of sunrise and sunset, 
and yet to deny the existence of the sun. Cause 
and Effect, then, being nothing but a Relation with 
its Correlation, and such words being mere States, 
it is only necessary to reflect for a moment, and we 

(30) If this be the case with our own expressions, there exists but 
little chance of being rightly comprehended by others. I have myself 
been the object of misrepresentation, because a Reviewer c 
discriminate between a a reasoning being" and a rational being! 



96 OP ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

shall be certain that all we intend to express by them 
is, that we conceive that the first State (Cause) pro 
duces a second or correlative State (Effect). Again, 
if we ask ourselves the exact meaning of these two 
States, we must feel, that that which implies Cause, 
means the State which alters (not some other thing, 
but another STATE) ; and that which signifies Effect, 
the State which is altered : or, if we use compound 
Terms, they may both, respectively, be expressed by 
the Altering-STATE and the Altered-sTATE , for the 
whole process of the mind in Reasoning is, like that 
of Calculation, purely abstract. And here I think it 
right to remind the reader, that whenever we wish to 
avoid the use of the term Cause or ( Effect, we ought 
to remember that we have the alternative of employ 
ing simple, in place of abstract language. Thus, if we 
do not desire to use the abstract word i Cause, in such 
a sentence as, Thomas was the Cause of Williams 
death, we can have recourse to the direct form, and 
say, Thomas killed William. In the first of these two 
examples, the matter is just put as abstractly as if it 
were stated, algebraically, a = b ; 31 and, consequently, 

( 31 ) All Reasoning is solely carried on by means of Abstractions : and 
when such Abstractions are limited to number and quantity, they can 
then be represented by ciphers and symbols that are employed for that 
particular branch of reasoning called Calculation : the only difference 
between them being, that in common arithmetic we are obliged to sup 
ply (mentally) the connecting words required, such as, and, make, to, 
from, by, into, &c. For instance, 2 (and} 2 (make) 4 ; but in Algebra, 
the nature of the process required that the state of the Relations should 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 97 

has nothing to do with either physical Agency or 
Power; but in the second, we may suppose the 
transmission of such power from the Agent to the 
Object, and producing his death. 

76. Having thus shown the Abstract character 
of Cause and Effect, I now proceed to demonstrate, 
that these words are also General in their nature, and, 
as such, are invariably the representatives of any 
Particular Conception. Thus we commonly say, if a 
wall fall upon a man and kill him, that The wall was 
the Cause of his death ; but the wall merely stood in 
the Relation of Cause, and the Abstract Agency that 
is conceived to produce his death was the Falling (of 
the wall). But such sentences being always elliptical, 
they would, if fully expressed, enounce that The wall 
STOOD IN THE RELATION ofCttuse to that Effect. It is no 
matter what sentence we may analyse, in which Cause 
is mentioned ; for we shall find that the particular 
word which is the real Cause is a Noun of Action 



be fully expressed ; and they are accordingly represented by signs + , 
_, x, -f, =, &c., which have superseded the more cumbrous use of 
words of the early stage of the science. Every one is aware, that a 
Calculation may be conducted in such a way, that the process shall not 
include the slightest error ; and yet, that if the data were either insuf 
ficient or erroneous, the Calculation must be useless. It is the_samc 
with Reasoning ; for if the facts arc either incomplete or faulty, the con 
clusion any one may arrive at will be equally so. Hence it is clear, 
that we may reason with perfect correctness, and yet be quite wrong in 
the result. 

II 



98 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

ending in ing., such as that of Falling, just given r or 
in tion, in that of Ignition, which I shall mention 
directly. For instance, a hailstone breaks a window : 
it is not the hailstone, but its Breaking, that is the 
Cause of the Fracture. So if I say, Heat is the Cause of 
Fluidity, \i is, Heat stands in the Relation of Producing 
to the abstract result Fluidity. Cause and Effect, 
therefore, are the mere General Forms which the in 
tellect employs in place of the particular expression 
which the case requires, as is discovered the moment 
the sentence is analysed. In the instances of Falling, 
Breaking, and Producing, as the Particular Notions 
represented by the term Cause, we must see that 
they all denote the altering- STATE, or action of the 
wall, the hailstone, and the heat ; and the results that 
arose from them respectively, namely, Death, Frac 
ture, and Fluidity, were the altered- STATES of the man, 
the window, and the solid, as the objects affected by 
them. This points out why we cannot with propriety 
say, I cause it; for if we could use this expression, we 
could equally well employ, / breaking it, I producing 
it. It is different, however, with the word fracture : 
for as we can say, I fractured it, so we can also say, 
/ effected it. When Cause is employed as a personal 
agent as when we say, He was the Cause of it we 
actually make as great a mistake as if we said, He was 
the Breaking of it : and in those languages that em 
ploy a word equivalent to Causer, the error is as 
great as if they added er to the word Breaking, or 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 99 

any other noun implying Action, and said Breakingcr, 
Prodncinger, &c., instead of employing Breaker, Pro 
ducer, c. See 110. It is obvious, therefore, from 
the whole tenour of these observations, that Cause 
and Effect are the most General Notions we can trace 
of any Abstract Agency ; and that whether we say The 
Breaking produced the Fracture, or The hailstone broke 
the window, we do in neither case, that is to say, 
either by the abstract or the simple form of expres 
sion, allude or refer openly, or covertly, to Cause 
and Effect. To do so, then, we must invariably and 
explicitly say, or understand, such and such an Abs 
traction is the Cause, or is the Effect ; but ivhen we 
consider it UNDER THIS ASPECT, we then call into ope 
ration one of the most General Forms of expression 
the human intellect has at its disposal. Where, there 
fore, there is no knowledge of language, there can 
be no Cause and Effect. No one will suppose that 
a horse thinks of either, when he feels the rider s leg 
move to give him the spur; yet it is sufficient to 
make him mend his pace. 

77. The process by which any one might form to 
himself the notion of this Relation may be explained 

( 32 ) The word Widower affords an excellent example of the mistakes 
we fall into, when we are not aware of the exact import of the original 
term which we take as a basis. Widow, like the Latin VIDUA, is derived 
from the Sanscrit VIDHAVA, that is, vi without UHAVAS, a husband ; so 
that Widower implies a man without a husband, if we refer it to its 
Sanscrit originals ; but a he-widow, according to its English derivation. 

it 2 



100 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

as follows. Suppose a child to apply a piece of 
paper to a lighted candle, he would see it take fire 
and disappear ; and if asked about it, would simply 
reply, that the candle had burnt the paper : but he 
would not have the most remote conception of Cause 
and Effect ; and that for the best of reasons, namely, 
that he had no knowledge of this or any other Rela 
tion. We will suppose him arrived at maturity, and 
to make a repetition of the same act. Having by 
this time become master of the phrase i Cause and 
Effect and other Abstractions, he could now say, 
that the candle w r as the Cause, and what took place, 
the Effect ; and so he would think he knew all about 
it : but if we suppose him to be able to reflect, we 
may imagine him to have some knowledge of the 
real value of words, and, consequently, to feel that 
the term Effect was but an Abstraction, and, that 
though he had thought the candle to be the Cause, 
this could not possibly be the case, as a Concrete 
Thing (the candle) could not produce the Abstract 
State Effect. After a little consideration, he would 
see, that if the Correlation Effect was an Abstrac 
tion, its Relation must be equally so. He might then 
ask himself what was the particular Effect that oc 
curred in the instance of the candle, and he would 
feel that it was Combustion. The moment he 
was aware of this, he would seek for the particular 
Abstraction that the mind required to stand in Re 
lation to it, and he would discover that it was 



s 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 101 

ignition 33 . He would now feel that the Ignition 
(by the candle) produced the Combustion (of the 
paper) ; and, that when the matter was expressed 
solely by General Language, The candle only STOOD 
IN THE RELATION of C-tiise (the ignition) to the Effect 
(combustion), and that both Cause and Effect were 
simply Abstractions of the highest generality, and not 
Things. If acquainted with the elements of algebra, 
he would be aware that he could not say candle = b ; 
but, that if he used the abstract sign I), he must com 
pare it with another sign equally abstract, and he 
would consequently say a = b. This shows to what 
an extent metaphysicians have deceived themselves, 
in supposing that Things and Physical Power had any 
thing to do with the Abstract and General Conception 
Cause and Effect. And as to the sequences they 
talk about, these, though they do exist in a limited 
degree in nature and art 34 , have nothing to do with 
the intellectual sequences which are alone connected 
with this Relation. For instance, A Good Disposition 
and Cultivation stand in the Relation of Causes to Good 
Principles: these, too, stand in the same Relation to 
Virtuous Actions ; and these, again, to Happiness. Not- 

( 31 ) Here it is evident that ignition is the altering-sTATE, and com- 
buxtion the altercd-STATE. The previous state of the paper was cohesion, 
in which combustion has induced a change of State or condition ; that is 
to say, such is the Abstract Expression of the fact : hut the simple truth 
that is evident to the senses is, as a child would express himself, 
that The candle burnt the paper. 

( 31 ) See 11 of Note (B) of the Appendix. 



102 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

withstanding, however, the continual reference made 
by Hume and others to the notion of sequence, there 
are very few sequences in nature which stand in the 
Relation of Cause and Effect. Thus, one season 
does not produce another; Winter does not give 
rise to Spring ; nor does the greenness of the leaf 
in Spring occasion the brown tint observed in it in 
Autumn ; the flow does not force on the ebb of the 
tide, nor the ebb the flow ; neither does day draw 
on the night, nor night the day. The Antecedents, 
in all these cases, are not the Causes, but the Con 
ditions of their Consequents ; the only Relation they 
stand in to one another being that of Contrast. 

78. The word Cause is so often confounded with 
Reason and Motive, that I feel that the next step 
should be to clear up the ambiguity. Let us sup 
pose we saw an infant lying dead, which we ex 
pected to find alive and well, we should naturally 
ask What was the Cause of its death? and if we were 
answered Neglect 35 , the Cause would then be as 
signed: but if we asked again, By whose neglect? 
and were told, By its mother s, our knowledge of the 
Cause would be enlarged, by being put in possession 
of the Reason : and if we pushed our inquiries 

( &gt;is ) Here we see an instance that an Abstract Word can stand in the 
Relation of Cause ; a thing never suspected to such an extent has 
this question been misunderstood. Cause always represents abstract, 
and never physical agency. 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 103 

further, and demanded ON what account ? and were 
answered, From her antipathy to it; we should then 
have the Motive, as we already had the Cause and 
the Reason of its death. Here we see, clearly, why 
these notions are so closely connected together in 
the mind : and, as it will be necessary, hereafter, to 
investigate each of them in its proper place, I shall 
content myself with having pointed out the reason of 
their being so often substituted for one another. 
Having premised these general remarks, I proceed 
to consider the most celebrated opinions that have 
been held with regard to this Relation, from anti 
quity to the present time: begging the reader to 
bear in mind, that Cause and Effect do not exist in 
the works and processes of nature and art, but only 
in the Conception of the mind that reasons upon 
them M . 

79. Pyrrho was the first great doubter, among 
the Greeks, who seems to have been deluded by the 
trickery of language. The opinion of himself and 
followers, as handed down by Diogenes Laertius, 



(-* ) When I speak of Conceptions existing in the mind, in any part 
of these remarks, and the reader remembers that I say Conceptions arc 
mere words preserved by the memory, he must not suppose that 
I contradict myself. Tn 150- 1G5, I have shown what the phrase 
The Mind really means. Conceptions exist, then, in the forms of 
speech that constitute what we call The Mind, but not in the Intel 
lect, See 158, and the last sentence of 17- 



104 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

and interpreted by Sir James Mackintosh 37 , is as fol 
lows : " Causation they take away thus. A Cause 
is so only in relation to an Effect. What is relative 
is only conceived, but does not exist; therefore 
cause is a mere conception." Now, every word of 
this is as true as that two and two make four 38 -, 
but the inference he was said to draw from it was 
altogether a delusion, from his ignorance of the na 
ture of language. That Cause is only a Relation, 
every just reasoner will allow ; and that Effect is 
the name of its Correlative Relation, will be equally 
granted : but when this is done, and we admit that 
Relations are only creatures of the mind, we have in 
no respect done away with the things or persons 
that we have conceived to be related ; and when it 
was said that Pyrrho would not get out of the way 
of a carriage, because he had convinced himself that 
Cause and Effect were mere Conceptions, he was as 
absurd as a man who should say to himself, Father 
and Son are mere Relations : now, as all Relationship 
is a mental Conception, there are no such creatures as 

( 37 ) Note (Q) in SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH S Dissertation on the Pro 
gress of Ethical Philosophy. 

( 38 ) I had printed an Essay on Cause and Effect, to prove its Concep- 
tional Character, before I was aware that I had been anticipated by 
Pyrrho. I have reprinted it in NOTE (B) of the Appendix. That 
part which related to Power, and which did not strictly belong to the 
question of Cause and Effect, will be found under 12G 130 of the 
text; and some remarks on "Ex Nihilo, Nihilfit" in NOTE (D) of 
the Appendix. 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 105 

men, and I will not, therefore, get out of the way of 
that mad Son of mine, who threatens to run me through 
with his sword. The absurdity of this last instance 
is too strong to require any other comment, than 
that it would have been strictly in accordance with 
the notions and conduct attributed to Pyrrho, if we 
do not relieve him from the imputation of being so 
very inconsistent, by supposing that his extreme 
scepticism had raised him up enemies, who have 
wilfully misrepresented his opinions : he must 
have been too well aware, that the Conceptional 
Character of any form of speech, in which a fact may 
be described, cannot re-act on the fact itself, and 
disprove its existence. 

80. The delusive influence of language over 
the mind is equally shown in Algazel, the Ara 
bian ; for of him it is said, that " he denied a neces 
sary connexion between Cause and Effect; for of 
two things, the affirmation of the existence of the 
one does not necessarily contain the affirmation of 
the other; and the same may be said of denial"." 
When Algazel denied a necessary connexion be 
tween Cause and Effect, he quite overlooked the 
fact, that these two words were not merely Relations, 
but that they were, moreover, of that kind in which, 
as I have before said, Effect is the Correlation of 

( !9 ) Sec Note (Q) in SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH S Dissertation on the 
nf Ethical Philosophy . 



106 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

Cause ; and that, by this very circumstance, they 
imply one another, and consequently must be neces 
sarily connected. Cause must, therefore, as uni 
formly suggest the notion of Effect, as Father does 
that of Child, and Husband that of Wife. But when 
we have convinced ourselves of this fact, it still 
cannot be applied to prove, as Algazel remarked, 
that, of " two separate things, the affirmation of the 
existence of the one necessarily contains the affir 
mation of the other." Algazel, therefore, was both 
right and wrong. He was wrong in his inference, 
which is the leading member of his sentence; and 
he was quite right in the last clause, which is that 
from which he drew it, though his assertion was a 
mere truism. His mistake arose from his not being 
aware, that, in the first case, he was dealing with 
Abstract Relations ; and in the other with Realities, as 
is proved by his employing the words " two sepa 
rate things": he, consequently, made the mistake 
that is inevitable from confounding together these 
opposite classes of words. Algazel s error is that 
of all metaphysicians. They forget that the Per 
ception is a Thing; but that the RELATION in which 
it stands is a mere Conception. Now, the Cause 
being a Relation, it leads to interminable confusion 
in reasoning, to suppose it and the thing related to be 
one and the same. He likewise fell into another 
error, that is uniformly made by those who reason 
on the nature of Cause and Effect ; and not merely 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 107 

forgot that these words are simply Abstract Rela 
tions, but that an Effect, no more than a Cause, can 
ever be a " Thing" but a Change produced by that 
which the mind conceives to stand in the Relation 
of Cause ; which CHANGE is properly called an EFFECT, 
and not a " Thing :" nay, so far from this being 
the case, any one has only to attend to the course of 
common conversation, or to the works lie may read, 
and he will find, that we as often refer to a single 
abstract word a whole sentence, or even a long 
detail of facts, as standing in the Relation of 
Cause, as we do to " Things" and for the same 
reason; we equally assert that another word, or 
set of circumstances, was the Effect. Thus we 
say, Virtue is the Cause of Happiness; in which 
that which stands in the Relation of Cause is 
a single word, and that an Abstract one too, while 
it amounts to a whole sentence, in the following 
remark : The Cause of the fickleness and injustice 
of the multitude (Effects) does not merely arise from 
their ignorance and envy, but from their acting 
at all times under the impulse of the moment, in 
stead of their being guided by the dictates of reason 
and reflection: and from the same Causes there can be 
(Effects) no stability in democratic communities, if they 
are not driven into a state of union, by pressure from 
without a position that quickly awakens them to a 
sense of gratitude, and obliges them to look again for 
assistance from those who had proved themselves the 



108 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

tried friends and benefactors of the commonwealth. 
So, also, Gibbon might have summed up the con 
tents of his great History, by saying, Such were 
the Causes that led to (Effects) the decline and fall 

( 40 ) The unworthy treatment experienced by Aristides and Scipio 
Africanus, two of the greatest patriots, as well as the best men of anti 
quity, will sufficiently support this opinion. Those who admire Repub 
lics will point to the United States of America; but they should 
remember, that its back- woods are the safety-valve, where the more 
daring and restless spirits of the nation can find a proper scene for 
their activity; and that but for this relief their system must have 
exploded long ago. The United States afford the extraordinary 
spectacle of a People without a Government ; for an Executive that is 
under the necessity of fulfilling the bidding of the populace at every 
effervescence of feeling, is no Government, in the proper sense of the 
word ; as this term can only apply to that which is able to control 
not foreign nations but its own people. If there is one name more 
than another that the Americans must revere, it is that of Washington 
and one for whom, perhaps, they can never hope to produce a 
parallel : but let them remember, that his integrity, straightforward 
conduct, and disinterestedness, were not the result of their system, but 
of that which gave birth to the moral dignity of a Chatham, and the 
host of other illustrious men, for which Great Britain will be renowned 
as long as history endures. It is English Institutions that have 
reason to be proud of Washington, and not the North-American 
Republic, which was the offspring, and not the parent of the Deliverer 
of his Country. Every good that America can boast of, she has 
derived from the Parent State : and she would commit the parricidal 
act of destroying her if she could, because she cannot forget the injus 
tice of one obstinate Ruler, who was never countenanced hi his coercive 
measures by our wisest statesmen, nor by the nation at large ! Does 
she suppose, for a moment, that either self-respect or glory would 
result from the success of such an effort ? No : foreign nations would 
only exult, and exclaim, " Thank God, one portion of the Anglo-Saxon 
race is extinguished as an empire ! May the remainder soon perish, by its 
own turbulent and unruly hand ! " 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 109 

of the Roman Empire: yet, in all these instances, 
that which stands in the Relation of Cause is not a 
" Thing " ; nor does it convey the notion of physical 
agency. 

81. The opinion of Saint Thomas Aquinas being 
identical with that of Hume indeed so much 
so, that the latter is supposed to have derived it 
from him it is only necessary to mention his 
name here, in the chronological order in which 
this celebrated man lived : and I pass on to Locke, 
w r ho is the next great authority, and who seems to 
have been quite ignorant of the important truth 
discovered, and misapplied, by Pyrrho; namely, 
that the Relation of Cause and Effect was merely 
a mental Conception. The definition Locke gives 
of Cause and Effect is as follows 41 : A cause is 
that which makes any other thing, either simple idea, 
substance, or mode, begin to be : and an effect is that 
which had its beginning from something else. Here 
Locke, in assigning his notion of Cause, explains 
his conception of an Effect at the same time : and 
he then tells us again, in less express terms, what he 
considers is an Effect. So far from thinking Cause 
a Relation, he says it is "that which makes any 
other thing, either simple idea, substance, or mode, 
begin to be." He has here been misled by the 

(") Bk. II. Ch, xxvi. 2. 



110 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

meaning of the verb To cause (see 93, 110), and con 
verts a Cause into an Agent or Maker ; and an Effect, 
so far from being the mere change (altered- STATE) 
resulting from the action of that which stood in the 
Relation of Cause, he considers as a "simple idea, 
substance, or mode," which the Agent has made to 
"begin to be." The definition is at once verbose 
and erroneous ; for if a production or creature can be 
said to be an Effect that is, a change there is an 
end to all distinctions of language. 

82. The foregoing remarks on Locke s notion 
of Cause and Effect will be sufficient to show that 
he had not a true conception of the nature of the 
Relation ; and that, in fact, like all other philosophers 
who went before him (Pyrrho excepted), he con 
ceived that things could be both Causes and Effects. 
I now, therefore, proceed to consider the remarks 
of Hume, who has done more than all other writers 
to perplex this question : and as his authority has 
had great influence, it will be necessary to consider 
his opinions with the closest attention. He sets out 
by saying 42 , "that all reasonings concerning matter 
of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause 
and Effect. By the means of that relation alone we 
can go beyond the evidence of our memory and 
senses." He then, a little afterwards, says, " Causes 

( 4e ) Essays, Vol. II. Section II. 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. Ill 

and Effects are discoverable, not In/ reason, but by 
experience" But to show that, when he made use of 
the terms Cause and Effect, he had not any idea of 
their true nature, it is only necessary to attend to 
the following quotations : " All the operations of 
bodies, without exception, are known only by expe 
rience." Again : " When we reason a priori, and 
consider merely any object or cause, as it appears 
to the mind, independent of all observation, it never 
could suggest to us the notion of any distinct object, 
such as its effect ; much less show us the inseparable 
and inviolable connexion between them." Finally, 
his two formal definitions of Cause and Effect may 
be brought in evidence : 

" Similar objects/ he says, " are always conjoined 
with similar. Of this we have experience. Suit 
ably to this experience, therefore, we may define a 
cause to be an object, followed by another ; and where 
all the objects, similar to the first, are followed by 
objects similar to tJie second: or, in other words, 
wliere, if the first object had not been, the second had 
never existed. The appearance of a cause always 
conveys the mind, by a customary transition, to the 
idea of the effect. Of this, also, we have experience. 
We may, therefore, suitably to this experience, 
form another definition of cause; and call it, 
an object followed by another y and whose appearance 
always conveys the thought to that other. But though 
both these definitions be drawn from circumstances 



112 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

foreign to the cause 43 , we cannot remedy this in 
convenience, or attain any more perfect definition, 
which may point out that circumstance in the cause 
which gives it a connexion with its effect ." 

Now, if the reader give but the most cursory 
attention to these extracts, he will feel that Hume 
had totally mistaken the nature of the Relation, and 
that he was considering the observed operations AND 
PHENOMENA OF NATURE in which, of course, he 
sought in vain for a necessary connexion, and not 
the purely intellectual distinctions, which we set up 
as often as we reason upon those operations, when 
we consider them in the abstract. That we know 
nothing except from experience, few would have 
been inclined to doubt, after the perusal of Locke s 
work. To give, therefore, Hume the benefit of 
being merely consistent in his arguments, we must 
always understand that his OBJECTS, or CAUSES, are 

( 43 ) Hume, by this remark, apparently alludes to the notion of 
Power as the true Cause ; but neither he nor Locke had even ima 
gined that there could be a distinction between Abstract and Physical 
Power : both metaphysicians were Realists, and therefore every thing 
they spoke of was, in their imaginations, equally real. See Note to 
123. 

( 44 ) Essays, Vol. II. Section VII. Part II. Not to distract the 
reader s attention, I have not made any observations on the verbal 
inaccuracies in the above extracts ; but in 85 88, he will have 
specimens of the internal constitution of Hume s arguments, that will 
show him how unsafe a guide so loose and vague a reasoner really is ; 
and how much he dealt in mere phrases, and words of which he had 
not previously fixed the meaning. 



OP CAUSE AND EFFECT. 113 

not Abstract Relations, but the real Things* 5 we dis 
cover by our senses. He, consequently, argues to 
show, that we know nothing of the nature of the 
necessary connexion between Objects, that is, why 
one change follows another ; and that therefore we 
have no authority, but Custom or Habit, for attri 
buting a necessary connexion to Cause and EfFect ; 
two mere Abstract Relations, that I have shown to 
be inseparably connected by their related existence 
in the mind. When he said, therefore, that it was 
" by means of the relation of cause and effect we are 
enabled to go beyond the evidence of our memory and 
senses" he was really drawing strongly upon the 
want of reflection to which mankind are prone on 
such subjects ; for who thinks of either Cause or 
Effect, when he calls to mind a kindness or an 
injury, or the scenes and friends of his childhood ; 
and yet no one doubts the excellence of his memory 
and senses with regard to the past, It is evident, 
therefore, that when Hume attempted to prove that 
the universal notion of the necessary connexion 
between Cause and Effect is only derived from Ex 
perience, he fell into a palpable fallacy. He over 
looked the fact, and, as I have shown, the very im 
portant distinction too, that the necessary connexion 
between Cause and Effect, as mere Abstract Relations, 

() Hume invariably considered Tftiiii/x in operation as Cause*: 
( 4(i ) It is clear that Hume did not fed the distinction between these 
t\vo words. See $&gt; 41. 

I 



114 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

exists in the mind, and not between the phenomena 
of nature ; and it therefore follows, that the question 
of Cause and Effect has nothing to do with that of 
Experience ; a consequence that could not fail to 
have been perceived by Hume, had he known what 
was the true nature of the Relation ; but, from what 
I have already said, and what remains to be shown, 
it is clear that neither he nor his predecessors, with 
the exception of Pyrrho, had any but the most 
crude conception of its character. His Essay will 
always remain as a "proof how much a fine compo 
sition will serve, as an impenetrable veil, to conceal 
the greatest fallacies and inconsistencies ; but so far 
from throwing any light on the Relation of Cause 
and Effect, he might just as well have danced an 
elegant minuet in its place : indeed, he has, by his 
authority, thrown such a gloom over the question, 
that those who have since reasoned upon it have 
not been able to see their way, in the least, through 
its perplexities. 

83. So, after all the parade made by Hume in 
this Essay on a necessary connexion, and which he 
evidently flung amongst metaphysicians with the 
same glee that Zeno did his sophism relating to 
Motion, it turns out that this modern Achilles, 
like its celebrated prototype, is nothing more than 
an oversight. It would indeed be strange, if the hu 
man understanding were so " ignorant and weak " as 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 115 

he supposes it, and that it had such a universal 
conviction without any just foundation; in short, 
that it believed in what there was no warrant for 
believing, and that equally among the most savage 
as well as the most civilised races, in ancient as well 
as in modern times. 



84. It will not, perhaps, surprise any one, after 
these remarks, that Hume should make another mis 
take in the same Essay ; though he had unwittingly 
fallen upon the true distinction by the mere forms of 
routine phrases, when uninfluenced by system : for 
in the following passages he has employed the word 
Event; and yet, inconsistently enough, immediately 
after uses Object as a synonymous term. The mistake 
is greater than that made by Algazel ; for he con 
founded Things with Abstract Relations : but Hume, 
in this case, has committed the error of making an 
Event the same as an Object. His words are 

85. "Solidity, extension, motion 47 ; these quali 
ties are all complete in themselves, and never point 
out any other event which may result from them. 
The scenes of the universe are continually shifting, 



( !: ) Hume borrowed the words solidity, extension, and motion from 
Locke; as may be seen by referring to 184 of this work. This is 
the way new systems are built up : old materials are taken without 
any examination of their soundness, and few men quarry for them 
selves. 

i 2 



116 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

and one object follows another in an uninterrupted 
succession ; but the power or force which actuates 
the whole machine is entirely concealed from us, 
and never discovers itself in any of the sensible qua 
lities of body 48 ."- 

86. We should certainly think that any one who 
might write a passage like the following had a 
greater knowledge of phrases than of the things he 
was describing : 

" Guns, balls, gunpowder ; these qualities are all 
complete in themselves, and never point out any 
other event which may be produced by them. The 
scenes of an arsenal are continually shifting, and one 
object follows another in uninterrupted succession ; 
but the care or attention which regulates the whole 
magazine is entirely concealed from us, and never 
discovers itself in any of the sensible qualities of the 
materials of war."- 

87. Perhaps the above farrago will rather startle 
the reader, though he may have read the passage 
which has given rise to it without his attention being 
roused. Yet, what causes this difference of judg 
ment? Simply this; that from his infancy he has 
been familiarised with the objects just enumerated, 
and he is at once aware of the incongruities heaped 

( 48 ) Essay*, Vol. II. Section VII. Part I. 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. U7 

together: but, in the other case, he does not, perhaps, 
feel the exact value of each word ; because they are 
mere Abstractions, the import of which can only be 
learned by a thorough knowledge of language and 
deep reflection. For, in those matters that are above 
our comprehension, we are too apt to be contented 
with periods that are elegantly turned, and in which 
an easy flow of language prevents us from suspecting 
inconsistency. We must therefore be convinced, 
that, in such cases, our imagination is, at the best, 
but agreeably soothed and tickled by an harmonious 
concord of sounds, arranged in such correct gram 
matical dependence, as must always lull our atten 
tion, and, consequently, prevent us from detecting 
the imposition that has been practised upon our 
judgment. But, to show that the above representa 
tion is not overstrained, I proceed to the analysis of 
Hume s own words. 

88. Now, passing over the fact, that Solidity 
and Extension are properties, and not qualities, and 
that Motion is a State, and neither a property nor a 
quality, and that not one of these words, moreover, 
can, even by the utmost torturing of language, be 
called an Event, we must still admit that there 
exists a singular degree of confusion in this passage: 
for how could it be expected, by any one who knew 
the exact import of words, that " the power or force 



118 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

which actuates the whole machine" should discover 
" itself in any of the sensible qualities of body " ? 
The operation of "power or force" sufficient to 
move a machine can only be discovered by the Mo 
tion of some of its parts ; and such Motion is not a 
" sensible quality/ but, as I have just said, a State ; 
and how could it be produced by either of the Abs 
tractions, " force or power " ? But it must be further 
seen, that Hume employed the word Object in the 
same sense as Event ; and, if the reader has any mis 
givings on the subject, he will find this fact placed 
beyond all doubt, by attending to a second quotation 
I shall make. It is very likely that he has, like myself, 
often read both these passages without ever feeling 
the nonsense they contain. This will prove to him, 
how easy it is for us to trip lightly over what is 
written with smoothness and elegance ; and how 
necessary it is to weigh every expression where truth 
is at stake. The same confusion subsisting in his 
mind as in the former passage, he says 

"But when one particular species of event has 
always, in all instances, been conjoined with another, 
we make no longer any scruple of foretelling one 
upon the appearance of the other, and of employing 
that reasoning which can alone assure us of any 
matter of fact or existence. We then call the one 
object, Cause ; the other, Effect. We suppose that 
there is some connexion between them ; some power 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 119 

in the one by which it infallibly produces the other, 
and operates with the greatest certainty and strong 
est necessity 4 V 

89. These are interesting instances how an acute 
and powerful mind may be betrayed into false rea 
soning, by not possessing an accurate and almost 
instinctive feeling of the force of words. Even the 
first sentence in the above passage is incorrect in 
reasoning and expression, because he makes the 
word Event 50 stand for both Cause and Effect: and 
so also in the next, for the mere sake of avoiding 
tautology, he employs Object for Event, It is diffi 
cult, however, to imagine how he could have fallen 
into the error of supposing an Effect to be an Object, 
even if he knew not, or had forgotten, that both it 
and Cause are merely Abstract Relations ? Indeed, 
the whole passage is a tissue of absurdities. 

( 49 ) Essays, Vol. II. Section VII. Tart II. 

( 50 ) Hume may have taken the word event in the sense of occur 
rence, instead of the consequence or result of an action, which is what 
the subject demanded. Either Effect or Change would have been 
a much less ambiguous term for his purpose, than Event. It has, 
however, become a favourite expression with succeeding- metaphy 
sicians : mankind seem led to copy one another, by the same unerring 
instinct that makes a flock of sheep follow the bell-wether. 

These views were written while I bad not an opportunity of con 
sulting Plume s work on Human Nature : but his Essays, and the pas 
sage already &lt;motcd, will show that be used the word Ohject syste 
matically; and it follows, that E vent was only introduced by way 
of changing the phrase. The confusion of thought that led to his 
making an indiscriminate use of these two words, in a similar sense, 
is remarkable. 



120 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

90. It is seldom that any error is detected, 
which is of itself not obvious, till it has produced its 
full consequences: and then the extreme case, at 
which the understanding has arrived, being evi 
dently absurd, even to the multitude, those who 
assume the airs and name of philosophers are reluc 
tantly forced to reconsider the steps that have led 
them to such extravagant conclusions ; when a fresh 
inquiry often helps them to discover the first step 
that led them into their error. The misconception 
of Hume gave rise to no less a consequence than the 
extraordinary work of Kant, called " The Critick of 
Pure Reason " ; but though this renowned produc 
tion of misapplied genius, on its first appearance, 
startled every person of sound sense, yet the fallacy 
upon which it is founded was so far from having 
been detected, that the work has even won the ap 
plause of many who were the first to feel doubts 
respecting its truth. Hume had, by his false reason 
ings, so perplexed the question of Cause and Effect, 
that the minds of men were ready for the reception 
of almost any solution of the difficulty he had started 
regarding a necessary connexion ; and though he 
had said that the true solution was, that it arose 
from Custom or Habit, yet Kant at once saw that this 
could not possibly be the case ; but then he did not, 
at the same time, perceive that Hume had attri 
buted this connexion to the phenomena of nature, 
and not to its real constituents mere Abstractions, 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 121 

that we employ as Antecedents and Consequents in 
reasoning. Kant, therefore, began to hunt about for 
some better solution of the problem of error than 
Custom, and he thought he found it in Necessity. 
Reflecting upon this supposed discovery, he consi 
dered, that if the human understanding had this one 
Conception not drawn from that grand storehouse of 
our knowledge Experience, which Locke had laid 
open to mankind, we might have more; and from 
this notion he deduced his tw r elve celebrated Cate 
gories or intuitions, on which he built his transcen 
dental system. As these are too important to be 
omitted in this work, the reader will find them more 
appropriately considered in 185 192. However, 
it will be as well to see what hints can be found of 
Kant s own notion of Cause and Effect. First, then, 
it will be thought not a little remarkable, that a 
mind so logical as his should have uttered a phrase 
so near the truth, as that "Every change has its 
cause 51 " without feeling that the word change, 
being an Abstraction, its true Antecedent must ne 
cessarily be an Abstract Word of the same nature. 
Had he but seen this inevitable conclusion, lie would 
have been at once led to feel that the two Concep 
tions or words stood in the state of Relation and 
Correlation to one another, and that therefore, as 
such, they (but not the phenomena of nature) were 

( ;&gt;1 ) l i&gt;. 4, &lt;j of The Critifk of Pure, Ramon. 



122 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

necessarily linked together in the mind. But having 
persuaded himself, that though Hume s solution was 
faulty, yet that the view he had taken of the Rela 
tion was right, he brought himself to believe that 
the notion of the connexion between the operations 
and phenomena of nature, instead of being derived 
from Experience, exists through the constructive 
form which pure Reason (see 191) confers, through 
its absolute nature, upon the materials presented 
to it by the Understanding ( 190). Upon this 
unsound foundation it was that Kant built up 
his fallacious system, an inverted pyramid, which 
rests, like the Mercury of John of Bologna, only 
on a breath 52 (necessity). To the dark and intricate 
convolutions of Kant s systematic and logical brain 
must be attributed the order, symmetry and ob 
scurity that have at once delighted, astonished, and 
confounded his readers. But when he placed such 
reliance on Hume, and made so capital a mistake, 



( 5J ) Shakspeare, who seems to have observed every thing that came 
within his reach, appears to have had in his eye the beautiful and 
graceful statue of Mercury rising from the breath of Zephyr, in these 
lines : 

" A station like the herald Mercury, 
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill." 

The puffed-out cheeks of Zephyr, when the figure is viewed in front, 
from below, bear a strong resemblance to a hill : and a friend, in my 
presence, though possessed of excellent sight and judgment, made this 
mistake, at the first glance he took of a small plaster cast of this fine 
specimen of modern art. 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 123 

he was not aware that the Conception of Necessity, 
like all other notions, being a mere Abstraction, has 
no other existence than as a word ; and that had 
Locke even been in error with regard to the doc 
trine of Experience, it gave him (Kant) no grounds 
to establish a system, built entirely on mere Abstract 
Relations, that are only so many symbols for reason 
ing ; the very ability displayed in his work being 
the more pernicious, by its tendency to fetter the 
understandings of mankind, already too much en 
slaved and oppressed by the misconceptions of pre 
ceding writers. 

91. Any one who has attended to the tenour of 
the preceding remarks, as well as to the arguments 
of modern writers, will be at no loss to discover that 
the sources of error on this question by metaphysi 
cians are threefold : 

92. First. They consider a Thing or object as 
being a Cause ; and they do the same likewise with 
regard to an Effect. The consequence of this mis 
conception is, that though they talk of the Relation 
of Cause and Effect, when the context leads them to 
the right term, they utterly overlook their own in 
consistency, and forget that an Abstract Relation 
cannot imply either a Thing or object. 

93. Secondly. Deluded by language, they suppose 



124 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

that a Relation can be converted into a verb, and 
that the verb to cause has therefore the same 
sense as the Relation of Cause. Now, to cause 
meaning " to effect as an agent," they are evidently 
talking of an Agent, when they suppose they are 
speaking of the Relation of Cause and Effect ; and 
then, carrying out this error a step farther, they 
imagine the term Causation, implying " the act or 
power of causing," that is, of effecting like an Agent, 
means the relation of Cause and Effect also ; though 
we have seen that any abstraction, sentence, or 
chain of reasoning can stand in the Relation of 
Cause. 

94. Thirdly. Having got so far into the error of 
substituting Agent for Abstract Agency, we find Hume, 
very naturally, going one step farther still than his 
predecessors, and inquiring into the notion of 
Power, which must lie at the bottom of every ques 
tion relating to the phenomena of nature. The 
magnificent and mysterious operations observable 
in the universe could not fail, therefore, to be the 
first subject upon which he would fix his attention : 
and seeing that one change follows another in an 
uninterrupted sequence, yet one in which human 
reason cannot discover any necessary connexion, he 
triumphantly turned round, and asked, How it is 
that mankind so firmly believe in the necessary 
connexion of Cause and Effect ? Pleased with the 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 125 

grand discovery lie thought he had made of a con 
tradiction between fact and belief, it may be easily 
imagined that he said to himself, Look now at the 
" ignorance and weakness" of the human under 
standing ! see how it believes in what it can offer no 
reason for doing, and that, too, in what is of the 
first consequence to all belief! 

95. The remedy for all this confusion is, not to 
talk of the Relation of Cause and Effect till we 
have a clear conception of its nature ; and never, 
in any instance, to employ the word Causation for 
Abstract Agency, nor Cause for Agent : by which 
means we shall then cease to talk like the School 
men of such things as 

1. First Cause*, 

2. Efficient Cause, 

3. Material Cau.sc, 

4. Final Cause : 

and we shall consequently bear in mind, that we 
are no longer speaking of Relations, but Agents; as 
the word Cause, in the two first of the above instances, 
has no other sense. The advantage that would 

(53) The expression " Causa causarum " is incorrect ; as the word 
Causa is here used in the sense of Agent ; while Source or Origin is 
what is alone admissible, if we attend to Common Si-nse and Logic, two 
things that can never exist separately. The Arahic phrase MUSAH- 
BIBU i, ASBAB, " Causer of came*" thouch more correct in form, is 
faulty in conception. See 76, 11 - 



126 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

attend such a reform would be, that we should then 
be aware of the superior clearness of our reason 
ings, if we called these expressions, respectively, by 
the name of 

1. Creator, or Origin, 

2. Operative Agent, 

3. Matter, or Substance, 

4. End, or Purpose ; 

because, in every process of thought, it is of the first 
consequence to have terms that are perfectly clear 
and unambiguous. We have still too many relics of 
the jargon of the Schools; and the sooner we dismiss 
them, the better. 

96. The foregoing remarks contain all, I think, 
it is necessary to offer on the Relation of Cause and 
Effect, when it is unconnected with Reason and 
Consequence, and the other Relations with which it is 
so often, and unavoidably, mixed up : and I there 
fore proceed to the consideration of these last ; which 
will, moreover, be of use in helping to dispel any 
delusion the reader may still labour under, on this 
much misunderstood subject: and I therefore con 
clude this branch of the inquiry with three defini 
tions of Cause and Effect, out of which the reader 
can select that which best suits the form of his 
mind. 

97. Whatever produces a Change, STANDS (in our 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 127 

minds) in the RELATION of Cause; and whatever 
Change results from it, in that of Effect. 

Or, in other words : 

Cause is that general RELATION which we contem 
plate as effecting whatever we see take place. 

Effect is that general CORRELATION which ive con 
ceive to result from that which STANDS IN RELATION 

to it. 

Or, again : 

Cause is the altering-STATE. 
Effect is the 



Of Reason and Consequence. 

98. The question of Reason and Consequence 
being, as I have already said, so much connected 
with that of Cause and Effect, the consideration of 
it naturally follows as the next in the order of sub 
jects. It is singular, that its obvious connexion with 
Cause and Effect has been altogether overlooked in 
every investigation regarding the latter question; 
and still more so, when even a child appeals to the 
fact as often as it assigns a Reason for its actions. 
Yet, in every instance in which the word Because 
(by cause 54 ) is employed, we have an example of 

( 54 ) The common use of Because is itself a proof how natural is 
the tendency of the mind to confound Cause and Reason together ; for 
instead of Because we ought to employ l liy Reason. So we use, in 
differently for one another, the expressions, Through this Cause, For 

this 



123 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

the conjunction of these two Relations. Whenever, 
therefore, we employ this word, there is a Reason 
given in which we shall also see an example of 
Cause and Effect ; and it is further of the greatest 
value, in placing beyond all contradiction and dis 
pute the Abstract Nature of the word Cause. By its 
means, therefore, and that of the word Effect (which 
explains itself to every mind), we may satisfy our 
selves that Cause never means a "Thing"; as has 
been supposed by all metaphysicians, if we except 
Pyrrho, though he knew not how to avail himself of 
the truth he had discovered. We shall likewise be 
able to ascertain, with perfect clearness, why Rea 
son can be always substituted for it, at pleasure, as 
well as the word Motive, whenever it relates to a 
rational being ; and we shall consequently see that 
the human understanding, so far from displaying 
" ignorance and weakness," as Hume supposed, is 
really always in the right, when left to its own 
discretion ; and that its deficiencies are almost inva 
riably the result of an attempt to force what we do 
not fully comprehend into some system that we 
have taken up immaturely. A case that may be 
illustrated by that of gravitation ; which, when left 
to its own influence, brings down to the earth every 

this Reason, On this Account, and Therefore, as if they had all one 
and the same sense. The word Reason itself is not altogether that 
which ought to be employed; as it is the Account, or explanation, 
which Reason renders to itself of the operations observed in nature 
and art, that we really intend by its use. 



\ 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 129 



body, in the straightcst line possible ; while every 
attempt that human art could devise to facilitate 
that end would only have the effect of deranging 
this spontaneous effort of nature. 

99. If we examine with attention the operations 
of the human intellect, we shall find that they are, 
like those of every thing which we include under the 
general term ( nature, perfectly uniform and con- 
sistent. If we wanted, for instance, to convince 
a savage from Terra del Fuego that a thing cannot 
both be, and not be, at the same moment, we must 
set about it in a similar manner that we should to 
prove it to an infant Locke or Hume. An exami 
nation of the languages of the most savage races 
will prove that they are fundamentally constructed 
on the same principles as our own : and let it not be 
imagined that this is a trifling fact ; for only those 
who have reflected on language are aware of its 
complicated and exquisite mechanism. Uniformity 
in languages could not exist, if the mode of proceed 
ing of the intellect was not fixed and invariable. 
There is, therefore, but one form of intellect com 
mon to mankind ; but individuals and races will be 
found to possess it in different degrees. That this 
fact, as well as the extraordinary address of the 
intellect in the employment of language can admit 
of no dispute, will be evident, by attending to what 
I am about to sav. 



130 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

100. In every instance that can be produced, in 
which we use the word Because/ we, by its means, 
give a reason for the Action or State that is the sub 
ject of what we are talking about. Sometimes it may 
be convenient to express the Reason that moved us to 
act ; and we then term such a Reason the Motive. 
Hence it is evident, that the notion of a Reason is 
always involved in the sentence that assigns either 
the Cause or Motive ; while the Effect or Act is 
equally involved in another sentence. A child will 
assign a Reason for its actions, and say, " I sat down 
BECAUSE / was tired" and similar phrases ; and yet 
the profoundest philosophers have been completely 
mystified by their own ingenuity, the moment they 
have attempted to investigate the question. The 
real fact is, that the intellect is guided in some way 
that always enables it to effect its purpose, when 
left to its natural efforts ; and is, almost always, 
thwarted, the instant it is interrogated, or called upon 
to give up a secret of which it knows no more than 
the bird does of the unerring instinct which instructs 
it to build its nest. Now, if we analyse the sentence 
given above, it will be at once admitted that we 
have a pure case of Cause and Effect, combined 
with a Reason and a Consequence. 

Reason, and Cause : I was tired. 

Consequence-, and Effect : I sat down. 

101. In this instance there is no mention of a 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 131 

" thing," or " object"; and that which constitutes the 
Reason and Cause is the phrase, I was tired; while 
the sentence / sat dmvn, is its Consequence and 
Effect ; which likewise, it will be allowed, are not 
things or objects. We now see why Cause and 
Effect must necessarily be related ; for every thing 
we assign as a Reason must necessarily be connected 
with that which it is intended to explain. One 
sentence, therefore, is the Reason and Cause, and 
the other the Consequence and Effect. But it will 
be as well to give a few more examples, to put this 
point beyond all doubt ; and these I shall arrange 
under the well-known heads of Action, Being, and 
Suffering, 

ACTION. 

The deer tremble, because the lion roars. 

Reason, and Cause : The lion roars. 
Consequence, and Effect: The deer tremble. 

The window is broken, because the boy flung a 
stone at it. 

Reason, and Cause: The boy flung a stone 

at the window. 
Consequence, and Effect: The window is broken. 

BEING. 
The lion devoured the man, because he was hungry. 

Reason, and Cause : The lion was hungry. 
Consequence, and Effect: The lion devoured the 

man. 
K 2 



132 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

The boy whips his top, because he is fond of play. 

Reason, and Cause : The boy is fond of play. 
Consequence, and Effect : The boy whips his top. 

SUFFERING. 

The iron grows hot, because it is hammered. 

Reason, and Cause: The iron is hammered. 
Consequence, and Effect: The iron grows hot. 

The ball rebounds, because it is struck. 

Reason, and Cause : The ball is struck. 

Consequence, and Effect: The ball rebounds. 

In all the foregoing instances, it is the whole sen 
tence that stands for Reason and Cause, or Conse 
quence and Effect, as the case may be. 

102. Having conducted the reader so far, I pro 
ceed to show him what are the Correlations of 
Reason, Cause, and Motive. Reason gives rise to a 
Consequence ; Cause is a specific kind of Reason, and 
has its Effect ; but Motive is a particular kind or 
variety of Cause, which produces an Act. So every 
Motive is a Cause, and both it and Cause are Rea 
sons. To determine, therefore, in a definite and 
precise manner, whether any given case is that of 
Reason, Cause, or Motive, we have only to remem 
ber whether the leading sentence implies Action, 
Being, or Suffering. If it do not, it is a Reason 
unconnected with any notion of Cause; and its Con 
sequence will likewise bear evidence of the fact, by 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 133 

not implying a Change, which is the real meaning of 
every Effect ; and such instances can only occur in 
scientific demonstration. On the other hand, a 
Reason that is conjoined with a Cause always con 
tains an instance of Action, Being, or Suffering, as 
may be seen in the examples already given; and 
Motive and Act are the same as Cause and Effect, 
but can only be applied to a rational being. This 
particular kind of Cause will be clearly compre 
hended by an example : 

Motive : William was desirous of revenge. 
Act : William killed Thomas. 

103. The foregoing instances will be sufficient 
to explain the nature of the difference between 
Reasons, Causes, and Motives ; but it must not be 
forgotten, that many Reasons, Causes or Motives 
may combine to give rise to but one Consequence, 
Effect, or Act. To prove this, and to show that 
Cause never means a " Thing," or " Object," though 
every one of these may stand in that Relation, I 
may suppose an historian to give an account of the 
French Revolution. He might state, in great detail, 
all the grievances, real and imaginary, which the 
nation had endured ; and then he might sum up the 
whole in the following words : These were the 
Causes that led to (Effect) the temporary subversion of 
monarchy in France. And this example will, I think, 



134 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

remove any remaining doubts (if they exist) from 
the mind of the reader as to the nature of these 
Relations ; and he will likewise be aware, that 
though the Term Reason and Consequence has been 
heretofore overlooked, it is as much entitled to " a 
local habitation and a name" as the hackneyed and 
misunderstood Phrase l Cause and Effect/ which has 
solely obtained such exclusive currency through the 
misconceptions of metaphysicians, and is as subor 
dinate to Reason and Consequence as a branch is to 
the trunk from which it springs. When we ask, 
What is the Cause of that Effect? we only demand, 
What is the PARTICULAR Reason of that Effect? 
a fact that may help to convince those that are still 
doubtful of the Abstract Character of Cause and 
Effect : for I suppose no one will contest the Abs 
tract Sense of the word Reason. The four follow 
ing Relations are all equally subordinate to Reason 
and Consequence. 

Of Motive and Act, and Motive and Result. 

104. So much has been said of Motive and Act in 
explaining the two preceding Relations, that it will 
require but a few words on the present occasion to 
complete what I have to say. This particular kind 
of Cause, implied by Motive, may have two Conse 
quences, according to the mode of proceeding of the 
Agent. If a mother destroy her child by neglecting 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 135 

to nourish it, the Motive has its Correlation Re 
sult ; but if she were to produce the same effect 
by violence, the Correlation of the Motive would 
then be Act ; that is, the omission of her duty as a 
parent gives birth to Result, and the commission of 
violence to Act. Hence, in speaking of this Rela 
tion, we must say Motive and Act, or Motive and 
Result, according as we are aware of the Reason 
that has moved the Agent to one or the other. 

Of Origin and End. 

105. The notion of a First Cause contains in 
itself the assertion of a beginning : hence the Deity 
is often spoken of under such a term, when the word 
Origin would be more appropriate ; and we ought, 
for the same reason, to employ its Correlation, EndJ 
in preference to Final Cause. Every case of Agency 
and Act, as well as of Source and Product, may be 
considered, in relation to Cause and Effect, as 
Origin and End. The idiom of our language may 
sometimes require us to employ the word Begin 
ning, in preference to Origin. 

td Of Agency and Act. 

106. When we speak of any operation in nature 
or art, without reference to a particular Agent, we 
employ the word Agency ; and we can then con 
sider it in Relation to the Act that results, which is 



136 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

its Correlation. This Relation is often substituted 
for that of Cause and Effect ; but quite erroneously ; 
for the latter only expresses Abstract Agency, while 
the former, though used in a general sense, always 
indicates Agency that is Physical. 

Of Source and Product. 

107. So intimately are the six relations I am 
now explaining connected together in our minds, 
that we are continually substituting them for one 
another. Thus the Deity, as the great Source of 
the universe, is continually represented as its Cause, 
and we speak of the universe as the Effect ; but as 
an Effect only means a Change., we should be more 
correct in saying that it was a Product, which pro 
ceeded from him as its Source : for every production 
must be contained in its Source ; and it was this fact 
that misled the Hindu metaphysicians into the error 
of confounding Source and Product with Cause and 
Effect 55 . The word Source has been borrowed 
from the French language, and loses it real sense of 
Fountain or Spring in the figurative use to which it 
is applied in this Relation; and the same may be 
said of Product. 

108. I have now given the six Relations com 
plete; and those that may still contend that the 

( M ) See 5 and 10 of Note (B) of the Appendix. 



OF CAUSE ARD EFFECT. 137 

words Cause and Effect mean Objects., Things, or 
Persons, must be prepared to maintain the same 
opinion with regard to Reason, Motive, Origin, 
Agency, and Source, as well as Consequence, Re 
sult, End, and Act, if they wish to pass for consistent, 
though erroneous reasoners. 

Of Causation and Causality. 

109. The word Causation, by its etymology, im 
plies the ACT of causing, or making to do ; and Cau 
sality, the STATE of being Causal. The first is more 
particularly employed by English, and the latter by 
French, metaphysicians ; though by both, in cases 
exactly similar. But the import they have in the 
minds of those employing them (if they have any) 
I have found it very difficult, nay, impossible, to 
comprehend. They are only alluded to here to show 
the very vague and indistinct manner in which 
words of the first importance in reasoning are used ; 
and the little hope, therefore, there must exist of 
their being comprehended, to any useful purpose, 
by those who read the works in which they are 
found. Had those who discussed the question of 
Cause and Effect known its true nature, they never 
would have employed either the word Causation or 
Causality. Their use of the word Causation shows 
that it was meant to imply Physical Agency, which 
has nothing whatever to do with the Relation of 



138 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

Cause and Effect ; and they were led into this mis 
take, as I before said, by the verb to cause, which 
means, "to effect as an agent." 

110. Before quitting this subject, therefore, it 
will be as well to inquire into the origin of this 
mistake. Neither in the Greek, Sanscrit, Bengali, 
nor Hindustani, any more than in the Arabic or 
Persian languages, does there exist a verb with 
the exact sense we imply by to cause. Our English 
verb is undoubtedly derived from the French causer ; 
and this last, in all probability, has been formed 
from CAUSO, which Dr. Johnson assigns as the origi 
nal stem of causation; and says, it is low Latin. If 
this be the case, it was not, then, till that language 
had been barbarized, and its genuine spirit forgotten, 
that this most illogical term was introduced, and, 
most likely, by some of the Schoolmen. It has, of 
course, taken too deep root to be now discarded 
from the philosophical terms of European reasoners: 
but whoever employs any one of its derivatives, 
such as Causation, Causator, Causative, or Causable, 
should ever be alive to the misconceptions into 
which its use may lead him. The words Causal, 
and Causality, derived from low Latin, must be 
equally guarded against, whenever they relate to 
physical, instead of abstract Agency. The tendency 
of the mind to connect this Relation with Personal 
Agency is shown in the use of atTo$ in the sense of 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 139 

\Causer, which is likewise countenanced by the San 
scrit HETUKAS, and the Arabic MUSABBIB. The con- 
i fusion of mind which has led to these mistakes 
seems, therefore., to be common to all mankind ; but 
no Arab would say, like ourselves, Wno was the 
CAUSE of it? but, Wiio was the CAUSER of it? 

111. For the length to which the remarks on 
this important subject have extended, I feel I can 
not excuse myself better than by quoting the words 
of Hume : 

" And what stronger instance can be produced 
of the surprising ignorance and weakness of the 
understanding, than the present? For surely, if 
there be any relation among objects x (?), which it 
imports to us to know perfectly, it is that of Cause 
and Effect. On this are founded all our reasonings 
concerning matter of fact or existence. By means 
of it alone we attain any assurance concerning 
objects (?) which are removed from the present 
testimony of our memory and senses (?). The only 
immediate utility of all sciences, is to teach us how 
to control and regulate future events by their 
causes. Our thoughts and inquiries are, therefore, 
every moment employed about this relation : yet 

( 56 ) Here Hume is again incorrect in supposing an Object can stand 
in the Relation of Effect, though it may in that of Cause ; for it is but 
the Change produced in an object by something else which the mind 
conceives to stand in the relation of Cause, that constitutes the Effect. 



140 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

so imperfect are the ideas which we form concern 
ing it, that it is impossible to give any just defini 
tion of a Cause, except what is drawn from some 
thing extraneous and foreign to it 57 ." 

112. It may assuredly be said, with the greatest 
truth, that metaphysical writers, so far from clear 
ing up the difficulties of the subject, have only per 
plexed it ; and even contributed to the notion, that 
the human understanding is under the influence 
of some mysterious principles or agency that set 
reason at defiance. The attempt of Brown 58 to 

( sr ) Essays, Vol. II. pp. 79, 80. The last sentence proves that 
Hume had not given the subject the attention it deserved ; and he was 
avowedly ignorant that a Cause is an Abstract Relation, otherwise he- 
would not have uttered the last phrase of the above sentence. No 
modern writer was a greater Realist than Hume, nor had any one a 
more crude or popular notion of the true value of words. His meta 
physical works teem with proofs of this assertion. Take the following 
example, from Section XV. Part III. Vol. I. of his work On Human 
Nature : " No objects are contrary to each other but existence and non- 
existence." In this example we have two Abstractions ; both of which 
are termed objects, and the last of them implying privation : so that 
inexistence is itself an object ; that is, the not being anything consti 
tutes a supposition to be something ! This is the wisdom that was set 
up in opposition to the absurdities of the Schoolmen : yet possibly it 
will continue to delight mankind much better than any thing I can 
say ; for, as Hume himself has well remarked, " tis not reason which 
carries the prize, but eloquence ; and no man needs ever despair ofyain- 
ing proselytes to the most extravagant hypothesis, who has art enough to 
represent it in any favourable colours." 

( 58 ) 1 have not deemed it necessary to make any remarks on Brown s 
Work on Cause and Effect, though he has treated the question so 

elaborately ; 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 141 

clear up this point is a remarkable proof to what 
an extent human ingenuity may be exerted, and 
how much may be said, to no purpose. In the 
instances I have produced, it must be seen that the 
understanding, though always right in practice, is 
invariably wrong in theory, the moment it attempts 
to account for its own mode of proceeding ; a fact 
that agrees with what Goldsmith said, with so much 
felicity and humour, of Burke s brother : 

" Here lies honest William, whose heart was a mint, 
While the owner ne er knew half the good that was in t : 
The pupil of impulse, it forc d him along, 
His conduct still right, with his argument wrong : 
Still aiming at honour, yet fearing to roam ; 
The coachman was tipsy, the chariot drove home. 
Would you ask for his merits ? Alas ! he had none ; 
What was good was spontaneous; his faults were HIS OWN." 

113. Such is the nature of prejudice and early 
bias, that I fear the reader may still be induced to 

elaborately ; because it is entirely founded on the misapprehension 
upon which I have said so much in the preceding observations; 
namely, the mistake that this Relation exists between the phenomena 
of nature. It is surprising that so many acute and able men should 
have fallen into this common and vulgar error; -one from which they 
would certainly have escaped, had they known any thing of the true 
nature of language. Brown s disquisitions arc peculiarly marked by 
those characteristics for which the metaphysicians of his nation have 
ever been distinguished division and xuMivision. It is evident that 
such a process can in no way remedy a fallacy, nor convert error into 
truth. -See SIR JAMES MACINTOSH S Dissertation on Ethical Phi/o- 
, p. 207. 



142 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

relapse into his old convictions, as often as he wishes 
to represent the notion of Cause and Effect to his 
own mind. If this should be the case, I have no other 
resource left for him, than to recommend him to 
read over again the preceding remarks, and to reflect 
upon them : for though it has been happily said 

" A man, convinced against his will, 
Is of the same opinion still," 

yet I do hope that the obvious and irrefragable 
proofs I have adduced with regard to this contested 
Relation will place it in its true light FOR EVER. 

Of Matter, Space, Time, Movement, and Force. 

114. The reader has been made aware that all 
Abstractions relate to what is General or Particular. 
(See 33 36). The words Space, Time, Move 
ment, and Force, are all Abstractions employed in a 
General Sense ; and the word Matter f is likewise a 



( 59 ) The etymology of the word Matter deserves mention ; more 
particularly as it proves how consistent language is, in its greatest 
changes. We derive the word Matter from the French matiere, a cor 
ruption of the Latin materia; and this, and the Greek fjerpov, both 
descend from the Sanscrit MATRAM. We have two corruptions of the 
original Sanscrit term in the Saxon portion of our language ; namely, 
mother* the feculent matter that forms in vinegar and beer ; and mud, 
the slimy matter deposited by water. The root of MA TRAM is MA, 
measure, and the Sanscrit termination TRAM is the same as the Greek 
rpov. The word MATRA, in the feminine, seems to have implied the 
first measure (of Space) ; and is, therefore, with the Hindus, equi 
valent 



OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 143 

Generalization, though it relates to what is Concrete. 
He has seen, that whatever is general has no existence, 
except by the means of words. To investigate, 
therefore, the nature of the foregoing Terms, we 
must look to their use as Particular Words, and see 
if they have any better claim to reality. First, then, 
taking the Generalization to which we give the 
name of Matter, as it is not employed in a parti 
cular sense, we must substitute a Body in its place ; 
and as it is inseparable from Space, we must also 
take a Space into consideration along with it. 

Of a Body, and a Space. 

115. A Body is either a single atom, or it is an 
aggregation of many atoms. I will not here enter 
upon the question of infinite divisibility ; but take 
it for granted that there is a point at which all 
things begin to be ; and which the Greeks, with 
great felicity of expression, called an atom, or that 
which is indivisible. When, therefore, we think of a 

valent to the atom of the Greeks. In the Institutes, attributed to 
Menu, all nature is said to be made up of MATRAS, which arc declared 
to be minute or subtile. Those who think that the Latin materia is 
derived from MATER, a mother, and therefore means mother substance, 
are quite in error ; for the Latin MATER and the Greek /UT/TV/O are both 
derived from the Sanscrit MATRI, a mother, which is radically distinct 
from MATRAM. Here we see that the corruptions of MATRAM and 
MATRI are parallel in sound; and that both words have undergone 
similar changes in their descent. The same analogy holds through 
nearly all the Teutonic languages. 



] 44 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

Body composed of one or more atoms, we are, from 
the very condition of such a Conception, obliged to 
admit that it occupies a Space as large as itself. 
If we have supposed a Body composed of a single 
atom, we may imagine another of the same kind ; 
and having done that, we may again imagine these 
two little Bodies to approach one another. The 
instant we have had this conception, we have called 
into existence, in our own minds, the notion of a 
Space, and of a Movement of one or of both the 
atoms a Time in which it was accomplished and 
a Force by which they were impelled together. 
Now, this process, which we have merely fancied, 
we see take place at every moment, either in Bodies 
that are quite inanimate, or in such as are endowed 
with locomotion. Indeed, while I have been writ 
ing these few lines, I have seen my pen Move in a 
certain Space ; I am sensible it has occupied a cer 
tain Time ; and that it has been impelled by my 
hand with a certain Force. Now, my pen is a real 
thing (a body), that leaves no doubt of its existence 
on my mind : it is therefore termed Concrete, and 
is capable of being appreciated by all my senses. 
But when I come to inquire into the nature of its 
inseparable adjuncts, I am no longer certain of their 
separate and real existence. I feel, that to talk of a 
Space, I should never have had the least notion of 
it without the existence of my own body, or of some 
material thing which moved : Movement, therefore, 



OP A 15ODV AND A SPACE. 145 

is essential to the notion of Space. The definition 
of a Body is, that it is that which prevents what is 
similar to itself from occupying the Space it fills ; 
and the definition of a Space is, that it is that 
which can be filled by a Body of its own dimen 
sions : they are both, therefore, united in the same 
conviction of the mind. But though we could have 
had no notion of a Space without the existence of 
Bodies, we must be aware that we can see many 
Bodies in a given Space ; and that it is therefore not 
full, that is, not impervious. We can see these Bodies 
move to, and from, and cross one another ; and they 
thus prove that the Space was not filled by unyield 
ing Matter. The whole field or circuit of vision is, 
as it were, but one large image, in which we may 
occasionally see many smaller images (bodies) 
moving in various directions. These, and their 
movements, raise in us the conviction of a certain 
Space, such as we derive from sight; but that 
which we obtain from touch, we possess from the 
consciousness that we can, and do, move our hands 
and fingers freely at our will. That a Space may be 
enlarged, we learn by moving our eyes, head, or 
bodies : and from the conviction that we can do so 
in any direction, we acquire the belief that the 
Space might, if we could but move ourselves at 
pleasure, be extended without limitation. 



46 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

Of a Time. 

116. The reader is aware that Time, being a 
Generalization, has no existence, except as a sound. 
To understand its true nature, therefore, we must 
examine it as a Particular Term. When we see 
two Bodies move with unequal velocity in the same 
direction, we are convinced that one reaches its 
destination quicker than the other. But though we 
saw this, if we had no language, we could have no 
notion of Time: but with the aid of language we 
have that General Notion ; yet still it does not tell 
us how much quicker one Body can move than 
another. When, however, language has a word for a 
second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, 
a year, a century, &c., we are able to assign exactly 
the degree in which one reached a certain point 
before the other : for, as all these periods of time can 
be called one, so they may be called two, or any other 
number. Now, one may be halved ; and that half 
may be subdivided, in thought, ad infinitum; BUT 
ONLY IN THOUGHT. When mankind began to observe 
and to reason, they found themselves obliged to 
have some certain standard for quicker and slower; 
and they fixed on those two great Bodies, that move 
in the heavens, called the sun and the moon. The 
apparent revolution of the first they called a day ; 
and the complete revolution of the other, a month. 
By dividing the first, they had hours ; and they had 



OP A TIME. 147 

weeks by doing the same for the second. The divi 
sion of the hours gave them minutes ; and the sub 
division, seconds. Now, when they had to express 
the difference in the velocity between any two 
moving bodies, they could say it occupied so many 
hours, so many minutes, or so many seconds ; for 
every one of these expressions was borrowed from 
the divisions of a great circle 60 . Each of them, 
therefore, constituted a certain time ; and when 
they said an act took up such or such a short Time, 
they only asserted that the difference was equal to a 
certain portion of the sun s revolution, that is to say, 
of a day. Now, from all this it is clear, that, as a 
Particular Term, a Time must always mean a cer 
tain portion of the sun or moon s revolution, or the 
Movement of some other body ; as the hands of a 
clock, for instance. Space and Time, therefore, 
though always classed together, ought to be kept 
quite distinct. We may speak of Matter and Space 
just as we would of sword and scabbard, because 
they are concomitant notions : but it will be evident, 

( 60 ) This assertion is not the less true because the Egyptians 
divided the circle into 300, to agree with their earliest notion of the 
length of the year, that is, of the number of days in which they con 
ceived the sun to m ake his annual circuit. So the Chinese divide the 
circle into 365i; which is inconvenient, though it be nearer the true 
length of the year. The notions of Time and Space being conjoint and 
coetaneous, they naturally act and re- act upon one another in the mind : 
and if the orbit, which the sun was supposed to move in, suggested the 
number of the degrees of the circle, the division of those, on the other 
hand, gave the hours, and their subdivision the minutes and seconds. 

I, 2 



148 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

that any specified Time is only the name for the 
Movement of a Body in a certain space. Yet such 
is the influence of language over our minds, that we 
even talk of " a space of time/ as if the latter were 
something real, of which we could separate a portion 
from the general mass. Kant has been so far misled 
by language, as to consider Time and Space as Forms 
of the mind ; and he terms the first an internal, and 
the second, an external Sense. This is the very 
basis of his metaphysical system. (See 188, 189.) 
Mathematicians are equally deceived by the nature 
of language ; and when they say that " The velocity is 
always proportional to the time of descent" they, uncon 
sciously, only assert that one regulated Movement 
bears a certain proportion to another regulated 
Movement, or that the descent of a body in space 
bears an exact proportion, in accordance with the law 
of gravitation, to the Movement of the sun, of a clock, 
or merely of a pendulum. I do not, however, mean to 
say, or imply, that Time and Movement should not 
be distinguished by separate terms. My only object 
is, to show that they are fundamentally identical. 
When we ask, What is the time ? we just do the same 
as if we put the question, How much has the sun 
moved ? Practically, the term Time is indispensable 
in preventing ambiguity; and the evidence derived 
from all languages will show that Nature ( 121) in 
tended we should be under the delusion of believing 
them to be distinct notions or existences. 



OF A TIME. 



1 17. When we reflect, that we can always say 
that any event has had a before and after, we shall 
be singularly struck by the foregoing conclusions. 
Yet let us remember, that these very words are 
borrowed from the notion of a Space in which we 
see objects so placed. If, then, there exist no such 
thing as Time General or Particular, how is the 
above succession of acts to be conceived ? Here the 
reader, in suggesting this contradiction between 
Sense and Reason, has laid bare one of the most 
mysterious parts of nature, one which immedi 
ately recalls our attention once more to that of 
Matter and Space. Were we to push these two 
questions to the same extreme that I have done 
with regard to Time, I should violate the condition 
upon which the whole of these observations has 
been ventured ; namely, the objective reality of nature. 
Such an attempt would only convince us how delu 
sive is the nature of every thing that arises from our 
sensations ; and we should find the steadfast earth 
recede from under us, the starry host vanish from 
sight, " the heavens depart as a scroll that is rolled 
together ;" and all our firmest convictions would be 
shaken to their basis ; nor would aught remain to the 
reeling understanding, but the bewildering belief 
that nothing is certain ; and that there is neither 
before nor after in Time or Space ; neither Move 
ment nor Force in matter or spirit ; nor fulness nor 
void in nature; and that all is but a vision, of 



150 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

which no account can be given by either SENSE or 
REASON. It is evident, from the foregoing reasoning, 
that 

118. A TIME is only another name for a Specified 
Movement of some Body, that has been agreed upon AS 
A STANDARD ; and that Time, as a general Term, is a 
mere SOUND. 



Of a Movement. 

119. The next question for consideration relates 
to Movement 62 , which must likewise be considered 
in its Particular point of view. A Particular Move 
ment has no more existence than that which we call 
General; for i Movement is merely an Abstract 
Word. To understand, therefore, what it means, 
we must refer to the verb to move, from which it is 
derived. Matter, we see, can move ; but when we 
abstract and form the notion of Movement from it, 
we have a word that merely deludes us. But the 
verb to move, being sometimes neuter, its pre 
sent participle, as such, is capable of serving as 
an adjective, and we can talk and think of a Moving 
Body of any kind. Movement, therefore that is, the 
Moving- STATE stands in the same relation to Body, 

( 62 ) I have uniformly employed the word Movement, instead of 
Motion ; because it has the advantage of being referred to the verb to 
move. See 131, on Motion. 



OF A MOVEMENT. 151 

as redness, or any quality, does : for as there is no 
such thing as redness, though we can talk and think 
of a red coat, a red cow, &c., so there is no such thing 
as Movement, though we can likewise talk and think 
of a Moving Body ; such as, a Falling Star, a Flowing 
Stream, &c. The well-known sophism, or rather 
fallacy of Zeno, which is known by the name of 
Achilles, and by which he attempted to prove that 
there was no such thing as Movement, is a proof how 
the mind of the most acute man maybe deceived, even 
independently of the misconceptions that arise out 
of language. That fallacious proposition remained 
undetected till very modern times; yet it appears 
to me, that it required no mathematical process to 
show its absurdity ; for even the evidence of his 
sight might have convinced Zeno that one body can 
pass another ; and that to pass is only the name for a 
particular kind of Movement ; &gt;and this must be 
relatively true, whether the world has a real, or an 
ideal existence. 



Of a Force. 

120. The word Force, from its general employ 
ment in mathematical reasoning, requires particular 
attention, Like Space, Time, and Movement, with 
which it is inseparably linked, it is only a General 
and Abstract Term ; and, as such, is a mere sound. 
The word has been derived from the French 



152 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

language, in which it was formed from the Latin 
FORS (strong} ; and it therefore, by its origin, means 
strength ; but, from the multitude of terms we have 
in our heterogeneous language, it is generally reser 
ved for employment in the abstract sciences. As a 
Particular term, a Force has no more reality than 
the General one ; and when we speak of The Force of 
the torrent, or, that The rock rolled down with a Force 
that nothing could withstand, we have not conferred 
any more reality on it than it possessed in its general 
character. When employed in mathematics, it has a 
purely Abstract Sense ; and then expresses nothing but 
an ideal quantity, that becomes the subject of calcula 
tion. A quantity, to be real, must refer to something 
in nature ; but it too frequently happens that ques 
tions purely physical are mixed up with those that 
are abstract, by such as have neglected to look into the 
nature of language ; and this has been already shown 
( 14) in the case of Newton himself. With mathe 
maticians, quantity always means something real: it 
is on this account that Force, Momentum, and Ve 
locity, are always understood by them to be realities. 
If a mathematician took it into his head to investi 
gate the amount of the several integral and fractional 
quantities of nothing, he might represent each by 
figures or symbols, and arrive at a right conclusion 
upon the data he had assumed; yet, by such a pro 
cess, he would only have amused himself for the 
time, and his Nothing would really have stood for 



OF A FORCE. 



something. As a figurative expression, the word 
Force is of very common use ; and it then implies a 
Reality, as when we hear that a General sent a Force 
to the relief of a town. These observations will be 
sufficient to enable the reader to form a correct no 
tion of this much misunderstood term 63 . 

121. From the tenour of the foregoing remarks, 
it is evident that we have only two Realities, instead 
of five ; that is to say, we have Matter and Space. 
But, as soon as we turn language into Abstractions, 
the whole five make their appearance, by the addi 
tion of Time, Movement, and Force. This is worthy 
of consideration ; because we see that language itself 
helps to complete the plan of Nature, and proves 
itself to have been an instrument intended for the 
full representation and comprehension of the phe 
nomena we witness around us. Indeed, stript of 
language, the intellect is a mere waste, luxuriating 
in barrenness, though capable of the richest pro 
ducts. 



( M ) Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne, asserted that there was as much 
proof for the reality of Grace as of Force. Had this most worthy man 
known the nature of the Abstractions against which he raised his 
voice so loudly, he would have spared himself the remark ; as he 
would then have known, that all we can truly say, is, that Bodies 
may be made to force, or that, by supplication, God may be rendered 
gracious. Faith, too, when released from its Abstract Nature, im 
plies that its possessor is faithful, that is, truly believes what he 
has been tawjht Minute Philosopher, Dialogue VII. IX. X. 



154 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

122. From what has been just said, it is evi 
dent that there is an intimate and inseparable union 
between these five fundamental Generalizations. 
Thus the Movement of Matter gives the notion of 
Space ; and its Movement in Space, that of Time. 
Movement is immediately connected with the notion 
of Force, as implying that from which it has received 
its impulsion. These Generalizations are all pri 
mary, and constitute the basis of any supposition 
connected with nature. 



Of Power. 

123. Power is a word in universal use ; and per 
haps there is not one which is oftener employed in 
more various senses 64 ; but they are all abstract, ex 
cept that for which I have exclusively reserved it in 
this work, namely, that of a real Agent ; as when we 
speak of the Power (caloric) passing from the fire 
into the boiler of a steam-engine. In this sense, it 

( 64 ) Locke and Hume were both Realists, and employed the word 
Power without any suspicion of the ambiguous meanings it conveys. 
With both of them it implied Force, Energy, Efficacy, &c. But as 
these words are mere Abstractions, they must be referred, if we wish to 
know what they really import, to something that forces, is energetic, 
efficacious, &c. ; and such a something would be found to be a Concrete 
or Physical Agent. Locke distinguishes Power into active and passive. 
Passive Power resolves itself, therefore, into something that is non- 
energetic, intfficacious, &c. ; that is, something that is powerful, enough, 
to be powerless ! Such are the absurdities the ablest of mankind may 
fall into, from ignorance of the nature of language. 



OF POWER. 155 

unequivocally implies something real, and is no 
longer used as an Abstraction. In a plural sense, as 
in the " mechanical powers/ it is employed figura 
tively, and the reader therefore must not be misled 
to think that it has in this case a Concrete sense. 
The mechanical powers, which are commonly con 
sidered as six, are, the lever (and balance), the 
pulley, the wheel-and axle, the wedge, the inclined 
plane, and the screw, which are contrived for the 
convenient and economical application of the real 
essence, Power ; as by their means there is the least 
possible waste of this greatest desideratum in labour. 

124. Mankind, from the obscurity of the subject, 
and trusting merely to their senses, have considered 
every Body in Movement as a Force : but if we 
examine the matter a little closer, we must be con 
vinced that the Body in Movement is, as it were, 
but the mask of that which forces. Every Body 
that moves must have been impelled by something. 
Now every one, by his own feelings, is aware, that 
according to the degree of Strength he possesses at 
the moment, and which is always varying, he is able 
to impel a Body with more or less velocity. It is 
clear, in this case, that, as his weight has not dimi 
nished, the Movement cannot simply depend upon 
his will and his body. We say, by the mere use of 
popular language, when we feel ourselves weakened 
after an effort, that we are exhausted. Now here 



156 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

we have really said what is perfectly true, without 
any figure of speech ; and we are deprived of that 
which enabled us, a few seconds before, to impel 
bodies in various directions. We have therefore, by 
our efforts, lost something, that, from long experi 
ence, we know cannot return without rest. That 
something, therefore, which we can employ, when 
we possess it, is a Reality, though quite invisible 
and imponderable. 

To this mysterious thing, men have agreed to 
give the name of Power ; a word originally Abstract, 
but which, in this case, has, by its use, lost its Abs 
tract sense, and has been converted, as often as it 
is used for this purpose, into a Concrete Term. 
When mathematicians, therefore, calculate any 
Force, though their ciphers and symbols merely 
represent what is Abstract namely, number and 
quantity, they do really calculate the quantity of 
Power that is in and has been communicated by 
another body (living or otherwise) to the one which 
they imagine, for the time in movement. 

125. The main object of the present investiga 
tion is, to prepare the way for the consideration of 
the real nature of the agency which actuates the 
universe. Power, by itself, would be utterly unequal 
to the accomplishment of any effect in nature or art, 
if it were not directed by some intelligence. The 
truth of such a view will, I think, be rendered 



OF POWER. 157 

evident by the following remarks, which I printed 
on a former occasion. 

126. " It may not, however, be without its use 
to carry this inquiry a few steps further, and to con 
sider the unanswerable objection that attends upon 
materialism, with regard to the doctrine of Power. 
The atheist considers that Power is inherent in mat 
ter, and inseparable from it ; and that it is through 
its own energy that this universe, with all its won 
derful variety, has arisen. Perhaps the best answer 
to the groundlessness of this assumption will be, to 
consider the nature of the Power with which the 
materialist endows matter; and this maybe done in 
a few words. Power must be either something real 
or something ideal; that is, it must be either Con 
crete or Abstract. In the case of a cannon-ball, the 
Power passes from the gunpowder, by its explosion, 
into the ball. It is therefore clear, that it is capa 
ble of augmentation and diminution ; and that it 
consequently can be transferred from one body to 
another. Power, therefore, it must be seen, is not 
an inherent and inseparable property of matter. 
But it may be replied, that by Power is meant 
nothing that, is transferable, but merely an inherent 
Energy which is in matter, and which, by certain 
mechanical arrangements, enables one thing to give 
impulse to another. This last explanation implies 
that it is nothing real that is meant by Power, but 



158 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

something ideal; and to this last supposition, there 
fore, the remainder of the argument must be directed. 
Power and Energy, if they do not mean some 
thing real, mean nothing at all, as they are mere 
abstract Terms employed by the mind for the con 
venience of reasoning : and the materialist, in using 
them without a material sense 65 , has really, in this 
instance, changed himself into an idealist; and is so 
inconclusive a reasoner, as to admit of operations 
that stand in the Relation of Effects, and yet to 
deny the existence of the indispensable thing which 
can alone produce what are to stand in the Relation 
of Causes. But as there may be some materialists 
that do not hold the doctrine that Power is inherent 
in matter, though they deny the existence of an 
All-wise Mind, rendering it the instrument of his 
WILL in producing the phenomena we witness around 
us, the following remarks are intended as an answer 
to such a supposition. 

127. " Power being admitted to exist as a real 
something, it may be asked what it is that directs or 
guides it into the production of all the exquisite 
forms we see in nature? Every individual has a 
certain degree of Power at his command : still, ex 
perience shows us that there must be a most feli 
citous combination of circumstances, such as fine 

( 6S ) By the word material, it is meant that they imply something 
real, however subtile, and not an Abstraction. 



OF POWER. 159 

organization, years of instruction, and application to 
a particular branch of study, before he (who is him 
self assumed to be a mere production of chance !) is 
fitted to give even an ordinary and lifeless imita 
tion of those graceful and beautiful objects, which, 
according to the supposition of the atheist, has 
arisen fortuitously, that is, without a directing mind. 

128. " The power possessed by every individual 
is exhausted after a certain degree of effort; and 
sleep and repose are both necessary for its renewal. 
We find that a watch will not go till it is wound 
up, that is, till a certain degree of Power is commu 
nicated to it : by what process, therefore, is it, that 
the individual is, as it were, wound up, or renovated 
for new efforts ? Repose and sleep, which are mere 
STATES of quiescence, could not do it : there must, 
consequently, have been some Agent at work, which 
has, so to say, recharged him with Power for the 
labours of the coming day. That Agent the theist 
calls God : the atheist terms it repose, a mere Abs 
tract Term, and therefore devoid of reality: he 
has consequently assigned an effect that is without 
a cause, merely from his ignorance of the nature of 
language. 

129. " If it be argued, that the Power which had 
been exhausted by effort returns to the individual 
by the simple process of sleep, it will be only 



160 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

necessary to bear in mind, that what has life must 
possess more Power than that which is inanimate : 
consequently, if there was a transfer of Power by the 
ordinary laws of nature, it would pass from that 
which is alive into that which is not ; that is, if it 
tended to an equalization, it would quit, and not enter 
the body. But so far is this from being the case, 
that we find that the body receives an increase of 
Power during sleep. There remains, therefore, but 
one inference to be drawn from this fact ; namely, 
that the Power of the sleeping body has been re 
plenished by some agency. Vital function could not 
be assigned as the reason, since function itself, as 
an Action, must require an Actor or Agent for its 
production ; and it could, therefore, be only the 
medium by which the end was effected. 

130. " But it may be said, that if the food was 
flesh, the Power was transferred from it to the indi 
vidual who ate it ; and though this must be true to 
a certain extent, as experience proves, still, at the 
best, it could be but the vehicle of the Power, and 
cannot do away with the necessity of some agency 
by which the transfer was effected, and does not ac 
count for the means by which it entered the animal 
from whom the flesh was taken. It may, perhaps, 
be replied, that he got it from the herbage on 
which he fed ; but if so, whence did the herbage 
acquire it? Now all this shows, that in each step 



OF POWER. 



of the progression we must suppose a conscious and 
efficient, though invisible Agency, as the prime 
source of all these natural operations. These inex 
plicable difficulties of atheism have evidently beset 
the human mind from the earliest periods of its in 
vestigations ; as will be seen by the following extracts 
from the Book of Job 66 , one of the most sublime 
compositions that have come down to us from an 
cient times ; where, speaking of the agency of the 
Deity, it is said : 

Behold, I go forward, but he j.y not there and back 
ward, but I cannot perceive him : 

On the left hand, WIIKRP: in: DOTH WORK, but I cannot 
behold film: he hideth himself on the rig-lit hand, that I 
cannot see him. 



Of Motion. 

131. The word Motion has very often the sense 
of Power, in the way in which it is frequently used : 
for people speak of a body as having Motion in it, 
implying that it possesses at the moment something 
that has the means of moving it. From the many 
senses in which the word is used, and to prevent all 
ambiguity, 1 have invariably substituted Movement 
for it, to imply that 1 attach no other than an Abs 
tract Meaning to the notion I intend to convey ; and 

( (;n ) Chap, xxxiii. vorr. 8, 9. 
M 



162 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

because it has the advantage of being referrible to 
the verb to move, in our own language. 



Of Form. 

132. If we consider Matter as a primary Gene 
ralization (concrete), we shall find that there are 
other Generalizations (abstract), which, being de 
pendent upon it, we must consider as secondary. 
The first of these is Form, which, without Matter, 
could have had no existence. As a General Abs 
tract Term, it has, of course, no reality ; and it re 
mains to be discovered whether it has better claims 
when considered as a Particular Abstraction. 

133. When a man without a knowledge of lan 
guage, as one dumb for instance, examines any 
object with his fingers, he remarks, if it be of 
suitable dimensions, that it terminates on every 
side : if he uses his eyes for the same purpose, he 
observes the same thing, if he can get a proper view 
of it. When he has done this, it is perhaps supposed 
that he has got a notion of its Form. This, however, 
is not the case ; for, even after all this effort, he is 
only aware that it is similar, or not, to some other 
object with which he is already acquainted. He 
may even have a sense of the beautiful, and be cap 
tivated by its appearance, and yet not be able to 
imagine why. We will suppose language to be 



OF FORM. |G3 

imparted to him : he is now able to say (but not to 
think), that the Form which pleased him was very 
beautiful. All he really can think, is, that the ob 
ject that is, the image it has made in his mind is 
very beautiful ; for the Form of any thing is merely 
in the word. Why the object pleased him so much, 
is one of those ultimate facts of which no account 
can be given: and all that can be said is, that it 
was so designed, that the presence of certain objects 
in nature (and only those in nature) are calculated 
to give inexpressible pleasure ; and the greater, as 
they are more perfect, and observed with more 
attention ; apparently, as if the sense of beauty were 
improved, or better awakened, by its employment. 
If the Form were any thing real, it would be capa 
ble of separation and duration apart from the object 
in which it is conceived to exist. The truth is, that 
the intellect receives, in the case I have supposed, a 
certain amount of information of the external object ; 
if by touch, in succession ; but if by sight, at once 
and completely. The sensations, in the first case, 
have to be put together by the intellect, before it 
can construct the whole notion of the object, sup 
posing it to be too large to be grasped : but in the 
last supposition, there is an image raised at once in 
the mind, which is considered the same as the 
object felt by the fingers ; because we have a con 
viction of the concurring and co-operating efforts of 
the senses, as instruments of the individual thinking 



164 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

self. But in no way is the Form either made or 
conceived by the intellect, but is totally dependent 
upon language for its existence. The mention of 
Form suggests, in this place, the utility of drawing 
the reader s attention to the feeling he has of objects 
in his dreams. He has in them an appearance 
of objects, moving apparently in space ; and yet he 
must be aware that they occupy no space. They 
are simply sensations, and of the most mysterious 
kind. These will convince him, that the magni 
tude of the objects which he beholds when awake, 
does not depend upon the size of the objects them 
selves, but on a cause within himself; and all that the 
external objects can determine, is the relative size of 
one to the other, depending on the degree of distance 
at which they are placed from him. When we 
reflect on the wonderful combinations and the in 
vention displayed in our dreams, we must be con 
vinced that they are among the most mysterious 
phenomena of existence. The word Form has a 
near resemblance to Symmetry. Its delusive nature 
so far beguiled Kant, that, as I before said ( 114 
116), he considered Time and Space as Forms of the 
mind. These views show, that 

134. Form is nothing but an Intellectual Pro 
perty. See 69. 



( 165 ) 

Of Number. 

135. We become acquainted with certain words 
at so early an age, that we use them without ever 
inquiring how we came by them, or indeed ever 
imagining that they could have cost the least effort 
in their invention. Number is one of the most re 
markable of these. The bulk of mankind seem to 
think that the notion of Number is quite obvious. A 
little reflection will, however, convince us that this 
is not the fact. It is, indeed, so far from being 
obvious, that it is one of the grand criteria of the 
difference between man and the brute. No animal 
is sensible of number. If the fondest parent in the 
lower species is, unknown to her, deprived of all 
but one of her young, however numerous, she does 
not observe her loss while that one is left to her ; 
but deprive her of that solitary remnant of her 
progeny, and she is for a time inconsolable. It is 
therefore evident, that she has no notion of Number, 
however self-evident the matter may seem to be to 
us. But, to comprehend this a little better, let us 
suppose one of the human species, even with the 
knowledge of language, to have ten or eleven eggs 
before him exactly similar, he would not, without 
reckoning them, be aware of the loss of a single egg. 
Even here, then, is an approximation, though a 
distant one, to the ignorance of irrational creatures. 
The miser, with all his love of gold, must count his 



166 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

ten pieces, to be sure he has not lost one. It be 
comes, therefore, a question, as curious as it is 
interesting, to inquire how mankind arrived at the 
knowledge of Numbers, that is, at the means of com 
putation. Among many savage tribes, it is common to 
find that they cannot reckon beyond five units ; and 
the remainder of mankind, in general, limit them 
selves to ten, and then combine these together for 
the higher Numbers : but, if I remember right, the 
Basques go as high as twenty, and then increase by 
combination. Now it is obvious, that, in these three 
modes, those who have respectively used them 
have been guided to the employment of each system 
by the fingers of one hand, or of both hands ; and 
in the case of the Biscayans, they have added to these 
the number of their toes. If, then, we say that each 
finger and each toe had a separate name which is 
of the highest probability in the infancy of society, 
as we see that the languages of savages are re 
dundant in names for individual objects, but nearly 
destitute of such as express general notions we 
may suppose, for instance, that the thumb of the 
right hand was called one ; the index finger, two ; 
and so of the others. All, then, that had to be done, 
was to mention the name of the particular finger 
that was called one, two, or three, for any number 
up to ten ; and then, for fifteen, for instance, to say 
five-ten, which in time was contracted into fifteen. 
The rest were formed after the same analogy. It 



OF NUMBER. 



may be thought, that here, at least, we have no 
Abstract Words ; and that therefore Numbers are 
exempt from the charge of implying nothing of 
themselves. This, at first sight, appears plausible ; 
but if we remember, that, though we have employed 
the names of what were real, namely, the fingers, 
the words we have thus borrowed have lost their 
original import ; and for their class we must not 
refer to their former, but their present use, which 
is, to express a certain Relation. That the no 
tion of Number is altogether a distinction of the 
mind,, must be evident from what I have already 
said with respect to the difference between the 
human race and brutes ; and being merely a Gene 
ral Term, we must inquire into the origin of its par 
ticular notion, which is the unit. When the mind 
contrasts a single object with a multitude, it arrives 
at the conception of one. When it does the same 
with two, three, or more objects, it feels that the 
distinction amounts to two, three, or more ones. 
Every number, therefore, how r ever high, only implies 
so many units. Hence it is evident that the notion 
of Number is merely relative ; and that it arises, 
like that of other Relations, from an effort of the 
intellect, which could only be accomplished by the 
aid of language. Deprive any being of the no 
tion of language, and you would equally deprive 
him of all notion of Numbers, and other Rela 
tions, lie would still see objects before him as 



168 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

clearly as formerly ; but he would have no more 
conception of Number, than an untaught man has of 
the properties of the circle when he looks at the 
ring on his finger. Devoid of the knowledge of 
numbers, and their parent language, man would 
merely be the most cunning of animals : possessed, 
however, of these advantages, he stands like a god at 
the head of creation, wielding all the powers of 
nature for his pleasure and use, and converting the 
surface of the earth into a garden, stored with every 
convenience and contrivance that can conduce to his 
comfort and happiness. With it, likewise, he is able 
to weigh the globe he inhabits, and the other 
planets, in an intellectual balance ; and to predict 
their revolutions, and the return of the seasons, 
without quitting his closet. 

136. A fancy exists among German metaphy 
sicians, respecting an Absolute Unity., which has been 
broached in modern times by F. W. Schelling. As 
I feel I cannot say any thing more to the purpose 
than I did on a former occasion, I hope to be ex 
cused for quoting my own opinions ; an indulgence 
which I must claim, for a similar reason, in other 
places, in these pages. 

137. " It is worth while, however, to examine 
this new discovery of Schelling s a little closer. 
The idea of one is purely relative, for it arises 



OF NUMBER. 169 

from the perception of the division of matter ; and 
so we say, one, two, three parts, &c. Our ideas 
on this point are, therefore, perfectly clear and 
defined. When, however, we transfer the notion 
from the forms of matter the only thing of 
which the senses afford us any information to that 
which is indefinite, namely, infinity, and which 
we only know by inference, it is certain we have 
fallen into a fallacy. We cannot in the least release 
ourselves from this embarrassment by tacking to 
it another word ; such as, absolute J for instance ; as 
the original materiality and Numerical Relation still 
remain. Even if we could, by an effort of ima 
gination, contemplate one single thing to the exclu 
sion of every thing else, that thing would still be 
definite : and as this idea supposes the existence 
of no other individual thing but the one contem 
plated, the Relation of Number could never have 
presented itself to the mind ; and we should only 
have called that one thing by such a General Term 
as thing, spot, figure, &c. But even admitting that 
we did call it one, and wished by language to show 
that it was released from all comparison, it would 
still, as the one thing contemplated, and therefore 
comprehended by the mind, be definite, that is, finite, 
and not infinite. This must prove, that the term abso 
lute unity, as applied to the Divine Essence, is totally 
inapplicable. If mankind, therefore, from the effect 
of daily use, should receive this new term as one 



170 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

perfectly applicable to the divine nature, let no one 
smile if some future Schelling, some scion of tran 
scendentalism, should go one step further, and talk 
of an absolute half, an absolute quarter, &c. The 
term absolute unity is, it appears to me, altogether a 
fallacy, as an attempt to improve upon the word 
unity y which we must, from the constitution of our 
minds, as individual beings, attribute to the divine 
nature, as often as we contemplate it in its agency, 
as the creator and ruler of all things ; but neither 
Unity nor Absolute Unity can we, with philosophic 
accuracy, attribute to the Divine Essence, or God 
head, which can be represented by no sign or sym 
bol of human invention. It must be admitted of our 
worthy friends the Germans, with reference to meta 
physics, that " they do (to parody the words of Shak- 
speare) speak an infinite deal of nothing, more 
than all other men in Europe 68 ." 

( 6t) ) It becomes a question of the highest interest, to ascertain 
whether the Relation of Number has entered into the plan upon which 
the universe has been contrived. I hold back, for the present, some 
remarks that I have prepared on the subject. Number, in common 
with all the other Relations, depends for its existence on the frame of 
our intellect. If, therefore, we can establish the fact of a uniformity 
in the mode of action of Divine and human intelligence, a great 
advance is made in the knowledge of what seems almost beyond our 
finite comprehension ; and a harmony is established between man and 
the rest of creation, that proves him to be part of a magnificent and 
extended plan. All Relations, we have seen, are but figments of the 
Intellect which enable us to reason ; and it would follow, therefore, 
as a matter of inference, that human reason is in accordance with 
Divine Intelligence, differing, not in kind, but in its degree. 



( HI ) 

Of Quantity. 

138. The notion of number naturally leads to 
that of Quantity, of which it is the higher Generali 
zation, because it includes measure as well as num 
ber. The word Quantity, being derived from the 
Latin QUANTUS, meaning how much? and how many? 
signifies, hoiv-much-ness, and how -many -ness. The 
English language has this degree of definiteness 
over several others, that it can distinguish between 
how much, and how many, as applied to both measure 
and number. The French language, for instance, 
has but the one word, combien, for both purposes. 
This affords an example of the great disadvantage 
attending the employment of comprehensive forms 
of expression. Every specific question should be 
discussed with specific terms; otherwise, a reason 
that would apply only to one particular view may 
incautiously be extended to that with which it has 
no relation. Thus, as I have said before, in 107, 
the Hindus, by comprehending both Cause and 
Effect, as well as Source and Product, under the 
same term, have been led into even greater mistakes 
than the metaphysicians of Europe, upon the points 
connected with these topics 67 . 

C T ) Sec Note (Ii), 5, 1&lt;&gt;. 



172 OF ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

Of Weight. 

139. When we take up a Body in our hands, 
we feel that it would fall to the ground, if left to 
self. But we can find others a feather, or a soap- 
bubble, for instance that, on the contrary, will float 
of themselves in the air. When we have observed 
this, we express the fact, by saying, that the first was 
heavy, and the two last light. But as, according to the 
genius of language, we have a class of words which 
we call abstract, that we employ when we reason, 
we convert this word Heavy into Heaviness, to agree 
with the others. When we are desirous of knowing 
how heavy any Body is, we weigh it against another ; 
and then pronounce that it is of the same, greater, 
or less Weight than that Body. Still, there is no 
such thing as absolute weight ; and all we have learnt, 
by weighing it, is, that it is of a certain relative 
weight to another body. When we do not speak 
of Weight in the abstract, we call it a Weight ; and 
then it always refers to that of some particular 
object. Weight is only gravitation viewed and con 
sidered in a special light. The remarks which 
follow, on Magnitude, apply with equal force to 
Weight. 

Of Magnitude. 

140. When we contemplate a Body, we observe 
that it has, among other properties, that of being 



OF MAGNITUDE. 173 

larger or smaller than others with which we con 
trast it. To the notion that arises in our minds 
after such a comparison, we give the name of Mag 
nitude (great-STATE). But such a Relation, it is clear, 
cannot exist in the object itself, but in the mind 
contemplating it. Every object is only large or 
small relatively to some other ; and whatever is rela 
tive implies a mind that is capable of inferring the 
Relation. When we say, therefore, that any object 
has a certain size, we can do no more than point out 
or produce another thing of the same size. Conse 
quently, there is no such thing as Absolute Magni 
tude. When, therefore, we ask what is the parti 
cular Magnitude or size of any object, we only de 
mand the name of the Body to which it is equal ; be 
it our thumb (an inch), ourfoot, &c. Should it ex 
ceed or fall short of these respectively, we have 
only to multiply or divide them, as the case may 
require. It is obvious, that the question of Magni 
tude is identical with that of Matter and Space ; 
and perhaps it may help to convince the reader how 
inscrutible these questions are, and which have, in 
truth, puzzled philosophers ever since the first 
dawn of inquiry. Such investigations, however, 
have their use ; as they prove that everything in 
nature is RELATIVE, and nothing ABSOLUTE. This 
inexplicable result, joined to what I have said with 
regard to Infinity and Time, will make the reflect 
ing mind fall back with wonder and astonishment 



174 OP ABSTRACT GENERAL AND PARTICULAR TERMS. 

at the incomprehensible nature of the phenomena 
which we behold around us 6g : so true is the pro 
found and beautiful sentiment of Pascal ; that 
Reason confounds the dogmatist, and Nature the 
sceptic. 



Of Proportion. 

141. If we look at any object with attention, we 
shall observe, if it have parts, that these parts can 
be compared with one another; and each of these, 
besides being capable of being contrasted with the 
others, can likewise be compared with the entire 
object itself. When we have so done, we can say it 
has such and such Proportions. If it does not con 
tain separate parts or members, we are then confined 
to the examination of its diameter in different direc 
tions ; and from this effort we draw our inference, 
as to its Proportions. In all these processes of the 
intellect, we have clearly only arrived at an infe 
rence; and we thus feel, that the notion of Pro 
portion, like that of Form and other properties, is 
truly a creation of the mind, resulting from the em 
ployment of language. 

( 69 ) The incomprehensible nature of these topics to Human Reason 
is further pointed out in the Appendix, Note (D). 



( 175 ) 



OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

142. The utmost we can learn from the pure 
sciences is, the fact of the perfect agreement of their 
results with the actual phenomena of nature. They 
can, however, teach us nothing as to the origin or 
the rationale of things: still, the demonstrations of 
Science cannot but raise our minds to the conviction 
of a wondrous Intelligence, that must be the regu 
lating principle of all that we behold around us. 
That every thing obeys laws established by perfect 
wisdom, without any deviation, is surely as edifying 
a conclusion as it is possible for humanity to arrive 
at ; and cannot but make us feel the dignity of our 
own nature, at the very moment we are humbled 
by the contrast that we must unconsciously draw 
between ourselves and the Omnipotent Being to 
whom we are indebted for existence. To be fitted 
for the contemplation of the spectacle of the universe 
is surely to have a high privilege, and an important 
station in nature. 



176 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

Of the Laws of Nature. 

143. It was not long, even in the infancy of society, 
before mankind observed that certain results always 
occurred under similar circumstances. Thus, the fall 
of a stone, or any other heavy body, to the ground, 
was soon taken as a matter of course : such, also, 
was the case with the ascent of flame and smoke. It 
is unnecessary to repeat here other familiar instances 
in which we always expect a recurrence of what we 
have observed before. When such facts began to 
be reasoned upon, they impressed the mind with the 
conviction that they had their undeviating uniformity 
from some presiding influence; and, as the word 
Nature had become personified as the great Agent 
of the universe, every result of the kind was said to 
take place by a Law she had established: hence 
arose the expression so commonly used, " the Laws 
of Nature" We must see from this, that it is purely 
figurative. But, though very convenient for general 
purposes, it cannot be denied that it has a great 
tendency to mislead those who employ it, and to 
make them think that every thing jumps here, and 
jumps there, in consequence of a " sic volo" or in 
junction, given to them, at creation, by Nature. The 
agents that keep the universe in harmonious action 
being invisible, such phrases help to take away all 
uncertainty ; and mankind repose upon them with a 
security, that will last as long as their ignorance of 



OF ATTRACTION. 177 

the real nature of things exists : for the mind of man 
has as great a horror of uncertainty, as, philoso 
phers tell us, Nature lias of a vacuum. 



Of Attraction. 

144. The word Attraction, by its derivation, means 
the act of drawing to ; but its employment as an 
Agent can only tend to mislead, and is not useful, 
even theoretically. It is one of those remarkable 
instances of the effect that language has, in mislead 
ing the minds of even the acutest and most cautious 
of men. But scientific and natural philosophers will 
find that they are beguiled by language as much as 
the rest of mankind ; and that they are then as much 
under the dominion of fancy, as those who are not 
supposed to be, like themselves, lovers of calculation 
and matters of fact. 

145. No movement, it will be admitted, can be 
evident to us, without it is perceived by some one 
of our Senses. Matter is consequently necessary to 
the existence of those forms which we can per 
ceive ; for whatever form is of sufficient magnitude 
and solidity to be cognisable by our touch, and is 
still not tangible, we naturally and truly pronounce 
to be a mere vision, and to have no outward exis 
tence. But while we are thus sensible that matter 
is indispensably requisite to movement, we must be 



J78 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

equally certain that that which is void of life and 
thought can in no way move itself. If we say it is 
done by Attraction, we then assert that bodies mu 
tually attract one another, and so join together spon 
taneously. This may be a very easy, though not a 
very profound way of accounting for the junction 
and approximation of bodies. If a juggler says " va 
presto" and seems to make anything disappear by 
word of command, he may deceive children and 
ignorant people ; but those who are better informed 
only admire the dexterity he had displayed in the 
feat. That a philosopher should talk of Attraction as 
a reality, and attribute all the phenomena in nature 
to it, is drawing as strongly on the credulity of 
mankind in general, as the juggler does upon the 
simplicity of his company. It is in vain that the 
philosopher says in his own defence, that he means, 
by such an expression, only to assert a general fact, 
namely, the tendency of one body to another. If he 
mean no more, he should remember, that he who 
would be the very first to cavil at any term that 
was contrary to the technical phraseology he is in the 
habit of employing, should be the last to make use 
of an expression that contains in itself an assumption 
that he cannot defend. But he will not make the 
admission, till he is hard pressed ; and then he will 
instantly relapse into his real and habitual concep 
tion, and talk of attractive and repulsive forces as in 
dubitable facts ; thus showing that he has no other 



OF ATTRACTION. 179 

opinion on the subject, than the one he has been 
forced for the moment to abandon; nor could it 
be othenvise, if thought and words have any confor 
mity: and be it likewise remembered, that these 
same Forces are the mere chimeras of his own ima 
gination. See 120 122. 

146. It is easy to understand how one body 
may attract another ; for a boatman, with his hook, 
may be seen to attract, or draw to himself, another 
boat : but how one atom, or one body, can of itself at 
tract another, seems utterly incomprehensible to me. 
I feel it is only battering down a wall of pasteboard, 
to make these remarks; for not only do natural 
philosophers feel that Attraction is one of those 
points which they must surrender up the moment it 
is vigorously attacked, and which they only pre 
serve for want of a better definition ; but the reader 
is aware that this famous Agent is nothing more 
than an Abstraction, which has been converted into 
a reality by the mere course of language ; and there 
fore has no existence, except as a sound : it conse 
quently stands in the unhappy situation of the non 
causa pro causa of logicians. 



Of Attractive and Repulsive Forces. 

147. Natural philosophers, having satisfied 
themselves of the existence of Attraction, have 

N 2 



180 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

founded upon this belief the doctrine of Attractive 
and Repulsive Forces, as real powers. We have seen, 
that the notion of Force is purely Abstract, and 
likewise General ; and that therefore it has no 
existence, except by the medium of language. We 
have further seen, that if we are to understand any 
thing by the term, we must refer it to something that 
forces ; and, in every case, it can only be effected 
through the medium of a real essence, which I call 
by the name of POWER ( 123 130), that may be 
made to exhibit its energy by the means of any 
body that it can move. But mathematicians having 
taken the word Force as a reality, have constructed 
their arguments upon the strength of the supposi 
tion ; and it must be admitted, that they labour under 
many chances of being deluded, when they theorize 
without a due knowledge of the nature of language. 
All that is statical and dynamical, in nature, being 
strictly in accordance with science, it is not sur 
prising that they find but little difficulty in antici 
pating most of the obvious consequences resulting 
from this important truth ; but then it is attended 
by one great disadvantage, namely, that, as in the 
case I have supposed about nothing ( 120), they may 
assume any theory, and prove it to themselves and 
others with the usual parade of the most rigorous 
demonstration. Thus, according to the undulatory 
theory of light of Huygens, they have only to as 
sume the propulsion of waves, agreeably to certain 



OF ATTRACTIVE AND REPULSIVE FORCES. 181 

laws, and they may, without difficulty, satisfy them 
selves that it is right : but if they laid aside their 
symbols, and asked themselves how waves could 
cross each other in the same instant of time, above, 
below, on every side, and at all angles, without 
disturbing, confusing, or obliterating their own ef 
fects, they might be brought to feel that something 
more than nicety of observation and dexterity in 
wielding the calculus are necessary in such investi 
gations : and the very same objection lies against 
the radial theory of Newton. Some other hypothe 
sis, therefore, must be sought for, to account for the 
propagation of light : and, even were either rays or 
waves free from the difficulties I have pointed out, 
it would be still necessary to show what it is that 
propels either the one or the other with such asto 
nishing velocity. A theory is not worth any thing, 
that merely amuses us with words, or assumes 
something that requires as much explanation as 
that which it was meant to expound. The doctrine 
of Forces can only be admitted in questions of pure 
mathematics,, where the whole of the topics under calcu 
lation are all equally abstract ; but when it is pre 
tended that the cohesion of bodies, for instance, can 
be explained by the means of Attractive and Repul 
sive Forces, it is clear that nothing but error and 
misconception can be the consequence : for it is 
only to assume that the Attractive Force (an Abs 
traction) is equal to a certain amount, and that the 



182 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

Repulsive Force (an Abstraction) is something less, 
which therefore allows the Attractive Force to be 
the stronger of the two ; and so all things in nature 
are very ingeniously, firmly, and compactly held 
together by this Attractive Abstraction, when, of 
course, the whole finishes with Q. E. D., and every 
one is satisfied. In making these remarks, I have 
not the most remote intention of undervaluing the 
labours of mathematicians; which, in all that regards 
pure science, have been of inestimable value to 
mankind, and really constitute, what may, without 
exaggeration, be called the glory of the Human Intel 
lect 7 ". My only object is, to point out, that a know 
ledge of the nature of words is an important, nay, an 
indispensable branch of their calling; and without 
which they will, as often as they begin to theorize, 
fall into the most absurd mistakes. They should, 
therefore, be on their guard, whenever they are 
considering a question of physical science; and re 
member, that their symbols either represent what is 



( 70 ) It is worthy of remark, that the germs of, nearly, every funda 
mental notion in science is be found among the Hindus, apparently 
unborrowcd ; but there seems to exist no trace of that branch of ma 
thematics called conic sections. These immortal investigations of 
the properties of the sections of the cone, to which modern Astronomy 
is so much indebted for its most brilliant discoveries, is therefore 
entirely due to Greek genius ; and show what it could effect in abstract 
science, when a rational subject was presented for its employment. 
See 169. 



OF AFFINITY. 183 

real, or something that is purely abstract 71 , and, 
therefore unreal. 



Of Affinity. 

L48. The word Affinity is here introduced 
rather with a view of drawing the reader s attention 
to the fact that it is not overlooked, than for the pur 
pose of any particular elucidation. By its etymology, 
it means nearness ; but this sense is merely figura 
tive as to its scientific use, where it marks the 
fitness of one substance to combine with another by 
known laws. Though employed much in the same 
way as the word Attraction, it does not assume so 
much as that contested term ; because, being used in 
a neuter sense, it lays no claim to being an Agent 
in nature, but is felt to be, as it ought to be consi 
dered, rather as a result. When, however, Kirwan 
and some succeeding writers on chemistry sub 
divide Affinity into various kinds, every one must feel 
that they have merely multiplied terms to an unne 
cessary extent, and that they have only obscured 
a subject sufficiently mysterious. We are told 
that there are the following kinds of affinity : 

( n ) In Note (E) of the Appendix, it will be seen that Mr. Davies 
Gilbert has cleared up the difficulties that involved in mystery the 
nature of Negative and Imaginary Quantities; but he does not seem 
to have been aware of the paralogisms attendant upon the ordinary 
use of Abstractions in mathematical and other reasoning. 



184 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

Affinity, Compound. 

Divellent. 

Double. 

Intermediate. 

Quiescent. 

Reciprocal. 

Simple. 

Vital. 

149. The reader will be quite convinced, by 
the above specimen, that it is unnecessary to pursue 
the subject any farther. 



Of the Vis Inertise, c. 

150. Newton considered that there is a " passive 
principle, by which bodies persist in their motion 
or rest in proportion to the force impressing it, and 
resist as much as they are resisted;" to which he 
gave the name Vis Inertia, or the power of resistance. 
Had this question not related to mechanics, but to 
the abstract expression of the laws of the phenomena 
of nature, we might have understood that he meant 
by this " passive principle" nothing more, than that 
all bodies continue to move as long as they are im 
pelled, and that action and re-action are equal and 
opposite. If we do not take the expression in this 
last sense, we must suppose that he used the terms 
" Motion," " Rest," and " Force," with a Concrete 
Meaning; and then we shall be reduced to the 



OF THE VIS INERTIA, &C. 185 

further dilemma of inferring that his " Passive Prin 
ciple " is a real Agent in nature. Now, supposing, 
for a moment, that this was what he meant, it is 
not very easy to comprehend how an Agent, "by 
which bodies resist as much as they are resisted," 
could be passive. The fact is, that the difficulty 
that arises in our minds on this occasion is that 
which must ever result from the use of Abstract 
Language with regard to fundamental notions. By 
not remembering that Notion, Rest, Force, and simi 
lar words, are purely Abstract Terms, we cannot 
but argue in a circle ; and end in amusing ourselves, 
at the best, with phrases that, when examined, are 
found to be nothing to the purpose, or to beg the whole 
question. Science is, undoubtedly, an abstract pro 
cess ; and for the mathematical solution of the laws of 
motion, various things must be assumed, by which 
mathematicians arrive at a true expression of the 
desired answer ; but in so doing, they ought never 
to forget the nature of the words or the symbols 
they have employed in the process of reasoning 
and calculation ; and both operations will be found 
to have a nearer resemblance to one another than is 
generally supposed. Let us, in opposition to In 
ertia (inertness), suppose that all movement is pro 
pagated solely by means of the real essence, POWER : 
we shall then have something that stands in the 
relation of cause to the effect, and be certain that 
bodies cannot move without it ; that they are there- 



136 OP SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

fore perfectly passive and indifferent ; merely chang 
ing place when impelled by it, and continuing in 
movement, resistance, or place, only as long as they 
are under its influence. We shall also see that bodies 
must be always inert of their own nature : and we 
consequently get rid of this extra Agent, that is both 
Active and Passive at the same moment, and which 
has been introduced into the mechanism of nature 
under the delusive influence of language 72 . 

151. By a notion similar to that which led 
Newton to the employment of the term Vis Iiiertice, 
mathematicians speak of the following kinds of 
Force : 

Vis Activa. 
. . . Passiva. 
. . . Absoluta* 
. . . Accelatrix. 
. . . Impressa. 



, . . Centripeta. 
. . . Matrix. 



( 72 ) Since writing these remarks, I find that Sir John Herschel has 
explained away the agency of the Vis Inertia, and, consequently, its 
reality. (See his able Discourse on Natural Philosophy, 234.) The 
object of my remarks being to show the delusive influence of lan 
guage over the minds of the soundest reasoners, it still remains a 
question in what sense Newton himself understood the term. I 
have already shown, in 14, that language led him into error with 
regard to Attractive and Repulsive Forces. 



OF THE VIS INERTLE, &C. 187 

152. To the foregoing must be added the Vis 
Viva and the Vis Mortua of Leibnitz. Such terms 
may be useful, and can lead to no misconception 
as long as the true nature of language is not for 
gotten ; but it is hardly possible that they can be 
employed by mathematicians, through the ten 
dency to Realism that always exists in the mind 
of every man, without being mistaken for real 
entities. 



Of the Vis Vitae, Sfc. 

153. The practisers of the healing art must 
have been among the earliest votaries, if not the 
pioneers, of science. The pugnacious tendencies of 
mankind were continually calling into use whatever 
skill they had acquired ; and, if we may judge from 
the accurate specimen afforded us of the prac 
tice of semi-savage life in the Pacific Ocean 73 , 
human ingenuity arrives at considerable perfection 
in conditions of society that would scarcely promise 
such advancement, The followers of the medical 
art must have been strongly impressed with the 
secret agency of nature in effecting those surprising 
cures and restoration of parts, which came from 
time to time under their observation. From the 
days of Hippocrates to the present, physicians have 

(7 3 ) See Mariner s very interesting account of the Friendly Isles. 



188 OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING. 

employed various terms that express their convic 
tion of some secret force operating in animal bodies. 
Of these, the following are the most common : 

Vis Vita. 

. . . Mortua. 

. . . Medicatrix Natures. 

. . . Conservatrix. 

. . . Plustica. 

: . . . Nervosa. 

. . . Insita. 

154. Other names have been assigned, such 
as Archcea by Van Helmont, and Impetum Faciens 
by Boerhaave. Perhaps to all these terms we must 
attribute an Abstract, rather than a Concrete Sense ; 
and they are no other than so many attempts to 
hide ignorance of causes under fictitious names, 
which might serve as props to support the under 
standing from betraying its weakness, to itself and 
to others. 

155. Having said so much against the abuses 
attendant upon the employment of Abstract Lan 
guage, without we preserve a perpetual conscious 
ness of its real nature, I think the present is a 
favourable opportunity for pointing out its indispen 
sable utility as the sole means of classification and 
reasoning. All diseases being merely States of the 
body, it follows, that without the help of Abstrac- 



OF THE VIS VITVE, &C. 189 

tions they could never have been the object of 
reflection : for as they have no other existence than 
as sounds, they would be without a designation ; and 
consequently, never being the subject of thought, 
we should be only able to say that one person was 
sick or affected just like such another person, or that 
he was feverish, gouty, coughed, &c. Now, however, 
we can say, that he has a Fever (tertian, quartan, 
or any other) ; that he has the Gout, a Cough, &c. 
The obvious inference to be derived from this ob 
servation is, that though diseases are classed under 
separate heads, they must really be as different from 
one another, even when called by the same name 
as the bodies are in which they occur. 



( 190 ) 



OF THE MIND. 

156. The investigation of what is called " The 
Mind" will be sufficient, of itself, to show that the 
consideration of the nature of words is no con 
temptible pursuit, but one really deserving of the 
closest application of our faculties. THE MIND 
is one of those comprehensive and Abstract Gene 
ralities which we are momentarily in the habit of 
employing, till at last we believe them to be per 
fectly real things, of which it would be folly to 
doubt. A little reflection will however convince us, 
that, at least in the manner in which we make use 
of these expressions, we are under a great miscon 
ception. To feel the full force of this remark, we 
must consider what are the constituent parts of 
The Mind, and what likewise is their nature. If 
we accurately analyse them, we must see that they 
consist, Reason being excepted, merely in what are 
called the Faculties, which consequently are mere 
Abstractions ; and to them, therefore, I now proceed 
to draw the reader s attention, after a few remarks 
upon Sensation, Consciousness, and Intelligence. 



Of Sensation, Consciousness, and Intelligence. 

157. No right consideration of the Mind can be 
undertaken without a due comprehension of these 
three terms. 

158. A zoophyte, and most animals just born, 
cannot be said to possess Consciousness; and it is 
not for some days after the birth of an infant that 
it shows symptoms of this state ; and a very much 
longer period elapses before it exhibits signs of 
Intelligence. So, when any one is asleep, w r e dis 
cover that even Sensation is almost, dormant, and 
that, when suddenly roused, he is simply conscious ; 
but it is not until he is broad awake that he can 
give an intelligible answer, though he is perfectly 
Conscious of the presence of the person who may be 
interrogating him. All these facts point out, that 
Sensation, Consciousness, and Intelligence are to 
tally distinct States; and that the abode of each 
must be sought for in separate organs. Physiology 
has decisively shown, that it is to the nerves we 
must look as the seat of Sensation; and that the 
information they obtain is referred at once to the 
brain, which is the common centre from which they 
radiate, mediately, or immediately. It is the brain, 
therefore, or a part of its contents, that is con 
scious of what the nerves have experienced : and if 
the impressions are not of a transitory nature, the 



192 OF THE MIND. 

Consciousness of such sensations is then termed 
Memory. Our feelings, therefore, are recorded in 
the brain, as in a memorandum-book ; but we might 
as well expect that such a volume could make use 
of its contents, as that the brain should be able to 
employ its own materials, that is, that what is Con 
scious should supply the place of that which is 
Intelligent. If Sensation depend on the nervous 
system, and Consciousness on some portion of the 
brain, we must equally believe that the Intelligence, 
which, with the aid of Reason, is to compare, clas 
sify, and decide upon the facts at its disposal, must 
have its own peculiar organ. What portion of the 
contents of the scull is thus pre-eminently distin 
guished over the whole system, it is not my inten 
tion to discuss at present; but it is evident that 
it must be as superior to the portion of the brain 
that is Conscious, as this is to the nerves, and as 
these, again, are to the muscles and coarser parts 
of the body. It is this unknown organ, so highly 
endowed, and constituting the thinking, reflecting 
Agent, resulting from the combination of soul with 
matter, duly organized, that I call, in these pages, 
by the name of INTELLECT. But as the brain is the 
general term for the contents of the scull, what I 
have just said must be so far modified as not to 
mislead any one; and that portion of its contents 
which is conscious ought, for the sake of clearness 
of conception, to be called by some word which 



SENSATION,, CONSCIOUSNESS, AND INTELLIGENCE. 193 

would clearly express its office ; and for this reason 
I assign it the name of SENSORIUM. 

159. It must not, however, be supposed, for a 
moment, that though the Intellect, Sensorium, and 
Nerves are separate and distinct organs, that they 
are independent of one another. They are to be 
considered as forming a triad, in which every one is 
essential to the operation of the other ; nor can 
Intelligence, on any occasion, dispense with feeling, 
when it pronounces judgment on the facts pre 
sented to it by Consciousness, except on an abstract 
subject. For instance, when we say that the whole 
is equal to all its parts, Feeling is in abeyance, 
though the notion of whole and parts was originally 
obtained through its means. The Intellect, without 
the aid of the materials afforded by the Sensorium, 
and derived from the Nerves, would be as useless 
as a mill that is without grain and a hopper. It is 
the union, therefore, of Intellect, Sensorium, and 
Nerves that constitute the mysterious Agent called 
Self, and which is consequently intelligent, conscious, 
and feeling, and, when under the guidance of Reason, 
is also rational. This triple being resembles, exter 
nally, a bulbous root with its dependent fibres ; the 
other parts of the body being subsidiary adjuncts, 
intended for effecting nutrition and action, under 
the will of the Intellect, the calls of the Appetites, 
and likewise, but too often, under the unbridled 



194 OP THE MIND. 

dictates of the Passions. Are the Feelings, then, 
too acute, the Appetites too craving, and the Pas 
sions too violent, the Intellect will be troubled in its 
operations; and " the still small voice of Reason" 
being unheard, the individual is, for the time, under 
what is termed mental derangement, even though he 
is not what is actually called mad. But though our 
Feelings do occasionally betray us into excesses that 
are injurious, in their consequences, to ourselves and 
others, we must never forget, that no decision can 
take place, with the exception just alluded to, that is 
not effected under their influence a fact of the ut 
most consequence, in the regulation of our conduct, 

Of the Faculties. 

160. Of all the Faculties of the Mind, there 
being none so important as the Understanding, I 
commence with it. The first great delusion we are 
under, is in supposing that the word Understanding 
represents any thing whatsoever. We, that is, our 
thinking selves, may understand what we hear or 
see ; but when we employ the Abstract word Under 
standing for some part of ourselves, we do so 
clearly by a fallacy. When we understand anything, 
we necessarily feel, are conscious, and intelligent: and 
were I to analyse the term Understanding according 
to the usual mode in these cases, I would conse 
quently say, that it is compounded of Feeling, 



OF THE FACULTIES. 195 

Consciousness, and Intelligence. For if I analyse 
one Abstraction, I shall most likely do it by the help 
of others ; but, in reality, there is neither Under 
standing, Feeling, Consciousness, nor Intelligence ; 
and, instead of these, we must remember that it 
is the union of soul with matter, which, being 
organized into human frames, understands, feels, is 
conscious, and intelligent. This, I think, is suffi 
ciently obvious ; and I now proceed to say the same 
of some other of the most remarkable of our Fa 
culties. 

161. We talk of the Faculties we call Memory, 
Imagination, Judgment, Will, Attention, Reflection, 
&c. ; but it is obvious we must do the same with 
these Abstractions as with the Understanding, and 
remember, that all we can truly say is, that we, our 
individual selves, can remember, imagine, judge, will, 
attend, reflect, $c. and nothing more. Consequently, 
the supposition of Faculties, upon which we so often 
draw, is a mere conventional form of speech ; and, 
however expedient or inevitable this course is, we 
ought never to forget its real nature when we in 
vestigate such matters, otherwise we shall only 
delude ourselves, and mislead others. W^e call 
these Abstractions, Faculties, and Powers, but it 
is only by a sort of figure of speech ; and yet men go 
on gravely discussing the nature of these Faculties 
as realities of which there can be no doubt. We 



OF THE MIND. 



likewise forget that the words Faculty and Power 
are both Abstract Terms. 

162. The Faculties, if we except Reason, con 
stituting the whole of what is called The Mind, we 
must see that the very thing, of which we were as 
sure as of our own bodies, resolves itself into the 
mere OPERATIONS of what we may appropriately 
call the Intellectual Agent, which, in the sense that 
results from the preceding views, means nothing 
more than the Thinking Individual, cognisant of 
exterior nature through the organs of sense. It is 
in short, as I have before said, the Mysterious Being 
that results from the equally mysterious combina 
tion of soul with matter. Language, though the 
essential and indispensable instrument of thought, 
ought never to be mistaken for that which thinks, 
that is to say, for the Intellect; yet language is as 
indispensable to it as wheels are to a carriage ; and 
were a Shakspeare to be utterly deprived of the 
memory of words, he would not merely be unable to 
think, but be simply a cunning animal. From which 
we must feel, that speech was as much designed 
as an aid to the Intellect, as the hands and legs 
are to the body, or as the trunk is to the elephant ; 
and indeed is actually so identified with the Intel 
lect, as to be mistaken for what we call i The Mind. 



Of Reason. 

163. Of all the divisions into which we separate 
The Mind/ Reason is the only one which is not a 
misconception arising from the delusive nature of 
language. It is not a Faculty, but a real Aycnt, 
aiding and assisting the Intellect of man in all its 
varied operations. Upon what grounds I make 
this assertion, must be deferred for the present ; as 
it would not merely involve me in a disquisition of 
a length disproportioned to the other questions 
which I have selected for discussion, but because it 
will appear more appropriately hereafter, in con 
nexion with that to which it has never been 
suspected to be related : and all I have to say will, 
consequently, then be better understood than it 
could be in this place. In so doing, I do not ask the 
reader for any admission, but merely that he will 
suspend his judgment till I can produce all the evi 
dence necessary to leave no doubt of the truth on his 
mind ; and he will then see why Instinct never errs ; 
while Reason, of which we are so proud, is ever in 
danger of going astray. 

Of Insanity. 

164. The preceding views demonstrate that 
what we call The Mind is merely a collective 
Term for the operations of the Intellect. When we 



198 OF THE MIND. 

speak therefore of Insanity of Mind, we can only do 
so by a figure of speech ; and we must consequently 
look for the cause of mental alienation (in the absence 
of our knowledge of the abode of the Intellect) to 
the state of the brain and nervous system. The 
question of moral insanity, that is, of disease of that 
separate part of us which is commonly called The 
Mind, has long been agitated among medical rea- 
soners ; but had just notions of language been en 
tertained, the subject could never have been mooted. 
If, therefore, no other advantage could be derived 
from the preceding remarks, than the placing this 
important point in its true light, the effort would 
certainly have been worth the trouble. Insanity, 
it is evident, must always be a physical disease; 
for it would be an absurdity to suppose that the Soul 
could be subject to derangement, disease, or death. 

Of Ideas. 

165. Perhaps it will be impossible to find, in 
the whole range of our language, any word that has 
been brought into such general use as Idea; and 
which, if we examine it closely, is so little entitled 
to the distinction. So much, indeed, has this word 
obtained a general currency, that it requires some 
hardihood to call its legitimacy in question. What 
we term an Idea 7 *, being derived from a Greek 

( 74 ) , fc o. 



OF IDEAS. 199 

word implying I see 70 , signifies properly a sight ; but 
is restricted, by convention, to mean a Form or 
Image, not perceived by the senses, but supposed to 
be conceived by the mind. It is generally assumed 
that Ideas are, as it were, the pabulum of our 
thoughts ; but if we closely examine this point, 
we shall find it to be an error, and that, though 
the belief in Ideas has prevailed over that of Species 
ever since the time of Des Cartes, we have only sub 
stituted one illegitimate notion for another. When 
we reason, we do but employ Words; and if we 
seem to call up the Images or Perceptions of the 
things they represent, it is merely by that insepa 
rable conjunction that exists between the objects 
of our thoughts, and to which the term Association 
of Ideas is applied ( 168). The same result, how 
ever, will take place if we hear any word pro 
nounced in a particular way, to which our attention 
had been once strongly drawn ; for, on hearing it 
again, we shall, in all probability, call up the image 
of the person, and even the place where we first 
heard it. Such things must have been observed by 
every one. How often does it happen, that we can 
not bring to mind, not the Idea, but the exact Word 
we feel is required by the nature of what we have 
said, and of what we are about to say ? Our dis 
course, in these respects, being like a piece of 



200 OF THE MIND. 

mosaic, or a dissected map, we know we want 
something, and we are quite aware what form it 
should have, to fill up the gap in what we are con 
structing ; yet there can be no Idea, image, or form 
previously in our minds, if what we require should 
be an Abstract Term : but, does it refer to some 
thing we have seen, touched, &c., then we call up the 
image, in our endeavour to find the word we want. 
If any one will closely attend to the operations of 
his own mind, he will find this to be the fact. When 
we argue about something that we have never seen 
ourselves, or had pourtrayed to us by a pictorial 
or other representation, we can talk about it just as 
clearly and as cogently as if we spoke from personal 
knowledge ; yet, in so doing, we do not call up or 
form any image on the subject 76 . If, for instance, I 
talk of Mango Capac, the divine founder of the 
Peruvian monarchy, I have not merely no image of 
him in my mind, but, as I never remember to have 
seen any representation of him produced by the 
imagination of another, I do so without any other 
aid than that of Words. Again, if I tell the reader 
that the Chinese employ, to a great extent, a hard 
substance, of a granular formation, in their cookery, 
and that it is of so much consequence to this singu 
lar people, that it is to be seen piled up, in large 
stacks, on the banks of their canals and rivers, ready 

( 76 ) See Note (F). 



OF IDEAS. 201 

for transportation throughout the country, and that 
the want of it would cause an immediate commotion 
in man, woman, and child, from one end of the 
empire to the other, I am sure he is able to com 
prehend all I have said, though his imagination 
has not, perhaps, in this description, called up the 
Idea of the thing I mean 77 . As a further proof that 
it is only with words we reason, let the reader 
remember, that eight out of the nine parts of speech, 
which we employ in reasoning, cannot, by any pos 
sible means, be referred to Ideas. If children and 
people of vivid imaginations do, at times, couple 
the images of things with the tenour of the dis 
courses (not the single words) that they hear, this is 
no proof that each word represents an Idea. Very 
often it arises merely, as I before said, from the 
Association of Ideas, but generally from a more than 
usual interest in what they are listening to ; and it 
is natural, on such an occasion, that they should 
substitute some person, place, or other object, which 
had previously come under their cognisance, for 
what they hear described ; but this cannot be the 
case in discourses that relate to moral and abstract 
subjects ; for what Picture or Image can we call up, 
to identify with such words as Principle and Con 
duct ; or Profundity^ Research, Glory, &c. ? To reason, 

( 7r ) Those whose imagination may not have helped them to the 
solution of what is here intended, will find it in Note (G) of the 
Appendix. 



202 OF THE MIND. 

therefore, is to employ language according to 
the frame of our intellect, just as to walk is to 
employ our legs according to the action for which 
they were formed. There can, consequently, be no 
reasoning without language, as there can be no 
walking without legs, nor flying without wings. The 
applying, therefore, the term Idea to any single 
word is a mere mental delusion, founded upon 
custom, and derived from the misconception of 
metaphysicians. 

166. Having thus shown that we cannot call a 
word that stands for a Perception, that is for some 
thing Concrete, an Idea, it may be questioned how 
far it is merely useful, as the representative of the 
remaining class of words called Conceptions. By 
the very nature of the word Idea it implies some 
thing that is single : it cannot, therefore, represent 
those Inferences, Phrases, Opinions, &c. already al 
luded to ( 3 and 30) which are really or virtually 
compounded of many single words ; yet we conti 
nually employ it for such purposes. So we also say, 
Such is my Idea] &c., though we mean, on such 
occasions, l my opinion, my notion, my sentiments, &c. 
We must see, therefore, that Idea is one of those 
words that are introduced into language, from time 
to time, without the least necessity for so doing ; 
and, that by its rejection we should be really bene- 
fitted : for whatever tends to make language vague, 



OF IDEAS. 203 

not merely unfits it for its legitimate use, but is 
really injurious to every process of reasoning. As a 
word that seemed so happily to stand as a general 
representative for Concrete and Abstract terms, its 
use might have been tolerated in philosophical in 
vestigations ; but as we have seen that it is inadmis 
sible as the representative of Perceptions, it may be 
justly doubted whether it would not be better if it 
\vere altogether discarded from philosophical lan 
guage, as merely tending to multiply, without any 
adequate advantage, the terms which are used in 
reasoning. In these pages it has been only em 
ployed for the purpose of refutation or of quotation, 
as not merely useless, but tending to create false 
inferences ; for besides being a redundancy, it has 
not, like Perception and Conception, the advantage 
of being connected with a verb in our language. 
Few reasoners can be more clear than Locke, as far 
as regards the making his sentiments understood ; 
and yet, by calling the words we employ to repre 
sent what we have conceived by our minds, as well 
as what we have perceived with our senses, by the 
term Ideas, he has diminished much of the perspi 
cuity that he might have introduced into his work. 
All true knowledge consists in individualization and 
exact representation ; and many false and incorrect 
notions pass without detection by the use of General, 
and therefore vague, Words. We ought to avoid 
the needless multiplication of Terms ; to which our 



204 OF THE MIND. 



language is but too prone, owing to the various 
sources from which it is derived : multiplication of 
terms being apt to generate the notion of multipli 
city of things, a baneful tendency in philosophy. 
The word Conception, however, has not only a 
beauty and force from being connected with the 
verb to Conceive, but is, moreover, of particular 
value, as being applicable to all the Conceptions of 
our minds, as well as to our combinations of words 
into phrases. Thus we can apply it to the inven 
tions of the poet, the artist, the musical composer, 
and to those of the mechanic, properties that render 
it a term of peculiar aptitude and felicity for every 
thing connected with what can be conceived by the 
intellect. But if we contrast the word Idea with 
Perception and Conception, we must at once disco 
ver that it is not the true representative of either 
the one or the other : for, if it be employed for the 
first, we must see that Image is a more correct term ; 
and if for the last, that is to say, for Conception, we 
must be equally convinced, that a word, that in its 
own language meant an Image or Form, cannot, 
without a certainty of error, be applied to mere 
sounds, that have no more existence than so much 
breath ; and that its employment in a double cha 
racter can only produce confusion of thought, and, 
consequently, fallacy of judgment : for I must once 
more remind the reader, that an Idea must either 
be the equivalent of a Perception, or a Conception ; 



OF IDEAS. 205 

and that these two words are merely Abstractions, 
that could have no sense, if we did not refer them, 
respectively, to the only assertion any of us can 
truly make ; namely, I PERCEIVE Things, and I CON 
CEIVE States. 



Of Abstract Ideas. 

167. I have said so much on the real nature of 
Abstract Ideas in 6, that I feel it is only necessary 
to allude to them here, to show that they have not 
been forgotten in the systematic view which I have 
proposed to myself in the present remarks. If 
Ideas really represent nothing, and are merely 
names for the sounds or symbols w r e call Concep 
tions, it is obvious that the abstracting of these 
Abstractions is a mere delusion of language. For 
Abstract Ideas, therefore, \ye ought invariably to 
substitute the expressions, Abstract Terms, Abstract 
Words, or Abstractions. 

Of the Association of Ideas. 

168. From the preceding observations, it is 
evident that we cannot, with any propriety, speak 
of the Association of Ideas; but we may, with 
greater justice, do so of our Associated Recollections. 
No one event or object being capable of being 
observed alone, but always in conjunction with 



206 OF THE MIND. 

others, it naturally follows, that we cannot think of 
any one of them without its being accompanied by 
those which were associated with it from the con 
nexion of time and place, or of reflection. For 
instance, I rise from my chair, and look out of the 
window, on a beautiful meadow bespangled with 
countless wild flowers : the sky is serenely beautiful 
not a cloud is to be seen : the air conveys along, 
with a delightful coolness, the most agreeable 
fragrance from the rich vegetation over which it 
has passed. Beneath the umbrageous foliage of a 
horse-chesnut, I behold some cows, that have sought 
shelter, in a shallow pool at its roots, from the 
ardent heat of the sun : they are engaged in chew 
ing the cud, and whisking their tails to keep off the 
tormenting attacks of innumerable winged-insects 
that are hovering around them. I see the milk 
maid approaching, with a pail in one hand, and a 
stool and tether in the other. During all this 
scene, my ears are delighted with the songs of 
various birds, that express the fulness of their joy of 
existence in a thousand varied notes : my palate is 
gratified at this moment by the flavour of the fruit 
I am eating : my fingers, too, touch the soft and 
dimpled cheek of a child beautiful as a cherub ; and 
these objects occupy all my senses at once, and give 
rise to the most pleasing reflections. My bosom, 
too, is in harmony, by its own sensations, with the 
picture I have sketched so imperfectly; and all my 



OF THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS. 

thoughts and emotions carry me at once to the 
contemplation of the wondrous Being by whom the 
whole has been created, and continues to be upheld, 
and that by an agency at once mysterious and 
omnipotent. Now, as nothing, in nature, can be seen, 
felt, or thought of, singly, it matters not which of 
these objects, reflections, or feelings may be called 
up at any time hereafter : it will, as far as memory 
serves, be accompanied or associated with the 
others with which it is conjoined. This simple fact, 
however, would, if it passed through the alembic of 
a metaphysician s brains, be mystified under the 
wonder-working Term, Association of Ideas ; by 
the means of which it has been attempted to 
account for Instinct itself; with which it has no 
more to do, than with Respiration, Function, or any 
other operation of the animal economy. So great 
an influence have mere phrases, that they are 
endowed by mankind with agency to perform every 
office in nature : nay, we find metaphysicians even 
going farther in error than the rest of mankind ! 
Under every point of view, therefore, the expres 
sion i Associated Recollections is not merely more 
exact, but more intelligible, than that of the Asso 
ciation of Ideas. When we speak of Associations 
that are present, and not past, we may call them 
Associated Impressions. 



( 208 ) 



OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

169. From the earliest dawn of thought, up to 
the present moment, mankind have been the dupes 
of language. Impelled by an irresistible curiosity, 
they have endeavoured to compel Nature to give up 
her secret ; and though the wisdom of Egypt had 
pronounced, with oracular truth, that her " veil had 
not been drawn aside by any man," and thereby 
implied that it never could be done ; and though a 
poet of Persia, endowed with more than usual in 
spiration, had declared that men might desist from 
the attempt, for that her enigma never had been, 
and never could be solved ; yet still it is, and ever 
will be, the object of human investigation and per 
severance. If we look to those ancient authorities 
with which we are most familiar, that is to say, to 
the Greeks, we shall find that this most ingenious 
people, profiting by the hints they had received 
from the Phoenicians, Egyptians, and other Eastern 
nations, who were most renowned in their day for 
wisdom and civilization, pursued with an ardour 
worthy of a more fortunate result, and a persever 
ance that nothing but the insuperable difficulty of 
the subject could have baffled, the investigation of 
the great mystery of LIFE. They were not aware 



OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 209 

that, independently of the perplexity and incompre- 
hensibleness of the question, they were deceived, at 
every step, by the very nature of the instrument 
with which they hoped to obtain a right solution 
of the mysterious problem. This instrument was 
language. It will be only necessary to look cur 
sorily at their fundamental distinctions, to be con 
vinced how greatly they were deceived. But if 
such men as Plato and Aristotle were thus misled, 
how could it be otherwise with inferior minds ? If 
we contrast the systems of these eminent men with 
those of other schools, cotemporary and modern, 
we shall find that the views of all are based upon 
the same radical errors. 



210 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

Platos. 

170. Plato, the pupil of Socrates, who was him 
self the soundest and most modest thinker that Greece, 
or perhaps any country, has ever produced, flourished 
at a time when these studies had been brought to a 
considerable perfection of system, and when the 
intelligence of the Greeks was at its height. His 
celebrated dialogues, though abounding in sur 
prising beauties and infinite subtleties, are so 
blended with mysticism and the mysteries of the 
religion of his country, that it requires all the 
veneration and admiration that the moderns have 
for the remains of Greek genius, not to smile, and to 
feel surprise that one of the ablest men, one indeed 
of the greatest geniuses of his own or any other 
age, could have been so deluded by mere fancies. 
Let us take for example his five Forms, which he 
considered the basis of existence. They might be 
explained thus : 

Substance. 

Similitude. 

Diversity. 

Permanence. 

Movement. 

171. Though commentators give a different 
interpretation to these five Forms of Plato, I believe 
that the meanings I have assigned them are very 



PLATO S. -- ARISTOTLE S. 



nearly those he himself intended they should have ; 
because a reference to the Categories of Aristotle 
(which were doubtlessly framed in opposition to 
them) will, evidently, form the best commentary on 
those of his master. But, that the reader may be 
able to judge for himself, I subjoin the original 
terms, and the translation 79 of the words of the 
commentators, such as they have been handed 
down from antiquity. Whichever representation 
the reader may prefer, he cannot but be convinced 
that they are only reveries, by which their inventor 
allowed himself to be deluded, through a few sounds. 
Plato undoubtedly considered that these words re 
presented real entities, or things in nature, by the 
name he assigned them ; and similar beliefs we 
have seen exist to this day, without the excuse that 
might be alleged for him. 

Aristotle s. 

172. The foregoing view of Plato s Forms will, 
as I have just said, be strengthened by the ten Cate 
gories of Aristotle, his pupil and opponent. They 
are commonly translated as follows : 

( r9 ) " otxna, the principle, essence, ravrov, the same, regarding the 
relation it bears to itself and other things, erepov, the other, when one 
varies from another. o-ra&lt;m, while it keeps its station, or preserves a 
unity.. KVVIJO-^, motion, or that by which it exerts a power to act. 
DR. FRANCKLIN S Translation DE NATURE DEORUM. 





212 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

Substance. Time. 

Quantity. Situation. 

Quality. Possession. 

Relation. Action. 

Place. Suffering 80 . 

173. When we remember that the systems of 
these two eminent men are completely in contrast; 
and that though the first took the ideal, and the 
second the real view of nature; we must see that 
both were deceived by language 81 ; for their terms, 

( ) ovtrta, TTOO-OV, Trotoi/, vpocrri, TTOV, vore, Keiar6ai, e\eiv, troteiv, "irdayeiv- 
( 81 ) " Aristotle held, against Plato, that previous to, and indepen 
dent on matter, there were no universal ideas or essences ; and that 
the ideas or exemplars, which the latter supposed to have existed in 
the divine mind, and to have been the models of all created things, 
had been eternally impressed upon matter, and were coeval with, and 
inherent in, their objects. Zeno and his followers, departing both 
from the Platonic and Aristotelian systems, maintained that these pre 
tended universals had neither form nor essence, and were no more 
than mere terms and nominal representations of their particular ob 
jects. The doctrine of Aristotle prevailed until the eleventh century ; 
when Roscellinus embraced the Stoical system, and founded the sect 
of the Nominalists, whose sentiments were propagated by the famous 
Abelard. These two sects (Realists and Nominalists) differed considera 
bly among themselves, and explained, or rather obscured, their respec 
tive tenets in a variety of ways." Note to DR. MACLAINE S Translation 
of MOSHEIM S Ecclesiastical History. It was not Zeno, but his master 
Stilpo, the Megarean, who first maintained the position that Universals 
and Species had no other existence than as words. It is to him, and to 
Roscellinus in modern times (see 18), that we must assign the doc 
trines held by the Nominalists. Neither the one nor other, however, 
appear to have doubted the Reality of qualities. Upon this point all 
philosophers seem merely to have differed, as to whether they existed 
in the Object, or in the Mind. See my remarks in 64 68. 



ARISTOTLES. 



though all used in different senses by both, were 
mere Abstractions, and therefore possess no claim 
to be considered as a correct analysis of nature. 
Plato s Forms were undoubtedly understood and 
conceived by him to be something as actual as his 
own existence ; and though it might be argued that 
Aristotle intended his only as a Classification, yet 
let any candid person examine his metaphysical 
system, and he will be convinced that Aristotle took 
all these words as expressing real entities, just as 
has been done subsequently by his followers, the 
Realists among the Schoolmen : Aristotle believing 
them to exist eternally in Matter, as Species ; Plato, 
in the Divine Mind, as Universals. 

174. It will not be uninteresting, to compare 
the foregoing divisions of the Academic and Peri 
patetic schools with those of India. There is such 
a general affinity between them, that they could not 
have had an independent production, but must 
have stood, more or less, in the relation of parent 
and offspring, whether the originality be conceded 
to Greece or to India. It may, however, be re 
marked, that the Hindu systems are all complete 
and peculiar in themselves ; and every part is in 
harmony with the whole of any one system, which 
likewise contains principles totally unnoticed by the 
Greeks. For the originality of the Hindu systems, 
it may be further remarked, that they have all a 



214 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

special application, being intended either to support 
or controvert the texts of the Vedas, or Hindu Scrip 
tures ; which are so ancient, that the peculiar dialect 
of the language in which they were written (the 
Sanscrit) was obsolete prior to the expedition of Alex 
ander, about 330 years before the Christian era. To 
these observations it may be added, that had their 
logic been borrowed from Aristotle, who was the pre 
ceptor of that conqueror, it might be naturally 
expected to be as perfect as the copies made by the 
Arabians and the moderns ; but instead of this being 
the case, it bears all the appearance of a system, 
which, though in its infancy, was a wonderful step 
in advance upon human knowledge, but deficient in 
the refinements and subdivisions of the Stagirite: 
it bears, in short, pretty nearly the same relation to 
the system of Aristotle, that their Algebra (confess 
edly of Hindu invention) does to the state of that 
science in the present day 82 . 



( 82 ) The reader, who may take an interest in the subject, can refer 
to Mr. Colebrooke s exposition of Hindu Logic, in The Transactions 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. I. pp. 92 118 ; or to his Miscellaneous 
Essays, Vol.1, p. 261. In The Asiatic Journal for February 1839, 
Colonel Vans Kennedy has given an exposition of Hindu logic ; in which 
he differs, apparently with reason, from Mr. Colebrooke, and I think the 
following passage deserving of quotation : " But it seems, at the same 
time, evident, that the argument of Gautama and the syllogism of 
Aristotle are too essentially different, in both form and substance, to 
admit of its being supposed that the one was derived from the other. 
For the validity of the syllogism depends upon this axiom, that if two 

terms 



( 215 ) 



Gotamas. 

175. Gotama is the reputed founder of logic in 
India. The division of " The Predicaments/ or 
" Objects of Proof," are six, according to Kanada ; 
viz. 

Substance. Community. 

Quality. Particularity. 

Action. Relation 83 (intimate). 

To this arrangement other authors add a seventh, 
Privation, or Negation. Besides these Categories, 
others are alleged, by different authorities. 



terms agree with one and the same third, they agree with each other ; but 
the nature and properties of the term which should be employed as 
the middle terms have not been explained by Aristotle. Gautama, 
on the contrary, founds the conclusiveness of his argument, on such a 
property being assigned, as a reason for affirming the proposition as 
will prove the predicate ; and, on the applicability of the reason being 
shown, by adducing, in its support, the instance of some object which 
possesses the property specified in the reason and predicate. In this 
case, therefore, it is not sufficient to lay it down as a rule, that if A 
can be attributed to every B, and B to every C, then A is attributable 
to every C, and to frame syllogisms with the letters of the alphabet : 
for the argument of Gautama cannot be formed, unless a distinct notion 
of the properties of the subjects by which the question is to be proved 
has been first conceived. When, however, this argument is duly con 
sidered, it will, perhaps, be admitted, that it exhibits a more natural 
mode of reasoning than is compatible with the compressed limits of 
the syllogism, and that its conclusion is as convincing as that of the 
syllogism." p. 146. 

( 83 ) Or, Aggregation. 



216 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

176. Mind, in common with all substance (for 
they hold it to be such) is the substratum of eight 
qualities; viz. 

Number. Disjunction. 

Quantity. Priority. 

Individuality. Subsequence. 

Conjunction. Faculty. 

177. This last arrangement, which is made by 
Kanada, is nothing more nor less than another set of 
Predicaments or Categories, though termed Qualities 
by him. But as the Predicaments, in common with 
all Qualities, are considered as real essences by the 
Hindus, as well as by ourselves, their distinction of 
the classes into Categories and Qualities makes no 
difference in their natures. 

Jina s. 

178. The Jainas (followers of Jina), who are an 
ancient and a celebrated sect in India, have so many 
opinions in common with the Bauddhas (followers 
of Buddha), as to have been often confounded with 
them, hold that there are five Kdrana, or Causes, 
which unite in the production of all events. These 
are as follow : 

1. Time. 

2. Nature. 

3. Fate or Necessity. 

4. Works, or the principle of Retributive Justice. 

5. Mental Effort, or Perseverance. 



.IAIN AS. 41 I 

179. The Jainas, besides the above, comprehend 
nature under the six following Categories ; viz. 

1. Motion. 4. Time. 

2. Rest. 5. Life. 

3. Vacuum. (5. Matter. 

With the exception of Matter, which is a Generali 
zation of Body, and is therefore a Concrete Term, 
the whole of the above are Abstractions ; though the 
first group is considered as Causes, and the last as 
Principles or Categories : but, in both cases, they 
were perfect Realities in the conception of their 
framers and followers 84 . 

180. The systems of Gotama and Jina will be 
sufficient to serve as an illustration of the identity of 
the fallacy into which the Hindu philosophers have 
fallen, in common with those of other countries. 



181. The next system, to contrast with those 
that have been just given, is that of the divisions of 
the soul, which the Parsees, or descendants of the 
ancient Persians, attribute to Zoroaster. If not 



( bl ) I have preferred the above exposition given by Colonel Miles, 
as more popular, to that of Mr. Colcbrooke, printed in Vol. IX. p. 287 
of the Asiatic Researches of Calcutta, and reprinted in his Essays, 
Vol. II. p. 191. See Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, p. 335. 



218 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

handed down from antiquity, it was in all pro 
bability framed in India, or borrowed from that 
fertile hot-bed of metaphysical systems. 

182. " The soul of man, instead of a simple 
essence, a spark of that eternal light which animates 
all things, consists, according to Zoroaster, of five 
separate parts, each having peculiar offices : 

1. The Feroher, or principle of sensation. 

2. The Boe, or principle of intelligence. 

3. The Rouan, the principle of practical judgment, ima 
gination, volition. 

4. The Akho, or principle of conscience. 

5. The Jan, or principle of animal life. 

When the four of these, which cannot subsist in the 
body without the last, abandon their earthly abode, 
the Jan mingles with the winds, and the Akho 
returns to heaven with the celestial Rouhs (or spi 
rits) ; because, its office being continually to do 
good, and shun evil, it can have no part in the 
guilt of the soul, whatever that may be. The Boe, 
the Rouan, and the Feroher, united together, are 
the only principles which are accountable for the 
deeds of the man, and which are accordingly to be 
examined at the day of judgment. If good pre 
dominate, they go to heaven ; if evil, they are 
despatched to hell. The body is regarded as a mere 
instrument in the power of the Rouan, and therefore 



ZOROASTER S. 210 

not responsible for its acts. After death, the Akho 
has a separate existence, as the Feroher had previous 
to its birth 85 ." 

183. It is not possible to pronounce on the 
terms contained in the division of the soul as attri 
buted to Zoroaster, without a thorough knowledge 
of the language in which the works, considered as 
the production of that sage, are written. In all 
probability, even if we admit of the authenticity of 
these five terms, we shall not be far mistaken if we 
suppose that the most of them are but abstrac 
tions used in a real or personified sense. That 
this is the case with the last of the five, that is, with 
Jan, is certain ; as it still means life or vitality, 
in the modern language of Persia. But whether 
ancient or modern, this dissection of the soul is of 
the highest interest, as an additional instance of the 
delusions of the human mind ; and though not 
strictly in place here, among the Categories, it is 
well worthy of attention. 

Locke s. 

184. It is to our own country that we must 
look for the next set of Categories of nature : and 

( H5 ) Not having the Zendavesta of Anquctil &lt;lu Perron at hand, 1 
have borrowed the above extract from my friend Mr. JAMES BAILLIE 
FRAZER S judicious account of Persia, forming one of the Volumes of 
The Edinburgh Cabinet Library. 



220 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

Locke has distinctly furnished us with a system, in 
which he has shortly and explicitly unfolded his 
views. As he was a Realist, in every sense of the 
word, we cannot hope to find that he does more 
than substitute his own set of General Terms for 
those of others. On reading them down, the reader 
will see that they tell us nothing new ; and, that 
they are arranged upon the notion, that Abstract 
Words are real entities. They do not even display 
any remarkable ingenuity or depth of thought, and 
may even be contested as to the general views they 
inculcate. He says : 

" And thus I have, in a short draught, given 
a view of our original Ideas, from whence all the 
rest are derived, and of which they are made up ; 
which if I would consider, as a Philosopher, and 
examine on what Causes they depend, and of what 
they are made, I believe they all might be reduced 
to these very few primary and original ones ; viz. 

Extension; 

Solidity ; 

Mobility, or the power of being moved, 
which by our senses we receive from body ; 

Perceptivity, or the power of perception 
or thinking; 

Motivity, or the power of moving, which, 
by reflection, we receive from our minds. 



LOCKE S. KANT S. 221 

1 crave leave to make use of these two new words, 
to avoid the danger of being mistaken in the use of 
those which are equivocal. To which if we add 

Existence, 

Duration, 

Number, 

which belong both to the one and the other, we 
have, perhaps, all the Original Ideas, on which the 
rest depend. For by these, I imagine, might be 
explained the nature of colours, sounds, tastes, 
smells, and all other Ideas we have, if we had but 
faculties acute enough to perceive the severally- 
modified extensions, and motions of those minute 
bodies which produce those several sensations in 
us." * 

Kant s. 

185. As the last but one, though not the least 
renowned, and certainly the most perplexing of 
those who have added to these systems, I proceed 
to consider the view of The Human Mind, and of 
Nature, given by Immanuel Kant. This extra 
ordinary man was so misled by his own subtlety 
and ingenuity, that he conceived the notion of 
relieving metaphysics from the charge of uncertainty, 
so justly urged against them. He was aware, that 
that, in which no fixed principles were universally 
acknowledged, could rest upon no solid foundation. 

C" 1 ) Conduct of Human Understanding, Book II. Chap. xxi. 7^- 



222 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

Among all preceding writers on the subject, he 
thought that Hume had, at all events, made one 
capital discovery, in his Essay on a Necessary Con 
nexion ( 82, 83.) ; and, that if there existed one 
notion (necessity) not drawn from experience, which 
Locke had convinced most thinking people was the 
only source of knowledge, there might be more. 
Following up this notion, he thought he had dis 
covered eleven others; and upon these, which I 
shall enumerate presently, he built his dark and 
incomprehensible system. But this was not all ; for 
it struck him, that as one of the main difficulties 
that beset astronomers was removed by adopting 
the system of Copernicus in place of that of 
Ptolomy, or, in other words, in preferring the belief 
that our planet revolved about the sun, and not 
that the sun and other heavenly bodies revolved 
about us, he conceived, that by making Time and 
Space to exist in and not out of the mind, he took 
away the great stumbling-block in metaphysics : 
thus making all nature a subjective, and not an 
objective existence. Yet, strange to say, he at the 
very same time made the following statement: 
" Our exposition, consequently, teaches the Reality 
(that is, the objective validity) of space, in reference 
to all that externally (?), as object, can be presented 
to us ; but, at the same time, the Ideality of space, in 
reference to things, if they are considered in them 
selves by means of reason that is, without regard 



KANT S. 223 

to the nature of our sensibility 87 ." Here he evi 
dently contradicts himself; and he well knew 
why ; for if all nature exist only in the mind, what 
becomes of all other beings? He therefore slipped 
in this non sequitur, though it was contrary to the 
fundamental position he had laid down, that it 
might serve as a loop-hole, at which to escape, if 
hard pressed upon the point. 

186. By these bold assumptions, joined to his 
twelve celebrated Categories, he obtained what he 
considered would enable him to construct a system 
that might rest, like mathematics, on data that would 
be universally admitted, and consequently be no 
longer dependent on proofs got from groping in the 
dark 88 , that is, from uncertain experience, or, as he 
calls it, empirical knowledge. By the means of such 
foundations and assumptions he has built up, with 
a style, and terms of extreme obscurity, a system so 
intricate and complicated, that it has puzzled his 
warmest admirers and followers to make out what 
he would be at, from time to time. To this system 
he gave the name of transcendental, because it 
transcended all proofs drawn from experience ; and 
made metaphysics an Abstract Science, or one in 
which every problem could be solved by principles 
existing in the mind itself. It was also his opinion, 

(" ) English Translation, page 33. 

( R8 ) See some able remarks on the Philosophy of Kant, in Tait s 
Magazine for June 1836. 



224 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

that " Only by means of this CRITIC can the roots 
themselves be cut off from Materialism, Fatalism, 
Atheism, freethinking Unbelief, Fanaticism, and Su 
perstition, which may be universally hurtful ; finally, 
also, from Idealism and Scepticism, which are more 
dangerous to the schools, but hardly can pass over 
to the public." The attempt was worthy of his 
genius ; but though he constructed his break-water 
with the utmost skill, yet it is evident that it could 
not, built as it was upon so weak a foundation, 
withstand the mighty, though scarcely audible bil 
lows that rolled continually against it from the 
great ocean of COMMON SENSE ; and which, in fifty 
years, have made so many ravages in its best com 
pacted parts, that it lies a stupendous wreck, over 
which the tide of opinion rises and falls without 
causing further devastation ; leaving it as a memo 
rial for future generations, who will exclaim, on 
beholding it Thtre were giants in the earth, in 
those daysT 

187. It is now only necessary to analyse his 
system, which is likewise founded upon another 
assumption ; namely, that the human mind is com 
pounded of three estates, or separate divisions, that 
is to say, of SENSE, UNDERSTANDING and REASON. 
But I shall begin with the consideration of Sense ; 
and merely draw the reader s attention to the fol 
lowing synoptical view of Kant s system 89 . 

( 89 ) Taken from MR. WIRGMAN S Principles of KANT S Philosoptty. 



KANT S. 



225 



THE MIND. 



SENSE. 
2 Receptivities. 



Time. 



Space. 



QUANTITY. 

Unity. 

Multitudes. 

Totality. 



Absolute 
Totality. 



UNDERSTANDING. 

1 2 Categories. 

QUALITY. RELATION. MODALITY. 

Reality. Substance and Accident. Possibility. 

Negation. Cause and Effect, Existence. 

Limitation. Action and Re-action. Necessity. 

REASON. 

6 Ideas. 



Absolute 
Limitation. 



Absolute 
Substance. 

Absolute 
Cause. 

Absolute 
Concurrence. 



Absolute 
Necessity. 



RESULTS. 



INTUITION, 

present in 

TIME and SPACE. 



CONCEPTION, 

absent in 

TIJIK and SPACK. 



IDEA, 

out of 
TIME and SPACE. 



22G OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 



SENSE. 

188. With regard to Sense, it is evidently an 
Abstraction, that can therefore have no real and 
separate existence. We can feel; and when we abs 
tract, we can talk of Feeling, or its synonymous Abs 
traction, Sense. So much for the basis. Let us 
now consider its dependent notions. This non 
entity, Sense, has two other non-entities, which he 
calls Receptivities (Holding-nesses). These two re 
ceptive non-entities have been vulgarly called Space 
and Time. I have already shown, that, though 
classed together ( 115, 116), they ought to be kept 
separate ; because the first has a real, and the second 
only a relative existence ; that is, it is a notion or 
word we have derived from the apparent revolution 
of the sun round the earth. Both Space and Time 
he holds to be Mental Receptivities, that constitute 
the SENSITIVE FACULTY. 

Space is, he says, a receptivity for matter in ex 
tension. 

Time is also a receptivity for matter in succession. 

189. Now, according to Kant, both Space and 
Time only exist in the mind, and constitute two 



KANT S. 



Senses ; the first of which he calls external, and the 
second internal. But. he does not explain how a 
second being, or percipient, can exist, if he thus 
takes away the outness of Space ; for it is self- 
evident, that all nature, according to this system, 
can only exist in the mind of the one person who 
conceives, and all other percipients must be only 
modes of the one individual who has such a faculty : 
and Kant thus reduces every thing to an egoism, of 
which his own mind was the centre and boundary. 
He is here, at the least, inconsistent, even if we 
could admit of the basis of his system. This is per 
haps enough for Sense. The next division is the 
Understanding. 



228 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 



UNDERSTANDING. 

190. The Understanding he takes for another 
Reality ; and conceives that it has four grand divi 
sions, to which he gives the names of 

Quantity, 
Quality, 
Relation, 
Modality, 

respectively. Under each of these heads he places 
three sub-divisions ; making thus, in the whole 
twelve, according to Mr. Wirgman; but fifteen 
according to the new complete translation of the 
CriticJc of Pure Reason; because to those under 
Modality we have the opposite set resulting from 
Negation ; that is to say, 

Impossibility, 

Non-existence, 

Contingence. 

These twelve (or fifteen) terms are, according to 
Kant, real divisions of the Understanding, which he 
took, like Sense, to mean a real substratum of 
perception. They were, in his view of his philo 
sophy, a sort of original types or standards, to 



KANT S 229 

which every thing perceived was referrible, and 
which confer their form upon every object in na 
ture. They are, indeed, to be considered as normal 
principles, that give a reality and shape to every 
thing. To what degree they can be entitled to this 
pre-eminent and peculiar office, the reader will best 
judge from what has already been said : and if he 
still believes that the mere figments of the intellect, 
which it employs, like ciphers, to reckon with, have 
a separate and independent existence, why then he 
can take Kant at his word; for, of course, he can 
never hope to comprehend him in detail. He must 
not however forget the remarks that I have already 
made on the Understanding ( 160) ; namely, that all 
we can say, in any case, is, We understand ; and that, 
consequently, there is no such Faculty as the Un 
derstanding. 



230 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 



REASON. 

191. Reason, according to Kant, unites the 
twelve Categories that exist in the Understanding, 
and which are themselves out of Time and Space, 
into six ideas, which are absolute ; namely, 

Totality, Necessity, 

Limitation, Cause, 

Substance, Concurrence. 

He considers Reason as a spontaneity., or active 
Faculty, free from Time and Space, in the same 
way as the Understanding was out of space. 



192. Such is a brief, but I believe accurate 90 , 
sketch of the basis of Kant s celebrated system. If 
we cease to believe in the reality of Abstractions, 
we can no more think that it is a true representa 
tion of nature, than we can that Aladdin s palace 
had a real existence ; and it is as futile to inquire 
into its principles and consequences, as it would be 
to speculate on the style of architecture and the 

( 90 ) I have endeavoured not to misrepresent this almost unrepre 
sentable system ; but if I have not succeeded, I hope I shall be ex 
cused for a failure, where so many have had the same fate before me. 



KANT S. 



proportions of that celebrated edifice of Oriental 
romance. Throughout his work, Kant displays 
consummate ingenuity, in constructing his dark and 
useless labyrinth : and he has cemented the whole 
together into a cyclopean mass, by the help of a 
profound knowledge of logical forms, that will long 
preserve it as an object of wonder and admiration, 
leaving far behind it all other systems, for subtlety, 
intricacy, and darkness, and, I may add, for utter 
uselessness. As a metaphysical feat, it will, in all 
probability, never be surpassed ; but it is merely to 
be considered "a cunningly-devised" system, in 
which Logic is abetting Realism in an attempt to 
waylay the Human Understanding. Of this system 
I said, on a former occasion, as follows: " The 
system of Kant makes phenomena, or the things 
seen, to arise from nownenon, or what is known; 
which two words, when released from the juggle of 
grammatical forms, imply, that we know by seeing, 
what we knew by knowing, or, in plain English, we 
know what we knew. Afterwards, by converting this 
tioumenon, a passive participle implying what is 
known, into something that is the type of our ideas, he 
has, by the help of Realism, which he has carried to 
an unprecedented extent, and by the use of uncouth 
and obscure terms, framed a system so dark and 
complicated, that it has served to hoodwink most of 
his own countrymen ; although it has been rejected, 
with one voice, by the unsophisticated sense of the 



232 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

rest of mankind;" an opinion which I still see no 
reason to alter. The admirers of this eminent 
metaphysician may perhaps think that his system 
ought to have been given more in detail ; but my 
object, throughout the whole of these pages, is with 
fundamental notions; and if these are false, of what 
value are the consequences, however consistent, 
derived from them? Indeed, nothing but the 
great celebrity of Kant s system, and the fact that 
his Categories are its very foundation, have led me 
to deviate from the plan I have almost invariably 
followed, of merely analysing the materials of meta 
physicians. Nor, indeed, is it necessary : for Kant 
has himself said, " Upon the solution of this problem 
(synthetic judgments), or upon a satisfactory proof 
that the possibility, which it longs to know explained, 
cannot at all, in fact, take place, DEPENDS, NOW, WHE 
THER METAPHYSICK FALLS OR STANDS 91 ." NoW, as I 

have shown, 90, that the very basis of this syn 
thetic judgment is altogether a fallacy, it follows 
that the superstructure raised upon it is a mere 
castle built in the air, and that it has, consequently, 
been treated at greater length than it really me 
rits 92 . 



&lt; 91 ) Critick of Pure Reason, p. 17. 

( 92 ) Kant s system reminds me of the reply made by a Quaker to a 
Materialist, to whom he had listened for some time with great patience : 
" Friend ! thee art DARK, but not DEEP." 



( 233 ) 



F. W. Schetting s. 

193. The last system of Categories that I have 
to show the reader is that of Frederick William 
Schelling. This view is translated from the History 
of Philosophy, by Tennemann, as rendered by M. 
Victor Cousin 93 . 

I. The Absolute, the whole in its primary form (God), 

manifests himself in 

II. Nature (the Absolute, according to its secondary 

forms). 
It then produces itself in two Relative orders ; viz. 

THE REAL. THE IDEAL. 

Under the following- powers : 

Weight Matter, Truth Science, 

Light Movement, Goodness Religion, 

Organization Life, Beauty Art. 

Above, as reflected forms of the Universe, place 
themselves : 

Man (the Microcosm). The State. 

The System of the World (the external Universe). History. 

194. Of this system, of which I am informed 
the able author is still living, I need not say any 
thing particular, except that it displays the order 
and method for which the Germans are distin 
guished. 

( ) Tome II. p. HO. ,. 



234 OF VARIOUS METAPHYSICAL CATEGORIES. 

195. The whole of these Categories, from Plato 
to Schelling, the reader must be convinced, are only 
so many Abstractions ; of which it will be unneces 
sary for me to say any thing more, after all the 
remarks I have previously made on such words. 
It is clear, therefore, that as long as we believe in 
the Objective Reality of Nature, we must consider 
them merely as, wx et prceterea nihiL 






( 235 ) 



CONCLUSION. 



196. From the preceding observations, it is 
evident that Metaphysical Systems are mere crea 
tures of the fancy, and that they are as much in 
contrast with one another as could be expected 
with reference to the nature of their origin. The 
low estimate in which they have been held by the 
common sense of the bulk of mankind has not been 
without justice, though it has only arisen from a 
sort of blind instinct. Men may be dazzled by 
what they hear, particularly when it is accompanied 
by the charms of a pleasing style and graceful 
imagery ; but if the foundation be not laid in 
nature, it makes no more impression on the mind 
than a passing cloud in summer ; for nothing can 
produce lasting conviction, or create a desire for 
closer acquaintance, but what is the very image of 
truth. Boileau has said, most justly, 

" II n y a ricn de beau que le vrai." 

197. When we hear words that reflect nature 
accurately and beautifully, we are conscious that 
our minds are nourished with such wholesome 



236 CONCLUSION. 

aliment as its healthy condition universally demands. 
It is only to the conviction of the inherent truth 1 
of the Abstract Sciences, that is, of their consistency 
with nature, that they are cultivated with such plea 
sure and assiduity 94 : but take away that conviction, 
and they would be as little followed or prized as 
metaphysical speculations ; which are truly what 
the poet has described them, 

" Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy." 

198. On the one grand point, however, to which 
I have directed the reader s attention that is to say, 
the true nature of Abstract Words I must now make 
a few concluding remarks. Reasoning, it must be 
seen, is entirely dependent for its existence upon 
Abstractions, and differs but in its greater variety 
and extent from Calculation. The last process, 

( 94 ) Mathematical science busies itself with deducing, by calcula 
tion, the laws that depend upon the relations of number and quantity, 
in those things of which we are cognisant through our SENSES. But meta 
physics only consider the relations existing between Abstractions that 
have no existence, except as sounds, and which represent nothing IN or 
OUT of nature. As a science, therefore, it is as chimerical as either 
alchymy or astrology, though requiring the exercise of powers of 
mind of the highest order. Indeed, arithmetic and mathematics are 
only kinds of metaphysics applied to rational and useful purposes, by 
the means of symbols instead of sounds. Metaphysics, therefore, may 
be followed as a sort of intellectual gladiatorship. or gymnastic disci 
pline, tending to give strength and suppleness to the mind, and fit it 
for the real combats of life, which, in comparison, will be mere 
pastime. 



CONCLUSION. 237 

every one feels, is merely effected by symbols ; and 
the former,, I believe, I have clearly demonstrated, 
is accomplished by means precisely similar. The 
intellect is as dependent upon such words for its 
efforts as the arm is upon the fingers, by which it 
grasps whatever it has the strength to hold up ; and 
we are as much driven to the use of language by 
instinct, as we are to that of our teeth and jaws for 
biting and mastication. Above all other points, 
however, the reader should ponder on the wonder 
fully curious nature of Abstract Words ; on the prin 
ciple of which we cannot too deeply fix our atten 
tion, from its high importance and universality. 
We must see, that we are impelled by nature to the 
employment of one or more words that are equiva 
lent, by usage, to the Term STATE : and when we 
search for the original of this most mysterious sym 
bol which is, in fact, whether expressed or under 
stood, the foundation of all Abstract language we 
find that the human intellect can give no account of 
that by which it is rendered the god of this nether 
world ! 

199. In fine, I cannot do better than conclude 
with the following quotation from Locke ; which 
may be considered as the complement of the Re 
flection which I have placed at the beginning of 
these remarks, and in the justness of which all 
will agree: 



238 CONCLUSION. 

" Were the capacities of our understandings ivell con 
sidered, the extent of our knowledge once discovered 
and the horizon found., which sets the bounds between 
the enlightened and dark parts of things- between 
what is, and what is not comprehensible by us, men 
would perhaps with less scruple acquiesce in the avowed 
ignorance of the one, and employ their thoughts and 
discourse with more advantage and satisfaction in the 
other* 5 ." 



( 9S ) LOCKE On the Conduct of Human Understanding, Book I. 
Chap. I. 8. 



APPENDIX. 



NOTE (A). &lt;;. 

I. NOTHING can be more delusive than the apparent 
significancy of the terminations ness, sJiip, hood, head, &c. 
If we look for the original of ness, we find it in the Saxon 
t)ip*e. At first sight, we might suppose that the termi 
nation in goodness, and such words, was identical with that 
in Sheerness, and similar names of places ; but the latter 
is derived from the Saxon nefe, a nose, implying a pro 
jection of the land, similar to the effect of that feature on 
the face. In all probability, if we had not been able to 
refer to the original distinction between ruffe and nere, 
etymologists would have insisted that the termination in 
goodness, &c., had been derived, like the names of head 
lands and promontories, from no.se. Ship, hood, head, &c., 
though apparently familiar terms are equally obscure; 
ship being derived from the Saxon fcip and f cyp ; and 
the same word is written schap in Dutch. So the termi 
nations hood and head can be deduced from the Saxon 
bAb, the German hpit, and the Dutch held; and all these 
terminations are equally insignificant, in whatever lan 
guage they are found. In the Sanscrit language, Abstract 
Words are made by such terminations as T\V\M, TV, YA, 
and TIS. The first of these has been corrupted into the 
Saxon bort), and the English dom, in freedom, &c. TV has 
! o-iven rise, apparently, to the Greek rns, and Latin TAS, as 
i in \evKorns, whiteness, and VITVUTVS, life or livingness. The 



240 APPENDIX. 

TIS is evidently corrupted into the Greek o-/j, in such word: 
as (Travis, state, and 7ro/&gt;/&lt;r/?, formation, &c. Not one o 
these terminations can be traced up to any word having ?.] 
meaning. If they ever were significant, it could only be 
in the earliest antiquity. In the Arabic language, we find 
the termination IYAT forming Abstracts; as, KABILIYAT, 
ability, which is derived from KABIL, able; and yet we are 
certain, by the genius of the language, that this termi 
nation never was significant, but is purely artificial. 

2. In conclusion, I have only to repeat, that this in 
stance from the Arabic is very valuable; as tending to 
show, that possibly the terminations I have just explained 
may never have had a separate existence, as significant 
words, in the languages where they are found. If the 
mind, as I have already said in 11, is led to make this 
jump, it might at the same time call up an unmeaning 
sound on an emergency. Were I, for want of the right 
expression, in the hurry of conversation, to praise Alex 
ander s greatsen of soul, I might, perhaps, be nearly as 
well comprehended as if I spoke of his greatness of soul. 
If such words ever had a meaning, it may have been very 
different from what the sense now requires ; for we have 
seen, in 12, that the Sanscrit and Arabic languages totally 
differed from the Greek and Latin, in the words they have 
adopted to express the notion of State. 

NOTE (B). 79. 

" Some Observations on the Hindu and European Notions of 
Cause and Effect. 

1. "A careful consideration of what the Hindus have 
said on Cause and Effect makes it evident that they have 
fallen into the same error as the Greeks and modern 
writers on that subject; and that they have blended the 
Relation of Cause and Effect with the question of Source 



APPENDIX. 241 

and Product, as well as with that of Doer and Deed, Agent 
and Act ; and that they have also used the word Cause in 
the sense of Efficient, Maker, Motive, Reason, Origin, &c., as 
is done by our own metaphysicians. The Latin CAUSA, the 
Greek curia. 1 and the Sanscrit IIKTU, are all simple terms, 
the verbal derivation of which is not now obvious; so that, 
no means remain of defining their actual import by ana 
lysis, nor by any ulterior reference : but it will be seen, 
in the course of the following remarks, that this cannot 
be assigned as the reason of the great obscurity and con 
fusion in which the true meaning of these words is in 
volved. 

2. " Though mankind, by that discrimination with which 
they are commonly endowed, not only, generally speaking, 
use language correctly, but immediately feel the impro 
priety of any thing that is contrary to its true analogies, 
yet there are very few indeed who could, even after some 
labour of thought, give any thing like a rational solution 
of the nature of the words they have been employing. 
Most people, if they were asked what they meant by the 
word Cause, would fly to an illustration, and point to a 
Thing of some kind as being a Cause. But this would be 
an error; for the word Cause implies the Relation in 
which the thing stands, and riot the Thing itself. Cause, 
therefore, is merely a General Term which the mind 
employs to mark one of the two Relations in which any 
thing may, under certain circumstances, be contemplated. 
A word that implies a Relation, must often, by its nature, 
have another that is invariably understood, and which is 
its Correlative attendant: thus the term Fatlier implies 

( ) The Greek alrta is, in all probability, derived from the Sanscrit HE-IT. 
The want of etymological significancy in these words is a proof of their 
antiquity, and shows that they were of the first necessity; as is also cleir 
from their import. The Sanscrit KARAXA, implying; the making to do, is 
evidently of much later use. 



242 APPENDIX. 

that there is a Child ; Husband, that there is a Wife, &c. ; 
and, by the same analogy, Cause implies that there must 
be something else, which we call an Effect: but the sense 
of the word Thing is complete and absolute in itself, 
without the aid of any other word. Even Locke, when he 
demies Cause as a substance exerting its power into act 2 , 
has fallen into this mistake; for Cause can never be a 
substance ; but a substance may stand in the Relation of 
a Cause which is to produce an Effect. 

3. "These general distinctions have been premised, for 
the purpose of leading the mind of the reader to the true 
consideration of this not unimportant question; as the 
fallacies of many of the ablest writers have derived their 
importance solely from the obscurity and confusion in 
which the import of the term Cause has been involved. 
We have just seen that a substance cannot be a Cause, 
but that it may stand in the Relation of Cause : therefore, 
till there was a mind to perceive the Relation between 
events, there could be no Cause, as it is merely a mental 
distinction. 

4. "Having thus cleared a way all other imports from the 
word Cause, except that w r hich really belongs to it, namely, 
a Relation of something that is perceived to be prior to 
another Relation that is called an Effect, we must see, that 
when it is employed for Source, Origin, Reason, Motive, 
Efficient, Agent, or Maker, we are really talking about 

( ) I have not been able to verify this quotation, which is taken from 
Johnson s Dictionary, where it is employed to elucidate the word Cause : 
but this is of very little consequence, as it is only necessary to refer to 
Locke s Essay on Human Understanding, Bk. II. Ch. XXVI. 2, to see 
that it is supported by his argument on Cause and Effect ; for he says 
there, A Cause is that which makes any other thing, either simple idea, sub 
stance or mode, begin to be ; and an Effect is that which had its beginning 
from some other thing. This definition, which applies very well to Agent 
and Result, does not contain any allusion to the Conception of Relation, 
which alone constitutes that of Cause and Effect. 



APPENDIX. 243 

things with which it has no logical affinity. When we 
say, therefore, that God is the first Cause of all things, we 
mean, though we express ourselves incorrectly, that he is 
the Source or Maker of all things. When, again, we talk 
of secondary Causes, we must intend the subsidiary agents, 
or means, by which an Effect is produced. By the same 
analogy, we cannot with propriety speak of efficient and 
material Causes; for the first means an Agent capable of 
effecting anything ; and the second, a Source from which 
something proceeds, and which can have nothing to do with 
the real meaning of Cause ; that is, the conception of relation 
between the Doer and the Deed, or the Agent and the Act. 

5. "The importance of the foregoing distinctions and 
elucidations will be immediately felt, when the application 
is made to the arguments of K APFLA, and the other Sdnkhya 
philosophers. For when they assert 3 that Effects exist in 
their Causes, and that "what exists not, can by no ope 
ration of the Cause be brought into existence," and eluci 
date their meaning by saying that the oil previously 
existed in the seed from which it was expressed, we must 
immediately see that by the word Cause they intend a 
Source from which a Production proceeds ; which is a mere 
truism ; for, undoubtedly, without a Source there could be 
no Production : but when they apply it to the Divine 
Source of all things, they beg the question ; for they might 
as well argue, that, as every numerical series is composed 
of units, a unit must come from something else, which, 
every one will allow, would be nonsense. Now, to con 
tinue this illustration, it may be said, that just as the unit 
is the admitted starting point of numbers, so must the 
Deity be the Source of all things ; and all Productions, 
natural and artificial, proceed from his Essence, as all 
multiples do from the unit. 

6, {&lt; The whole of this confusion, in the use of the term 

( 3 ) Trana En;;, //.v. Society, Vol. I. p. 38. 
R 2 



244 APPENDIX. 

Cause, has arisen from the very nature of the human mind; 
which, deriving all its ideas of language from sensible 
objects, assimilates every thing to substance, and considers 
all Abstractions as realities. It is on this account, that 
employing, as we do, such words as Cause, from infancy 
upwards, as something real, we never arrive at any idea 
of their real import, but by close reflection. Now, expe 
rience proves that this is an operation beyond any syste 
matic effort of the generality of mankind: and if the 
mind does even occasionally light upon the truth, it is 
only as is exemplified in the electric flash, which gives a 
momentary gleam, to leave us at once in the obscurity in 
which it found us. Owing to this inveterate and almost 
inevitable mental error, and to the consequent confusion 
of ideas, we have been led to the invention of a verb 
meaning to cause ; and we make use of such expressions as 
" He caused him to fall."" But as the verb to cause, in such 
senses, means to make to do, or to be, and therefore implies 
that he made him fall, it must express physical Agency, and 
not abstract Relation; for when the phrase is properly 
expressed, it means, " He, standing in the Relation of Cause, 
made him fall. This misuse of language is not of the least 
consequence in the common business of life, as it misleads 
no one; but it is of the highest importance when we 
reason about fundamental notions ; as it then becomes the 
source of the worst errors of philosophy, deceiving those 
who are considered the infallible authorities of the rest of 
mankind ; and thereby riveting the human mind in the 
fetters of their own mistakes. Such being the nature of 
language, we cannot hope, nor is it possible, to alter its 
course: but it is incumbent on philosophers to bear its 
imperfections in mind, when they attempt to philosophize 
upon the nature of things, and to endeavour to prevent it 
from misleading themselves, as well as those for whom 
they write. 



\ j&gt; i 1 1: \ D i x. 

7. " It may, however, be objected by those who have not 
attended closely to the ten our of these observations, that 
Cause and Effect have always been regarded by philosophic 
writers as standing in a State of Relation to one another ; 
and that, as a proof, they always speak of " the Relation of 
Cause and Effect. 1 1 This is perfectly true ; but while they 
have so spoken, they have always argued as if Cause were 
something real, instead of a mental Conception. Indeed, 
they have converted it, by their mode of argumentation, 
into an entity, or rather a substantiality, possessing physical 
agency, and capable of producing effects; and this is proved, 
not merely by the quotation from Locke, but likewise by 
the use of the verb to cause, implying to make to do ; and 
the noun of action, causation, signifying the act of making 
to do, which such writers employ, on the same occasions, 
with equal incorrectness. By a strange inconsistency, 
arising from the deceptive character of language, they 
convert the Relation of Cause into an Agent ; and, at the 
same time, fancy they employ the verb to cause, and the 
noun causation, in a manner that only intends Relation! 
So inveterate are these errors in our way of thinking, 
owing to the nature of our minds as well as of language, 
and of habit as the consequence of its employment, that it 
will require no ordinary effort in the reasoner who may 
attempt to liberate himself from their thraldom ; and an 
attentive perusal of the arguments that have been adduced 
on the nature of Cause and Effect, by any one who shall 
ceep the foregoing distinction in view, will make him feel 
that those stately disquisitions that have been raised on the 
allacy here exposed are often but mere verbiage, vox et 
vrffterca niliil, or, at the best, but as the baseless fabric of a 
vision. The same kind of fallacy could with ease be shown, 
on nearly similar grounds, to be the case with all the 
arguments generally used about Nature and Necessity. 4 

( 4 ) Tliis I have since done, and the Reader will fi, d them 33-39 of 
lie text. 



246 APPENDIX. 

8. " The only chance of preventing the errors that have 
been pointed out from being committed by those who are not j 
accustomed to analyse their own thoughts, is to remember, 
that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, in which the 
word Cause is employed, it is involved in this fundamental 
error. They should therefore always consider, when they 
adopt the term, whether they use it in any of the many 
senses that have been already pointed out; and if so, they 
should employ the specific word in its place; that is, if 
they intend to speak of an Agent, a Maker, &c., they should 
employ those words, and no other. With respect, too, to 
the verb to cause, and to the noun causation, these should 
never be employed in any case where the Relation of 
Cause and Effect is intended; as they invariably imply 
physical and not abstract Agency, and they consequently 
establish the very point of dispute in such cases ; namely, 
the existence of a causer, agent, or doer; which being once 
admitted, the whole subject of debate falls to the ground. 
As a proof of the importance of the foregoing distinctions 
and observations, a few remarks are here added, that will 
at once illustrate and confirm their truth: and for the 
purpose of pointing out the constancy of the fallacy about 
Cause, whenever it is adopted by popular usage for an 
Agent instead of the Conception of Relation, the word 
Causer is made to follow it, in brackets. Were the subject 
clearly and universally comprehended, it would save much 
chance of confusion if the word Cause were always re 
stricted to the sense of the Relation, and Causer to that 
of the Agent or Efficient of a result 

When the Hindu metaphysicians, after the enunciation 
of the rule, give the examples by which the exact import 
of the term may be inferred, we must see clearly that 
they sometimes employ the word Cause as the Efficient, 
Effector, Producer, Agent, or Maker, and sometimes as the 
Source of production; and often as the Reason, or the 



A PPENDIX. 



Motive, as well as the Origin of anything, just as is done 
by the metaphysicians of Europe. 

1 0. " When they say, therefore, that there is no distinction 
between Cause and Effect, and that Effects exist in their 
Causes, it is clear, from the example they give, namely, 
that The seed of sesamum is the Came of tJic oil, and that 
therefore the oil existed in its Cause, which was the seed, 
they have palpably confounded Agent and Source, and that 
the seed can neither be considered as standing in the 
Relation of Cause, nor as an Agent or Causer. It is quite 
evident, that the oil, as a Product, must have existed in its 
Source, which was the seed. So likewise, when they say 
the Deity is the efficient Cause of the universe, they mean that 
he was the Agent in producing it: and when they say 
he was also its material Cause, they imply that he was the 
Source from which it proceeded. Now, when we assert 
that God made the world, we mean to say, that he stands 
in the Relation of its Cause, that he is its Source and its 
Maker, which senses are all included in the one word, 
CREATOR: and, by the same reason, the world is contem 
plated as an Effect of his power, as the Product of his 
essence, and the H ork of his agency. The Sankhi/a philo 
sophers, therefore, in asserting that that which did not 
previously exist could not by any effort of the Cause 
(causer) be brought into existence, have, by separating the 
Cause (causer) in this case from the Source, made a petitlo 
principii, and proved their own point by the form of the 
enunciation : for it will be evident, that when we consider 
the Cause (causer) we call First, we must not argue as we 
would about the Cause (causer) we contemplate as secon 
dary; as we cannot here separate Cause (causer) and Source, 
though we may do so afterwards, for we then know, by 
observation, that they are distinct, Thus, to borrow a 
Hindu illustration, the potter is the Cause (i. e. Causer or 
Maker) of the pot, but he is not the Source of the earth 



248 APPENDIX. 

from which it is formed. Sometimes, however, what we 
call a secondary Cause (causer) must include the two dis 
tinctions ; as when we say, The spider spins his web, of 
which he is at once the Cause (causer) and the Source, and 
consequently the web is a Work and a Product ; and the 
spider stands in the Relation of Source to the web, which is 
reciprocally in that of Product to him. But those who 
have been familiarised to the jargon of the Schools, which 
has been current from Aristotle to the present time, will 
here, perhaps, fly from the real scope of this argument, 
which is to prove that Cause and Effect simply imply a 
Conception of Relation, and will say that the oil existed 
potentially in the sesamum, just as the fruit existed poten 
tially in the tree, and the tree in its seed, and the seed in 
the preceding tree and seed, &c. But the fallacy of this 
argument, which has nothing to do with the present 
question, will be evident, by showing that, by a similar 
process of reasoning, we might say that all the bullets cast 
in a mould existed potentially in the mould, as the lead 
poured in is only the equivalent of the nutriment taken in 
by the tree and seed. The potentiality which produced 
the bullets existed in the individual who made the mould 
and cast the bullets ; and the potentiality of the individual 
exists only in God, who made and sustains him : and the 
same must be said of the tree and seed, which have their 
existence from the Deity only, who is therefore the Source 
of all power and of all existence. 

11. "The remarks which are now about to be offered to 
the reader s consideration, and to which his attention is 
requested, contain the real essence of this question ; and 
they have been kept back for the purpose of preparing his 
mind for what would have been otherwise unintelligible or 
inconclusive. Passing over the error that has been pointed 
out, of Cause being considered as a Substance instead of a 
Relation, it is uniformly thought, that in a series of things 



APPENDIX. 249 

acting upon one another, the prior is the Cause, and the 
subsequent the Effect. Thus, in a series of balls put in 
motion by the billiard- player, the first ball is said to be 
the Cause, and the next the Effect to it, and the Cause to 
the one it strikes ; and so on, till the whole are put in 
movement. That this, however, is not a logical conclusion, 
will be evident, if we remember that the first ball, which 
we call the Cause, has, by its movement, only urged on the 
the second, and that therefore the Effect it produced was 
the movement of the second. Now, if there were fifty 
balls, each separately moved by the one that preceded it, 
it might be said that there were fifty movements ; though, 
in point of fact, we can only say that the fifty balls \vere 
moved. Having got thus far, let us consider that it was 
the movement of the first ball that made the second to 
change its place, and so communicated an impulse to the 
whole series. The moment we see this clearly, w^e must 
be convinced that it was not the first ball, but its move 
ment, that moved the second ; and that the movement of 
the second made the next change place, till the \vhole were 
urged forward in succession. In all this operation, we 
can not fail to perceive that \ve have had fifty Effects, and 
not one Cause ; for, otherwise, movement must be both 
Cause and Effect : and if we suppose it so, then w r e arrive 
at this conclusion, that movement stands in the Relation 
of Cause to movement ; which is as much to say, that 
movement can produce itself, or, in plain language, that 
change of place can produce change of place ! To get at the 
Cause (causer), therefore, we must go back to the billiard- 
player, who put the whole in movement. Now it is evident, 
that all the Effects witnessed on this or any other occasion 
are simply changea, that evidence the passage of something 
that flits from the first to the last; and which, being propa 
gated by the will of the Agent or Doer, forces the ball on, 
till it is arrested in its progress by impinging on the next, 



250 APPENDIX. 

which it moves in its turn. The sometliing that operates 
in such changes, mankind have agreed to call POWER ; 
which, as long as we believe in the reality of the external world, 
is a real essence, capable, under direction, of effecting all the 
changes that arise from the irill of individual beings, or 
the will of God. But as matter is seen to be passive, or at 
least may be considered so, from the uniformity of the law 
of gravitation, Power is the sole means by which it is set 
in movement, when it is once at rest : but as Power is 
unequal to produce an Effect, except under direction, it 
cannot, strictly speaking, be held to be a Cause (causer), 
but must be merely considered as the medium by which 
the real Cause (causer), that is, the Deity, carries on all 
the operations observed in nature. As all things in nature 
are but results dependent upon the Divine Will, we must, 
if we desire to be conclusive in our reasoning, admit that 
there is no real Cause (causer) but God, who, in his cha 
racter of Creator, forms and sustains all things, being both 
the Origin and the Agent in the production of the universe : 
it is HE, therefore, as the Source of being, that stands in 
the Relation of Causa Causarum to all things : FOR IN HIM 

WE LIVE, AND MOVE, AND HAVE OUR BEING. 

1 2. " To sum up the inferences to be drawn from the 
preceding argument, it may be stated, that the definition 
of Cause and Effect is simply as follows. Whatever produces 
a change, STANDS in the RELATION of Cause; and whatever 
results from it, in that of Effect ." 

Extracted from the Asiatic Journal for March 1836. 

[Paragraph (11) was written for the purpose of exposing 
the fallacies resulting from the use of Abstract Words. 
The juggle of thought arises from making the Abstract 
Term " Movement " mean a reality, as is commonly done. 
One Movement does not produce another : it is the POWER, 
passing from the Agent into the balls in succession, that 
makes them move one after another.] 



APPENDIX. 251 

NOTE (C). 51. 

As I think the reader would like to see what Dr. John 
son has said, in his Dictionary of the English language, on 
the various senses of the word nature, I subjoin his epitome 

Boyle s notions, which he seems to have considered as 
worthy of attention. To each I have attached some re 
marks. He says : 

" Of this word, which occurs so frequently, with signifi 
cations so various, and so difficultly defined, Boyle has 
given an explication, which deserves to be epitomised : 

(1) "Nature sometimes means the Author of Nature, 
or natura naturans as nature hath made man partly cor 
poreal and partly immaterial. For nature, in this sense, 
may be used the word Creator" 

[Nature is here evidently employed in a personified 
sense, and agrees with the fourth meaning I have as 
signed it. See 51. Perhaps the word Deity, or God, 
might better represent it than Creator J] 

(2) " Nature sometimes means that on whose account a 
thing is what it is, and is called ; as when we define the 
nature of an angle. For nature, in this sense, may be used 
essence or quality" 

[The word essence is not altogether inadmissible in this 
case ; but quality is perfectly erroneous. However, we 
must feel that it is the property of an angle that is intended 
here by the word nature. See 69 and 73.] 

(3) " Nature sometimes means what belongs to a living 
creature at its nativity, or accrues to it by its birth ; as 
when we say, a man is noble by nature, or a child is 
naturally forward. This may be expressed by saying, 
the man was born so ; or, the thing ivas generated such" 

[This particular sense of nature is that which I have 
included under contrivance, in the second meaning I have 
attached to the word. See 50.] 



252 APPENDIX. 

(4) " Nature sometimes means an internal principle of 
local motion ; as we say, the stone falls, or the flame rises 
by nature ; for this we may say, that the motion up or down 
is spontaneous, or produced by its proper cause." 

[Nature, in this sense, implies tendency a meaning 
that has not been assigned to it in my sketch.] 

(5) " Nature sometimes means the established course of 
things corporeal ; as, nature makes the night succeed the 
day. This may be termed established order, or settled 
course" 

[This is the same as that I have just commented upon 
above, under number one, and clearly means nature per 
sonified as an Agent. The explanation is an oversight ; 
and does not refer to Nature, but to that which she is 
supposed to accomplish.] 

(6) " Nature means, sometimes, the aggregate of the 
powers belonging to a body, especially a living one; as 
when physicians say, that nature is strong ; or nature, left 
to herself, will do the cure. For this may be used, con 
stitution, temperament, or structure of the body." 

[This use of nature is also one in which it is personified ; 
and is therefore the same as numbers one and five of 
Boyle, being what physicians call the vis medicatrix naturce, 
or curative power of Nature; and also the vis vita, or power 
of life.} 

(7) " Nature is put likewise for the system of the cor 
poreal works of God ; as there is no phrenix or chimera in 
nature. For nature, thus applied, we may use the world, 
or the universe." 

[This is what I have classed as the fifth sense of nature, 
as when we sum up every thing under the comprehensive 
terms God and Nature. See 52.] 

(8) " Nature is sometimes, indeed commonly, taken for 
a kind of semi-deity. In this sense it is best not to use it 
at all." 



A &gt; I 1 E N D I X. 253 

[Here we have nature, for the fourth time, employed in 
personified sense, as we have before had it in numbers 
ne, five, and six. See 51.] 

Having thus compared the various senses assigned by 
Soyle to the w r ord nature, it will be seen that he has given 
t four times out of the eight as existing in distinct uses, 
rhen it really had but one, namely, that of a personified 
vord employed as an Agent. He has not an example of 
he use of this word, in the two senses of appearance and 
nateriality. It is unnecessary to say any thing more on 
;he subject, as the reader has now sufficient materials upon 
vhich to form his own judgment. 



NOTE (D). 140. 

1. The consideration of Infinity, Matter, Space, Magni- 
ude, &c., are sufficient to make us see that human reason 
an form no adequate notion of the real substratum of 
xistence. The following remarks, which I formerly put 
orth, are so much connected with these questions, that 
tiey may perhaps be considered deserving of perusal. 

Of the Maxim, " Ex Nihtto, NihilfiC 

2. " The preceding remarks appear to the writer to be 
ndispensable to the taking a rational view of the cele- 
&gt;rated maxim "Ex nihilo, nihil fit" 1 of the ancient Greek 
)liilosophers : for though some of the Hindu metaphy- 
icians hold the doctrine that nothing conies from nothing, 
vhich cannot be disputed, and seems at first sight to be 

nearly the same opinion as that of the Greeks, yet it 
loes, in fact, essentially differ from it ; as the first merely 
mplies, that without a source there can be no product, 
jut it has no reference to an agent or causer; while the 
&gt;ther means something more, by intimating that no agent 



APPENDIX. 



could produce a work without having a source from which 
to elicit his production. The opinion of the Greeks, 
though essentially true in itself as regards any secondary 
cause (causer) or agent, is utterly inapplicable to the 
Deity, as it assumes the fact that his work, that is, the 
universe, is distinct from his essence ; and to prove the 
fallacy of such a supposition, it is only necessary to con 
sider what would be the inevitable consequences of the 
eternal and absolute existence of matter, with a Deity 
separate and attempting to operate upon it; and this 
may be done without taking into consideration the still 
greater difficulty, how either could, in that case, have had 
any claim to infinity. 

3. " The absurdity of the maxim of the Greeks, which 
Hume justly characterizes as impious 5 , consists in sup 
posing a being existing without a cause (causer), and 
therefore of himself, and yet unable to produce matter by 
his fiat. A Deity so inefficient as the maxim supposes 
him, must either have been pure spirit, or pure matter, or 
a compound of both. If we regard him as pure spirit, 
but unable to modify matter by his fiat, we must imme 
diately admit that he could not have acted upon chaotic 
matter so as to give birth to the universe. So likewise if 
we suppose such a Deity to be pure matter, he must have 
remained like a statue, inert, powerless, and lifeless ; and 
therefore incapable of creation. There remains, then, but 
the third supposition ; namely, that he was a compound of 
both spirit and matter. But such a notion as the last 
implies a self-evident contradiction ; for as he existed of 
himself, without any extraneous cause, how could matter 
and spirit become blended in his person ? If the Deity, 
being spirit, had no power to modify matter by his fiat, 
how could he operate upon it, so as to give it that form 

( 5 ) Essays, Vol. II. Note (Q). 



APPENDIX. 255 

that was necessary to constitute the corporeity that united 
both natures in his own person ; namely, spirit and matter ? 
But granting, for a moment, that such a union could have 
arisen by some sort of process or result incapable of being 
conceived by the human mind, he must still have been 
under the necessity of fashioning for himself instruments 
with which to work, like a mere mechanic ; and even then 
it is impossible to conceive how he could regulate the 
birth, maturity, and decay of universal nature. He could 
not himself have escaped the influence of gravitation; 
which we must, on the hypothesis of his origin, suppose to 
be an inherent and indestructible property of matter. It 
is likewise evident, that a being so constituted could have 
no ubiquity; for, as he w r ould be composed of matter, 
whatever place he occupied would exclude any planetary 
system, and he and his work could never have occupied 
the same part of space. He must have been either large 
or small. If large, all the heavenly orbs must, by the 
power of gravitation, have clustered round him, just as 
barnacles attach themselves round a wreck at sea; and 
merely added to his mass. If small, he could have had 
scarcely any influence upon any object larger than him 
self; and he must have fallen in by the same force upon 
what he never could have formed. In short, the diffi 
culties and absurdities attendant upon the supposition of 
the independent and absolute existence of matter are too 
many to admit of its being entertained by any reflecting 
mind that has given the subject a moment of due con 
sideration. 

4. " The sum of the argument amounts to this, that 
whether we divide or multiply matter ad infinitum, we 
arrive at a contradiction to common sense ; and we have 
but one conclusion left us, from the incomprehensible 
nature of the subject, namely, that every thing we see, 
and feel, and think about, are but results presented to us 



APPENDIX. 

by Divine Omnipotence and Wisdom, for reasons which it 
would be folly in us to attempt to scan." 

[Extracted from the Asiatic Journal for March 1836. 

NOTE (E). 177. 

" On the Nature of Negative and Imaginary Quantities. 

By Davies Gilbert, Esq. President of the Royal Society. 

" The object of this paper, the author observes, is one that 
has given rise to much controversy, and has been involved 
in much unnecessary mystery. Paradoxes and apparent 
solecisms, when involved with facts and indubitable truths, 
will always be found, upon accurate examination, to be 
near the surface ; and to owe their existence either to am 
biguities of expression, or to the unperceived adoption of 
some extraneous additions or limitations into the compound 
terms employed for definition, and which are subsequently 
taken as constituent parts of their essence. 

" The first misapprehension pointed out, is that of consi 
dering any quantity whatever as negative per se ; and with 
out reference to another opposed to it, which has previously 
been established as positive. In order to avoid previously- 
formed associations of ideas, the author prefers employing, 
in his reasonings on this subject, the symbols (a) and (6) 
to express this quality of opposition, rather than the usual 
ones of plus and minus. By the aid of this notation, he is 
enabled to present, in its full generalization, the law of the 
signs in multiplication, a process which, it is well known, 
is founded solely upon the principle of ratios ; and to show, 
that like signs invariably give the sign belonging to the 
assumed unity, or universal antecedent of the ratios ; and 
unlike signs, the contrary. 

" Since either the one or the other of the arithmetical 
scales derived from the two unities is in itself equally 
affirmative, but negative with relation to the other, it 



APPENDIX. 257 

follows, that by using the scale of (b), all even roots in 
the scale (a) will become imaginary, and thus the ap 
parent discrimination of the two scales is removed; so 
that the properties belonging to the two scales are inter 
changeable, and all formula become universally applicable 
to both, by changing the signs according to the side in 
which the universal antecedent is taken. Imaginary quan 
tities, then, are merely creations of arbitrary definitions, 
endowed with properties at the pleasure of him who de 
fines them ; and the whole dispute respecting their essence 
turns upon the very point that has been contested from 
the earliest times, between the hostile sects of realists and 
nominalists. 

" It is now, however, universally agreed, that all abs 
tractions and generalizations are mere creatures of the 
reasoning faculty, existing nowhere but in the mind con 
templating them. Such, in algebra, are the supposed even 
roots of a real quantity, taken in the scale opposite to that 
which has given the universal antecedent : the sign indi 
cating the extraction impossible to be performed, veils the 
real quantity, and renders it of no actual value until the 
sign is taken away, by an involution, the reverse of the 
supposed operation which the sign represents; although 
the quantity itself is, in the mean time, by its arbitrary 
essence, made applicable to all the purposes for which real 
quantities are used, in every kind of formula. 

" Several illustrations of these views of the nature of 
imaginary quantities occurring in logarithmic formula; 
and series expressing circular arcs, are given by the 
author. By considering all quantity as affirmative per s&lt;; 
and admitting plus and minus merely as correlative terms, 
we thus succeed in banishing mystery and paradox from 
the science most powerful in eliciting truth, and where 
they ought least to find a place." 

[Abstract of the Proceedings of fjic Royal Society, 
for the 13th November 1830. 



258 APPENDIX. 



NOTE (F). 165. 

To the remarks I have made on ideas, I am happy to 
add some by Burke, that I have since discovered ; and 
which, as far as they go, confirm all I have said on the 
subject. It is to be regretted that a writer so eminently 
qualified for the task did not consider the question in all 
its bearings ; as the sanction of his name could not have 
failed to draw the attention to it that it so well deserves. 
His words are : 

" EXAMPLES THAT WORDS MAY AFFECT, WITHOUT RAISING IMAGES. 

" I find it very hard to persuade several that their 
passions are affected by words from whence they have no 
ideas ; and yet harder to convince them, that in the ordi 
nary course of conversation we are sufficiently understood, 
without raising any images of the things concerning which 
we speak. It seems to be an odd subject of dispute with 
any man, whether he has ideas in his mind or not. Of 
this, at first view, every man, in his own forum, ought to 
judge without appeal. But, strange as it may appear, we 
are often at a loss to understand what ideas we have of 
things, or whether we have any ideas at all upon some 
subjects. It even requires a good deal of attention to be 
thoroughly satisfied on this head. Since I wrote these 
papers, I found two very striking instances of the possi 
bility there is, that a man may hear words without having 
any idea of the things which they represent, and yet after 
wards be capable of returning them to others, combined 
in a new way, and with great propriety, energy, and in 
struction. The first instance is that of Mr. Blacklock, a 
poet, blind from his birth. Few men blessed with the 
most perfect sight can describe visual objects with more 
spirit and justness than this blind man; which cannot 



APPENDIX. 



259 



possibly be attributed to his having a clearer conception of 
the things he describes than is common to other persons. 
Mr. Spence, in an elegant preface which he has written to 
the works of this poet, reasons very ingeniously, and, I 
imagine, for the most part, very rightly, upon the cause 
of this very extraordinary phenomenon; but I cannot 
altogether agree with him, that some improprieties in 
language and thought, which occur in these poems, have 
arisen from the blind poet" s imperfect conception of visual 
objects; since such improprieties, and much greater, may 
be found in writers even of a higher class than Mr. Black- 
lock, and who, notwithstanding, possessed the faculty of 
seeing in its full perfection. Here is a poet doubtless as 
much affected by his own descriptions as any that reads 
them can be ; and yet he is affected with this strong en 
thusiasm, by things of which he neither has, nor can 
possibly have, any idea, further than that of a bare sound : 
and why may not those who read his works be affected in 
the same manner that he was, with as little of any real 
ideas of the things described ? The second instance is of 
Mr. Saunderson, professor of mathematics in the University 
of Cambridge. This learned man had acquired great 
knowledge in natural philosophy, in astronomy, and what 
ever sciences depend upon mathematical skill. What was 
the most extraordinary, and the most to my purpose, he 
gave excellent lectures upon light and colours; and this 
man taught others the theory of those ideas which they 
had, and which he himself undoubtedly had not. But it 
is probable that the words red, blue, green, answered to 
him as well as the ideas of the colour themselves ; for the 
ideas of greater or lesser degrees of refrangibility being 
applied to these words, and the blind man being instructed 
in what other respects they were found to agree or to dis- 
ao-ree, it was as easy for him to reason upon the words, as 
if he had been fully master of the ideas. Indeed, it must 



260 APPENDIX. 

be owned he could make no new discoveries in the wav 

* 

of experiment. He did nothing but what we do every 
day in common discourse. When I wrote this last sen 
tence, and used the words every day and common discourse, 
I had no images in my mind of any succession of time ; 
nor of men in conference with each other ; nor do I ima 
gine that the reader will have any such ideas on reading 
it. Neither, when I spoke of red, or blue, and green, as 
well as refrangibility, had I these several colours, or the 
rays of light passing into a different medium, and there 
diverted from their course, painted before me in the way 
of images. I know very well that the mind possesses a 
faculty of raising such images at pleasure 6 ; but then an 
act of the will is necessary to this ; and in ordinary con 
versation or reading, it is very rarely that any image at 
all is excited in my mind. If I say, " I shall go to Italy 
next summer," I am well understood. Yet I believe 
nobody has by this painted in his imagination the exact 
figure of the speaker passing by land or by water, or both, 
sometimes on horseback, sometimes in a carriage, with all 
the particulars of the journey. Still less has he any idea 
of Italy, the country to which I proposed to go; or of the 
greenness of the fields, the ripening of the fruits, and the 
warmth of the air, with the change to this from a different 
season, which are the ideas for which the word summer is 
substituted; but least of all has he any image from the 
word next; for this word stands for the idea of many 
summers, \vith the exclusion of all but one : and surely 
the man who says next summer has no images of such a 
succession, and such an exclusion. In short, it is not only 
of those ideas which are commonly called abstract, and of 
which no image at all can be formed, but even of par- 

( (i ) Red, blue, green and other colours are not images. See my remarks 
on this subject in 64 68, but particularly in 66. G. C. H. 



APPENDIX. 261 

ticular real beings, that we converse without having 
any idea of them excited in the imagination ; as will cer 
tainly appear on a diligent examination of our own minds. 
Indeed, so little does poetry depend for its effect upon the 
power of raising sensible images, that I am convinced it 
would lose a very considerable part of its energy if this were 
the necessary result of all description : because that union 
of affecting words, which is the most powerful of all 
poetical instruments, would frequently lose its force along 
with its propriety and consistency, if the sensible images 
were always excited. There is not, perhaps, in the whole 
jEneid, a more grand and laboured passage than the de 
scription of Vulcan s cavern in Etna, and the works that 
are carried on there. Virgil dwells particularly on the 
formation of the thunder, which he describes unfinished 
under the hammers of the Cyclops. But what are the 
principles of this extraordinary composition : 

Trcs imbris torti radios., trcs nubis aquosce 
Addiderant ; rutili tres iynis at alitis austri ; 
Fulgores nunc terrificos sonitumqut. , mctumque 
Misccbant opuri^Jlammisque scquacibus Iras. 

This seems to me admirably sublime : yet, if we attend 
coolly to the kind of sensible images which a combination 
of ideas of this sort must form, the chimeras of madmen 
cannot appear more wild and absurd than such a picture. 
" Three rays of twisted showers, three of watery clouds, 
three of fire, and three of the winged south-wind; then 
mixed they in the work terrific, lightnings, and sound, and 
fear, and anger, with pursuing flames." This strange 
composition is formed into a gross body ; it is hammered 
by the Cyclops, it is in part polished, and partly continues 
rough. The truth is, if poetry gives us a noble assemblage 
of words, corresponding to many noble ideas, which are 
connected by circumstances of time or place, or related to 
each other as cause and effect, or associated in any natural 



262 APPENDIX. 

way, they may be moulded together in any form, and 
perfectly answer their end. The picturesque connection 
is not demanded ; because no real picture is formed : nor 
is the effect of the description at all the less upon this 
account. What is said of Helen, by Priam and the old 
men of his council, is generally thought to give us the 
highest possible idea of that fatal beauty : 

Ov ve/jie&lt;ns, T/xSa? /cat evKvrj/jufias A^atot ? 
Toi^y afj.cfil tyvvaiKi iroXvv %povov ahyea Traff^eiv 
AIVOJ? y adavuTouri derjs et? u&gt;ira eoiKev. 

They cry d. No wonder such celestial charms 
For nine long years have set the world in arms ; 
What winning graces ! what "majestic mien ! 
She moves a goddess, and she i^oks a queen. 

POPE. 

Here is not one word said of the particulars of her beauty ; 
nothing which can in the least help us to any precise idea 
of her person ; but yet we are much more touched by this 
manner of mentioning her, than by those long and la 
boured descriptions of Helen, whether handed down by 
tradition, or formed by fancy, which are to be met with 
in some authors. I am sure that it affects me much more 
than the minute description which Spenser has given of 
Belphebe : though I own m&lt;~* ,.^i-e are parts in that de 
scription, as there are in all the descriptions of that 
excellent writer, extremely fine and poetical. The terrible 
picture which Lucretius has drawn of Religion, in order 
to display the magnanimity of his philosophical hero in 
opposing her, is thought to be designed with great bold 
ness and spirit : 

Humana ante oculosfceda cum vitajaceret, 
In terris, oppressa gravi sub religione, 
Quee caput e cceli regionibus ostendebat 
Horribili, desuper visu mortalibus instans ; 
Primus Grains homo mortales tollere contra 
Est oculos ausus 



A P P I". N H 1 X. 



What idea do you derive from so excellent a picture ?- 
None at all, most certainly : neither has the poet said a 
single word which might in the least serve to mark a 
single limb or feature of the phantom, which he intended 
to represent in all the horrors imagination can conceive. 
In reality, poetry and rhetoric do not succeed in exact 
description, so well as painting does : their business is, to 
affect rather by sympathy than imitation; to display 
rather the effect of things on the mind of the speaker, or 
of others, than to present a clear idea of the things them 
selves. This is their most extensive province, and that in 
which they succeed the best. 11 

[Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful, Part V. sect 6. 



NOTE (G). 105. 
Salt. 



F 1 N I S. 