THE 



PHILOSOPHY 



OF THK 



INDUCTIVE SCIENCES, 



FOUNDED UPON THEIR HISTORY. 



BY THE 



REV. WILLIAM WHEWELL, B.D., 

VV.LIOW OF TRINITY OOLLKOB, AND PROrBSaOIt OF MORAL PHILOSOPHT IN THE t7NIVBR8ITY 

or CAMBBIDOB, VICB PRBBIDBNT OF THB OBOLOOICAL 80CIBTY 

OF t-ONDON. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 




Aafinddia ^xovt€S biad^ovciv dKkrjkotg, 



VOLUME THE SECOND. 

LONDON: 

JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND. 

CAMBRIDGE: J. and J. J. DEIGHTON. 



M.DCCC.XL. 



iVjL/^i^ ' ^'9'^'^®^ "^y vjOOQ Ic 



LoNi>ON : 

HAftRISUN AKD Co., PkIKTIRS, 

St. MxRTiN't Lawk. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONTENTS 

OP 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 






TBE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 

PART I,— OF IDEAS, cmttnusd. 

Book IX. — ^Thb Philosophy op Biology. 

Page 

Chap. 1. Analogy of Biology with other Sciences . 3 

2. Suoceasiye Biological Hjrpotheses .8 

3. Attempts to Analyze the Idea of Life . 30 
4 Attempts to form Ideas of Separate Vital Forces; and 

firtt^ of Assimilation and Secretion . . 39 

5. Attempts to form Ideas of Separate Vital Forces^ em- 

tinued — Voluntary Motion ... 58 

6. Of the Idea of Final Causes . . . .77 

Book X- — ^Thb Philosophy op Paljbtioloqy. 

Chap. 1. Of Palaetiological Sciences in general . 95 

2. Of the Three Members of a Palsstiological Science . 100 

3. Of the Doctrine of Catastrophes and the Doctrine of 

Uniformity . . . . .123 

4. Of the Relation of Tradition to Pal»tiology . 137 

PART II.— OF KNOWLEDGE. 
Book XI.— Of thb Construction op Scibnce. 

Chap. 1. Of two principal Processes by which Science is 

Constructed ...... 169 

2. Of the Explication of Conceptions . 171 

3. Of Facts as the Materiab of Science . .192 

4. Of the Colligation of Facts . .201 

5. Of certain Characteristics of Scientific Induction . 212 

6. Of the Logic of Induction . . . .239 



Digitized by VjOOy IC 



IV 



CONTENTS. 



Chap. 7» Of Laws of Phenomena and of Causes 

8. Of Art and Science 

9. Of the Classification of Sciences 



Page 

260 
271 

277 



Book XII, — Review of Opinions on the Nature of Knowledge, 
AND the Means of Seeking it. 



Chap. 1. Introduction . . . 


283 


2. Plato 


. 286 


3. Aristotle .... 


292 


4. The Later Greeks .... 


. 297 


5. The Romans .... 


300 


6. The Schoolmen of the Middle Ages 


. 305 


7- The Innovators of the Middle Ages 


319 


8. The ReTival of Platonism 


. 337 


9. The Theoretical Reformers of Science 


353 


10. The Practical Reformers of Science . 


. 366 


11. Francis Bacon .... 


388 


12. From Bacon to Newton 


. 414 


13. Newton ..... 


436 


14. Locke and his French Followers 


. 457 


15. The Reaction against the Sensational School 


469 



Book XIII. — Of Methods Employed in the Formation of 
Science. 

Chap. 1. Introduction ..... 482 

2. Of Methods of Observation . . . .485 

3. Of Methods of Acquiring clear Scientific Ideas, and 

firH^ of Intellectual Education , . . 505 

4. Of Methods of Acquiring clear Scientific Ideas, con- 

tinued, — Of the Discussion of Ideas . . 521 

5. Analysis of the Process of Induction . . 527 

6. General Rules for the Construction of the Conception 536 
7* Special Methods of Induction applicable to Quantity . 542 

8. Methods of Induction depending on Resemblance . 559 

9. Of the Application of Inductive Truths . . 572 
10. Of the Induction of Causes . , .577 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TUE 

PHILOSOPHY 



OJf THB 



INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 



PART I. 

OF IDEAS. 



VOL. II. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



T&p Kok&p ica\ nfU»p r^ tt^rfcuf viro\afifi6poprtf, fxSKkop ^ 
Mpcof Mpaf fj KOT oKplfifum ^ np jScXriiSiwv re jcol Ooviuktim- 
T€pw cShii, tC dfAxp^pa ravra rijv TH2 SMfXHS 'UTOPIAN 
ci'Xifya»ff &v hf vpwrois riBttrjfup' dojcri df jcal frpor aX^^cay 
Sfta&eaf ^ yp^Ans abTijs iiiydka oiift/3aXXe<r^(Ut fidkurra ^ vphs 
r^ ^vo-iir t[cTi yap otoy AFXH TON ZOOS. 

Abistot. nept ^i^^c. 1. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BOOK IX. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 



Chapter I. 
ANALOGY OF BIOLOGY WITH OTHEIl SCIfiNCES! 

1. In the History of the Sciences^ after treating of 
the Sciences of Classification, we proceeded to what are 
there termed the Organical Sciences, including in this 
term Physiology and Comparative Anatomy. A peculiar 
feature in this group of sciences is that they inyolre the 
notion of litdng things. The notion of Ltfe^ however vague 
and obscure it may be in men's minds, is apprehended as 
a peculiar Idea, not resolvable into any other Ideas, such^ 
for instance, as Matter and Motion. The separation be^ 
tween living creatures and inert matter, between organ** 
ized and unorganized beings, is conceived as a positive 
and insurmountable barrier. The two classes of otgects 
are considered as of a distinct kind, produced and pre*<* 
served by different forces. Whether the Idea of Life is 
really thus original and fundamental, and whether, if so, 
it be one Idea only, or involve several, it must be the 
province of true philosophy to determine. What we 
shall here offer may be considered as an attempt to con- 
tribute something to the determination of these ques*- 
tions ; but we shall perhaps be able to make it appear 
that science is at present only in the course of its pro- 
gress towards a complete solution of such problems. 

Since the main feature of those sciences of which 

B 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



4 philosophV op biology. 

we have now to examine the philosophy is, that they 
involve the idea of life, it would be desirable to have 
them designated by a name expressive of that circum- 
stance. The word Physiology^ by which they have most 
commonly been described, means the Science of Nature ; 
and though it would be easy to explain, by reference to 
history, the train of thought by which the word was 
latterly restricted to living nature, it is plain that the 
name is, etymologically speaking, loose and improper. 
The term Biology^ which means exactly what we wish to 
express, the Science of Lifcy has often been used, and has 
of late become not uncommon among good writers. I 
shall therefore venture to employ it, in most cases, rather 
than the word Physiology. 

2. As I have already intimated, one main inquiry 
belonging to the Philosophy of Biology, is concerning the 
Fundamental Idea or Ideas which the science involves. 
If we look back at the course and the results of our dis- 
quisitions respecting other sciences in this work, and 
assume, as we may philosophically do, that there will be 
some general analogy between those sciences and thisf, 
in their developement and progress, we shall be enabled 
to anticipate in some measure the nature of the view 
which we shall now have to take. We have seen that 
in other subjects the Fundamental Ideas on which sci- 
ence depended, and the Conceptions derived from these, 
were at first vague, obscure, and confused; — that by 
gradual steps, by a constant union of thought and obser- 
vation, these conceptions become more and more clear, 
more and more definite ; — ^and that when they approached 
complete distinctness and precision, there were made 
great positive discoveries into which these conceptions 
entered, and thus the new precision of thought was 
fixed and perpetuated in some conspicuous and lasting 
truths. Thus we have seen how the first confused 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALOGY OP BIOLOGY WITH OTHER SCIENCES. & 

mechanical conceptions (Force and the like,) were from 
time to time growing clearer down to the epoch of Newton ; 
— how true conceptions of Genera and of wider classes, 
gradually unfolded themselves among the botanists of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ; — ^how the idea of 
Substance became steady enough to govern the theories 
of chemists only at the epoch of Lavoisier ; — ^how the 
Idea of Polarity, although often used by physicists and 
chemists, is even now somewhat vague and indistinct in 
the minds of the greater part of speculators. In like man- 
ner we may expect to find that the Idea of Life, if indeed 
that be the governing Idea of the science which treats 
pf living things, will be found to have been gradually 
approaching towards a distinct and definite form among 
the physiologists of all ages up to the present day. And 
if this be the case, it may not be considered superfluous, 
with reference to so interesting a subject, if we employ 
some space in tracing historically the steps of this pro- 
gress ; — the changes by which the originally loose idea 
of Life, or of Vital Powers, became more nearly suited 
to the purposes of science. 

3. But we may safely carry this analogy between Bio- 
logy and other sciences somewhat further. We have 
seen, in other sciences, that while men in their speculations 
were thus tending towards a certain peculiar Idea, but 
before they as yet saw it clearly to be peculiar and inde- 
pendent, they naturally and inevitably clothed their specu- 
lations in conceptions borrowed from some other extra- 
neous idea. And the unsatisfactoriness of all such at- 
tempts, and the necessary consequence of this, a constant 
alteration and succession of such inappropriate hypotheses, 
were indications and aids of the progress which was going 
on towards a more genuine form of the science. For 
instance, we have seen that in chemistry, so long as men 
refused to recognise a peculiar and .distinct kind of power 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



6 PHUOSOPHY OP BIOLOaY. 

in the Affinity which binds together the elements of 
bodies, they framed to themselves a series of hypotheses, 
mch constructed according to the prevalent ideas of the 
time, by w\m\ they tried to represent the relation of the 
compound to the ingredients :-^rst supposing that the 
elements bestowed upon the whole qualities resenMing 
their own i — ^then giving up this supposition, and imagin* 
Ing that the properties of the body depended upon the 
$hape of the component particles ; — then, as their view 
expanded* assuming that it was not the shape, but the 
jni^hanical forees of the particles which gave the body 
its attributes ; — and finally acquiescing in, or rather re- 
luctantly admitting, the idea of Affinity^ conceived as a 
peculiar power, different not only from material contact, 
but from any mechanical or dynamical attraction. 

Now we cannot but think it very natural to find that 
the history of Biology offers a series of occurrences of the 
same nature. The notions of Life in general, or of any 
Vital Functions or Vital Forces in particular, are obviously 
Very loose and vague as they exist in the minds of most 
men. The discrepancies and controversies respecting the 
definitions of all such terms, which are found in all works 
on physiology, afford us abundant evidence that these 
notions are not, at least not generally, apprehended with 
complete clearness and steadiness. We shall therefore 
find approaches and advances, intermediate steps, gra- 
dually leading up to the greatest degree of distinctness 
which has yet been attained. And in those stages of 
imperfect apprehension in which the notions ef life and 
of vital powers are still too loose i^d unformed to be 
^applied independently, we may expect to find them sup- 
pOHed and embodied by means' of h3rpotheses borrowed 
from other suljects, and thus made so distinct and sub?- 
etwtial as to supply hk least a temporary possibility of 
aeienlific reMicHung upon the laws of Ufe. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALOGY OP BIOLOGY WITH OTHBB SCIENCES. ? 

4. For example, if we suppose that mm begin tQ 
speculate upon the properties of living thiiigs without 
aeknowledging a peculiar Vital Ppwey, but making i^se 
successively of the knowledge supplied bjr tfe^ ptjidy of 
ether suloects, we may easily iroagins fL series pf jiypor 
tjieses along which they woulfi pa^. 

They would probably, fir»t, in thf 8 ^ in fttb^)? sci^B1ces, 
have their thoughts oeisupipd by ?agije »n^ mjfsHc^notmB 
ia which material and spiritual ageuAy* nati^ ^nd sifpe)^ 
natural events, were miwd tQgetb^r withQufc discriminar 
tioa, and witbofit any .clear notion at all. @qt as th^ 
a^ttquired a more genuine perception iE>f t|)^ pature cff 
knowledge, they would natu^Uy tiy tp expl^^ii} jif^ 
motions and processes by means of such forces as they 
had learnt the existence of from other sciences. They 
might first have a mecfimicffl hyppthesis, in which the 
mechanical forces of the sojfd^ apd ^^|ds wjijch compose 
organized bodies should be referred to, as the most im- 
piirt^t influences in the process of life. They might 
theii attend to the actions which the fluids exercise in 
virtue of their affinity, and might thus form a chetnipfff 
theory. When they had proved the insufllclence of thefts 
hypotheses, borrowed from the powers which matter exfiir 
bits in other cases, they might think themselves mtkfh 
rized. to assume some {>eculiar p(>wdr or Sgency, still 
material, and thus they wonli have ^e hypothesis of ^ 
vital fluid. And if they were driven to reject this, th^y 
mig^t thii^ that there was no r^ifmce but ^p a#S4mi 
an immateriai principle of life, and thus they WQ#1 9f riv§ 
At the doctrine of an animal sotfi. 

Now» through the cycle of hypotheses which ^e ln^^ 
thus supt>os0d, fbjmlogy ban luctuaDy parsed. ^b& pq^r 
elusions to whiph th^ most phUospi^ciii mind^ b#^e h^^ 
le^ hy a furvey of this progress is, that by thp ftdlfjr^ jojp 
all thes^ theories, mw b^YS e^«as(ed t^nf p$tth of ifimfF* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



8 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

and shown that scientific truth is to be sought in some 
other manner. But before I proceed further to illustrate 
this result, it will be proper, as I have already stated, to 
exhibit liistorically the various hypotheses which I have 
described. In doing this I shall principally follow the 
Histmy of Medicine of Sprengel. It is only by taking 
for my guide a physiologist of acknowledged science and 
judgment, that I can hope, on jsuch a subject, to avoid 
errors of detail. I proceed now to give in succession an 
account of the Mystical, the latrochemical, the latromar 
thematical, and the Vital-Fluid Schools ; and finally of 
the Psychical School who hold the Vital Powers to be 
derived from the Soul {Psyche). 



Chapter II. 
SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 

Sect. L Mystical SchooL-'^lji order to ablnreviate as 
much as can conveniently be done the historical view 
which I have now to take, I shall altogether pass over 
the physiological speculations of the ancients, and begin 
my survey with the general revival of science in modem 
times. 

We need not' dwell long on the fantastical and xmsub- 
stantial doctrines concerning physiology which prevailed 
in the sixteenth century, and which flowed in a great 
measure from the fertile but ill-regulated imaginations of 
the cultivators of Alchemy and Magic. One of the pro« 
minent doctors of this school is the celebrated Paracelsus, 
whose doctrines contained a combination of biblical in- 
terpretations, visionary religious notions, fanciful ana- 
logies, and bold experiments in practical medicine. The 
opinion of a close but mystical resemblance of parts 
between the universe and the human body, the Macrocosm 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCC^SSSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 9 

and the Microcosm^ as these two things, thus compared, 
were termed, had probably come down from the Neopla- 
tonists ; it was adopted by the Paracelsists*, and con-* 
aeeted with Tarious astrological dreams and cabbalistic 
riddles. A succession of later Paracelsistsf, Bosicrucians, 
and other fanatics of the same kind, continued into the 
seventeenth century. Upon their notions was founded the 
pretension of curing pounds by a sympathetic powder, 
which Sir Kenelm Digby, among others, asserted; while 
animal magnetism,and the transfer of diseases from one per- 
son to another I, were maintained by others of this schooL 
They held, too, the doctrines of astral bodies correspond- 
ing to each terrestrial body; and of the signatures of plants, 
that is, certain features in their external form by which 
their virtues might be known. How little advantage or 
progress real physiology could derive from speculations of 
this kind may be seen frx>m this, that their tendency was 
to obliterate the distinction between living and lifeless 
things: according to Paracelsus, all things are alive, eat» 
drink, and excrete ; even minerals and fluids^. Accord- 
ing to him and his school, besides material and immaterial 
beings, there are elementally spirits which hold an inter- 
mediate place, sylvansj nymphs^ gnomes^ salamanders^ &cc. 
by whose agency various processes of enchantment may be 
achieved, and things apparently superiiatural explained. 
Thus this spiritualist scheme dealt with a world of its 
own by means of fSEinciful inventions and mystical visions, 
instead of making any step in the study of nature. 

Perhaps, however, one of the most fantastical of the 
inventions of Paracelsus may be considered as indicating a 
perception of a peculiar character in the vital powers. 
According to him, the business of digestion is performed 
by a certain demon whom he calls ArcJuEUs^ who has his 

* Spr., ill., 456. t Ih., iv., 270* t Ih.y iv., 276. 

5 J6., iii. 468. Parac, De Vita Berum Naturalium^ p. 889. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



10 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

abode in the stomiuih, and \ifIiQ, bj means of his alche« 
mical processes, separates the nutritive from the harmful 
part of our food, and makes it capable of sjssimilation^. 
This fitnciful notion was afterwards adopted and expanded 
by Van Heimontf . According to him the stomach anil 
spleen are both under the direction of this m^ster-spiriti 
and these two organs form a sort of Duumvirate in the body* 

But though we msy see in such writers occasiona) 
gleams of physiological thought, the absence of definit^ 
physical relations in the speculations thus promulgated 
was naturally intolerable to men of sound understaudipg 
and scientific tendencies. Such men naturally took hold pf 
that part of the phenomena of life which eould be most disr 
tinctly conceived, and which could be appwroptly explaine4 
by means of the sciences then cultivated ; and this was th^ 
part which appeared to be reducible to chemical concop- 
tions and doctrines. It will readily be supposed th^t fiie 
processes of chemistry have a considerable bearing upoa 
physiological processes, ^d might, till their range wa9 
limited by a sound investigation, be supposed to havQ 
still more than they really had ; and thus a physiology 
was formed which d^ended mainly upon chemistry, ^n4 
the school which h^ld this doctrine has been called the 
iatroehemical school. 

SjacT. II. The latrochemical Sekool.-r-Thsit all physical 
properties, and therefore chenifcal relations, have a mate- 
rial influence on physiological results, was .already recog- 
nised, though dimly, in the Galenic doctrine of the four 
elementary qualities. 3ut lat the tin^e of Paracelsus, 
ehemical action was more distinctly than before separated 
fiom other kinds of physical action; cmd therefore a 
physiological doctrine, founded upoyi ph^mistry, and freed 
from the extravagance and mysticism of the Paracelsists, 
was a very promising jjMith of speculation. Andrew Liba- 

? Spb., ill., 468. t Ib^ iy., i 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 11 

yius* of Halle, in Saxony, Physician and Teacher in the 
Gymnasium at Koberg, is pointed out by Sprengel as the 
person who began to cultivate chemistry, as distinct from 
the theosophic fisintasies of his predecessors ; and Angelus 
Sala of Vienna f, as his successor. The latter has the 
laudable distinction of having rejected the prevalent con- 
ceits about potable gold, a universal medicine, and the 
like:}:. In Germany already at the beginning of the 
seventeenth century a peculiar chair of Cht/miahria was 
already created at Marpurg: and many in various places 
pursued the same studies, till, in the middle of the seven- 
teenth century, we come to Lemery§, the principal 
reformer of pharmaceutical chemistry. But we are not 
here so much concerned with the practical as with the 
theoretical parts of iatrochemistry; and hence we pass oh 
to Sylvius (I Mid his system. 

The opinion that chemistry had an important bearing 
upon physiology did not, however, begin with Sylvius. 
Paracelsus, among his extravagant absurdities, did some 
service to medicine by drawing attention to this iniportant 
truth. He used^ chemical principles for the explanation 
of particular diseases ; most or all of them according to 
him, arise from the effervescence of salts, from the com- 
bustion of sulphur, or from the coagulation of mercury. 
His medicines were chemical preparations ; and it waiB** 
an undeniable advantage of the^ Paracelsian doctrine that 
cbemistiy thus became indispensable to the physician. 
We still retain a remnant of the chemical npmidhclaturQ 
of Paracelsus in the term tartoTy denoting the stony con- 
cretion which forms on the teeth ft- According to him 
there is a Certain substance, the basis of all diseases which 
arise from a thickening of the juices and a collection of 

? Spb., ill., 550. t lb., iv., 281. % lb., iv., 283. 

§ /6.,iv., 291. II /&.,!?., 336. 

ir Ib.y iii., 472. ** lb., iii., 482. ft lb., iii., 475. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



12 PHaOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

eartby matter; and this substance he calls Tartattis^ 
because it ** burns like the fire of hell." Helmont, the 
successor of Paracelsus in many absurdities, also followed 
him in the attempt to give a chemical account, however 
loose and wild, of the functions of the human body ; and 
is by Sprengel considered, with all his extravagancies, as 
a meritorious and important discoverer. The notion of 
the fermentation of fluids*, and of the aerial product 
thence resulting, to which he gave the name of Gas^ forms 
an important part of his doctrines ; and of the six diges- 
tions which he assumes, the Jirst prepares an acid, which 
is neutralized by the gall when it reaches the duodenum, 
and this constitutes the second digestion. 

I have already, in the History of Chemistry f, stated, 
that the doctrine of the opposition of acid and alkali, the 
great step which theoretical chemistry owes to Sylvius, 
was first brought into view as a physiological tenet, 
although we had then to trace its consequences in ano- 
ther science. Tlie explanation of all the functions of the 
animal system, both healthy and morbid, by means of 
this and other chemical doctrines, and the prescription of 
methods of cure founded upon such explanations, form 
the scheme of the iatrochemical school ; a school which 
almost engrossed the favour of European physicians 
during the greater part of the seventeenth century. 

Sylvius taught medicine at Leyden, from the year 
1658, with so much success, that Boerhaave alone sur- 
passed him^. His notions, although he piqued himself 
on their originality, were manifestly suggested in no 
small degree (as all such supposed novelties are) by the 
speculations of his predecessors, and the spirit of the 
times. Like Helmont^, he considers digestion as con- 
sisting in a fermentation ; but he states it more definitely 

• Vol. v., 315. t But. Ind. Set., iii., loa 

t Sfb., iv., 336. § Ib.y 338. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



6ucce;ssive biological hypotheses. 18 

as the effervescence of an acid, supplied by the saliva 
and the pancreatic juice, with the alkali of the gall. By 
various other hypothetical processes, all of a chemical 
nature, the blood becomes a collection of various juices^ 
which are the subjects of the speculations of the iatro^ 
chemists, to the entire neglect of the solid parts of 
the body. Diseases were accounted for by a supposed 
prevalence of one or the other of the acrid principles, the 
acid or the alkaline : and Sylvius* was bold enough to 
found upon these hypotheses practical methods of cuk^ 
which were in the highest degree mischievous. 

The Sylvian doctrine was often combined vnth some 
of the notions of the Cartesian system of philosophy; 
but this mixture I shall not notice, since my present 
object is to trace the history of a mere cheniical physio* 
logy as one of the unsuccessful attempts at a philosophy 
of life. With various modifications, this doctrine was 
diffused over Europe. It gave rise to several contro* 
yersies, which turned upon the questions of the novelty 
of the doctrine, and the use of chemical remedies to 
wliich it pointed, as well as upon its theoretical truth. 
We need not dwell long upon th^se controversies, 
although they were carried on with no small vehemence 
in their time. Thus the school of Paris opposed all 
innovation, remained true to the Galenic dogmatism, and 
declared itself earnestly against all combination of che- 
mistry with medicine; and even against the chemical 
preparation of medicaments. Guy Patin, a celebrated 
and learned professor of that day, declares f that the 
chemists are no better than forgers, and ought to be pun- 
ished as such. The use of antimonial medicines was a 
main point of dispute between the iatrochemists and 
their opponents ; Patin maintained that more men had 
been destroyed by antimony than by the thirty years wai: 

• Spb., iv., 345. t /J., 849. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



14 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGT. 

of Germany ; and endeavonred to substantiate this asser* 
tion by collecting all such cases in his Mart^ologium 
Antimonii. It must have been a severe blow to Patin 
when* in 1666, the doctors of the faculty of Pari^ 
assembled by command of the parliament, declared, by a 
Inajorlty of ninety-two voices, that the use of antimonial 
inedioin^ was allowable and laudable, and when all 
attempts to s^t aside this decision &iled. 

Fjorentius Schuyl of Leyden sought to recommend 
the iatrochemical doctrines, by maintaining that they 
were to be found in the Hippocratic writings ; nor was 
it difficult to give a chemical interpretation of the 
humoral pathdlogy of the ancients. The Italian f phy- 
sicians also, for the most part, took this line, and 
attempted to show the agreement of the principles of 
the ancient school of tnedicine with the new chemical 
notions* This, indeed, is the usual manner in which the 
diffiision of new theoretical ideas becomes universal. 

The progress of the cheniical school of medicine in 
England^ inquires our more especial nbtice. Willis was 
the most celebi^ted champion of this sect. He assumed, 
but With modifications of his own, the three Paracelsian 
principles^ salt, sulphur, and mercury; considered diges*- 
tion as the effect of an acid, and explained other parts of 
the animal economy by distillation, fermentation, and the 
like. All diseases arise from the want of the requisite 
ferment: and the physician, he saysf, may be compared to 
a vintnerj since both the one and the other have to take 
care that the necessary fermentations go on, that no 
foreign matter mixes itself with the wine of life, to inter- 
rupt or derange those operations. In the middle of the 
seventeenth century, medicine had reached a point in 
which the life of the animal body was considered as 

* Spr., iv., 350. t 75., 368. 

t Ib^, 353. § Ib.y 864- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 15 

taerely a chemical process; the wish to explain fevery* 
.thing on known principles left no recognised difference 
between organized and unorganized bodies^ and diseases 
were treated according to this delusive notion. The 
condition of chemistrj iti^elf during this period, though 
net one of brilliant progress^ was sufficiently stable and 
flourishing to give a plausibility to any speculation which 
was founded on chemical principles^ and the real iiiflu- 
ence of these principles in the animal fitame could not be 
denied. 

The iatrochemists were at first resisted, as we have 
seen, by the adherents of the ancient schools ; they wer^ 
Attacked on various grounds, and finally deposed from 
their ascendency by another sect, which we have to speak 
of, as the iatromathematical, or mechanical schiE^ol. This 
sect was no less unsatisfactory and errotieotis in its posi- 
tive doctrines than the chemists had been ; fbl* th& animal 
frame is Ho more a mere machine than a mere laboratory : 
but it promoted the cause of truth, by detecting and 
exposing the insufficient explanations and unproved 
asseHions of the reigning theory. 

Boyle was one of the persons who first raised doubts 
against the current chemical doctrines df his time, as we 
have elsewhere noted ; but his objections had no peculiar 
physiological import. Hermann Conring*, the most 
learhed physician of his time, a contemporary with Syl- 
vius, took a view more pertinent to our present object ; 
for he not only rejected the alchemical and hermetical 
medicines, but taught expressly that chemistry, in its 
then existing condition, was better fitted to be of use in 
the practice of pharmacy, than In the theories of physio- 
logy and pathology. He made the important assertion, 
alsc^ that chemical principles do not pre-exist as such in 
the animal body; and that there are higher powers which 

* Sp«., It., 361. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



16 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY, 

operate ia the organic world, and which do not depend 
on the form and mixture of matter. 

Attempts were made to prove the acid and alkaline 
nature of the fluids of the human body by means of expe- 
riments, as by John Viridet of Geneva*, and by Baimond 
Vieussensf , the latter of whom maintained that he had 
extracted an acid from the blood, and detected a ferment 
in the stomach. In opposition to him, Hecquet, a dis- 
ciple of the iatromathematical school, endeavoured to 
prove that digestion was performed, not by means of fer- 
mentation, but by trituration. Hecquet's own opinions 
cannot be defended ; but his objections to the chemical 
doctrines, and his assertion of the difference of chemical 
and organical processes, are evidences of just thought f. 

The most important opponents of the iatrochemical 
school were Pitcaim in England, Bohn and Hoffman in 
Glermany, and Boerhaave in Holland. These eminent 
physicians, about the end of the seventeenth century, 
argued on the same grounds of observation, that digestion 
is not fermentation, and that the Sylvian accounts of the 
origin of diseases by means of acid and alkali are false. 
The arguments and authority of these and other persons 
finally gained an ascendency in the medical world, and 
soon after this period we may consider the reign of 
the chemical school of physiology as past. In fact, the 
attempts to prove its assertions experimentally were of 
the feeblest kind, and it had no solid basis on which it 
could rest, so as to resist the shock of the next hypothesis 
which the progress of the physical sciences might impel 
against it. We may, therefore, now consider the opinion 
of the mere chemical nature of the vital processes as 
disproved, and we proceed next to notice the history of 
another unsuccessful essay to reduce vital actions to 
known actions of -another kind. 

? Spk., iv., 320. t ^^'.^ 350, (1715.) t n., 401. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 17 

Sect. III. The latromaiheinaiical SchooL'-^In the firtt 
Section of this chapter, we enumerated the biological 
hypotheses which at first present themselves, as the 
mystical, the mechanical, the chemical. We might have 
expected that they should occur to men's minds in the 
order thus stated : and in fact they did so ; for the phy- 
siology of the ancient materialists, as DemocrituB and 
Lucretius, is mechanical so far as it is at all distinct in 
its views, and thus the mechanical preceded the che* 
mical doctrine. But in modem times, the fluid or che* 
mical physiology was developed before the solid or 
mechanical : of which the reason appears to have been 
this ; — that mechanics and chemistry began to assume a 
scientific character about the same time ; and that of the 
two, chemistry not only appeared at first sight more 
applicable to the functions of the body, because fill the 
more rapid changes appear to be connected with modi* 
fications of the fluids of the animal system, but also, bjr 
its wider range of facts and morfe indefinite principle^ 
aflTorded a better temporary refuge for the mind when 
perplexed by the difficulties and mysteries which spring 
out of the speculations concerning life. But if chemistry 
was thus at first a more inviting field for the phyriologist^ 
mechanics soon became more attractive in virtue of the 
splendid results obtained by the schools of Galileo and 
Newton. And when the insufficiency of chemical phy- 
siology was discovered by trial, as we have seen it vras, 
the hope naturally arose, that the mechanical principles 
which had explained so many of the phenomena of the 
external universe might also be found applicable to the 
smaller world of material life; that the microcosm as 
well as the macrocosm might have its mechanical princi- 
ples. From this hope sprung the iatromathematical 
school, or school of mechanical physiologists. 

We may, however, divide this school into two parts, 

VOL. II. c 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



18 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

the Italian, and the Cartesio-Newtoniau sect. The 
former employed themselves in calculating and analysing 
a number of the properties of the animal frame which 
are undoubtedly mechanical ; the latter, somewhat intoxi- 
cated by the supposed triumphs of the corpuscular philo- 
sophy, endeavoured to extend these to physiology, and 
for this purpose introduced into the subject many arbi- 
trary and baseless hypotheses. I will very briefly men- 
tion some of the writers of both these sects. 

The main points to which the Italian or genuine 
mechanical physiologists attended, were the application 
of mechanical calculations to the force of the muscles, 
and of hydraulical reasonings to the motion of the fluids 
of the animal system. The success with which Galileo 
and his disciples had pursued these branches of mecha^ 
nical philosophy, and the ascendency which they had 
obtained, first in Italy, and then in other lands, made 
siich speculations highly interesting. Borelli may be 
considered as the first great name in his line, and his 
book, De Motu Animalium^ {Opus Posthumumy Romas, 
1680,) is even now a very instructive treatise on the force 
and action of the bones and muscles. This, certainly one 
of the most valuable portions of mechanical physiology, 
has not even yet been so fully developed as it deserves, 
although John Bernoulli* and his son Daniel f applied 
to It the resources of analysis, and Pembertont, in Eng- 
land, pursued the same subject. Other of these mecha- 
nico-physiological problems consisted in referring the pres- 
sure of the blood and of the breath to hydrostaticarprin- 
cFples. In this manner Borelli was led to assert that the 
muscles of the heart exert a force of 180,000 pounds^. 
But a little later, Keill reduced this force to a few 
ounces II . Keill and others attempted to determine, on 

• De MotuMmeulorum, f AcL Acad. Petrop. i., 170. 

t Coune o/PAyHolf^y, 1773. § Spr., iv. 110. || Jb. 443. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL RTPOTHESES. 16 

similar principles, the velocity of the blood ; we need not 
notice the controversies which thus arose, since there iS 
not involved in them any peculiar physiological principle. 

The peculiar character of the iatromathematical 
school, as an attempt at ph3rsiological theory, is more 
manifest in its other section, which we have called the 
Cartesio-Newtonian. The Cartesian system pretended 
to account for the appearances and changes of bodied by 
means of the size, figure, and motion of their minute 
particles. And though this system in its progress toward- 
the intellectual empire of Europe was suddenly overs 
turned by the rise of the Newtonian philosophy, these 
corpuscular doctrines rather gained than lost by the revo- 
tion ; for the Newtonian philosophy enlarged the powers 
of the corpuscular hypothesis, by adding the effects of the 
attractive and repulsive forces of particles to those of 
their form and motion. By this means, although New* 
ton*s discoveries did not in &ct augment the probability 
of the corpuscular hypotliesis, they so &r increased its 
plausibility, that this hypothesis found ftivour both with 
Newton himself and his contemporaries, no less than it 
had done with the Cartesians. 

The attempt to apply this corpuscular hypothesis to 
physiology was made by Des Cartes himself. The gene- 
ral character of such speculations may easily be guessed*. 
The secretions are effected by the organs operating after 
the manner of sieves. Round particles pass through 
cylindrical tubes, pyramidal ones through triangular 
pores, cubical particles through square apertures, and 
thus different kinds of matter are separated. Similar 
speculations were pursued by other mathematicians ; the 
various diameter of the vessels f, their curvatures, folds, 
and angles, were made subjects of calculation. Bellini, 
Donsellim'y Gulielmini, in Italy; PeiTault, Dodart, in 

• Spr., iv., 329: t lb., 432. 

C 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



20 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY, 

France; Cole, Keill, Jurin, in England, were the prin- 
cipal cultivators of such studies. In the earlier part of 
the eighteenth century, physiological theorists considered 
it as almost self-evident that their science required them 
to reason concerning the size and shape of the particles! 
of the fluids, the diameter and form of the invisible 
vessels. Such was, for instance, the opinion of Cheyne*, 
who held that acute fevers arise from the obstruction of 
the glands, which occasions a more vehement motion of 
the blood. Mead, the physician of the King, and the 
friend of Newton, in like manner explained the effects of 
poisons by hypotheses concerning the form of their par- 
ticlesf , as we have already seen in speaking of chemistry. 

It is not necessary for us to dwell longer on this 
subject, or to point out the total insuBSciency of the mere 
mechanical physiology. The iatrochemists had neglected 
the effect of the solids of the living frame; the iatro* 
mathematicians attended only to these ^. And even 
these were considered only as canals, as cords, as levers^ 
as lifeless machines. These reasoners never looked for 
any powers of a higher order than the cohesion^ the 
resistance, the gravity, the attraction, which operate in 
inert matter. If the chemical school assimilated the 
physician to a vintner or brewer, the mechanical physio- 
logists made him an hydraulic engineer; and, in fact, 
several of the iatromathematicians were at the same time 
teachers of engineering and of medicine. 

Several of the reasoners of this school combined chcr 
inical with their mechanical principles; but it would 
throw jio additional light upon the subject to give any 
account of these, and I shall therefore go on to sjieak of 
the next form of the attempt to explain the processes of 
life. 

• Spn., v., 223. & Mechanical Account of P<n$(mt. 1702. 
} Spr., iv., 419. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. 21 

Sect. IV. The Vital-Fluid School. — I speak here, not 
of tLat opinion which assumes some kind of fluid or 
ether as the means of communication along the nerves in 
particular, but of the hypothesis that all the peculiar 
functions of life depend upon some subtle ethereal sub- 
stance diffused through the frame; — ^not of a nervous 
fluid, but of a vital fluid. Again, I distinguish this 
opinion from the doctrine of an immaterial vital power or 
principle, an animal soul, which will be the subject of the 
next Section : nor is this distinction insignificant ; for a 
material element^ however subtle, however much spiritual- 
ized, must still act everywhere according to the same 
laws ; whereas we do not conceive an immaterial spirit 
or soul to be subject to this necessity. 

The iatromathematical school could explain to their 
own satisfaction how motions once begun, were trans- 
ferred and modified ; but in many organs of the living 
frame there seemed to be a power of beginning motion, 
which is beyond all mere mechanical action. Tliis led to 
the assumption of a principle of a higher kind, though 
still material. Such a principle was asserted by Frederick 
Hoffinan, who was bom at Halle, in 1660*, and became 
Professor of Medicine at the newly-established University 
there in 1694. According to himf, the reason of the 
greater activity of organized bodies lies in the influence 
of a material substance of extreme subtilty, volatility, 
and energy. This is, he holds, no other than the Ether, 
which, diffused through all nature, produces in plants the 
bud, the secretion and motion of the juices, and is 
separated from the blood and lodged in the brain of 
animals:}:. From this, acting through the nerves, must 
be derived all the actions of the organs in the animal 
frame; for when the influence of the nerve upon the 
snuscle ceases, muscular motion ceases also. 

* Spr., v. 254. t Ih., V. 257. 

X JD^ Differentid OrganUmi et Mechanismi, pp. 48, 67* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



32 HIILOSO?HY OP BIOLOGY. 

The mode of operation of this yital fluid was, how- 
ever, by no means steadily apprehended by Hoflhiann 
and hi9 followers. Its operations are so far mechanical* 
that all effects are reduced to motion, yet they cannot be 
explained according to known mechanical laws. At one 
time the effects are said to take place according to laws 
of a Higher Mechanics which are still to be disco ve^-edf- 
At another time, in complete contradiction of the general 
spirit of the system, metaphysical conceptions are intro* 
doced : each particle of the vital fluid is said to have a 
determined idea of the whole mechanism and organism |> 
and according to this, it forms the body and preserves it 
by its motion. By means of this fluid the soul operates 
upon the body, and the instincts and the passions have 
their source in this material sensitive soul. This attribu- 
tion of ideas to the particles of the fluid is less unaccount- 
able when we recollect that something of the same kind 
is admitted into Leibnitz's system, whose monads have 
also ideas. 

Notwithstanding its inconsistencies, Hoffman's system 
was received with very general favour both in Germany 
and in the rest of Europe ; the more so, inasmuch as it 
fell in very well with the philosophy both of Leibnitz 
and of Newton. The Newtonians were generally inclined 
to identify the vital fluid with the Ether, of which their 
master was so strongly disposed to assume the existence ; 
and indeed he himself suggested this identification. 

When the discoveries made respecting Electricity in 
the course of the eighteenth century had familiarized 
men with the notion of a pervading subtle agent, invi* 
sible, intangible, yet producing very powerful effects in 
every part of nature, physiologists also caught at the sug- 
gestion of such an agent, and tried, by borrowing or 
imitating it, to aid the imperfection of their notions ol 

• Bw., T. 8fla 3. t <fep., vol. V. p. 123. 

I Ih Dif. On^oH. €4 M4chan.^ p. 81. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES. S8 

the vital powers. The Vital Principle* was imagined to 
be a substance of the same kind, by some to be the same 
substance, with the electric fluid. By its agency all 
these processes in organized bodies were accounted for 
which cannot be explained by mechanical or chemical 
laws, as the secretion of various matters (tears, milk, 
biJe, &c.) from an homogeneous fluid, the blood; the 
production of animal heat, digestion, and the like. 
According to John Hunter, this attenuated substance 
pervaded the blood itself, as well as the solid organic 
frame ; and the changes which take place in the blood 
which has flowed out of the veins into a basin are ex-» 
plained by saying that it is, for a time, till this vital fluid 
evaporates, truly alive. 

The notion of a vital fluid appears also to be favour- 
ably looked upon by Cuvier; although with him this 
doctrine is mainly put forwards in the form of a nervous 
fluid. Yet in the following passage he extends the 
operation of such an agent to all the vital functions f. 
" We have only to suppose that all the medullary and 
nervous parts produce the nervous agent, and that they 
alone conduct it ; that is, that it cto only be transmitted 
by them, and that it is changed or consumed by their ac-^ 
tions. Then everything appears simple; A detached por-* 
tion of muscle preserves for some time its irritability, on 
account of the portion of nerve which always adheres to it# 
The sensibility and the irritability reciprocally exhfiust each 
other by their exercise, because they change or consumet 
the same agent. All the interior motions of digestion^ 
secretion, ex^cretion, participate in this exhaustion, or may 
produce it. All local excitation of the nerves brings 
thither more blood by augmenting the Irritability of the 
arteries» and the afflux of blood augments the real sensi^r 

• Prichabd, an the Doctrine of a VUal Prineiphf p. 12. 
t Miit. S^. Nat. <%UM 1789, i. 214, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



24 PHIL060PHT OF BIOLOGY. 

bilitj by augmenting the production of the nervous agent. 
Hence the pleasures of titillations, the pains of inflame 
mation. The particular sensations increase in the same 
aianner and by the same causes ; and the imagination 
exercises, (still by means of the nerves,) upon the internal 
fibres of the arteries or other parts, and through them on 
the sensations, an action analogous to that of the will 
upon the voluntary motions. As each exterior sense is 
exclusively disposed to admit the substances which it is 
to perceive, so each interior organ, secretory or other, is 
also more excitable by some one agent than by another: 
and hence arises what has been called the proper sensi- 
hility or proper life of the organs; and the influence of 
specifics which introduced into the general circulation 
affect only certain parts. In fine, if the nervous agent 
cannot become sensible to us, the reason is that all sensa* 
tion requires that this agent should be altered in some 
way or other ; and it cannot alter itself. 

" Such is the summary idea which we may at present 
form of the mutual and general working of the vital 
powers in animals." 

Against the doctrine of a vital fluid as one uniform 
material agent pervading the organic frame, an argument 
has been stated which pointy out extremely well the 
philosophical objection to such an hypothesis^. If the 
vital principle be the same in all parts of the body, how 
does it happen, it is asked, that the secretions are so 
Afferent f How do the particles in the blood, separated 
irom their old compounds and united into new ones, 
under the same influence, give origia to all the different 
fluids which are produced by the glands? The liver 
secretes bile, the lacrymal gland tears, and so on. Is the 
vital principle different in all these organs? To assert 
this, is to multiply nominal principles without limit, and 
• Feichard, an a ViCal Principle, p. 98. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOaiCAL HYPOTHESES. 25 

without any advance in the explanation of facts. Is the 
Yital principle the same, bat its operation modified by 
the structure of the organ ? We have then two unknown 
causes, the vital principle and the organic structure, to 
account for the eflfect. By such a multiplication of 
hypotheses nothing is gained. We may as well say at 
once, that the structure of the organ, acting by laws yet 
unknown, is the cause of the peculiar secretion. It is 
as easy to imagine this structure acting to produce the 
whole effect, as it is to imagine it modifying the activity 
of another agent. Thus the hyjjothesis of the vital fluid in 
this form explains nothing, and does not in any way help 
onwards the progress of real biological knowledge. 

The hypothesis of an immaterial vital principle must 
now be considered. 

Sect. V. The Psychical School. — ^The doctrine of an 
animal soul as the principle which makes the operations 
of organic different from those of inorganic matter, is quite 
distinct from, and we may say independent of, the 
doctrine of the soul as the intelligent, moral, responsible 
part of man's nature* It is the former doctrine alone of 
which we have here to speak, and those who thus hold 
the existence of an immaterial agent as the cause of the 
phenomena of life, I term the Psychical School. 

Such a view of the constitution of living things is 
very ancient.. For instance, Aristotle's Treatise **o» the 
Soidi^ goes entirely upon the supposition that the soul is 
the cause of motion, and he arrives at the conclusion that 
&ere are different parts in the soul ; the ntdritive or 
vegetative^ the sensitive^ and the rational''^. 

But this doctrine is more instructive to us, when it 
appears as the antagonist of other opinions concerning^ 
the nature of life. In this form it comes before us as 
promulgated by Stahl, whom we have already noticed as 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



26 PHILOSOPHT OF BIOLOGY. 

one of the great discoverers in chemistry. Bom in the 
same year as Hoffman, and appointed at his suggestion 
professor at the same time in the same new university of 
Halle, he soon published a rival physiological theory. In 
a letter to Lucas Schrock, the president of the Academy 
of Naturalists, he describes the manner in which he was 
led to form a system for himself*. Educated in the 
tenets of Sylvius and Willis, according to which all dis^ 
eases are derived from the acidity of the fluids, Stahl, when 
a young student, often wondered how these fluids, so liable 
to be polluted and corrupted, are so wonderfully preserved 
through innumerable external influences, and seem to be 
far less affected by these than by age, constitution, pas- 
sion. No material cause, could, he thought, pn)duce such 
effects. No attention to mechanism or chemistry alone 
could teach us the true nature and laws of organisation. 
So far as Stahl recognised the influence, in living 
bodies, of something beyond the range of mechanics and 
chemistry, there can be no doubt of the sound philosophy 
of his views ; but when hei proceeds to found a positive 
i^tem of physiology, his tenets become more precarious. 
The basis of his theory is thisf: the body has, as body, 
no power to move itself, and must always be put in 
motion by immaterial substances. All motion is a spi- 
ritual actj:. The source of all activity in the oiffanic 
body, from which its preservation, the permanency of its 
oomposition, and all its other functions proceed, is an 
immaterial being, which Stahl calls the Soul; because^ 
as he says, when the effects are so similar, he will not 
multiply powers without necessity. Of this principle, he 
says, as the Hippocratians said of Nature, that ^* it does 
without teaching what it ought to do J," and does it 
••without consideration ||." These ancient tenets Stahl 

• Spr., v. 803. t 75., v.' 308. t lb., v. 814. 

§ Stahl, irfpi ^iv^^mt cfarMcvrov. || ^k 4k diayo^r. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCBB8IVE BIOLO0ICAL HYPOTHESES. 27 

interpreta in such a manner that eyen the involuntary 
motions proceed from the soul, though without reflection 
or clear consciousness. It is indeed evident, that there 
are many customary motions and sensations which are 
perfectly rational, yet not the objects of distinct conscious^ 
ness ; and thus instinctive motions, and those of which 
we are quite unconscious, may still be connected with 
reason. Tbe questions which in this view offer themselves, 
as, how the soul passes from the mother to the childi 
be dismisses as unprofitable*. He considers nutrition 
and secretion as the work of the soul. The corpuscular 
theory and the doctrine of animal spirits are, he rightly 
observes, mere hypotheses, which are arbitrary in their 
character, and only shift the difficult}^ For, if the ani* 
mal spirits are not matter, how can they explain the 
action of an immaterial substance on the body ; and if 
they are matter, how are they themselves acted on ? 

This doctrine of the action of the soul on the body,' 
was accepted by many persons, especially by the iatro- 
mathematicians, who could not but feel the insufficiency 
of their system without some such supplement: such 
were Cbeyne and Mead. In Germany, Stahl's disciples 
in physiology were for the most part inconsiderable per* 
sonsf . Several Englishmen who speculated concerning 
the metaphysics as well as the physiology of Sensation 
and Motion, inclined to this psychical view, as Porterfield 
and Whytt. Among the French, Boissier de Sauvageii 
was the most zealous defender of the Stahlian system. 
Actions, he sayst> which belong to the preservation of 
life are determined by a moral not a mechanical neces^ 
sity. They proceed from the soul, but cannot be con- 

? This was of course an obvious probkw. Hahvey, On Generation^ 
Exercise 27, p. 148, teaches, ** That the egg is not the production oi 
the womb, but of the soul.** 

t Spb,, v. 339, &c. X Jb., 36a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



28 PHILOSOPHY OP Biotocnr. 

trolled by it, as the starting from fear, or the trembling 
at danger. Unzer, a physician at Altona*, was also a 
philosophical Stahlianf. 

We need not dwell on the opposition which was 
offered to this theory, first by Hoffman, and afterwards 
by Haller. The former of these had promulgated, as we 
have seen, the rival theory of a nervous fluid, the latter 
was the principal assertor of the doctrine of irritability, 
an important theory on which we may afterwards have to 
touch. Haller's animosity against the Stahlian hypothesis 
is a remarkable feature in one who is in general so tole- 
rant in his judgment of opinions. His arguments are 
taken from the absence of the control of the will over 
the vital actions, from the want of consciousness accom- 
panying these actions, from the uniformity of them in dif- 
ferent conditions of the mind, and from the small sensi- 
bility of the heart which is the source of the vital actions. 
These objections, and the too decided distinction which 
Haller made between voluntary and involuntary muscles, 
were very satisfactorily answered by Whytt and Platner. 
In particular, it was urged that the instinctive actions of 
brutes are inexplicable by means of mechanism, and may 
be compared with the necessary vital actions of the 
human body. Neither kind are accidental, neither kind 
are voluntary, both are performed without reflection. 

Without tracing further the progress of the psychical 
doctrine, I shall borrow a few reflections upon it from 
Sprengelt: — 

" When the opponents of the Stahlian system repeat 
incessantly that the assumption of a psychical cause in 
corporeal effects is a metaphysical speculation which does 
not belong to medicine, they talk to no purpose. The 
states of the soul are objects of our internal experience, 
and interest the physician too nearly to allow him to 

* A.D- 1799. t Spr. v. 360. J 75. 383, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SUCCESSIVE BIOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES, 29 

ne^e6% them. The innumerable upcotiscious tefforts of 
the soul, the powerful and daily effects of the passions 
upon the body, too often put to confusion those who 
would expel into the region of metaphysics the disposi- 
tions of the mind. The connexion of our knowledge of 
the soul, as gathered from experience, with our know-* 
ledge of the human body, is far closer than the mecha^ 
nical and chemical physiologists suspect. 

"The strongest objection against the psychical sys- 
tem, and one which has never been sufficiently answered 
by any of its advocates, is the universality of organic 
effects in the vegetable kingdom. The comparison of 
the physiology of plants with the physiology of animals 
puts the latter in its true light. Without absolutely 
triHing with the word satdy we cannot possibly derive 
from a soul the organic operations of vegetables. But 
just as little can we, as some Stahlians have done, draw 
a sharp line between plants and animals, and ascribe the 
processes of the former to mere mechanism, while we 
derive the operations of the latter from an intellectual 
principle. Not to mention that such a line is not pos-^ 
sible, the rise of the sap and the alteration of the fluids 
of plants cannot be derived entirely from material causes; 
as their highest origin." 

Thus, I may add, this psychical theory, however diffi- 
cult to defend in its detail, does in its generalities express 
some importent truths respecting the vital powers. It 
not only, like the last theory, gives unity to the living 
body, but it marks, more clearly than any other theory, 
the wide interval which separates mechanical and che- 
mical from vital action, and fixes our attention upon the 
new powers which the consideration of life compels us to 
assume. It not only reminds us that these powers are 
elevated above the known laws of the material world, but 
also that they are closely connected with the world of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



80 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOOY. 

ihought and feeling, with \?i]l and reason ; and thus it 
carries tis in a manner in which none of the preceding 
theories have done, to a true conception of a living, 
conscious^ sentient, active individual. 

At the same time we cannot but allow that the life 
of plants and of the lower orders of animals shows us very 
clearly that, in order to arrive at any sound and consistent 
knowledge respecting life, we must form some conception 
of it from which all the higher attributes which the term 
•* soul ** involves, are utterly and carefully excluded ; and 
therefoi'e we cannot but come to the conclusion that the 
psychical school are right mainly in this ; that in ascrib* 
ing the functions of life to a soul, they mark strongly and 
justly the impossibility of ascribing them to any known 
attributes of body. 



Chapter III» 
ATTEMPTS TO ANALYSE THE IDEA OP LIFE. 

1. Definitions of Life. — We have seen in the pre- 
ceding chapter that all attempts to obtain a distinct con- 
ception of the nature of Life in general have ended in 
failure, and produced nothing beyond a negative result. 
And the conjecture may now naturally occur, that the 
cause of this failure resides in an erroneous mode of pro- 
pounding to ourselves the problem. Instead of contem- 
plating Life as a single Idea, it may perhaps be proper to 
separate it into several component notions: instead of 
seeking for one cause of all vital operations, it may be 
well to look at the separate vital functions, and to seek 
their causes. When the view of this possibility opens 
upon us, how shall we endeavour to verify it, and to 
take advantage of it f 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO ANALYSE THB IDBA OF LIFE. 81 

Let US, as one obvious oourse, take some of the 
attetnpts vhich have been made to define Life, and let uft 
see whether they appear to offer to us any analysis of the 
idea into component parts. Such definitions, when they 
proceed from men of philosophical minds, are the ulti-* 
mate result of a long course of thought and observation ; 
and by no means deserve to be slighted as arbitrary selec- 
tions of conditions, or empty forms of words. 

2. Life has been defined by Stahl*, "The con- 
dition by which a body resists a natural tendency to che- 
mical changes, such as putrefaction.'^ In like manner, 
M. von Humboldt t defines living bodies to be "those 
which, notwithstanding the constant operation of causes 
tending to change their form, are hindered by a certain 
inward power from undergoing such change." The first 
of these definitions amounts only to the assertion, that 
vital processes are not chemical; a negative result, which 
we may accept as true, but which is, as we have seen, A 
barren truth. The second appears to be, in its import, 
identical with the first. An inward principle can only 
be understood as distinguished from known external 
powers, such as mechanical and chemical agencies. Or 
if, by an internal principle, we mean such a principle as 
that of which we are conscious within ourselves, we 
ascribe a soul to all living things : an hypothesis which 
we have seen is not more efifective than the former in 
promoting the progress of biological science.- Nearly th6 
same criticism applies to such definitions as that of Kant t 
that "Life is an internal faculty producing change, 
motion, and action." 

Other definitions refer us, not to some property 
residing in the whole of an organized mass, but to the 
connexion and relation of its parts. Thus M. von Hum- 

? Treviranus. Biologie^ p. 19. Stahlii, Theor. Med., p. 254. 
t Aphorwnm au$ d. Chem. PhydoL der I^kmam^ s« 1. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S2 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGV. 

boldt* has given another definition of a living body: 
that ** it is a whole whose parts, arbitrarily separated, no 
longer resist chemical changes.** But this additional 
assertion concerning the parts, adds nothing of any value 
to the definition of the whole. And in some of the lower 
kinds of plants and animals it is hardly true as a fact 

3. Another definition f places the character of Life in 
"motions serviceable to the body moved.*' To this it 
has been objected:^, that, on this definition, the earth and 
the planets are living bodies. Perhaps it would be more 
philosophical to object to the introduction of so loose a 
notion as that of a property being serviceable to a body« 
We might also add, that if we speak of all vital func- 
tions as fnotions, we make an assumption quite unautho* 
rized, and probably false. 

Other definitions refer the idea of Life to the idea of 
Organization. " Life is the activity of matter according 
to laws of organization^.** We are then naturally led to 
ask what is Organization. In reply to this is given us 
the Kantian definition of Organization, which I have 
already quoted elsewhere ||, "An organized product of 
nature is that in which all the parts are mutually ends 
and means %'* That this definition involves exact fun- 
damental ideas, and is capable of being made the basis of 
sound knowledge, I shall hereafter endeavour to show. 
But I may observe that such a definition leads us some- 
what further. If the parts of organized bodies are known 
to be means to certain ends, this must be known because 
they fulfil these ends, and produce certain effects by the 
operation of a certain cause or causes. The question then 

* Veriuehe uber die gereitzte Mwkel und Nervenfd$er^ book ii., 
p,433. 

t Erhard. Roscblaub's MagasAa der HMkunde^ b. i., st« 1, p. 69. 

% Trbviranus, BiologU^ p. 41. 

§ ScHMm, Phymlogie^ b. ii., p. 274. 

II HUU Ind. Sei.f iii. 470. IT Kant, Urtheikkraft, p. 296. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO ANALYSE THE IDEA OP LIFE. 33 

recQi^ what is the cause which produces such effects as 
take place in organized or living bodies ? and this is iden- 
tical with the problem of which in the last chapter we 
traced the history, and related the failure of physiologists 
in all attempts at its solution. 

4. But what has been just said suggests to us 
that it may be an improvement to put our* problem in 
another shape: not to take for granted that the cause 
of all vital processes is one, but to suppose that there 
may be several separate causes at work in a living body. 
If this be so, life is no longer one kind of activity," but 
-several. We have a number of operations which are 
son^how bound together, and life is the totality df dl 
the^ : in shoirt, life is not one function, but a system of 
functions. : » 

5. We are thus brought very near to .the celebrated 
d^nition of life given by Bichat* : " Life is the sum of 
the functions by which death is resisted." But upon the 
definition thus stated, we may venture to observe ;— first, 
that the introduction of the notion of death in order to 
define the notion of life appears to be unphilosophical. 
We may more naturally define death with reference to 
life, as the cessation of life ; or at least we may consider 
life and death as correlative and interdependent notions. 
Again, the word '* sum," used in the way in which it here 
occurs, appears to be likely to convey an erroneous con- 
ception, as if the functions here spoken of were simply 
added to each other, and connected by co-ei^stence. It 
is plain that our idea of life involves more than this : the 
functions are all clearly connected, and mutually depend 
on each other ; nutrition, circulation, locomotion, repro- 
duction, each has its influence upon all the others. 
These functions not merely co-exist, but exist with many 
mutual relations and connexions ; they are continued J90 

* Pky9ioloffic(d Emarches m Life nnd I)eath. 

VOL. n. i> 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



84 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

as to form, not merely a sum^ but a system. And thus 
we are led to modify Bichat's definition, and to say that 
Life is the system of vital functions. 

6. But it will be objected that by such a definition 
we explain nothing : the notion of vital functions^ it may 
be saidj inTolves the idea of life^ and thus brings us round 
again to our starting point. Or if not, at least it is as 
necessary to define Vital Functions as to define Life itself, 
so that we have made little progress in our task. 

'To this we reply, that if any one seeks, upon such 
subjects, some ultimate and independent definition from 
which he can, by mere reasoning, deduce a series of con- 
clusions, he seeks that which cannot be found. In the 
Inductiye Sciences, a definition does not form the basis 
of reasoning, but points out the course of investigation, 
^e 4ofinition must include words ; and the meaning of 
these words must be sought in the progress and results 
of observations, as I have elsewhere said*. " The meaning 
of words is to be sought in the progress of thought ; the 
hii^ory of science is our dictionary; the steps of scientific 
induction are our definitions." It will appear, I think, 
that it is more easy for us to form an idea of a separate 
Function of the animal frame, as Nutrition or Reproduc- 
tion, than to comprehend Life in general tmder any single 
idea. And when we say that Life is a system of Vital 
Functions, we are of course directed to study these fiinc^ 
tions Separately, and (as in all other subjects of scientific 
research) to endeavour to form of them such clear and 
definite ideas as may enable us to discover their laws. 

7. The view to which we are thus led, of the most 
promising mode of conducting the researches of biology, 
la one which the greatest and most philosophical physio- 
logists of modem times have adopted. Thus Cuvier 
considers this as the true office of physiology at present. 

* iJRtt Ind. Sd^ m. 100. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEBiPTa TO ANAIiYSB THE IDEA OP LIFE. 80 

<* It belongs to modern times," he says, ^* to fonn a just 
elassification of the vital phenomena; the task of the* 
present time is to analyse the forces which belong to 
each organic element, and upon the zeal and activity 
jvhieh are given to this task depends^ according to my 
judgment, the fortune of physiology*.'* This classifica- 
tion of the phenomena of life involves, of course, a dift- 
tinetion and arrangement of the vital functions ; and the 
investigation of the powers by which these functions ar» 
carried on, is a natural sequel to such a classification. 

8. Clamjications of Functions, — Attempts to elaesify 
the vital functions of man were made at an early period, 
and have been repeated in great number up to modern 
times. The task of classification is exposed to the same 
difficulties, apd governed by the same conditions, in this 
as in other subjects, Here, as in the case of other things, 
there may be many classifications which are moderately 
good and natural, but there is only one which is the best 
and the true natural system. Here, as in other cases, 
one classification brings into view one set of relations ; 
another, another; and each may be valuable for its spe^ 
cial purpose. Here, as in other cases, the classes may be 
well constituted, though the boundary lines which divide 
them be somewhat indistinct, and the order doubtful. 
Here, as in other cases, we may have approached to the 
natural classification without having attained it ; and hero, 
as in other ca^es, to define our classes is the last and 
hardest of our problems. 

The most ancient classification of the Functions of 
living thingsf^ Is the division of them into Vital, Natural^ 
and Animal. The Vital Functions are those which can- 
not be interrupted without loss of life, as CirculaHon, 
Respiration^ and Nemom Communicatum' The Natuml 

• Hiift. Sc. Nat.dep. 1789, i. 218. 
t Diet. de$ Science9 Nat.y art. Fonctions. 

D 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



36 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

Functions are those which without the intervention of 
' the will operate on their proper occasions to preserve 
the bodies of animak; they are DigesUonf Absorption^ 
Nutrition ; to which was added Generation* The Animal 
Functions are those which involve perception and will, 
•by which the animal is distinguished from the vegetable ; 
•they are SensiMlity, Locomotion^ and Voice. 

The two great grounds of this division, the distinction 
of functions which operate continually, and those which 
operate occasionally ; and again, the distinction of func- 
tions which involve sensation and voluntary motion from 
those which do not, are really of fundamental import- 
ance, and gave a real value to this classification. It 
was, however, liable to obvious objections: namely, jPtV^t 
that the names of the classes were ill chosen ; for all the 
Junctions are natural, all are vital: Second^ that the 
lines of demarcation between the classes are obscure and 
vague ; Respiration is a f)ital function, as being continu- 
ally necessary to life; but it is also a natural function, 
since it concurs in the formation of the nutritive fluid, 
•and an animal function, since it depends in part on the 
will. But these objections were not fatal, for a classi- 
£cation may be really sound and philosophical, though 
its boimdary lines are vague, and its nomenclature ill 
selected. The division of the functions we have men- 
tioned kept its ground long ; or was employed with a 
subdivision of one class, so as to make them four ; the 
vitals natural, animal and sewual functions. 

10. I pass over many intermediate attempts to clas- 
sify the functions, and proceed to that of Bichat as that 
which is, I believe, the one most generally assented to in 
modern times. The leading principle in the scheme of 
this celebrated physiologist is the distinction between 
organic and animal life. This separation is nearly iden- 
tical with the one just noticed between the vital and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO ANALYSE THE IDEA OF LIFE. 3? 

animal functions; bnt Bichat, by the contrasts which he 
pointed out between these classes of fiinctions, gave a 
decided prominence and permanence to the distinction. 
The Organic Life, which in animals is analogous to the 
life of vegetables, and the Animal Life, which implies 
sensation and voluntary motion, have each its system of 
organs. The centre of the animal life is the brain, of the 
organic life, the heart. The former is carried on by a 
symmetrical, the latter, by an unsymmetrical system of 
organs : the former produces intermitting, the latter con- 
tinuous actions : and, in addition to these, other differ- 
ences are pointed out. This distinction of the two lives, 
being thus established, each is subdivided into two orders 
of Functions. The Animal Functions are passive, as 
Sensation: or active, as Locomotion and Voice \ again, the 
Organic Functions are those of composition, which are 
concerned in taking matter into the system, Digestion, 
Absorption, Respiration, Circulation, Assimilation; and 
those of decomposition, which reject the materials when 
they have discharged their office in the system, and these 
are again. Absorption, Circulation, and Secretion. To these 
are added Calorification, or the production of animal heat. 
It appears, from what has been said, that Absorption and 
Circulation, (and we may add Assimilation and Secretion, 
which are difficult to separate,) belong alike to the pro-^ 
cesses of composition and decomposition ; nor in truth, 
can we, with any rigour, separate the centripetal and 
centrifugal movements in that vortex which, as we 6|iall 
see, is an apt image of organic life. 

Several objections have been made to this classifica- 
tion ; and in particular, to the terms thus employed. It 
has been asserts to be a perversion of language to ascribe 
to animals tuH) lives, and to call the higher faculties in 
man, perception and volition, the animal iimctions. But, 
as we have already said, when a classification is really 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S8 PHILOSOPHY Of BIOLOGY. 

good, such objections, which bear only Upon the mode id 
which it is presented, are by no means fatal ! and it i& 
generally acknowledged, by all the most philosophical 
cultivators of biology, that this arrangement of the func- 
tions is better suited to the purposes of the science than 
those which preceded it. 

11. But according to the principles which we havd 
already laid down, the solidity of such & classification id 
to be verified by its serving as a useful guide in biological 
researched. If the arrangement which we hate explained 
be really founded in natural relations^ it vnll be found that 
in proportion as physiologists have studied the separate 
functions above enumerated, their ideas of these functions, 
and of the powers by which they are carried on, have 
become more and more clear;— have tended more and 
more to the character of exact and rigorous science. 

To examine how ftir this has been the case with 
l^gard to all the separate functions, would be to attempt 
to estimate the vttlue of all the principal physiological 
speculations of modem times ; — a task far too vast and 
too arduous for any one to undertake who has not devoted 
his life to such studies* But it may properly come withitil 
the compass of our present plan to shew how, with regard 
to the broader lines of the above classification, there has 
been such a progress as We have above described, from 
more loose and inaccurate notions of some of the vital 
functions to more definite and precise ideas. This I 
shall attempt to point out in one or two instances. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



89 



Chapter IV. 

ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAt 

FORCES, AND FIRST OF ASSIMILATION 

AND SECRETION. 

Sect. I. Course of Biological Research. 

1. It is to be observed that at present I do not speak 
of the progress of our knowledge with regard to the de* 
tail of the processes which take place in the htiman body*, 
but of the approach made to some distinct idea of the 
specially vital part of each process. In the History of 
Physiology, it has been seen* that all the great discoveries 
made respecting the organs and motions of the animal 
frame have been followed by speculations and hypotheses 
connected with such discoveries. The discovery of the 
circulation of the blood led to theories of animal heat| 
the discovery of the motion of the chyle led to theories 
of digestion ; the close examination of the process of re^ 
production in plants and animals led to theories of g^ne* 
ration. In all these cases, the discovery brought to light 
some portion of the process which was mechanical of 
chemical, but it also, in each instance, served to show 
that the process was something more than inechanical ot 
chemical. The theory attempted to explain the process 
by the application of known causes; but there always 
remained some part of it which must unavoidably be 
referred to an tmknown cause. But though unknown^ 
such a cause was not a hopeless object of study. A6 the 
vital functions became better and better understood, it 
was seen more and more clearly at what precise points of 
the process it was necessary to assume a peculiar vital 
energy, and what sort of properties this energy must be 
conceived to possess. It was perceived where, Art ^hat 
• JKi*. /fkl. «H., lii., 406. • 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



40 PHILOSOPHY Of BIOLOGY- 

manner, in what degree, mechanical and chemical agen- 
cies were modified, overruled, or counteracted, by agencies 
which must be hyper-mechanical and hyper-chemical. 
And thus the discoveries made in anatomy by a laborious 
examination of facts, pointed out the necessity of intro- 
ducing new ideas, in order that the facts might be intel- 
ligible* Observation taught much; and among other 
things, she taught that there was something which could 
not be observed, but which must, if possible, be con- 
ceived. I shall notice a few instances of this. 

Sect. II. Attempts to form a distinct Conception of 
Assimilation and Secretion. 

2. The Ancients. — ^That plants and animals grow by 
taking into their substance matter previously extraneous, 
is obvious to all ; but as soon as we attempt to conceive 
this process distinctly in detail, we find that it involves 
no inconsiderable mystery. How does the same food 
become blood and flesh, bone and hair? Perhaps the 
earliest attempt to explain this mystery, is that recorded 
by Lucretius* as the opinion of Anaxagoras, that food 
contains some bony, some fleshy particles, some of blood, 
and so on. We might, on this supposition, conceive that 
the mechanism of the body appropriates each kind of 
particle to its suitable place. 

But it is easy to refute this essay at philosophizing 
(as Lucretius refutes it) by remarking that we do not 
find milk in grass, or blood in fruit, though such food 
gives such products in cattle and in men. In opposition 
to this " Homoiomereia," the opinion that is forced upon 
us by the facts is, that the process of nutrition is not a 
selection merely, but an assimilation ; the organized sys- 
tem does not find, but make, the additions to its structure. 

3* Buffbn. — ^This notion of assimilation may be vari- 
ously expressed and illustrated ; and all that we can do 

* Luca., 1. 855. Nunc et Anaxagoree scrutemiir Sftowfiiptuw, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OP SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 41 

here, in order to show the progress of thought, is to ad- 
duce the speculations of those writers who have been most 
successful in seizing and marking its peculiar character. 
Buffon may be taken as an example of the philosophy of 
his time on this subject. "The body of the animal/' 
says he*, "is a kind of interior mould, in which the 
matter subservient to its increase is modelled and 
assimilated to the whole, in such a way that, without 
occasioning any change in the order and proportion of 
the parts, there results an augmentation in each part 
taken separately. This increase, this development, if we 
would have a clear idea of it, how can we obtain it, except 
by considering the body of the animal, and each of the 
parts which is to be developed, as so many interior moulds 
which only receive the accessory matter in the order 
which results from the position of all their parts ? This 
development cannot take place, as persons sometimes 
persuade themselves, by an addition to the outside ; on 
the contrary, it goes on by an intimate susception which 
penetrates the mass ; for, in the part thus developed, the 
size increases in all parts proportionally, so that the new 
matter must penetrate it in all its dimensions : and it is 
quite necessary that this penetration of substance must 
take place in a certain order, and according to a certain 
measure ; for if this were not so, some parts would de- 
velope themselves more than others. Now what can 
there be which shall prescribe such a rule to the acces- 
sory matter except the interior motddf" 

To speak of a mould simply, would convey a coarse 
mechanical notion, which could not be received as any 
useful contribution to physiological speculation. But 
this interior mould is, of course, to be understood figura- 
tively, not as an assemblage of cavities, but as a collec- 
tion of laws, shaping, directing, and modifying the new 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



48 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

•matter ; giving it not only form, but motion and activit/, 
mich as belong to the parts of an organic being. 

3. It must be allowed, however, that even with this 
explanation, the comparison is very loose and insufficient. 
A mould may be permitted to mean a collection of laws, 
but still it can convey no conception except that of laws 
regulated by relations of space ; and such a conception is 
very plainly quite inadequate to the purpose. What can 
we conceive of the interior mould by which chyle is sepa- 
rated from the aliments at the pores of the lacteals, or 
tears secreted in the lacrymatory gland ? 

An additional objection to this mode of expression of 
Buffbn is, that it suggests to us only a single marked 
change in the assimilated matter, not a continuous series 
of changes. Yet the animal fluids and other substances 
are, in ffect, undergoing a constant series of changes. 
Food becomes chyme, and chyme becomes chyle ; chyle 
is poured into the blood ; from the blood secretions take 
place, as the bile ; the bile is poured into the digestive 
canal, and a portion of the matter previously introduced 
is rejected out of the system. Here we must have a 
series of "interior moulds;" and these must imprest 
matter at its ejection from the organic system as well as 
at its reception. But, moreover, it is probable that none 
of the above transformations are quite abrupt. Change 
is going on between the beginning and the end of each 
stage of the nutritive circulation. To express the laws 
of this continuous change, the image of an interior mould 
is quite unsuited. We must seek a better mode of 
isonception. 

4. Vegetable and animal nutrition is, as we have 
sitid, a constant circulation. The matter so assumed is 
not all retained : a perpetual subtraction accompanies a 
l^erpetual ikddition. There is an excretion as well as an 
intussusception. Th6 matter which is assumed by the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FO«M IDEAS OP SEI>AIIATE VITAL FORCES. 4S 

living creature is retained only for a While, and is then 
parted with. The individual is the same, but its partd 
are in a perpetual flux: they come and go. For a time 
the matter which, belougs to the organic body is bound 
to it by certain lavrs: but before it is thus bound and 
after it is loose; this matter may circulate about the unU 
yeroe in any other form^ Life consists in a permanent 
influence over a perpetually changing set of particles* 

5. Cuvier. — ^This condition also has been happily ex- 
pressed, by means of a comparison, by another great 
naturalist. " If," says Cuvier*, " if, in order to obtain a 
Just idea of the essence of life^ we consider it in the 
beings where its effects are most simple, we shall soon 
perceive that It consists in the faculty which belongs to 
certain bodily combinations to continue during a deter* 
minate time under a determinate form; constantly attract- 
ing into their composition a part of the surrounding 
substances^ and giving up in return Some part of tbeif 
own substance. 

^ Life is tiius a vortMy more or less rapid, more or less 
complex, which has a constant direction, and which alwayid 
carries along its sti'eam particles of the same kinds ; but 
in which the individual particles are constantly enter* 
ing in and departing out; so that the Jorm of the living 
body is more essential to it than its Matter. 

^' So long as this motion subsists, the body in which 
it takes place is aUve ; it lives. When the motion stops 
finally, the body dies. After death, the elements whloli 
compose the body, given up to the ordinary chemical 
affinities, soon separate, and the body which was alive is 
dissolved.'* 

This notion of a vortex f which is permanent while 

* Regne Animal'^ i. 11. 

+ The definition of life given by M. de Blainville appears to me 
Aoi to differ essentially from that of Cuvier* " tin corps vivant est 
one sorte de foyer chimique ou il-y-a a tous momens apport de nou- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



44 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

the matter which composes it constantly (changes, — of pe- 
culiar forces which act in this vortex so long as it exists, 
and which give place to chemical forces when the circu- 
latory motion ceases, — appears to express some of the 
leading conditions of the assimilative power of living 
things in a simple and general manner, and thus tends 
to give distinctness to the notion of this vital function. 

6. But we may observe that this notion of a vortex 
is still insufficient. Particles are not only taken into the 
system and circulated through it for a time, but, as we 
have seen, they are altered in character in a manner to 
us unintelligible, both at their first admission into the 
system and at every period of their progress through it. 
In the vortex each particle is constantly transformed 
while it whirls. 

It may be said, perhaps, that this transformation may 
be conceived to be merely a fiew arrangement of particles, 
and that thus all the changes which take place in the 
circulating substances are merely so many additional 
windings in the course of the whirling current. But to 
say this, is to take for granted the atomic hypothesis in 
its rudest form. What right have we to assume that 
blood and tears, bile and milk, consist of like particles of 
matter differently arranged ? What can arrangement, a 
mere relation of space, do towards explaining such differ- 
ences? Is not the insufficiency, the absurdity of such 
an assumption proved by the whole course of science ? 
Are not even chemical changes, according to the best 
views hitherto obtained, something more than a mere 
pew arrangement of particles ? And are not vital as 
much beyond chemical, as chemical are beyond geome- 

Velles molecules et depart de molecales anciennes ; on la composition 
n'est jamais fixe (si ce n'est d'un certain nombre de parties yerita- 
blement mortes ou en depot), mais toujours pour ainsi dire in nisUj 
d*on mouvement plus on moins lent et quelquefois cbaleur." — Princij>e$ 
tPAnat. Comp^ 1822, t. i. p. 16. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 45 

trical modifications? It is not enough, then, to conceive 
life as a vortex. The particles which are taken into the 
organic frame do more than circulate there. They are, 
at every point of their circulation, acted upon by laws of 
an unknown kind, changing the nature of the substance 
which they compose. Life is a vortex in which vital 
forces act at every point of the stream : it is not only a 
current of whirling matter, but a cycle of recurring 
powers, 

7. Matter and Fwm. — ^This image of a vortex is 
closely connected with the representation of life offered 
us by writers of a very different school. In Schellinq's 
Lectures on Academic Study ^ he takes a survey of the 
various branches of human knowledge, determining ac- 
cording to his own principles the shape which each science 
must necessarily assume. The peculiar character of orga- 
nization, according to him*, is that the matter is only an 
accident of the thing itself, and the organization consists 
in form alone. But this form, by its very opposition to 
matter, ceases to be independent of it, and is only ideally 
separable. In organization, therefore, substance and 
accident, matter and form, are completely identical f. 
This notion, that in organization the form is essential and 
the matter accidental, or, in other words, that the form is 
permanent and the matter fluctuating and transitory, 
agrees, if taken in the grossest sense of matter and form, 
with Cuvier's image of a vortex. In a whirlpool, or in a 
waterfall, the form remains, the matter constantly passes 
away and is renewed. But we have already seen J that in 
metaphysical speculations in which matter and form are 
' opposed, the word form is used in a far more extensive 
sense than that which denotes a relation of space. It may 

* Lect. xiii., p. 288. 

1 1 have not translated Schelling's words, but given their import 
as far as I could. 
tBooki.- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



46 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY, 

indeed designate any change which matter can undergo ; 
and we may very allowably say that food and blood are 
the same matter under different forms. Hence if we 
assert that life is a constant form of circtdating matter^ we 
express Cuvier's notion in a mode free from the false 
suggestion which " vortex '' conveys. 

8. We may^ however, still add something to this 
account of life. The circulating parts of the system not 
only circulate, but they form the non-circulating parts. 
Or rather, there are no non-circulating parts : all por- 
tions of the frame circula;te more or less rapidly. The 
food which we take circulates rapidly in the fluids, nlore 
slowly in the flesh, still more slowly in the bones ; but in 
all these parts it is taken into the systein, retained there 
for some time, and Anally replaced by other matter. But 
while it remains in the body, it exercises upon the other 
circulating parts the powers by which their motion is 
produced. Nutriment forms and supports the organs, 
and the organs carry fresh nutriment to its destination. 
The peculiar forces of the living body, and its peculiar 
structure, are thus connected in an indescribable manner. 
The forces produce the structure; the structure, again, 
is requisite for the exertion of the forces. The idea of 
an organic or living being includes this peculiar condi- 
tion — that its construction and powers are such, that it 
constantly appropriates to itself new portions of substance 
which, so appropriated, become indistinguishable parts of 
the whole, and serve to carry on subsequently the same 
functions by which they were assimilated. And thus 
organic life is a constant form of circulating matter^ in which 
the matter and the form determine each other hy peculiar 
laws {that w, by vital forces). 

Sect. III. Attempts to conceive tJie Fo7*ces of Assimila- 
Hon and Secretion* 

9. I have already stated that in our attempts to obtain 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FQBH IPBAS OF 8EP ABATE VITAL FORCES. 47 

dear and Bcientific Ideas of vital forces, we have, in the 
first place, to seek to understand the course of change 
and motion in each function, so as to see at what points 
of the process peculiar causes come into play ; and next, 
to endeavour to obtain some insight into the peculiar 
jcharacter and attributes of these causes. Having spoken 
of the first part of this mode of investigation in regard 
to the general nutrition of organic bodies, I must now 
say a few words on the second part. 

The forces here spoken of are vital forces. From 
what has been said, we may see in some measure the dis- 
tinction between forces of this kind and mechanical or 
chemical forces ; the latter tend constantly to produce a 
final condition, after which there is no further cause of 
change; mechanical forces tend to produce equilibrium; 
i^hemlcal forces tend to produce composition or decompo* 
sition ; and this point once reached, the matter in which 
these forces reside is altogether inert. But an organic 
)>ody tends to a constant motion, and the highest activity 
of organic forces shows itself in continuous change. 
Again, in mechanical and chemical forces, the force of 
any aggregate is the sum of the forces of all the parts : 
the sum of the forces corresponds to the sum of the 
matter. But in organic bodies the amount of effect does 
not depend on the matter, but on the form : the particles 
lose their separate energy, in order to share in that of the 
aystem ; they are not added, they are assimilated. 

10. It is diflScult to say whether anything has been 
^ined to science by the various attempts to assign a 
fixed name to the vital force which is thus the immediate 
0ause of assimilation. It has been called organic attrao 
tian or vital attraction^ organic affinity or vital affimty^ 
being thus compared with mechanical attraction or che- 
mical aflSnity. But, perhaps, as the process is certainly 
Bmther mechanical nor chemical, it is desirable to appro* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



48 I»H1L0S0^HY OF BIOLOGY. 

priate to it a peculiar name ; and the name Assimilation^ 
or Organic Assimilation^ by the usage of good biological 
writers, is generally employed for this purpose, and may 
be taken as the standard name of this vital force. To 
illustrate this, I will quote a passage from the excellent 
Elements of Physiology of Professor Miiller. " In the pro- 
cess of nutrition is exemplified the fundamental principle 
of organic assimilation. Each elementary particle of an 
organ attracts similar particles from the blood, and by 
the changes it produces in them, causes them to partici- 
pate in the vital principle of the organ itself. Nerves 
take up nervous substance, muscles muscular substance : 
even morbid structures have the assimilating power ; 
.warts in the skin grow with their own peculiar structure ; 
in ah ulcer, the base and border are nourished in a way 
conformable to the mode of action and secretion deter- 
mined by the disease.^' 

11. The force of organic assimilation spoken of in the 
last paragraph denotes peculiarly the fon^e by which each 
organ appropriates to itself a part of the nutriment re- 
ceived into the system, and thus is maintained and aug- 
mented with the growth of the whole. But the growth 
of the solid parts is only one portion of the function of 
nutrition ; besides this, we must consider the motion and 
changes of the fluids, and must ask what kind of forces 
may be conceived to produce these. What are the 
powers by which chyle is absorbed from the food, by which 
bile is secreted from the blood, by which the circulating 
motion of these and all other fluids of the body are con- 
stantly maintained ? To the questions, — What are the 
forces by which absorption, secretion, and the vital motions, 
of fluids are produced ?— :no satisfactory answer has been 
returned. Yet still some steps have been made, which 
it may be instructive to point out. 

12. In absorption it would appear that a part of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 49 

agency is inorganic ; for liot only dead membranes, but 
inorganic substances, absorb fluids, and even absorb tliem 
with elective forces, according to the ingredients of the 
fluid. A force which is of this kind, and which hiLs been 
termed endosmose^ has been found to produce very curious 
effects. When a membrane separates two fluids, holding 
in solution different ingredients, the fluids pass through 
the membrane in an imperceptible manner, and mix or 
exchange their elements. The force which produces 
these effects is capable of balancing a very considerable 
pressure. It appears, moreover, to depend, at least among 
other causes, upon attractions operating between the 
elements of the solids and the fluids, as well as between 
the different fluids; and this force, though thus appa- 
rently of a mechanical and chemical nature, probably has 
considerable influence in vital phenomena. 

13. But still, though endosmose may account in part 
for absorption in some cases, it is certain that there is 
some other vital force at work in this process. There 
must be, as Miiller says*, " an organic attraction of a 
kind hitherto unknown." "If absorption," he addsf, "is 
to be explained in a manner analogous to the laws of 
endosmose, it must be supposed that a chemical affinity^ 
resulting from the vital process itself, is exerted between 
the chyme in the intestines and the chyle in the lacteals, 
by which the chyle is enabled to attract the chyme with- 
out being itself attracted by it. But such affinity or 
attraction would be of a vital nature, since it does not 
exist after death." 

14. If the force of absorption be thus mysterious in 
its nature, the force of secretion is still more so. In this 
ease we have an organ filled with a fine net-work of 
blood-vessels, and in the cavities of some glandf or open 
part, we have a new fluid formed, of a kind altogether 

? Phy%wlogy, p. 299. t Ih., p. SOL 

VOL. II. E 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



80 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

different from the blood itself. It is easily shown that 
this cannot be explained by any action of pores or capil- 
lary tubes. But what conception can we form of the 
forces by which such a change is produced ? Here, again, 
I shall borrow the expressions of Miiller, as presenting 
the last result of modem physiology. He says*, **The 
Indre probable supposition is, that by virtue of imbibition, 
fer the general organic porosity, the fluid portion of the 
blood becomes diffiised through the tissue of the secreting 
brgan ; that the external surface of the glandular canals 
exerts a chemical attraction on the elements of the fluid, 
inftising into them at the same time a tendency to unite 
in new combinations ; and then repels them in a manner 
which is certainly quite inexplicable, towards the inner 
fturf^e of tjie secreting membrane, or glandular canals." 
" Although quite unsupported by facts," he adds, " this 
theory of attraction and repulsion is not without its ana- 
logy in physical phenomena ; and it would appear that 
very similar powers effect the elimination of the fluid in 
secretion, and cause it to be taken up by the lymphatics 
in absorption." He elsewhere saysf, *• Absorption seems 
to depend on an attraction the nature of which is un- 
known, but of which the very counterpart, as it were, 
takes place in secretion; the fluids altered by the se- 
creting action being repelled towards the free side or 
open surface only of the secreting membranes, and then 
)>redsed forwards by the successive portions of the fluids 
jBeoreted." 

15. With regard to the forces which produce the 
Motion of absorbed or secreted fluids along their destined 
bourse, it may be seen, from the last quoted sentence, 
that the same vital force which changes the nature, also 
produces the movement of the substance. The fluids ai-e 
pressed forwards by the successive portions absorbed or 
secreted. That this is the sole cause, or at least a very 
^ Phyihloffy^ p. 464. t lb., p. 301. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDJS48 OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 51 

powerfiil cause, of the moticm of the nutritive fluids in 
oi^ganic bodies, is easily shown by experience. It is found* 
that the oi^^ns which effect the ascent of the sap in trees 
duf ing the spring wre the terminal parts of the roots ; 
that the whole force by which the sap is impelled upwards 
is the vis a terg(h as it has been called, the force pushing 
from behind, exerted in the roots. And thus the force 
which produces this motion is exerted exactly at those 
points where the organic body selects from the contiguous 
mass those particles which it absorbs and appropriates. 
And the same may most probably be taken for the cause 
oi the motion of the lymph and cliyle ; at least, Miiller 
saysf that no other motive power has been detected which 
impels those fluids in their course. 

Thus, though we must confess the Vital Fowe con- 
cerned in Assimilation and Secretion to be unknown in 
its nature, we still obtain a view of some of the attributes 
which it involves. It has mechanical efficacy, producing 
motions, often such as would require great mechanical 
force. But it exerts at the same point both an attraction 
and a repulsion, attracting matter on one side, and repel- 
ling it on the other; and in this circumstance it diflfers 
entirely from mechanical forces. Again, it is not only 
mechanical but chemical, producing a complete change 
in the nature of the substance on whidi it acts ; to which 
we must add that the changes produced by the vital 
forces are such as, for the most part, our artificial che- 
mistry cannot imitate. But, again, by the action of the 
Tital force at any point of an organ, not only are fluids 
made to pass, and changed as they pass, but the organ 
itself is maintained |nd strengthened, so as to continue 
or to increase its operation : and thus the vital energy 
supports its activity by its action, and is augmented by 
being exerted. 

* :M9lleii, p. 300. + lb., p. 254. 

H 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



52 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

We have thus endeavoured to obtain a view of some 
of the peculiar characters which belong to the Force of 
Organic Assimilation ; — the Force by which life is kept up, 
conceived in the most elementary form to which we can 
reduce it by observation and contemplation. It appears 
that it is a force which not only produces motion and 
chemical change, but also vitalizes the matter on which 
it acts, giving to it the power of producing like changes 
on other matter, and so on indefinitely. It not only cir- 
culates the particles of matter, but puts them in a stream 
of which the flow is development as well as movement. 

The force of Organic Assimilation being thus con- 
ceived, it becomes instructive to compare it with the force 
concerned in Generation, which we shall therefore endea- 
vour to do. 

Sect. IV. Attempts to conceive the Process of Generation. 
16. At first sight the function of Nutrition appears 
very different from the function of Generation. In the 
former case we have merely the existing organs main- 
tained or enlarged, and their action continued ; in the 
latter, we have a new individual produced and extricated 
from the parent. The term reprodiiction has, no doubt, 
been applied, by different writers, to both these func- 
tions; — to the processes by which an organ when muti- 
lated, is restored by the forces of the living body, and to 
the process by which a new generation of individuals is 
produced which may be considered as. taking the place of 
the old generation, as these are gradually removed by 
death. But these are obviously different senses of the 
word. In the latter case, the term reproduction is 
figuratively used ; for the safne indiyiduals are not repro- 
duced ; but the species is kept up by the propagation of 
new individuals, as in nutrition the organ is kept up by 
the assimilation of new matter. To escape ambiguity, I 
shall avoid using the term repvduction in the sense of 
propagation. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OP SEPARATE VITAL FORCE?. 53 

17. In Nutrition, as we have seen, the matter, which 
from being at first extraneous, is appropriated by the 
living system, and directed to the sustentation of the 
organs, undergoes a series of changes of which the detail 
eludes our observation and apprehension. The nutriment 
which we receive contributes to the growth of flesh and 
bone, viscera and organs of sense. But we cannot trace 
in its gradual changes a visible preparation for its final 
office. The portion of matter which is destined to repair 
the waste of the eye or the skin, is not found assuming a 
likeness to the parts of the eye or the structure of the 
skin, as it conies near the place where it is moulded into 
its ultimate form. The new parts are insinuated among 
the old ones, in an obscure and imperceptible matter. 
We can trace their progress only by their effects. The 
organs are nourished, and that is almost all we can learn : 
we cannot discover how this is done. We cannot follow 
pature through a series of manifest preparations and 
processes to this result. 

18. In Generation the case is quite different. The 
youngf} being is formed gradually and by a series of dis- 
tinguishable processes. It is included within the parent 
before it is extruded, and approaches more or less to the 
likeness of the parent before it is detached. While it 
is still an embryo, it shares in the nutriment which circu- 
lates through the system of the mother; but its destination 
is already clear. While the new and the old parts, in 
every other portion of the mother, ire undistioguishably 
mixed together, this new part, the foetus, is clearly dis- 
tinct from the rest of the system, and becomes rapidly 
more and more so, as the time goes on. And thus there 
is formed, not a new part, but a new whole ; it is not an 
organ which is kept up, but an offspring which is pre- 
parefd. The progeny is included in the parent, and is 
griwlually fitted to be separated from it The young is at 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



64 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

first onlj the development of a part of the organization 
of the mother; — of a germ^ an ovule. But it is not 
developed like other organs, retaining its general form. 
It does not become merely a largier bud, a larger ovule ; 
it is entirely changed ; it becomes from a bud, a blossom, 
a flower, a fruit, a seed ; from an ovule it becomes an 
eggf a chick, a bird ; or it may be, a foetus, a child. The 
original rudiment is not merely nourished, but unfolded 
and transformed through the most marked and remote 
changes, gradually tending to the form of the new indi* 
viduaL 

Id. But this is not all. The faetus is, as we have 
said, a development of a portion of the mother's organi- 
jsation/ But the foetus (supposing it female) is a likeness 
of the mother. The mother, even before conception, 
contains within herself the germs of her progeny ; the 
fomale foetus, therefore, at a certain stage of develop* 
ment, will contain also the germs of possible progeny ; 
and thus we may have the germs of future generations^ 
pre-existing and included snccesisively within one another. 
And this state of things, which thus suggests itself to us 
as possible, is found to be the case in facts which obser- 
vation supplies. Anatomists have traced ovules in the 
unborn foetus, and thus we have three generations in- 
cluded one iidthin another. 

20. Supposing we were to stop here, the process of 
propagation might appear to be altogether different from 
that of nutrition. The latter, as we have seen, may be 
in some measure illustrated by the image of a vwtea?; 
the former has been represented by the image of a series 
of germs, sheathed one within another successively, and 
this without any limit. This view of the subject has 
been termed the doctrine of the pre-eanstence of ge^tns ; 
imd has been designated by German writers by a term 
(tinschachtelungs-theorie) descriptive of the successive 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 56 

sheathing of which I have spoken. Imitating this term, 
we ' may call it the theory of stwcesme inclusion* It hqs 
always had many adherents ; and has been, perhaps, up 
to the present time, the most current opinion on tbiB 
subject of generation* Cuvier inclines to this opinion*. 
" Fixed forms perpetuating themselves by generation dis^ 
tinguish the species of living things. These forms do 
not produce themselves, do not change themselves. Life 
supposes them to exist already ; its flame can be lighted 
only in organization previously prepared ; and thq mort 
profound meditations and the most delicate researches 
terminate alike in the mystery of the pre-existence of 
germs." 

21. Yet this doctrine is full of difficulty. It is, aa 
Cuvier says, a mysterious view of the subject ;-^&o mys- 
terious that it can hardly be accepted by us, who seek 
distinct conceptions as the basis of our philosophy. Can 
it be true, not only that the germ of the offspring is 
originally included in the parent, but also the getms of 
its progeny, and so on without limit : — So that each fruits 
ful individual contains in itself an infinite collection of 
future possible individuals; — a reserve of infinite sue** 
ceeding generations? This is hard to admit. Have we 
no alternative ? What is the opposite doctrine ? 

22. The opposite doctrine deserves at least some 
notice. It extends to the production of a new individual, 
the conception of growth by nutrition. According to 
this view, we suppose propagation to take place, not as in 
the view just spoken of, by inclusion afid extrusion, but 
by assimilation and development ;— not by the Dnatdrial 
{M'e^xistence 6f germs, but by the communication of 
vital forces to new matter. This opinion appears to be 
entertained by som^ of the most eminent physiologists 
of the present time. Thus, Miiller says* "Theorganie 

. * R^^ne Animal, p. 20. ' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



56 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

force is also creative. Tlie organic force which resides in 
the whole, and on which the existence of each part 
depends^ has also the property of generating from organic 
matter the parts necessary to the whole." Life, he adds, 
is not merely a harmony of the parts. On the contrary, 
the harmonious action of the parts subsists only by the 
influence of a force pervading all parts of the body. 
" This force exists before the harmonizing parts, which 
are in fact formed by it during the development of the 
embryo." And again; "The creative force exists in the 
germ, and creates in it the essential force of the future 
animal. The germ is potmtiaUy the whole animal : during 
the development of the germ the parts which constitute 
the iactual whole are produced." 

23. In this view, we extend to the reproduction of 
an individual the same conception of organic assimilation 
which we have already arrived at, as the best notion we 
can form of the force by which the reproduction and sus- 
tentation of parts takes place. And is not such an 
extension really very consistent ? If a living thing can 
appropriate to itself extraneous matter, invest it with its 
own functions, and thus put it in the stream of constant 
development, may we not conceive the development of a 
new whole to take plac^ in this way as well as of a part ? 
If the organized being can infuse into new matter its vital 
forces, is there any contradiction in supposing this infu- 
sion to take place in the full measure which is requisite 
for the production of a new individual? The force of 
organic assimilation is transferred to the very matter on 
which it acts ; it may be transferred so that the operation 
of the forces produces not only an organ, but a system of 
organs. 

24. This identification of the forces which operate 
in Nutrition and Generation may at first seem forced 
and obscure, in consequence of the very strong apparent 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 5T 

differences of the two processes which we have already 
noticed. But this defect in the doctrine is remedied by 
the consideration of what may be considered as inter- 
mediate cases. It is not true that, in the nutrition of 
special organs, the matter is always conveyed to its ulti- 
mate destination without being on its way moulded into 
the form which it is finally to bear, as the embryo is 
moulded into the form of the future individual. On the 
contrary, there are cases in which the waste of the organs 
is supplied by the growth of new ones, which are prepared 
and formed before they are used, just as the offspring is 
prepared and formed before it is separated from the* 
parent. This is the case with the teeth of many animals, 
and especially with the teeth of animals of the croco- 
dile kind. Young teeth grow near the root of the old 
ones, like buds on the stem of a plant ; and as these 
become fully developed, they take the place of the 
parent tooth when that dies and is cast away. And 
these new teeth in their turn are succeeded by others 
which germinate from them. Several generations of 
such teeth, it is said as many as four, have been detected 
by anatomists, visibly existing at the same time; just 
as several generations of germs of individuals have been, 
as we already stated, observed included in one another. 
But this case of the teeth appears to show very strikingly 
how insufficient such observations are to establish the 
doctrine of successive inclusion, or of the pre-existence of 
germs. Are we tp suppose that every crocodile's tooth 
includes in itself the germs of an infinite number of pos- 
sible teeth, as in the theory of pre-existing germs, every 
individual includes an infinite number of individuals ? If 
this be true of teeth, we must suppose that organ to 
follow laws entirely different from almost every other 
organ; for no one would apply to the other organs in 
general such a theory of reproduction. But if such a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



58 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOaY. 

theory be not maintained respecting the teeth, how cati 
-we maintain the theory of the pre-existing germs of indi« 
viduals, which has no recommendation except that of 
accounting for exactly the same phenomena? 

It would seem, then, that we are, by the closest consi* 
deration of the subject, led to conceive the forces by 
which generation is produced as forces which vitalize 
certain portions of matter, and thus prepare them for 
development according to organic forms ; and thus the 
conception of this Generative Force is identified with 
the conception of the Force of Organic Assimilation, to 
which we were led by the consideration of the process 
of nutrition. 

I shall not attempt to give further distinctness and 
fixity to this conception of one of the vital forces ; but I 
shall proceed to exemplify the same analysis of life by some 
remarks upon another Vital Process, and the Forces of 
which it exhibits the operation. 



Chapter V. 

ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE 

VITAL FORCES, Continued.— yOLV^TAUY 

MOTION. 

1. Wb formerly noticed the distinctions of wganic 
and animal functions, organic and animal forces, as one 
of the most marked distinctions to which physiologists 
have been led in their analysis of the vital powers. I 
have now taken one of the former, the organic class of 
ftinctions, namely^ nutrition; and have endeavoured to 
point out in some measure the peculiar nature of the 
vital forces by which this function is carried on. It may 
serve to show the extent and the difficulty of this dubje^^t, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FOEM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 59 

if, before quitting it, I offer a few remarks suggesteil by a 
function belonging to the other class, the animal Unc- 
tions. This I shall briefly do with respect to voluntary 
motion. 

2. In the History of Physiology, I have already 
related the progress of the researches by which the 
organs employed in voluntary motion became known to 
anatomists. It was ascertained to the satisfaction of all 
physiologists, that the immediate agents in such motion 
are the muscles ; that the muscles are in some way con- 
tracted, when the nerves convey to them the agency of 
th^ will ; and that thus the limbs are moved. It was 
ascertained, also, that the nerves convey sensations from 
the organs of sense inwards, so as to make these sensa- 
tions the object of the animal's consciousness. In man 
and the higher animals, these impressions upon the 
nerves are all conveyed to one internal organ, the brain ; 
and from this organ all impressions of the will appear to 
proceed ; and thus the brain is the centre of animal life, 
towards which sensations converge, and from which voli- 
tions diverge. 

But this being the process, we are led to inquire how 
fitr we can obtain any knowledge, or form any conception 
of the vital forces by means of which the process is car-p 
ried on. And here I have further stated in the History*, 
that the transfer of sensations and volitions along the 
nerves was often represented as consisting in the motion 
of a Nervous Fluid. I have related that the hypothesis of 
such ft fluid, conveying its impressions either by motions 
of translation or of vibration, was countenanced by many 
great names, as Newton, Haller, and even Cuvier. But 
I have ventured to express my doubt whether this hypo- 
thesis can have much value: "for," I have said, **this 
principle cannot be mechanical, chemical, or physical, 
and therefore cannot be better understood by embodying 

* H%9t. fnd. Sci.y iii. 428. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



60 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

it in a fluid; The difficulty we have in conceiving what 
the force w, is not got rid of by explaining the machinery 
by which it is transferred.^^ 

3. I may add, that no succeeding biological researches 
appear to have diminished the force of these considera- 
tions. In modem times, attempts have repeatedly been 
made to identify the nervous fluid with electricity or 
galvanism. But these attempts have not been satisfac- 
tory or conclusive of the truth of such an identity: and 
Professor Miiller probably speaks the judgment of the 
most judicious physiologists, when he states it as his 
opinion, after examining the evidence*, "That the vital 
actions of the nerves are not attended with the deve- 
lopment of any galvanic currents which our instruments 
can detect ; and that the laws of action of the nervous 
principle are totally different from those of electricity." 

That the powers by which the nerves are the instru- 
ments of sensation, and the muscles of motion, are vital 
endowments, incapable of being expressed or explained 
by any comparison with mechanical, chemical, and elec- 
trical forces, is the result which we should expect to find, 
judging from the whole analogy of science ; and which 
thus is confirmed by the history of physiology up to the 
present time. We naturally, then, turn to inquire 
whether such peculiar vital powers have been brought 
into view with any distinctness and clearness. 

4. The property by which muscles, under proper sti- 
mulation, contract and produce motion, has been termed 
iiTitability or contractility; the property by which nerves 
are susceptible of their appropriate impressions has been 
termed sensibility. A very few words on each of these 
subjects must suffice. 

Irritabilitt/. — I have, in the History of Physiologyf, 
noticed that Glisson, a Cambridge professor, distinguished 
the irritation of muscles as a peculiar property, different 

? Elem. Phyi., p. 640. f -^»»<- ^w<?. Set., iii. 427. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPAEATE VITAL FORCES. 61 

from any merely mechanical or physical action. I have 
mentioned, also, that he divides irritation into natural , 
vital, and animal; and points out, though briefly, the 
graduated differences of irritability in different organs. 
Although these opinions did not at first attract much 
notice, about seventy years afterwards attention was 
powerfully called to this vital force, irritability^ by Haller 
I shall borrow Sprengel's reflections on this subject. 

'' Hitherto men had been led to see more and more 
clearly that the cause of the bodily functions, the funda^ 
mental power of the animal frame, is not to be sought in 
the mechanism, and still less in the mixture of the parts. 
In this conviction, they had had recourse partly to the 
quite supersensuous principle of the soul, partly to the 
half-material principle of the animal spirits, in order to 
explain the bodily motions. Glisson alone saw the 
necessity of assuming an original power in the fibres, 
which, independent of the influence of the animal spirits, 
should produce contraction in them. And Gorter first 
held that this original power was not to be confined to 
the muscles, but to be extended to all parts of the living 
body. 

" But as yet the laws of this power were not known, 
nor had men come to an understanding whether it were 
fully distinct from the elasticity of the parts, or by what 
causes it was put in action. They had neither instituted 
observations nor experiments which established its rela- 
tion to other assumed forces of the body. There was 
still wanting a determination of the peculiar seat of this 
power, and experiments to trace its gradual differences 
in different parts of the body. In addition to other 
causes, the necessity of the assumption of such a power 
was felt the more, in consequence of the prevalence of 
Leibnitz's doctrine of the activity of matter; but it 
was an occult quality, and remained so till Haller, by 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



62 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

numerous experiments and solid observations, placed in 
a clear light the peculiarities of the powers of the animal 
body," 

6. Perhaps, however, Haller did more in the way of 
determining experimentally the limits and details of the 
application of this idea of Irritability as a peculiar attri- 
bute, than in developing the idea itself. In this way his 
merits were great. As early as the year 1789, he pub* 
lished his opinion upon irritability as the cause of mus- 
cular motion, which he promulgated again in 1743. But 
from the year 1747 he was more attentive to the pecu- 
liarities of irritability, and its difference from the effect of 
the nerves. In the first edition of his Physiology y which 
appeared in 174?!^ he distinguished three kinds of force 
in muscles, — ^the dead force, the innate force, and the 
nervous power. The first is identical with the elastic 
force of dead matter, and remains even after death. The 
innate force continues only a short time after death, and 
discloses itself especially by alternate oscillations; the 
motions which arise from this are much more lively than 
those which arise from mere elasticity: they are not 
excited by tension, nor by pressure, nor by any mechai- 
nical alteration, but only by irritation. The nervous 
force of the muscle is imparted to it from without by the 
nerves; it preserves the irritability y which cannot long 
subsist without the influence of the nervous force, but is 
not identical with it. 

In the yefir 1752, Haller laid before the Society of 
Gottingen the result of one hundred and ninety experi- 
ments; from which it appears to what parts of the 
animal system irritability and nervous power belong. 
These I need not enumerate. He also investigated with 
care its gradations in those parts which do possess it. 
Thus the heart possesses it in the highest degree, and 
Other organis follow in their order. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FOEM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 63 

6. Haller's doctrine was, that there resides in the 
muscles a peculiar vital power by which they contract> 
and that this power is distinct from the attributes of the 
nerves. And this doctrine has been accepted by the 
best physiologists of modem times. But .this distinction 
of the irritability of the muscles from the setmbility of the 
nerves became somewhat clearer by giving to the former 
Attribute the name of contractility. This accordingly 
•was done; it is, for example, the phraseology used by 
Bichat. By speaking of animal sensibUity and animal 
tHmfy^actility^ the passive and the active element of the 
processes of animal life are cjearly separated and opposed 
to each other. The sensations which we feel, and the 
muscular action which we exert, may be ^^losely and 
inseparably connected, yet still they are clearly distin- 
guishable. We can easily in our apprehension separate 
4he titillation felt in the nose on taking snufT, from the 
action of the muscles in sneezing, or the perception of 
an object falling towards the eye, from the exertion which 
shuts the eye^Iid ; although in these cases the passive and 
active part of the process are almost or quite inseparable 
in fact And this clear separation of the active from the 
passive power is something, it would seem, peculiar to 
the Animal Vital Powers ; it is a character by which they 
differ, not only from mechanical, chemical, and all other 
merely physical forces, but even from Organic Vital 
Powers. 

7. But this difibrence between the Animal and the 
Organic Vital Powers requires to be further insisted upon, 
for it appears to have been overlooked or denied by very 
eminent physiologists. For instance, Bichat classifies the 
Vital Powers as Animal Sensibility, Animal Contractility, 
Organic Sensibility, Organic Contractility. 

Now the view which suggests itself to us, in agreoi^ 
ment with what has been said, is this : — ^that though Ani- 
mal Sensibility and Animal Contractility are clearly and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



64 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

certainly distinct, Organic Sensibilityand Organic Contrac- 
tility are neither separable in fact nor in our conception, 
but together make up a single Vital Power. That they 
are not separable in fact is, indeed, acknowledged by 
Bichat himself. "The organic contractility," he says* 
" can never be separated from the sensibility of the same 
kind ; the reaction of the excreting tubes is immediately 
connected with the action which the secreted fluids exer- 
cise upon them : the contraction of the heart must neces- 
sarily succeed the influx of the blood into it." It is not 
wonderful, therefore, that it should have happened, as he 
complains, that "authors have by no means separated 
these two things, either in their consideration or in lan- 
guage." We cannot avoid asking, Are Organic Sensibility 
and Organic Contractility really anything more than 
two different aspects of the same thing, like action and 
reaction in mechanics, which are only two ways of con- 
sidering the action which takes place at a point ; or like 
the positive and negative electricities, which, as we have 
seen, always co-exist and correspond to each other? 

8. But we may observe, moreover, that Bichat, by his 
use of the term Contractility, includes in it powers to 
which it cannot with any propriety be applied. Why 
should we suppose that the vital powers of absorption, 
secretion, assimilation, are of such a nature that the name 
contractility may be employed to describe them? We 
have seen, in the last chapter, that the most careful study 
of these powers leads us to conceive them in a manner 
altogether removed from any notion of contraction. Is 
it not then an abuse of language which cannot possibly 
lead to anything but confusion, to write thiisf: "The 
insensible organic contractility is that, by virtue of which 
the excreting tubes react upon their respective fluids, 
the secreting organs upon the blood which flows into 

? Life and Death, p. 94. f lb. p. 95. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 66 

them, the parts where nutrition is performed upon the 
nutritive juices, and the lymphatics upon the substances 
which excite their open extremities/' In the same man- 
ner he ascribes* to the peculiar sensibility of each organ 
the peculiarity of its products and operations. An 
increased absorption is produced by an increased suscep- 
tibility of the "absorbent orifices.'' And thus, in this 
view, each organic power may be contemplated either as 
sensibility or as contractility, and may be supposed to be 
rendered more intense by magnifying either of these its 
aspects; although, in fact, neither can be conceived to 
be increased without an exactly commensurate increase 
of the other. 

9. This opinion, unfounded as it thus appears to be, 
that all the different organic vital powers are merely dif- 
ferent kinds of contractility or excitability, was connected 
with the doctrines of Brown and his followers, which 
were so celebrated in the last century, that all diseases 
arise from increase or from diminution of the vital force. 
The considerations which have already offered themselves 
would lead us to assent to the judgment which Cuvier 
has pronounced upon this system. " The theory of exci- 
tation," he says, " so celebrated in these later times by its 
influence upon pathology and therapeutick, is at bottom 
only a modification of that, in which, including under a 
common name sensibility and irritability," and we may 
add, applying this name to all the vital powers, " the 
S})eculator takes refuge in an abstraction so wide, that if, 
by it, he simplifies medicine, he annihilates all positive 

physiologyt.** 

10. TTie separation of the nervous influence and the 
muscular irritability, although it has led to many highly 
instructive speculations, is not without its difficulties, 

? Life and Death, p. 90. 
+ Hist det Set. Nat. depuU 1789, i, 219. 
VOL. II. F 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



66 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

>vhpn yiewed ^ith refereD<?e to the Idea of Vital Power. 
|f tb^ jfritabjlity of each muscl^ reside in the muscle 
itself, how does ijb differ from a mere mechanical force, 
as ^l^tiqity? ^ut, in ppiiit of fj^ct, it is certain th^,t the 
p!|scul^r irritability pf the animal body is not an attribute 
pf thj9 muscle itself independent of its connexion with 
the system. No muscle, or other part, removed from 
the !>ody, lony preserves its irritability. This power cannot 
gubsist permanently, except in connexion with ap organic? 
wjiole. This condition peculiarly constitutes irritability 
^ liyipg fpr<?e : and fhis condition would be satisfied by 
consi4ering the force as derived from the nervous system ; 
but it appears that though the nervous system has the 
ipost important influence upon all vital actions, the 
musculai: irritability must peeds be considered as some-: 
thin^f distinct. And thus the Irritability or Contractility 
pf the njuscje is a peculiar ei}(|owment of the texture, but 
it is at the saine time an endowment which can only co- 
e:tjst with life ; it is, in short, a peculiar Vital Power. 

1^. This necessity of the union of the muscle with 
the whole neryous system, in order that it may possess 
irritability, w^ th^ meaning of the true part of StahVs 
psychipjfl doctripe ; and the reason why he and his adher- 
ents persisted in asserting the power pf the soul even 
pver involun(;ary motions. This doctrine was the source 
of much controversy in later times. 

!^But,'* says Cuvier*, "this opposition of opinion 
may be reconciled by the intimate union pf the nervous 
^ubst-jpce with the fibre and the other contractile organic 
elements, and by their reciprocal action ; — doctrines 
yvhich ^ad been presented with so much probability by 
physiologists of the Scotch school, but which were ele- 
vated above the rank of hypotheses only by thp observa- 
tions of more recent times. 

• jgist. de9 Sci. Nat. dqmis 17P9^ i. ?13. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FO|tlf ipBAp 0? SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 6? 

. *f Tl^e ^bre does not contract by itself, bijt by the 
in^uence of ^be nervous filan^^nts, wbicli ar^ al^ii^y^ 
united with it. The change which ppducep the con- 
traction cannot take place without the conci^rrence of 
both these substances ; and it is further necessary that it 
should be occ^ioned each time by an extefior caus^, \fj 
a stimulant. 

"The will is one of the^e stimulants; ?>ut it only 
excites the irritability, it dqes pot popstitutej it ; fpit i^ 
the case pf pjerpons pa^ralytjo from apoplexy, %h^ irritabi? 
lity remains, though the power of the will Qver it |g gouQ. 
Thus hritabilUy depends in part on the nerv^, but ppt PP 
the sensibility : this last is anpther property, still ipor^ 
admirable and opcult than the irritability; but it is only 
pne among several functions of the nervous system. It 
would be an abuse pf words tp extend this denomipatiQll 
to functions unapcQTnpanied by perc€iption.-' 

12. Supposing, thqn, that Contractility is established 
as a peculiar Vital Power residing in the muscles, we way 
ask whether we can trape with any further exactne$s the 
seat and nature pf this power. It would be unsuitable 
to the nature of the present work tq d^ell upon the 
anatomical discussions bearing upon this point. I will 
only remark that some anatomists paaintain^ that inpsr 
cles are contracted by those fibres assuming a :^ig:^g form, 
which at first were straight. Othprs (Professor Owen 
and Dr. A. Thompson,) doubt the accuracy of this pbser- 
vatiou; and conpeiye that the muscular fibre becomes 
ihprter and thicker, but does not deviate from a right line. 
We may reTuark that the latter kind pf action appears 
to be more elementary in its nature. We can cpnceivi^ 
a straight line thrpwn into a zigzag shape by muscular 
contractipns taking place between remote parts of it; 
but it is difficult to conceive by what ekmenUn^y mode pf 

* MiJLLEB, JElm* Ph9'9 p. 887. 

F 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



68 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

action a straight fibre could bend itself at certain points, 
and at certain points only; since the elementary force 
must act at every point of the fibre, and not at certain 
selected points. 

13. A circumstance which remarkably marks the 
difference between the vital force of contractility, inhe- 
rent in muscles, and any merely dead or mechanical force, 
is this ; that in assuming their contractile state, muscles 
exert a tension which they could not themselves support 
or convey if not strengthened by their vital irritability. 
They are capable of raising weights by their exertion, 
which will tear them asunder when the power of con- 
triEu^tion is lost by death. This has induced Cuvier and 
other physiologists* to believe " that in the moment of 
action, the particles that compose a fibre, not only ap- 
proach towards each other longitudinally, but that their 
cohesive attraction becomes instantaneously much greater 
than it was before: for without such an increase of 
cohesive force, the tendency to shorten could not, as it 
would appear, prevent the fibre from being torn." We 
see here the diflSculty, or leather the impossibility, of con- 
ceiving muscular contractility as a mere mechanical force ; 
and perhaps th^re is little hope of any advantage by call- 
ing in the aid of chemical hypothesis to solve the mecha- 
nical difficulty. Cuvier conjectures that a sudden change 
in the chemical Composition may thus so quickly and 
powerfully augment the cohesion. But we may ask, are 
not a chemical synthesis and analysis, suddenly performed 
by a mere act of the will, as difficult to conceive as a 
sudden increase and decrease of mechanical power directly 
produced by the same cause ? 

15. Sensibility. The nerves are the organs and chan- 
nels of isensibility. By means of them we receive our 
sensations, whether of mere pleasure and pain, or of qua- 

* Prichabd, Vital Prin.^ p. 126. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OP SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 69 

Uties which we ascribe to external objects, as a bitter 
taste, a sweet odour, a shrill sound, a red colour, a hard 
or a hot object of tou<5h. Some of these sensations are 
but obscurely the objects of our consciousness; as for 
example the feeling which our feet have of the ground, 
or the sight which our eyes have of neighbouring objects, 
when we walk in a reverie. In these cases the sensa^ 
tions, though obscure, exist ; for they serve to balance and 
guide us as we walk. In other cases, our sensations are 
distinctly and directly the objects of our attention. 

But our sensations, as we have already said, we ascribe 
as qualities to external objects. By our senses we perceive 
objects, and thus our sensations become perceptions. We 
have not only the sensation of round, purple, and green, 
repeated and varied, but the perception of a bunch of 
grapes partly ripe and partly unripe. We have not only 
sensations of noise and of variously-coloured specks ra- 
pidly changing their places, but we have perceptions, by 
sound and sight, of a stone rolling down the hill and 
crushing the shrubs in its path. We scarcely ever dwell 
upon our sensations; our thoughts are employed upon 
objects. We regard the impressions upon our nerves, 
not for what they are^ but for what they tell us. 

But in what language is it that the impressions upon 
the nerves thus speak to us of an external world, of the, 
forms and qualities and actions of objects? How is it 
that by the aid of our nervous system we become ac- 
quainted not only with impressions but with things ; that 
we learn not only the relation of objects to us, but to 
one another ? 

16. It has been shown at some length in the previous 
Books, that the mode in which sensations are connected 
in our minds so as to convey to us the knowledge of 
objects and their relations, is by being contemplated with 
reference to Ideas. Our sensations, connected by the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



70 PJIILOSOPfiY OF BIOLOGY. 

Idea of Space, become figures ; connected by the Idea of 
Time, they become causes and effects ; connected by the 
Idea of Resemblance, they become individuals and kinds ; 
cbniiected by the Idea of Organization, they become 
living things. It has been shown that without these 
Ideas there can be no connexion among our sensations, 
ftnd therefore no perception of Figure, Action, Kind, or 
iti sTiort of bodies under any aspect whatever. Sensations 
fcre the rude Matter of bur perceptions; and are nothing, 
except so far as they have Foi-m given them by Ideas. 
But thus moulded by our Ideas, sensation becomes the 
source of an endless store of iniportant knowledge of 
fevery possible kind. 

17. But one of the most obvious uses of our percep- 
tions and our knowledge is to direct our actions. It is 
suitable to the condition of our being that when ^ye per- 
(5eive a bunch of grapes, we should be able to pluck and 
eat th^ ripfe ones; that when we perceive a stone rushing 
iown the side of a hill, we should be able to mote so as td 
av6id.it. And this must be done by moving our limbs; 
in short; by the use of our muscles. And thus sensation 
leads, hot directly, but through the medium of Ideas, to 
muscular contraction. I say that sensation and muscular 
Action are iii siich cases connected through the medium 
of Ideas. For when we proceed to pluck the grape 
tvhicK we see, the sensation does not determine the 
motion of the hand by any necessary geometrical or 
mechanical conditions, as an impression made upon a 
inachine determines its motions ; but the perceptiofi leads 
us to stretch forth the hand to that part of space, where- 
ever it is, wtere we know that the grape is, and this, not in 
any deteriniriate path, but, it may be, avoiding 6r removing 
iiit^rvenirig obstacles, which we n}80 perceive. There is in 
ivety such case a cohnexion between iKe sensation aiid 
fh^ resulting actioiil; liot of a material but of a mental 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES, tl 

kind, ^ The cause and the eiTect are bound together, hot 
by physical but by intellectual ties. 

18. And thus in such cases, between the two vital 
operations, sensation and muscular action, there inter- 
venes, as an intermediate step, perception or knowledge; 
which IS not merely vital but ideal. But this is not all J 
there is still another mental part of the process which may 
be readily distinguished from that which we have de- 
scribed. An act of the willy a volition, is that in the mind 
which immediately determines the action of the muscles 
of the body. And thus Will intervenes betweeii Know- 
ledge and Action ; and the cycle of operations whicli takd 
place when animals act with reference to external objects 
is this : — ^Sensation, I^erception, Volition, Muscular Con- 
traction. 

19. To attempt further to analyse the mental pari oi 
this cycle does not belong to the present part 6^ bnt 
work. But we may remark here, as we hav0 aii*etfdf 
remarked In the History*, How irresistibly we kte led 
by physiological researches into the domain of thought 
and mirid. We pass from the body to ihe soiil, from 
physics to metaphysics; from biology to psychology} 
from things to persons ; from nouns to pronbims. t have 
there noticed the manner in which Cuvier expresses this 
transition by the introduction of the pronoun: ""flie 
impression of external objects upon the me; the produc- 
tion of a sensation, of an image, is a mystery Impene- 
trable to our thoughts.'* 

20. feut to return to the merely biological part of 
oiif speculations. We have arrived, it will be perceived; 
at this result: that in animal actions there Intervenes 
betweeri the two terms of Sensation and Muscular Coiir 
traction; an intermediate process ; which inay fed described 
kn & communication to iind from ^ centre. This ceiitre ik 

* HtsL Ind. Set., lii.; 430. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



72 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

the seat of the sentient and volent faculties, and is of a 
hyperphysical nature. But the existence of such a centre 
as a necessary element in the functions of the animal life 
is a truth which is important in biology. This indeed may 
be taken as the peculiar character of animal, as distin- 
guished from merely organic powers. Accordingly it is 
so. stated by Bichat. For although he superfluously, as it 
would seem, introduces into his list of vital powers an 
organic sensibility, he still draws the distinction of which 
I have spoken ; " in the animal life, sensibility is the 
faculty of receiving an impression plits that of referring it 
to a common centre*." 

21. But since Sensibility and Contractility are thus 
connected by reference to a common Centre, we may ask, 
before quitting the subject, what are the different forms 
which this reference assumes. Is the connexion always 
attended by the distinct steps of knowledge and will, — ^by 
a clear act of consciousness, as in the case which we 
have taken, of plucking a grape ; or may these steps 
become obscure, or vanish altogether? 

We need not further illustrate the former connexion. 
Such actions as we have described are called voluntary 
actions. In extreme cases, the mental part of the process 
is obvious enough. But we may gradually pass from 
these to cases in which the mental operation is more and 
more obscure. 

In walking, in speaking, in eating, in breathing, our 
muscular exertions are directed by our sensations and 
perceptions: yet in such processes, how dimly are we 
conscious of perceptive and directive power ! How the 
mind should be able to exercise such a power, and yet 
should be scarcely or not at all conscious of its exercise, 
is a very curious problem. But in all or in most of the 
above instances^ the solution of this problem appears to 
* Ltfe and Deaths p. 84. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OP SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 78 

depend upon psychological rather than biological prin- 
ciples, and therefore does not belong to this place. 

22. But in cases at the other extreme, the mental 
part of the operation vanishes altogether. In many 
animals, even after decapitation, the limbs shrink when 
irritated. The motions of the iris are determined by the 
influence of light on our eyes, without our being aware 
of the motions. Here sensations produce motions, but 
with no trace of intervening perception or will. The 
sensation appears to be reflected back from the central 
element of animal life, in the form of a muscular contrac- 
tion; but in this case the sensation is not modified or 
regulated by any idea. These reflected motions have no 
reference to relations of space or force among surround- 
ing objects. They are blind and involuntary, like the 
movements of convulsion, depending for direction and 
amount only on the position and circumstances of the 
limb itself with its muscles. Here the Centre from which 
the reflection takes place is merely animal, not intellec- 
tual. 

In this case some physiologists have doubted whether 
the reflection of the sensation in the form of a muscular 
contraction does really take place from the Centre ; and 
have conceived that sensorial impressions might affect 
motor nerves without any communication with the nerv- 
ous Centre. But on this subject we may, I conceive, 
with safety adopt the decision of Professor Miiller, deli- 
berately given after a careful examination of the subject. 
*• When impressions made by the action of external stimuli 
on sensitive nerves give rise to motions in other parts, 
these motions are never the result of the direct reaction 
of the sensitive and motor fibres of the nerves on each 
other ; the irritation is conveyed by the sensitive fibres 
to the brain and spinal cord, and is by these communi- 
cated to the motor fibres.'' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



74 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

23. Thus we have two extreme cases of the connexiori 
of sensation with muscular action ; in one of which the 
connexion clearly isy and in the other it as clearly is noU 
determined by relations of Ideas, iii its transit through 
tlie nervous Centre. There is another highly curious case, 
standing intermediate between these two, and extremely 
difficult to refer to either. I speak of the case of /w- 

Instinct leads to actions which are such as if tJiey 
were detei'mined by Ideas. The lamb follows its mother 
by instinct ; but the motions by which it does this, the 
special muscular exertions, depend entirely upon the 
geornetrical and mechanical relations of external bodies, 
as the form of the ground, and the force of the wind. 
The contractions of the muscles which are requisite in 
order that the creature inay obey its instinct, vary with 
every variation of these external conditions; — are not 
determined by any rule or necessity, but by properties of 
space and force. Thus the action is not governed by 
sensations directly, but by sensations moulded by ideas. 
And the same is the case with other cases of instinct. 
The dog hunts by instinct ; but he hunts certain kinds of 
animals merely, thus showing that his instinct acts ac- 
cording to resemblances and differences ; he Crosses the 
field repeatedly to find the track of his prey by scent ; 
thus recogtiising the relations of space with reference to 
the track ; he leaps, adjusting his force to the distance 
and height of the leap with mechanical precision ; and 
thus he practically recognises ihe Ideas of Reseriiblance, 
Space, and Force. 

But have animals such Ideas ? lii any proper sense 
in -(vhich we caii speak of possessing Ideas, It appeals 
J)lain that they have not. Animals cannot, at any time, 
be sfeid pfroperly to possess ideas, for ideas imply the 
possibility of speculative knowledge. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES. 75 

24. But if we allow to animals the practical posses- 
sion of ideas, we have still a great diflBculty remaining. 
In the case of man, his ideas are unfolded gradually by 
his intercourse with the external world. The child learnt 
to distinguish forms and positions by a repeated and 
incessant use of his hands and eyes ; he learlis to walk; 
to run, to leap, by slow and laborious degrees ; he dis- 
tinguishes otie man from another, and one animal from 
another, only after repeated mistakes. Nor can we con- 
ceive this to be otherwise. How should the child know 
at once what muscles he is to exert in order to touch 
with iiis hand a certain visible object? ttow should he 
know what muscles to exert that he may stand and not 
fall, till he has tried often? How should he learn 16 
direct his attention to the differences of different faces 
and persons, till he is roused by some memory, or hope 
which implies memory ? It seems to us as if the sensa- 
tions could not, without considerable practice, be rightly 
referred to Ideas of Space, Force, Resemblance, and the 
like. 

Yet that which thus appears impossible, is in fcLct 
done by animals. The lamb almost immediately after its 
birth follows its mother, accommodating the actions of its 
muscles to the form of the ground. The chick, just 
escaped from the shell, picks up a minute insect, directing 
its beak with the greatest accuracy. Even the huraari 
infant seeks the breast and exerts its muscles in sucking, 
almost as soon as it is born. Hence, then, we see that 
Instinct produces at once actions regulated by Ideas, or, 
at least, which take place as if they were regulated by 
Ideas ; although the Ideas cannot have been developed 
by exercise, and only appear to exist so far as such 
actions are concerned. 

25. The term Instinct may properly be opposed to /»- 
sight. The former implies an inward principle of action, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



76 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

implanted witbin a creature and practically impelling it, 
but not capable of being developed into a subject of con- 
templation. While the instinctive actions of animals are 
directed by such a principle, the deliberate actions of nutn 
are. governed by insight : he can contemplate the ideal 
relations on which the result of his action depends. He 
cftn in his mind map the path he will follow, and esti- 
mate the force he will exert, and class the objects he 
has to deal with, and determine his actions by the rela- 
tions which he thus has present to his mind. He thus 
possesses Ideas not only practically, but speculatively. 
And knowing that the Ideas by which he commonly di- 
rects his actions. Space, Cause, Resemblance, and the like, 
have been developed to that degree of clearness in which 
he possesses them by the assiduous exercise of the senses 
and the mind from the earliest stage of infancy, and that 
these Ideas are capable of being still further unfolded 
into long trains of speculative truth, he is unable to con- 
ceive the manner in which animals possess such Ideas as 
their instinctive actions disclose: — Ideas which neither 
require to be unfolded nor admit of unfolding ; which 
are ad^uate for practical purposes without any previous 
exercise, and inadequate for speculative purposes with 
whatever labour cultivated. 

I have ventured to make these few remarks on In- 
stinct since it may, perhaps, justly be considered as the 
last province of Biology, where we reach the boundary 
line of Psychology. I have now, before quitting this 
subject, only one other principle to speak of. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



77 



Chapter VL 
OF THE IDEA OF FINAL CAUSES. 

1. By an examination of those notions which enter 
into all our reasonings and judgments on living things, it 
appeared that we conceive animal life as a vortex or cycle 
of moving matter in which the form of the vortex deter- 
mines the motions, and these motions again support the 
form of the vortex: the stationary parts circulate the 
fluids, and the fluids nourish the permanent parts. Each 
portion ministers to the others, each depends upon the 
other. The parts make up the whole, but the existence 
of the whole is essential to the preservation of the parts. 
But parts existing under such conditions are organs^ and 
the whole is organized. This is the fundamental concep- 
tion of organization. "Organized beings," says the physio- 
logist^, "are composed of a number of essential and 
mutually dependent parts." " An organized product of 
nature," says the great metaphysician f, "is that in which 
all the parts are mutually ends and means." 

2. It will be observed that we do not content our- 
selves with saying that in such a whole, all the parts are 
muttiaUt/ dependent This might be true even of a me- 
chanical structure ; it would be easy to imagine a frame- 
work in which each part should be necessary to the 
support of each of the others ; for example, an arch of 
several stones. But in such a structure the parts have 
no properties which they derive from the whole. They 
are beams or stones when separate ; they are no more 
when joined. But the same is not the case in an 
organized whole. The limb of an animal separated from 

* MoLLBR, Elem,^ p. 18. 
t Kant, Utiheilikrqft, p. 296. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



78 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

the body, loses the properties of a limb and soon ceases 
to retain even its fomi. 

3. Nor do we content ourselves with saying that the 
parts are mutuaUt/ eomes and effects. This is the case 
in machinery. In a clock, the pendulum by means of 
the escapement causes the descent of the weight, the 
weigjit by the same escapement keeps up the motion of 
the pendulum. But things of this kind may happen by 
accident. Stones slide from a rock down the side of a 
hill and cause it to be smooth ; the smoothness of the 
slope causes stones still to slide. Yet no one would call 
such a slide ^n organized system. The system is organ- 
ized, when the effects which take place among the parts 
are essential to our conception of ike whole; when the 
whole would not be a whple, nor the parts, parts, except 
these effects were produced ; when the effects not only 
hfippen in fact, but are included in the idea of the object ; 
whep they are not only seen, but foreseen ; not only ex- 
pected, but intended: in short when, instead of being 
causes and effects, they are ends and meansy as they are 
termed in the above definition. 

Thus we necessarily include, in our Idea of Organi- 
zation, the notion of an end, a purpose, a design ; or, to 
use another phrase which has been peculiarly appro- 
priated in this case, a Final Cause. This idea of a Final 
Cause is an essential condition in order to the pursuing 
our researches respecting organized bodies. 

4. This Idea of Final Cause is not deduced from the 
phenomena by reasoning, but is assumed as the only con- 
dition under which we can reason on such subjects at all. 
We do not deduce the Idea of Space, or Time, or effi- 
cient Cause from the phenomena about us, but necesf^arily 
look at phenomena as subordinate to these Ideas from 
the beginning of our reasoning. It is true, our ideas of 
relations of Space, i^nd Time, and Force may become 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDEA OF FINAL CAUSES. 79 

}Ducb more clear by our familiarizing ourselves with par- 
ticijlar pbepomeua : but stil}, the FundameDtal |deas are 
not generated but unfolded; not extracted from the 
external world, but evolved from the \^orld within. Jn 
like manner, in the conte^lplation of organic structures, 
we consider each part as subservient to some use, and we 
cannot study the structure as organic without such a 
conception. This notion of adaptation, — this Idea pf an 
End, — ipay become much more clear and impressive by 
seeing it exemplified in particulai; cases. But still, 
though suggested and evoked by specia} c^s, it is not 
furnished by them. Jf it be not supplied by the min^ 
itself, it can never be logically deduced from the pheno* 
Qiena. It is not a portion of the facts which we study, 
but it is a principle which connect?, includes, and renders 
^hem intelligible; as our other Fundamental Idea« do 
the classes of facts to which they ^respectively apply. 

6. This has already been confirmed by reference tp 
fact; in the History of Physiology, I have shown that those 
who studied ^the structure of animals were irresistibly led 
to the conviction that the parts of this structure have 
each its end or purpose ; — that each member and organ 
not merely produces a certain effect or answers a certain 
use, but is so framed as to impress us with the persuasioi^ 
that it was constructed yiw* that use : — that it was intended 
to produce the effect. It was there seen that this per- 
suasion was repeatedly expressed in the most emphatic 
manner by Galen ; — ^that it directed the researches an4 
led to the discoveries of Harvey; — that it has always 
been dwelt upon as a favourite contemplatiop, and fol- 
lowed as a certain guide, by the best anatomists ; — and 
that it is inculcated by the physiologists of the profoundest 
views and naost extensive knowledge of our own time. 
^U these persons have deemed it a most certain and im- 
portant principle of physiology, that In every organized 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



80 PHaOSOPHT OF BIOLOGY. 

structure, plant or animal, each intelligible part has its 
allotted office :— each organ is designed for its appropriate 
function : — that nature, in these cases, produces nothing 
in vain : that, in short, each portion of the whole arrange- 
ment has its final came ; an end to which it is adapted, 
and in this end, the reason that it is where and what 
it is. 

6. This Notion of Design in organized bodies must, I 
say, be supplied by the student of organization out of 
his own mind: a truth which will become clearer if 
we attend to the most conspicuous and acknowledged 
instances of design. The structure of the eye, in which 
the parts are curiously adjusted so as to produce a distinct 
image on the retina, as in an optical instrument; — the 
trochlear muscle of the eye, in which the tendon passes 
round a support and turns back, like a rope round a 
pulley; — ^the prospective contrivances for the preservation 
of animals, provided long before they are wanted, as the 
milk of the mother, the teeth of the child, the eyes and 
lungs of the foetus : — these arrangements, and innumer- 
able others, call up in us a persuasion that Design has 
entered into the plan of animal form and progress. And 
if we bring in our minds this conception of Design, nothing 
can more fully square with and fit it, than such instances 
as these. But if we did not already possess the Idea of 
Design ; — ^if we had not had our notion of mechanical 
contrivance awakened by inspection of optical instruments, 
or pulleys, or in some other way; — if we had never been 
conscious ourselves of providing for the future ; — ^if this 
were the case, we could not recognise contrivance and 
prospectiveness in such instances as we have referred to. 
The facts are, indeed, admirably in accordance with these 
conceptions, when the two are brought together : but the 
facte and the conceptions come together from different 
quarters — ^from without and from within. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDEA OP FINAL CAU8E8. 81 

7. We may farther illustrate this point by referring 
to the relations of travellers who tell us that when con- 
summate examples of human mechanical contrivance 
have been set before savages, they have appeared inca- 
pable of apprehending them as proofs of design. This 
shows that in such cases the Idea of Design had not 
been developed in the minds of the people who wer^ 
thus unintelligent : but it no more proves that such an 
idea does not naturally and necessarily arise, in the pro- 
gress of men's minds, than the confused manner in 
which the same savages apprehend the relations of space, 
or number, or cause, proves that these ideas do not 
naturally belong to their intellects. All men have these 
ideas ; and it is because they cannot help referring their 
sensations to such ideas, that they apprehend the world 
as existing in time and space, and as a series of causes 
and effects. It would be very erroneous to say that the 
belief of such truths is obtained by logical reasoning 
from facts. And in like manner we cannot logically 
deduce design from the contemplation of organic struc- 
tures; although it is impossible for us, when the facts 
are clearly before us, not to find a reference to design 
operating in our minds. 

8. Again ; the evidence of the doctrine of Final 
Causes as a fundamental principle of Biology may be 
obscured and weakened in some minds by the constant 
habit of viewing this doctrine with suspicion as unphi- 
losophical and at variance with morphology. By che- 
rishing such views it is .probable that many persons, 
physiologists and others, have gradually brought them- 
selves to suppose that many or most of the an*ange- 
ments which are familiarly adduced as instances of design 
may be accounted for, or explained away ; — ^that there is 
a certain degree of prejudice and narrowness of compre- 
hension in that lively admiration of the adaptation of 

VOL. n. G 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S3 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOOT. 

means to ends which common minds derive from the 
speetacle of organic arrangements. And yet, eren in 
persons accustomed to these views^ the strong and ttatu*^ 
rai influence of the Idea of a Final Cause, the spon- 
taneous recognition of the relation of means to an end 
as the assumption which makes organic arrangements 
intelligible, breaks forth when we bring before them a 
new case, with regard to which their genuine conTictioni 
have not yet been modified by their intellectual habits. 
I will offer, as an example which may serve to illustrate 
this, the discoveries recently made with regard to the 
process of suckling of the kangaroo. In the case of this, 
as of other pouched animals, the young animal is re* 
moved, while very small and imperfectly formed, from 
the womb to the pouch, in which the teats are, and is 
there placed with its lips against one of the nipples. But 
the young animal taken altogether is not so large as 
the nipple, and is therefore incapable of sucking after 
the manner of common mammala Here is a difficulty: 
how is it overcome? — Bj an appropriate contritxmee: the 
nipple, which in common mammals is not furnished with 
any muscle, is in the kangaroo provided with a powerftil 
extrusory muscle by which the mother can inject the 
milk into the mouth of her offspring. And again; in 
order to give attachment to this muscle there is a bone 
which is not found in animals of other kinds. But this 
mode of solving the problem of suckling so small a 
creature introduces another difficulty. If the milk is 
injected into the mouth of the young one, without any 
action of its own muscles, what is to prevent the fluid 
entering the windpipe and producing suffocation ? How 
is this danger avoided ?*--nBy another appit>priate ean-^ 
frivanee : there is a funnel in the back of the throat by 
which the air passage is completely separated from the 
passage for nutriment, and the injected milk pastes in a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDBA Of PtNAL 0AU8X9. 88 

ditided stream on each side of the larynx to the oeso-* 
pha^*. And as if to show that this apparatus is really 
formed with a yiew to the wants of the young one> the 
structure alters in the course of the animal's growth ; and 
the Ainnel, no longer needed, is modified and disappears. 
With regard to this and similar examples, the remark 
which I would urge is this:-^that no one, however pre-» 
Judiced or un philosophical he may in general deem the 
reference to Final Causes, can, at the first impression, 
help regarding this curious system of arrangement as 
the means to an end. So contemplated, it becomes 
significant, intelligible, admirable : without such a prin* 
ciple, it is an unmeaning complexity, a collection of con-* 
tradictions, producing an almost impossible result by a 
portentous conflict of chances. The parts of this appara« 
tus cannot have produced one another; one part is in 
the mother; another part in the young one: without 
their harmony they could not be effective ; but nothing 
except design can operate to make them harmonious. 
They are intended to work together ; and we cannot resist 
the conviction of this intention when the facts first come 
before us. Perhaps there may hereafter be physiolo- 
gists who, tracing the gradual development of the parts 
of which we have spoken, and the analogies which con- 
nect them with the structures of other animals, may think 
that this development, these analogies, account for the 
conformation we have described ; and may hence think 
lightly of the explanation derived from the reference 
to Final CauseSi Yet surely it is clear, on a calm con^ 
sideration of the subject^ that the latter explanation is 
not disturbed by the former ; and that the observer's 
first impression, that this is *'an irrefragable evidence 
of creative. foresight f," can never be obliterated; how- 

* Mr. Owen, in PhU. Trans., 1834, p. 348. t lb. p. 349. 

G 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



84 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

ever miicli it may be obscured in the minds of those 
who confuse this view by mixing it with others which 
are utterly heterogeneous to it, and therefore cannot be 
contradictory. 

9. I have elsewhere* remarked how physiologists, 
who thus look with suspicion and dislike upon the 
introduction of Final Causes into physiology, have still 
been unable to exclude from their speculations causes 
of this kind. Thus Cabanis saysf, "I regard with 
the great Bacon, the philosophy of Final Causes as 
sterile ; but I have elsewhere acknowledged that it was 
very difficult for the most cautious man never to have 
recourse to them in his explanations." Accordingly, he 
says, " The partisans of Final Causes nowhere find argu- 
ments so strong in favour of their way of looking at 
nature as in the laws which preside and the circumstances 
of all kinds which concur in the reproduction of living 
races. In no case do the means employed appear so 
clearly relative to the end." And it would be easy to find 
similar acknowledgments, express or virtual, in other wri- 
ters of the same kind. Thus Bichat, after noting the dif- 
ference between the organic sensibility by which the organs 
are made to perform their offices, and the animal sensi- 
bility of which the nervous centre is the seat, says J, "No 
doubt it will be asked, wAy" — that is, as we shall see, for 
what end — " the organs of internal life have received from 
nature an inferior degree of sensibility only, and why 
they do not transmit to the brain the impressions which 
they receive, while all the acts of the animal life imply 
this transmission ? The reason is simply this, that all the 
phenomena which establish our connexions with surround- 
ing objects ought to be^ and are in fact, under the influence 

• Bridgewater Treatise, p. 352. 

t Bapporti de Physique et du Moral, i. 299. 

X Life and Death, (trans.) p. 32. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDEA OP FINAL CAUSES. 85 

of the will ; while all those which serve for the purpose 
of assimilation only, escape, and ought indeed to escape, 
such influence." The reason here assigned is the Final 
Cause; which, as Bichat justly says, we cannot help 
asking for. 

10. Again ; I may quote from the writer last men- 
tioned another remark, which shows that in the organical 
sciences, and in them alone, the Idea of forces as Means 
acting to an End, is inevitably assumed and acknowledged 
as of supreme authority. In Biology alone, observes 
Bichat*, have we to contemplate the state of disease. 
" Physiology is to the movements of living bodies, what 
astronomy, dynamics, hydraulics, &c., are to those of 
inert matter : but these latter sciences have no branches 
which correspond to them as pathology corresponds to 
physiology. For the same reason all notion of a medica- 
ment is repugnant to the physical sciences. A medica- 
ment has for its object to bring the properties of the 
system back to their natural type ; but the physical pro- 
perties never depart from this type, and have no need to 
be brought back to it : and thus there is nothing in the 
physical sciences which holds the place of therapeutick in 
physiology." Or, as we might express it otherwise, of inert 
forces we have no conception of what they ought to do^ 
except what they do. The forces of gravity, elasticity, 
affinity, never act in a diseased manner ; we never con- 
ceive them as failing in their purpose; for we do not 
conceive them as having any purpose which is answered by 
one mode of their action rather than another. But with 
organical forces the case is different ; they are necessarily 
conceived as acting for the preservation and develop- 
ment of the system in which they reside. If they do not 
do this, they fail, they are deranged, diseased. They 
have for their object to conform the living being to a 
* Anatomie Generalcy i. liij. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



86 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOIiOOY. 

certain type; and if tliey cause or allow it to deviate from 
this type, their action is distorted, morbid, contrary to the 
ends of nature. And thus this conception of organized 
beings as susceptible of disease, implies the recognition of 
a state of health, and of the organs and the vital forces as 
means for preserving this normal condition. The state of 
health and of perpetual development is necessarily con- 
templated as the Final Cause of the processes and powers 
with which the different parts of plants and animals are 
endowed. 

11. This Idea of a Final Cause is applicable as a fun- 
damental and regulative idea to our speculations concern- 
ing organised creatures only. That there is a purpose in 
many other parts of the creation, we find abundant reason 
to believe from the arrangements and laws which prevail 
around us. But this persuasion is not to be allowed to 
regulate and direct our reasonings with regard to inor- 
ganic matter, of which conception the relation of means 
and end forms no essential part. In mere Physics, Final 
Causes, as Bacon has observed, are not to be admitted as 
a principle of reasoning. But in the organical sciences, 
the assumption of design and purpose in every part of 
every whole, that is, the pervading idea of Final Cause, 
is the basis of sound reasoning and the source of true 
doctrine. 

12. The Idea of Final Cause, of end, purpose, design, 
intention, is altogether different from the Idea of Cause, 
as efficient cause, which we formerly had to consider ; and 
on this account the use of the word Cause in this phrase 
has been objected to. If the idea be clearly entertained 
and steadily applied, the word is a question of subordinate 
importance. The term Final Cause has been long fami- 
liarly used, and appears not likely to lead to confusion. 

13. The consideration of Final Causes, both in phy- 
siology and ip other subjects, has at all times attracted 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



II>£A OF FINAL CAUSES. 87 

mucdi Attention, in conBequence of its bearing upon thq 
belief of aa Intelligent Author of the Universe. I do 
not intend, in this plaoe, to pursue the sul^ect far in this 
view; but there is one antithesii of opinion, already 
noticed in the History of Physiology, on which I will again 
make a few remarks*. 

It has appeared to some persons that the mere aspeot 
of order and symmetry in the works of nature^ — the 
oontemplation of comprehensive and consistent law*-^is 
sufficient to lead us to the conception of a design 
and intelligence producing the order and carrying into 
effeet the law. Without here attempting to decide 
whether this is true, we may discern, after what has 
been said, that the conoeption of design, arrived at in 
this manner, is altogether difibrent from that idea of 
design which is suggested to us by organized bodies, 
and which we describe as the doctrine of Final Causes. 
The regular form of a crystal, whatever beautiful sym- 
metry it may exhibit, whatever general laws it may 
exemplify, does not prove design in the same manner in 
which design is proved by the provisions for the preser- 
vation and growth of the seeds of plants, and of the young 
of animals. The law of universal gravitation, however 
vnde and simple, does not impress us with the belief of 
a purpose, as does that propensity by which the two sexes 
of eaeh animal are brought together. If it could be shown 
that the symmetrical structure of a flower results from 
laws of the same kind as those which determine the regu- 
lar forms of crystals, or the motions of the planet^ the 
discovery might be very striking and important, but it 
would not at all come under our idea of Final Cause- 

14. Accordingly, there have been, in modem times, 
two different schools of physiologists, the one proceeding 

' * ffkt. Ind. Sol., b. zvii., obap. 8. On the Doctrine of Final 
CaoiK in Pkyvology. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



88 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY. 

upon the idea of Final Causes, the other school seeking 
in the realm of organized bodies wide laws and analogies 
from which that idea is excluded. All the great biolo- 
gists of preceding times, and some of the greatest of 
modem times, have belonged to the former school ; and 
especially Cuvier, who may be considered as the head of 
it. It was solely by the assiduous application of this 
principle of Final Cause, as he himself constantly declared, 
that he was enabled to make the discoveries which have 
rendered his name so illustrious, and which contain a £ar 
larger portion of important anatomical and biological 
truth than it ever before fell to the lot of one man to 
contribute to the science. 

15. The opinions which have been put in opposition 
to the principle of Final Causes have, for the most part, 
been stated vaguely and ambiguously. Among the most 
definite of such principles, is that which, in the History 
of the subject, I have termed the Principle of metamor- 
phosed and developed Symmetry, upon which has been 
founded the science of Morphology. 

The reality and importance of this principle are not 
to be denied by us : we have shown how they are proved 
by its application in various sciences, and especially in 
botany. But those advocates of this principle who have 
placed it in antithesis to the doctrine of Final Causes, 
have by this means done fiEtr more injustice to their own 
favourite doctrine than damage to the one which they 
opposed. The adaptation of the bones of the skeleton to 
the muscles, the provision of fulcrums, projecting pro- 
cesses, channels, so that the motions and forces shall 
be such as the needs of life require, cannot possibly 
become less striking and convincing, from any discovery 
of general analogies of one animal frame with another, 
or of laws connecting the development of different parts. 
Whenever such laws are discovered, we can only consider 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDEA OF FINAL CAUSE8« 8d 

them as the means of producing that adaptation which 
we so much admire. Our conviction that the Artist 
works intelligently, is not destroyed, though it may be 
modified and transferred, when we obtain a sight of his 
tools^ Our discovery of laws cannot contradict our per- 
suasion of ends; our Morphology cannot prejudice our 
Teleology. 

16. The irresistible and constant i^prehension of a 
purpose in the forms and functions of animals has intro« 
duced into the writings of speculators on these subjects 
various forms of expression, more or less precise, more or 
less figurative ; as, that animals are framed with a view 
to the part which they have to play ; — ^that nature does 
nothing in vain ; that she employs the best means for her 
ends ; and the like. However metaphorical or inexact any 
of these phrases may be in particular, yet taken altogether, 
they convey, clearly and definitely enough to preclude any 
serious error, a principle of the most profound reality and 
of the highest importance in the organical sciences. But 
some adherents of the morphological school of which I 
have spoken reject, and even ridicule, all such modes of 
expression. " I know nothing," says M. Geoffrey Saint 
Hilaire, " of animals which have to play a part in nature. 
I cannot make of nature an intelligent being who does 
nothing in vain; who acts by the shortest mode; who 
does all for the best." The philosophers of this school, 
therefore, do not, it would seem, feel any of the admira- 
tion which is irresistibly excited in all the rest of man^ 
kind at the contemplation of the various and wonderful 
adaptations for the preservation, the enjoyment, the con- 
tinuation of the creatures which people the globe ; — at 
the survey of the mechanical contrivances, the chemical 
agencies, the prospective arrangements, the compensa- 
tions, the minute adaptations, the comprehensive inter- 
dependencies, which zoology and physiology have broi^ht 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



90 PttiWWPHY OF BIOLOay, 

into view, more and more» the ftirther their reiearehes 
have been curried. Yet the dear and deep««eated con- 
viction of the reality of theae proyisions, whidi the study 
of anatomy produces in its most profound and accurate 
eultiYatorSy cannot be shaken by any objections to the 
metaphors or terms in which this conviction is clothed. 
In regard to the Idea of a Purpose in organization, as in 
regard to any other idea, we cannot fully express our 
meaning by phrases borrowed from any extraneous source; 
but that impossibility arises precisely from the circum- 
stance of its being a Fundamental Idea which is inevit^ 
ably assumed in our representation of each special fetet. 
The same objection has been made to the idea of mecha* 
nical forcey on accoimt of its being often expressed in 
metaphorical language; for writers have spoken of an 
wergy^ effbrU or soHcitaHan to motion ; and bodies have 
been said to be animated by a force. Such language, it 
has been urged, implies volition, and the act of animated 
beings. But the idea of force as distinct from mere 
motion,— ras the cause of motion, or of tendency to 
motion,-^is not on that account less real. We endeavour 
in vain to conduct our mechaniwl reasonings without the 
aid of this idea, and must express it as we can. Just as 
little can we reason concerning organized beings without 
assuming that each part has its function, each function 
its purpose; and so for as our phrases imply this, they 
will not mislead us, however inexact, or however iigu^ 
rative they be, 

17. The doctrine of a purpose in organization has 
been sometimes called the doctrine of the Candiiioms (^ 
Eavdmee: and has been stated as teadiing that each 
animal must be so framed as to contain in its structure 
the conditions which its existence requires. When ex^ 
piMsed in this manner, it has given rise to the otgeetion, 
that it merely offem an identical propoiitioii ; dnoe no 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ID£A OF FIKAL CAU8£8. dl 

aniiaal oon exist Tritliout such oonditions. But in reality, 
such expressions as those just quoted giye an inadequate 
statement of the Principle of a Final Cause. For we 
disoover in innumerable cases, arrangements in an mumal, 
of which we see, indeed, that they are subservient to its 
well being; but the nature of which we never should 
have been able at all to conjecture, from considering 
what was necessary to its existence, and which strike us, 
no less by their unexpectedness than by their adaptation : 
so iar are they firom from being presented by any per- 
ceptible necessity. Who would venture to say that the 
trochlear muscle, or the power of articulate speech, must 
occur in man, because they are the necessary conditions 
of his existence? When, indeed, the general scheme 
and mode of being of an. animal are known, the expert 
and profound anatomist can reason concerning the pro* 
portions and form of its various parts and organs, and 
prove in some measure what their relations must be. 
We can assert, with Cuvier, that certain forms of the 
viscera require certain forms of the teeth, certain forms 
of the limbs, certain powers of the senses. But in all 
this, the functions of self*nutrition and digestion are sup* 
posed already existing as ends ; and it being taken for 
granted, as the only conceivable basis of reasoning, that 
the organs are means to these ends, we may discover 
what modifications of these organs are necessarily related 
to and connected with each other. Instead of terming 
this rule of speculation merely " the principle of the couf 
ditions of existence," we might term it ^^ the principle of 
the conditions of organs as meam adapted to animal 
existence as their end."* And how £Etr this principle is 
from being a mere barren truism, the extraordinary dis^ 
coveries made by the great assertor of the principle, and 
universally assented to by naturalists, abundantly prove* 
The vast extinct creation which is recalled to U& in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



92 PHILOSOPHY OP BIOLOGY. 

Cuvier's great work, the Ossemens Fossiles^ cannot be the 
consequence of a mere identical proposition. 

18. It has been objected, also, that the doctrine of 
Final Causes supposes us to be acquainted with the inten- 
tions of the Creator ; which, it is insinuated, is a most 
presumptuous and irrational basis for our reasonings. 
But there can be nothing presumptuous or irrational in 
reasoning on that basis, which if we reject, we cannot 
reason at all. If men really can discern, and cannot 
help discerning, a design in certain portions of the works 
of creation, this perception is the soundest and most 
satisfectory ground for the convictions to which it 
leads. The Ideas which we necessarily employ in the 
contemplation of the world around us, afford us the 
only natural means of forming any conception of the 
Creator and Governor of the Universe ; and if we are by 
such means enabled to elevate our thoughts, however 
inadequately, towards Him, where is the presumption of 
doing so ? or rather, where is the wisdom of refusing to 
open our minds to contemplations so animating and ele- 
vating, and yet so entirely convincing? We possess the 
ideas of time and space, under which all the objects of 
the universe present themselves to us ; and in virtue of 
these ideas thus possessed, we believe the Creator to be 
eternal and omnipotent. When we find that we, in like 
manner, possess the idea of a Design in Creation, and 
that with regard to ourselves, and creatures more or less 
resembling ourselves, we cannot but contemplate their 
constitution under this idea, we cannot abstain from 
ascribing to the Creator the infinite profundity and 
extent of design to which all these special instances 
belong as parts of a whole. 

19. I have here considered Design as manifest in 
organization only: for in that field of speculation it is 
forced upon us as contained in all the phenomena, and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IDEA OF FINAL CAUSES. 93 

as the only mode of our understanding them. The 
existence of Final Causes has often been pointed out 
in other portions of the creation; — in the apparent 
adaptations of the various parts of the earth and of the 
solar system to each other and to organized beings. In 
these provinces of speculation, however, the principle of 
Final Causes is no longer the basis and guide, but the 
sequel and result of our physical reasonings. If in look- 
ing at the universe, we follow the widest analogies of 
which we obtain a view, we see, however dimly, reason 
to believe that all its laws are adapted to each other, and 
intended to work together for the benefit of its organic 
population, and for the general welfare of its rational 
tenants. On this subject, however, not immediately 
included in the principle of Final Causes as here stated, 
I shall not dwell. I will only make this remark ; that 
the assertion appears to be quite unfounded, that as 
science advances from point to point, final causes recede 
before it, and disappear one after the other. The prin- 
ciple of design changes its mode of application indeed, 
but it loses none of its force. We no longer consider 
particular facts as produced by special interpositions, but 
we consider design as exhibited in the establishment and 
adjustment of the laws by which particular fiicts are pro- 
duced. We do not look upon each particular cloud as 
brought near us that it may drop fatness on our fields, 
but the general adaptation of the laws of heat, and air, 
and moisture, to the promotion of vegetation, does not 
become doubtful. We do not consider the sun as less 
intended to warm and vivify the tribes of plants and 
animals, because we find that, instead of revolving round 
the earth as an attendant, the earth along with other 
planets revolves round him. We are rather, by the dis- 
covery of the general laws of nature, led into a scene of 
wider design, of deeper contrivance, of more comprehen- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



94 PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGT. 

sive adjustments. Final causes, if they appear driven 
further from us by such an extension of our views, 
embrace us only with a vaster and more majestic circuit : 
instead of a few threads connecting some detached objects, 
they become a stupendous net-work, which is wound 
round and round the universal frame of things. 

I now quit the subject of Biology, and vnth it the circle 
of sciences depending upon separate original Ideas and 
permanent relations, tf from the general relations which 
permanentlyprevail and constantly recur among the objects 
around us, we turn to the inquiry of what has actually 
happened;— if from Science we turn to History;— we find 
ourselves in a new field. In this region of speculation 
we can rarely obtain a complete and scientific view of 
the connexion between objects and events. The past 
History of Man, of the Arts, of Languages, of the Earth, 
of the Solar System, offers a vast series of problems, of 
Which perhaps not one has been rigorously solved. Still 
man, as his speculative powers unfold themselves, cannot 
but feel prompted and invited to employ his thoughts 
even on these problems. He cannot but wish and endea- 
vour to understand the connexion between the successive 
links of such chains of events. He attempts to form a 
Science which shall be applicable to each of these 
Histories; and thus he begins to construct the class of 
sciences to which I now, in the last place, proceed. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



95 



BOOK X. 



THE PHILOSOPHY VF PALjETIOLOGY. 



Chapter I* 
OF PALiETIOLOGICAL SCIENCES IN GENERAL. 

1. I HAVE already stated in the Hiitorjf <^ the Sci^ 
ences% that the class of Sciences which I designate as 
PdcBticiogical are those in which the object is to ascend 
from the present state of things to a more ancient con- 
dition, from which the present is derived by intelligible 
canses. As conspicuous examples of this class we may 
take Geology, Glossology or Comparative Philology^ and 
Comparative Archaeology. These provinces of knowledge 
might perhaps be intelligibly described as Histories ; the 
History of the Earth, — the History of Languages, — the 
History of Arts. But these phrases would not fully 
describe the sciences we have in view; for the object 
to which we now suppose their investigations to be 
directed is not merely to ascertain what the series of 
events has been, as in the common forms of History^ 
but also how it has been brought about. These sciences 
are to treat of causes as well as of effects. Such re- 
searches might be termed philosophical history ; or, in 
order to mark more distinctly that the causes of events 
are the leading object of attention, (etiological history. 
But since it will be more convenient to describe this 
class of sciences by a single appellation, 1 have taken the 

* iii., 481. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



96 THE PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

liberty of proposing to call them* the Pdattiohgical 
Sciences. 

While PalcBontology describes the beings which have 
lived in former ages without investigating their causes, 
and jEtiology treats of causes without distinguishing, his- 
torical from mechanical causation ; Pd(Btiology is a com- 
bination of the two sciences ; exploring by means of the 
second the phenomena presented by the first. The 
portions of knowledge which I include in this tenn are 
palaeontological setiological sciences. 

2. All these sciences are connected by this bond ; — 
that they all endeavour to ascend to a past state, by 
considering what is the present state of things, and what 
are the causes of change. Geology examines the exist- 
ing appearances of the materials which form the earth, 
infers from them previous conditions, and speculates con- 
cerning the forces by which one condition has been made 
to succeed another. Another science, cultivated with 
great zeal and success in modern times, compares the 
languages of different countries and nations, and by an 
examination of their materials and structure, endeavours 
to determine their descent from one another : this science 
has been termed Comparative Philology or Ethnography ; 
and by the French, Linguistique^ a word which we might 
imitate in order to have a single name for the science, 
but the Greek derivative Glossology appears to be more 
convenient in its form. The progress of the Arts (Archi- 
tecture and the like); how one stage of their culture 
produced another ; and how far we can trace their ma- 

? A philological writer, in a very interesibg work, (Mr. Donaldaon, 
in his New Cratyluiy p. 12,) expresses his dislike of this word, and 
suggests that I must mean palcB-cBttologiccd. I think the word is more 
likelj to obtain currency in the more compact and euphonious form in 
which I have used it. It has been adopted by Mr. Winning, in his 
Manual of Comparative Philology. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF PALJBTIOLOGICAL SCIENCES IN GENERAL. 97 

tarest and most complete condition to their earliest fonn 
in various nations; — are problems of great interest 
belonging to another subject, which we may for the 
present term Comparative Archaeology. I have already 
noticed, in the History *f how the researches into the 
origin of natural objects, and those relating to works of 
art, pass by slight gradations into each other ; how the 
examination of the changes which have affected an ancient 
temple or fortress, harbour or river, may concern alike 
the geologist and the antiquary. Cuvier's assertion that 
the geologist is an antiquary of a new order, is perfectly 
correct, for both are palsetiologists. 

3. We are very far from having exhausted, by this 
enumeration, the class of sciences which are thus con- 
nected. We may easily point out many other subjects 
of speculation of the same kind. As we may look back 
towards the first condition of our planet, we may in like 
manner turn our thoughts towards the first condition of 
the solar system, and try whether we can discern any 
traces of an order of things antecedent to that which is 
now established ; and if we find, as some great mathe- 
maticians have conceived, indications of an earlier state 
in which the planets were not yet gathered into their 
present forms, we have, in the pursuit of this train of 
research, a pal»tiological portion of Astronomy. Again, 
as we may inquire how languages, and how man, have 
been diffused over the earth's surfiace from place to 
place, we may make the like inquiry with regard to the 
races of plants and animals, founding our inferences upon 
the existing geographical distribution of the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms : and thus the Geography of Plants 
and of Animals also becomes a portion of PalsBtiology. 
Again, as we can in some measure trace the progress of 
Arts from nation to nation and from age to age, we can 

? iii., 482. 
VOL. II. H 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



98 PHILOSOPHY OF PAL^TIOLOGTT. 

also pursue a Bimilar investigation with respect to the 
progress of Mythology, of Poetry, of Government, of 
Law. Thus the philosophical history of the human race> 
viewed with reference to these subjects, if it can give rise 
to knowledge so exact as to be properly called Science* 
tvill supply sciences belonging to the class I am now to 
consider. 

4. It is not an arbitrary and useless proceeding to 
construct such a class of sciences. For wide and various 
as their subjects are, it will be found that they have all 
certain principles, maxims, and rules of procedure in 
common ; and thus may i-eflect light upon each other 
by being- treated of together. Indeed it will, I trust, 
appear, that we may by such a juxtaposition of difierent 
speculations^ obtain most salutary lessons. And ques-* 
tions, which, when viewed as they first present themselves 
under the aspect of a special science, disturb and alarm 
men's minds, may perhaps be contemplated more calmly, 
as well as more clearly, when they are considered as 
general problems of palietiology. 

6. It will at once occur to the reader that, if we 
include in the circuit of our classification such subjects as 
have been mentioned, — ^politics and law, mythology and 
poetry,— -we are travelling very far beyond the material 
sciences within whose limits we at the outset proposed 
to confine our discussion of principles. But we shall 
remain faithful to our original plan ; and for that purpose 
shall confine ourselves in this work to those pala^tiological 
sciences which deal with material things. It is true, that 
the general principles and maxims which regulate these 
sciences apply also to investigations of a parallel kind 
respecting the products which result from man's imagi<> 
native and social endowments. But although there may 
be a similarity in the general form of such portions of 
knowledge, their materials are so different from those 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF PALJBTIOLOOICAL SCIENCES IN GENERAL. 99 

with which we have been hitherto dealing, that we cannot 
hope to take them into our present account with any 
profit* Language, Government, Law, Poetry, Art, em- 
brace a number of peculiar Fundamental Ideas, hitherto 
not touched upon in the disquisitions in which we have 
been engaged ; and most of them involved in far greater 
perplexity and ambiguity, the subject of controversies 
far more vehement, than the Ideas we have hitherto 
been examining. We must therefore avoid resting 
any part of our philosophy upon sciences, or supposed 
sciences, which treat of such subjects. To attend to 
this caution, is the only way in which we can secure 
the advantage we proposed to ourselves at the outset, 
of taking, as the basis of our speculations, none but 
systems of undisputed truths, clearly understood and 
expressed*. We have already said that we must, know* 
ingly and voluntarily, resign that livelier and warmer 
interest which doctrines on subjects of Polity or Art pos- 
sess, and content ourselves with the cold truths of the 
material sciences, in order that we may avoid having 
the very foundations of our philosophy involved in con- 
troversy, doubt, and obscurity. 

6. We may remark, however, that the necessity of 
rejecting from our survey a large portion of the researches 
which the general notion of Palsetiology includes, sug- 
gests one consideration which adds to the interest of 
our task. We b^gan our inquiry with the trust that 
any sound views which we should be able to obtain 
respecting the nature of truth in the physical sciences, 
and the mode of discovering it, must also tend to throw 
light upon the nature and prospects of knowledge of 
all other kinds ; — ^must be useful to us in moral, poli- 
tical, and philological researches. We stated this as a 

? See vol. 1. p. 8. 

H 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



100 PHILOSOPHY OF PALJETIOLOGY. 

confident anticipation ; and the evidence of the justice 
of our belief already begins to appear. We have seen, 
in the last Book, that biology leads us to psychology, 
if we choose to follow the path ; and thus the passage 
irom the material to the immaterial has already un- 
folded itself at one point; and we now perceive that 
there are several large provinces of speculation which 
concern subjects belonging to man's immaterial nature, 
and which are governed by the same laws as sciences 
altogether physical. It is not our business here to dwell 
on the prospects which our philosophy thus opens to our 
contemplation ; but we may allow ourselves, in this last 
stage of our pilgrimage among the foundations of the 
physical sciences, to be cheered and animated by the ray 
that thus beams upon us, however dimly, from a higher 
and brighter region. 

But in our reasonings and examples we shall mainly 
confine ourselves to the physical sciences; and for the 
most part to Geology, which in the History I have put 
forwards as the best representative of the Palaetiological 
Sciences. . 



Chapter II. 

OF THE THREE MEMBERS OF A PALiETIO- 
LOGICAL SCIENCE. 

1. Divisions of such Sciences. — ^In each of the Sciences 
of this class we consider some particular order of pheno- 
mena now existing : from our knowledge of the causes 
of change among such phenomena, we endeavour to infer 
the causes which have made this order of things what it 
is : we ascend in this manner to some previous stage of 
such phenomena; and from that, by a similar course of 
inference, to a still earlier stage, and to its causes. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



3f£MB£RS OF A PALiBTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 101 

Hence it will be seen that each such science will consist 
of two parts, — ^the knowledge of the phenomena, and the 
knowledge of their causes. And such a division is, in 
fact^ generally recognised in such sciences : thus we have 
History, and the Philosophy of History ; we have Comr 
parison of Languages, and the Theories of the Origin and 
Progress of Language; we have Descriptive Geology, 
and Theoretical or Physical Geology. In all these cases, 
the relation between the two parts in these several 
provinces of knowledge is nearly the same ; and it may, 
on some occasions at least, be useful to express the dis* 
tinction in a uniform or general manner. The investiga- 
tion of causes has been termed JEticlogy by philosophical 
writers, and this term we may use in contradistinction 
to the mere Phenomenology of each such department of 
knowledge. And thus we should have Phenomenal Geo- 
logy and Etiological Geology, for the two divisions of 
the science which we have above termed Descriptive and 
Theoretical Geology. 

2. Study of Games. — But our knowledge respecting 
the causes which actually hate produced any order of 
phenomena must be arrived at by ascertaining what the 
causes of change. in such matters can do. In order to 
learn, for example, what share earthquakes, and volcanoes, 
and the beating of the ocean against its shores, ought to 
have in our Theory of Geology, we must make out what 
effects these agents of change are able to produce. And 
this must be done, not hastily, or unsystematically, but 
in a careful and connected manner ; in short, this study of 
the causes of change in each order of phenomena must 
become a distinct body of Science, which must include a 
large amount of knowledge, both comprehensive and 
precise, before it can be applied to the construction of a 
theory. We must have an iEtiology corresponding to 
each order of phenomena. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



102, PHILOSOPHY OF PAL-2ETI0L0GY. 

3, JEtiology. — ^In the History of Geology, I have 
spoken of the necessity for such an iEtiology with regard 
to geological phenomena : this necessity I have compared 
with that which, at the time of Kepler, required the 
formation of a separate science of Dynamics, (the doctrine 
of the causes of motion,) before Physical Astronomy 
could grow out of Phenomenal Astronomy. In pursuance 
of this analogy, I have there given the name of Geological 
Dtfnamics to the science which treats of the causes of 
geological change in general. But, as I have there inti- 
mated, in a large portion of the subject the changes are 
so utterly different in their nature from any modification 
of motion, that the term Dynamics, so applied, sounds 
harsh and strange. For in this science we have to treat, 
not only of the subterraneous forces by which parts of the 
earth's crust are shaken, elevated, or ruptured, but also 
of the causes which may change the climate of a portion 
of the earth's surface, making a country hotter or colder 
than in former ages; again, we have to treat of the 
causes which modify the forms and habits of animals 
and vegetables, and of the extent to which the effects of 
such causes can proceed ; whether, for instance, they can 
extinguish old species and produce new. These and other 
similar investigations would not be naturally included in 
the notion of Dynamics ; and therefore it will be better 
to use the term JEtiohgy when we wish to group together 
all those researches which have it for their object to de- 
termine the laws of such changes. In the same manner 
the Comparison and History of Languages, if it is to lead 
to any stable and exact knowledge, must have appended 
to it an iEtiology, which aims at determining the nature 
and the amount of the causes which really do produce 
changes in language ; as colonization, conquest, the mix- 
ture of races, civilization, literature, and the like. And 
the same rule applies to all sciences of this class. We 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PAUBTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 103 

shall now make a few remarks on the characteristics of 
such branches of science as those to which we are led by 
the above considerations. 

4. Phenomenologj/ requires Classification. Phenome^ 
tud Geology. — ^The Phenomenal portions of each science 
imply Classification, for no description of a large and 
varied mass of phenomena can be useful or intelligible 
without classification. A representation of phenomena, 
in order to answer the purposes of science, must be sys* 
tematic. Accordingly, in giving the History of Descrip- 
tive or Phenomenal Geology, I have called it Systematic 
Geology^ just as Classificatory Botany is termed Systematic 
Botany. Moreover, as we have already seen, Classifica- 
tion can never be an arbitrary process, but always implies 
some natural connexion among the objects of the same 
class ; for if this did not exist, the classes could not be 
made the subjects of any true assertion. Yet though 
the classes of phenomena which our system acknowledges 
must be such as already exist in nature, the discovery of 
these is, for the most part, very far from obvious or easy. 
To detect the true principles of natural classes, and to 
select marks by which these may be recognised, are steps 
which require genius and good fortune, and which &11 to 
the lot only of the most eminent persons in each science* 
In the History, I have pointed out Werner, William 
Smith, and Cuvier, as the three great authors of Sys- 
tematic Geology of Europe. The mode of classifying the 
materials of the earth's surface which was found, by these 
philosophers, fitted to enunciate such general fkcts as 
came under their notice, was to consider the rocks and 
other materials as divided into successive layers or strata, 
superimposed one on another, and variously inclined and 
broken. The German geologist distinguished his strata 
for the most part by their mineralogical character ; the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



104 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

other two by the remains of animals and plants which the 
rocks contained. After a beginning had thus been made 
in giving a genuine scientific form to phenomenal geology, 
other steps followed in rapid succession, as has already 
been related in the History*. The Classification of the 
Strata was fixed by a suitable nomenclature. Attempts 
were made to apply to other countries the order of strata 
which had been found to prevail in that first studied: 
and in this manner it was ascertained what rocks in 
distant regions are the synonyms, or equivalentsfy of each 
other. The knowledge thus collected and systematized 
was exhibited in the form of geological maps. 

Moreover, among the phenomena of geology we have 
Laws of nature as well as Classes. The general form of 
mountain chains ; the relations of the direction and incli- 
nation of different chains to each other ; the general 
features of mineral veins, faults, and fissures ; the preva- 
lent characters of slaty cleavage ; — wei-e the subjects of 
laws established, or supposed to be established, by exten- 
sive observation of facts. In like manner the organic 
fossils discovered in the strata were found to follow 
certain laws with reference to the climate which they 
appeared to have lived in ; and the evidence which Uiey 
gave of a regular zoological development. And thus by 
the assiduous labours of many accomplished and active 
philosophers. Descriptive or Phenomenal Geology was 
carried towards a state of completeness. 

5. Phenomenal Uranographt/. — In like manner in 
other palsetiological researches, as soon as they approach 
to an exact and scientific form, we find the necessity of 
constructing in the first place a science of classification 
and exact description, by means of which the ph^ao- 
mena may be correctly represented and compared ; and of 

? Hiit. Ind. Sci., iii., 627. t lb., lii., 532. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PALiETIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 105 

obtaining by this step a solid basis for an inquiry into the 
causes which have produced them. Thus the Palaetiology 
of the solar system has, in recent times, drawn the atten* 
tion of speculators ; and a hypothesis has been started, 
that our sun and his attendant planets have been produced 
by the condensation of a mass of diffused matter, such as 
that which constitutes the nebulous patches which we 
observe in the starry heavens. But the sagest and most 
enlightened astronomers have not failed to acknowledge, 
that to verify or to disprove this conjecture, must be the 
work of many ages of observation and thought. They 
have perceived also that the first step of the labour re- 
quisite for the advancement of this portion of science must 
be to obtain and to record the most exact knowledge at 
present within our reach, respecting the phenomena of 
these nebulae, with which we thus compare our own system; 
and, as a necessary element of such knowledge, they have 
seen the importance of a classification of these objects, 
and of others, such as Double Stars, of the same kind. 
Sir William Herschel, who first perceived the bearing of 
the phenomena of nebulae upon the history of the solar 
system, made the observation of such objects his business^ 
vnth truly admirable zeal and skill ; and in the account 
of the results of his labours, gave a classification of Ne- 
bulae; separating them into, first. Clusters of Stars; second. 
Resolvable NebuUe; third. Proper Nebula; fourth, Pla^ 
netartf Nebulte; fifth, SteUar Ndndm; sixth. Nebulous 
Stars*. And since, in order to obtain from these remote 
appearances, any probable knowledge respecting our own 
system, we must discover whether they undergo any 
changes in the course of ages, he devoted himself to the 
task of forming a record of their number and appearance 
in his own time, that thus the astronomers of succeeding 

* PkU. Tran$,y 1786 and 1789, and Sir J. Hersohbl's Atironomy^ 
Art. 616. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



100 PHILOSOPHY OF PAUBTIOLOOY. 

generations might have a definite and exact standard 
with which to compare their observations. Still, this 
task would have been executed only for that part of the 
heavens which is visible in this country, if this Hippar- 
chus of the Nebulee and Double Stars had not left behind 
him a son who inherited all his father's zeal and more 
than his father's knowledge. Sir John Herschel in 
1838 went to the Cape of Good Hope to complete what 
Sir William Herschel left wanting ; and in the course of 
five years observed with care all the nebulae and double 
stars of the Southern hemisphere. This great Herschdian 
Stn^ey of the Heavens^ the completion of which is the 
noblest monument ever erected by a son to a father, must 
necessarily be, to all ages, the basis of all speculations 
concerning the history and origin of the solar system; 
and has completed, so for as at present it can be com- 
pleted, the phenomenal portion of Astronomical Palae- 
tiology. 

6. Phenomenal Geography of Plants and Animals. — 
Again, there is another Palsatiological Science, closely 
connected with the speculations forced upon the geolo- 
gist by the organic fossils which he discovers imbedded 
in the strata of the earth ; — namely, the Science which 
has for its object the Causes of the Difiusion and Distri- 
bution of the various kinds of Plants and Animals. And 
this science also has for its first portion and indispensable 
foundation a description and classification of the existing 
phenomena. Such portions of science have recently been 
cultivated with great zeal and success, under the titles of 
the Geography of Plants^ and the Geography of Animals. 
And the results of the inquiries thus undertaken have 
assumed a definite and scientific form by leading to a 
division of the earth's surface into a certain number of 
botanical and zoological Provinces, each province occupied 
by its own peculiar vegetable and animal population. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBBRS OF A PALi&TIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 107 

We find, too, in the course of these investigations, various 
general laws of the phenomena offered to our notice; 
such, for instance, as this: — ^that the difference of the 
animals originally occuppng each province, which is clear 
and entire for the higher orders of animals and plants, 
becomes more doubtful and indistinct when we descend 
to the lower kinds of organisations; as Infusoria and 
Zoophytes* in the animal kingdom, Grasses and Mosses 
among vegetables. Again, other laws discovered by 
those who have studied the geography of plants are 
these : — that countries separated from each other by wide 
tracts of sea, as the opposite shores of the Mediterranean, 
the islands of the Indian and Pacific Oceans, have usually 
much that is common in their vegetation : — and again, 
that in parallel climates, analogous tribes replace each 
other. It would be easy to adduce other laws, but those 
already stated may serve to show the great extent of the 
portions of knowledge which have just been mentioned, 
even considered as merely Sciences of Phenomena. 

7. Phenomenal Glossology. — It is not my purpose in 
the present work to borrow my leading illustrations from 
any portions of knowledge but those which are 'concerned 
with the study of material nature ; and I shall, therefore, 
not dwell upon a branch of research, singularly interest- 
ing, and closely connected with the one just mentioned^ 
but dealing with relations of thought rather than of 
things; — I mean the Paleetiology of Language ;— the 
theory, so fer as the facts enable us to form a theory, of 
the causes which have led to the resemblances and differ- 
ences of human speech in various regions and various 
ages. This, indeed, would be only a portion of the study 
of the history and origin of the dif^ision of animals, if we 
were to include ntan among the animals whose dispersion 

? Priohard, Reiearchei into the Physieal HUtory of Mankind, 
i. 55, 28. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



108 PHILOSOPHY OP PALiETIOLOGy. 

we thus investigate; for language is one of the most 
clear and imperishable records of the early events in the 
career of the human race. But the peculiar nature of 
the faculty of speech, and the ideas which the use of it 
involves, make it proper to treat Glossology as a distinct 
science. And of this science, the first part must neces- 
sarily be, as in the other sciences of this order, a classifi- 
cation and comparison of languages, governed in many 
respects by the same rules, and presenting the same diffi- 
culties, as other sciences of classification. Such, accord- 
ingly, has been the procedure of the most philosophical 
glossologists. They have been led to throw the languages 
of the earth into certain large classes or families^ accord- 
ing to various kinds of resemblance; as the Semitic 
iamily^ to which belong Hebrew, Arabic, Chaldean, 
Syrian, Phoenician, Ethiopian, and the like; the Indo- 
Ewropean^ which includes Sanskrit, Persian, Greek, Latin, 
and German ; the Monosyllabic languages, Chinese, Tibe- 
tan, Birman, Siamese; the Polysynthetic languages, a 
class including most of the North-American Indian 
dialects; and others. And this work of classification 
has been the result of the labour and study of many very 
profound linguists, and has advanced gradually from step 
to step. Thus the Indo-European family was first formed 
on an observation of the coincidences between Sanskrit, 
Greek, and Latin ; but it was soon found to include the 
Teutonic languages, and more recently Dr. Prichard* 
has shown beyond doubt that the Celtic must be included 
in the same femily. Other general resemblances and 
differences of languages have been marked by appropriate 
terms: thus August von Schlegel has denominated 
them synthetical and analytical according as they foitn 
their conjugations and declensions by auxiliary verbs and 

* Dr. Prichard, On the Eastern Origin of the Celtic Nations. 
1831. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PAUenOLOGIGAL SCIENCE* 109 

prepositions, or by changes in the word itself: and the 
pdysynthetic languages are so named by M^Duponcean, 
in consequence of their still more complex mode of 
inflexion. Nor are there wanting, in this science also^ 
general laws of phenomena; such, for instance, is the 
curious rule of the interchange of consonants in the 
cognate words of Greek, (xothic, and German, which has 
been discovered by James Grimm. All these remark* 
able portions of knowledge, and the great works which 
have appeared on Glossology, such, for example, as the 
Mithridates of Adelung and Vater, contain, for their 
laigest, and hitherto probably their most valuable part, 
the phenomenal portion of the science, the comparison of 
languages as they now are. And beyond all doubt, 
until we have brought this comparative philology to a 
considerable degree of completeness, all our speculations 
respecting the causes which have operated to produce 
the languages of the earth must be idle and unsubstantial 
dreams. 

Thus in all Palaetiological Sciences, in all attempts to 
trace back the history and discover the origin of the pre- 
sent state of things, the portion of the science which 
must first be formed is that which classifies the pheno- 
mena, and discovers general laws prevailing among them. 
When this work is performed, and not till then, we may 
begin to speculate successfully concerning causes, and to 
make some progress in our attempts to go back to an 
origin. We must have a Phenomenal science preparatory 
to each JStiohgical one. 

8. The Study of Phenomena leads to Theory. — ^As we 
have just said, we cannot, in any subject, speculate suc- 
cessfully concerning the causes of the present state of 
things, till we have obtained a tolerably complete and 
systematic view of the phenomena. Yet in reality men 
have not in any instance waited for this completeness 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



110 PHILOSOPHY OF PALJBTIOLOGY, 

and syBtem in their knowledge of fkcts before they have 
begun to foiga theories. Nor was it natural, considering 
the speculative propensities of the human mind, and how 
incessantly it is endeavouring to apply the Idea of Gause^ 
that it should thus restrain itself. I have already noticed 
this in the History of Geology. *^ While we have been 
giving an account,'' it is there said, ** of the objects with 
which Descriptive Geology is occupied, it must have been 
Mt how diiBcult it is, in contemplating such fistcts, to 
confine ourselves to description and classification. Con- 
jectures and reasonings respecting the causes of the phe* 
nomena force themselves upon us at every step; and 
even influence our classification and nomenclature. Our 
Descriptive Gteology impels us to construct a Physical 
Geology.'* And the same is the case with regard to the 
other subjects which I have mentioned. The mere con- 
sideration of the different degrees of condensation of dif* 
i^rent nebulae led Herschel and Laplace to the hypothesis 
that our solar system is a condensed nebula. Immediately 
upoh the division of the earth's surface into botanical and 
leoological provinces^ and even at an earlier period, the 
opposite hypotheses of the origin of all the animals of 
each kind from a single pair, and of their original diffiisioii 
all over the earth, were under discussion. And the con- 
sideration of the fttmilies of languages irresistibly led to 
speculations concerning the families of the earliest human 
inhabitants of the earth. In all cases the contemplation 
of a very few phenomena, the discovery of a very few 
steps in the history, made men wish for and attempt 
to form a theory of the history from the very beginning 
of things. 

9. No sound Theory without Etiology. — But though 
man is thus impelled by the natural propensities of his 
intellect to trace each order of things to its causes, 
he does not at first discern the only sure way of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



l^CEMBEBS OF A PALJETIOLOGIOAL SODBNCE. Ill 

obtaining such knowledge: he does not suspect how 
much labour and how much method are requisite for sue* 
cess in this undertaking : he is not aware that for each 
order of phenomena he must construct, by the accumu- 
lated results of multiplied observation and distinct 
thought, a separate Etiology* Thus, as I have elsewhere 
remarked*, when men had for the first time become ac- 
quainted with some of the leading phenomena of Qeology, 
and had proceeded to speculate concerning the past 
changes and revolutions by which such results had been 
produced, they forthwith supposed themselves able to 
judge what would be the effects of any of the obvious 
agents of change, as water or volcanic fire. It did not 
at first occur to them to suspect that their common and 
extemporaneous judgment on such points was by no 
means suflScient for sound knowledge. They did not 
foresee that, before they could determine what share these 
or any other causes had had in producing the present coU'- 
dition of the earth, they must create a special science 
whoise object should be to estimate the general laws and 
effects of such assumed causes :— that before they could 
obtain any sound Geological Theory, they must carefully 
cultivate Geological -Sltiology. 

The same disposition to proceed immediately from 
the facts to the theory, without constructing, as an inter- 
mediate step, a science of Causes, might be pointed out 
in the other sciences of this order. But in all of them 
this error has been corrected by the failures to which it 
led. It soon appeared, for instance^ that a more careful 
inquiry into the effects which climate, food, habit and 
circumstances can produce in animals was requisite in 
order to determine how the diversities of animals in 
difierent countries have originated. The Etiology of 
Animal Life (if we may be allowed to give this name to 

? Hist. Ind. Scl, lii. 546. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



112 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOOY- 

that study of such causes of change which is at present 
BO zealously cultivated, and which yet has no distinctive 
designation,) is now perceived to be a necessary portion of 
all attempts to construct a history of the earth and its 
inhabitants. 

10. Catise in Palcdtiohgy. — We are thus led to con- 
template a class of sciences which are commenced with 
the study of Causes. We have already considered sci- 
ences which depended mainly upon the Idea of Cause, 
namely, the Mechanical Sciences, But it is obvious that 
the Idea of Cause in the researches now under our con- 
sideration must be employed in a very different way from 
that in which we applied it formerly. Force is the cause 
of motion, because force at all times and under all cir- 
cumstances, if not counteracted, produces motion ; but 
the cause of the present condition and elevation of the 
Alps, whatever it was, was manifested in a series of 
events of which each happened but once, and occupied 
its proper" place in the series of time. The former is 
mechanical^ the latter historical^ came. In our present 
investigations, we consider the events which we contem- 
plate, of whatever order they be, as forming a chain which 
is extended from the beginning of things down to the 
present time ; and the causes of which we now speak are 
those which connect the successive links of this chain. 
Every occurrence which has taken place in the history of 
the solar system, or the earth, or its vegetable and animal 
creation, or man, has been at the same time effect and 
cause ; — the effect of what preceded, the cause of what 
succeeded. By being effect and cause, it has occupied 
some certain portion of time ; and the times which have 
thus been occupied by effects and causes, summed up 
and taken all together, make up the total of Past Time. 
The Past has been a series of events connected by this 
historical causation, and the Present is the last term of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PAL-flSTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 1 13 

this series. The problem in the Palsetiological Sciences, 
-with which we are here concerned, is, to determine the 
manner in which each tenn is derived from the pre- 
ceding, and thus, if possible, to calculate backwards to 
the origin of the series. 

11. Van^iotis kinds of Cause. — ^Those modes by which 
one term in the natural series of events is derived from 
another, the forms of historical causation, the kinds of 
connexion between the links of the infinite chain of time, 
are very various ; nor need we attempt to enumerate them. 
But these kinds of causation being distinguished from 
each other, and separately studied, each becomes the 
subject of a separate ^Etiology. Thus the causes of 
change in the earth's surface, residing in the elements, 
fire and water, form the main subject of Geological -Sltio- 
logy. The -Etiology of the vegetable and animal king- 
doms investigates the causes by which the forms and dis- 
tribution of species of plants and animals are affected. 
The study of causes in Glossology leads to an Etiology 
of Language, which shall distinguish, analyse, and estimate 
the causes by which certain changes are produced in the 
languages of nations ; in like manner we may expect to 
have an Etiology of Ai-t, which shall scrutinize the influ- 
ences by which the various forms of art have each given 
birth to its successor : by which, for example, there have 
been brcTught into being those various forms of architec- 
ture which we term Egyptian, Doric, Ionic, Roman, 
Byzantine, Romanesque, Gothic, Italian, Elizabethan. It 
is easily seen by this slight survey how manifold and 
diverse are the kinds of cause which the Paleetiological 
Sciences bring under our consideration. But in each of 
those sciences we shall obtain solid and complete systems 
of knowledge, only so far as we study, with steady thought 
and careful observation, that peculiar kind of cause which 
is appropriate to the phenomena under our consideration. 

VOL. II. I 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



1,14 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

12. Hypothetical Order of Pakstiological Causes.-^ 
The various kinds of bistorical cause are not only con- 
nected Avith each other by their common bearing upon 
the historical sciences, but they form a kind of progression 
which we may represent to ourselves as having acted in 
succession in the hypothetical history 6f the earth and its 
inhabitants. Thus assuming, merely as a momentary 
hypothesis, the origin of the solar system by the conden* 
sation of a nebula, we have to contemplate, first, the 
causes by which the luminous incandescent diffiised mass 
of which a nebula is supposed to be constituted, is grar 
dually condensed, cooled, collected into definite masses, 
solidified, and each portion made to revolve about its 
axis, and the whole to travel about another body. We 
have no difficulty in ascribing the globular form of each 
mass to the mutual attraction of its particles: but 
when this form was once assumed and covered with a 
solid crust, are there, we may ask, in the constitution of 
such a body, any causes at work by which the crust 
might be again broken up and portions of it displaced, 
and covered with other matter ? Again, if we can thug 
explain the origin of the earth, can we with like success 
account for the presence of the atmosphere and the 
waters of earth and ocean ? Supposing this done, we 
have then to consider by what causes such a body could 
become stocked with vegetable and animal life; for 
there have not been wanting persons, extravagant spe- 
culators, no doubt, who have conceived that eveji this 
event in the history of the world might be the work 
of natural causes. Supposing an origin given to life 
upon our earth, we have then, brought before us by 
geological observations, a series of different forms of 
vegetable and animal existence; occurring in different 
strata, and, as the phenomena appear irresistibly to 
prove, existing at successive periods : and we are com- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEHBEES OF A PALiBnOLOOICAL SCIENCE. US 

pelled to inquire what can have been the causes by 
which the forms of each period have passed into those of 
the next. We find, too, that strata, which must have 
been at first horizontal and continuous, have undergone 
enormous dislocations and ruptures, and we have to con<* 
sider the possible effect of aqueous and volcanic causes 
to produce such changes in the earth's crust. We are 
thus led to the causes which have produced the present 
state of things on the earth; and these are causes to 
which we may hypothetically ascribe, not only the form 
and position of the inert materials of the earth, but also 
the nature and distribution of its animal and vegetable 
population. Man too, no less than other animals, is 
affected by the operation of such causes as we have re- 
ferred to, and must, therefore, be included in such specu- 
lations. But man's history only begins, where that of 
other animals ends, with his mere existence. They are 
stationary, he is progressive. Other species of animals 
once brought into being, continue the same through all 
ages ; man is changing, from age to age, his language, his 
thoughts, his works. Yet even these changes are boutid 
together by laws of causation ; and these causes too may 
become objects of scientific study. And such causes, 
though not to be dwelt upon now, since we permit our- 
selves to found our philosophy upon the material sciences 
only, must still, when treated scientifically, fall within 
the principles of our philosophy, and must be governed 
by the same general rules to which all science is subject. 
And thus we are led by a close and natural connexion, 
through a series of causes, from those which regulate the 
imperceptible changes of the remotest nebulae in the 
heavens, to those which determine the diversities of 
language, the mutations of art, and even the progress of 
civilization, polity, and literature. 

While I have been speaking of this supposed series 

I 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



116 PHILOSOPHY OP PALiETIOLOGY, 

of events, including in its course the formation of the 
earthy the introduction of animal and vegetable life, and 
the revolutions by which one collection of species has 
succeeded another, it must not be forgotten, that though 
I have thus hypothetically spoken of these events as 
occurring by force of natural causes, this has been done 
only that the true efficacy of such causes might be 
brought under our consideration and made the subject of 
scientific examination. It may be found, that such oc- 
currences as these are quite inexplicable by the aid of any 
natural causes with which we are acquainted ; and thus 
the result of our investigations, conducted with strict 
regard to scientific principles, may be, that we must either 
contemplate supernatural influences as part of the past 
series of events, or declare ourselves altogether unable to 
form this series into a connected chain. 

13. Mode of Ctdtivating jEtioiogy : — In Geology. — 
In what manner, it may be asked, is -Sltiology, with 
regard to each subject such as we have enumerated, to be 
.cultivated? In order to answer this question, we must, 
according to our method of proceeding, take the most 
successful and complete examples which we possess of 
such portions of science. But in truth, we can as yet 
refer to few examples of this kind. In Geology, it is 
only very recently, and principally through the example 
and influence of Mr. Lyell, that the -Sitiology has been 
detached from the descriptive portion of the science; 
and cultivated with direct attention : in other sciences 
the separation has hardly yet been made. But if we 
examine what has already been done in Geological j£tio- 
logy, or as in the History it is termed. Geological 
Dynamics, we shall find a number of different kinds of 
investigation which, by the aid of our general principles 
respecting the formation of sciences, may suffice to sup- 
ply very useful suggestions for -Etiology in general. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PAL-aBTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 117 

In Greological -Etiology causes have been studied, in 
many instances, by attending to their action in the phe- 
nomena of the present state of things, and by inferring 
from this the nature and extent of the action which they 
may have exercised in former times. This has been 
done, for example, by Von Hoff, Mr. Lyell and others, 
with regard to the operations of rivers, seas, springs, 
glaciers, and other aqueous causes of change. Again, 
the same course has been followed by the same philoso- 
phers with respect to volcanos, earthquakes, and other 
violent agents. Mr. Lyell has attempted to show, too, 
that there take place, in our own time, not only violent 
agitations, but slow motions of parts of the earth's crust, 
of the same kind and order with those which have assisted 
in producing all anterior changes. 

But while we thus seek instruction in the phenomena 
of the present state of things, we are led to the question, 
What are the limits of this present period ? For instance, 
among the currents of lava which we trace as part of the 
shores of Italy and Sicily, which shall we select as belong- 
ing to the existing order of things ? In going backwards 
in time, where shall we draw the line? and why at such 
particular point ? These questions are important, for our 
estimate of the efficacy of known causes will vary with the 
extent of the effects which we ascribe to them. Hence 
the mode in which we group together rocks is not only a 
step in geological classification, but is also important to 
-Jitiology. Thus when the vast masses of trap rocks in 
the Western Isles of Scotland and in other countries, 
which had been maintained by the Wemerians to be of 
aqueous origin, were, principally by the sagacity and 
industry of Macculloch, identified as to their nature with 
the products of recent volcanos, the amount of effect 
which might justifiably be ascribed to volcanic agency 
was materially extended. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



H8 PHILOSOPHY OP PALiEnOLOGY. 

In other cases, instead of observing the current effects 
of our geological causes, we have to estimate the results 
from what we know of the causes themselves ; as when, 
with Herschel, we calculate the alterations in the tem- 
perature of the earth which astronomical changes may 
possibly produce ; or when, with Fourier, we try to cal- 
culate the rate of cooling of the earth's surface, on the 
hypothesis of an incandescent central mass. In other 
cases, again, we are not able to calculate the effects of 
our causes rigorously, but estimate them as well as we 
can, partly by physical reasonings, and partly by compa- 
rison with such analogous cases as we can find in the 
present state of things. Thus Mr. Lyell infers the change 
of climate which would result if land were transferred 
from the neighbourhood of the poles to that of the 
equator, by reasonings on the power of land and water to 
contain and communicate heat, supported by a reference 
to the different actual climates of places under the same 
latitude, but under different conditions as to the distribu- 
tion of land and water. 

Thus our Etiology is constructed partly from calcu- 
lation and reasoning, partly from phenomena. But we 
may observe that when we reason from phenomena to 
causes, we usually do so by various steps ; often ascending 
fit)m phenomena to mere laws of phenomena, before we 
can venture to connect the phenomenon confidently with 
its cause. Thus the law of subterranean heat, that it 
increases in descending below the surface, is now well 
established, although the doctrine which ascribes this 
effect to a central heat is not universally assented to. 

14. In the Geography of Plants and Animals. — We 
may find in other subjects also, considerable contributions 
towards ^Etiology, though not as yet a complete system 
of science. The ^Etiology of vegetables and animals, 
indeed, has been studied with great zeal in modem times> 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PALiBTIOLOGIOAL SCIENCE. 110* 

as an essential preparative to geological theory ; for how 
can we decide whether any assumed causes have produced 
the succession of species which we find in the earth's 
strata, except we know what effect of this kind given 
causes can produce? Accordingly, we find in Mr. 
Lyeirs Treatise on Geology the most complete discussion 
of such questions as belong to these subjects : — ^for ex- 
ample, the question whether species can be transmuted 
into other species by the long continued influence of 
external causes, as climate, food, domestication, combined 
with internal causes, as habits, appetencies, progressive 
tendencies. We may observe, too, that as we have 
brought before us the inquiry what change difference of 
climate can produce in any species, we have also the 
inverse problem, how far a different development of the 
species, or a different collection of species, proves a differ- 
ence of climate. In the same way, the geologist of J:he 
present day considers the question, whether, in virtue of 
causes now in action, species are from time to time extin- 
guished ; and in like manner the geologists of an earlier 
period discussed the question, nowlong completely decided 
whether fossil species in general are really extinct species. 
16. In Languages. — Even with reference to the Etio- 
logy of language, although this branch of science has 
hardly been considered separately from the glossological 
investigations in which it is employed or assumed to be 
employed, it might perhaps be possible to point out 
causes or conditions of change which, being general in 
their nature, must operate upon all languages alike. 
Changes made for the sake of euphony when words are 
modified and combined, occur in all dialects. Who can 
doubt that such changes of consonants as those by which 
the Greek roots become Gothic, and the Gothic, German, 
have for their cause some general principle in the pronun- 
ciation of each language? Again, we might attempt to 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



130 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

decide other questions of no small interest. Have the 
terminations of verbs arisen from the accretion of pro- 
nouns ; or, on the other hand, does the modification of a 
verb imply a simpler mental process than the insulation 
of a pronoun, as Adam Smith has maintained ? Again, 
when the language of a nation is changed by the invasion 
and permanent mixture of an enemy of different speech, 
is it generally true that it is changed from a synthetic to 
an analytical structure? I will mention only one more 
of these wide and general glossological inquiries. Is it 
true, as Dr. Prichard has suggested*, that languages have 
become more permanent as we come down towards later 
times? May we justifiably suppose, with him, that in the 
very earliest times, nations, when they had separated from 
one stock, might lose all traces of this common origin 
out of their languages, though retaining strong evidences 
of it in their mythology, social forms, and arts, as appears 
to be the case with the ancient Egyptians and the 
Indiansf? 

Large questions of this nature cannot be treated pro- 
fitably in any other way than by an assiduous study of 
the most varied forms of living and dead languages. But 
on the other hand, the study of languages should be pro- 
secuted not only by a direct comparison of one with 
another, but also ^vith a view to the formation of a science 
of causes and general principles, embracing such discus- 
sions as I have pointed out. It is only when such a 
science has been formed, that we can hope to obtain any 
solid and certain results in the Palsetiology of language; 
— to determine, with any degree of substantial proof, 
what is the real evidence which the wonderful faculty of 
speech, under its present developments and forms, bears to 
the events which have taken place in its own history, and 
in the history of man since his first origin. 

• Be$earche$, ii. 221. t lb., ii. 192. 



DJgitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMHEKS OF A PAUETIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 121 

16. Comhmction of Theories, — When we have thus 
obtained^ with reference to any such subject as those we 
have here spoken of, these two portions of science, a 
systematic description of the facts, and a rigorous analysis 
of the causes, — the Phenomenology and the j^Etiohgy of the 
subject, — we are prepared for the third member which 
completes the science, the Theory of the actual facts. 
We can then take a view of the events which really have 
happened, discerning their connexion, interpreting their 
evidence, supplying from the context the parts which are 
unapparent. We can account for known facts by intelli- 
gible causes, we can infer latent facts from manifest 
effects, so as to obtain a distinct insight into the whole 
history of events up to the present time, and to see the 
last result of the whole in the present condition of things. 
The term Theory, when rigorously employed in such 
sciences as those which we here consider, bears nearly the 
sense which I have adopted : it implies a consistent and 
systematic view of the actual facts, combined with a true 
apprehension of their connexion and causes. Thus if we 
speak of a Theory of Mount Etna, or a Theory of the 
Paris Basin, we mean a connected and intelligible view 
of the events by which the rocks in these localities have 
come into their present condition. Undoubtedly the 
term Theory has often been used in a looser sense ; and 
men have put forth Theories of tlie Earthy which, instead 
of including the whole mass of actual geological facts and 
their causes, only assigned, in a vague manner, some 
causes by which some few phenomena might, it was con- 
ceived, be accounted for. Perhaps the portion of our 
Palaetiological Sciences which we now wish to designate, 
would be more generally understood if we were to describe 
it as TItearetical or Philosophical History ; as when we 
talk of the Theoretical History of Architecture, or the 
Philosophical History of Language. And in the same 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



122 PHILOSOPHY OF PALJETIOLOGY. 

manner we might speak of the Theoretical History of the 
Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms ; meaning, a distinct 
account of the events which have produced the present 
distribution of species and families. But by whatever 
phrase we describe this portion of science, it is plain that 
such a Theory, such a Theoretical History, must result 
from the application of causes well understood to facts 
well ascertained. And if the term Theory be here em- 
ployed we must recollect that it is to be understood, not 
in its narrower sense as opposed to facts, but in its wider 
signification, as including all known facts and differing;, 
from them only in introducing among them principles of 
intelligible connexion. The Theories of which we now 
speak are true Theories, precisely because they are 
identical with the total system of the Facts. 

17. No sound PaUBtiological Theory yet ea^tant. — It is 
not to disparage the present state of science to say that 
as yet no such theory exists on any subject. " Theories 
of the Earth" have been repeatedly published ; but when 
we consider that even the facts of geology have been 
observed only on a small portion of the earth's surface, 
and even within those narrow bounds very imperfectly 
studied, we shall be able to judge how impossible it is 
that geologists should have yet obtained a well-established 
Theoretical History of the changes which have taken 
place in the crust of the terrestrial globe from its first 
origin. Accordingly, I have ventured in my History 
to designate the most prominent of the Theories which 
have hitherto prevailed SiS premature geological theories*: 
and we shall soon see that geological theory has not 
advanced beyond a few conjectures, and that its culti- 
vators are at present mainly occupied with a controversy 
in which the two extreme hypotheses which first offer 
themselves to men's minds are opposed to each other. 

• Hist. Ind. Scu, iii. 603. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEMBERS OF A PALiBTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 128 

And if we have no theoretical history of the earth which 
merits any confidence, still less have we any theoretical 
History of Language, or of the Arts, which we can con- 
sider as satisfactory. The Theoretical History of the 
Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms is closely connected 
with that of the earth on which they subsist, and must 
follow the fortunes of geology. And thus we may ven- 
ture to say that no Palaetiological Science, as yet, pos- 
sesses all its three members. Indeed most of them are 
very far from having completed and systematized their 
Phenomenology : in all, the cultivation of Etiology is 
but just begun, or is not begun ; in all, the Theory must 
reward the exertions of future, probably of distant, gene- 
rations. 

But in the mean time we may derive some instruction 
from the comparison of the two antagonist hypotheses of 
which I have spoken. 



Chapter III. 

OF THE DOCTRINE OF CATASTROPHES AND THE 
DOCTRINE OF UNIFORMITY. 

1. Doctrine of Catastrophes. — I have already shown, 
in the History of Geology, that the attempts to frame a 
.theory of the earth have brought into view two com- 
pletely opposite opinions: — one, which represents the 
course of nature as uniform through all ages, the causes 
which produce change having had the same intensity in 
former times which they have at the present day; — the 
other opinion, which sees in the present condition of 
things evidences of catastrophes; changes of a more sweep- 
ing kind, and produced by more powerful agencies than 
those which occur in recent times. Geologists who held 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



124 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

the latter opinion, maintained that the forces which have 
elevated the Alps or the Andes to their present height 
could not have been any forces which are now in action : 
they pointed to vast masses of strata hundreds of miles 
long, thousands of feet thick, thrown into highly-inclined 
positions, fractured, dislocated, crushed: they remarked 
that upon the shattered edges of such strata they found 
enormous accumulations of fragments and rubbish, 
rounded by the action of water, so as to denote ages of 
violent aqueous action: they conceived that they saw 
instances in which whole mountains of rock in a state of 
igneous .fusion, must have burst the earth's crust from 
below : they found that in the course of the revolutions 
by which one stratum of rock was placed upon another, 
the whole collection of animal species which tenanted 
the earth and the seas had been removed, and a new set 
of living things introduced in its place: finally, they 
found above all the strata vast masses of sand and gravel 
containing bones of animals, and apparently the work of 
a mighty deluge. With all these proofs before their eyes 
they thought it impossible not to judge that the agents 
of change by which the world was urged from one con- 
dition to another till it reached its present state must 
have been more violent, more powerful, than any which 
we see at work around us. They conceived that the 
evidence of " catastrophes " was irresistible. 

2. Doctrine of Uniformity. — I need not here repeat 
the narrative (given in the History*) of the process by 
which this formidable array of proofs was, in the minds 
of some eminent geologists, weakened, and at last over- 
come. This was done by showing that the sudden breaks 
in the succession of strata were apparent only, the dis- 
continuity of the series which occurred in one country 
being removed by terms interposed in another locality : 

• Hx9U Ind. Set., iii. 612. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES OF CATASTROPHES AND OP UNIFORMITY. 125 

by urging that the total effect produced by existing 
causes, taking into account the accumulated result of 
long periods, is far greater than a casual speculator would 
think possible: by making it appear that there are in 
many parts, of the world evidences of a slow and imper- 
ceptible rising of the land since it was the habitation of 
now existing species: by proving that it is not univer- 
sally true that the strata separated in time by supposed 
catastrophes contain distinct species of animals: by 
pointing out the limited fields of the supposed diluvial 
action : and finally, by remarking that though the creation 
of species is a mystery, the eMinction of them is going on 
in our own day. Hypotheses were suggested, too, by 
which it was conceived that the change of climate might 
be explained, which, as the consideration of the fossil 
remains seemed to show, must have taken place between 
the ancient and the modern times. In this manner the 
whole evidence of catastrophes was explained away : the 
notion of a series of paroxysms of violence in the causes 
of change was represented as a delusion arising from our 
contemplating short periods only in the action of present 
causes : length of time was called in to take the place of 
intensity of force : and it was declared that geology need 
not despair of accounting for the revolutions of the earth, 
as astronomy accounts for the revolutions of the heavens, 
by the universal action of causes which are close at hand 
to us, operating through time and space without variation 
or decay. 

An antagonism of opinions, somewhat of the same 
kind as this, will be found to manifest itself in the other 
Palsetiological Sciences as well as in Geology; and it will 
be instructive to endeavour to balance these opposite 
doctrines. I will mention some of the considerations 
which bear upon the subject. 

3. Is Uniformity frcbable a 'priori? — ^The doctrine of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



126 PHILOSOPHY OP PALiBTIOLOOY. 

Uniformity in the course of nature has sometimes been 
represented by its adherents as possessing a great degree 
of a priori probability. It is highly unphilosophical, it 
has been urged, to assume that the causes of the geolo* 
gieal events of former times were of a different kind from 
causes now in action, if causes of this latter kind can in 
any way be made to explain the facts. The analogy of 
all other sciences compels us, it was said, to explain phe- 
nomena by known, not by unknown, causes. And on 
these grounds the geological teacher recommended* ^^an 
earnest and patient endeavour to reconcile the indications 
of former change with the evidence of gradual mutations 
now in progress." 

But on this we may remark, that if by known causes 
we mean causes acting with the same intensity which 
they have had during historical times, the restriction is 
altogether arbitrary and groundless. Let it be granted, 
for instance, that many parts of the earth's surface are 
now undergoing an imperceptible rise. It is not pre- 
tended that the rate of this elevation is rigorously uni- 
form ; what, then, are the limits of its velocity ? Why may 
it not increase so as to assume that character of violence 
which we may term a catastrophe with reference to all 
changes hitherto recorded ? Why may not the rate of 
elevation be such that we may conceive the strata to 
assume suddenly a position nearly vertical ? and is it, in 
foct, easy to conceive a position of strata nearly vertical, 
a position which occurs so frequently, to be gradtwUtf 
assumed ? In cases where the strata are nearly verticd, 
as in the Isle of Wight, and hundreds of other places, or 
where they are actually Inverted, as sometimes occurs, are 
not the causes which have produced the effect as truly 
known causes, as those which have raised the coasts where 
we trace the former beach in an elevated terrace? If 

* Lybll, b. iv. 0. 1, p. 338. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES OF CATASTROPHES AND OF UNIFORMITY. 127 

the latter case proves slow elevation, does not the former 
case prove rapid elevation ? In neither case have we any 
measure of the time employed in the change ; but does 
not the very nature of the results enable us to discern, 
that if one was gradual, the other was comparatively 
sudden ? 

The causes which are now elevating a portion of 
Scandinavia can be called known causes^ only because we 
know the effect. Are not the causes which have elevated 
the Alps and the Andes known causes in the same sense? 
We know nothing in either case which confines the 
intensity of the force within any limit, or prescribes to it 
any law of uniformity. Why, then, should we make a 
merit of cramping our speculations by such assumptions ? 
Whether the causes of change do act uniformly; — 
whether they oscillate only within narrow limits;— 
whether their intensity in former times was nearly the 
same as it now is; — these are precisely the questions 
which we wish Nature to answer to us impartially and 
truly: where is then the wisdom of ^^an earnest and 
patient endeavour" to secure an affirmaUve reply? 

Thus I conceive that the assertion of an a priori 
claim to probability and philosophical spirit in favour of 
the doctrine of uniformity, is quite untenable. We must 
learn from an examination of all the facts, and not from 
any assumption of our own, whether the course of nature 
be uniform. The limit of intensity being really unknown, 
catastrophes are just as probable as uniformity. If a 
volcano may repose for a thousand years, and then break 
out and destroy a city; why may not another volcano 
repose for ten thousand years, and then destroy a con- 
tinent ; or if a continent, why not the whole habitable 
sur&ce of the earth ? 

4. Cycle of Uniformity indefinite.'-^'&VLt this argument 
may be put in another form. When it is said that the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



128 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY. 

course of nature is uniform, the assertion is not intended 
to exclude certain smaller variations of violence and rest, 
such as we have just spoken of; — alternations of activity 
and repose in volcanos; or earthquakes, deluges, and 
storms, interposed in a more tranquil state of things. 
With regard to such occurrences, terrible as they appear 
at the time, they may not much affect the average rate 
of change ; there may be a cyclcy tliough an irregular one, 
of rapid and slow change ; and if such cycles go on suc- 
ceeding each other, we may still call the order of nature 
uniform, notwithstanding the periods of violence which 
it involves. The maximum and minimum intensities of 
the forces of mutation alternate with one another ; and we 
may estimate the average course of nature as that which 
corresponds to something between the two extremes. 

But if we thus attempt to maintain the uniformity of 
nature by representing it as a series of cycles^ we find 
that we cannot discover, in this conception, any solid 
ground for excluding catastrophes. What is the length 
of that cycle, the repetition of which constitutes uni- 
formity? What interval from the maximum to the 
minimum does it admit of? We may take for our cycle 
a hundred or a thousand years, but evidently such a pro- 
ceeding is altogether arbitrary. We may mark our cycles 
by the greatest known paroxysms of volcanic and terre- 
motive agency, but this procedure is no less indefinite 
and inconclusive than the other. 

But further; since the cycle in which violence and 
repose alternate is thus indefinite in its length and in its 
range of activity, what ground have we for assuming 
more than one such cycle, extending from the origin of 
things to the present time ? Why may we not suppose 
the maximum force of the causes of change to have taken 
place at the earliest period, and the tendency towards the 
minimum to have gone on ever since? Or instead of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES OF CATASTROPHES AND OF UNIFORHmr* 129 

only one cycle, there may have been several, but of such 
length that our historical period forms a portion only of 
the last ; — the feeblest portion of the latest cycle. And 
thus violence and repose may alternate upon a scale of 
time and intensity so large, that man's experience sup- 
plies no evidence enabling him to estimate the amount. 
'The course of things is umfcrm^ to an Intelligence which 
ean embrace the succession of several cycles, but it is 
ixttastropkic to the contemplation of man, whose survey 
<san grasp a part only of one cycle. And thus the hypo- 
thesis of uniformity, since it cannot exclude degrees of 
diange, nor limit the range of these degrees, nor define 
the interval of their recurrence, cannot possess any essen- 
tial simjdicity which, previous to inquiry, gives it a claim 
upon our assent superior to that of the opposite cata- 
strophic hypothesis. 

5. Uniformitarian Arguments are Negative onfy.-^ 
There is an opposite tendency in the mode of maintaining 
the catastrophist and the uniformitarian opinions, which 
depends upon their fundamental principles, and shows 
itself in all the controversies between them. The Cata- 
strophist is affirmative, the Uniformitarian is negative in 
his assertions: the former is constantly attempting to 
construct a theory; the .latter delights in demolishing all 
theories. The one is constantly bringing fresh evidence 
of some great past event, or series of events, of a striking 
and definite kind ; his antagonist is at every step explain- 
ipg away the evidence, and showing that it proves nothing. 
One geologist adduces his proofis of a vast imiversal deluge; 
but another endeavours to show that the proofs do not 
establish either the universality or the vastness of such an 
event. The inclined broken edges of a certain formation 
covered with their own fragments beneath supeijacent 
liorizontal deposits a^ at one time sqpposed to prove a 
catastrophic breaking up of the earUer strata ; but this 

VOL. II. K 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



180 THILOiOPRT OF PAURIOLOGr^ 

dpiaion it iahtrorerted by ihowing that the wcM fbnba* 
ttonsy when punned into other countries^ exhibit k nni** 
form gradation from the lower to the upper^ with no 
trace of Tiolence. Extensire and lofty elevations of the 
<;oaet^ continents of igneous rock, at first appear to indi- 
cute operations &r more gigantic than those which now 
occur ; but attempts are soon made to show that time 
onlj is wanting to liable the present age to riyal the peat 
in the production of such changes. Each new fact ad^ 
duced bj the catastrophist is at first striking and appa^ 
Irentlj conyincing; but as it becomes iamiliar, it strikes 
the imagination less powerfuUj ; and the uniformitarian^ 
constantly labouring to produce some imitation of it by 
the machinery which he has so well studied, at last in 
eteiy caise seems to himself to succeed, so fiur as to destroy 
the effect of his opponent's evidence. 

This is so with regard to more remote, as well as with 
Tegard to immediate evidences of change* When it is 
ascertained that in every part of the earth's crust the 
temperature increases aa we descend below the Sttr£M)% 
«t first this &ct seems to indicate a central heat : and a 
central heat naturally suggests an earlier state of the 
mass, in which it was incandescent, and from which it is 
new cooling. But thit original incandescence of the 
globe of the eartfti is manifestly an entire violation of the 
l^resent course of things; it belongs to the catastoophist 
view, and the advocates of unifbrmity have to explain it 
away« Accordingly, one of them holds tibat this inorease 
of heat in descending below the surface may very possibly 
not go on all the way to the centre^ The heat which in« 
creases at first as we descend, may, he concdves, afkei^ 
wards decrease ; and he suggests causes which may have 
produced sudi a succesrion of hotter and colder shells 
within Ae tnaas of the earth. I have mentioned tfeis 
suggestion in the History of Geolc^; and hate givm 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES Of OATA8TOOPHB8 ANP OF UOTFORMITY. 1^ 

toy ^M8<>n8 fi)r believing it altogether untenable^* Other 
penons also, desirotui of reconoiling thii subterraueoua 
heat with the tenet of uniformity, have offered another 
suggestion: — that the warmth of incandeaoenee of the 
interior parts of the earth does not iorise out of an oii* 
ginally hot oondition from which it is gradually eooling» 
but results from chemical action oonistantly going on 
among the materials of the earth's substance. And thus 
new attempts are perpetually making, to escape from the 
cogency of the reasonings which send us towards an ori- 
ginal state of things different from the i^^esent* Those 
who theorize concerning an origin go on building up the 
&bric of their speculations, while those who think such 
theories unpbilosophical, ever and anon dig away the 
foundation of this structure. As we have already said, the 
uniformitarian's doctrines are a collection of negatives. 

This is so entirely the case, that the uniformitarian 
would for the most part shrink from nuuntaining as 
positive tenets the explanations which he so willingly 
uses as instrutnents of controversy. He puts forward his 
suggestions as difficulties, but he will not stand by them 
as doctrines. And this is in accordance with his general 
tendency ; for any of his hypotheses, if insisted upon as 
positive theories, would be found inconsistent with the 
assertion of uniformity. For example, the nebular hypo« 
thesis appears to give to the history of the heavens an 
aspect which obliterates all special acts of creatioB» 
for, aeeording to that hypothesis, new planetary systenM 
are eonstently forming; but when asserted as the origin, 
of our own solar system, it brings with it an original 
incandesoenee, and an origin of the organic world. And 
if, instead of using the chemical theory of subterrweons 
heat to neutraliM the evidence of original incandescence^ 
we assert it as a positive tenet, we ean no longer mau*> 

* Bitt. Ind. iSci^ iii. 502, and note. 

K 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



182 PHILOSOPHY OF PALJETIOLOGY. 

tain the infinite past duration of the earth ; for chemical 
forces, as well as mechanical, tend to equilibrium ; and 
that condition once attained, their efficacy ceases. Che- 
mical affinities tend to form new compounds ; and though, 
when many and various elements are mingled together, 
the play of synthesis and analysis may go on for a long 
time, it must at last end. If, for instance, a large por- 
tion of the earth's mass were originally pure potassium, 
we can imagine violent igneous action to go on so long 
as any part remained unoxidized ; but when the oxidation 
of the whole has once taken place, this action must be 
at an end; for there is in the hypothesis no agency 
which can reproduce the deoxidized metal. Thus a per- 
petual motion is impossible in chemistry, as it is in 
mechanics ; and a theory of constant change continued 
through infinite time, is untenable when asserted upon 
chemical, no less than upon mechanical principles. And 
thus the Scepticism of the uniformitarian is of force only 
so long as it is employed against the dogmatism of the 
catastrophist When the doubts are erected into dogmas, 
they are no longer consistent with the tenet of unifor- 
mity. When the negations become affirmations, the 
negation of an origin vanishes also. 

6* Uniformity in the Organic World. — ^In speaking of 
the violent and sudden changes which constitute cata- 
strophes, our thoughts naturally turn at first to great 
mechanical and physical effects; — ^ruptures and displace- 
ments of strata; extensive submersions and emersions of 
land; rapid changed of temperature. But the catastrophes 
which we have to consider in geology affect the organic as 
well as the inorganic world. The sudden extinction of one 
collection of species, a!hd the introduction of another in 
their place, is a catastrophe, even if unaccompanied by 
mechanio|l violence. Accordingly, the antagonism of 
the catM^ophist and uniformitarian school has shown 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTKINES OF CATASTROPHES AND OP UNIFORMITY. 133 

itself in this department of the subject, as well as in the 
other. When geologists had first discovered that the 
successive strata are each distinguished by appropri- 
ate organic fossils, they assumed at once that each of 
these collections of living things belonged to a separate 
creation. But this conclusion, as I have already said, 
Mr. Lyell has attempted to invalidate, by proving that in 
the existing order of things, some species become extinct; 
and by suggesting it as possible, that in the same order it 
may be true that new species are from time to time pro- 
duced, even in the present course of nature. And in 
this, as in the other part of the' subject, he calls in the 
aid of vast periods of time, in order that the violence of 
the changes may be softened down: land he appeara dis- 
posed to believe that the actual extinction and creation 
of species may be so slow as to excite no more notice 
than it has hitherto obtained; and yet may be rapid 
enough, considering the immensity of geological periods, 
to produce such a succession of different collections of 
species as we find in the strata of the earth's surface. 

7. Origin of the present Organic W6rld.-^The last 
great event in the history of the vegetable and animal 
kingdoms was that by which their various tribes were 
placed in their present seats. And we may form vari- 
ous hypotheses with regard to the sudden or gradual 
manner in which we may suppose this distribution to 
have taken place. We may assume that at the begin- 
ning of the present order of things, a stock of each species 
was placed in the vegetable or .animal province to which 
it belongs, by some cause out of the common order of 
nature; or we may take a uniformitariari view of the 
subject, and suppose that the provinces of the organic 
world derived their population from some anterior state 
of things by the operation of natural causes. 

Nothing has been pointed out in the exi^ting^OTder 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



134 PfiiLotoPfiY OF PkUBftmuoat. 

6t things which has any analogy ot resemblance, of any 
Talid kind, to that creative energy which must be exerted 
in tiie production of a new species. And to assume die 
introduction of new species as a part of the order of 
nature, without pointing out any natural fact with which 
such an event can be classed^ would be to reject creation 
by an arbitrary act. Hence, even on natural grounds^ the 
most intelligible view of the history of the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms seeitas to be, that each period which 
is marked by a distinct collection of species forms a cycle ; 
and that at th« b^pinning of each such cycle a creative 
power was exerted, of a kind to which there was nothing 
at all analogous in the succeeding part of the same cycle. 
If it be uiged that in some cases the same species, or the 
same genus^ runs through two geological formations, which 
maM^ on other grounds, foe referred to differ^it cycles of 
ereative energy, we may reply dutt the creation of many 
sew qiecies does not imply the extinction of all the old 
ones. 

Thus we are led by our reasonings to this view, that 
As present order of things was commenced by an act of 
Creative power entirely diff^^ent to any agency which has 
been exerted since. None of the influences which have 
modified the present races of animals and plants since 
they were placed in their habitations on the earth's muv 
fitee can have had any efficacy in producing them at first. 
We are necessarily driven to assume, as the banning of 
the present cycle of organic nature an ev^it not inclQded 
in the coucse of nature. And we may remark that this 
necesaty ib the more bogent, preoiaely because otiier cycles 
have preceded the present 

8. Nebular Origin of the Sdwr SyHem.^lf we attempt 
to apply the sanve antithesis of opinion (the doctrines of 
catastrophe and umifonnity,) to the other subjects of 
paketiftlogical sciences^ we diall be led to similar conclu* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES OF CATA8TB0PHE8 AND OF UNIFORMITY. 185 

dons. Tkus if we tQm our attention to astronomieal 
pdaitielogj, we perceiye (hat the nebular hypothesis has 
a unifbrmitaiian tendency. According to this hypothesis 
the fbrmation of this our system of sun, planets^ and 
satellites, was a process of the same kind as those which 
are still going on in the heavens. One after anothmv 
Bebnltt eondense into separate masses, whidi begin to 
revolve about each other by mecfaiuiiml necessity, and 
Icurm systems of which our solar system is a finished 
example. But we may remark, that the unif<nrmitariaii 
doctrine on this subject rests on most unstable found*** 
tions. We have as yet only very vague and imperfect 
reasonings to show that by such condensation a material 
system such as ours could result ; and the introduction 
of otyanisfdd beings into such a material syst^ is utterly 
out of the reach of our philosophy. Here again, there- 
£t»e, we are led to regard the present order of the worid 
as pointing towards am <Higin altogether of a diffi^rent 
kind from anytMng which our materiid science can grai^ 
9t Origin of Lanffuages. — ^We may veirtuDe to «y that 
we (riiould be led to tbo sune condusioii onee more, if 
we w^e to take into our oonsideralion thoee pidsetiolo* 
gical sciences which are beyond the domain of matter; 
for instance, the history of languages. We may ekplata 
many of the differences and changes whidi we become 
acquainted with, by referring to the action of causes of 
change which still operate. But what glossologist will 
venture to dedare tliat the efficacy of such causes has 
been uDif>nn; that the influences which mould a lan- 
guage, or make one language differ from others of tiie 
same stock, operated formerly with no more efficacy tlian 
they exercise now. "Where," as has elsewhere been 
asked, "do we now find a language in tiie process of 
formaljon, unfolding itself in inflexions, t^ninationis, 
dtanges of vowels by grammatical relations, such as dm- 
racterize the oldest known languages I" A^ain« as another 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



186 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiBHOLOGT. 

proof how little the history of languages suggests to the 
philosophical glossologist the persuasion of a uniform 
action of the causes of change^ I may refer to the 
conjecture of Dr. Prichard, that the varieties of language 
produced by the separation of one stock into several, 
have been greater and greater as we go backwards in 
history : — that * the formation of sister dialects from a 
common language, (as the Scandinavian, German, and 
Saxon dialects from the Teutonic, or the Gaelic, Erse and 
Welsh from the Celtic,) belongs to the first millennium 
before the Christian era; while the formation of cognate 
languages of the same &mily, as the Sanskrit^ Latin, Qreek 
and Gothic, must be placed at least two thousand years 
before that era ; and at a still earlier period took place 
the separation of the great families themselves, the Indo- 
European, Semitic, and others, in which it is now diffi- 
cult to trace the features of a common origin. No 
hypothesis except one of this kind will explain the exiuir 
ence of the families, groups, and dialects of languages, 
which we find in existence. Yet this is an entirely dif- 
ferent view from that which the hypothesis of the uniform 
progress of change would give. And thus in the earliest 
stages of man's career, the revolutions of language must 
have been, even by the evidence of the theoretical his- 
tory of language itself, of an order altogether different 
from any which have taken place within the recent 
history of man. And^ we may add, that as the early 
stages of the progress of language must have been widely 
different from those later ones of which we can in some 
measure trace the natural causes, we cannot place the 
origin of language in any point of view in which it comes 
under the jurisdiction of natural causation at all. 

10. No Natural Origin discore^^able.'^-'We are thus led 
by a survey of several of the pala^tiological sciences to a 
confirmation of the principle formerly asserted f. That 

* Be9earehe$, ii., 224. f HUl. Ind. Sci.^ iii., 581. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



DOCTRINES OF CATASTROPHES AND OP UNIFORMITY. 137 

in no palsetiological science has man been able to arrive 
at a beginning Trhich is homogeneous with the known 
course of events. We can in such sciences often go very 
far back; — determine many of the remote circumstances 
of the past series of events; — ascend to a point which 
seems to be near the origin ; — ^and limit the hypotheses re- 
specting the origin itself: — ^but philosophers never have 
demonstlfatedy and, so &r as we can judge, probably never 
will be able to demonstrate, what was that primitive state 
of things from which the progressive course of the world 
took its first departure. In all these paths of reseim)h, 
when we travel far backwards, the aspect of the earlier 
portions becomes very different froiri that of the advanced 
part on which we now stand ; but in all cases the path is 
lost in obscurity as it is traced backwards towards its 
starting point : — ^it becomes not only invisible, but unima- 
ginable; it is not only an interruption, but an abyss, 
which interposes itself between us and any intelligible 
beginning of liiings. 



Chapter IV. 

OF THE RELATION OP TRADITION TO PAL^E- 
TIOLOGY. 

1. Importance of Tradition. — Since the Palsetiological 
Sciences have it for their business to study the train of 
past events produced by natural causes down to the present 
time, the knowledge concerning such events which is 
supplied by the remembrance and records of man, in 
whatever form, must have an important bearing upon 
these sciences. All changes in the condition and extent 
of land and sea, which have taken place within man's ob- 
servation, all effects of deluges, sea-waves, rivers, springs, 
volcanos, earthquakes, and the like, which come within 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



188 PHILOeOPHT OF PAUBnOLOGT. 

the reach of human history, have a stroi^ interest for 
the palaetiologist. Nor is he less concerned in all recorded 
instances of the modification of the forms and habits of 
plants and animals, by the operations of man, or by 
transfer from one land to another. And when we come 
to the Palaetiology of Language, of Art, of Civilization, 
we find our subject still more closely connected with 
history; for in truth these are historical, no less than 
palsetiological investigations. But, confining ourselves at 
present to the material sciences, we may observe that 
though the importuice of the information which tradition 
gives us, in the sciences now under our consideration, as, 
ior instance geology, has long been tacitly recognised; yet 
it is only recentiy that geologists have employed themselves 
in collecting their historical iacts upon such a scale and 
with such comprehensive views as are required by the 
interest and use of collections of this kind* The Essay 
of Von Hofi^, Oh the Nahmi AUeraUoM in tie Surfwe 
of the Earth which are proved by Tradition, was the work 
which first opened the eyes of geologists to the extent 
and importance of this kind of investigation. Since that 
time the same path of research has been pursued with 
great perseverance by others, especially by Mr. Lyell; 
and is now justly considered as an essential portion of 
geology. 

we might naturally expect to have some bearing on geo- 
logy, are recorded in the historical writings iriiid^ even 
on mere human grounds, have the strongest claim to our 
'lespect as records of the early history of the world, and 
are confirmed by the traditions of various nations all over 
ihe globe, namely, tiie formation of the earth and its 
population, and a subsequent deluge. It has been made 
41 matter of controversy how the narrative of these events 

* Vol. i., 1822; vol. il., 1824. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATlCm tXi TSADmON TO FAUenOLOGY. 189 

it to b» undttstood, so as to make it agree with the facts 
which an examination of the earth's surface and of its 
Tegetable and animal population discloses to us. Such 
eontroYersies, when they are considered as merely arcbseo- 
logical, may occur in any of the palsetiological sciences. 
We may have to compare and to reconcile the evidence 
of existing phenomena with that of historical tradition. 
But under some ciroumstances this process of conciliation 
may lussume an interest of another kind, on which we 
wiU make a few remarks. 

3. Nslural and PrmdenOai History of the WorU."^ 
We may contemplate the existence of man upon the 
earth, his origin and his progress, in the same manner as 
we contemplate the existence of any other race of ani- 
mals ; namely, in a purely pals^ological view: We may 
eonsid^ how hx our knowledge of laws of causation 
enables us to exfdain his diflbsion and migration, his 
di&renoes and resemblances, his actions and works. And 
this is the view of man as a member of the natural course 
of things. 

B«t man, at the same time the contemplator and the 
subject of his own contemplation, endowed with &cul- 
ties and powers which make him a being of a different 
nature from other animals, cannot help regarding his own 
actions and enjoyments, his recollections and his hopes, 
under an aspect quite different from any thst we have 
y«t had presented to us. We have been endeavouring 
to place in a clear light the Fundamental Ideas, such as 
thai of Oatse^ on which d^9ends our knowledge ^f the 
natural course of things. But there are other Ideas to 
idiich man necessarily refers his actions ; he is led by 
his nature, not only to consider his own actions, and 
those of his fellow^men, as springing out of this or that 
^aase, leading to this or that material result ; but also 
as good OT bad, as what they ought or ought not to be. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



140 PHILOSOPHT OP PALiBTIOLOOY. 

He has Ideas of moral relations as well as those Ideas of 
material relations with which we have hitherto been 
occupied. He is a moral as well as a natural agent 

Contemplating himself and the world around him 
by the light of his Moral Ideas, man is led to the convic- 
tion that his moral faculties were bestowed upon him by 
design and for a purpose; that he is the subject of a 
moral government; that the course of the world is 
directed by tlie Power which governs it, to the unfolding 
and perfecting of man's moral nature; that this guid- 
ance may be traced in the career of individuals and of 
the world ; that there is a providential as well as a natural 
course of things. 

Yet this view is beset by no small difficulties. The 
full development of man's moral faculties; — ^the perfection 
of his nature up to the measure of his own ideas ; — ^the 
adaptation of his moral being to an ultimate destiaation, 
by its transit through a world full of moral evil, in which 
each has his share ; — are effects for which the economy of 
the world appeara to contain no adequate provision. 
Man, though aware of his moral nature, and ready to 
believe in an ultimate destination of purity and blessed- 
ness, is too feeble to resist the temptation of evil, and to 
restore his purity when once lost. He cannot but look 
for some confirmation of that providential order which he 
has begun to believe; some provision for those defi- 
ciencies in his moral condition which he has begun to feel. 

He looks at the history of the world, and he finds 
that at a certain period it offers to him the promise of 
what he seeks. When the natural powers of man had 
been developed to their full extent, and were beginning 
to exhibit symptoms of decay; when the intellectual 
progress of the world appeared to have reached its limit, 
without supplying man's moral needs ; we find the great 
Epoch in the Providential history of the world. We 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PAUETIOLOGY. 141 

find the announcement of a Dispensation by which man's 
deficiencies shall be supplied and his aspirations ful- 
filled: we find a provision for the purification, the support, 
and the ultimate beatification of those who use the pro- 
vided means. And thus the providential course of the 
world becomes consistent and intelligible. 

4. The Sacred Narrative. — ^But with the new Dispen- 
sation, we receive, not only an account of its own scheme 
and history, but also a written narrative of the providen- 
tial course of the world from the earliest times, and even 
from its first creation. This narrative is recognized and 
authorized by the new dispensation, and accredited by 
some of the same evidences as the dispensation itself. 
That the existence of such a sacred narrative should be a 
part of the providential order of things, cannot but appear 
natural; but naturally also, the study of it leads to some 
difficulties! 

The sacred narrative in some of its earliest portions 
speaks of natural objects and occurrences respecting 
them. In the very beginning of the course of the world, 
we may readily believe (indeed as we have seen in the 
last chapter, our scientific researches lead us to believe) 
that such occurrences were very different from anything 
which now takes place ;— ^different to an extent and in a 
manner which we cannot estimate. Now the narrative 
must speak of objects and occurrences in the words and 
phrases which have derived their meaning from their ap- 
plication to the existing natural state of things. When 
applied to an initial supernatural state therefore, th€W^ 
words and phrases cannot help being to us obscure and 
mysterious, perhaps ambiguous and seemingly contra- 
dictory. 

5. DifficulHes in interpreting the Sacred Narrative.'^ 
The moral and providential relations of man's condition 
*aft so miuch more important to him than mere natural 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



142 PHILOSOPHY OP PAUBTIOLOOY* 

relationB^ t^t at first we may well suppose he will aoc»pt 
the Sacred Narrative, as not only unquestionable in it* 
true import, but also as a guide in his views even of tQere 
natural relations. He will try to modify the conceptions 
which he entertains of objects and their properties, so 
that the Sacred Narrative of the supernatural condition 
shall retain the first meaning which he had put upon it in 
virtue of his own habits in the usage of language. 

But man is so constituted that he cannot persist in 
this procedure. The powers and tendencies of his intel-* 
lect are such that he cannot help trying to attain tru6 
conceptions of objects and their properties by the study 
of things themselves. For instance, when he at first 
read of a firmament dividing the waters above from the 
waters below, he perhaps conceived a transparent floor in 
the skies, on which the superior waters rested which 
descend in rain ; but as his observations and his reason- 
ings satisfied him that such a floot could not exist, he 
became willing to allow (as St, Augustine allowed) that 
the waters above the firmament are in a state of vapour. 
And in like manner in other subjects, men, as their views 
of nature became more distinct and precise, modified, so 
far as it was necessary for consistency's sake^ their first 
rude interj^retations of the Sacred Narrative; so that, with- 
out in any degree losing its import as a view of th« 
providential course of the world, it should be so conceived 
as not to contradict what they knew of the natural onto 
of things. 

But this accommodation was not always made without 
painful struggles and angry controversies. When men 
had conceived the occurrences of the Sacred Narrative m 
a particular manner, they could not readily and willingly 
adopt a new mode of conception ; and they resisted all 
attempts to recommend it to them, as attacks upon the 
sacredness of the Narrative. They had clothed tbiir 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITIOir TO PALiBnOLOaT. 149 

Bdief of the workings of ProTidonce in certain imagJM t 
and tkey clnng to those images with the persuasion that 
without them their belief could not subsist Thusi 
thej imagined to themselves that the earth was a flat 
floor> solidly and broadly laid for the convenience of 
man, and they felt as if Uie kindness of Providence was 
disparaged, when it was maintained that the earth was 9 
globe held together only by the mutual attraction of its 
parts* 

The most memorable instance of a struggle of this 
kind is to be found in the circumstances which attended 
the introduction of the Heliocentric Theory of Coperni^ 
cus to general acceptance. On this controversy I have 
already made some remarks in the History of Science*, 
and have attempted to draw jfrom it some lessons which 
may be useful to us when any similar conflict of opinions 
may occur. I will here add a few reflections vrith a 
similar view. 

6. Suck dificulHes inevitaUe.'^In the first place, I 
remark that such modifications of the current interpre* 
tation of the words of Scripture appear to be an inevitable 
consequence of the progressive character of Natural 
Science. Science is constantly teaching us to describe 
ksown fiiets in new language, but the language of Script 
tare is always the same. And not only so, but the Ian* 
guage of Scripture is necessarily adapted to the common 
state of man's intellectual development, in which he !i 
supposed not to be possessed of science. Hence the 
phrases used by Scripture are precisely those which science 
soon teaches man to consider as inaccurate. Yet they 
are not on that account the less fitted for their proper 
purpose : for if any terms had been used, adapted to a more 
advanced state of knowledge, they must have been unin- 
telligiUe among those to whom the Scripture was first 

? 1. 401. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



144 PHILOSOPHY OP PAUanOLOGY. 

addressed. If the Jews had been told that water existed 
in the clouds in small drops, they would have marvelled 
that it did not constantly descend ; and to have explained 
the nason of this, would have been to teach Atmology in 
the sacred writings. If thej had read in their Scripture 
that the earth was a sphere, when it appeared to be a 
plain, they would only have been disturbed in their 
thoughts or driven to some wild and baseless imagina- 
tions by a declaration to them so strange. If the Divine 
Speaker, instead of saying that he would set his bow in 
the clouds, had been made to declare that he would 
give to water the property of refracting different colours 
at different angles, how utterly unmeaning to the hearers 
would the words have been ! And in these cases^ the 
expressions, being unintelligiUe, startling, and bewilder- 
ing, would have been such as tended to uuftt the Saered 
Narrative for its place in the provid^itial dispensation of 
the world. 

Accordingly, in the great controversy which took 
place in Galileo's time between tixe defenders of the then 
customary interpretations of Scripture, and the assertora 
of the Copemican system of the universe, when the inncK 
vatoi^ were upbraided with maintaining opinions contrary 
to Scripture, they replied that Scripture was not intended 
to teach men astronomy, and that it expressed the acts of 
divine power in images which were suited to the ideas of 
unscientific men. To speak of the rising and setting and 
travelling of the sun, of the fixity and of the foundations 
of the earth, was to use the only language which would 
have made the Sacred Narrative intelligiUe. To fextract 
from these and the like expressions doctrines of science, 
was, they declared, in the highest degree unjustifiable; and 
such a course could lead, they held, to no result but a 
weakening of the authority of Scripture in proportion as 
its credit was identified with that of these modes of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PAUBnOLOGY. 145 

applying it. And this judgment has since been generally 
assented to by those who most reverence and value the 
study of the designs of Providence as well as that of the 
works of nature. 

7. Science tells us nothing concerning Creation. — Other 
apparent difficulties arise from the accounts given in 
the Scripture of the first origin of the world in which 
we live: for example, light is represented as created 
before the sun. With regard to difficulties of this kind, 
it appears that we may derive some instruction from the 
result to which we were led in the last chapter ;— -namely, 
that in the sciences which trace the progress of natural 
Occurrences, we can in no case go back to an origin, but 
in every instance app^u* to find ourselves separated from 
it by a state of things, and an order of events, of a kind 
altogether difierent from those which come under our 
experience. The thread of induction respecting the 
natural course of the world snaps in our fingers, when we 
try to ascertain where its beginning is. Since, then, 
science can teach us nothing positive respecting the 
beginning of things, she can neither contradict nor con- 
firm what is taught by Scripture on that subject ; and 
thus, as it is unworthy timidity to fear contradiction, so 
is it ungrounded presumption to look for confirmation in 
such cases. The providential history of the world has its 
own beginning, and its own evidence ; and we can only 
render the system insecure, by making it lean on our 
material sciences. If any one were to suggest that the 
nebular hypothesis countenances the Scripture history of 
the formation of this system, by showing how the lumi- 
nous matter of the sun might exist previous to the sun 
itself, we should act wisely in rejecting such an attempt 
to weave together these two heterogeneous threads; — 
the one a part of a providential scheme, the other a frag- 
ment of physical speculation. 

VOL. II. L 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



146 PHIL080FHT OF PAUBnOLOGY. 

We shall best learn thoee lessons of the true philoso* 
phj of seienee whieh it is our object to collect, by attend- 
ing to portions of science which haye gone through such 
crises as we are now considering ; nor is it requisite, for 
this purpose, to bring forwards any sulijects which are 
still under discussion. It may, howeyer, be mentioned 
that such maxims as we are now endeayouring to establish, 
and the one before us in particular, bear with a peculiar 
force upon those Palsetiological Sciences of which we haye 
been treating in the present Book. 

8. Scientific tiews^ when familiar^ do not disturb the 
mUhorify of Scripture. — ^Tbere is another rdlection which 
may serye to console and encourage us in the painfiil 
litruggles which thus take place, between those who main- 
fain interpretations of Scripture already prcyalent and 
those who contend for such new ones as the new dis- 
ioyeiles of science require. It is this ; — ^that though the 
fiew opinion is resisted by one party as something 
destmotiye of the credit of Scripture and the reyerence 
which is its due, yet, in fact, when the new interpretation 
has been generally established and incorporated with 
men's current thoughts, it ceases to disturb their yiews 
of the authority of the Scripture or of the truth of its 
teaching. When the language of Scripture, inyested 
with its new meaning, has become fitmiliar to men, it is 
fbund that the ideas which it calls up are quite as recon- 
6ileable as the former ones were with the most entire 
acceptance of the proyidential dispensation. And when 
this has been found to be the case, all cultiyated persona 
look back with surprise at the mistake <tf thofle who 
thought that the essence of the reyelation was inyolyed 
in their own arbitrary yersion of some collateral circum'^ 
stance in the reyealed narratiye. At the present day, we 
can hardly conceiye how reasonable men could oyer haye 
imagined that religious reflections on the stability of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATJON OF TRADITION TO PAUETIOLOGY. 147 

eartiv and the beauty and use of the luminaries M^hich 
revc^ve round it, would be interfered with by an acknow- 
ledgment that this rest and motion are apparent only^. 
And thus the authority of revelation is not shaken by 
aay dianges introduced by the progress of science in the 
piode of interpreting expressions which describe physical 
ol^ts and occurrences ; proTided the new interpretation 
is admitted at a proper season, and in a proper spirit; 
so as to soften, as mudi as possible, both the public con- 
Itroversies and the private scruples which almost inevit- 
ably accompany such an alteration. 

9. When ^hoM old Interpretations be given upf^-^ni 
tha question then occurs^ What is the proper season for 
a religious and enlightened commentator to make such 
a change ip the current interpretation of sacred Scrip- 
ture? At what period ought the established exposition 
of a passage to be given up, and a new mode of underr 
standing the passage, such as is, or seems to be, required 
by new discoveries respecting the laws of nature^ accepted 
in its place? It is j^ain, that to introduce such an alter* 
ation lightly and hastily would be a procedure fraught 
with inconvenience ; for if the change w^e made in such 
a manner, it ntiight be afterwards discovered that it had 
been adoj^d without sufficient reason, and that it was 
neoessaity to reidstltte the old exposition* And the minds 
of the readers of Scripture, always to a certain extent 
and for a time disturbed by the subversion of their long- 
establi^ed notions, would be distressed without any 
need, and might be seriously unsettled* While, on the 
other hand, a too protracted and obstinate resistance to 
the innovation, on the part of the scriptural expositors, 
would tend to identify, at least in the minds of many, 
the authority of the Scripture with the truth of the expo- 
sition; and therefore would bring discredit upcm the 

? I have here borrowed a sentence or two from my own History. - 

L 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



148 PHILOSOPHY OF PAL-KTIOLOGY. 

revealed word, when the established interpretation was 
finally proved to be untenable. 

A rule on this subject, propounded by some of the most 
enlightened dignitaries of the Roman Catholic church, 
on the occasion of the great Copemican controversy 
begun by Gralileo, seems well worthy of our attention. 
The following was the opinion given by Cardinal Bellar- 
mine at the time: — *'When a demonstration shall be 
found to establish the earth's motion, it will be proper to 
interpret the sacred Scriptures otherwise than they have 
hitherto been interpreted in those passages where men- 
tion is made of the stability of the earth and movement 
of the heavens." This appears to be a judicious and 
reasonable maxim for such cases in general. So long as 
the supposed scientific discovery is doubtful, the exposi- 
tion of the meaning of Scripture given by commentators 
of established credit is not wantonly to be disturbed: 
but when a scientific theory, irreconcileable with this 
ancient interpretation, is clearly proved, we must give up 
the interpretation, and seek some new mode of under- 
standing the passage in question, by means of which it 
may be consistent with what we know ; for if it be not, 
our conception of the things so described is no longer 
consistent with itself. 

It may be said that tiiis rule is indefinite, for who 
shall decide when a new theory is completely demon- 
strated, and the old interpretation become untenable? 
But to this we may reply, that if the rule be assented to, 
its application will not be very difficult. For when men 
have admitted as a general rule, that the current inter- 
pretations of scriptural expressions respecting natural 
objects and events may possibly require, and in some 
cases certainly will require, to be abandoned, and new 
ones admitted, they will hardly allow themselves to con- 
tend for such interpretations as if they were essential 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PALJETIOLOGY, 149 

parts of revelation; and will look upon the change of 
exposition, whether it come sooner or later, without 
alarm or anger. And when men lend themselves to the 
progress of truth in this spirit, it is not of any material 
importance at what period a new and satisfactory inter- 
pretation of the scriptural diflSculty is found; since a 
scientific exactness in our apprehension of the meaning 
of such passages as are now referred to is very far from 
being essential to our full acceptance of revelation. 

10. In what Spirit shoidd the Change be accepted? — 
Still these revolutions in scriptural interpretation must 
always have in them something which distresses and dis- 
turbs* religious communities. And such uneasy feelings 
will take a different shape, according as the community 
acknowledges or rejects a paramount interpretative 
authority in its religious leaders. In the case in which 
the interpretation of the Church is binding upon all its 
members, the more placid minds rest in peace upon the 
ancient exposition, till tlie spiritual authorities announce 
that the time for the adoption of a new view has arrived ; 
but in these circumstances, the more stirring and inqui- 
sitive minds, which cannot refrain from the pursuit of 
new truths and exact conceptions, are led to opinions 
which, being contrary to those of the Church, are held 
to be sinful. On the other hand, if the religious constitu- 
tion of the community allow and encourage each man to 
study and interpret for himself the Sacred Writings, we 
are met by evils of another kind. In this case, although, 
by the unforced influence of admired commentators, there 
may prevail a general agreement in the usual interpreta- 
tion of difficult passages, yet as each reader of the Scrip-* 
ture looks upon the sense which he has adopted as being 
his own interpretation, he maintains it, not with the 
tranquil acquiescence of one who has deposited his judg- 
ment in the hands of his Church, but with the keenness 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



150 PHILOSOPHY OF PALJETIOLOOY. 

and Btrenuousness of self-love. In such a state of things^ 
though no judicial severities can be employed against the 
innovators, there may arise more angry controversies than 
in the other case. 

It is impossible to overlook the lesson v«^hich here 
offers itself, that it is in the highest degree unwise in 
the friends of religion, whether individuals or commu- 
nities, unnecessarily to embark their credit in expositions 
of Scripture on matters which appertain to natural 
science. By delivering physical doctrines as the teaching 
of revelation, religion may lose much, but cannot gain 
anything. Tliis maxim of practical wisdom has often 
been urged by Christian vmters. Thus St. Augustin 
says*: ** In obscure matters and things far removed from 
our senses, if we read anything, even in the divine 
Scripture, which may produce diverse opinions without 
damaging the faith which we cherish, let us not rush 
headlong by positive assertion to either the one opinion 
or the other ; lest, when a more thorough discussion has 
shown the opinion which we had adopted to be false, our 
faith may fall with it: and we should be found con- 
tending, not for the doctrine of the sacred Scriptures, but 
for our own ; endeavouring to make our doctrine to be 
that of the Scriptures, instead of taking the doctrine of 
the Scriptures to be ours." And in nearly the same 
spirit, at the time of the Copemican controversy, it was 
thought proper to append to the work of Copernicus a 
postil, to say that the work was written to account fop 
the phenomena, and that people must not run on blindly 
and condemn either of the opposite opinions. Even vrhefa 
the Inquisition, in 1616, thought itself compelled to 
pronounce a decision upon this subject, the verdict was 
delivered in very moderate language ; — that " the doctrine 
of the earth's motion appeared to be contrary to Scrip* 
J- ? Lib. i. de Genm^ cap. 18. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SBLATIOH OF TRADITION TO PAUffnOLOGY. 151 

tore :"' and yet» moderate as this expression is, it has been 
blamed by judicious members of the Roman church as 
deciding a point such as religions authorities ought not 
to pretend to decide; and has brought upon that church 
no ordinary weight of general condemnation* Kepler 
pointed out, in his Uvely manner, the imprudence of 
employing the force of reHgious authoritieB on such sub^ 
jects: Acies ddahrB in ferrum iUuOj pasted nee in Ugnwm 
wdel ampUus. Capiat hoc cufus interest ** If you ic^ try 
to chop iron, the axe becomes unable to cut eyen wood.^ 
11. In what Spirit^ shaM the Change be myedf—Bnt 
white we thus endearour to show in what manner the 
interpreters of Scripture may most safely and most pro* 
perly accept the discoveries of science, we must not 
forget that there may be errors committed on the other 
side also ; and that men of science, in bringing forward 
views which may for a time disturb the minds of lovers 
of Scripture, should consider themselves as bound by 
strict rules of candour, moderation, and prudence. In- 
tentiooally to make their supposed discoveries a means 
of discrediting, contradicting, or slighting the sacred 
Scriptures, or tiiie authority of religion, is in them unpar«- 
donaUe. As men who make the science of Truth the 
business <^ their lives, and are persuaded of her genuine 
superiority, and certain of her ultimate triumph, they are 
peculiariy bound to urge her claims in a cdm and tem- 
perate spirit ; not forgetting that there are other kinds 
of truUi besides that which they peculiariy study. They 
may properly reject audiority in matters of science ; but 
tbey are to leave it its proper office in matters of religion* 
I may here again quote Kepler's expressions: ** In Theo- 
logy we balance authorities, in Philosophy we weigh 
reasons. A holy man was Lactantius who denied that 
the earth ^was round; a holy man was Augustio, who 
granted the rotundity, but denied the antipodes ; a holy 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



152 PHILOSOPHY OP PALiETIOLOaY, 

thing to nle is tbe Inquisition, which allows the smallness 
of the earth, but denies its motion ; but more holy to me 
is Truth ; and hence I prove, from philosophy, that the 
earth is round, and inhabited on every side, of small size, 
and in motion among the stars, — and this I do with no 
disrespect to the Doctors." I the more willingly quote such 
a passage from Kepler, because the entire ingenuousness 
and sincere piety of his character does not allow us to 
suspect in him anything of hypocrisy or latent irony. 
That similar professions of respect may be made ironic 
cally, we have a noted example in the celebrated Intro- 
duction to GalUeds Dialogue on the Copemican System ; 
probably the part which was most offensive to the autho- 
rities. " Some years ago,"* he begins, " a wholesome edict 
was promulgated at Rome, which, in order to check the 
perilous scandals of the present age, imposed silence upon 
the Pythagorean opinion of the mobility of the earth. 
There were not wanting," he proceeds, ** persons who 
rashly asserted that this decree was the result, not of a 
judicious inquiry, but of passion ill-informed ; and com- 
plaints were heard that counsellors, utterly unacquainted 
with astronomical observation, ought not to be allowed, 
with their sudden prohibitions, to clip the wings of spe- 
culative intellects. At the JieaHng of rash lamentations 
like these, my zeal could not keep silence.^' And he then 
goes on to say, that he wishes, in his Dialogue, to show 
that the subject had been fully examined at Rome. 
Here the irony is quite transparent, and the sarcasm 
glaringly obvious. I think we may venture to say that 
this is not the temper in which scientific questions should 
be treated ; although by some, perhaps, the prohibiticHi of 
pubHe discussion may be considered as justifying any 
evasion which is likely to pass unpunished. 

12* Dttfy of Mutual Forbearance. — We may add^ as a 
further reason for niutual forbearance in such cases, that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BELATION OP TRADITION TO PALJETIOLOGY. 153 

the true interests of boUi parties are the same. The man 
of science is concerned, no less than any other person, in 
the troth and import of the divine dispensation ; the reli- 
gious man, no less than the man of science, is, by the 
nature of his intellect, incapable of believing two contra- 
dictory declarations. Hence they have both alike a need 
for understanding the Scripture in some way in which it 
shall be consistent with their understanding of nature. 
It is for their common advantage to conciliate, as Kepler 
says, the finger and the tongue of God, his works and 
his word. And they may find abundant reason to bear 
with each other, even if they should adopt for this pur- 
pose different interpretations, each finding one satisfactory 
to himself; or if any one should decline employing his 
thoughts on such subjects at all. I have elsewhere "^ 
quoted a passage from Kepler f which appears to me 
written in a most suitable spirit : " I beseech my reader 
that, not unmindful of the Divine goodness bestowed upon 
man, he do with me praise and celebrate the wisdom of 
the Creator, which I open to him from a more inward 
explication of the form of the world, from a searching of 
causes, from a detection of the errors of vision ; and that 
thus not only in the firmness and stability of the earth may 
we perceive with gratitude the preservation of all living 
things in nature as the gift of God : but also that in its 
motion, so recondite, so admirable, we may acknowledge 
the wisdom of the Creator. But whoever is too dull to 
receive this science, or too weak to believe the Coper- 
nican system without harm to hi& piety, him, I say, I 
advise that, leaving the school of astronomy, and con- 
demning, if so he please, any doctrines of the philosophers, 
he follow his own path, and desist from this wandering 
through the universe; and that, lifting up his natural 
eyes with which alone he can see, he pour himself out 
? BrutgewaUr Tr.^ b. 314. t dm. StelL Mart.^ Intiod. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



154 PHILOSOPHY OP PALJETIOLOOY* 

from his own heart in worship of God the Creator, being 
certain that he gives no less worship to God than the 
astronomer, to whom God has given to see more clearly 
with his inward eyes, and who, from what he has himself 
discovered, both can and will glorify God.** 

13. Case of Galileo. — ^I may perhaps venture here to 
make a remark or two upon this subject with reference 
to a charge brought against a certain portion of the His^ 
tort/ of the Inductive Sciences. Complaint has been made* 
that the character of the Roman church, as shown in its 
behaviour towards Galileo, is misrepresented in the ac« 
Count given of it in the History of Astronomy. It is 
asserted that Galileo provoked the condemnation he 
incurred; first, by pertinaciously demanding the assent 
of the ecclesiastical authorities to his opinion of the con- 
sistency of the Copernican doctrine with Scripture ; and 
afterwards by contumaciously, and, as we have seen, con- 
tumeliously violating the silence which the Church had 
enjoined upon him. It is further declared that the 
statement which represents it as the habit of the Roman 
church to dogmatize on points of natural science is im- 
founded ; as well as the opinion that in consequence of 
this habit, new scientific truths were promulgated less 
boldly in Italy than in other countries. I shall reply very 
briefly on these subjects ; for the decision of thism is by 
no means requisite in order to establish the doctrines to 
which I have been led in the present chapter, nor, I hope, 
to satisfy my reader that my views have been collected 
from an impartial consideration of scientific history. 

With regard to Galileo, I do not think it can be 
denied that he obtruded his opinions upon the ecclesias- 
tical authorities in an unnecessary and imprudent manner. 
He was of an ardent character, strongly convinced him* 
self, and urged on still more by the conviction which he 
* Dublin Review^ No. ix., July, 1838, p. 72. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BELATION OF TRADITION TO PALiETIOLOGY. 155 

J>roduced among his disciples, and thus he became impa- 
tient for the triumph of truth. This judgment of him has 
recently been delivered by various independent autho- 
rities» and has undoubtedly considerable foundation*. As 
to the question whethw authority in matters of natural 
science were habitually claimed by the authorities of the 
Church of Rome, I have to allow that I cannot produce 
instances which establish such a habit. We who have 
been accustomed to have daily before our eyes the Moni- 
tion which the Romish editors of Newton thought it 
necessary to prefix — Cc&terum latis a summo Pontifice con- 
tra telluris motum Decretisy nos obsequi profitemur — ^were 
not likely to conjecture that this was a solitary instance 
of the interposition of the Papal authority on such sub- 
jects. But although it would be easy to find declarations 
of heresy delivered by Romish Universities, and writers 
of great authority, against tenets belonging to the natural 
sciences, I am not aware that any other case can be 
adduced in which the Church or the Pope can be shown 
to have pronounced such a sentence. I am well con- 
tented to acknowledge this ; for I should be far more 
gratified by finding myself compelled to hold up the 
seventeenth century as a model for the nineteenth in this 
respect, than by having to sow enmity between the 
admirers of the past and the present through any dispa- 
raging contrast f. 

* Besides the Dublin Review, I may quote the Edinburgh BemeWy 
Which I suppose will not be thought likely to have a bias in favour of 
the exereise of eoclesiastical authority in matters of science ; though 
certainly there is a puerility in the critic's phraseology which does not 
add to the weight of his judgment. ^^ Galileo contrived to surround 
the tnith with every variety of obstruction. The tide of knowledge, 
which had hitherto advanced in ]>eace, he crested with angry breakers, 
and he involved in its surf both his friends and his foes." — Ed. Rev,, 
No. cxxiii. p. 126. 

t I may add that the most candid of the adherents of the Chnreh 
of Rome condemn the assumption of authority in matters of science, 
made, in this one instance at least, by the eoolesiastiQal tribupalst The 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



156 PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY, 

With respect to the attempt made in my History to 
characterize the intellectual habits of Italy as produced by 
her religious condition,— certainly it would ill become any 
student of the history of science to speak slightingly of 
that country, always the mother of sciences, always ready 
to catch the dawn and hail the rising of any new light of 
knowledge. But I think our admiration of this activity 
and acuteness of mind is by no means inconsistent with 
the opinion, that new truths were promulgated more 
boldly beyond the Alps, and that the subtilty of the 
Italian intellect loved to insinuate what the rough Grer- 
man bluntly asserted. Of the decent duplicity with which 
forbidden opinions were handled, the reviewer himself 
gives us instances, when he boasts of the liberality with 
which Copemican professors were placed in important 
stations by the ecclesiastical authorities, soon after the 
doctrine of the motion of tho earth had been declared by 
the same authorities contrary to Scripture. And in the 
same spirit is the process of demanding from Galileo a 
public and official recantation of opinions which he had 
repeatedly been told by his ecclesiastical superiors he 
might hold as much as he pleased. I think it is easy to 
believe that among persons so little careful to reconcile 
public profession with private conviction, official decorum 
was all that was demanded. When Galileo had made his 
renunciation of the eartVs motion on his knees, he rose 
and said, as we are told, E pur si mtiove — **and yet it does 
move." This is sometimes represented as the heroic soli- 
loquy of a mind cherishing its conviction of the truth, in 
spite of persecution ; I think we may more naturally con- 
ceive it uttered as a playful epigram in the ear of a car- 
dinal's secretary, with a full knowledge that it would be 
immediately repeated to his master. 

author of the Ages of Faith (Book viii. p. 248), says, ** A Congrega- 
tion, it is to be lamented, declared the new system to be opposed to 
Scripture, and therefore heretical." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PALiETIOLOGY, 157 

Besides the Ideas involved in the material sciences^ 
of which we have already examined the principal ones, 
there is one Idea or Conception which our Sciences do 
not indeed include, but to which they not obscurely point; 
and the importance of this Idea will make it proper to 
speak of it, though this must be done very briefly. 



Chapter V. 
OF THE CONCEPTION OP A FIRST CAUSE. 

1. At the end of the last chapter but one, we were led 
to this result, — that we cannot, in any of the Palcetiolo- 
gical Sciences, ascend to a beginning which is of the same 
nature as the existing cause of events, and which depends 
upon causes that are still in operation. Philosophers 
never have demonstrated, and probably never will be able 
to demonstrate, what was the original condition of the 
solar system, of the earth, of the vegetable and animal 
worlds, of languages, of arts. On all these subjects the 
course of investigation, followed backwards as far as our 
materials allow us to pursue it, ends at last in an impe^^ 
netrable gloom. We strain our eyes in vain when we 
try, by our natural faculties, to discern an Origin. 

2. Yet speculative men have been constantly employed 
in attempts to arrive at that which thus seems to be 
placed out of their reach. The Origin of Languages, the 
Origin of the present Distribution of Plants and Animals, 
the Origin of the Earth, have been common subjects of 
diligent and persevering inquiry. Indeed inquiries re- 
specting such subjects have been, at least till lately, the 
usual form which Palsetiotogical researches have assumed. 
Cosmogcmyy the origin of the world, of which, in such 
speculations, the earth was considered as a principal part> 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



158 PHILOSOPHV OF PAUBTIQLOaY. 

Ims been It favourite studj both of ancient and of modem 
times : and most of the attempts at Geolc^ i»^vioufl to 
the pres^it period have been Camogoides or Geogonies^ 
rather than that more genuine science ^hich we have 
endeavoured to delineate. Gloisologji though now an 
extensive body of solid knowledge, was mainly brought 
into being by inquiries concerning the original language 
spoken by men ; and the nature of the first separation 
and division of languages, the first peopling of the earth 
by man and by animals^ were long sought after with ardent 
curiosity, although of course with reference to the autbo* 
rity of the Scriptures, as well as the evidence of natural 
phenomena. Indeed the interest of such inquiries even 
yet is far from being extinguished. The disposition to ex- 
plore the past in the hope of finding, by the light of natural 
reasoning as well as by the aid of revelation, the origin 
of the present course of things, appears to be unconquer- 
able. What was the beginning? is a question which the 
human race cannot desist from perpetually asking. And 
no failure in obtaining a satisfactory answer can prevent 
inquisitive s^ts fitmi again and again repeating the 
inquiry, although the blank abyss into which it is uttered 
does not even return an echo. 

3. What, then, is the reason of an attempt so perti- 
nacious yet so fruitless? By what motive are we fm-* 
polled thus constantly to seek what we can never find ? 
Why are the error of our conjecturefi^ the futility of our 
reasonings, the precariousness^of our interpretations, over 
and over again proved to us in vain? Why is it impos- 
sible for us to acquiesce in our ignorance and to relinquish 
the inquiry? Why cannot we content ourselves with 
examining those links of the chain of causes which are 
nearest to us; — ^those in which the connexion is intelligible 
and clear; instead of fixing our attention upon those 
PNnQte portions where we can no longer estimate its co* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CX>NCEPnON OF A FIBfiT CAU«B. 159 

herence? In short* whj did not men from the first take 
for Uie subject of th^ speeulations the Course of Nature 
rather than the Origin of Things ? 

To this we wflj, that in doing what they have thus 
don^ in seeking what they have sought, men are impelled 
by an intelleotual necessity, l^iey cannot conceive a 
series of connected occurrences without a commence^ 
ment ; they cannot help supposing a cause for the whole, 
as well as a cause for each part ; they cannot ]be satisfied 
with a succession of causes without assuming a First 
Cause. Such an assumption is necessarily impressed 
upon our minds by our contemplation of a series of causes 
and effects ; that there must he a FirH Cause^ is accepted 
by all intelligent reasoners as an Axiom : and like othei^ 
Axioms, its truth is necessarily implied in the Idea which 
it involves. 

4. 1%Q evidence of this axiom may be illustrated in 
several ways. In the first place, the axiom is assumed 
in the argument usually o£Eered to prove the existence of 
the Deity. Since, it is said, the world now exists, andt 
since nothing cannot produce something, aomethipg must 
have existed from eternity. Iliis Something is the First 
Cause : it is God. 

Now what I have to remark here is this : the con* 
clusiveness of this argum^it, as a proof of the existence 
of one independent, immutable Deity, depends entirely 
upon the assumption of the axiom above stated* The 
world, a series of causes and effect^ exists ; therefor^ 
there mnst be, not only this series of causes and effects^ 
but also a First Cause. It will be easily seen, that witb« 
out the axiom» that in every series of causes and effects 
there must be a First Cause, the reasonii^ is altogether 
inconclusive. 

5. Or to put the matter otherwise: The argument 
for the existence of the Deity was stated thus : 8<miethiii§ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



160 PHILOSOPHY OP PALJETIOLOOY* 

exists, therefore something must have existed from eter- 
nity. Granted, the opponent might say ; but this some^ 
thing which has existed from eternity, why may it not be 
this very series of causes and effects which is now going 
on, and which appears to contain in itself no indication 
of beginning or end ? And thus, without the assumption 
of the necessity of a First Cause, the force of the argu- 
ment may be resisted. 

6. But, it may be asked, how do those who have 
written to prove the existence of the Deity reply to 
such an objection as the one just stated ? It is natural 
to suppose that, on a subject so interesting and so long 
discussed, all the obvious arguments, with their replies, 
have been fully brought into view. What is the result 
in this case ? 

The principal modes of replying to the above objec- 
tion, that the series of causes and effects which now 
exists, may have existed from eternity, appear to be these. 

In the first place, our minds cannot be satisfied with 
a series of successive, dependent, causes and effects, 
without something first and independent. We pass from 
effect to cause, and from that to a higher cause, in search 
of |something on which the mind can rest ; but if we can 
do nothing but repeat this process, there is no use in it. 
We move our limbs, but make no advance. Our ques- 
tion is not answered, but evaded. The mind cannot 
acquiesce in the destiny thus presented to it, of being 
referred from event to event, from object to object, along 
an interminable vista of causation and time. Now this 
mode of stating the reply, — to say that the mind ccmnot 
thm be satisfied^ appears to be equivalent to sapng that 
the mind is conscious of a principle in virtue of which 
such a view as this must be rejected ; — ^the mind takes 
refuge in the assumption of a First Cause, from an 
employment inconsistent with its own nature. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PAL^TIOLOGY. 161 

7. Or again, we may avoid the objection, by putting 
the argument for the existence of a Deity in this form : 
The series of causes and effects which we call the worlds 
or the cot^se of nature^ may be considered as a whole^ 
and this whole must have a cause of its existence. The 
whole collection of objects and events may be compre- 
hended as a single effect, and of this effect there must be 
a cause. This Cause of the Universe must be superior 
to, and independent of the special events, which, happen- 
ing in time, make up the universe of which He is the 
cause. He must exist and exercise causation, before 
theise events can begin : He must be the First Cause. 

Although the argument is here somewhat modified 
in form, the substance is the same as before. For the 
assumption that we may consider the whole series of 
causes and effects as a single effect^ is equivalent to the 
assumption that besides partial causes, we must have a 
First Cause. And thus the Idea of a First Cause, and 
the axiom which asserts its necessity, are recogni2sed in 
the usual argumentation on this subject. 

8. This Idea of a First Cause, and the principle 
involved in the Idea, have been the subject of discussion 
in another manner. As we have already said, we assume 
as an axiom that a'First Cause must exist ; and we assert 
that God, the First Cause, exists eternal and immutable, 
by the necessity which the axiom implies. Hence God 
is said to exist necessarily ; — ^to be a necessarily existing 
being. And when this necessary eadstence of God had 
been spoken of, it soon began to be contemplated as a 
sufficient reason, and as an absolute demonstration of His 
existence ; without any need of referring to the world as 
an effect, in order to arrive at God as the cause. And 
thus men conceived that they had obtained a proof of 
the existence of the Deity, a priori^ from ideas, as Well 
as a posteriori^ from effects. 

VOL. 11. M 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



162 PHaOSOPHY OF PALJETIOLOGY. 

9. Thus, Thomas Aquinas employs this reasoning to 
prove the eternity of God*. "Oportet ponere aliquod 
primum necessarium quod est per se ipsum neoessarium ; 
et hoc est Deus, oum sit prima oausa ut dictum est : igitur 
Deus sBtemus est^ cum omue necessarium per se sit seter- 
num." It is true that the schoolmen never professed to 
b^ able to prove the eanstence of the Deity a priori : but 
they made use of this conception of necessary existence 
in a manner which approached very near to such an 
attempt. Thus Snares; f discusses the question, ^^Utrum 
aliquo mode possit a priori demonstrari Deum esse." 
And resolves the question in this manner: ^^Ad hune 
ergo medum dicendum eat: Demonstrate a posteriori 
Deum esse ens necessarium et a se, ex hoc attributd 
posse a priori demonstrari prater illud non posse esse 
aliud ens necessarium et a se, et consequenter demon-* 
strari Deum esse." 

But in modem times attempts were made by Des- 
cartes and Samuel Clarke, to prove the Divine exist- 
ence at once a priori^ Arom the conception of necessary 
existence ; which, it was argued, could not subsist with- 
out actual existence. This argumentation was acutely 
and severely criticized by Dr. Waterland, 

10. Without dwelling upon a sul^ect, the discussion of 
which does not enter into the design of the present work, 
I may remark that the question whether an a priori proi^t 
of the existence of a First Cause be possible, is a ques** 
tion concerning the nature of our Ideas, and the evidence 
of the axioms which they involve, of the same kind as 
many questions which we have already bad to discuss. 
Is our Conception or Idea of a First Cause gathered from 
the effects we see around us ? It is plain that we must 
answer, here as in other cases, that the Idea is not 

? AawN. Conir. Gentil. lib. i. c. 14, p. 21. 
t Meeaphyi,^ torn. ii. disp. 29, sect 3, p. 28. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELATION OF TRADITION TO PALJETIOLOGY. 163 

wtraoted from the phenomena, but assumed in order that 
tb^ phenomena may become intelligible to the mind ;— 
that the Idea is a necessary one, inasmuch as it does not 
depend upon observation for its evidence; but that it 
depends upon observation for its developments since with* 
out some observation, we cannot conceive the mind to bo 
cognisant of the relation of causation at all. In this 
respect, however, the Idea of a First Cause is no less 
necessary than the ideas of Space, or Time, or Cause in 
general. And whether we call the reasoning derived 
from such a necessity an argument h priori or aposteriorif 
in either case it possesses the genuine character of demon-* 
stration, being founded upon adorns which command 
universal assent. 

11. I have, however, spoken of our Conception rather 
than of our Idea of a First Cause ; for the notion of a 
First Cause appears to be rather a modification of the 
Fundamental Idea of Cause, which was formerly discussed, 
than a separate and peculiar Idea. And the Axiom, that 
there mtist be a First Cause, is recognised by most persons 
as an application of the general Axiom of Causation, that 
every effect must have a came; this latter Axiom being 
applied to the world, considered in its totality, as a single 
effect. This distinction, however, between an Idea and 
a Conception, is of no material consequence to our argu-^ 
ment; provided we allow the maxim, that there must 
be a First Cause, to be necessarily and evidently true ; 
whether it be thought better to speak of it as an inde« 
pendent Axionj, or to consider it as derived from the 
general Axiom of Causation, 

12. Thus we necessarily infer a First Cause, although 
the Pals^tiological Sciences only point towards it, and do 
not lead us to it. But I must observe further ; that in 
each of the series of events which form the subject of 
Palaetiological research, the First Cause is the same. 

M 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



16 i PHILOSOPHY OF PALiETIOLOGY 

Without here resting upon reasoning founded upon our 
Conception of a First Cause, I may remark that this 
identity is proved by the close connexion of all the 
branches of natural science, and the way in which the 
causes and the events of each are interwoven with those 
which belong to the others. We must needs believe 
that the First Cause which produced the earth and its 
atmosphere is also the Cause of the plants which clothe 
its surface ; that the First Cause of the vegetable and of 
the animal world are the same; that the First Cause 
which produced light produced also eyes ; that the First 
Cause which produced air and organs of articulation pro- 
duced also language and the faculties by which language 
is rendered possible : and if those faculties, then also all 
man's other faculties ;— the powers by which, as we have 
said, he discerns right and wrong, and recognizes a pro- 
vidential as well as a natural course of things. Nor can 
we think otherwise than that the Being who gave these 
faculties, bestowed them for some pui'pose; — ^bestowed 
them for that purpose which alone is compatible with 
their nature : — the purpose, namely, of guiding and ele- 
vating man in his present career, and of preparing him 
for another state of being to which they irresistibly direct 
his hopes. And thus, although, as we have said, no one 
of the Palaetiological Sciences can be traced continuously 
to an origin, yet they not only each point to an origin, 
but all to the same origin. Their lines are broken indeed, 
as they run backwards into the early periods of the world, 
but yet they all appear to converge to the same invisible 
point. And this point, thus indicated by the natural 
course of things, can be no other than that which is 
disclosed to us as the starting point of the providential 
course of the world ; for we are persuaded by such reasons 
as have just been hinted, that the Creator of the natural 
world can be no other than the Author and Governor 
and Judge of the moral and spiritual world. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



KELATION OF TRADITION TO PALiETIOLOGY. 165 

13. Thus we are led, by our material sciences, and 
especially by the Palaetiological class of them, to the 
borders of a higher region, and to a point of view from 
which we have a prospect of other provinces of know- 
ledge, in which other faculties of man are concerned 
besides his intellectual, other interests involved besides 
those of speculation. On these it does not belong to our 
present plan to dwell : but even such a brief glance as 
we have taken of the connexion of material with moral 
speculations may not be useless, since it may serve to 
show that the principles of truth which we are now labo- 
riously collecting among the results of the physical sci- 
ences, may possibly find some application in those parts 
of knowledge towards which men most naturally look 
with deeper interest and more serious reverence. 



We have been employed up to the present stage 
of this work in examining the materials of knowledge, 
namely. Facts and Ideas ; and we have dwelt particularly 
upon the latter element ; inasmuch as the consideration 
of it is, on various accounts, and especially at the present 
time, by far the most important. We have now to pro- 
ceed to the remainder of our task; — to determine the 
processes by which those materials may actually be made 
to constitute knowledge. We have surveyed the stones 
of our building: we have found them exactly squared, 
and often curiously covered with significant imagery and 
important inscriptions. We have now to discover how 
they may best be fitted into their places, and cemented 
together, so that rising stage above stage, they may grow 
at last into that lair and lofty temple of Truth for which 
we cannot doubt that they were intended by the Great 
Architect. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 

PHILOSOPHY 



Ot THE 



INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 



PART II. 

OF KNOWLEDGE. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



De Scientiis turn demtim bene sperandum eet, qoando 
por SoALAM Teram et per gradus continuos, et non inter- 
luissos aut hialcos, a particularibas ascendetur ad Azio- 
matur minora, et deinde ad media, alia aliis superiora, 
et postremb demum ad generalissima. 

In constitaendo autem Axiomate, Forma Inductionis 
alia qnam adhuc in U8U fiiit, ezcogitanda est ; et qn» 
non ad Principia tantam (quad vocant) probanda et 
invenienda, sed etiam ad Axiomata minora, et media, 
denique omnia. 

Bacon, Nov. Org.^ Aph. civ. cv. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



169 



BOOK XI. 



OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 



Chapter I. 

OF TWO PRINCIPAL PROCESSES BY WHICH 
SCIENCE IS CONSTRUCTED. 

To the subject of the present Book all that has pre- 
ceded is subordinate and preparatory. The First Part of 
this work treated of Ideas: we now enter upon the 
Second Part, in which we have to consider the Know- 
ledge which arises from them. It has already been stated 
that knowledge requires us to possess both Facts and 
Ideas; — that every step in our knowledge consists in 
applying the ideas and conceptions furnished by our 
minds to the facts which observation and experiment 
offer to us. When our conceptions are clear and distinct, 
when our fects are certain and sufficiently numerous, and 
when the conceptions, being suited to the nature of the 
facts, are applied to them so as to produce an exact and 
universal accordance, we attain knowledge of a precise 
and comprehensive kind, which we may term Science. 
And we apply this term to our knowledge still more 
decidedly when, facts being thus included in exact and 
general propositions, such propositions are, in the same 
manner, included with equal rigour in propositions of a 
higher degree of generality; and these again in othei-s of 
a still wider nature, so as to form a large and systematic 
whole. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



170 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

But after thus stating, in a general way, the nature of 
science, and the elements of which it consists, we have 
been examining with a more close and extensive scrutiny, 
some of those elements ; and we must now return to our 
main subject, and apply to it the results of our long 
investigation. We have been exploring the realm of 
Ideas; we have been passing in review the difficulties 
in which the workings of our own minds involve us 
when we would make our conceptions consistent with 
themselves : and we have endeavoured to get a sight of 
the true solutions of these difficulties. We have now to 
inquire how the results of these long and laborious effi)rt8 
of thought find their due place in the formation of our 
knowledge. What do we gain by these attempts to 
make our notions distinct and consistent ; and in what 
manner is the gain of which we thus become possessed, 
canied to the general treasure-house of our permanent 
and indestructible knowledge? After all this battling 
in the world of ideas, all this struggling with the shadowy 
and changing forms of intellectual perplexity, how do wc 
secure to ourselves the fruits of our warfare, and assure 
ourselves that we have really pushed forwards the fron*- 
tier of the empire of Science ? It is by such an appro- 
priation that the task which We have had in our bands 
during the last nine Books of this work, must acquire its 
real value and true place in our design. 

In order to do this, we must reconsider, in a more 
definite and precise shape, the doctrine which has already 
been laid down ;— that our knoMledge consists in apply- 
ing Ideas to Facts ; and that the conditions of real know^ 
ledge are that the ideas be distinct and appropriate, and 
exactly applied to clear and certain facts. The steps by 
which our knowledge is advanced are those by which 
one or the other of these two processes is rendered more 
complete ; — ^by which coficeptiom are made more clear in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TWO PROCESSES BY WHICH SCIENCE IS CONSTRUCTED. 171 

themselves, or by which the conceptions more strictly 
bind together the facts. These two processes may be con-* 
sidered as together constituting the whole formation of 
our knowledge ; and the principles which have been esta- 
blished in the preceding Books, bear principally upon the 
former of these two operations ; — ^upon the business of 
elevating our conceptions to the highest possible point of 
precision and generality. But these two portions of the 
progress of knowledge are so clearly connected with 
each other, that we shall consider them in immediate 
succession. And having now to consider these operations 
in a more exact and formal manner than it was before 
possible to do, we shall designate them by certain con- 
stant and technical phrases. We shall speak of the two 
processes by which we arrive at science, as the EwpUcation 
of Conceptions and the CoUigation of Facts : we shall 
show how the discussions in which we have been engaged 
have been necessary in order to promote the former of 
these offices ; and we shall endeavour to point out modes, 
maxims» and principles by which the second of the two 
tasks may also be furthered. 



Chapter II. 

OF THE EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 

1. We have given the appellation of Ideas to certain 
comprehensive forms of thought, — as spacCy number^ catisCy 
composition^ resemblance^ — which we apply to the plieno- 
mena which we contemplate. But the special modifica- 
tions of these ideas which are exemplified in particular 
fects. We hiave termed Conceptions; as a circle^ a square 
fiumb^y an accelerating force^ a netUral combination of ele- 
ments, a genm. Such Conceptions involve in themselves 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



172 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

certaiu necessary and universal relations derived from the 
ideas just enumerated ; and these relations are an indis- 
pensable portion of the texture of our knowledge. But 
to determine the contents and limits of this portion of 
our knowledge, requires an examination of the ideas and 
conceptions from which it proceeds. The conceptions 
must be, as it were, carefully unfolded^ so as to bring 
into clear view the elements of truth with which they are 
marked from their ideal origin. This is one of the pro- 
cesses by which our knowledge is extended and made 
more exact ; and this I shall describe as the Explication 
of Conceptions. 

In the preceding Books we have discussed a great 
many of the Fundamental Ideas of the most important 
existing sciences. We have, in those Books, abundant 
exemplifications of the process now under our considera- 
tion. We shall here add a few general remarks, sug- 
gested by the survey which we have thus made. 

2. (I.) Such discussions as those in which we have been 
engaged concerning our fundamental ideas, have been the 
course by which, historically speaking, those conceptions 
which the existing sciences involve have been rendered 
so clear as to be fit elements of exact knowledge. The 
disputes concerning the various kinds and measures of 
Force were an important part of the progress of the sci- 
ence of mechanics. The struggles by which philosophers 
attained a right general conception of plane, of circular, 
of elliptical Polarization, were some of the most difficult 
steps in the modern discoveries of optics. A conception 
of the Atomic Constitution of bodies, such as shall include 
what we know, and assume nothing more, is even now a 
matter of conflict among chemists. The debates by which, 
in recent times, the conceptions of Species and Genera 
have been rendered more exact, have improved the science 
of botany : the imperfection of the science of mineralogy 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 173 

arises in a great measure from the circumstance, that in 
that subject, the conception of a Species is not yet fixed. 
In physiology, what a vast advance would that philoso- 
pher make, who should establish a precise, tenable, and 
consistent conception of Life ! 

Thus discussions and speculations concerning the im- 
port of very abstract and general terms and notions, may 
be, and in reality have been, far from useless and barren. 
Such discussions arose from the desire of men to impress 
their opinions on others, but they had the effect of making 
the opinions much more clear and distinct. In trying to 
make others understand them, they learnt to understand 
themselves. Their speculations were begun in twilight, 
and ended in the full brilliance of day. It was not easily 
and at once, without expenditure of labour or time, that 
men arrived at those notions which now form the ele- 
ments of our knowledge ; on the contrary, we have, in 
the history of science, seen how hard discoverers, and the 
forerunners of discoverers, have had to struggle with the 
indistinctness and obscurity of the intellect, before they 
could advance to the critical point at which truth became 
clearly visible. And so long as, in this advance, some 
speculators were more forward than others, there was a 
natural and inevitable ground of difference of opinion, of 
argumentation, of wrangling. But the tendency of all 
such controversy is to diffuse truth and to dispel error. 
Truth is consistent, and can bear the tug of war ; error is 
incoherent, and falls to pieces in the struggle. True con- 
ceptions can endure the sun, and become clearer as a 
fuller light is obtained ; confused and inconsistent notions 
vanish like visionary spectres at the break of a brighter 
day. And thus all the controversies concerning such 
conceptions as science involves have ever ended in the 
establishment of the side on which the truth was found. 

3. Indeed, so complete has been the victory of truth 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



174 CONSTRUCTION OP 8GIENCE. 

in most of these instances, that at present we can hardly 
imagine the struggle to have been neeessary, Th# very 
essence of these triumphs is that they lead ua to regard 
the views we reject as not only false, but inconceivable. 
And hence we are led rather to look back upon th« van- 
quished with contempt than upon the victon with grati- 
tude. We now despise those who in the Gopemican 
controversy could not conceive the apparent motion of 
the sun on the heliocentric hypothesis ; or those who, in 
opposition to Galileo, thought that a uniform force might 
be that which generated a velocity proportional to the 
space; or those who held there was something absurd 
in Newton's doctrine of the different refrangibility of 
differently coloured rays; or those who imagined that 
when elements combine, their sensible qualities must be 
manifest in the compound ; or those who were reluctant 
to give up the distinction of vegetables into herbs, shrubs, 
and trees. We cannot help thinking that men must 
have been singularly dull of comprehension to find a 
difficulty in admitting what is to us so plain and simple* 
We have a latent persuasion that we in their place should 
have bpen wiser and more clear-sighted i — that we should 
have taken the right side, and given our assent at onci^ 
to the truth. 

4. Yet in reality such a persuaaion is a mere delusion. 
The persons who, in such instances as the above, were 
on the losing side, were very far, in most cases, from 
being persons more prejudiced, or stupid, or narrow- 
minded, than the greater part of mankind now are; 
and the cause for which they fought was far from being 
a manifestly bad one, till it had been so decided by the 
result of the war. It is the peculiar character of scien- 
tific contests, that what is only an epigram with regard 
to other warfare is a truth in this ; and they who are 
defeated are really in the wrong. But they may, never- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 176 

thde88, be men of great subtilt j, sagacity* and genius ; 
and we nourish a very foolish self-eomplaeenoy when we 
suppose that we are their superiank That this is so, is 
proved by reeoUeeting that many of those who have made 
very great discoveries have laboured under the imper* 
fection of thought which was the obstacle to the next 
step in knowledge. Though Kepler detected with great 
aouteness the numerieal laws of the solar system, he 
laboured in vain to conceive the very simplest of the laws 
of motion by which the paths of the planets are governed. 
Though Priestley made some important steps in chemistry, 
he could not bring his mind to admit the doctrine of a 
general principle of oxidation. How many ingenious 
men in the last century rejected the Newtonian attrac- 
tion as an impossible chimera ! How many more, equally 
intelligent, have, in the same manner, in our own time, 
r^ected, I do not now mean as false, but as inconceivable, 
the doctrine of luminiferous undulations ! To err in this 
way is the lot, not only of men in general, but of men of 
great endowments, and very sincere love of truth. 

6. And those who liberate themselves from such per* 
plexities, and who thus go on in advance of their age in 
such matters, owe their superiority in no small degree to 
such discussions and controversies as those to which we 
now refer. In such controversies, the conceptions in 
question are turned in all directions, examined on all 
sides; the strength and the weakness of the maxims 
which men apply to them are fiilly tested ; the light of 
the brightest minds is diffiised to others. Inconsistency 
is unfolded into self-contradiction ; axioms are built up 
into a system of necessaiy truths ; and ready exemplifi- 
cations are accumulated of that which is to be proved or 
disproved concerning the ideas which are the basis of 
the controversy. 

The History of Mechanics from the time of K^ler 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



176 . CONSTRUCTION OF {SCIENCE. 

to that of Lagrange, is perhaps the best exempUfieatioa 
of the mode in which the progress of a science depends 
upon such disputes and speculations as give clearness and 
generality to its elementary conceptions. This, it is to 
be recollected, is the kind of progress of which we are 
now speaking; and this is the principal feature in the 
portion of scientific history which we have mentioned. 
For almost all that was to be done by reference to obser^ 
vation, was executed by €ralileo and his disciples. What 
remained was the task of generalization and simplifica- 
tion. And this was promoted in no small degree by the 
various controversies which took place within that period 
concerning mechanical conceptions: — as, for example, 
the question concerning the measure of the force of per- 
cussion ; — ^the war of the vis vwa ; — the controversy of 
the centre of oscillation ;— of the independence of statics 
and dynamics ; — of the principle of least action ;-— of tine 
evidence of the laws of motion ; — and of the number of 
laws really distinct. None of these discussions was witln 
out its influence in giving generality and clearness to the 
mechanical ideas of mathematicians: and therefore, though 
remote from general apprehension, and dealing with very 
abstract notions, they were of eminent use in the perfect- 
ing the science of mechanics. Similar controversies con- 
cerning fundamental notions, those, for example, which 
Galileo himself had to maintain, were no less useful in 
the formation of the science of hydrostatics. And the 
like struggles and conflicts, whether they take the form 
of controversies between several persons, or only operate 
in the efforts and fluctuations of the discoverer's mind, 
are always requisite before the conceptions acquire that 
clearness which makes them fit to appear in the enuncia- 
tion of scientific truth. 

This, then, is one object of the preceding Books ; — to 
bring under the reader's notice the main elements of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 177 

controversies which have thus had so important a share 
in the formation of the existing body of science, and the 
decisions on the controverted points to which the mature 
examination of the subject has led; and thus to give 
an abundant exhibition of that step which we term the 
Explication of Conceptions. ^ 

6. (II.) The result of such controversies as we have 
been speaking of, often appears to be summed up in a 
Definition ; and the controversy itself has often assumed 
the form of a battle of definitions. For example, the 
inquiry concerning the laws of felling bodies led to the 
question whether the proper definition of a uniform force 
is, that it generates a velocity proportional to the space 
from rest, or to the time. The controversy of the vis viva 
was, what was the proper definition of the measure of 
force. A principal question in the classification of mine- 
rals is, what is the definition of a mineral species. Phy- 
siologists have endeavoured to throw light on their sub« 
ject, by defining organizationy or some similar term. 

7. It is very important for us to observe, that these 
cpntroversies have never been questions of insulated and 
avhibrarjf definitions, as men seem often tempted to sup 
pose them to have been. In all cases there is a tacit 
assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed 
by means of the definition, and which gives it its import- 
ance. The dispute concerning the definition thus acquires 
a real value, and becomes a question concerning true and 
false. Thus in the discussion of the question. What is a 
uniform force? it was taken for granted that gravity is a 
uniform force: — in the debate of the vis viva^ it was 
assumed that in the mutual action of bodies the whole 
effect of the force is unchanged : — ^in the zoological defi- 
nition of species, (that it consists of individuals which 
have, or may have, sprung from the same parents,) it is 
presumed that individuals so related resemble each other 

VOL. n. N 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



178 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

more than those Which are excluded by such a definition ; 
or perhaps, that species so defined have permanent and 
definite differences. A definition of organization, or of 
any other term, which was not employed to express some 
principle, would be of no value. 

The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of 
a term may be a useful step in the explication of our 
conceptions; but this will be the case then only when 
we have under our consideration some proposition in 
which the term is employed. For then the question 
really is, how the conception shall be understood and 
defined in order that the proposition may be true. 

8. The establishment of a proposition requires an 
attention to observed fiicts, and can never be rightly 
derived from our conceptions alone. We must hereafter 
consider the necessity which exists that the facts should 
be rightly bound together, as well as that our conceptions 
should be clearly employed, in order to lead us to real 
knowledge. But we may observe here that, in such 
oases at least as we are now considering, the two pro- 
cesses are co*ordinate. To unfold our conceptions by the 
means of definitions has never been serviceable to science, 
except when it has been associated with an immediate use 
of the definitions. The endeavour to define a Uniform 
Force was combined with the assertion that gravity is a 
uniform force : the attempt to define Accelerating Force 
was immediately followed by the doctrine that accelera^ 
ting forces may be compounded : the process of defining 
Momentum was comiected with the principle that mo- 
menta gained and lost are equal : naturalists would have 
given in vain the definition of Species which we have 
quoted, if they had not also given the characters of 
species so separated. Definition and Proposition are the 
two handles of the instrument by which we apprehend 
truth ; the former is of no use without the latter. Defi- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 170 

nition may be the beat mode of explainiDg our conception; 
but that whicli alone makes it wortli nrhile to explain it 
in any mode, is the opportunity of using it in the expres^ 
sion of truth. When a definition is propounded to us M 
a useful step in knowledge, we are always entitled to ask 
what principle it serres to enunciate. If there be no 
answer to this inquiry, we define and giye clearness to our 
Qonoeptions in Tain. While we labour at such a task, we 
do but light up a vacant room ; we sharpen a knife with 
which we have nothing to cut ; we take exact aim, while 
we load our artillery with blank cartridge; we apply strict 
rules of grammar to sentences which have no meaning. 

If, on the other hand, we have under our considera- 
tion a proposition probably established, every step which 
we can make in giving distinctness and exactness to the 
terms which this proposition involves, is an important 
step towards scientific truth. In such cases, any improve^ 
ment in our definition is a real advance in the explication 
of our conception. The clearness of our expressions oasts 
a light upon the ideas which we contemplate and convey 
to others. 

d. (III.) But though defrnition may be subservient 
to a right explication of our conceptions, it is not essential 
to that process. It is absolutely necessary to every 
advance in our knowledge, that those by whom such 
advances are made should possess clearly the conceptions 
which they employ: but it is by no means neoessaiy 
that they should unfold these conceptions in the words 
of a formal definition. It is easily seen, by examining 
the course of Galileo's discoveries, that he had a distinct 
conception of the mofoing force which urges bodies down- 
wards upon an inclined plane, while he still hesitated 
wheUier to call it Momentum, Energy, Impetus, or 
Force, and did not venture to ofkat a definition of the 
thing which was the subject of bis thoughts. TUhe con- 

N2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



180 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

ception of pdarizalion was clear ia the miads of many 
optical speculators, from the time of Huyghens and 
Newton to that of Young and FresneL This conception 
we have defined to be "opposite properties depending 
upon opposite positions;'' but this notion was, bj the 
discoverers, though constantly assumed and expressed by 
means of superfluous hypotheses, never clothed in definite 
language. And in the mean time, it was the custom, 
among subordinate writers on the same subjects, to say 
that the term polarization had no definite meaning, and 
was merely an expression of our ignorance. The defini* 
tion which was offered by Haiiy and others of a ndneror 
logical jjp^oic* ;— " The same elements combined in the 
same proportions, with the same fundamental form;**-^ 
was false, inasmuch as it was incapable of being rigor- 
ously applied to any one case ; but this defect did not 
prevent the philosophers who propounderl such a defini- 
tion from making many valuable additions to mineralo* 
gical knowledge, in the way of identifying some species 
and distinguishing others. The right conception which 
they possessed in their minds prevented their being 
misled by their own very erroneous definition. The want 
of any precise definitions of strata^ and formations^ and 
epochs, among geologists, has not prevented the discus- 
sions which they have carried on upon such sulgects from 
being highly serviceable in the promotion of geological 
knowledge. For however much the apparent vagueness 
of these terms might leave their arguments open to caviL 
there was a general understanding prevalent amo^g the 
most intelligent cultivators of the science, as to what was 
meant in such expressions ; and this common underetand- 
ing sufficed to determine what evidence should be consi- 
dered conclusive and what inconclusive in these inquiries. 
And th^s the distinctness of conception, which is a reel 
requisite of scientific progress, existed in the minds of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 181 

inquirers, although definitions, ^vhich are a partial and 
accidental evidence of this distinctness, had not yet been 
hit upon. Tlie idea had been developed in nien*s minds, 
although a clothing of words had not been contrived for 
it, nor, perhaps, the necessity of such a vehicle felt: 
and thus that essential condition of the progress of know- 
ledge of which we are here speaking existed; while it 
was left to the succeeding speculators to put this unwritten 
rule in the form of a verbal statute. 

10. (IV.) Men are often prone to consider it as a 
thoughtless omission of an essential circumstance, and as 
a neglect which involves some blame, when knowledge 
thus assumes a form in which definitions, or rather con- 
ceptions, are implied but are not expressed. But in such 
a judgment, they assume that to be a matter of choice 
requiring attention only, which is in fact as difficult and 
precarious as any other portion of the task of discovery. 
To define, so that our definition shall have any scientific 
value, requires no small portion of that sagacity by which 
truth is detected. As we have already said, definitions 
and propositions are co-ordinate in their use and in their 
origin. In many cases, perhaps in most, the proposition 
which cotitains a scientific truth, is apprehended with 
confidence, but with some vagueness and vacillation, 
before it is put in a positive, distinct, and definite form. 
It Is thus known to be true, before it can be enunciated 
in terms each of which is rigorously defined. The busi- 
ness of definition is part of the business of discovery. 
When it has been clearly seen what ought to be our 
definition, it must be pretty well knowh what truth we 
have to state. The definition, as well as the discovery, 
rapposes a decided step in our knowledge to have been 
made. The writers on Logic in the middle ages, made 
Defitntion the last stage in the progress of knowledge; Mji 
in this arrangement at least, the history of sdenee, iKoii 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



182 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

tlie philosophy derived from the history, confirm their 
speculative views. If the explication of our conceptions 
ever assume the form of a definition, it will not be as an 
arbitrary process, or as a matter of course, but as Hie 
mark of one of those happy efforts of sagacity to which 
all the successive advances of our knowledge are owing. 

11. (V.) Our conceptions, then, even when they be- 
come so clear as the progress of knowledge requires, are 
not adequately expressed, or necessarily expressed at all, 
by means of definitions. We may ask, then, whether there 
is any other mode of expression in which we may look for 
the evidence and exposition of that peculiar exactness 
of thought which the formation of science demands. 
And in answer to this inquiry, we may refer to the pre- 
vious discussions respecting many of the fundamental 
ideas of the sciences. It has there been seen that these 
ideas involve many elementary truths which enter into 
the texture of our knowledge, introducing into it con- 
nexions and relations of the most important kind, although 
these elementary truths catinot be deduced from any 
verbal definition of the idea. It has been seen that these 
elementary truths may often be enunciated by means of 
AjnomSf stated in addition to, or in preference to, Definl- 
t^ions. For Example, the Idea of Cause, which forms the 
l)asis of the science of mechanics, makes its appearance 
in our elementary mechanical reasonings, not as a defini- 
tion, but by means of the axioms that causes are measured 
by their effects, and that reaction is equal and opposite to 
action. Such axioms, tacitly assumed or occasionally 
stated as maxims of acknowledged validity, belong to all 
the ideas which form the foundations of the sciences, and 
are constantly employed in the reasoning and speculations 
ef those who think clearly on such subjects. It may 
often be a task of some difficulty to detect and enunciate 
in wordfl the principles which are thus, perhaps silently 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 188 

and unc5onsciou8ly, taken for granted by those who have a 
share in the establishment of scientific truth : but inas- 
much as these principles are an essential element in our 
knowledge^ it is very important to our present purpose to 
separate them from the associated materials and to trace 
them to their origin. This accordingly 1 have attempted 
to do^ with regard to a considerable number of the most 
prominent oi such ideas, in the preceding Books. The 
reader will there find many of these ideas resolved into 
axioms Mid principles by means of which their effect 
upon the elementary reasonings of the various sciences 
may be expressed. That part of the Work is intended to 
form, in some measure^ a representation of the ideal side 
of our physical knowledge ; — a table of those contents of 
our conceptions which are not received directly from fttcts; 
—-an exhibition of rules to which we know that truth 
must conform. 

12, In order, however, that we may see the necessary 
cogency of these rules, we must possess, clearly and 
steadily, the ideas from which the rules How. In order 
to perceive the necessary relations of the circles of the 
sphere, we must possess clearly the Idea of solid Space : 
i— in order that we may see the demonstration of the 
composition of forces, we must have the Idea of Cause 
moulded into a distinct conception of statical force. This 
is that Clearness qf Ideas which we stipulate for in any 
one's mind, as the first essential condition of his making 
any new step in the discovery of truth. And we now see 
what answer we are able to give, if we are asked for a 
Criterion of this Clearness of Idea. The Criterion is, that 
the person shall see the necessity of the Axioms belongs 
ing to each Idea ;— shall accept them in such a manner as 
to perceive the cogency of the reasonings founded upon 
them. Thus a person has a clear idea of space who 
follows the reasonings of geometry and fully apprehends 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



134 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCl. 

their conclusiveuess. The explication of concepti<Ki% 
which we are speaking of as an essential part of real 
knowledge, is the process by which we bring the cleainess 
of our ideas ,to bear upon the formation of our knowledge; 
And this is done, as we have now seen, not always, nor 
generally, nor principally, by laying down a definition of 
the conception ; but by acquiring such a possession of it 
in our minds as enables, indeed compels us, to admit 
along with the conception, all the axioms and principles 
which it necessltrily implies^ and by which it produces its 
effect upon our reasonings. 

13. (VI.) But in order that we may make any real 
advance in the discovery of truth, our ideas must not 
only be clear, they must also be appr(^priate. Each 
science has for its basis a different class of ideas ; and the 
steps which constitute the progress of one science can 
never be made by employing the ideas of anoth^ kind of 
science* No genuine advance could ever be obtained in 
mechanics by applying to the subject the ideas of space 
%nd time merely : — ^no advance in chemistry by the use of 
inere mechanical conceptions : — no discovery in physiology, 
by referring facts to mere chemical and mechanical prin- 
ciples* Mechanics must involve the conception of force ; 
—chemistry, the conception of elementary composition ; 
*-— physiology, the conception of vital powers. Each 
science must advance by means of its appropriate concep- 
tions. Each has its own field, which extends as for as its 
principles can be applied. I have already noted the 
separation of several of these fields by the divisions of the 
preceding Books. The Mechanical, the Secondary Me- 
chanical, the Chemical, the Classificatory, the Biological 
Sciences form so many great provinces in the kingdom of 
knowledge, each in a great measure possessing its own 
peculiar fundamental principles. Every attempt to build 
up a new science by the application of principles which 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 185 

beloDg to fin old one, will lead to frivolous and barren 
speculations. 

This truth has been exemplified in all the instances in 
which subtle speculative men have failed in their attempts 
to frame new sciences, and especially in the essays of the 
andent schools of philosophy in Greece, as has already 
been stated in the History of Science. Aristotle and 
his followers endeavoured in vain to account for the 
Hiechanical relation of forces in the lever by applying th6 
inappropriate geometrical conceptions of the properties of 
the circle : — ^they failed in explaining the form of the 
luminous spot made by the sun shining through a hole, 
because they applied the inappropriate conception of a 
drcular quality in the sun's light : — they speculated to no 
purpose about the elementary composition of bodies, 
because they assumed the inappropriate conception of 
likeness between the elements and the compound, instead 
of the genuine notion of elements merely determining the 
qualities of the compound. And in like manner, in 
modem times, we have seen, in the history of the ftmda- 
mental ideas of the physiological sciences, how all the 
inappropriate mechanical and chemical and other ideas 
which were applied in succession to the subject failed in 
bring^g into view any genuine physiological truth. 

14. That the real cause of the failure in the instances 
above mentioned lay in the conceptions^ is plain. It was 
not ignorance of the facts which in these cases prevented 
the discovery of the truth. Aristotle was as well ac- 
quainted with the fact of the proportion of the weights 
which balance on a lever as Archimedes was, although 
Archimedes alone gave the true mechanical reason for 
the proportion. Aristotle knew that the rays of light are 
straight lines, although he was not a sufficiently just 
thinker to apply the conception of rays in explaining the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



186 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCfi. 

round imftge which the sun produces by shining through 
a triangular hole*. 

With regard to the doctrine of the four elements 
indeed) the inapplicability of the conception of composi*- 
tion of qualities^ required, perhaps^ to be proved by some 
reference to facts. But this conception was devised at 
first, and accepted by succeeding times, in a blind and 
gratuitous manner, which could hardly have happened if 
men had been awake to the necessary condition of our 
knowledge; — that the conceptions which we introduce 
into our doctrines are not arbitrary or accidental notions, 
but certain peculiar modes of apprehension strictly deter- 
mined by the subject of our speculations. 

15. (VII.) It may, however, be said that this injunc- 
tion that we &pe to employ appropriate conceptions only 
in the formation of our knowledge, cannot be of practical 
use, because we can only determine what ideas are appro^ 
priatO) by finding that they truly combine the facts. And 
this is to a certain extent true. Scientific discovery 
must ever depend upon some happy thought, of which we 
6annot trace the origin ; some fortunate cast of intellect, 
rising above all rules. No maxims can be given which 
inevitably lead to discovery. No precepts will elevate t 
man of ordinary endowments to the level of a man of 
genius : nor will an inquirer of truly inventive mind need 
to come to the teachef of inductive philosophy to learn 
how to exercise the faculties which nature has given bim. 
8uch persons as Kepler or Fresnel, or Brewster, will have 

• The Edinburgh Reviewer of my History {Ed, Rev, No. oxxxiii., 
p. 118,) thinks that Aristotle committed this error because he did not 
try the experiment under various forms. Yet he cannot but allow 
that the result follows by mere geometrical reasoning, without any 
experiment, from the fact which Aristotle did know, that the rays of 
light are straight lines. Is the Reviewer's mind in that stage of spe- 
culation in which the truths of geometry are considered as best proved 
experimentally ? 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXFUOATION Of OONCBPTtOHS. 187 

their powers of discoTering truth little augment^ by ftny 
injunctions respecting distinct and appropriate Ideas; 
and such men may very naturally question the utility of 
rules altogether. 

16. But yet the opinions which such persons may 
entertain, will not lead us to doubt concerning the value 
of the attempts to analyse and methodize the process of 
discovery. Who would attend to Kepler if he had main- 
tained that the speculations of Francis Bacon were 
worthless? Notwithstanding what has been said, we 
may venture to assert that the maxim which points out 
the necessity of ideas appropriate as well as clear, for 
the purpose of discovering truth, is not without its use. 
It may, at least, have a value as a caution or prohibition, 
and may thus turn us away from labours certain to be 
fruitless. We have already seen that this maxim, if duly 
attended to, would have at once condemned as wrongly 
directed the speculations of physiologists of the mathema- 
tical, mechanical, chemical, and vital-fluid schools ; since 
the ideas which the teachers of these schools introduce, 
cannot suffice for the purposes of physiology, which seeks 
truths respecting the vital powers. Again, it is clear 
from similar considerations that no definition of a mine- 
ralogical species by chemical characters alone can answer 
the end of science, since we seek to make mineralogy^ 
not an analytical but a classificatory science*. Even 
before the appropriate conception is matured in men'il 
minds so that they see clearly what it is, they may still 
have light enough to see what it is not. 

17. (VIII.) Another result of this view of the neoes- 
Rty of appropriate ideas, combined with a survey of the 

* This agrees with what M. Necker has well observed in hifl 
*,* Rigne Mineral" that those who have treated mineralogy as a merely 
chemical science, have substituted the analysis of substances for the 
classification of individuals. Bee ab6te, b. viii. chap. 3. p. 506. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



188 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE- 

history of science is, that though for the most part, as we 
shall see, the progress of Science consists in accumulating 
and combining facts rather than in debating concerning 
definitions ; there are still certain periods when the rfw- 
cnssion of Definitions may be the most useful mode of cul- 
tivating some special branch of science. This discussion 
is of course always to be conducted by the light of facts ; 
and as has already been said, along with the settlement 
of every good Definition will occur the corresponding 
establishment of some Proposition, But still at particular 
periods, the want of a Definition, or of the clear concep- 
tions which Definition supposes, may be peculiarly felt. 
A good and tenable Definition of Species in mineralogy 
would at present be perhaps the most important step 
which the science could make. A just conception of the 
nature of life, (and if expressed by means of a Definition 
so much the better,) can hardly Jfiail to give its possessor 
an immense advantage in the speculations which now 
come under the consideration of physiologists. And con- 
troversies respecting Definitions, in these cases and such 
as these, may be very far from idle and unprofitable. 

Thus the knowledge that clear and appropriate ideas 
are requisite for discovery, although it does not lead to 
any very precise precepts or supersede the value of 
natural sagacity and inventiveness, may still be of use to 
us in our pursuit after truth. It may show us what course 
of research is, in each stage of science, recommended by 
the general analogy of the history of knowledge ; and it 
may both save us from hopeless and barren paths of 
speculation, and make us advance with more courage and 
confidence, to know that we are looking for discoveries 
in the manner in which they have always hitherto been 
made. 

18. (IX.) Another consequence follows from the 
views presented in this Chapter, and it is the last I shall 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OF CONCEPTIONS. 189 

at. present mention. No scientific discovery can, with 
anj justice, be considered dtie to accident* In whatever 
manjier facts may be presented to the notice of a dis- 
coverer, they can never become the materials of exact 
knowledge, except they find his mind abeady provided 
with precise and suitable conceptions by which they may 
be analysed and connected. Indeed, as we have already 
seen, facts cannot be observed as facts, except in virtue 
of the conceptions which the observer* himself uncon- 
sciously supplies ; and they are not facts of observation 
for any purpose of discovery, except these familiar and 
unconscious acts of thought be themselves of a just and 
precise kind. But supposing the ikcts to be adequately 
observed,, they can never be combined into any new truth, 
except by means of some new conceptions, clear and ap- 
propriate, such as I have endeavoured to characterize. 
When the observer s mind is prepared with such instru- 
ments, a very few facts, or it may be a single one, may 
bring the process of discovery into action. But in such 
cases, this previous condition of the intellect^ and not the 
single fact, is really the main and peculiar cause of the 
success. The fact is merely the occasion by which the 
engine of discovery is brought into play sooner or later. 
It is, as I have elsewhere said, only the spark which dis- 
charges a gun already loaded and pointed ; and there is 
little propriety in speaking of such an accident as the 
cause why the bullet hits the mark. If it were true that 
the fall of an apple was the occasion of Newton's pursu- 
ing the train of thought which led to the doctrine of 
universal gravitation, the habits and constitution of New- 
ton's intellect, and not the apple, were the real source of 
this great event in the progress of knowledge. The 
common love of the marvellous, and the vulgar desire to 
bring down the greatest achievements of genius to our 

? B. 1. c. 2. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



190 CONSTEUCTION OP 8COTN0BU 

own level, may lead men to ascribe mch results to any 
casual circumstances which accompany them ; but no one 
who fririy considers the real nature of great discoveries, 
and the intellectual proceasQS which they involve, can 
seriously hold the opinion of their being the efibct of 
accident 

19« Such accidents never happen to oonmion men* 
Thousands of men, even of the most inquiring and spe-* 
culative men, had seen bodies fall; but who, except 
Newton, ever followed the accident to such consequences ? 
And in fact, how little of his train of thought was con- 
tained in, or even directly suggested by, the fall of the 
apple ! If the apple fall, said the discoverer, why should 
not the moon* the planets, the satellites fall ? But how 
much previous thought, what a steady conception of the 
universality of the laws of motion gathered from other 
sources, were requisite, that the inquirer should see any 
connexion in these cases ! Was it by accident that he 
saw in the apple an image of the moon, and of every 
body in the solar system? 

80. The same observations may be made with regard 
to the other cases which are sometimes adduced as ex- 
amples of accidental discovery. It has been said*, ** By 
the accidental placing of a rhomb of calcareous spar upon 
a book or line Bartholinus discovered the property of the 
Double Rrfractim of light." But Bartholinus could have 
seen no such consequence in the accident if he bad not 
previously had a clear conception of single rrfracHcm^ A 
lady, in describing an optical experiment which had been 
shown her, said of her teacher, '^ He told me to wcvea^ 
tmd diminish the angle of r^rooHon^ and at last I found 
that he only meant me to move my head up and down." 
At any rate, till the lady had acquired the notions which 
the technical terms convey, she could not have made 

* Ed. Jkv., No, cxxxiiL, p. >21. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EXPLICATION OP CONCEPTIONS. 191 

Bartholinii8*8 discovery by means of his accident. ^^ By 
accidentally combining two rhombs in different positions," 
it is added^ ^^Huyghens discoYered the Polmixatian of 
Light," Supposing that this experiment had been made 
Tvithout design, what Huyghens really obserred, was that 
the images appeared and disappeared alternately as he 
turned the rhombs round. But was it an easy or an 
obvious business to analyse this curious alternation into 
the circumstances of the rays of light having sides, as 
Newton expressed it, and into the additional hypotheses 
which are implied in the term polarization ? Those will 
be able to answer this question who have found how far 
from easy it is to understand clearly what is meant by 
polarimtion in this case, now that the property is fully 
established. Huyghens's success depended on his clear* 
ness of thought, for this enabled him to perform the intel* 
lectual analysis, which never would have occurred to 
most men, however often they had ^* accidentally com- 
bined two rhombs in different positions." ^^ By accideui* 
tally looking through a prism of the same substance, and 
turning it round, Mains discovered the polarization of 
light by reflection." Mains saw that, in some positions, 
the light reflected from the windows of the Louvre thus 
seen through the prism, became dim. Another man 
would have supposed this dimness the result of accident ; 
but his mind was differently constituted and disciplined. 
He considered the position of the window, and of the 
prism ; repeated the experiment over and over ; and in 
virtue of the eminently distinct conceptions of space which 
he possessed, resolved the phenomena into its geometrical 
conditions. A believer in accident would not have 
sought them ; a person of less clear ideas would not have 
fotmd them. A person must have a strange confidence 
in the virtue of chance, and the worthlessness of intellect,. 

• Ed. Rev., No. cxxxii!., p. 121. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



192 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

who can say*, even in the heat of debate, or the reckless- 
ness of anonymous criticism, that " in all these ftmda^ 
mental discoveries appropriate ideas had no share," and 
that the discoveries " might have been made by the most 
ordinary observers." 

21. I have now, I trust, shown in various ways, how 
the Ewflication of Conceptions^ including in this term 
their clear development from Fundamental Ideas in the 
discoverer's mind, as well as their precise expression in 
the form of Definitions or Axioms, when that can be 
done, is an essential part in the establishment of all exact 
and general physical truths. In doing this, I havee ndea- 
voured to explain in what sense the possession of clear 
and appropriate ideas is a main requisite for every step 
in scientific discovery. That it is far from being the only 
step, I shall soon have to show ; and if any obscurity 
remain on the subject treated of in the present chapter, 
it will, I hope, be removed when we have examined the 
other elements which enter into the constitution of our 
knowledge. 



Chapter III. 
OF FACTS AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 

We have now to examine how science is built up 
by the combination of facts. In doing this, we suppose 
that we have already obtained a supply of definite and 
certain facts, free from obscurity and doubt. We must, 
therefore, first consider under what conditions facts can 
assume this character. 

* Thb is said by the Edinburgh Reviewer of my History, in an 
attempt to disprove the necessity of clear and appropriate ideas for 
discovery. Ed. Bev,y No, cxzxiii., p. 122. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF FACTS AS THK MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 193 

When we inquire what facts are to be made the 
materials of science, perhaps the answer which we should 
most commonly receive would be, that they must be l/rue 
fa$t8j as distinguished from any mere inferences or opi« 
nions of our own. We should probably be told that we 
must be careful in. such a case to consider as facts only 
what we really oj^serve : that we must assert only what 
we see ; and believe nothing except upon the testimony 
of our senses. 

But such maxims are &r from being easy to apply^ as 
a little examination will convince us. 

1. It has been explained in the preceding part of 
this work that all perception of external objects and 
occurrences involves an active as well as a passive pro* 
cess of the mind ; — includes not only s^isations, but also 
ideas by which sensations are bound together, and have a 
imity given to them. From this it follows that there is 
a difficulty in separating in our perceptions what we 
receive from without, and what we ourselves contribute 
from within ; — what we perceive, and what we infer. In 
many cases, this difficulty is obvious to all: as, for 
example, when we witness the performances of a juggler 
or a ventriloquist. In these instances we imagine our«- 
9elves to see and to hear what certainly we do not see 
and hear. The performer takes advantage of the habits 
by which our minds supply interruptions and infer con? 
nexions ; and by giving us fallacious indications, he leads 
us to perceive as an actual fact, what does not happen 
at all. In these cases it is evident that we ourselves 
assist in making the fact ; for we make one which does 
not really exist. In other cases, though the fsLCt which 
we perceive be true, we can easily see that a large por* 
tion of the perception is our own act ; as when from the 
sight of a bird of prey we infer a carcass, or when we 

VOL. II. o 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



104 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

read a half-obliterated inscription. In the latter case, 
the mind supplies the meaning, and perhaps half the 
letters ; yet we do not hesitate to say that we aetaimy 
read the inscription. Thus, in many cases, our own 
inferences and interpretations enter into our fects. But 
this happens in many instances in which it is at first 
sight less obvious. When any one has seen an oak-tree 
blown down by a strong gust of wind, he does not think 
of the occurrence any otherwise than as a fiu?t of which 
b^ is assured by his senses. Yet by what sense does he 
perceive the force which he thus supposes the wind to 
exert? By what sense does he distinguish an oak-tree 
fh>m all other trees? It is clear upon reflection, that in 
such a case, his own mind supplies the conception of 
extraneous impulse and pressure, by which he thus inter- 
prets the motions observed, and the distinction of dif- 
ferent kinds of trees according to which he thus names 
the one under his notice. The idea of force, and the 
idea of definite resemblances and differences, are thus 
combined with the impressions on our senses, and form 
M undistinguished portion of that which we consider as 
the fact. And it is evident that we can in no other way 
perceive force, than by seeing motion ; and cannot give 
k name to any object without not only seeing a differ-* 
enee of single objects, but supposing a difference of classes 
of olgects. When we speak as if we saw impulse and 
attraction, things and classes, we really see only objects 
of various forms and colours, more or less numerous, 
variously combined. But do we really perceive so much 
as this? When we see the form, the size, the number, 
the motion of objects, are these really mere impressions 
on our senses, unmodified by any contribution or ope- 
ration of the mind itself? A very little attention will 
suflSce to convince us that this is not the case. When 
we see a windmill turning, it may happen, as we have 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF FACTB AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 195 

elsewhere noticed*, that we mistake the direction in 
which the sails turn : when we look at certain diagrams, 
they may appear either convex or concaye : when we see 
the moon first in the horiron and afterwards high up in the 
sky, we judge her to be much larger in the former than in 
the latter position, although to the eye she subtends the 
same angle. And in these oases and the like^ it has been 
seen that the error and cohfnsion which we thus incur 
arise from the mixture of acts of the mind itself with 
impressions on the senses. But such acts are, as wo 
have also seen, inseparable portions of the process of per<* 
oeption. A certain activity of the mind is involved, not 
only in seeing objects erroneously, but in seeing them 
at all. With regard to solid objects, this is generally 
acknowledged. When we seem to see an edifice occu- 
pying space in all dimensions, we really see only a repre^ 
sentation of it as it appears referred by perspective to a 
surface. The inference of the solid form is an operation 
of our own, alike when we look at a reality and when we 
look at a picture. But we may go further. Is plane 
figure really a mere sensation ? If we look at a decagon, 
do we see at once that it has ten sides, or is it not neces- 
sary for us to count them : and is not counting an act of 
the mind ? All objects are seen in space ; all otjects are 
seen as one or many : but are not the idea of space and^ 
the idea of number requisite in order that we may thus 
apprehend what we see ? That these ideas of space and 
number involve a connexion derived from the mind and 
not from the senses, appears, as we have already seen, 
from this, that those ideas afford us the materials of uni« 
tersdly and necessary truths : such truths as the senses 
cannot possibly supply. And thus even the perception 
of such facts as the size, shape, and number of olr}eets, 
cannot be said to be impressions of sense, distinct from 

Vol. i. p. 112. 

O 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



190 CONSTEUCnON OF SCIENCE. 

all acts of mind, and cannot be expected to be free from 
error on the ground of their being mere observed facts. 

Thus the difficulty which we have been illustrating, 
of distinguishing facts from inferences and from interpre- 
tations of facts, is not only great, but amounts to an 
impossibility. The separation at which we aimed in the 
outset of this discussion, and which was supposed to be 
necessary in order to obtain a firm groundwork for 
science, is found to be unattainable. We cannot obtain 
a sure basis of facts by rejecting all inferences and judg- 
ments of our own, for such inferences and judgments 
form an unavoidable element in all facts. We cannot 
exclude our ideas from our perceptions, for our percep* 
tions involve our ideas. 

2. But still it cannot be doubted that in selecting 
the facts which are to form the foundation of science, we 
must reduce them to their most simple and certain form; 
and must reject everything from which doubt or error 
may arise. Now since this, it appears, cannot be done, 
by rejecting the ideas which all fiEwts involve, in what 
manneir are we to conform to the obvious maxim that the 
fSEicts which form the basis of science must be perfectly 
definite and certain ? 

The analysis of facts into Ideas and Sensations, which 
we have so often referred to, suggests the answer to this 
inquiry. We are not able, nor need we endeavour, to 
exclude ideas from our facts, but we may be able to dis< 
cem, with perfect distinctness, the ideas which we include. 
We cannot observe any phenomena without applying to 
them such ideas as space and number, cause and resem* 
blance, and usually several others; but we may avoid 
applying these ideas in a wavering or obscure manner, 
wid confounding ideas with one another. We cannot read 
any of the inscriptions which nature presents to us, with- 
out interpreting them by means of some language Mhich 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF FACTS AS THE MATERIALS OF SCIENCE. 



iS7 



we ourselves are accustomed to speak, but we may make 
it our business to acquaiut ourselves perfectly with the 
language which we thus employ, and to interpret it 
according to the rigorous rules of grammar and analogy. 

This maxim, that when facts are employed as the 
basis of science, we must distinguish clearly the ideas 
which they involve, and must apply these in a distinct 
and rigorous manner, will be found to be a more precise 
guide than we might perhaps at first expect. We may 
notice one or two Rules which flow from -it. 

3. In the first place, facts, when used as the materials 
of physical science, must be referred to conceptions of the 
intellect onlt/^ all emotions of fear, admiration, and the 
like, being rejected or subdued. Thus the observations of 
phenomena which are related as portents and prodigies, 
striking terror and boding evil, are of no value for pur- 
poses of science. The tales of armies seen warring in 
the sky, the sound of arms heard from the clouds, fiery 
dragons, chariots, swords seen in the air, may refer to 
meteorological phenomena; but the records of pheno^ 
mena observed in the state of mind which these descrip^ 
tions imply can be of no scientific value. We cannot 
make the poets our observers. 

Annorum scmiiam toto Germania ooelo 
Audiit ; insolitis tFemuenmt motibus Alpes. 
Yox quoque per lucos yulgo exaudita silentes 
Iiigens, et Bimulacra modis pallentia miris 
Visa sub obsoarom noctis : pecndesqne locato. 

The mixture of fancy and emotion with the observation 
of fecte has often disfigured them to an extent which 
is too familiar to all to need illustration. We have an 
example of this result in the manner in which Comets 
are described in the treatises of the middle ages. In 
such works, these bodies are regularly distributed into 
several classes, accordingly as they assume the form of a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



108 CONOTBUCriON OF saENCE. 

BWord, of a Bpear, of a cross, and so on. When sucli 
resemblances had become matters of interest, the impress 
sions of the senses were governed, not by the rigorous 
conceptions of form and colour, but by these assimied 
images; and under these circumstances we can attach 
little value to the statement of what was seen. 

In all such phenomena, the reference of the ol^ects 
to the exact ideas of space, number, position, motion, and 
the like, is the first step of science : and accordingly, this 
reference was made at an early period in those scienceii 
which made an early progress, as, for instance, astronomy- 
Yet even in astronomy there appears to have been a 
period when the predominant conceptions of men in 
regarding the heavens and the stars pointed to mythical 
^ory and supernatural influence, rather than to mere 
relations of space, time, and motion : and of this primeval 
condition of those who gazed at the stars, we seem to 
have ^mnants in the constellations, in the mythological 
names of the planets, and in the early prevalence of astror 
logy. It was only at a later period, when men had begun 
to measure the places, or at least to count the revolutions! 
of the stars, that astronomy had its birth. 

4. And thus we are led to another Rule : — ^that in 
collecting facts which are to be made the basis of science, 
the facts are to be observed, as far as possible, toith refer-' 
ence to place^ figwre^ number^ motion^ and the like concep- 
tions; which depending upon the ideas of space and 
time, are the most universal, exact, and simple of our con- 
ceptions. It was by early attention to these relations in 
the case of the heavenly bodies, that the ancients formed 
the science of astronomy : it was by not making precise 
observations of this kind in the case of terrestrial bodies, 
that they foiled in framing a science of the mechanics of 
motion* They succeeded in optics as for as they made 
observations of this nature ; but when they ceased to 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF FACTS AS THE MATE&IALS OF 8CIENCE. 190 

trace the geometrical paths of rajg in the actual experi- 
ment, they ceased to go forwards in the knowledge of 
this subject. 

6. But we may state a further Bule :•— that though 
these relations of time and space are highly important in 
almost all facts, we are not to confine ourvelyes to these: 
hut. are to consider the phenomena with reference to 
other concq^twns also: it being always understood that 
these conceptions are to be made as exact and rigorous 
as those of geometry Mid number. Thus the science of 
Harmonics arose from considering sounds with reference 
to cOfwordi and discords; Hie science of Mechanics arose 
from Hot only observing motions as they take place in 
time and space^ but further, referring them to force as 
iheir cause* And in like mann^ other sciences depend 
upon other Ideas, which, as I have endeayoured to show^ 
Hre not less fundam^ital than those of time and space; 
and like them, capable of leading to rigorous conse^ 
quences. 

6. Thus the fBcts which we assume as the basis of 
meaoe are to be freed from all the mists which imagina^ 
tion and passion throw round them ; and to be separated 
into those elementary fiEU^ts which exhibit simple and 
evident relations of Time, or Space, or Cause, or some 
other ideas equally clear. We resolve the complex ap? 
pearances which nature offers to us, and the mixed and 
manifold modes of looking at these appearances which 
rise in our thoughts, into limited, definite, and clearly^ 
understood portions. This process we may term the 
Decomposition of Facts. It is the beginning of exa^t 
knowledge, — the first step in the formation of all science* 
This decomposition of fiacts into elementary iacts, clearly 
understood and surely ascertained, must precede all dis- 
covery of the laws of nature. 

7. But though this step is necessary, it is not in&Uibly 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



206 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

sufficient. It by no means follows that when we have 
thus decomposed facts into elementary truths of observa'* 
tion, we shall soon be able to combine these so as to 
obtain truths of a higher and more speculative kind. We 
have examples which show us how far this is from being 
a necessary consequence of the former step. Observa-^ 
tions of the weather, made and recorded for many years, 
have not led to any general truths, forming a science of 
Meteorology: and although great numerical, precision hasl 
been given to such observations by means of barometers, 
thermometers, and other instruments, still no general laws 
regulating the cycles of change of such phenomena have 
yet been discovered. In like manner the fi^ces of crys* 
tals, and the sides of the polygons which these crystals 
form, were counted, and thus numerical facts were ob- 
tained, perfectly true and definite, but still of no value 
for purposes of science. And when it was discovered 
what element of the form of crystals it was important to 
observe and measure, namely, the angle made by two 
faces with each other, this discovery was a step of a higher 
order, and did not belong to that department, of mere 
exact observation of manifest facts, with which we are 
here concerned, 

8. When the complex facts which nature offers to us 
are thus decomposed into simple facts, the decomposition, 
in general, leads to the introduction of tefTns and phrases, 
more or less technical, by which these simple fiwts are 
described. Thus when astronomy was thus made a science 
of measurement, the things measured were soon described 
as hours, and dat/s, and cycles, altitude and declination, 
phases and aspects. In the same manner in music, the 
concords had names assigned them, as diapente, diatessaron, 
diapason; in studying optics, the rays of light were 
spoken of as having their course altered by reflection and 
refraction; and when useful observations began to be 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF FACTS AS THE MATISWALS OF SCIENCE. 201 

made in mechanics^ the observers spoke oi force^ pressure^ 
momentum^ inertia, and the like. 

When we take phenomena in which the leading idea 
is Resemblance, and resolve them into precise component 
facts, we obtain some kind of classification ; as, for in- 
stance, when we lay down certain rules by which parti- 
cular trees, or particular animals are to be known.. This 
is the earliest form of natural history ; and the classifica-* 
tion which it involves is that which corresponds, nearly 
or exactly, with the usual names of the objects thus 
classified. 

9. Thus the first attempts to render observation certain 
and exact, lead to a decomposition of the obvious facts 
into elementary facts, connected by the ideas of space, 
time, number, cause, likeness, and others: and into a classi- 
fication of the simple facts, more or less just, and marked 
by names either common or technicaL Elementary facts, 
and individual objects, thus observed and classified, form 
the materials of science ; and any improvement in classi- 
fication or nomenclature, or any discovery of a connexion 
among the materials thus acciunulated, leads us fairly 
within the precincts of science. We must now, there- 
fore, consider the manner in which science is built up of 
such materials ; — the process by which they are brought 
into their places, and the texture of the bond which 
unites and cements them^ 



Chapteb IV. 
OF THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 

Facts such as the last chapter speaks of are, by means 
of such conceptions as are described in the preceding 
chapter, bound together so as to give rise to those gene- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



202 CONSTRUOnON OF 80IEN0E* 

ral propositions of which science consists. Thus the &ct9 
that the planets revolve about the sun in certain periodio 
times and at certain distancesy are included and connected 
in Kepler's law by means of such conceptions as thd 
squares of numbers^ the cubes of {jUstances, and the propor^ 
tionalify of these quantities. Again the existence of this 
proportion in the motions of any two planets, forms a set 
of hjctB which may all be combined by means of the 
conception of a certain central acoeleratinjf farce, as was 
proved by Newton. The whole of our physical knowledge 
consists in the establishment of such propositions; and in 
all such cases facts are bound together by the aid of suit- 
able conceptions. This part of the formation of our 
knowledge we have called the CoUigaiUm of Facts : and 
we may apply this term to every case in which, by an act 
of the intellect, we establish a precise connexion among 
the phenomena which are presented to our senses. The 
knowledge of such connexions, accumulated and syste- 
matijDed, is Science. On the steps by which science is 
thus collected firom phenomena we shall proceed now to 
make a few remarks. 

1. Science begins with common observation of fects, 
in which we are not conscious of any peculiar discipline 
or habit of thought exercised in observing. Thus the 
common perceptions of the appearances and recurrences 
of the celestial luminaries, were the first steps of a^tro* 
nomy: the obvious cases in which bodies fall or are 
supported were the beginning of mechanics ; the familiar 
aspects of visible things were the origin of optics ; the 
usual distinctions of well-known plants first gave rise to 
botany. Facts bdonging to such parts of our knowledge 
are noticed by us, and accumulated in our memories in 
the common cmirse of our habits, almost without our 
being aware that we are observing and c<^i6cting fistcts. 
Yet such facts may lead to many scientific truths; for 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF. THE COLLIGATION OF FACTS. 203 

instance, in the first stages of Astronomy (as we have shown 
in the History) such &ct8 lead to Methods of Intercalation 
and Rules of the Recurrence of Eclipses. In succeeding 
stages of science, more especial attentioh and preparation 
on the part of the observer, and a selection of certain 
kinds of facts, becomes necessary ; but there is an early 
period in the progress of knowledge at which man is a 
physical philosopher without seeking to be so, or being 
aware that he is so. 

2. But in all stages of the progress, even in that 
early one of which we have just spoken, it is necessary, 
in order that the iBcts may be fit materials of any know* 
ledge, that they should be decomposed into elementary 
facts, and these observed with precision. Thus in the first 
infiEincy of astronomy, the recurrence of phases of the 
moon, of places of the sun's rising and setting, of planets^ 
of eclipses, was observed to take place at intervals of cer^^ 
tain definite numbers of days and in a certain exact order; 
find thus it was that the observations became portions of 
astronomical science. In other cases, although the facts 
were equally numerous, and their general aspect equally 
fiamiliar, they led to no science, because their exact cir- 
cumstances were not apprehended. A vague and loose 
mode of looking at facts very easily observable, left men 
for a long time under the belief that a body ten times as 
heavy as another falls ten times as fast; — ^that objects 
immersed in water are always magnified, without regard 
to the form of the surface ; — ^that the magnet exerts an 
irresistible force ; — ^that crystal is always found associated 
with ice; — and the like. These and many others are 
examples how blind and careless man can be, even in 
observation of the plainest and commonest appearances ; 
and they show us that the mere fiiculties of perception, 
fdthough constantly exercised upon innumerable objects, 
may long fail in leading to any exact knowledge. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



204 . CONSTEUCnON OF SCIENCE. 

3- If we further inquire what was the favourable con- 
dition through which some special classes of facts were, 
from the first, fitted to become portions of science, we 
shall find it to have been principally this; — that these 
facts were considered with reference to the ideas of time, 
number, and space, whidi are ideas possessing peculiar 
definiteness and precision ; so that with regard to them 
confusion and indistinctness are hardly possible. Thd 
interval from new moon to new moon was always a par- 
ticular number of days : the sun in his yearly course rose 
and set near to a known succession of distant objects : 
the moon's path passed among the stars in a certain order : 
•~these are observations in which mistake and obscurity 
are not likely to occur, if the smallest degree of attention 
is bestowed upon the task. To count a number is, 
from the first opening of man's mental fiu^ulties, an ope« 
ration which no science can render more precise. The 
relations of space are nearest to those of number in 
obvious and universal evidence. Sciences depending upon 
these ideas arise with the first dawn of intellectual civili- 
zation. But few of the other ideas which man employs 
in the acquisition of knowledge possess this clearness in 
their common use. The idea of resemblance may be 
noticed as coming next to those of space and number in 
original precision ; and the idea of cause, in a certain 
more vague and general mode of application, suflicient 
for the purposes of common life, but not for the ends of 
science, exercises a very extensive influence over men^s 
thou^ts. But the other ideas on which science depends, 
with the conceptions which arise out of them, are not 
unfolded till a much later period of intellectual progress ; 
and therefore, except in such limited cases as I have 
noticed, the observations of common spectators and uncul- 
tivated nations, however numerous or varied, are of little 
or no effect in giving rise to science. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF THE COLLIGATION OP FACTS. 205 

4. Let us now suppose that, besides common every- 
day perception of facts, we turn our attention to some 
other occurrences and appearances, with a design of o\h 
taining from them speculative knowledge. This process 
is more peculiarly called observation^ or, when we our- 
selves occasion the facts, e^pperiment. But the same re^ 
mark which we have already made, still holds good here* 
These facts can be of no value except they are resolved 
into those exact conceptions which contain the essential 
circumstances of the case. They must be determined, not 
indeed necessarily, as has sometimes been said, ^' accord- 
ing to Number, Weight, and Measure ;" for, as we have 
endeavoured to show in the preceding Books ?, there are 
many other conceptions to which phenomena may be 
subordinated quite diiferent from these, and yet not at 
all less definite and precise. But in order that the facts 
obtained by observation and experiment may be capable 
of being used in furtherance of our exact and solid know* 
ledge, they must be apprehended and analysed according 
to some conceptions which, applied for this purpose, give 
distinct and definite results, such as can be steadily taken 
hold of and reasoned from ; that is, they must be referred 
to clear and appropriate ideas, according to the manner 
in which we have already explained this condition of the 
derivation of our knowledge. The phenomena of light, 
when they are such as to indicate sides in the ray, must 
be referred to the conception of polarization ; the pheno- 
mena of mixture, when there is an alteration of qualities 
as well as quantities, must be combined by a conception 
of elementary composition. And thus when mere position, 
and number, and resemblance, will no longer answer the 
purpose of enabling us to connect the facts, we call 
in other ideas, in such cases more efficacious, though 
less obvious. 



* Books v., vi., vii., viii,, ix., x. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



200 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

5. But how are we in these cases to discover such 
ideas, and to judge which will be efficacious, in leading to 
a scientific combination of our experimental data? To 
this question we must in the first place answer, that the 
first and great instrument by which facts, so observed 
with a view to the formation of exact knowledge, are 
combined into important and permanent truths, is that 
peculiar sagacity which belongs to the genius of a dis-^ 
coverer; and which, while it supplies those distinct 
and appropriate conceptions which lead to its success^ 
cannot be limited by rules, or expressed in definitions. 
It would be difficult or impossible to describe in words 
the habits of thought which led Archimedes to refer the 
conditions of equiUbriuiii on the lever to the conception 
of pressure, while Aristotle could not see in them anything 
more than the results of the strangeness of the properties 
of the circle ; — or which impelled Pascal to explain by 
means of the conception of the weight of air thd fact 
which his predecessors had connected by the notion of 
nature's horror of a vacuum ; — or which caused Vitellio 
and Roger Bacon to refer the magnifying power of a 
convex lens to the bending of the rays of light towards 
the perpendicular by refraction, while others conceived 
the effect to result from the matter of medium, with no 
consideration of its form* These are what are commonly 
spoken of as felicitous and inexplicable strokes of in* 
ventive talent ; and such, no doubt, they are^ No rulei^ 
can ensure to us similar success in new cases ; or can 
enable men who do not possess similar endowments to 
make like advances in knowledge. 

6. Yet still we may do something in tracing the 
process by which such discoveries are made; and this it 
is here our business to do. We may observe that these, 
and the like discoveries, are not improperly described aa 
happy guesses; and that guesses, in these as in other 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OP THE OOLUOATTON OP PACTS. 207 

luBtances, imply various suppositions made, of which some 
one tarns out to be the right one. We may, in such cases, 
oonceiTe the discoverer as inventing and trying many 
conjectures, till he finds one which answers the purpose 
of combining the scattered facts into a single rule. The 
discovery of general truths from special facts is performed, 
commonly at least, and more commonly than at first ap- 
pears, by the use of a series of suppositions, or hypothesesy 
which are looked at in quick succession, and of which the 
one which really leads to truth is rapidly detected, and 
when caught sight of, firmly held, verified, and followed 
to its consequences. In the minds of most discoverers, 
this process of invention, trial, and acceptance or rejection 
of the hypothesis, goes on so rapidly that we cannot trace 
it in its successive steps. But in some instances we can 
do so; and we can also see that the other examples of 
discovery do not differ essentially from these. The same 
intellectual operations take place in other cases, although 
this often happens so instantaneously that we lose the 
trace of the progression. In the disc6veries made by 
Kepler, we have a curious and memorable exhibition of 
this process in its details. Thanks to his communicative 
disposition, we know that he made nineteen hypotheses 
with regard to the motion of Mars, and calculated the 
results of each, before he established the true doctrine, 
that the planet's path is an ellipse. We know, in like 
manner, that Gralileo made wrong suppositions respecting 
the laws of felling bodies, and Mariotte, concerning the 
motion of water in a siphon, before they hit upon the 
correct view of these cases. 

7. But it has very often happened in the history of 
science, that the erroneous hypotheses which preceded 
the discovery of the truth have been made, not by the 
discoverer himself, but by his precursors ; to whom he 
thus owed the service, often an important one in such 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



208 . CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

cases, of exhausting the most tempting forms of eiror. 
Thus the various fruitless suppositions by which Kepler 
endeavoured to discover the law of refraction, led the 
way to its real detection by Snell; Kepler's numerous 
imaginations concerning the forces by which the celestial 
motions are produced, — ^his " physical reasonings " as he 
termed them, — were a natural prelude to the truer physi- 
cal reasonings of Newton. The various hypotheses by 
which the suspension of vapour in air had been explained, 
and their fiedlure, left the field open for Dalton with iiis 
doctrine of the mechanical mixture of gases. In most 
cases, if we could truly analyse the operation of the 
thoughts of those who make, or who endeavour to make 
discoveries in science, we should find that many more 
suppositions pass through their minds than those which 
are expressed in words ; many a possible combination of 
conceptions is formed and soon rejected. There is a con- 
stant invention and activity, a perpetual creating and 
selecting power at work, of which the last results only 
are exhibited to us. Trains of hypotheses are called up 
and pass rapidly in review ; and the judgment makes its 
choice from the varied group. 

8. It would, however, be a great mistake to suppose 
that the hypotheses, among which our choice thus lies, 
are constructed by an enumeration of obvious cases, or 
by a wanton alteration of relations which occur in some 
first hypothesis. It may, indeed, sometimes happen that 
the proposition which is finally established is such as may 
be formed, by some slight alteration, from those which 
are justly rejected. Thus Kepler's elliptical theory of 
Mars's motions involved relations of lines and angles much 
of the same nature as his previous false suppositions : and 
the true law of refraction so much resembles those erro- 
neous ones which he tried, that we cannot help wondering 
how he chanced to miss it. But it more frequently 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OP THE COLUaATION OF FAOTS. 209 

happens that new truths are brought into view by the appli^ 
cation of new ideas, not bj new modifications of old ones. 
The cause of the properties of the lever was learnt, not 
by introducing any new geometrical combination of lines 
and circles, but by referring the properties to genuine 
mechanical conceptions. "Wlien the motions of the pla- 
nets were to be explained, this was done, not by merely 
improving the previous notions, of cycles of time, but by 
introducing the new conception of epicycles in space. 
The doctrine of the four simple elements was expelled, 
not by forming any new scheme of elements which should 
impart, according to new rules, their sensible qualities to 
their compounds, but by considering the elements of bodies 
as neutralizing each other. The fringes of shadows could 
not be explained by ascribing new properties to the single 
rays of light, but were reduced to law by referring them 
to the interference of several rays. 

Since the true supposition is thus very frequently 
something altogether diverse from all the obvious con- 
jectures and combinations, we see here how far we are 
from being able to reduce discovery to rule, or to give 
any precepts by which the want of real invention and 
sagacity shall be supplied. We may warn and encourage 
these faculties when they exist, but we cannot create 
them, or make great discoveries when they are absent. 

9. The conceptions which a true theory requires are 
very often clothed in a hypothesis which connects with them 
several superfluous and irrelevant circumstances. Thus 
the conception of the polarization of light was originally 
represented under the image of particles of light having 
their poles all turned in the same direction. The laws of 
heat may be made out perhaps most conveniently by con- 
ceiving heat to be a fluid. The attraction of gravitation 
might have been successfully applied to the explanation of 
fitcts, if Newton had throughout treated attraction as the 

VOL. II. p 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



210 CONSTBUOTION OF 0CIBNCB. 

result of an ether dlfiused through space ; a supposition 
which he hw noticed as a possibility. The doctrine of 
definite and multiple proportions may be conveniently 
expressed by the hypothesis of atom^* In such cases the 
hypothesis may serve at first to facilitate the introduction 
of a new conception. Thus a pervading ether might for a 
time remove a difficulty, which some persons find consider*- 
ablet of imagining a body to exert force at a distance. A 
particle with poles is more easily conceived than polariza* 
tion in the abstract. And if hypotheses thus employed will 
really explain the facts by means of a few simple assump- 
tionsy the laws may afterwards be reduced to a simpler 
form than that in which they were first suggested. The 
general laws of heat, of attraction, of polarization, of 
multiple proportions, are now certain, whatever image we 
may form to ourselves of their ultimate causes. 

10. In order, then, to discover scientific truths^ 
suppositions consisting either of new conceptions, or of 
new combinations of old ones, are to be made, till we 
find one which succeeds in binding together the hcts. 
But how are we to find this? How is the trial to be 
made? What is meant by success in these cases? To 
this we reply, that our inquiry must be, whether the 
facts have the same relation in the hypothesis which 
they have in reality ; — whether the results of our sup- 
positions agree with the phenomena which nature pre- 
sents to us. For this purpose we must both carefully 
observe the phenomena, and steadily trace the conse* 
quences of our assumptions, till we can Imng the two 
into comparison. The Conceptions which our hypotheses 
involve, being derived from certain Fundamental Ideas^ 
afford a basis of rigorous reasoning, as we have shown in 
the Books respecting those Ideas. And the results to 
which this reasoning leads will be susceptible of being 
verified or contradicted by observation of the foots. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OP THE COLLIGATION OP PACTS, 211 

Thus the EpicyoUoal Theory of the Moou, once assumed, 
detennined A^hat the moon's place among the stars ought 
to be at any given time, and could therefore be tested by 
actually observing the moon's places. The doctrine that 
musical strings of the same length stretched with weights 
of 1, 4, 9, 16> would give the musical intervals of an 
octave, a fifth, a fourth, in succession, could be put to the 
trial by any one whose ear was capable of appreciating 
those intervals: and the inference which follows from 
this doctrine by numerical reasoning, — that there must be 
certain imperfections in the concords of every musical 
scale,^-could in like manner be confirmed by tryingvarious 
modes of Temperament. In like manner all received 
theories in science, up to the present time, have been 
established by taking up some supposition, aad comparing 
it, directly or by means of its remoter consequences, 
v?ith the facts it was intended to embrace. Its agree- 
ment, under certain cautions and conditions, of which 
we may hereafter speak, is held to be the evidence of 
its truth. It answers its genuine purpose, the colligation 
of facts. 

11. When we have, in any sul^ect, succeeded in one 
attempt of this kind, and obtained some true bond of unity 
by which the phenomena are held together, the subject is 
open to further prosecution ; which ulterior process may, 
for the most part, be conducted in a more formal and tech<« 
nical manner. The first great outline of the subject is 
drawn ; and the finishing of the resemblance of nature 
demands a more minute pencilling, but perhaps requires 
less of genius in the master. In the pursuance of this 
task, rules and precepts may be given, and features and 
leading circumstances pointed out, of which it may often 
be useful to the inquirer to be aware. 

Before proceeding further, I shall speak of some cha- 
racteristic marks which belong to such scientific processes 

P 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



212 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

as are now the subject of our consideration^ and which 
may sometimes aid us in determining when the task has 
been rightly executed. 



Chapteb V. 

OP CERTAIN CHARACTERISTICS OP SCIENTIFIC 
INDUCTION. 

1. The two operations spoken of in the preceding 
chapters, — the Explication of the Conceptions of our own 
minds, and the Colligation of observed Facts by the aid 
of such Conceptions, — are, as we have just said, insepa* 
rably connected with each other. When united, and 
employed in collecting knowledge from the phenomena 
which the world presents to us, they constitute the mental 
process of Induction ; which is usually and justly spoken 
of as the genuine source of all our real general knowledge 
respecting the external world. And we see, from the 
preceding analysis of this process into its two constitu- 
ents, from what origin it derives each of its characters. 
It is real^ because it arises from the combination of real 
fiEtcts, but it is general^ because it implies the possession 
of general ideas. Without the former, it would not be 
knowledge of the external world ; without the latter, it 
would not be knowledge at all. When Ideas and Facts 
are separated from each other, the neglect of facts gives 
rise to empty speculations, idle subtleties, visionary inven- 
tions, false opinions concerning the laws of phenomena, 
disregard of the true aspect of nature : while the want of 
ideas leaves the mind overwhelmed, bewildered, and stu- 
pified by particular sensations, with no means of connect- 
ing the past with the future, the absent with the present, 
the example with the rule ; open to the impression of all 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTERISTICS OP SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 213 

appearances, but capable of appropriating none. Ideas are 
the Form^ facts the Material^ of our structure. Knowledge 
does not consist in the empty mould, or in the brute 
mass of matter, but in the rightly-moulded substance. 
Induction gathers general truths from particular facts ;— - 
and in her harvest, the com and the reaper, the solid ears 
and the binding band, are alike requisite. All our know- 
ledge of nature is obtained by Induction ; the term being 
understood according to the explanation we have now 
given. And our knowledge is then most complete, then 
most truly deserves the name of Science, when both its 
elements are most perfect ; — when the Ideas which have 
been concerned in its formation have, at every step, been 
clear and consistent ; — and when they have, at every step 
also, been employed in binding together real and certain 
Facts. Of such Induction I have already given so many 
examples and illustrations in the two preceding chapters, 
that I need not now dwell further upon the subject. 

2. Induction is familiarly spoken of as the process by 
which we collect a general proposition from a number of 
particular cases : and it appears to be frequently imagined 
that the general proposition results from a mere juxta- 
position of the cases, or at most, from merely conjoining 
and extending them. But if we consider the process 
more closely, as exhibited in the cases lately spoken of, 
we shall perceive that this is an inadequate account of 
the matter. The particular facts are not merely brought 
together, but there is a new element added to the combi- 
nation by the very act of thought by which they are com- 
bined. There is a conception of the mind introduced in 
the general proposition, which did not exist in any of the 
observed facts. When the Greeks, after long observing 
^he motions of the planets, saw that these motions might 
be rightly considered as produced by the motion of one 
wheel revolving in the inside of another wheels th^Sj^r 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



214 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

wheels were creations of their minds, added to the fkcts 
which they perceived by sense. And 'even if the wheels 
were no longer supposed to be material, but were reduced 
to mere geometrical spheres or circles, they were not 
the less products of the mind alone, — something addi- 
tional to the facts observed. The same is the case in all 
other discoveries. The fiacts are known, but they are 
insulated and unconnected, till the discoverer supplies 
from his own stores a principle of connexion. The pearls 
are there, but they will not hang together till some one 
provides the string. The distances and periods of the 
planets were all so many separate facts; by KepWs 
Third Law they are connected into a single truth : but 
the conceptions which this law involves were supplied by 
Kepler's mind, and without these, the facts were of no 
avail. The planets described ellipses round the sun, in 
the contemplation of others as well as of Newton ; but 
Newton conceived the deflection from the tangent in 
these elliptical motions in a new light, — as the effect of 
a central force following a certain law ; and then it was 
that such a force was discovered truly to exist. 

Thus"*^ in each inference made by Induction, there 
is introduced some general conception, which is given, 
not by the phenomena, but by the mind. The conclu-^ 
sion is not contained in the premises, but includes them 
by the introduction of a new generality. In order to 
obtain our inference, we travel beyond the cases which 
we have before us ; we consider them as mere exemplifi-i 
cations of some ideal case in which the relations are com- 
plete and intelligible. We take a standard, and measure 
the facts by it ; and this standard is constructed by us, 
not offered by Nature. We assert, for example, that a 
body left to itself will move on with unaltered velocity; 

* I repeat here remarks made at the end of the Mechanical Euclid^ 
p. 178. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARAOTEBiarnOS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 216 

not because our senses ever disclosed to us a body doing 
this, but because (taking this as our ideal case) we find 
that all actual cases are intelligible and explicable bj 
means of the Conception of Forces^ causing change and 
motion, and exerted by surrounding bodies* In like 
manner^ we see bodies striking ^ach other, and thus 
moving and stopping, accelerating and retarding each 
other : but in all this, we do not perceive by our senses 
tiiat abstract quantity Mommbwn^ which is always lost 
by one body as it is gained by another. This Momentum 
is a creation of the ibind, brought in among the facts, in 
order to convert their apparent confusion into order, their 
seeming chance into certainty, their perplexing variety 
into simplicity. This the Conception of Momentum 
gained and lost does : and in like manner, in any other 
case in which a truth is established by Induction, some 
Conception is introduced, some Idea is applied, as the 
means of binding together the facts, and thus producing 
the truth. 

8. Hence in every inference by Induction there is 
some Conception superindiiced upon the Facts : and we 
may henceforth conceive this to be the peculiar import of 
the term Induction. I am not to be understood as assert- 
ing that the term was originally or anciently employed 
vfith this notion of its meaning ; for the peculiar feature 
just pointed out in Induction has generally been over- 
looked. This appears by the accounts generally given of 
Induction. "Induction," says Aristotle*, "is when by 
means of one extreme termf we infer the other extreme 
term to be true of the middle term." Thus, (to take 
suck exemplifications as belong to our subject,) from 

* Analyi. Prior., lib. ii., c. 23. tl€pl rfjs ^naywyrjt. 
t The Bjllogigm here aUuded to would be tbis :— 

Mercury, Venus, Mars, describe ellipses about the Sun; 

All Planets do what Mercury^ Yenns, Mars, do; 

Therefore aU Planets describe eUipses about the Sun. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



216 CONSTRUCnON OF SCIENCE. 

knowing that Mercury, Venus, Mars, describe ellipses 
about the Sun, we infer that all Planets describe ellipses 
about the Sun. In making this inference syllogistically, 
we assume that the evident proposition, " Mercury, Venus, 
Mars, do what all Planets do,'' may be taken coiwerselff^ 
"All Planets do what Mercury, Venus, Mars, do.** But 
we remark that, in this passage, Aristotle (as was natural 
in his line of discussion) turns his attention entirely to 
the evidence of the inference ; and overlooks a step which 
is of far more importance to our knowledge, namely, the 
ihvefUion of the second extreme term. In the above 
instance, the particular luminaries, Mercury, Venus, 
Mars, are one logical ea^reme; the general designation 
Planets is the middle term ; but having these before us, 
how do we come to thinlc of description of eUipsesyVihich is 
the other extreme of the syllogism ? When we have once 
invented this " second extreme term," we may, or may not, 
be satisfied with the evidence of the syllogism ; we may, 
or may not, be convinced that, so far as this property 
goes, the extremes are coextensive with the middle 
term*; but the statement of the syllogism is the important 
step in science. We know how long Kepler laboured, 
how hard he fought, how many devices he tried, before he 
hit upon this term, the elliptical motion. He rejected, as 
we know, many other "second extreme terms," for example, 
various combinations of epicyclical constructions, because 
they did not represent with sufficient accuracy the special 
facts of observation. When he had established his pre- 
miss, that " Mars does describe an ellipse about the Sun," 
he does not hesitate to yuess at least that, in this respect, 
he might convert the other premiss, and assert that " All 
the Planets do what Mars does." But the main business 
was, the inventing and verifying the proposition respect- 

* E2 oIp aitrivrp€<l>9i tA T ry B mii fi^ virc/yrf/rcc rh fwor.— Aristot. 
Ibid. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACrrBBISnCS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 217 

ing the ellipse. The Inyention of the Conception was the 
great step in the discovery; the Verification of the Pro- 
position was the great step in the proof of the disco- 
very. If Logic consists in pointing out the conditions 
of proof, the Logic of Induction must consist in show- 
ing what are the conditions of proof in such inferences 
as this: but this subject must be pursued in the next 
chapter ; I now speak principally of the act of invention 
which is requisite in every inductive inference. 

4. Although in every inductive inference an act of 
invention is requisite, the act soon slips out of notice. 
Although we bind together facts by superinducing upon 
them a new conception, this conception, once introduced 
and applied, is looked upon as inseparably connected with 
the facts, and necessarily implied in them. Having once 
had the phenomena bound together in their minds in 
virtue of the conception, men can no longer easUy restore 
them back to the detached and incoherent condition in 
which they were before they were thus combined. The 
pearls once strung, they seem to form a chain by their 
nature. Induction has given them a unity which it is so 
far from costing us an effort to preserve, that it requires 
an effort to imagine it dissolved. For instance, we usually 
represent to ourselves the earth as round, the earth and the 
planets as revolving about the sun, and as drawn to the 
sun by a central force ; we can hardly understand how it 
could cost the Greeks, and Copernicus, and Newton so 
much pains and trouble to arrive at a view which is to us 
so familiar. These are no longer to us conceptions caught 
hold of and kept hold of by a severe struggle ; they are 
the simplest modes of conceiving the facts: they are 
really facts. We are willing to own our obligation to 
those discoverers, but we hardly y^e/ it : for in what other 
manner (we ask in our thoughts,) could we represent 
the facts to ourselves ? 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



218 CONSTBUCnON OF SCIENCE. 

Thug we see why it is that this step of which we 
now speak, the invention of a new Conception in every 
inductive inference, is so generally overlooked that it has 
hardly been noticed by preceding philosophers. When 
once performed by the discoverer, it takes a fixed and per*- 
manent place in the understanding of every one. It is a 
thought which, once breathed forth, permeates all men's 
minds. All fancy they nearly or quite knew it before. 
It oft was thought, or almost thought, though never till 
now expressed. Men accept it and retain it, and know 
it cannot be taken from them, and look upon it as their 
own. They will not and cannot part with it, even though 
they may deem it trivial and obvious. It is a secret, 
which once uttered, cannot be recalled, even though it 
be despised by those to whom it is imparted. As soon 
as the leading term of a new theory has been pronounced 
and understood, all the phenomena change their aspect 
There is a standard to which we cannot help referring 
them. We cannot fall back into the helpless and bewil- 
dered state in which we gazed at them when we possessed 
no principle which gave them unity. Eclipses arrive in 
mysterious confusion : the notion of a Cyde dispels the 
mystery. The Planets perform a tangled and mazy 
dance; but Epicydes reduce the maze to order. The 
Epicycles themselves run into confusion; the concep- 
tion of an Ellipse makes all clear and simple. And tiius 
from stage to stage, new elements of intelligible order 
are introduced. But this intelligible order is so com- 
pletely adopted by the human understanding, as to seem 
part of its texture. Men ask whether Eclipses follow a 
Cycle ; whether the Planets describe Ellipses ; and they 
imagine that so long as they do not answer such ques- 
tions rashly, they take nothing for granted. They do 
not recollect how much they assume in asking the ques- 
tion : — ^how far the conceptions of Cycles and of Eilipsei^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



.CHARACTESIBTIOS OF BCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 210 

are beyond the visible mirface of the celestial phenomena : 
~-how many ages elapsed, how much thought, how much 
observation, were needed, before men's thoughts were 
fashioned Into the words which they now so fomiliarly 
use. And thus they treat the subject, as we have seen 
Aristotle treating it; as if it were a question, not of 
invention, but of proof; not of substance, but of form: 
as if the main thing were not tvhat we assert, but how we 
assert it. But for our purpose it is requisite to bear in 
mind the feature which we have thus attempted to mark ; 
and to recollect that in every inference by induction, 
there is a Conception supplied by the mind and superin- 
duced upon the Facts. 

5. In collecting scientific truths by Induction we 
often find (as has already been observed,) a Definition 
and a Proposition established at the same time, — intro- 
duced together and mutually dependent on each other. 
The combination of the two constitutes the Inductive act ; 
and we may consider the Definition as representing the 
superinduced Conception, and the Proposition as exhibit- 
ing the Colligation of Facts. 

6. To discover a conception of the mind which will 
justly represent a train of observed fiicts is, in some mea- 
sure, a process of coiyecture, as I have stated already ; 
and as I then observed, the business of conjecture is 
commonly conducted by calling up before our minds 
several suppositions, and selecting that one which most 
agrees with what we know of the observed facts. Hence 
he who has to discover the laws of nature may have to 
invent many suppositions before he hits upon the right 
one ; and among the endowments which lead to his suc- 
cess, we must reckon that fertility of invention which 
ministers to him such imaginary schemes, till at last he 
finds the one which conforms to the true order of 
nature. A hcUitj in devising hypotheses, therefore, is 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



220 CONSTRUCmON OF SCIENCE. 

80 tsLT from being a fault in the intellectual character 
of a discoverer, that it is» in truth, a faculty indispen- 
sable to his task. It is, for his purposes, much better 
that he should be too ready in contriving, too eager in 
pursuing systems which promise to introduce law and 
order among a mass of imarranged facts, than that he 
qhould be barren of such inventions and hopeless of such 
success. Accordingly, as we have already noticed, great 
discoverers have often invented hypotheses which would 
not answer to all the facts, as well as those which would ; 
and have fancied themselves to have discovered laws, 
which a more careful examination of the facts overturned. 
The tendencies of our speculative nature*, carry- 
ing us onwards in pursuit of symmetry and rule, and 
thus producing all true theories, perpetually show 
their vigour by overshooting the mark. They obtain 
something, by aiming at much more. They detect the 
order and connexion which exist, by conceiving imagi- 
nary relations of order and connexion which have no 
existence. Real discoveries are thus mixed with base- 
less assumptions ; profound sagacity is combined with 
fanciful conjecture ; not rarely, or in peculiar instances, 
but commonly, and in most cases; probably in all, if 
we could read the thoughts of discoverers as we read 
the books of Kepler. To try wrong guesses is, with 
most persons, the only way to hit upon right ones. The 
character of the true philosopher is, not that he never 
conjectures hazardously, but that his conjectures are 
clearly conceived, and brought into rigid contact with 
facts. He sees and compares distinctly the ideas and 

* I here take the liberty of cliaracterizing inventiye minds in gene- 
ral in the same phraseology which, in the History of Science, I have 
employed in reference to particular examples. These expressions are 
what I have used in speaking of the discoTeries of Copernicus.— iTtW. 
Ind. Sci,, vol. i. p. 373. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 221 

the things; — ^the relations of his notions to each other 
and to phenomena. Under these conditions it is not 
only excusable, but necessary for him, to snatch at every 
semblance of general rule,— -to try all promising forms 
of simplicity and symmetry. 

Hence advances in knowledge* are not commonly 
made without the previous exercise of some boldness and 
license in guessing. The discovery of new truths requires, 
imdoubtedly, minds careful and scrupulous in examining 
what is suggested ; but it requires, no less, such as are 
quick and fertile in suggesting. What is invention, 
except the talent of rapidly calling before us the many 
possibilities, and selecting the appropriate one? It is 
true that when we have rejected all the inadmissible 
suppositions, they are often quickly forgotten; and few 
think it necessary to dwell on these discarded hypo- 
theses, and on the process by which thiey were con- 
demned. But all who discover truths must have reasoned 
upon many errors to obtain each truth ; every accepted 
doctrine must have been one chosen out of many candi- 
dates. If many of the guesses of philosophers of bygone 
times now appear fanciful and absurd because time and 
observation have refuted them, others, which were at the 
time equally gratuitous, have been confirmed in a manner 
which makes them appear marvellously sagacious. To 
form hypotheses, and then to employ much labour and 
skill in refuting, if they do not succeed in establishing 
them, is a part of the usual process of inventive minds. 
Such a proceeding belongs to the rule of the genius of 
discovery, rather than (as has often been taught in modem 
times) to the exception. 

7. But if it be an advantage for the discoverer of 

* These obsenrations are made on occasion of Kepler's speculations, 
and are illustrated by reference to his discoveries.— iTtt^ Ind, Sci,y 
vol. i. p. 411—414. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



322 coNSTBUcnoN of soisnoe. 

truth that he be ingenious and fertile in inventing bypo^ 
theses which may connect the phenomena of nature, it 19 
indisp^isably requisite that he be diligent and careful in 
comparing his hypotheses with the facts, and ready to 
abandon his invention as soon as it appears that it does 
not i^gree with the course of actual occurrences* This 
constant comparison of his own conceptions and suppo^ 
sition with observed facts under all aspects, forms the 
leading employment of the discoverer: this candid and 
simple love of truth, which makes him willing to sup- 
press the most favourite production of his own ingenuity 
as soon as it appears to be at variance with realities, 
constitutes the first characteristic of his temper. He 
must have neither the blindness which cannot, nor the 
obstinacy which will not, perceive the discrepancy of his 
&ncies and his facts. He must allow no indolence, or 
partial views, or self*^complacency, or delight in seeming 
demonstration, to make him tenacious of the schemes 
which he devises, any further than they are confirmed by 
their accordance with nature. The framing of hypothec 
ses is, for the inquirer after truth, not the end, but the 
beginning of his work. Each of his systems is invented, 
not that he may admire it and follow it into all its oon-t 
sistent consequences, but that he may make it the occa- 
sion of a course of active experiment and observation. 
And if the results of this process contradict his fundfr* 
mental assumptions, however ingenious, however synmie- 
trical, however elegant his system may be, he rejects it 
without hesitation. He allows no natural yearning for 
the offspring of his own mind to draw him aside from 
the higher duty of loyalty to his sovereign. Truth: to 
her he not only gives his a£fections and his wishes, but 
strenuous labour and scrupulous minuteness of attention. 
We may refer to what we have said of Kepler, New- 
ton, and other eminent philosophers, for illustrations of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC " 



CHARACTERZCTICS OF 80ISNTIFI0 INDUCTION. 228 

this character. In Kepler we have remarked^ the 
courage and perseverance with which he undertook and 
Mcecuted the task of computing his own hypotheses: 
and, as a still more admirable characteristic, that he neVer 
allowed the labour he had spent upon any conjecture to 
produce any reluctance in abandoning the hypothesis, as 
soon as he had evidence of its inaccuracy. And in the 
history of Newton's discovery that the moon is retained 
in her orbit by the force of gravity, we have noticed the 
same moderation in maintaining the hypothesis, after it 
had once occurred to the author's mind. The hypothesis 
required that the moon should fall from the tangent of 
her wbit every second through a space of sixteen feet ; 
but according to his first calculations it appeared that in 
&ct die only fell through a space of thirteen feet in that 
time. The difference seems small, the approximation 
encouraging, the theory plausible ; a man in love with 
his own fancies would readily have discovered or invented 
some {m)bable cause of the difference. But Newton 
acquiesced in it as a disproof of his conjecture, and ** laid 
aside at that time any further thoughts of this matterf." 
8. It haa often happened that those who have under- 
taken to instruct mankind have not possessed this pure 
love of truth and comparative indifference to the mainr 
tttiance of their own inventions. Men have frequently 
adhered with great tenacity and vehemence to the hypo- 
theses which they have once framed ; and in their affec- 
tion for thaie, have been prone to overlook, to distort^ 
and to misinterpret fietcts. In this manner hypotheses 
have so often been prejudicial to the genuine pursuit of 
truth, that they have fidlen into a kind of obloquy ; and 
have been considered as dangerous temptations and fal- 
lacious guides. Many warnings have been uttered against 
the fabrication of hypotheses by those who profess to 

• m$t. Ind. Set., i., 414. t lb., H., 180. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



224 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

teach philosophy ; many disclaimers of such a course by 
those who cultivate science. 

Thus we shall find Bacon frequently discommending 
this habit, imder the name of ^^anticipation of the mind/' 
and Newton thinks it necessary to say emphatically 
"hypotheses non fingo." It has been constantly urged 
that the inductions by which sciences are formed must 
be cauMous and rigorous; and. the various imaginations 
which passed through Kepler's brain, and to which he 
has given utterance, have been blamed or pitied as la* 
mentable instances of an unphilosophical frame of mind. 
Yet it has appeared in the preceding remarks that hypo- 
theses rightly used are among the helps, far more than 
the dangers, of science ; — ^that scientific induction is not 
a " cautious" or a " rigorous" process in the sense of 
abstaining from such suppositions, but in not adhering to 
them till they are confirmed by fact, and in carefully 
seeking from facts confirmation or refutation. Kepler s 
character was, not that he was peculiarly given to the 
construction of hypotheses, but that he narrated with 
extraordinary copiousness and candour the course of his 
thoughts, his labours, and his feelings. In the minds of 
most persons, as we have said, the inadmissible supposi- 
tions, when rejected, are soon forgotten : and thus the 
trace of them vanishes from the thoughts, and the suc- 
cessful hypothesis alone holds its place in our memory. 
But in reality, many other transient suppositions must 
have been made by all discoverers; — hypotheses which 
are not afterwards asserted as true systems, but enter- 
tained for an instant ; — ** tentative hypotheses," as they 
have been called. Each of these hypotheses is followed 
by its corresponding train of observations, from which it 
derives its power of leading to truth. The hypothesis is 
like the captain, and the observations like the soldiers of 
an army : while he appears to command them, and in this 



* Digitized by VjOOQIC 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 225 

way to work his own will, he does in fact derive all his 
power of conquest from their obedience, and becomes 
helpless and useless if they mutiny. 

Since the discoverer has thus constantly to work 
his way onwards by means of hypotheses, false and true, 
it is highly important for him to possess talents and 
means for rapidly testing each supposition as it offers 
itself. In this as in other parts of the work of discovery, 
success has in general been mainly owing to the native 
ingenuity and sagacity of the discoverer's mind. Yet 
some rules tending to further this object have been 
delivered by eminent philosophers, and some others may 
perhaps be suggested. Of these we shall here notice 
only some of the most general, leaving for a future chap* 
ter the consideration of some more limited and detailed 
processes by which, in certain cases, the discovery of the 
laws of nature may be materially assisted. 

9. A maxim which it may be useful to recollect 
is this; — ^that hypotheses may often be of service to 
science, when they involve a certain portion of incom- 
pleteness, and even of error. The object of such inven- 
tions is to bind together facts which without them are 
loose and detached ; and if they do this, they may lead 
the way to a perception of the true rule by which the 
phenomena are associated together, even if they them- 
selves somewhat misstate the matter. The imagined 
arrangement enables us to contemplate as a whole a col- 
lection of special cases which perplex and overload our 
minds when they are considered in succession ; and if 
our scheme has so much of truth in it as to conj6in what 
is really connected, we may afterwards duly correct or limit 
the mechanism of this connexion. If our hypothesis 
renders a reason for the agreement of cases really similar, 
we may afterwards find this reason to be false, but we 
shall be able to translate it into the language of trutli. 

VOL. II, Q 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



226 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

A conspicuoufl example of such an hypothesis, one 
which was of the highest value to science, though very 
incomplete, and as a representation of nature altogether 
false, is seen in the doctrine of epicycles by which the 
ancient astronomers explained the motions of the sun, 
moon, and planets. This doctrine connected the places 
and velocities of these bodies at particular times in a 
manner which was, in its general features, agreeable to 
nature. Yet this doctrine was erroneous in its assertion 
of the circular nature of 4II the celestial motions, and in 
making the heavenly bodiis revolve round the earth. It 
was, however, of immense value to the progress of astro- 
nomical science; for it enabled men to express and 
reason upon many important truths which they discovered 
respecting the motion of the stars, up to the time of 
Keplier. Indeed we can hardly imagine that astronomy 
could, in its outset, have made so great a progress under 
any other form, as it did in consequence of being cul- 
tivated in this shape of the incomplete and Mm epicy- 
clical hypothesis. 

We may notice another instance of an exploded hypo<« 
thesis, which is generally mentioned only to be ridiculed, 
and which undoubtedly is both false in the extent of its 
assertion, and unphilosophical in its expression; but 
which still, in its day, was not without merit. I mean 
the doctrine of Natures horror of a vacuum {fuga vacuh) 
by which the action of siphons and pumps and many 
other phenomena were explained, till Mersenne and Pas- 
cal taught a truer doctrine. This hypothesis was of real 
service ; for it brought together many fiacts which really 
belong to the same class, although they are very different 
in their first aspect. A scientific writer of modem times* 
appears to wonder that men did not at once divine the 
weight of the air from which the phenomena formerly 

* Deluc, Modificat%on$ de VAimosphere^ p<artie i. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTEEI8TICS OP SClENTinO INDUCTION. 227 

ascribed to the fuga vacui really result. <* Loaded, com- 
pressed by the atmosphere/' he says, "they did not recog- 
nize its action. In vain all nature testified that air was 
elastic and heavy ; they shut their eyes to her testimony. 
The water rose in pumps and flowed in siphons at that 
tinle as it does at this day. They could not separate the 
boards of a pair of bellows of which the holes were 
stopped; and they could not bring together the same 
boards without difficulty if they were at first separated. 
Infants sucked the milk of their mothers; air entered 
rapidly into the lungs of animals at every inspiration ; 
cupping-glasses ^produced tumours on the skin ; and in 
spite of all these striking proofs of the weight and elas- 
ticity of the air, the ancient philosophers maintained 
resolutely that air was light, and explained all these 
phenomena by the horror which they said nature had for 
a vacuum." It is curious that it should not have occurred 
to the author while writing this, that if these facts, so 
numerous and various, can all be accounted for by one 
principle, there is a strong presumption that the principle 
is not altogether baseless. And in reality is it not true 
that natiire does abhor a vacuum, and do all she can to 
avoid it? No doubt this power is not unlimited; and 
we can trace it to a mechanical cause, the pressure of the 
circumambient air. But the tendency, arising from this 
pressure, which the bodies surrounding a space void of 
air have to rush into it, may be expressed, in no extra- 
vagant or unintelligible manner, by saying that nature 
has a repugnance to a vacuum. 

That imperfect and false hypotheses, though they 
may thus explain some phenomena, and may be useful in 
the progress of science, cannot explain all phenomena ; 
— and that we are never to rest in our labours or acqui- 
esce in our results, till we have found some view of the 
subject which is consistent with all the observed facts :— 

Q 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



228 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

will of course be understood. We shall afterwards have 
to speak of the other steps of such a progress. 

10. The hypotheses which we accept ought to explain 
phenomena which we have observed. But they ought to 
do more than this : they ought to foretel phenomena 
which have not yet been observed ; — at least all of the 
same kind as those which the hypothesis was invented to 
explain. For our assent to the hypothesis implies that 
it is held to be true of all particular instances. That 
these cases belong to past or to future times, that they 
have or have not already occurred, makes no difference 
in the applicability of the rule to them. Because the 
rule prevails, it includes all cases ; and will determine 
them all, if we can only calculate its real consequences. 
Hence it will predict the results of new combinations, as 
well as explain the appearances which have occurred in 
old ones. And that it does this with certainty and cor- 
rectness, is one mode in which the hypothesis is to be 
verified as right and useful. 

The scientific doctrines which have at various periods 
been established have been verified in this manner. For 
example, the Epicyclical Theory of the heavens was con- 
firmed by its predicting truly eclipses of the sun and 
moon, configurations of the planets, and other celestial 
phenomena; and by its leading to the construction of 
Tables by which the places of the heavenly bodies were 
given at every moment of time. The truth and accuracy 
of these predictions were a proof that the hypothesis was 
valuable and, at least to a great extent, true ; although, 
as was afterwards found, it involved a false representation 
of the structure of the heavens. In like manner, the 
discovery of the Laws of Refraction enabled mathema- 
ticians to predict, by calculation, what would be the 
effect of any new form or combination of transparent 
lenses. Newtotfs hypothesis of Fits of Easy Transiiiis- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION, 229 

sion and Easy Reflection in the particles of light, although 
not confirmed by other kinds of facts, involved a true 
statement of the law of the phenomena which it was 
framed to include and served to predict the forms and 
colours of thin plates for a wide range of given cases. 
The hypothesis that Light operates by Undulations and 
Interferences, afforded the means of predicting results 
under a still larger extent of conditions. In like manner 
in the progress of chemical knowledge, the doctrine of 
Phlogiston supplied the means oi /(yreseeiiig the conse- 
quence of many combinations of elements, even before 
they were tried ; but the Oxygen Theory, besides afford- 
ing predictions, at least equally exact, with regard to the 
general results of chemical operations, included all the 
facts concerning the relations of weight of the elements 
and their compounds, and enabled chemists to f(yi*esee 
such facts in untried cases. And the Theory of Electro- 
magnetic Forces, as soon as it was rightly understood, 
enabled those who had mastered it to predict motions 
such as had not been before observed, which were accord- 
ingly found to take place. 

Men cannot help believing that the laws laid down by 
discoverers must be in a great measure identical with the 
real laws of nature, when the discoverers thus determine 
effects beforehand in the same manner in which nature 
herself determines them when the occasion occurs. Those 
who can do this, must, to a considerable extent, have de- 
tected nature's secret ; — must have fixed upon the condi- 
tions to which she attends, and must have seized the rules 
by which she applies them. Such a coincidence of untried 
facts with speculative assertions cannot be the work of 
chance, * but implies some large portion of truth in the 
principles on which the reasoning is founded. To trace 
order and law in that which has been observed, may be 
considered as interpreting what nature has written down 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



230 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE, 

for us, and will commonly prove that we understand her 
alphabet. But to predict what has not been observed, is 
to attempt ourselves to use the legislative phrases of 
nature ; and when she responds plainly and precisely to 
that which we thus utter, we cannot but suppose that we 
have in a great measure made ourselves masters of the 
meaning and structure of her language. The prediction 
of results, even of the same kind as those which have 
been observed, in new cases, is a proof of real success in 
our inductive processes. 

11. We have here spoken of the prediction of facts 
of the same kind as those from which our rule was col- 
lected. But the evidence in favour of our induction is 
of a much higher and more forcible character when it 
enables us to explain and determine cases of a kind 
different from those which were contemplated in the 
formation of our hypothesis. The instances in which 
this has occurred, indeed, impress us with a conviction 
that the truth of our hypothesis is certain. No accident 
could give rise to such an extraordinary coincidence. No 
false supposition could, after being adjusted to one class 
of phenomena, so exactly represent a different class, when 
the agreement was unforeseen and uncontemplated. That 
rules springing from remote and unconnected quarters 
should thus leap to the same point, can only arise from 
that being the point where truth resides. 

Accordingly the cases in which inductions from classes 
of facts altogether different have thus jumped together^ 
belong only to the best established theories which the 
history of science contains. And as I shall have occasion 
to refer to this peculiar feature in their evidence, I will 
take the liberty of describing it by a particular phrase ; 
and will term it the Consilience of Inductions. 

It U exemplified principally in some of the greatest 
discoveries. Thus it was found by Newton that the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHAEACTBBI8TI0S OF SCIENTIFIO INPUCTION. 231 

doctrine of the attraction of the sun varying according to 
the inverse square of this distance, which explained 
Kepler's third law of the proportionality of the cubes of 
the distances to the squares of the periodic times of the 
planets, explained also his first and second laws of the 
elliptical motion of each planet ; although no connexion 
of these laws had been visible before. Again, it appeai'ed 
that the force of universal gravitation, which had been 
inferred from the perturbations of tlie moon and planets 
by^ the sun and by each other, also accounted for the fect> 
apparently altogether dissimilar and remote, of the pre^ 
cession of the equinoa?es. Here was a most striking and 
surprising coincidence, which gave to the theory a stamp 
of truth beyond the power of ingenuity to counterfeit. 
In like manner in optics ; the hypothesis of alternate fits 
of easy transmission and reflection would explain the 
colours of thin plates, and indeed was devised and ad- 
justed for that very purpose ; but it could give no account 
of the phenomena of the fringes of shadows. But the 
doctrine of interferences, constructed at first with refers 
ence to phenomena of the nature of thefringesy explained 
also the colours of thin plates better than the supposition 
of the fits invented for that very purpose. And we have 
in physical optics another example of the same kind, 
which is quite as striking as the explanation of precession 
by inferences from the facts of perturbation. The doc- 
trine of undulations propagated in a spheroidal form was 
contrived at first by Huyghens, with a view to explain 
the laws of double refraction in calcHspar ; and was pur- 
sued with the same view by Fresnel. But in the course 
of the investigation it appeared, in a most unexpected 
and wonderful manner, that this same doctrine of sphe- 
roidal undulations, when it was so modified as to account 
for the directions of the two refracted rays, accounted 
also for the positions of their planes of polarization^ ; a 
? Hiii. Ind. SeLy ii. 420. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



232 coKSTRUcrriON of science. 

phenomenon which, taken by itself, it had perplexed 
previous mathematicians, even to represent. 

The theory of universal gravitation, and of the nndu- 
latory theory of light, are, indeed, full of examples of 
this Consilience of Inductions. With regard to the latter, 
it has been justly asserted by Herschel, that the history 
of the undulatory theory was a succession oi felicities^. 
And it is precisely the unexpected coincidences of results 
drawn from distant parts of tho subject which are pro- 
perly thus described. Thus the laM^s of the modijication 
of polarization to which Fresnel was led by his general 
views, accounted for the rule respecting the angle at 
which light is polarized^ discovered by Brewsterf . The 
conceptions of the theory pointed out peculiar modifca- 
tions of the phenomena when Newton's nngs were pro- 
duced by polarized light, which were ascertained to take 
place in fact, by Arago and Airy:]:. When the beautiful 
phenomena of dipolarized light were discovered by Arago 
and Biot, Young M^as able to declare that they were 
reducible to the general laws of interference which he 
had already established^. And what was no less striking 
a confirmation of the truth of the theory, measures of the 
same element deduced from various classes of facts were 
found to coincide. Thus the length of a luminiferous 
undulation, calculated by Young from the measurement 
of fringes of shadows, was found to agree very nearly with 
the previous calculation from the colours of thin plates\\. 

No example can be pointed out, in the whole history 
of science, so far as I am aware, in which this Consilience 
of Inductions has given testimony in favour of an hypo- 
thesis afterwards discovered to be false. If we take one 
class of facts only, knowing the law which they follow, 
we may construct an hypotheses, or perhaps several, 
which may represent them : and as new circumstances are 

• See ffiit. Ind. &»., ii. 435. t lb., 423. 

t R., 460. § lb., 426. II lb., 400. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CnARACTERISnCS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 233 

discovered, we may often adjust tbe hypothesis so as to 
correspond to these also. But when the hypothesis, of 
itself and without adjustment for the purpose, gives 
us the rule and reason of a class of facts not contem- 
plated in its construction, we have a criterion of its 
reality, which has never yet been produced in favour of 
falsehood. 

12. In the preceding section I have spoken of the 
hypothesis with which we compare our facts as being 
framed aU at once, each of its parts being included in 
the original scheme. In reality, however, it often happens 
that the various suppositions which our system contains 
are added upon occasion of different researches. Thus in 
the Ptolemaic doctrine of the heavens, new epicycles and 
eccentrics were added as new inequalities of the motions 
of the heavenly bodies were discovered ; and in the 
Newtonian doctrine of material rays of light, the suppo- 
sition that these rays had "fits," was added to explain 
the colours of thin plates ; and the supposition that they 
had "sides" was introduced on occasion of the pheno- 
mena of polarization. In like manner other theories have 
been built up of parts devised at different times. 

This being the mode in which theories are often 
framed, we have to notice a distinction which is found to 
prevail in the progress of true and of false theories. In 
the former class all the additional suppositions tend to 
simplicity and harmony; the new suppositions resolve 
themselves into the old ones, or at least require only 
some easy modification of the hypothesis first assumed : 
the system becomes more coherent as it is further ex- 
tended. The elements which we require for explaining 
a new class of facts are already contained in our system. 
Different members of the theory run together, and we 
have thus a constant convergence to unity. In false 
theories, the contrary is the case. The new suppositions 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



234 COKSTBUOTION OF SCIENCE. 

are something altogether additional ; — ^not suggested by 
the original scheme ; perhaps difficult to reconcile with 
it. Every such addition adds to the complexity of the 
hypothetical system, which at last becomes unmanageable, 
and is compelled to surrender its place to some simpler 
explanation. 

Such a false theory, for example, was the ancient 
doctrine of eccentrics and epicycles. It explained the 
general succession of the places of the Sun, Moon, and 
Planets ; it would not have explained the proportion of 
their magnitudes at different times, if these could have 
been accurately observed ; but this the ancient astrono- 
mers were unable to do. When, however, Tycho and other 
astronomers came to be able to observe the planets 
accurately in all positions, it was found that no combina- 
tion of equable circular motions would exactly represent 
all the observations. We may see, in Kepler's works, the 
many new modifications of the epicyclical hypothesis 
which offered themselves to him; some of which would 
have agreed with the phenomena with a certain degree of 
accuracy, but not so great a degree as Kepler, fortunately 
for the progress of science, insisted upon obtaining. After 
these epicycles had been thus accumulated, they all disap- 
peared and gave way to the simpler conception of an 
elliptical motion. In like manner, the discovery of new 
inequalities in the moon's motions encumbered her system 
more and more with new machinery, which was at last 
rejected all at once in favour of the elliptical theory. 
Astronomers could not but suppose themselves in • a 
wrong path when the prospect grew darker and more 
entangled at every step. 

Again ; the Cartesian system of vortices might be 
said to explain the primary phenomena of the revolutions 
of planets about the sun, and satellites about planets. 
But the elliptical form of the orbits required new suppo- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHABACTBEICTICS OP SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 235 

sitions. Bernoulli ascribed this curve to the shape of the 
planet, operating on the stream of the vortex in a manner 
similar to the rudder of a boat. But then the motions of 
the aphelia, and of the nodes, — the perturbations,— even 
the action of gravity to the earth, — could not be accounted 
for without new and independent suppositions Here 
was none of the simplicity of truth. The theory of 
gravitation on the other hand became more simple as 
the facts to be explained became more numerous. The 
attraction of the sun accounted for the motions of the 
planets ; the attraction of the planets was the cause of 
the motion of the satellites. But this being assumed, the 
perturbations, the motions of the nodes and aphelia, only 
made it requisite to extend the attraction of the sun to 
the satellites, and that of the planets to each other : — ^the 
tides, the spheroidal form of the earth, the precession, 
still required nothing more than that the moon and sun 
should attract the parts of the earth, and that these 
should attract each other;— so that all the suppositions 
resolved themselves into the single one, of the universal 
gravitation of all matter. It is difficult to imagine a 
more convincing manifestation of simplicity and unity. 

Again, to take an example from another science ;-— 
the doctrine of phlogiston brought together many fiwjts 
in a very plausible manner, — combustion, acidification, and 
others, — and very naturally prevailed foi* a while- But the 
balance came to be used in chemical operations, and the 
facts of weight as well as of combination were to be 
accounted for. On the phlogistic theory, it appeared that 
this could not be done without a new supposition, and 
thai a very strange one ; — ^that phlogiston was an element 
not only not heavy, but absolutely light, so that it dimi- 
nished the weight of the compounds into which it entered. 
Some chemists for a time adopted this extravagant view; 
but the wiser of them saw, in the necessity of such a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



236 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

supposition to the defence of the theory, an evidence that 
the hypothesis of an element phlogiston was erroneous. 
And the opposite hypothesis, which taught that oxygen 
was subtracted, and not phlogiston added, was accepted 
because it required no such novel and inadmissible as- 
sumption. 

Again, we find the same evidence of truth in the 
progress of the undulatory theory of light, in the course 
of its application from one class of fects to another. 
Thus we explain reflection and refraction by undulations; 
when we come to thin plates, the requisite "fits" are 
already involved in our fundamental hypothesis, for they 
are the length of an undulation : the phenomena of dif- 
fraction also require such intervals; and the intervals 
thus required agree exactly with the others in magnitude, 
so that no new property is needed. Polarization for a 
moment appears to require some new hypothesis; yet 
this is hardly the case ; for the direction of our vibrations 
i& hitherto arbitrary : — we allow polarization to decide it, 
and we suppose the undulations to be transverse. Having 
done this for the sake of polarization, we turn to the 
phenomena of double refraction, and inquire what new 
hypothesis they require. But the answer is, that they 
require none: the supposition of transverse vibrations, 
which we have made in order to explain polarization, 
gives us also the law of double refraction. Truth may 
give rise to such a coincidence ; falsehood cannot. Again, 
the facts of dipolarization come into view. But they 
hardly require any new assumption ; for the difference of 
optical elasticity of crystals in different directions, which 
is already assumed in uniaxal crystals*, is extended to 
biaxal exactly according to the law of symmetry; and 
this being done, the laws of the phenomena, curious and 
complex as they are, are fully explained. The phenomena 
? HUU Ind. Sci., ii. 427. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACJTERISTICS OF SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION. 237 

of circular polarization by internal reflection, instead of 
requiring a new hypothesis, are found to be given by an 
interpretation of an apparently inexplicable result of an 
old hypothesis. The circular polarization of quartz and 
its double refraction does indeed appear to require a new 
assumption, but still not one which at all disturbs the 
form of the theory ; and in short, the whole history of 
this theory is a progress, constant and steady, often stri- 
king and startling, from one degree of evidence and con- 
sistence to another of higher order. 

In the emission theory, on the other hand, as in the 
theory of solid epicycles, we see what we may consider 
as the natural course of things in the career of a false 
theory. Such a theory may, to a certain extent, explain 
the phenomena which it was at first contrived to meet ; 
but every new class of facts requires a new supposition— 
an addition to the machinery: and as observation goes 
on, these incoherent appendages accumulate, till they 
overwhelm and upset the original frame-work. Such has 
been the hypothesis of the material emission of light. 
In its original form it explained reflection and refraction: 
but the colours of thin plates added to it the fits of easy 
transmission and reflection ; the phenomena of diffraction 
further invested the emitted particles with complex laws 
of attraction and repulsion ; polarization gave them sides : 
double refraction subjected them to peculiar forces ema- 
nating from the axes of the crystal : finally, dipolarization 
loaded them with the complex and unconnected con- 
trivance of moveable polarization: and even when all 
this had been done, additional mechanism was wanting. 
There is here no unexpected success, no happy coinci- 
dence, no convergence of principles from remote quar- 
ters. The philosopher builds the machine, but its parts 
do not fit. They hold together only while he presses 
them. This is not the character of truth. 

As another exi^mple of the application of the maxim 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



238 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

now under consideration, I may perhaps be allowed to 
refer to the judgment which, in the History of Ther- 
motics, I have ventured to give respecting Laplace's 
Theory of Gases. I have stated*, that we cannot help 
forming an unfavourable judgment of this theory, by 
looking for that great characteristic of true theory; 
namely, that the hypotheses which were assumed to 
account for one doss of facts are found to explain another 
class of a different nature. Thus Laplace's first supposi- 
tions explain the connexion of compression with density^ 
(the law of Boyle and Mariotte,) and the connexion of 
elasticity with heat, (the law of Dalton and Gay Lussac.) 
But the theory requires other assumptions when we come 
to latent heat ; and yet these new assumptions produce 
no effect upon the calculations in any application of the 
theory. When the hypothesis, constructed with refer- 
ence to the elasticity and temperature, is applied to 
another class of facts, those of latent heat> we have no 
Simplification of the Hypothesis^ and therefore no evi-^ 
dence of the truth of the theory. 

13. The two last sections of this chapter direct our 
attention to two circumstances, which tend to prove, in 
a manner which we may term irresistible, the truth of 
the theories which they characterize : — ^the Consilience of 
Inductions from different and separate classes of facts; 
— and the progressive Simplification of the Theory as it 
is extended to new cases. These two Characters are, in 
fact, hardly different ; they are exemplified by the same 
cases. For if these Inductions, collected from one class 
of facts, supply an unexpected explanation of a new class, 
which is the case first spoken of, there will be no need 
for new machinery in the hypothesis to apply it to the 
newly<-contemplated facts; and thus we have a case in 
which the system does not become more complex when 
its application is extended to a wider field, which waA 
* HUU Ind. «W., ii. 630. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTERISnOS OP BaENTIPIC INDUCTION. 239 

the character of true theory in its second aspect. The 
Consiliences of our Inductions give rise to a constant 
Convergence of our Theory towards Simplicity and Unity. 
But, moreover, both these cases of the extension of 
the theory, without difficulty or new suppositions, to a 
wider range and to new classes of phenomena, may be cou'* 
veniently considered in yet another point of view; namely, 
as successive steps by which we gradually ascend in our 
speculative views to a higher and higher point of gene-* 
rality. For when the theory, either by the concurrence of 
two indications, or by an extension without complication^ 
has included a new range of phenomena, we have, in fact, 
a new induction of a more general kind, to which the 
inductions formerly obtained are subordinate, as particidar 
cases to a general proposition. We have in such exam- 
ples, in short, an instance of successive generalizaMon, 
This is a subject of great importance, and deserving of 
being well illustrated ; it will come under our notice in 
the next chapter. 



Chaptbb VI. 
OF THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 

1. The subject to which the present chapter refers is 
described by phrases which are at the present day fami« 
liarly used in speaking of the progress of knowledge. 
We hear very frequent mention of ascending from par^^ 
Hcular to general propositions, and from these to propo* 
sitions still more general ; — of truths induded in other 
truths of a higher degree of generality; — of different 
stages of generalization ; — and of the highest step of the 
process of discovery, to which all others are subordinate 
and preparatory. As these expressions, so familiar to our 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



240 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

ears, especially since the time of Francis Bacon, denote, 
very significantly, processes and relations which are of 
great importance in the formation of science, it is neces- 
sary for us to give a clear account of them, illustrated 
with general exemplifications, and this we shall endeavour 
to do. 

We have, indeed, already explained that science con- 
sists of propositions which include the facts from wliich 
they were collected; and other wider propositions, col- 
lected in like manner from the former, and including 
them. Thus, that the stars, the moon, the sun, rise, cul- 
minate, and set, are facts included in the proposition that 
the heavens, carrying with them all the celestial bodies^ 
have a diurnal revolution about the axis of the earth. 
Again, the observed monthly motions of the moon, and 
the annual motions of the sun, are included in certain 
propositions concerning the movements of those lumi- 
naries with respect to the stars. But all these proposi- 
tions are really included in the doctrine that the earth, 
revolving on its axis, moves round the sun, and the 
moon round the earth. These movements, again, consi- 
dered as facts, are explained and included in the state- 
ment of the forces which the earth exerts upon the moon, 
and the sun upon the earth. Again, this doctrine of 
the forces of these two bodies is included in the asser- 
tion, that all the bodies of the solar system, and all parts 
of matter, exert forces, each upon each. And we might 
easily show that all the leading fiwjts in astronomy are 
comprehended in the same generalization. In like man- 
mer with regard to any other science, so far as its truths 
have been well established and folly developed, we might 
show that it consists of a gradation of propositions, pro- 
ceeding from the most special facts to the most general 
theoretical assertions. We shall exhibit this gradation 
in some of the principal branches of science. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION. 241 

2. This gradation of truths, successively included in 
other truths, may be conveniently represented by TiMes 
resembling the genealogical tables by which the deriva- 
tion of descendants from a common ancestor is exhibited.; 
except that it is proper in this case to invert the form of 
the Table, and to make it converge to unity downwards 
instead of upwards, since it has for its purpose to express, 
not the derivation of many from one, but the collection 
of one truth from many things. Two or more co-ordinate 
facts or propositions may be ranged side by side, and 
joined by some mark of connexion, (a bracket, as ^ — v — ' 

or ' 1,) beneath which may be placed the more 

general proposition which is collected by induction from 
the former. Again, propositions co-ordinate with this 
more general one may be placed on a level with it ; and 
the combination of these, and the result of the combina- 
tion, may be indicated by brackets in the same manner ; 
and so on, through any number of gradations. By this 
means the streams of knowledge from various classes of 
facts will constantly run together into a smaller and smaller 
number of channels ; like the confluent rivulets of a great 
river, coming together from many sources, uniting their 
ramifications so as to form larger branches, these again 
uniting in a single trunk. The genealogical tree of each 
great portion of science, thus formed^ will contain all the 
leading truths of the science arranged in their due co- 
ordination and subordination. Such Tables, constructed 
for the sciences of Astronomy and of Optics, vrtll be given 
at the end of this chapter. 

3. The union of co-ordinate propositions into a pro- 
position of a higher order, which occurs in this Tree of 
Science wherever two twigs unite in one branch, is, in 
each case, an example of Induction. The single propo- 
sition is collected by the process of induction from its 
several members. But here we may observe, tliat the 

VOL. II. R 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



iMfl CONffTRUCnON OP SCIENCE. 

image of A mere union of the parts at each of these 
jK>ints, which the figure of a tree or a river presents, is 
Tery inadequate to convey the true state of the case ; for 
in Induction, as we have seen, besides mere collection of 
ipartioulars, there is always a 7iew conception^ a principle 
of connexion and unity, supplied by the mind, and super- 
induced upon the particulars. There is not merely a 
juxtaposition of materials, by which the new proposition 
contains all that its component parts contained ; but also 
a formative act exerted by the understanding, so that 
these materials are contained in a new shape. We must 
liemember, therefore, that our Inductive Tables, although 
they represent the elements and the order of these induc- 
tive steps, do not fully represent the whole signification 
of the process in each case. 

4. The principal features of the progress of science 
spoken of in the last chapter are clearly exhibited in 
these Tables ; namely, the Consilience of InductumSy and 
the constant Tendency to Simplicity observable in true 
theories. Indeed in all cases in which from propositions 
of considerable generality, propositions of a still higher 
degree are obtained, there is a convergence of inductions ; 
and if in one of the lines which thus converge, the steps 
be T^idlj and suddenly made in order to meet the 
other line^ we may consider that we have an example of 
Consilience. Thus when Newton had collected from 
Kepler's Laws the Central Force of the sun, and from 
these, combined with other fiujts, the Universal Force of 
all the heavenly bodies, he suddenly turned round to 
include in his generalization the Precession of the Equi- 
noxes, which he declared to arise from the attraction of 
the sun imd moon upon the protuberant part of the ter-^ 
reatrial i^heroid. The apparent remoteness of this fitet, 
in its nature^ from the others with which he thus asso- 
ciated it, causes this part of his reasoning to strike us 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



tHE LOCJto OP wt>v(moif. 248 

fti k remarkable example of Consilience. Ac<30h)ingly^ 
in the Table of Astronomy we find that the column! 
which contain the facts and theories relative to the mn 
and planets, after exhibiting several stages of induction 
within themselves^ are at length suddenly connected with 
ft column till then quite distinct, containing the precession 
of the equinMes. In like manner, in the Table of Optics, 
the columns which contain the facts and theories relative 
to dotibk refraction, and those which include polarisation 
by crystals, each go separately through several stages of 
induction ; and then these two sets of columns are sud* 
denly connected by Fresners mathematical induction that 
double refraction and polarization arise from the same 
cause : thus exhibiting a remarkable Consilience. 

5. The constant Tendency to Simplicity in the sciences 
of which the progress is thus represented, appears from 
the form of the Table itself; for the single trunk into 
which all the branches converge, contains in itself the 
substance of all the propositions by means of which this 
last generalization was arrived at. It is true, that this 
ultimate result is sometimes not so simple as in the Table 
it appears: for instance, the ultimate generalization of 
the Table exhibiting the progress of Phyirical Optics,— 
namely, that Light consists in Undulations, — ^must be 
understood as including some other hypotheses ; as, that 
the undulations are transverse, that the ether tlirougli 
which they are propagated has its elasticity in crystals 
and other transparent bodies regulated by certain laws 5 
and the like. Yet still, even acknowledging all the com- 
plication thus implied, the Table in question evidences 
clearly enough the constant advance tovrards unity, con- 
sistency, and simplicity, which have marked the progress 
of this Tlieory. The same is the case in the Inductive 
Table of Astronomy in a still greater degree. 

6. These Tables naturally afford the opportunity of 

R 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



244 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

assigning to each of the distinct steps of which the pro- 
gress of science consists, the name* of the Discoverer to 
whom it is due. Every one of the inductive processes 
which the brackets of our Tables mark, directs our atten-' 
tion to some person by whom the induction was first 
distinctly made. These names I have endeavoured to 
put in their due places in the Tables ; ftnd the Inductive 
Tree of our knowledge in each science becomes, in this 
way, an exhibition of the claims of each discoverer to 
distinction, and, as it were, a Genealogical Tree of scien- 
tific nobility. It is by no mean^ pretended that such a 
tree includes the names of all the meritorious labourers 
in each department of science. Many persons are most 
usefully employed in collecting and verifying truths, who 
do not advance to any new truths. The labours of a 
number of such are included in each stage of our ascent. 
But such Tables as we have now before us will present 
to us the names of all the most eminent discoverers : for 
the main steps of which the progress of science consists, 
are transitions from more particular to more general 
truths, and must therefore be rightly given by these 
Tables ; and those must be the greatest names in science 
to whom the principal events of its advance are thus due. 
7. The Tables, as we have presented them, exhibit 
the course by which we pass from particular to general 
through various gradations, and so to the most general 
They display the order of discovery. But by reading 
them in an inverted manner, beginning at the single 
comprehensive truths with which the Tables end, and 
tracing these back into the more partial truths, and these 
again into special facts, they answer another purpose ; — 
they exhibit the process of verification of discoveries once 
made. For each of our general propositions is true in 
virtue of the truth of the narrower propositions which it 
involves; and we cannot satisfy ourselves of its truth in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE LOGIC OP INDUCTION. 245 

any other way than by ascertaining that these its consti- 
tuent elements are true. To assure ourselves that the 
sun attracts the planets with forces varying inversely as 
the square of the distance, we must analyse by geometry 
the motion in an. ellipse about the focus, so as to see 
that it does imply such a force. We must also verify 
those calculations by which the observed places of each 
planet are stated to be included in an ellipse. These cal- 
culations involve assumptions respecting the path which 
the earth describes about the sun, which assumptions 
must again be verified by reference to observation. And 
thus, proceeding from step to step, we resolve the most 
general truths into their constituent parts; and these 
again into their parts ; and by testing, at each step, both 
the reality of the asserted ingredients and the propriety 
of the conjunction, we establish the whole system of 
truths, however wide and various it may be. 

8. It is a very great advantage, in such a mode of 
exhibiting scientific truths, that it resolves the verifica- 
tion of the most complex and comprehensive theories, 
into a number of small steps, of which almost any one 
falls within the reach of common talents and industry. 
That if the particulars of any one step be true, the gene- 
ralization also is true, any person with a mind properly 
disciplined may satisfy himself by a little study. That 
each of these particular propositions is true, may be ascer- 
tained, by the same kind of attention, when this propo- 
sition is resolved into its constituent and more special 
propositions. And thus we may proceed, till the most 
general truth is broken up into small and manageable 
portions. Of these portions, each may appear by itself 
narrow and easy ; and yet they are so woven together, by 
hypothesis and conjunction, that the truth of the parts 
necessarily assures us of the truth of the whole. The 
verification is of the same nature as the verification of a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



246 OTNWRUOTIOK OP WEEMCE. 

large and complex statement of great mm» reo^ty^ by 
a mereantile office on various accounts from many quarters. 
The statement is separated into certain eomprehensive 
heads, and these into others less extensive; and these 
again into smaller collections of separate articles, each of 
which can be inquired into and reported on by separate 
persons. And thus at last, the mere addition of numbers 
performed by these various persons, and the summation 
of the results which they obtain, executed by other ac- 
countants, is a complete and entire security that there is 
no error in the whole of the process. 

9. This comparison of the process by which we verify 
scientific truth to the process of book-keeping in a large 
commercial establishment, may appear to some persons 
not sufficiently dignified for the subject. But, in fact, 
the possibility of giving this formal and business-like 
aspect to the evidence of science, as Involved in the pro- 
cess of successive generalization, is an inestimable ad- 
vantage. For if no one could pronounce concerning 
a wide and profound theory except he who could at once 
embrace in his mind the whole range of inference, ex- 
tending from the special facts up to the most general 
principles, none but the greatest geniuses would be en- 
titled to judge concerning the truth or error of scientific 
discoveries. But, in reality, we seldom need to verify 
more than one or two steps of such discoveries at one 
time; and this may commonly be done (when the dis- 
eoveries have been fully established and developed,) by 
any one who brings to the task clear conceptions and 
steady attention. The progress of science is gradual: 
the discoveries which are successively made, are also 
verified successively. We have never any very large 
collections of them on our hands at once. The doubts 
and uncertainties of any one who has studied science 
with care and perseverance are generally confined to a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THB LOGIC OF INDU(mO». 247 

few points. If he can satisfy himself upon these, he has 
no misgivings respecting the rest of the structure ; which 
has indeed heen repeatedly verified by other persons in 
like manner. The fact that science is capable of being 
resolved into separate processes of verification, is that which 
renders it possible to form a great body of scientific truth* 
by adding together a vast number of truths, of which 
many men, at various times and by multiplied efibrts, have 
satisfied themselves. The treasury of Science is constantly 
rich and abundant, because it accumulates the wealth 
which is thus gathered by so many, and reckoned over by 
so many more : and the dignity of Knowledge is no more 
lowered by the multiplicity of the tasks on which her 
servants are employed, and the narrow field of labour to 
which some confine themselves, than the rich merchant 
is degraded by the number of offices which it is necessary 
for him to maintain, and the minute articles of which he 
requires an exact statement from his accountants. 

10. The analysis of doctrines inductively obtained, 
into their constituent facts, and the arrangement of them 
in such a form that the conclusiveness of the induction 
may be distinctly seen, may be termed the Logic of In^ 
duction. By Logic has generally been meant a system 
which teaches us so to arrange our reasonings that their 
truth or falsehood shall be evident in their form. In 
deductive reasonings, in which the general principles are 
assumed, and the question is concerning their application 
and combination in particular cases, the device which thus 
enables us to judge whether our reasonings are conclusive, 
is the Syllogism ; and this forfn^ along with the rules 
which belong to it, does in fact supply us with a criterion 
of deductive or demonstrative reasoning. The Inductive 
Table, such as it is presented in the present chapter, in 
like manner supplies the means of ascertaining the truth 
of our inductive inferences, so far as the form in which 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



248 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

our reasoning may be stated can afford such a criterion; 
Of course some care is requisite in order to reduce a 
train of demonstration into the form of a series of syl* 
logisms ; and. certainly not less thought and attention 
are required for resolving all the main doctrines of any 
great department of science into a graduated table of 
co-ordinate and subordinate inductions. But in each 
case, when this task is once executed, the evidence or 
veant of evidence of our conclusions appears at once in a 
most luminous manner. In each step of induction, our 
Table enumerates the particular facts, and states the gene- 
ral theoretical truth which includes these and which these 
constitute. The special act of attention by which we satisfy 
ourselves that the facts are so included, — ^that the general 
truth is so constituted, — ^then affords little room for error, 
with moderate attention and clearness of thought. 

11. We may find an example of this act of attention 
thus required, at any one of the steps of induction in our 
Tables ; for instance, at the step iu the early progress of 
astronomy at which it was inferred, that the earth is a 
globe, and that the sphere of the heavens performs a diurnal 
revolution round this globe of the earth. How was this 
established in the belief of the Greeks, and how is it fixed 
in our conviction ? As to the globular form, we find that 
as we travel to the north the apparent pole of the heavenly 
motions, and the constellations which are near it, seem to 
mount higher, and as we proceed southwards they descend. 
Again, if we proceed from two different points consi- 
derably to the east and west of each other, and travel 
directly northwards from each, as from the south of Spain 
to the north of Scotland, and from Greece to Scandinavia, 
these two north and south lines will be much nearer to 
each other in their northern than in their southern parts. 
These and similar facts, as soon as they are clearly esti- 
mated and connected in the mind, are seen to be consist 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE LOOIC Cffi INDUCTION. 249 

tent with a convex surface of the earth, and with no 
other : and this notion is further confirmed by observing 
that the boundary of the earth's shadow upon the moon 
is always circular ; it being supposed to be already esta- 
blished that the moon rieceives her light from the sun, 
and that lunar eclipses are caused by the interposition of 
the earth. As for the assertion of the diurnal revolution 
of the starry sphere, it is merely putting the visible phe- 
nomena in an exact geometrical form : and thus we esta^ 
Wish and verify the doctrine of the revolution of the 
sphere of the heavens about the globe of the earth, by 
contemplating it so as to see that it does really and 
exactly include the particular facts from which it is 
collected. 

We may, in like manner, illustrate this mode of veri- 
fication by any of the other steps of the same Table. 
Thus if we take the great Induction of Copernicus, the 
heliocentric scheme of the solar system, we find it in the 
Table exhibited as including and explaining, firsts the 
diurnal revolution just spoken of; second, thfe motions of 
the moon among the fixed stars; thirds the motions of 
the planets with reference to the fixed stars and the sun ; 
fouHh, the motion of the sun in the ecliptic. And the 
scheme being clearly conceived, we see that all the par- 
ticular facts are faithfully represented by it; and this 
agreement, along with the simplicity of the scheme, in 
which respect it is so far superior to any other conception 
of the solar system, persuade us that it is really the plan 
of nature. 

In exactly the same way, if we attend to any of the 
several remarkable discoveries of Newton, which form 
the principal steps in the latter part of the Table, as for 
instance, the proposition that the sun attracts all the 
planets with a force which varies inversely as the square 
of the distance, we find it proved by its including three 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



250 CONBTHUC-nON OP KaENOB. 

other propositions previously established i-^firsU that the 
sun's mean foroe on different planets follows the specified 
variation (which is proved from Kepler's third law); 
second^ ih9A, the force by which each planet is acted upon 
in different parts of its orbit tends to the sun (which is 
proved by the equable description of areas) ; thirds that 
this force in different parts of the same orbit is also 
inversely as the square of the distance (which is proved 
from the elliptical form of the orbit). And the New* 
tonian generalization, when its consequences are mathec 
matically traced, is seen to agree with each of these par* 
ticular propositions, and thus is fully established. 

12, But when we say that the m'ore general propo- 
sition includes the several more particular ones, we must 
recollect what has before been said, that these particulars 
form the general truth, not by being merely enumerated 
and added together, but by being seen in a new light. 
No mere verbal recitation of the particulars can decide 
whether the general proposition is true ; a special act of 
thought is requisite in order to determine how truly each 
is included in the supposed induction. In this respect 
the Inductive Table is not like a mere schedule of 
accounts, where the rightness of each part of the reckon- 
ing is tested by mere addition of the particulars. On the 
contrary, the Inductive truth is never the mere sum of 
the facts. It is made into somethiug more by the intro- 
duction of a new mental element ; and the mind, in order 
to be able to supply this element, must have peculiar 
endowments and discipline. Thus looking back at the 
instances noticed in the last article, how are we to see 
that a convex surface of the earth is necessarily implied 
by the convergence of meridians towards the north, or by 
the visible descent of the north pole of the heavens as we 
travel south ? Manifestly the student, in order to see this, 
must have clear conceptions of the relations of space^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THB MOW OF WPUOnON, 231 

mthev oatumlly inherent in bis mind, or established there 
by geometrical cultivation,— by studying the properties of 
circles and spheres. When he is so prepared, he will feel 
the force of the expressions we have used, that the facts 
just mentioned are ^een to be consistent with a globular 
form of the earth ; but without such aptitude he will not 
see this consistency : and if this be so, the mere ajssertion 
of it in words will not avail him in satisfying himself of 
the tnith of the proposition. 

In like manner, in order to perceive the force of the 
Copernican induction, the student must have his mind so 
disciplined by geometrical studies, or otherwise, that he 
sees clearly how absolute motion and relative motion 
would alike produce apparent motion. He must h^ve 
learnt to cast away all prejudices arising from the seem- 
ing fi^ty of the earth ; and then he will see that there 
is nothing which stands in the way of the induction, while 
there is much which is on its side. And in the same 
manner the Newtonian induction of the law of the sun's 
force from the elliptical form of the orbit, will be evi- 
dently satisfactory to him only who has such an insight 
into Mechanics as to see that a curvilinear path must 
arise from a constantly deflecting force ; and who is able 
to follow the steps of geometrical reasoning by which, 
from the properties of the ellipse, Newton proves this 
deflection to be in the proportion in which he asserts the 
force to be. And thus in all cases the inductive truth 
must indeed be verified, by comparing it with the parti- 
cular facts ; but then this comparison is possible for him 
only whose mind is properly disciplined and prepared in 
the use of those conceptions, which, in addition to the 
facts, the act of induction requires. 

13. In the Tables some indication is given, at several 
of the steps, of the act which the mind must thus per- 
form, besides the mere conjunction of facts, in order to 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



252 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

attain to the inductive truth. Thus in the cases of the 
Newtonian inductions just spoken of, the inferences are 
stated to be made "By Mechanics;" and in the case of 
the Copernican induction, it is said that, " By the nature 
of motion, the apparent motion is the same, whether the 
heavens or the earth have a diurnal motion; and the 
latter is more simple." But these verbal statements are 
to be understood as mere hints* : they cannot supersede 
the necessity of the student's contemplating for himself 
the mechanical principles and the nature of motion thus 
referred to. 

14. In the Common or Syllogistic Logic, a certain 
Fcyi'tnula of language is used in stating the reasoning, and 
is useful in enabling us more readily to apply the Cri- 
terion of Form to alleged demonstrations. This formula 
is the usual Syllogism ; with its members, Major Premiss, 
Minor Premiss, and Conclusion. It may naturally be 
asked whether in Inductive Logic there is any such For- 
mula ? Whether there is any standard form of words in 
which we may most properly express the inference of a 
general truth from particular facts ? 

At first it might be supposed that the formula of 
Inductive Logic need only be of this kind : " These par- 
ticulars, and all known particulars of the same kind, are 
exactly included in the following geneml proposition." 
But a moment's reflection on what has just been said will 
show us that this is not sufficient : for the particulars are 
not merely included in the general proposition. It is not 
enough that they appertain to it by enumeration. It is, 
for instance, no adequate example of Induction to say, 
" Mercury describes an elliptical path, so does Venus, so 
do the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus ; therefore 
all the Planets describe elliptical paths." This is, as we 
have seen, the mode of stating the evidence when the 
* In the Inductive Tables they are marked by an asterisk. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE LOGIC OF INDUCmON, 253 

proposition is once suggested; but the Inductive step 
consists in the suggestion of a conception not before 
apparent. When Kepler, after trying to connect the 
observed places of the planet Mars in many other ways, 
found at last that the conception of an ellipse would 
include them all, he obtained a truth by induction : for 
this conclusion was not obviously included in the pheno- 
mena, and had not been applied to these facts previously. 
Thus in our Formula, besides stating that the particulars 
are included in the general proposition, we must also 
imply that the generality is constituted by a new Concep- 
tion, — new at least in its application. 

Hence our Inductive Formula might be something 
like the following: "These particulars, and all known 
particulars of the same kind, are exactly expressed by 
adopting the Conceptions and Statement of the following 
Proposition." It is of course requisite that the Concep- 
tions should be perfectly clear, and should precisely 
embsace the facts, according to the explanation we have 
already given of those conditions. 

15. It may happen, as we have already stated, that 
the Explication of a Conception, by which it acquires its 
due distinctness, leads to a Definition, which Definition 
may be taken as the summary and total result of the 
intellectual efforts to which this distinctness is due. In 
such cases, the Formula of Induction may be modified 
according to this condition ; and we may state the infer- 
ence by saying, after an enumeration and analysis of the 
appropriate facts, " These facts are completely and dis- 
tinctly expressed by adopting the following Definition 
and Proposition." 

This Formula has been adopted in stating the Induc- 
tive Propositions which constitute the basis of the science 
of Mechanics, in a work intitled The Mechanical Euclid. 
The fundamental truths of the subject are expressed in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



254 coNSTtiiTcnidN of seiEMCfi. 

Indudhe Pairs of Asiiertiond, consisting each of ft Defini- 
tion and a Proposition, sncli as the following : 

Def.— A Uniforvi Force is that which acting in the 
direction of the body's motion, adds or subtracts equal 
velocities in equal times. 

Prop,— Gravity is a Uniform Force. 

Again, 

Def.— Two Motions are cofnpounded when each pro- 
duces its separate effect in a direction parallel to itself. 

Prop.^ — When any Force acts upon a body in motion, 
the motion which the Force would produce in the body 
at rest is compounded with the previous motion of the 
body. 

And in like manner in other cases. 

In these cases the proposition is, of course, established, 
and the definition realized, by an enumeration of the 
facts. And in the case of inferences made in such a form, 
the Definition of the Conception and the Assertion of 
the Truth are both requisite and are correlative to one 
another. Each of the two steps contains the verification 
and justification of the other. The Proposition derives its 
meaning from the Definition ; the Definition derives its 
i-eality from the Proposition. If they are separated, the 
Definition is arbitrary or empty, the Proposition vague or 
ambiguous. 

16. But it must be observed that neither of the pre- 
ceding Formulse expresses the full cogency of the induc- 
tive proof They declare only that the results can he 
clearly explained and rigorously deduced by the employ* 
ment of a certain Definition and a certain Proposition. 
But in order to make the conclusion demonstmtive, which 
in perfect examples of Induction it is, we ought to be 
able to declare that the results can be clearly explained 
end rigorously declared oniy by the Definition and Pro- 
{K)sifi(m which we adopt. And in rsality, the conviction 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THfi tOOIC OP iNDt/cnoM. ^56 

of the sound inductive reasoner does reach to this point. 
The Mathematician asserts the Laws of Motion, seeing 
clearly that they (or laws equivalent to them) afford the 
only means of clearly expressing and deducing the actual 
fects. But this conviction, that the inductive inference 
is not only consistent with the facts, but necessary, finds 
its place in the mind gradually, as the contemplation of 
the consequences of the proposition, and the various rela^ 
tions of the facts, becomes steady and familiar. It is 
scarcely possible for the student at once to satisfy himself 
that the inference is thus inevitable. And when he 
arrives at this conviction, he sees also, in many cases at 
least, that there may be other ways of expressing the 
substance of the truth established, besides that special 
Proposition which he has under his notice. 

We may, therefore, without impropriety, renounce the 
undertaking of conveying in our formula this final con- 
viction of the necessary truth of our inference. We 
may leave it to be thought, without insisting upon saying 
it, that in such cases what can be true, is true. But 
if we wish to express the ultimate significance of the 
Inductive Act of thought, we may take as our Formula 
for the Colligation of Facts by Induction, this : — " The 
several Facts are exactly expressed as one Fact if, and 
cniy ify we adopt the Conception and the Assertion ^ of 
the inductive inference. 

17. I have said that the mind must be properly dis«- 
eiplined in order that it may see the necessary connexion 
between the fiicts and the general proposition in which 
they are included. And the perception of this connexion, 
though treated as one step in our inductive inference, 
may imply many steps of demonstrative proof. The con- 
nexion is this, that the particular case is included in the 
general one, that is, may be deduced from it : but this 
deduction may often require many links of reasoning. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



256 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

Thus in the case of the inference of the law of the fofce 
from the elliptical form of the orbit by Newton, the proof 
that in the ellipse the deflection from the tangent is 
inversely as the square of the distance from the focus of 
the ellipse, is a ratiocination consisting of several steps^ 
and involving several properties of Conic Sections; these 
properties being supposed to be previously established by 
a geometrical system of demonstration on the special 
subject of the Conic Sections. In this and similar cases 
the Induction involves many steps of Deduction. And 
in such cases, although the Inductive step, the Invention 
of the Conception, is really the most important, yet since, 
when once made, it occupies a familiar place in men's 
minds ; and since the Deductive Demonstration is of con- 
siderable length and requires intellectual effort to follow 
it at every step ; men often admire the deductive part of 
the proposition, the geometrical or algebraical demonstra- 
tion, far more than that part in which the philosophical 
merit really resides. 

18. Deductive reasoning is virtually a collection of 
syllogisms, as has already been stated ; and in such rea- 
soning, the general principles, the Definitions and Axioms^ 
necessarily stand at the beginning of the demonstration. 
In an inductive inference, the Definitions and Principles 
are Hlq final restiU of the reasoning, the ultimate effect of 
the proof. Hence when an Inductive Proposition is to 
be established by a proof involving several steps of 
demonstrative reasoning, the enunciation of the Proposi- 
tion will contain, explicitly or implicitly, principles which 
the demonstration proceeds upon as axioms, but which 
are really inductive inferences. Thus in order to prove 
that the force which retains a planet in an ellipse varies 
inversely as the square of the distance, it is taken for 
granted that the Laws of Motion are true, and that 
they apply to the planets. Yet the doctrine that this 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE LOGIC OP INDUCTION. 257 

is SO, as well as the law of the force, were established 
only by this and the like demonstrations. The doctrine 
which is the hypothesis of the deductive reasoning, 
is the inference of the inductive process. The special 
fiicts which are the basis of the inductive inference, are 
the conclusion of the train of deduction. And in this 
manner the deduction establishes the induction. The 
principle which we gather from the facts is true, because 
the facts can be derived from it by rigorous demonstra- 
tion. Induction moves upwards and deduction down- 
wards on the same stair. 

But still there is a great difference in the character 
of their movements. Deduction descends steadily and 
methodically, step by step : Induction mounts by a leap 
which is out of the reach of method. She bounds to the 
top of the stair at once ; and then it is the business of 
Deduction, by trying each step in order, to establish the 
solidity of her companion's footing. Yet these must be 
processes of the same mind. The Inductive Intellect 
makes an assertion which is subsequently justified by 
demonstration; and it shows its sagacity, its peculiar 
character, by enunciating the proposition when as yet the 
demonstration does not exist : but then it shows that it is 
sagacity, by also producing the demonstration. 

It has been said that inductive and deductive reason- 
ing are contrary in their scheme ; that in Deduction we 
infer particular from general truths; while in Induction 
If e infer general from particular : that Deduction consists 
of many steps, in each of which we apply known general 
propositions in particular cases; while in Induction we have 
a single step, in which we pass from many particular truths 
to one general proposition. And this is truly said ; but 
though contrary in their motions, the two are the operation 
of the same mind travelling over the same ground. De- 
duction is a necessary part of Induction. Deduction 

VOL. II. s 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



258 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

justifies by calculation what Induction had happily guessed. 
Induction recognizes the ore of truth by its weight; 
Deduction confirms tho recognition by chemical analysis. 
Every step of Induction must be confirmed by rigorous 
deductive reasoning, followed into such detail as the nature 
and complexity of the relations (whether of quantity or 
any other) render requisite. If not so justified by the 
supposed discoverer, it is not Induction. 

19. Such Tabular arrangements of propositions as we 
have constructed may be considered as the Criterion of 
Truth for the doctrines which they include. They are 
the Criterion of Inductive Truth, in the same sense in 
which Syllogistic Demonstration is the Criterion of 
Necessary Truth, — of the certainty of conclusions, de- 
pending upon evident First Principles. And that such 
Tables are really a Criterion of the truth of the proposi- 
tions which they contain, will be plain by examining 
their structure. For if the connexion which the induc- 
tive process assumes be ascertained to be in each case 
real and true, the assertion of the general proposition 
merely collects together ascertained truths; and in like 
manner each of those more particular propositions is true, 
because it merely expresses collectively more special 
facts : so that the most general theory is only the asser- 
tion of a great body of facts, duly classified and subordi- 
nated. When we assert the truth of the Copernican 
theory of the motions of the solar system, or of the New- 
tonian theory of the forces by which they are caused, we 
merely assert the groups of propositions which, in the 
Table of Astronomical Induction, are included in these 
doctrines ; and ultimately, we may consider ourselves as 
merely asserting at once so many Facts, and therefore, of 
course, expressing an indisputable truth. 

20. At any one of these steps of Induction in the 
Table, the inductive proposition is a T/ieo^y with regard 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE tOGIO OP INDUCTION. 259 

to the Facts which it includes, while it is to be looked 
upon as a Fact with respect to the higher generalizations 
in which it is included. In any other sense, as was 
formerly shown, the opposition of Fact and Theory is 
untenable, and leads to endless perplexity and debate. 
Is it a Fact or a Theory that the planet Mars revolves in 
au Ellipse about the Sun? To Kepler, employed in 
endeavouring to combine the separate observations by the 
conception of an Ellipse, it is a Theory; to Newton, 
engaged in inferring the law of force from a knowledge 
of the elliptical motion, it is a Fact. There are, as we 
have already seen, no special attributes of Theory and 
Fact which distinguish them from one another. Facts 
are phenomena apprehended by the aid of conceptions 
and mental acts, as Theories also are. We commonly 
call our observations Facts^ when we apply, without effort 
or consciousness, conceptions perfectly familiar to us: 
while we speak of Theories, when we have previously 
contemplated the Facts and the connecting Conception 
separately, and have made the connexion by a conscious 
mental act. The real difference is a difference of relation; 
as the same proposition in a demonstration is the premiss 
of one syllogism and the condicsion in another ; — as the 
same person is a father and a son. Propositions are Facts 
and Theories, according as they stand above or below the 
Inductive Brackets of our Tables. 

21. To obviate mistakes I may remark that the terms 
higher and lowers when used of generalizations, are un- 
avoidably represented by their opposites in our Inductive 
Tables. The highest generalization is that which includes 
all others ; and this stands the lowest on our page, because, 
reading downwards, that is the place which we last reach. 

There is a distinction of the knowledge acquired by 
Scientific Induction into two kinds, which is so important 
that we shall consider it in the succeeding chapter. 

s 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



260 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

Chaptee VII. 
OF LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 

]. In the first attempts at acquiring an exact and 
connected knowledge of the appearances and operations 
which nature presents, men went no further than to leam 
tffkat takes place, not whjf it occurs. They discovered an 
Order which the phenomena follow, Rules which they 
obey ; but they did not come in sight of the Powers by 
which these rules are determined, the Causes of which 
this order is the eflFect. Thus, for example, they found 
that many of the celestial motions took place as if the 
sun and stars were carried round by the revolutions of 
certain celestial spheres; but what causes kept these 
spheres in constant motion, they were never able to 
explain. In like manner in modern times, Kepler dis- 
covered that the planets describe ellipses, before New- 
ton explained why they select this particular curve, and 
describe it in a particular manner. The laws of reflection, 
refraction, dispersion, and other properties of light have 
long been known ; the causes of these laws are at present 
under discussion. And the same might be said of many 
other sciences. The discovery of ^ Laws of Phenomena 
is, in all cases, the first step in exact knowledge ; these 
Laws may often for a long period constitute the whole of 
our science ; and it is always a matter requiring great 
talents and great efforts, to advance to a knowledge of 
the Causes of the phenomena. 

Hence the larger part of our knowledge of nature, at 
least of the certain portion of it, consists of the know- 
ledge of the Laws of Phenomena. In Astronomy indeed, 
besides knowing the rules which guide the appearances, 
and resolving them into the real motions from which they 
arise, we can refer these motions to the forces which pro- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 261 

duce them. In Optics, we have become acquainted with 
a vast number of laws by which varied and beautiful 
phenom^ia are governed ; and paiiaps we may assume, 
since the evidence of the undulatory theory has been so 
fully developed, that we know also the Causes of the 
Phenomena. But in a large class of Sciences, while we 
have learnt many Laws of Phenomena, the causes by 
which these are produced are still unknown or disputed. 
Are we to ascribe to the operation of a fluid or fluids, 
and if so, in what manner, the tncts of heat, magnetism, 
electricity, galvanism ? What are the forces by which 
the elements of chemical compounds are held together ? 
What are the forces, of a higher order, as we cannot help 
believing, by which the course of vital action in organized 
bodies is kept up ? In these and other cases, we have 
extensive departments of science; but we are as yet 
unable to trace the effects to their causes; and our 
science, so far as it is positive and certain, consists 
entirely of the laws of phenomena. 

2. In those cases in which we have a division of the 
science which teaches us the doctrine of the causes, as 
well as one which states the rules which the efl^ts fol- 
low, I have distinguished the two portions of the science 
by certain terms. I have thus spoken of Formal Astro- 
nomy and Physical Astronomy. The latter phrase has long 
been commonly employed to describe that department 
of Astronomy which deals with those forces by which the 
heavenly bodies are guided in their motions ; the former 
adjective appears well suited to describe a collection of 
rules depending on those ideas of space, time, position, 
number, which are, as we have already said, ihe forms of 
our apprehension of phenomena. The laws of phenomena 
may be considered as formulcdy expressing results in 
terms of those ideas. In like manner, I have spoken of 
Formal Optics and Physical Optics ; the latter division 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

including all speculations concerning the machinery by 
which the effects are produced. Formal Acoustics and 
Physical Acoustics may be distinguished in like manner, 
although these two portions of science haye been a good 
deal mixed together by most of those who have treated 
of them. Formal Thermotics, the knowledge of the laws 
of the phenomena of heat, ought in like manner to lead 
to Physical Thermotics, or the Theory of Heat with 
reference to the mode in which its effects are produced ; 
—a branch of science which as yet can hardly be said to 
exist. 

3. What kind9 of cause are we to admit in science ? 
This is an important, and by no means an easy question. 
In order to answer it, we must consider in what manner 
our progress in the knowledge of causes has hitherto been 
mude. By far the most conspicuous instance of success 
in such researches, is the discovery of the causes of the 
motions of the heavenly bodies. In this case, after the 
formal laws of the motions, — their conditions as to space 
and time,— had become known, men were enabled to go 
a step further ; to reduce them to the familiar and general 
cause of motion — ^mechanical force ; and to determine 
the laws which this force follows. That this was a step 
in addition to the knowledge previously possessed, and 
that it was a real and peculiar truth, will not be contested. 
And a step in any other subject which should be analo- 
gous to this in astronomy; — a discovery of causes and 
forces as certain and clear as the discovery of universal 
gravitation; — ^would undoubtedly be a vast advance 
upon a body of science consisting only of the laws of 
phenomena. 

4. But althongh physical astronomy may well be 
taken as a standard in estimating the value and magni- 
tude of the advance from the knowledge of phenomena 
to the knowledge of causes ; the peculiar features of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 263 

transition from formal to physical science in that subject 
must not be allowed to limit too narrowly our views of 
the nature of this transition in other cases. We are not, 
for example, to consider that the step which leads us to 
the knowledge of causes in any province of nature must 
necessarily consist in the discovery of centres of forces, 
and collections of such centres, by which the effects are 
produced. The discovery of the causes of phenomena 
may imply the detection of a fluid by whose undulations, 
or other operations, the results are occasioned. The phe- 
nomena of acoustics are, we know, produced in this 
manner by the air ; and in the cases of light, heat, mag- 
netism, and others, even if we reject all the theories of 
such fluids which have hitherto been proposed, we still 
cannot deny that such theories are intelligible and pos- 
sible, as the discussions concerning them have shown. 
Nor can it be doubted that if the assumption of such 
a fluid, in any case, were as well evidenced as the doctrine 
of universal gravitation is, it must be considered as a 
highly valuable theory. 

5. But again ; not only must we, in aiming at the 
formation of a Causal Section in each Science of Pheno- 
mena, consider fluids and their various modes of operation 
admissible, as well as centres of mechanical force; but 
we must be prepared, if it be necessary, to consider the 
forces, or powers to which we refer the phenomena, under 
still more general aspects, and invested with characters 
different from mere mechanical force. For example ; the 
forces by which the chemical elements of bodies are 
bound together, and from which arise, both their sensible 
texture, their crystalline form, and their chemical compo- 
sition, are certainly forces of a very different nature from 
the mere attraction of matter according to its mass. The 
powers of assimilation and reproduction in plants and 
animals are obviously still more removed from mere 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



264 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

mechanism; yet these powers are not on that account 
less real, nor a less fit and worthy subject of scientific 
inquiry. 

6. In fact, these forces — ^mechanical, chemical and 
vital, — as we advance from one to the other, each bring 
into our consideration new characters; and what these 
characters are, has appeared in the survey which we have 
made of the Fundamental Ideas of the various sciences. 
It was then shown that the forces by which chemical 
effects are produced necessarily involve the Idea of 
Polarity, — they are polar forces; the particles tend 
together in virtue of opposite properties which in the 
combination neutralize each other. Hence, in attempiug 
to advance to a theory of Causes in chemistry, our task is 
by no means to invent laws of mechanical force, and col- 
lections of forces, by which the effects may be produced. 
We know beforehand that no such attempt can succeed. 
Our aim must be to conceive such new kinds of force, 
including polarity among their characters, as may best 
render the results intelligible. 

7. Thus in advancing to a Science of Cause in 
any subject, the labour and the struggle is, not to ana- 
lyse the phenomena according to any preconceived and 
already familiar ideas, but to form distinctly new concep- 
tions, such as do really carry us to a more intimate view 
of the processes of nature. Thus in * the case of astro- 
nomy, the obstacle which deferred the discovery of the 
true causes from the time of Kepler to that of Newton, 
was the difficulty of taking hold of mechanical concep- 
tions and axioms with suflBcient clearness and steadiness ; 
which, during the whole of that interval, mathematicians 
were learning to do. In the question of causation which 
now lies most immediately in the path of science, that of 
the causes of electrical and chemical phenomena, the 
business of rightly fixing and limiting the conception of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 265 

polarity, is the proper object of the efforts of discoverers. 
Accordingly a large portion of Mr. Faraday's recent 
labours* is directed, not to the attempt at discovering 
new laws of phenomena, but to the task of throwing light 
upon the conception of polarity, and of showing how it 
must be understood, so that it shall include electrical 
induction and other phenomena, which have commonly 
been ascribed to forces acting mechanically at a distance. 
He is by no means content, nor would it answer the ends 
of science that he should be, with stating the results of 
his experiments ; he is constantly, in every page, pointing 
out the interpretation of his experiments, and showing 
how the conception of polar forces enters into this inter- 
pretation. " I shall," he saysf, " use every opportunity 
which presents itself of returning to that strong test of 
truth, experiment; but," he adds, "I shall necessarily 
have occasion to speak theoretically, and even hypothe- 
tically." His hypothesis that electrical inductive action 
always takes place by means of a continuous line of 
polarized particles, and not by attraction and repulsion 
at a distance, if established, cannot fail to be a great step 
on our way towards a knowledge of causes, as well as 
phenomena, in the subjects under his consideration. 

8. The process of obtaining new conceptions is, to 
most minds, far more unwelcome than luiy labour in em- 
jiloying old ideas. The effort is indeed painful and 
oppressive ; it is feeling in the dark for an object which 
we cannot find. Hence it is not surprising that we 
should far more willingly proceed to seek for new causes 
by applying conceptions borrowed from old ones. Men 
were familiar with solid frames, and with whirlpools of 
fluid, when they had not learnt to form any clear con- 

* Eleventb, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Series of Researches, Phil. 
Tram.^ 1837 and 8*. 
t Art. 1318. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



266 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

ception of attraction at a distance. Hence they at first 
imagined the heavenly motions to be caused by crystalline 
spheres, and vortices. At length they were taught to 
conceive central forces, and then they reduced the solar 
system to these. But having done this, they fancied that 
all the rest of the machinery of nature must be central 
forces. We find Newton expressing this conviction*, 
and the mathematicians of the last centuiy acted upon it 
very extensively. We may especially remark Laplace's 
labours in this field. Having explained, by such forces, 
the phenomena of capillary attraction, he attempted to 
apply the same kind of explanation to the reflection, 
refraction, and double refraction of light ;— to the con- 
stitution of gases ; — the operation of heat. It was soon 
seen that the explanation of refraction was arbitrary, and 
that of double refraction illusory; while polarization 
entirely eluded the grasp of this machinery. Centres of 
force would no longer represent the modes of causation 
which belonged to the phenomena. Polarization required 
some other contrivance, such as the undulatory theory 
supplied. No theory of light can be of any avail in which 
the fundamental idea of polarity is not clearly exhibited. 
9. Tlie sciences of magnetism and electricity have 
given rise to theories in which this relation of polarity is 
exhibited by means of two opposite fluids f; — a positive 
and a negative fluid, or a vitreous and a resinous, for elec- 
tricity, and a boreal and an austral fluid for magnetism. 
The hypothesis of such fluids gives results agreeing in a 
remarkable manner with the facts and their measures, as 
Coulomb and others have shown. It may be asked how 
far we may, in such a case, suppose that we have dis- 
covered the true cause of the phenomena, and whether it 
is sufficiently proved that these fluids really exist. The 

* Multa nio movent. Sec. Prof, to the Principia, already quoted, 
t Hist. Ind, Scuy iii., 23. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OP PHENOMENA AND OP CAUSES. 267 

right answer seems to be, that the hypothesis certainly 
represents the truth so far as regards the polar relation 
of the two energies, and the laws of the attractive and 
repulsive forces of the particles in which these energies 
reside; bnt that we are not entitled to assume that the 
vehicles of these energies possess other attributes of ma- 
terial fluids, or that the forces thus ascribed to the parti- 
cles are the primary elementary forces from which the 
action originates. We are the more bound to place this 
cautious limit to our acceptance of the Coulombian theory, 
since in electricity Faraday has in vain endeavoured to 
bring into view one of the polar fluids without the other : 
whereas such a result ought to be possible if there were 
two separable fluids. The impossibility of this separate 
exhibition of one fluid appears to show that the fluids are 
real only so fiir as they are polar. And Faraday's view 
above mentioned, according to which the attractions at a 
distance are resolved into the action of lines of polarized 
particles of air, appears still further to show that the con- 
ceptions hitherto entertained of electrical forces, accord- 
ing to the Coulombian theory, do not penetrate to the 
real and intimate nature of the causation belonging to 
this case. 

10. Since it is thus difficult to know when we have 
seized the true cause of the phenomena in any depart- 
ment of science, it may appear to some persons that 
physical inquirers are imprudent and unphilosophical in 
undertaking this research of causes ; and that it would 
be safer and wiser to confine ourselves to the investigation 
of the laws of phenomena, in which field the knowledge 
which we obtain is definite and certain. Hence there 
have not been wanting those who have laid it down as a 
maxim that " science inust study only the laws of phe- 
nomena, and never the mode of production *.** But it is 

* CoMTE, Philosophic Positive, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



268 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

easy to see that such a maxim would confine the breadth 
and depth of scientific inquiries to a most scanty and 
miserable limit. Indeed, such a rule would defeat its 
own object ; for the laws of phenomena, in many cases, 
cannot be even expressed or understood withotit some 
hjrpothesis respecting their mode of production. How 
could the phenomena of polarization have been conceived 
or reasoned upon, except by imagining a polar arrange- 
ment of particles, or transverse vibrations, or some equi- 
valent hypothesis ? The doctrines of fits of easy trans- 
mission, the doctrine of moveable polarization, and the like, 
even when erroneous as representing the whole of the 
phenomena, were still useful in combining some of them 
into laws; and without some such hypotheses the facts could 
not have been followed out. The doctrine of a fluid caloric 
may be false ; but without imagining such a fluid, how 
could the movement of heat from one part of a body to 
another be conceived ? It may be replied that Fourier, 
Laplace, Poisson, who have principally cultivated the 
Theory of Heat, have not conceived it as a fluid, but 
have referred conduction to the radiation of the mole- 
cules of bodies, which they suppose to be separate points. 
But this molecular constitution of bodies is itself an 
assumption of the mode in which the phenomena are 
produced ; and the radiation of heat suggests inquiries 
concerning a fluid emanation, no less than its conduction 
does. In like manner, the attempts to connect the laws 
of phenomena of heat and of gases, have led to hypo- 
theses respecting the constitution of gases, and the com- 
bination of their particles with those of caloric, which 
hypotheses may be false, but are probably the best means 
of discovering the truth. 

To debar science from inquiries like these, on the 
ground that it is her business to inquire into facts, and 
not to speculate about causes, is a curious example of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OP PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 269 

tbat barren caution which hopes for truth without daring 
to venture upon the quest of it. This temper would 
have stopped with Kepler's discoveries, and would have 
refused to go on with Newton to inquire into the mode 
in which the phenomena are produced. It would have 
stopped with Newton's optical facts, and would have 
refused to go on with him and his successors to inquire 
into the mode in which these phenomena are produced. 
And, as we have abundantly shown, it would, on that 
very account, have failed in seeing what the phenomena 
really are. 

In many subjects the attempt to study the laws of 
phenomena, independently of any speculations respecting 
the causes which have produced them, is neither possible 
for human intelligence nor for human temper. Men 
cannot contemplate the phenomena without clothing them 
in terms of some hypothesis, and will not be schooled to 
suppress the questionings which at every moment rise up 
within them concerning the causes of the phenomena. 
Who can attend to the appearances which come under 
the notice of the geologist ; — strata regularly bedded, full 
of the remains of animals such as now live in the depths 
of the ocean, raised to the tops of mountains, broken, 
contorted, mixed with rocks such as still flow from the 
mouths of volcanos ; — ^who can see phenomena like these, 
and imagine that he best promotes the progress of our 
knowledge of the earth's history, by noting down the 
facts, and abstaining from all inquiry whether these are 
really proofe of past states of the earth and of subterraneous 
forces, or merely an accidental imitation of the effects of 
such causes? In this and similar cases, to proscribe the 
inquiry into causes would be to annihilate the science. 

Finally, this caution does not even gain its own single 
comI, the escape from hypotheses. For, as we have said, 
those who will not seek for new and appropriate causes 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



270 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

of newly-studied phenomeiia» are almost inevitably led 
to ascribe the facts to modifications of causes already 
familiar. They may declare that they will not hear of 
such causes as vital powers, elective affinities, electric, or 
calorific, or luminiferous ethers or fluids ; but they will not 
the less on that account assume hypotheses equally un- 
authorized ; for instance — ^universal mechanical forces; a 
molecular constitution of bodies ; solid, hard, inert mat- 
ter; — and will apply these hypotheses in a manner which is 
arbitrary in itself as well as quite insufficient for its purpose. 

11. It appears, then, to be required, both by the 
analogy of the most successful efforts of science in past 
times and by the irrepressible speculative powers of the 
hutnan mind, that we should attempt to discover both 
the laws of phenotnena> and their catises. In every 
department of science, when prosecuted fur enough, these 
two great steps of investigation must succeed each other. 
The laws of phenomena must be known before we can 
speculate concerning causes ; the causes must be inquired 
into when the phenomena have been reduced to rule. 
In both these speculations the suppositions and concep- 
tions which occur must be constantly tested by reference 
to observation and experiment. In both we must, as fur 
as possible, devise hypotheses which, when we thus test 
them, display those characters of truth of which we have 
already spoken ; — an agreement with facts such as will 
stand the most patient and rigid inquiry ; a provision for 
predicting truly the results of untried cases ; a consilience 
of inductions from various classes of facts ; and a pro- 
gressive tendency of the scheme to simplicity and unity. 

12. We shall attempt hereafter to give several rules 
of a more precise and detailed kind for the discovery 
of the causes, and still more, of the laws of phe- 
nomena. But it will be useful in the first place to point 
out the Classification of the Sciences which results from 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LAWS OF PHENOMENA AND OF CAUSES. 271 

the principles already established in this work. And 
for this purpose we must previously decide the question, 
whether the practical Art8> as Medicine and Engineering, 
must be included in our list of Sciences. 



Chapter VIII. 
OF ART AND SCIENCE. 



1. The distinction of Arts and Sciences very mate- 
rially affects all classifications of the departments of Hu- 
man Knowledge. It is often maintainedi expressly or 
tacitly, that the Arts are a part of our knowledge, in the 
same sense in which the Sciences are so ; and that Art 
is the application of Science to the purposes of practical 
life. It will be found that these views require some 
correction, when we understand Science in the exact sense 
in which we have throughout endeavoured to contemplate 
it, and in which alone our examination of its nature can 
instruct us in the true foundations of our knowledge. 

When we cast our ej^es upon the early stages of the 
histories of nations, we cannot fail to be struck with the 
consideration, that in many countries the Arts of life 
already . appear, at least in some inide form or other, 
when, as yet, nothing of science exists. A practical 
knowledge of astronomy such as enables them to reckon 
months and years, is found among all nations except the 
mere savages. A practical knowledge of mechanics must 
have existed in those nations which have left us the 
gigantic monuments of early architecture. The pyramids 
and temples of Egypt and Nubia, the Cyclopean walls 
of Italy and Greece, the temples of Magna Grsecia and 
Sicily, the obelisks and edifices of India, the cromlechs 
and Druidical circles of countries formerly Celtic,— must 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



272 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

have demanded no small praetical mechanical skill and 
power. Yet those modes of reckoning time must have 
preceded the rise of speculative astronomy ; these struc- 
tures must have been erected before the theory of me- 
chanics was known. To suppose^ as some have done, 
a great body of science, now lost, to have existed in the 
remote ages to which these remains belong, is not only 
quite gratuitous and contrary to all analogy, but is a 
supposition which cannot be extended so far as to expl^n 
all such cases. For it is impossible to ima^ne thst every 
art has been preceded by the science which renders a 
reason for its processes. Certainly men formed wine from 
the grape, before they possessed a science of fermentation ; 
the first instructor of every artificer in brass and iron 
can hardly be supposed to have taught the chemistry of 
metals as a science ; the inventor of the square and the 
compasses had probably no more knowledge of demon- 
strated geometry than have the artisans who now use those 
implements; and finally the use of speech, the employment 
of the inflections and combinations of words, must needs 
be assumed as having been prior to any general view of the 
nature and analogy of language. Even at this moment, 
the greater part of the arts which exist in the world are not 
accompanied by the sciences on which they theoretically 
depend. Who shall state to us the general chemical truths 
to which the manufactures of glass, and porcelain, and iron, 
and brass, owe their existence? Do not almost all arti- 
sans practise many successful artifices long before science 
expldns the g»mnd of the process ? Do not arts at this 
day exist, in a high state of perfection, in countries in 
which there is no science, as China and India ? .These 
countries and many others have no theories of mecha- 
nics, of optics, of chemistry, of physiology; yet they 
construct and use mechanical and optical instruments, 
make chemical combinations, take advantage of physios- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF ART AND SCIENCE. 273 

logical laws. It is too evident to need farther illustra- 
tion that art may exist without science; — ^that it has 
usually been anterior to it, and even now commonly ad- 
vances independently, leaving science to follow as it can. 
2. We here mean by Science^ that exact, general, 
speculative knowledge, of which we have, throughout 
this work, been endeavouring to exhibit the nature and 
rules. Between such science and the practical Arts of 
life, the points of difference are sufficiently manifest. 
The object of Science is Knowledge ; the object of Art 
are Works. The latter is satisfied with producing its 
material results ; to the former, the operations of matter, 
whether natural or artificial, are interesting only so far as 
they can be embraced by intelligible principles. The 
end of art is the beginning of science; for when it is 
seen what is done, then comes the question why it is done. 
Art may have fixed general rules, stated in words ; but 
she has these merely as means to an end : to Science, 
the propositions which she obtains are each, in itself, a 
sufficient end of the effort by which it is acquired. When 
Art has brought forth her product, her task is finished; 
Science is constantly led by one step of her path to 
another. Each proposition which she obtains impels her 
to go onwards to other propositions more general, more 
profound, more simple. Art puts elements together, 
vnthout caring to know what they are, or why they 
coalesce. Science analyses the compound, and at every 
such step strives not only to perform, but to understand 
the analysis. Art advances in proportion as she becomes 
able to bring forth products more multiplied, more 
complex, more various ; but Science, straining her eyes to 
penetrate more and more deeply into the nature of thing?, 
reckons her success in proportion as she sees, in all the 
phenomena, however multiplied, complex, and varied, the 
results of one or two simple and general laws. 

VOL. II. T 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



274 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

3. There are many acts which man, as well as animals, 
performs by the guidance of nature, without seeing or 
seeking the reason why he does so; as the acts by which 
he balances himself in standing or moving, and those by 
which he judges of the form and position of the objects 
around him. These actions have their reason in the 
principles of geometry and mechanics ; but of such rea- 
sons he who thus acts is unaware : he works blindly, 
under the impulse of an unknown principle which we call 
Instinct When man's speculative nature seeks and finds 
the reasoiis why he should act thus or thus; — ^why he 
i^hould stretch out his arm to prevent his falling, or 
assign a certain position to an object in consequence of 
the angles under which it is seen ; — ^he may perform the 
same actions as before^ but they are then done by the aid 
of a different faculty^ which, for the sake of distinction, we 
may call Insight Instinct is a purely active principle ; it is 
seen in deeds alone ; it has no power of looking inwards ; 
it asks no questions; it has no tendency to discover 
reasons or rules; it is the opposite of Insight 

4. Art is not identical with Instinct : on the contrary, 
there are broad differences. Instinct is stationary; Art 
is progressive. Instinct is mute ; it acts, but gives no 
rules for acting : Art can speak ; she can lay down rules* 
But though Art is thus separate from Instinct, she is not 
essentially combined with Insight. She cani see what to 
do, but she needs not to see why it is done. She may 
lay down rules, but it is not her business to give reasons. 
When man makes that his employment, he enters upon 
the domain of science. Art takes the phenomena and 
laws of nature as she finds them : that they are multiplied, 
complex, capricious, incoherent, disturbs her not She is 
content that the rules of nature's operations should be 
perfectly arbitrary and unintelligible, provided they are 
constant, so that she can depend upon their effects. But 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OP ART AND SCIENCE. 275 

Science is impatient of all appearance of caprice^ incon« 
sistency, irregxilaritj, in nature. She will not bdievft in 
the existence of such characters. She resolves one appa^ 
rent anomaly after another; her task is not ended till 
every thing is so plain and simple^ that she is tempted to 
believe she sees t^t it could by no possibility have been 
otherwise than it is. . . 

5. It may be sdd that» after all/ Art does really 
involve the knowledge which Science delivers ;— ->that the 
artisan who raises large weights^ practically knows the 
properties of the mechanical powers ^ — that he who 
manufactures chemicid compounds is virtually acquainted 
with the laws of chemical combination. To this we reply» 
that it might on the same grounds be asserted/ that he 
who acts upon the principle that two sidei^ of a triangle 
are greater than the third is really acquainted with geo- 
metry; and that he who balances himself on one fbot 
knows the properties of the centre of gravity. But this 
is an acquaintance with geometry and mechanics which 
even brute animals possess. It is evident that it is not 
of such knowledge as this that we have here to treat. 
It is plain that this mode of possessing principles is alto- 
gether different fix>m that contemplation of them ofi which 
science is founded. We neglect tJie most easential and 
manifest differences, if we confound our unconscious 
assumptions with our demonstrative reasonings. 

6. The real state of the case is, that the principles 
which Art involves. Science alone evolves. TIte truths on 
which the success of Art depends^ lurk in the artist's 
mind in an undeveloped state; guiding his hand, stimu^ 
lating his invention, balancing his judgment, but not 
i^pearing in the form of enunciated propositionfii. Prin- 
ciples are not to him direct objects of meditation: ^ey 
are secret Powers of Nature, to which the forms which 
tenant the world owe their constancy, their movements, 

T 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



376 . ooNSTEUcnoN of science. 

theirelilkngesyiheirlaxariantand varied grow th» but which 
he can nowhere directly contemplate. That the creative 
and directive principles which have thei r lodgment in the 
artist's mind, when unfolded by our speculative powers 
into cgrst^natic shape, become science, is true; but it is 
predsely this process of development which gives to 
them their character of science. In practical Art» prin- 
ciples are unseen guides, leading us by invisible strings 
through paths where the end alone is , looked at : it 
is for Science to direct and purge our vision so that 
these airy ties, these principles and laws, generalizations 
and theories^ become distinct objects of vision. Many 
may feel the intellectual monitor, but it is only to he^ 
fiEivourite heroes that the Goddess of Wisdom visibly 
reveals herself. 

7. Thus Art, in its earlier stages at least, is widely 
different from Science, independent of it, and anterior to 
it. At a later period, no doubt, Art may borrow aid 
fh>m Science; and the discoveries of the philosopher 
may be of great value to the manufacturer and the artist. 
But even then, this application forms no essential part of 
the science : the interest which belongs to it is not an 
intellectual interest. The augmentation of human 
power and convenience may impel or reward the physical 
philosopher; but the processes by which man's repasts 
are rendered more delicious, his journeys more rapid, his 
weapons more terrible, are not, therefore. Science. They 
may involve principles which are of the highest interest 
to science ; but as the advantage is not practically more 
precious because it results from a beautiful theory, so the 
theoretical principle has no more conspicuous place in 
science because it leads to convenient practical conse« 
quences. The nature of science is purely intellectual; 
knowledge alone, — exact general truth, — ^is her object; 
and W4) cannot mix with such materials, as .matters of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OF ART AND SCIENCE, 277 

same kind, the merely empirical maxims of art, without 
introducing endless confusion into the subject, and 
making it impossible to attain any solid footing in our 
philosophy. 

8. I shall therefore not place, in our Classification of 
the Sciences, the Arts, as has generally been done ; nor 
shall I notice the applications of sciences to art, as 
forming any separate portion of each science. The 
sciences, considered as bodies of general speculative 
truths, are what we are here concerned with ; and appli- 
cations of such truths, whether useful or useless, are 
important to us only as illustrations and examples. 
Whatever place in human knowledge the Practical Arts 
may hold, they are not Sciences. And it is only by this 
rigorous separation of the Practical from the Theoretical, 
that we can arrive at any solid conclusions respecting the 
nature of truth, and the mode of arriving at it, such as it 
is our object to attain. 



Chapter IX. 
OF THE CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENCES. 

1. The Classification of Sciences has its chief use in 
pointing out to us the extent of our powers of arriving at 
truth, and the analogies which may obtain between those 
certain and lucid portions of knowledge with which we 
are here concerned, and those other portions, of a very 
ditferent interest and evidence, which we here purposely 
abstain to touch upon. The classification of human 
knowledge will, therefore, have a more peculiar import- 
ance when we can include in it the moral, political, and 
metaphysical, as well as the physical portions of our 
knowledge. But such a survey does not belong to our 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



278 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

presetit uudertaking: and a general view of the con- 
neicion and order of the branches of sciences which our 
review has hithertp included, will even now possess some 
interest ; and may serve hereafter as an introduction to a 
more complete scheme of the general body of human 
knowledge. 

2. In this, as in any other case, a sound classification 
must be the result, not of any assumed principles impe- 
ratively applied to the subject, but of an examination of 
the objects to be classified ;-— of an analysis of them 
into the principles in which they agree and differ. The 
Classification of Sciences must result from the considerar 
tioQ of their nature and contents. Accordingly, that 
review of the sciences in which the History of them 
engaged us, led to a Classification, of which the main 
features are indicated in that work. The Classification 
thus obtained, depends neither upon the faculties of th^ 
mind to which the separate parts of our knowledge owe 
their origin, nor upon the objects which each science 
contemplates ; but upon a more natural and fiindamental 
element ; — ^namely, the Ideas which each science involves. 
The Ideas regulate and connect the lacts, and are the 
foundations of the reasoning, in each science : and having 
in the present work more ftilly examined these Ideas, we 
are now prepared to state here the classification to which 
they lead. If we have rightly traced each science to the 
Conceptions which are really fundamental with regtml to 
it^ and which give rise to the first principles on which it 
depends, it is not necessary for our purpose that we 
should decide whether these Conceptions are absolutely 
Ailtimate principles of thought, or whether, on the con« 
^trary, they can be further resolved into other Funda- 
montai Ideas. We need not now suppose it determined 
wl^ethpr or not Number is a mere modification of the 
Jd^ of Time,; and Force a mere modification of the Idea 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENCES. 279 

of Cause: for however this may be, our Conception of 
Number is the foundation of Arithmetic, and our Concep- 
tion of Force is the foundation of Mechanics. It is to 
be observed also that in our classification, each Science 
may involve, not only the Ideas or Conceptions which are 
placed opposite to it in the list, but also all whidi precede 
it. Thus Formal Astronomy involves not only the Con- 
ception of Motion, but also those which are the founda- 
tion of Arithmetic and Geometry. In like manner, 
Physical Astronomy employs the Sciences of Statics and 
Dynamics, and thus rests on their foundations ; and they, 
in turn, depend upon the Ideas of Space and of Time as 
well as of Cause. 

3. We may further observe, that this arrangement of 
Sciences according to the Fundamental Ideas which they 
involve, points out the transition from those parts of 
human knowledge which have been included in our 
Histoiy and Philosophy, to other regions of speculation 
into which we have not entered. We have repeatedly 
found ourselves upon the borders of inquiries of a psycho- 
logical, or moral, or theological nature. Thus the History 
of Physiology* led us to the consideration of Life, Sen- 
sation, and Volition ; and at these Ideas we stopped, that 
we might not transgress the boundaries of our subject as 
then predetermined. It is plain that the pursuit of 
such conceptions and tbeir consequences, would lead us 
to the sciences (if we are allowed to call them sciences) 
which contemplate not only ariinial, but human princi- 
ples of action, to Anthropology and Psychology. In 
otifaer ways, too, the Ideas which we have examined, 
although manifestly the foundations of sciences, siicfa as 
we have here treated of, also plainly pointed to specula^ 
tions of a different order ; thus the Idea of a Final Cause 
is an indispensable guide in Biology, as we have seen ; 

* HisL Ind. ScL, lii. 431. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



280 CONSTRUCTION OF SCIENCE. 

but the conception of Design as directing the order fof 
nature^ once admitted, soon carries us to higher conteia- 
plations. Again, the Class of Palaetiological Sciences 
which we were in the History led to construct, although 
we there admitted onlj one example of the Class, namely 
Geology, does in reality include many vast lines of 
research ; as the history and causes of the diffusion of 
plants and animals, the history of languages, arts, and 
consequently of civilization. Along with these researches^ 
comes the question how far these histories point back- 
wards to a natural or a supernatural origin ; and the Idea 
of a First Cause is thus brought under our consideration. 
Finally, it is not difficult to see that as the Physical 
Sciences have their peculiar governing Ideas, which sup- 
port and shape them, so the Moral and Political Sciences 
also must similarly have their fundamental and formative 
Ideas, the source of universal and certain truths, each of 
their proper kind. But to follow out the traces of this 
analogy, and to verify the existence of those Fundamental 
Ideas in Morals and Politics, is a task quite out of the 
sphere of the work in which we are here engaged. 

4. We may now place before the reader our Classifica- 
tion of the Sciences, adding in the list a few not belong- 
ing to our present subject, that the nature of the transi- 
tion by which we are to extepd our philosophy into 
a wider and higher region may be in some measure 
perceived. 

We may observe that the term Physics^ when confined 
to a peculiar class of Sciences, is usually understood to 
exclude the Mechanical Sciences on the one side, and 
Chemistry on the other ; and thus embraces the Secondary 
Mechanical and Analytico-Mechanical Sciences. But 
the adjective Physical applied to any science and opposed 
to Formal, as in Astronomy and Optics, implies those 
speculations in which we consider not only the Laws of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENCES. 



281 



Phenomena but their Causes ; and generally, as in those 
^ses, their Mechanical Causes. 



PoBdamentel Ideas or Con- 
ceptions. 

Space . 

lime 

Number 

Sign 

Limit . 

Motion • 

Cause 

Mateer • 
Inertia . 
Ffuid Pressure 



Sciences. 
Greometry 

Arithmetic 
Algebra 
Differentials 
Pore Mechanism 
Formal Astronomy 



Outness 

Medium of Sensation 
IjUensity ^ Qualities 
Scales of Qualities , 



Pdarity 



Statics . • • 
Dynamics . . 
Hydrostatics .' , 
Hydrodynamics . 
Physical Astronomy 



Element {Chmposition) 

Chemical Af^niiy . 

substance (Atoms) 

Symmetry . 

likeness 

Degrees of Likeness 

Ifataral Affinity • 

( Vital Powers) 

Assimilation 

Inptability 

(Organization) . 

Final Cause 

loAinct 

Emotion • • 

Thought 

Historical Causation 



Acoustics 
Formal Optics 
Physical Optics 
Thermotics . 
Atmology 
Electricity • 
Magnetism . 
Galvanism • 



CUasiflcation. 



Pure Mathematical Sd* 
ences. 



jPure Motional Sciences. 



> Mechanical Sdencea. 



Secondary Mechanical Sci- 
> ences. 

(Phyacs.) 

lAnalytico-Mechanical Sci« 

f ences. 

-' (Physics.) 



Chemistry . 
Crystallography . 
Systematic Mineralogy 
Systematic Botany 
Systematic Zoology 
Comparaiiye Anatomy 



Biology 



Analytical Science. 
Analytico-ClasBifictttory 
Sciences. 

'Classificatory Sciences. 



Organical Sciences. 



first Cause 



Psychology 

Geology 
Distribution of Plants 

and Animals 
Glossology . 
Ethnogn^hy- 
Natural Theology. 



Palsetiolcgical Sciences. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



282 CONSTRUCTION OP SCIENCE. 

In the next Book, we shall trace the opinions of some 
of the most eminent writers, respecting the sources of 
our knowledge of nature and the rules which may aid us 
in seeking it. For the knowledge of a true Scientific 
Method is a science resembling other sciences ; and the 
ideas and views which it involves have been in some mea- 
sure gradually developed into clearness and certainty by 
successive attempts. We may, therefore, acquire a more 
confident persuasion of the right direction of our path, by 
seeing how £Eir it coincides with that which has been 
pointed out, with more or less distinctness, by many of 
the most sagacious and vigorous intellects, who have 
bestowed their attention upon this inquiry. 



Digitized by Google 



t 

I 

1 

I 



*. Book XL to face p. 



I, Fol. IL) 



(1.) 






1 

I 






•j^uno^ 



•Suno 



k 



auil[«)8iCj3 iq 8UOI) 
tin* JO uoi^v^doad 
uoipvxfd^ diqnop 
rJ9tii6 puv \XO\%^9^9^ 

•Uiniuaui iiD«d jo i[)i3i)8Via ^ 
un aqt^ iCq po^B^Bdood JSuiaq 8Uop«inpuQ ^ 

i uj>i)«[npun JO uoi^B^Df 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 





Spectra of 






Fringes of 


Colours of 


Colours of Colours of 


shadows. 


gratings. 

Fraun- 


striated 


thick thin Plates. 


jrimaldi. 


surfaces. 


Plates. Hook. 


?Iook. 


hofer. 


Coventry's 


Newton. Newton. 


J^ewton. 

1 




Micromet'. 

Barton's 

Buttons. 

Young. 




i 

The Laws of these Phenomena were 


Newton's ScaleqfColotirs. 


never discovered till Theory had in- 




dicated them. 




Fits of Rays. 


I 






Newton. 


Fringes 








obliterated 








by stopping 








light from 








one edge or 








interposing 








a glass. 






¦ 


Voung. 








\rago. 








By interf. 








of rays 








from edges. 








Young. 








By interf. 


• By interf. 






of rays 


of undul". 


* By interf. 


* By interf. * By interf. 


from all 


from all 


of rays 


ofundul-. ofnndnl*-. 


parts. 


parts. 


from stnae. 


from two fVom two 


* Fraun- 


• Young. 


surfaces. surfaces. 




^er 




* Young. "^ Young. 



DigitizWby Google 



283 



BOOK XII. 



REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON THE NATURE OF 

KNOWLEDGE AND THE METHODS 

OF SEEKING IT 



Chapter L 
INTRODUCTION. 



Br the examination of the elements of human thought 
in which we have been engaged, and by a consideration 
of the history of the most clear and certain parts of our 
knowledge, we have b6en led to certain doctrines respect- 
ing the progress of that exact and systematic knowledge 
which we call Science; and these doctrines we have 
endeavoured to lay before the reader in the preceding 
3ook. The questions on which we have thus ventured 
to pronounce have had a strong interest for man, from 
the eariie9t period of his intellectual progress, and have 
been the subj^ts of lively discussion and bold speculation 
in every age. We conceive that in the doctrines to 
which our researches have conducted us, we have a far 
better hope that we possess a body of permanent truths, 
than the earlier essays on the same subjects could furnish. 
For we have not taken our examples of knowledge at 
hazard) as earlier speculators did, and were almost com- 
pelled to do ; but have drawn our materiak from the vast 
store of unquestioned truths which modem science offers 
to us : and we have formed our judgment concerning the 
nature and progreis of knowledge by considering what 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



284 EEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

such science is, and how it has reached its present condi- 
tion. But though we have thus pursued our speculations 
concerning knowledge with advantages which earlier 
writers did not possess, it is still both interesting and 
instructive for us to regard the opinions upon this subject 
which have been delivered by the philosophers of past 
times. It is especially interesting to see some of the 
truths which we have endeavoured to expound, gradually 
dawning in men's minds, and assuming the clear and 
permanent form in which we can now contemplate them. 
I shall therefore, in this Book, pass in review many of the 
opinions of the writers of various ages concerning the 
mode by which man best acquires the truest knowledge ; 
and I shall endeavour, as we proceed, to appreciate the 
real value of such judgments, and their place in the pro- 
gress of sound philosophy. 

In this estimate of the opinions of others, I shall 
be guided by those general doctrines which I have, as I 
trust, established in the preceding part of this work. 
And without attempting here to give any summary of 
these doctrines, I may remark that there are two main 
principles by which speculations on such subjects in ajl 
ages are connected and related to each other; namely, 
the opposition of Ideas Bui^ Sematmis^ and the distinction 
of practical and speculative knowledge. The opposition 
of Ideas and Sensations is exhibited to us in the antithe- 
sis of Theory and Fact, which are necessarily considered 
as distinct and of opposite natures, and yet necessarily 
identical, and constituting Science by their identity. In 
like manner, although practical knowledge is in substance 
identical with speculative, (for all knowledge is specula- 
tion,) there is a distinction between the two in their 
history, and in the subjects by which they are exemplified, 
which distinction is quite essential in judging of the phi- 
losophical views of the ancients. The alternatives of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTE.OPUCTION 285 

identity and diversity, in these two antitheses, the succes- 
sive separation, opposition, and reunion of principles which 
thus arise, have produced, (as they may easily be imagined 
capable of doing,) a long and varied series of systems 
concerning the nature of knowledge ; among which we 
shall have to guide our course by the aid of the views 
already presented. 

I am far from undertaking, or wishing, to review the 
whole series of opinions which thus comes under our 
view; and I do not even attempt to examine all the 
principal authors who have written on such subjects. I 
merely wish to select some of the most considerable 
forms which such opinions have assumed, and to point 
out in some measure the progress of truth from age to 
age. In doing this, I can only endeavour to seize some 
of the most prominent features of each time and of each 
step ; and I must pass rapidly from classical antiquity to 
those which we have called the dark ages, and from them 
to modem times. At each of these periods the modifi- 
cations of opinion, and the speculations with which they 
were connected, formed a vast and tangled maze, into 
the byways of which our plan does not allow us to enter. 
We shall esteem ourselves but too fortunate^ if we can 
discover the single track by which ancient led to modem 
philosophy. 

I must also repeat that my survey of philosophi- 
cal writers is here confined to this one point, — their 
opinions on the nature of knowledge and the method of 
science. I with some effort avoid entering upon other 
parts of the philosophy of those of whom I speak ; I 
knowingly pass by those portions of their speculations 
which are in many cases the most interesting and cele- 
brated; — their opinions concerning the human soul, the 
Divine governor of the world, the foundations or leading 
doctrines of politics, religion, and general philosophy. I 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



286 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

am desirous that my reader should bear this in mind* 
siuce he must otherwise be offended with the scanty and 
partial view which I give in this place of the philosophers 
whom I enumerate. 



Chapteb II. 
PLATO. 

There would be small advantage in beginning our 
examination eariier than the period of the Socratic 
School at Athens ; for although the spirit of inquiry on 
such subjects had awoke in Greece at an eariier period, 
and although the peculiar aptitude of the Grecian mind 
for such researches had shown itself repeatedly in subtle 
distinctions and acute reasonings, all the positive results of 
these early efforts were contained in a more definite form 
in the reasonings of the Platonic age. Anterior to that 
time, the Greeks did not possess plain and familiar exam- 
ples of exact knowledge, such as the truths of Arithmetic, 
Geometry, Astronomy, and Optics, became in the school 
of Plato; nor were the antitheses of which we spoke 
above, so distinctly and fully unfolded as we find them in 
Plato's works. 

The question which hinges upon one of these anti- 
theses, occupies a prominent place in several of the 
Platonic dialogues ;— namely, whether our knowledge be 
obtained by means of Sensation or of Ideas. One of the 
doctrines which Plato most earnestly inculcated upon his 
countrymen was, that we do not know cohoeming sensible 
objects, but concerning ideas. The first attempts of the 
Greeks at metaphysical analysis had given rise to a school 
which maintained that material objects are the only 
realities. In opposition to this, arose another school, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PLATO. 287 

which taught that material objects have no permanent 
reality, but are ever waxing and waning, constantly 
changing their substance. ^VAnd hence,'* as Aristotle 
says*, ^^ arose the doctrine of ideas which the Platonists 
held. For they assented to the opinion of Heraclitus, 
that all sensible objects are in a constant state of flux. 
So that if there is to be any knowledge and science, it 
must be concerning some permanent natures, different 
from the sensible natures of objects ; for there can be no 
permanent science respecting that which is perpetually 
changing. It happened that Socrates turned his specu- 
lations to the moral virtues, and was the first philosopher 
who endeavoured to give universal definitions of such 
matters. He wished to reason systematically, and therefore 
he tried to establish definitions, for definitions are the 
basis of systematic reasoning. There are two things 
which may justly be looked upon as steps in philosophy 
due to Socrates ; inductive reasonings, and universal defi- 
nitions ;«— both of them steps which belong to the foun- 
dations of science. Socrates, however, did not make 
universals, or definitions separable from the objects ; but 
his followers separated them, and these essences they 
termed Ideas'' And the same account is given by other 
writers f. ^Some existences are sensible, some intelligi- 
ble : and according to Plato, they who wish to understand 
the principles of things, must first separate the ideas from 
the things, such as the ideas of Similarity, Unity, Number, 
Magnitude, Position, Motion: second, that we must 
assume an absolute Fair, Good» Just, and the like : third, 
that we must consider the ideas of relation, as Knowledge, 
Power : recollecting that the things which we perceive 
have this or that appellation applied to them because 
they partake of this or that Idea; those things being /vrt 
which participate in the idea of The Just, those being 

* Metaph.j xii. 4. t Dioo. Labrt. Vit, Plat 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



388 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

beautiful, wliich contain the idea of The Beautiful.'^ AM * 
many of the arguments by which this doctrine wtts main- 
tained are to be found in the Platonic dialogues. Thus 
the opinion that true knowledge consists in sensatioW,* 
which had been assperted by Protagoms and others^ fs 
refuted in the TAe^tdm: and We may add, so rietof^ 
oHsly refttted, that the arguments thel^ put forth hare' 
ever since exercised a strong influence upon the speed- 
lative world. It may be remarked th^t in the BfiihAf 
of Plato and of those who have since pmrsued thie 
same paths of speculation, the interest of such discnU- 
sions as those we are now referring to, wafe by no means 
limited to their bearing upon mere theory; but Was 
closely connected with those great questions of morals 
which have always a practical import. T^ose who asserted 
that the only foundation of knov^ledge was serisHtloh, 
asserted also that the only foundation of virtue wai^ the 
desire of pleasure. And in Plato, the metaphysical part 
of the disquisitions conoeming knowledge in genefral, 
though independent in its principles, always seems to be 
subordinate in its purpose to the questions concenmig the 
knowledge of our duty. 

Since Plato thus looked upon the Ideas which wem' 
involved in each department of knowledge as forming its 
only essential part, it was natural that he should look 
upon the study of Ideas as the true mode of pursuit 
knowledge. This he himsdf describes in the PhSebm^. 
" The beet way of arriving at truUi is not very dilBieult: to 
point out, bat most hard to pursue. All the arts whirh^ 
have ever been discovered, were revealed iii this manneh 
It is a gift of the gods to man, which, as I conceive, they 
settt down by some Prometheus, in a blaze of light; and 
the ancients, more clearsighted than we, and lesa removed 
fi*om the gods, handed down this traditionary doctrine : 

• T. ii. p. 16, c, d. ed. Bekker, t. v. p. 437. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PLATO. 289. 

tb^ whatever is said to be, comes of One and of Many, 
and comprehends in itself the Finite and the Infinite in 
coalition (being one kind, and consisting of infinite indivi* 
duf^Is)* And this being the state of things, we must, in 
ea^h ease, endeavour to seize the One Idea (the idea of the 
kipd) as the chief point ; for we shall find that it is there. 
And when we have seized this one thing, we may then 
consider how it comprehends in itself two, or three, or any 
other number; and, again, examine each of these ramifica- 
tions separately; till at last we perceive, not only that One 
is at the same time One and Many, but also how many. 
And when we have thus filled up the interval between 
the Infinite and the One, we may consid^ that we have 
done with each one. The gods then, as I have said, 
taught us by tradition thus to contemplate, and to learn, 
and to teach one another. But the philosophers of the 
present day seize upon the One, at hazard, too soon or 
too late, and then immediately snatch at the Infinite; 
but the intermediate steps escape them, by which tiie 
subject is subdivided, so that it can be the subject of logi-* 
cal exposition and discussion." 

It would seem that what the author here describes as 
the most perfect form of exposition, is that which refers 
each object to its place in a classification containing a 
complete series of subordinations, and which gives a defi- 
mtifm of each class. We have repeatedly remarked that» 
in sciences of classification, each new definition which gives 
a tenable and distinct se})aration of classes is an important 
advance in our knowledge ; but that such definitions are 
rather the last than the first step in each advance. In the 
progress of real knowledge, these definitions are always 
the results of a laborious study of individual cases, and 
are never arrived at by a pure eflfort of thought, which is 
what Plato appears to have imagined as the true mode of 
philosophizing. And still less do the advances of other 
VOL. ir. u 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



290 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

j9oiences consist in seizing at once upon the highest gene- 
rality, and filling in afterwards all the intermediate steps 
between that and the special instances. On the contrary, 
as we have seen, the ascents from particular to genend 
are all successive ; and each step of this ascent reqiiires 
time, and labour, and a patient examination of actual 
fects and objects. 

It would, of course^ be absurd to blame Plato for having 
inadequate views of the nature of progressive knowledge, 
it the time when knowledge could hardly be said to have 
begun its progress. But we already find in his specula- 
tions, as appears in the passages just quoted from his writ- 
ings, several points brought into view which will require 
our continued attention as we proceed. In overlooking 
the necessity of a gradual and successive advance from 
the less general to the more general truths, Plato shared 
in a dimness of vision which prevailed among philo- 
sophers to the time of Francis Bacon. In thinking too 
slightly of the study of actual nature, he manifested a 
bias from which the human intellect freed itself in the 
vigorous struggles which terminated the dark ages. In 
pointing out that till knowledge implies a unity of what 
we observe as manifold, which unity is given by the 
mind, Plato taught a lesson which has of late been 
too obscurely acknowledged, the recoil by which mea 
repaired their long neglect of facts having carried ihem 
for a while so far as to think that facts were the whole 
of our knowledge. And in analysing this principle of 
Unity, by which we thus connect sensible things, into 
Various Ideas, such as Number, Magnitude, Positioa» 
Motion, he made a highly important step, which it has 
been the business of philosophers in succeeding times to 
complete and to follow out. 

But the efficacy of Plato's speculations in their beai> 
ing upon physical science, and upon theory in general, 
was much weakened by the confusion of practical mth 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PLATO. 291 

theoretical knowledge, which aroBO fVom the ethical 
propetiirities of the Bocratic school. In the Platonic 
Dialogues, Art and Science are constantly spoken of indis- 
criminatelj. The skill possessed by the Painter, the 
Awhitect^ the Shoemaker, is considered as a just example 
of human science, no less than the knowledge which the 
geometer or the astronomer possesses of the theoretical 
truths with which he is conversant. Not only so ; but 
traditionary and mythological tales, mystical imaginations 
and &ntastical etymologies, are mixed up, as no less 
choice ingredients, with the mbst acute logical analyses, 
and the most exact conduct of metaphysical controversies* 
There is no distinction made between the knowledge 
possessed by the theoretical psychologist and the physi- 
cian, the philosophical teacher of morals and the legislator 
or the administrator of law. This, indeed, is the less to 
be wondered at, since even in out own time the same 
confusion is very commonly made \jy persons not other- 
wise ignorant or uncultured. 

On the other hand, we may remark finally, that Plato's 
admiration of Ideas was not a barren imagination, even so 
for as regarded physical science. For^ as we have seen*, 
he had a very important share in the introduction of the 
theory of epicycles, having been the first to propose to 
astronomers in a distinct form, the problem of whldi that 
theory was the solution ; namely, " to explain the celes« 
tial phenomena by the combination of equable cifdular 
motions." This demand of an ideal hypothesis which 
should exactly express the phenomena (sis well as they 
could then be observed)^ Md from which, by the inter^ 
position of snitable steps^ all special cases might be 
deduced, fiills in well with those views respecting the 
proper mode of seeking knowledge which we have quoted 
from the PkiMus. And the Idea which could thui 

* BisL Ind. flW., 1. 104. 

U 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



202 EEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

represent and replace . all the particular Facts, beiqg 
not only sought but found, we ijiay readily suppose that 
the philosopher was, by this event, strongly confirmed in 
his persuasion that such an Idea was indeed whajb the 
inquirer ought to seek. In this conviction alj his genuine 
followers up to modern times have participated ; and thi|^ 
though they have avoided the error of those who hold 
that facts alone are valuable as the elements of our know- 
ledge, they have frequently run into the opposite error pf 
too much despising and neglecting facts^ and of thinking 
that the business of the inquirer after truth was only a 
profound and constant contemplation of the conceptions 
of his own mind. But of this hereafter. 



Chapter III. 
ARISTOTLE. 

The views of Aristotle with regard to the foundations 
of human knowledge are very different from those of his 
tutor Plato, and are even by himself put in opposition to 
tKem. He dissents altogether from the Platonic doctrine 
that Ideas are the true materials of our knowledge; and 
after giving, respecting the origin of this doctrine, the 
account which we quoted in the last chapter^ he goe^ oa 
to reason against it. "Thus," he says*, "they devised 
Ideas of all things which are spoken of as universals : 
miich as if any one having to count a number of objeet^ 
should think that he could not do it while they were few, 
and shpuld expect to count them by making them more 
numerous. For the kinds of things are almost more 
numerous than the special sensible olgects, by seeking 
the causes of which they were led to their Ideas." He 
• Metapk. xii. 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ARISTOTLE. 295 

then goes on to urge several other reasons against the 
assumption of Ideas and the use of them in philosophical 
researches. 

Aristotle himself establishes his doctrines by trains of 
reasoning. But reasoning must proceed from certain First 
Pripciples; and the question then arises^ Whence are 
these First Principles obtained? To this he replies, that 
.they are the result of Ejpperience^ and he even employs 
the same technical expression by which we at this day 
describe the process of collecting these principles from 
observed facts ; — that they are obtained by InductiorL I 
have already quoted passages in which this statement is 
made*. " The way of reasoning," he saysf , " is the same 
in philosophy, and in any art or science : we must collect 
the facts {ra xnrapxoyra)^ and the things to which the facts 
happen, and must have as large a supply of these as pos- 
sible, and then we must examine them according to the 
terms of our syllogisms.'* .... "There are peculiar 
principles in each science ; and in each case these prin- 
ciples must be obtained from experience. Thus astrono- 
mical observation supplies the principles of astronomical 
science. For the phenomena being rightly taken, the 
demonstrations of astronomy were discovered; arid the 
same is the case with any other Art or Science. So that 
if the facts in each case be taken, it is our business to 
construct the demonstrations. For if in our natural Jiis^ 
tory {xara ri)v l<rrop[av) we have omitted none of the facts 
and properties which belong to the subject, we shall learn 
what we can demonstrate and what we cannot.** And, 
again I, " It is manifest that if any sensation be wanting, 
there must be some knowledge wanting, which we are 
thus prevented from having. For we acquire knowledge 
either by Induction {iTrayay/^) or by Demonstratijcm : and 

? HiH. Ind. Sci.y i. 74. t Analyt. Prior.f i. 30. 

X Analyt. Post , i. 18. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



204 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Dtmonstration is from uniTeraals, but Inductiou from 
purtieulars. It is impossible to have universal theoretical 
propositions except by Induction : and we cannot make 
inductions ivithout having sensation ; for sensation has to 
do with particulars*" 

It is easy to show that Aristotle uses the term Induc^ 
tion, as we use it, to express the process of collecting a 
general proposition from particular cases in which it is 
exemplified. Thus in a passage which we have already 
quoted*, he says, " Induction, and Syllogism from Induc- 
tion is when we attribute one extreme term to tiie middle 
by means of the other." The import of this technical 
phraseology will further appear by the example which he 
gives : ^^ We find that several animals which are deficient 
in bile are longlived, as man, the horse, the mule ; hence 
we infer that aU animals which are deficient in bile are 
longlived." 

We may observe, however, that both Aristotle's 
notion of induction^ and many other parts of his philoso- 
phy, are obscure and imperfect, in consequence of his 
refiisiug to contemplate ideas as something distinct from 
sensation. It thus happens that he always assumes the 
ideas which enter into his propositions as given; and con- 
siders it as the philosopher's business to determine whe- 
ther such propositions are true or not : whereas the most 
important feature in induction is, as we have said, the 
introduction of a new idea, and not its employment when 
once introduced. That the mind in this manner givea 
ijmity to that which is manifold, — that we are thus led to 
q)eculative principles which have an evidence higher than 
any others,— -and tiiat a peculiar sagacity in s<»ne men 
seiaes upop the conceptions. by which the foots may be 
bound into true propositions, — are doctrines which form no 
essential part of the philosophy of the Stagirite, although 

• AfML Pri.f ii. 23, rrtp) r?* inaycryijt. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ARISTOTLE. 295 » 

such views are sometimes recognized, more or less clearly, 
in his expressions* Thus he says*, "There can be no 
knowledge when the sensation does not continue in the 
mind. For this purpose, it is necessary both to perceive, 
and to have some unity in the mind ; (alcrOavofiivoif Sxetv 
''EN TI iv tQ '^vxS) ft^d many such perceptions having 
taken place, some difference is then perceived : and from 
the remembrance of these arises Reason* Thus from 
Sensation comes Memory, and from Memory of the same 
thing often repeated comes Experience : for many acts of 
Memory make up one Experience. And from Experi« 
ence, or from any Universal Notion which takes a per-* 
manent place in the mind,-— from the unity in the 
manifold, the same some one thing being found in many 
facts, — springs the first principle of Art and of Science } 
of Art if it be employed about production ; of Science^ 
if about existence." 

I will add to this, Aristotle's notice of Sagacity; 
since, although little or no further reference is made to 
this quality in his philosophy, the passage fixes our atten-* 
tion upon an important step in the formation of knowr 
ledge. "Sagacity," {a/rx,ivoM) he saysf, "is a hitting by 
guess {ivaroxla nf) upon the middle term (the conception 
common to two cases) in an inappreciable time. As for 
cMmple^ if any one seeing that the bright side of the 
moon is always towards the sun, suddenly perceives why 
this is ; namely, because the moon shines by the light of 
the sun: — or if he sees a person talking with a rich 
man, he guesses that he is borrowing money ;— or conjee* 
tures that two persons are friends, because they are 
enemies of the same person."— To consider only the first 
of these examples ;-^the conception here introduced, that 
of a body shining by the light which another casts upon 
it^ is not contained in the observed facts, but introduced 

* Anal. Poit., u. 19. t lb., I 34. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

by the mind. It i^ in shoi*t, that conception wbich^'in 
tbe act of induction, the tnind superadds to the phenomena 
M they are presented by the senses: and to iirvent such 
appropriate conceptions, such " eustochies," is, indeed^ tli© 
precise office of inductive sagacity. '" 

Attheendof this work (the Later Analytics) Aristbtii^ 
ascribes our knowledge of principles to Intellect, {pov<:) qr, 
as it appears necessary to translate the word, Intuitioft^. 
••Since, of our intellectual habits by which we aiin at 
truth, some are always true, but some admit of being 
false, as Opinion and Reasoning, but Science and Tntui/tion 
are always true ; and since there is nothing which is more 
certain than Science except Intuition ; and since Priiv 
ciples are better known to us than the Deductions from 
them ; and since all Seiextce is connected by reasoning, 
we cannot have Science respeeting Wnciples. Con- 
sidering this then, and that the beginning of Demonstra- 
tion cannot be Demonstration, nor the beginning of 
Science, Science ; and since, as we have said, there is no 
6ther kind of truth. Intuition must be the beginning ^ 
Science.** . ; 

What is here said, is, no doubt, in accordance with 
the doctrines which we have endeavoured to estabKsh 
respecting the nature of Science, if by this IrUuiiii^i we 
understand that contemplation of certain Fundamental 
Ideas, which is the basis of all rigorous knowledge. But 
notwithstanding this apparent approximation, Aristotle 
was far from having an habitual and practical possession 
of the principles which he thus touches upon. He did 
not, in reality, construct his philosophy by giving Unity 
to that which was manifold, or by seeking in Intuition 
principles which might be the basis of Demonstration ; 
nor did he collect, in each subject, fundamental proposi- 
tions by an induction of particulars. He rather endea- 

•Anal. PoiLy ii. IP. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



?outed to divide than to unite; he enajdoyed himself, not 
in eombining facts, but in analysing notions; and the 
criterion to wfaioh he referred his analysis ^as^ not the 
Acts of our experience, but our habits of language^ 
Thus his opinions rested, not upon sound inductions^ 
gathered in each case from the phenomena by means of 
appropriate Ideas ; but upon the loose and vague generali- 
2ation8 which are implied in the common use of speech. 

Yet Aristotle was so far condstent with his own 
doctrine of the derivation of knowledge from experience, 
thai he made in almost every province of human know*- 
ledge, a vast collection of such special facts as the expe- 
rieilce of his time supplied^ These collections are aln¥>st 
tmrivalled, even to the present day, especially in Natural 
.History; in other departments, when to the faet^ we 
must add the right Inductive Idea, in order to obtain 
truth, we find little of value in the Aristotelic wori&s. 
But in those parts which refer to Natural History, we 
find not only an immense and varied collection of facts 
and observations, but a sagacity and acuteness in classifi* 
cation which it is impossible not to admire. This indeed 
appears to have been the most eminent fietculty in Aris« 
totle's mind. 

The influence of Aristotle in succeeding ages will 
cMne under our notice shortly. 



Chapter IV. 
THE LATER GREEKS. 

Tirus while Plato was disposed to seek the essence of 
our knowledge in Ideas alone, Aristotle, slighting this 
source of truths looked to Experience as the beginning of 
Science ; while he attempted to obtain, by division and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



298 REVIEW OF OPINIONft ON KNOWLEDGE. 

deductioD/all that £xpeHenc6 did not Immediately ftup-> 
ply. And thus, with these two grekt names, began that 
struggle of opposite opinions which has ever since that 
time agitated the speculatire world, as men have urged 
the claims of Ideas or of Experience to our respect, 
and as alternately each of these elements of knowledge 
has been elevated above its due place, while the other 
has been unduly depressed/ We shall see the successive 
turns of this balanced struggle in the remaining portions 
of this review. 

But we may observe that practically the influence of 
Plato predominated rather than that of Aristotle, in the 
remaining part of the history of ancient philosophy. It 
was, indeed, an habitual subject of dispute among men of 
letters, whether the sources of true knowledge are to be 
found in the Senses or in the Mind ; the Epicureans taking 
one side of this alternative, and the Academics another, 
while the Stoics in a certain manner included both ele-^ 
ments in their view. But none of these sects showed 
their persuasion that the materials of knowledge were to 
be found in the domain of Sense, by seeking them there« 
No one appears to have thought of following the example 
of Aristotle, and gathering together a store of observed 
facts. We may except, perhaps, assertions belonging to 
some provinces of Natural History, which were collected 
by various writers: but in these, the mixed character of 
the statements, the want of discrimination in the estimate 
of evidence, the credulity and love of the marvellous 
which the authors for the most part displayed, showed 
that instead of improving upon the example of Aristotle, 
they were wandering further and further from the path of 
real knowledge. And while they thus collected, with so 
little judgment, such statements as offered themselves, it 
hardly appears to have occurred to any one to enlarge 
the stores of observation by the aid of experiment ; and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE hKim CntEEKS. 209 

to loarn what the laws of nature were, by trying what 
were their results in particular oases. They used Ho 
instruments for obtaining an insight into the constitution 
of the universe, except logical distinctions and discus- 
sions; and proceeded as if the phenomena familiar to 
their predecessors must contain all that was needed as a 
basis for natural philosophy. By thus contenting them- 
selves with the facts which the earlier philosophers had 
contemplated, they were led also to confine themselves to 
the ideas which those philosophers had put forth. For 
all the most remarkable alternatives of hypothesis, so far 
as they could be constructed with a slight and common 
knowledge of phenomena, had been promulgated by the 
acute and profound thinkers who gave the first impulse 
to philosophy : and it was not given to man to add much 
to the original inventions of their minds till he had 
undergone anew a long discipline of observation, and of 
thought employed upon observation. Thus the later 
authors of the Oreek Schools became little better than 
commentators on the earlier; and the common places 
with which the different schools carried on their debates, 
—the constantly recurring argument, with its known 
attendant answer,. — ^the distinctions drawn finer and finer 
and leading to nothing, — ^render the speculations of those 
times a scholastic philosophy, in the same sense in which 
we employ the term when we speak of the labours of the 
middle ages. It will be understood that I now refer to 
that which is here my subject, the opinions concerning 
our knowledge of nature, and the methods in use for the 
purpose of obtidning such knowledge. Whether the 
moral speculations of the ancient world were of the same 
stationary kind, going their round in a limited circle, like 
their metaphysics and physics, must be considered on 
some other occasion. 

As a specimen of the later Greek reasonings on phy- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SOO EEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

sicial philosophy, I may take a passage from Galen's Cota- 
mentary on the* Treatise of Hippocrates, On the Elements. 
^ Wh^t, then,** he asks*, "is the method of discovering 
these Elements? To me it seems there can be no other 
than that which was introduced by Hippocrates. For^^re 
must reason first, considering if an Element be a th!ng 
which is one, according to its idea; {iv n ri)v lS€av\) ''and 
next, if many and various and dissimilar, how many, knd 
of what kind they are, and how related by 'their associa- 
tion. Now that the First Element is not one only, com- 
prising both our bodies and other things, Hippocrates 
shows. For if man were one Element only, he could not 
fall sick; fbr there would be nothing which could derange 
his health, if he were of one Element only.** We Have 
seen, in the History of Science, that Galen is one of the 
greatest names in ancient Physiology: but wheii h^ 
makes the attempt to pass at one step from the most 
familiar facts to the ultimate constitution of the universe, 
it is not wonderful that his reasonings are of no real 
value or import. 

Before we quit the ancients we may observe some 
peculiarities in the Roman disciples of the Greek phiTo- 
sophy, which may be worthy our notice. 



Chapter V. 
THE ROMANS. 



The Romans had no philosophy but that whidi they 
borrowed from the Greeks; and wh4t they thus received, 
they hardly made entirely their own. The vast and pro- 
found question of which we have been speaking, the rela- 
tion between Existence and our Knowledge of what 

? Lib. 1. c. 2. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE>OKAN&L 301 

existp, they veyer appear to have fethpmed, even so fiwr 
as to. discern how wide and deep it is. In the develop* 
ment of the ideas bj which nature is to be understood, 
they went no. further than their. Gredc masters had gone^ 
npr indeed was more to be looked for* And in the 
piC^Qtical habit of accumulating observed facts as mate- 
rials for knowledge, they were much less discriminating 
and more credulous than their Greek predecessors. The 
descient from Aristotle to Pliny, in the judiciousness of 
the authors and the value of their collections of facts^ 
is immensew 

Since the Romans were thus servile followers of their 
Greek teachers, and little acqiKiinted with any example 
of new truths collected from the world around them, it 
was not to be expected that they could have any juat 
conception of that long and niagnificent ascent from one 
set of truths to others of higher order and wider compass^ 
which the history of science began to exhibit when the 
human mind recovered its progressive habits. Yet some 
dim presentiment of the splendid career thus destined for 
Ifhe intellect of man appears from time to time to have 
arisen in tbejr minds* Periiaps the ciroumstance which 
most powerfully contributed to suggest this vision, was 
the vast intellectual progress which they were themselves 
conscious of having made, through the introduction of 
the Greek philosophy ; and to this may be added, per- 
haps, some other features of national character. Their 
temper was too stubborn to acquiesce in the absolute 
authority of the Greek philosophy, although their minds 
werc not inventive enough to establish a rival by itdS side. 
And the wonderful progress of their political power had 
gi^en them a hope in the progress of man which the 
Gereeks never possessed. The Roman, as he believed the 
fortune of his State to be destined for eternity, believed 
also in the immortal destiny and endless advance of that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



d02 REVIEW OF 0HNI0K8 OK KNOWLEDGE. 

Intellectual Hepublio of whi^h he had been admitted a 
denizen. 

It is easy to find examples of such feelings as I have 
endeayoured to describe. The enthusiasm with which 
Lucretius and Virgil speak of physical knowledge, mani* 
festly arises in a great measure from the delight which 
they had felt in becoming acquainted with the Gn^k 
theories. 

Me Tero primum dalces ante omnia mnitt 
Quarum sacra fero ingenti perculsus amore, 
Accipiant, coelique vias et sidera monstrent, 
Defectus solis varios, Lunceque labores ! 

Felix qui potuit rerura cognoscere causas ! 

Ovid* expresses a similar feeling. 

Felices ammon quibua hac cognoscere primis 
Inque demos superas scandere cura fait ! . « . 

Admovere oculis distantia sidera nostris 
^theraqMe ingenio snpposnere suo. 

Sic petitur coslum : non nt ferat Ossam Olympns 
Summaque Peliacus sidera tanget apex. 

And from the whole tenour of these and similar pas* 
sages, it is eyident that the intellectual pleasure wbid^ 
Arises from our first introduction to a beautiflil physical 
theory had a main share in producing this enthusiasm 
at the contemplation of the yictories of soi«Qce ; altbougl^ 
undoubtedly the morel philosophy, whidh wa9 never sepa*- 
Jttted from the natural philosophy, and the triumph OTer 
superstitious fears which a knowledge of nature was 
supposed to furnish, added warmth to the f^elii^ of 
exultation. 

We may trace a similar imprestton in the ardent 
expressions which Pliny f makes use of in speaking of the 
early astronomers, and which we have quoted in the 
History. "^ Great men! elevated above the common 
standard of human nature, by discovering the laws whkh 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THB ftOMANS. 308 

celestial occurrences obey^ and by freeing the wretched 
mind of man from the fears which eclipses inspired*** 

This exulting contemplation of what science had done, 
naturally led the mind to an anticipation of further 
achievements still to be performed. Expressions of this 
fueling occur in Seneca, and are of the most remarkable 
kind, as the following example will show*. 

" Why do we wonder that comets, so rare a pheno- 
mena, have not yet had their laws assigned? — that we 
should know so little of their beginning and their end, 
when their recurrence is at wide intervals ? It is not yet 
fifteen hundred years since Greece, 

Stellis numeros et nomina fecit, 

reckoned the stars, and gave them names. There are 
still many nations which are acquainted with the heavens 
by sight only; which do not yet know why the moon dis- 
appears, why she is eclipsed. It is but lately that among 
us philosophy has reduced these matters to a certainty. 
The day i^all come when the course of time and the 
labour of a matorer age shall bring to light what is yet 
concealed. One generation, even if it devoted itself to 
the skies, is not enough for researches so extensive. How 
then can it be so, when we divide this scanty allowance 
of years into no equal shares between our studies and our 
vices? These things then must be explained by a long 
ftDceession of inquirieSr We have but just begun to 
know liow arise the morning and evening appearances^ 
the stations, the progressions, and the retrogradations of 
the fixed stars which put themselves in our way;— p>which 
appearing perpetually in another and another place com- 
pel us to be curious. Son^ one will hereafter demons 
strate in wiiat region the comets wander; why they move 
«o far asunder from the rest ; of what size and nature 
they are. Let us be content with what we h^ve dis- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



804 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

covered: let posterity contribute its share to truUi*" 
Again he adds* in the same strain. ^'Let us not 
wonder that what lies so deep is brought out so slowly. 
How many auimald have become known for the first time 
in this age! And the members of futui*e generations 
shall know many of which we are ignorant. Many 
things are reserved for ages to come, when our memory 
shall have passed away. The world would be a small 
thing indeed, if it did not contain matter of inquiry fw 
all the world. Eleusis reserves something for the second 
visit of the worshipper. So too Nature does not at once 
disclose all her mystei'ies. We think ourselves initiated, 
we are but in the vestibule. The arcana are not thrown 
open without distinction and without reserve. This age 
will see some things ; that which comes after us, others.** 
While we admire the happy coincidence of these 
conjectures with the soundest views which the history of 
science teaches us, we must not forget that they are 
merely conjectures, suggested by very vague impressions, 
and associated with very scanty conceptions of the laws 
of nature. Seneca's Natural Questions, from which the 
above extract is taken, contains a series of dissertations 
on various subjects of Natural Philosophy; as Meteors, 
Rainbows, Lightning, Springs, Rivers, Snow, Hail, Rain, 
Wind, Earthquakes and Comets. In the whole of these 
dissertations, the statements are loose, and the explana- 
tions of little or no value. Peihaps it may be worth our 
while to notice a case in which he rders to an observa* 
tion of his own, although his conclusion from it be erro- 
neous. He is arguing! against the opinion diat Springs 
arise from the water which falls in rain. *^In the first 
place,*' he says, ^' I, a very diligent digger in my vineyard, 
affirm that no rain is so heavy as to moisten the earth to 
the depth of more than ten feet. All the moisture is 

* QweH. Nat., vii, 30, 31. t /J., iii. 7- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ROMANS. 805 

cansotiied in this outer crudt, and degcends not to the 
lower part." We have here something of the nature of 
ati experiment ; and indeed, as we may readily conceive, 
the instinct which impels man to seek truth by exp^ri-^ 
finent can never be altogether extingaished. Seneca's 
€f^periment was deprived of its value by the indistinct^ 
11^88 of his ideas, which led him to rest in the erode con« 
e^[»(^n of the water being ^^ consumed" in the superficial 
crust of the earth. 

' It -is umiecessary to pursue further the reasonings of 
the Bomans on such subjects, and we now proceed to the 
ages which succeeded the fall of their empirew 



Chapter VI. 

THE SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 

In the History of the Sciences I have devoted a Book 
to the state of Science in the middle agee, and have 
eadeaTCMired to analyse the intellectual defects of that 
period. Among the characteristic features of the human 
mind duting those times, I have noticed Indistinctness of 
Ideas, a Goramentatorial Spirit, Mysticism, and Dogma^ 
tism. The account there given of this portion of the 
history of man belongs, in reality, rather to the present 
work than to the History of Progressive Science. For^ 
a» we have there remarked, theoretical Science was^ during 
the period of whieh we speak, almost entirely stationary ; 
and the investigation of Uie causes of such a state of 
things may be considered as a part of that review, in 
which we a)re now engaged, of the vicissitudes of manV 
acquaintance wiUithe methods of discovery. But when 
we offieffed to the world a history of science, to leave so 
large a chasm unexplained, would have ma^e the series 

VOL. II. X 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



306 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

of events seem defective and broken ; and the survey of 
the Middle Ages was therefore inserted. I would beg to 
refer to that portion of the former work the reader who 
wishes for information in addition to what is here given. 

The Indistinctness of Ideas and the Commentatorial 
Disposition of those ages have already been here brought 
under our notice. Viewed with reference to the opposi- 
tion between Experience and Ideas, on which pointy 
as we have said, the succession of opinions in a great 
measure turns, it is clear that the commentatorial 
method belongs to the ideal side of the question: for 
the commentator seeks for such knowledge as he values, 
by analysing and illustrating what his author has said ; 
and, content with this material of speculation, does not 
desire to add to it new stores of experience and obser- 
vation. And with re^rd to the two other features in the 
character which we gave to those ages, we may observe 
that Dogmatism demands for philosophical theories the 
i^ubmission of mind, due to those revealed religious doc- 
trines which are to guide our conduct and direct our 
hopes : while Mysticism elevates ideas into realities, and 
offers them to us as the objects of our religious regard. 
Thus the Mysticism of the middle ages and their Dogma- 
tism alike arose from not discriminating the offices of 
theoretical and practical philosophy. Mysticism claimed 
for ideas the dignity and reality of principles of mordi 
action and religious hope: Dogmatism imposed theoretical 
opinions respecting speculative points with the imperative 
tone of rules of conduct and fiiith. 

If, however, the opposite claims of theory and prac* 
tice interfered with the progress of science by the con- 
fusion they thus occasioned, they did so far more by 
drawing men away altogether from mere physical specu*^ 
lations. The Christian religion, with its precepts, its 
hopes, and its promises, became the leading subject of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OP THE MIDDLE AGES. 8©7 

men's thoughts ; and the great active truths thus revealed, 
and the duties thus enjoined, made all inquiries of mere 
curiosity appear frivolous and unworthy of msui. The 
Fathers of the Church sometimes philosophized ill ; but 
far more commonly they were too intent upon the gredt 
lessons which they had to teach, respecting man's situation 
in the eyes of his Heavenly Master, to philosophize at 
all respecting things remote from the business of life and 
of no importance in man's spiritual concerns. 

Yet man has his intellectual as well as his spiritual 
wants. He has Acuities which demand systems and 
reasons, as well as precepts and promises. The Christian 
doctor, who knew so much more than the heathen philo- 
sopher respecting the Creator and Governor of the uni- 
verse, was not long content to know or to teaeh less, re- 
specting the universe itself. While it was still maintained 
that Theology was the only really important study, Theo- 
logy was so extended and so fashioned as to include all 
other knowledge : and after no long time, the Fathers 
of the Church themselves became the authors of systems 
of universal knowledge. 

But when this happened, the commentatorial spirit 
was still in its full vigour. The learned Christians could 
not, any more than the later Greeks or the Romans, 
devise, by the mere force of their own invention, new 
systems, fulJ, comprehensive, and connected, like those of 
the heroic age of philosophy. The same mental tenden- 
cies which led men to look for speculative coherence aiid 
completeness in the view of the universe, led them also 
to admire and dwell upon the splendid and acute specu- 
lations of the Greeks. They were content to find, in 
these immortal works, the answers to the questions whicfa 
their curiosity prompted ; and to seek what further satis- 
faction they might require, in analysing and unfolding 
the doctrines promulgated by those great masters of 

X 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



303 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

knowledge. Thus the Christian doctors became, as to 
general philosophy, commentators upon the ancient Greek 
teacheirs. 

Among these, they selected Aristotle as their peculiar 
object of admiration and study. The vast store, both of 
opinions and facts, which his works contain, his acute 
diBtinctions, his cogent reasons in some portions of his 
speculations, his symmetrical systems in almost aU, natu- 
rally commended him to the minds of subtle and curious 
men. We may add that Plato, who taught men to con- 
template Ideas separate from Things, was not so well 
fitted for general acceptance as Aristotle, who rejected 
this separation. For although the due apprehension of 
this opposition of ideas and sensations is a necessary step 
in the progress of true philosophy, it requires a clearer 
view and a more balanced mind than the common herd 
of students possess ; and Aristotle, who evaded the neces- 
sary perplexities in which this antithesis involves us, 
appeared, to the temper of those times, the easier and the 
plainer guide of the two. 

The Doctors of the middle ages having thus adopted 
Aristotle as their master in philosophy, we shall not be 
surprised to find them declaring, after him, that ezperienee 
is the source of our knowledge of the visible world. But 
though, like the Greeks, they thus talked of experiment, 
like the Greeks, they showed little disposition to discover 
the laws of nature by observation of facts. This barren 
and formal recognition of experience or sensation as one 
source of knowledge, not being illustrated by a practical 
study of nature, and by real theoretical truths obtained 
by such a study, remained ever vague, wavering; and 
empty. Such a mere acknowledgement cannot, in aay 
times, ancient or modem, be considered as indicating b, 
just apprehension of the true basis and nature of science. 

In imperfectly perceiving how, and how far, experi- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OP THE MIDDLE AGES. 3v)9 

ence is the source of our knowledge of the external 
world, the teachers of the middle ages were in the dark ; 
but so on this subject have been almost all the writers of 
all ages, with the exception of those who in recent times 
have had their minds enlightened by contemplating phi^ 
losophically the modem progress of science. The opinions 
of the doctors of the middle ages on such subjects gene- 
rally had those of Aristotle for their basis ; but the sub- 
ject was often still further analysed and systematized, 
with an acute and methodical skill hardly inferior to that 
of Aristotle himself. 

The. Stagirite, in the beginning of his Physics, had 
made the following remarks. " In all bodies of doctrine 
which involve principles, causes, or elements. Science 
and Knowledge arise from the knowledge of these ; (for 
we then consider ourselves to know respecting any 
subject, when we know its first cause, its first prin- 
ciples, its ultimate elements.) It is evident, therefore, 
that in seeking a knowledge of nature, we must first 
know what are its principles. But the course of our 
knowledge is, from the things which are better known 
and more manifest to us, to the things which are more 
certain and evident in nature. For those tilings which 
are most evident in truth, are not most evident to us. 
[And consequently we must advance from things ob- 
scure in nature, but manifest to us, towards the things 
which are really in nature more clear and certain.] The 
things which are first obvious and apparent to us are 
complex; and from these we obtain, by analysis, prin- 
ciples and elements. We must proceed from universals 
to particulars. For the whole is better known to our 
senses than the parts, and for the same reason, the uni- 
versal better known than the particular. And thus 
words signify things in a large and indiscriminate way, 
which is afterwards analysed by definition ; as we see that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



810 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

the children at first call all men fathery and all womGn 
7nothei% but afterwards learn to distinguish." 

There are various assertions contained in this extract 
which came to be considered as standard maxims, and 
which occur constantly in the writers of the middle ages. 
Such are, for instance, the maxim, " Vere scire est per 
causas scire;*' the remark, that compounds are known to us 
before their parts, and the illustration from the expressions 
used by children. Of the mode in which this subject was 
treated by the i?choolmen, we may judge by looking at 
passages of Thomas Aquinas which treat of the subject 
of the human understanding. In the Summa Theologies, 
the eighty-fifth Question is On the manner and order of 
understanding, which subject he considers in eight Arti- 
cles J and these must, even now, be looked upon as exhi- 
biting many of the most important and interesting points 
of the subject. They are, First, Whether our under- 
standing understands by abstracting ideas (species) from 
appearances; Second, Whether intelligible species ab- 
•stracted from appearances are related to our understand- 
ing as that which we understand, or that by which we 
understand; Third, Whether our understanding doe& 
naturally understand universals first; Fourth, Whether 
our understanding can understand many things at once ; 
Fifih, Whether our understanding understands by com- 
pounding and dividing ; Si^th, Whether the understand- 
ing can err ; Seventh, Whether one person can understand 
the same thing better than another; Eighth, Whether 
•our understanding understands the indivisible sooner than 
the divisible. And in the discussion of the last point, for 
example, reference is made to the passage of Aristotle 
which we have already quoted. " It may seem," he bbjb, 
'^^ tliat wa understand the indivisible before the divisible ; 
ibr thf Philosopher says that we understand and know 
by knowing principles and elements; but indivisibles are 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 811 

the principles and elements of divisible things. But te 
this we maj reply, that in our receiving of science, prin-» 
ciples and elements are not always first ; for sometimes 
from the sensible effects we go on to the knowledge of 
intelligible principles and causes." We see that both 
the objection and the answer are drawn from Aristotle. 

We find the same close imitation of Aristotle in 
Albertus Magnus, who, like Aquinas, flourished in the 
thirteenth century. Albertus, indeed, wrote treatises 
correaponding to almost all those of the Stagirite, and 
was called the Ape of Aristotle. In the beginning of his 
Physics^ he says, " Knowledge does not always begin from 
that which is first according to the nature of things, but 
from that of which the knowledge is easiest. For the 
hiunan intellect, on account of its relation to the seuse&C 
{propter reflewionam quam habet ad sensum), collects science 
from the senses ; and thus it is easier for our knowledge 
to begin from that which we can apprehend by sense, 
imagination, and intellect, than from that which we appre- 
hend by intellect alone." We see that he has somen 
what systematized what he has borrowed. 

This disposition to dwell upon and systematize the 
leading doctrines of metaphysics assumed a more defi^ 
nite and permanent shape in the opposition of the 
Realists and Nominalists. The opposition involved in 
this controversy is, in fact, that fundamental antithesis 
of Sense and Ideas about which philosophy has always 
been engaged ; and of which we have marked the mani- 
festation in Plato and Aristotle. The question. What 
is the object of our thoughts when we reason concerning 
the external world ? must occur to all speculative minds r 
and the difficulties of the answer are manifest. We 
must reply either that our own Ideas, or that Sensible 
Things, are the elements of our knowledge of nature. 
And then the scruples again occur, — ^how we have any 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



312 REVIEW OF OPINIOXS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

general knowledge if our thoughts are fixed on particular 
objects ; and, on the other hand, — how we can attain to 
any true knowledge of nature bj contemplating id»s 
which are not identical with objects in nature. The two 
opposite opinions maintained on this subject were, on the 
one side, — ^that our general propositions refer to objects 
which are red^ though divested of the peculiarities of 
individuals ; and, on the other side, — that in such propo- 
sitions, individuals are not represented by any reality, but 
bound together by a name. These two views were, held 
by the Realists and Nominalists respectively : and thus 
the Realist manifested the adherence to Ideas, and the 
Nominalist the adherence to the impressions of Sense, 
which have always existed as opposite yet correlative 
tendencies in man. 

The Realists were the prevailing sect in the Scholastic 
times: for example, both Thomas Aquinas and Duns 
Scotus, the Angelical and the Subtile Doctor, held this 
opinion, although opposed to each other in many of their 
leading doctrines on other subjects. And as the Nomi- 
nalist, fixing his attention upon sensible objects, is obliged 
to consider what is the principle of generdizoMon^ in order 
that the possibility of any general proposition may be 
conceivable ; so on the other hand, the Realist, beginning 
with the contemplation of universal ideas, is compelled to 
ask what is the principle of individuatixmy in order tliat he 
may comprehend the application of general propositions 
in each particular instance. This inquiry concerning the 
principle of individuation was accordingly a problem 
which occupied all the leading minds among the School- 
men*. It will be apparent from what has been said, that 
it is only one of the many forms of the fundamental 
antithesis of the Ideas and the Senses, which we have 
constantly before us in this review. 

* Seo the opinion of Aquinas, Deqerakdo, Hut, Com, dei Sysi,, iv. 
499 ; of Duns Scotus, ib,y iv. 523. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 318 

The recognition of the derivation of our knowledge, 
in part at least, from Experience, though always loose 
and incomplete, appears often to be independent of the 
Peripatetic traditions. Thus Richard of St. Victor, a 
writer of contemplative theology in the twelfth century, 
says*, that " there are three sources of knowledge, experi- 
ence, reason, faith. Some things we prove by experiment, 
others we collect by reasoning, the certainty of others 
we hold by believing. And with regard to temporal 
matters, we obtain our knowledge by actual experience ; 
the other guides belong to divine knowledge." Richard 
also propounds a division of himian knowledge which is 
clearly not derived directly from the ancients, and which 
shows that considerable attention must have been paid to 
such speculations. He begins by laying down clearly 
and broadly the distinction, which, as we have seen, is of 
primary importance, between practice and tlkeory. Practice^ 
he says, includes seven mechanical arts; those of the 
clothier, the armourer, the navigator, the hunter, the 
physician, and the player. Theory is threefold, divine^ 
natural, doctrinal ; and is thus divided into Theology, 
Physics, and Mathematics. MaUiematicSi he adds, treats 
of the invisible forms of visible things. We have seen 
that by many profound thinkers this vfor^ forms has been 
selected as best fitted to describe those relations of things 
which are the subject of mathematics. Again, Physics 
discovers causes from their effects and effects from their 
causes. It would not be easy at the present day to give 
a better account of the object of physical science. But 
Richard of St. Victor makes this account still more 
remarkably judicious, by the examples to which he 
alludes; which are earthquakes, the tides, the virtues 
of plants, the instincts of animals, the classification of 
minerals, plants and reptiles. 

* Liher Excerptionttm^ U i. c. I. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



814 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Unde tremor terris, qua vi maria alta tumescant, 

Herbarum yires, animos irasque ferarutD, 

Omne genus Iruticum, lapidum quoque, reptiliumque. 

He further adds*, " Physical science ascends from effects 
to causes, and descends again from causes to effects." 
This declaration Francis Bacon himself might have 
adopted. It is true, that Richard would probably have 
been little able to produce any clear and definite instances 
of knowledge, in which this ascent and descent were 
exemplified ; but still the statement, even considered as 
a mere conjectural thought, contains a portion of that 
sagacity and comprehensive power which we admire so 
much in Bacon. 

Richard of St. Victor, who lived in the twelfth cen- 
tury, thus exhibits more vigour and independence of 
speculative power than Thomas Aquinas, Albertus Mag- 
nus, and Duns Scotus in the thirteenth. In the interval, 
about the end of the twelfth century, the writings of 
Aristotle had become generally known in the West ; and 
had been elevated into the standard of philosophical 
doctrine, by the divines mentioned above, who felt a 
reverent sympathy with the systematizing and subtle 
spirit of the Stagirite as soon as it was made manifest to 
them. These doctors, following the example of their 
great forerunner, reduced every part of human know- 
ledge to a systematic form ; the systems which they thus 
framed were presented to men's minds as the only true 
philosophy, and dissent from them was no longer con- 
sidered to be blameless. It was an offence against reli- 
gion as well as reason to reject the truth, and the truth 
could be but one. In this manner arose that claim which 
the Doctors of the Church put forth to control men's 
opinions upon all subjects, and which we have spoken of 
' in the History of Science as the Dogmatism of the 

* TV. Ex., 1. 1. c 7- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 315 

Middle Ages. There is no difficulty in giving examples 
of this characteristic. We may take for instance a 
Statute of the University of Paris, occasioned by a Bull 
of Pope John XXI., in which it is enacted, " that no 
Master or Bachelor of any faculty, shall presume to 
read lectures upon any author in a private room, on 
account of the many perils which may arise therefrom ; 
but shall read in public places, where all may resort, and 
may faithfully report what is there taught; excepting 
only books of Grammar and Logic, in which there can be 
no presumption." And certain errors of Brescain are 
condemned in a Rescript* of the papal Legate Odo, with 
the following expressions : " Whereas, as we have been 
informed, certain Logical professors treating of Theology 
in their disputations, and Theologians treating of Logic^ 
contrary to the command bf the law are not afraid to 
mix and confound the lots of the Lord's heritage ; we 
exhort and admonish your University, all and singular, 
that they be content with the landmarks of the Sciences 
and Faculties which our Fathers have fixed; and that 
having due fear of the curse pronounced in the law 
against him who removeth his neighbour's landmark, 
you hold such sober wisdom according to the Apostles, 
that ye may by no means incur the blame of innovation 
or presumption." 

The account which, in the History of Science, I gave 
of Dogmatism as a characteristic of the middle ages, has 
been indignantly rejected by a very pleasing modern 
ivriter, who has, with great feeling and great diligence, 
brought into view the merits and beauties of those times, 
termed by him Ages of Faith. He urgesf that religious 
authority was never claimed for physical science : and he 
quotes from Thomas Aquinas, a passage in which the 

* Tenneman, viii. 461. 
t Mores Catholici^ or Ages of Faith^ viii, p. 247. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



316 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

author protests against the practice of confounding opi- 
nions of philosophy with doctrines of faith. We. might 
quote in return the Rescript* of Stephen, bishop of Paris, 
in which he declares that there can be but one truth, and 
rejects the distinction of things being true according to 
philosophy and not according to the Catholic faith ; and 
it might be added, that among the errors condemned in 
this document are some of Thomas Aquinas himself. We 
might further observe, that if no physical doctrines were 
condemned in the times of which we now speak, this was 
because, on such subjects, no new opinions were promul- 
gated, and not because opinion was free. As soon as 
new opinions, even on physical subjects, attracted general 
notice, they were prohibited by authority, as we see in 
jthe case of Galileof . 

But this disinclination to recognize philosophy as 
independent of religion, and this disposition to find in 
new theories,- even in physical ones, something contrary 
to religion or scripture, are, it would seem, very natural 

* Tenneman, viii. 460. 

t If there were any doubt oh this subject, we might refer to the 
•writers who afterwards questioned the supremacy of Aristotle, and 
who with one voice assert that an infallible authority had been claimed 
for him. Thus Laurentius Valla : " Quo minus ferendi sunt recentes 
Peripatetic!, qui nullius sectce hominibus interdicant libertate ab Aris- 
totle dissentiendi, quasi sophos hie, non philosophus." Prtf. in DiaL 
(Tknneman, ix. 29.) So Ludovicus Vives : " Sunt ex philosophis et 
ex theologis qui non solem quo Aristoteles pervenit extremum esse 
aiunt naturse, sod qua pervenit earn rectissimam esse omnium et cer- 
tissimam in natura viani." (Tenneman, ix. 43.) We might urge too, 
the evasions practised by Reformers, through fear of the dogmatism 
to which they had to submit ; for example, the protestation of Telesius 
at the end of the Proem to his work, De Rerum Natura : ** Nee tamen, 
si quid'eorum qu» nobis posita sunt, sacris Uteris, Catholicaave ecdeeiGe 
decretis non cohsereat, tenendum id, quin penitus rejiciendum asseve- 
ramus con tendim usque. Neque cnim ktimana modo ratio qucevis* sed 
ipse etiam tensus illis postJialetiduB^ et si illis non congruat, abnegandus 
omuino et ipse etiam est sensus." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 317 

teadeticies of theologians; and it would be unjust to 
assert that these propensities were confined to the periods 
when the authority of papal Rome was highest ; or that 
the spirit which has in a great degree controlled and 
removed such habits was introduced by the Reformation 
of religion in the sixteenth century. We must trace to 
other causes, the clear and general recognition of Phi- 
losophy, as distinct from Theology, and independent of her 
authority. In the earlier ages of the Church, indeed, 
this separation had been acknowledged. St. Augustin 
says, "A Christian should beware how he speaks on 
questions of natural philosophy, as if they were doctrines 
of Holy Scripture ; for an infidel who should hear him 
deliver absurdities could not avoid laughing. Thus the 
Christian would be confused, and the infidel but little 
edified ; for the infidel would conclude that our authors 
really entertained these extravagant opinions, and there- 
fore they would despise them, to their own eternal ruin. 
Therefore the opinions of philosophers should never be pro- 
posed as dogmas of faith, or rejected as contrary to faith, 
when it is not certain that they are so." These words are 
quoted with approbation by Thomas Aquinas, and it is 
said*, are cited in the same manner in every encyclope- 
dical work of the middle ages. This warning of genuine 
wisdom was afterwards rejected, as we have seen ; and it 
it only in modern times that its value has again been 
fully recognized. And this improvement we must ascribe, 
mainly to the progress of physical science. For a great 
body of undeniable truths on physical subjects being accu- 
mulated, such as had no reference to nor connexion with 
the truths of religion, and yet such as possessed a strong 
interest for most men's minds, it was impossible longer to 
deny that there were wide provinces of knowledge which 

* Age$ of Faith^ viii, 247 : to the author of which I am obliged 
for this quotation. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



818 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

were not included in the dominions of Theology, and over 
which she had no authority. In the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, the fundamental doctrines of mechanics, hydro* 
statics, optics, magnetics, chemistry, were established and 
promulgated ; and along with them, a vast train of conse- 
quences, attractive to the mind by the ideal relations 
which they exhibited, and striking to the senses by the 
power which they gave man over nature. Here was a 
region in which philosophy felt herself entitled and im- 
pelled to assert her independence. From this region, 
there is a gradation of subjects in which philosophy ad- 
vances more and more towards the peculiar domain of 
religion; and at some intermediate points there have 
been, and probably will always be, conflicts respecting 
the boundary line of the two fields of speculation. For 
the limit is vague and obscure, and appears to fluctuate 
and shift with the progress of time and knowledge. 

Our business at present is not with the whole extent 
and limits of philosophy, but with the progress of phyncal 
science more particularly, and the methods by which it 
may be attained : and we are endeavouring to trace his- 
torically the views which have prevailed respecting such 
methods, at various periods of man's intellectual progress. 
Among the most conspicuous of the revolutions which 
opinions on this subject have undergone, is the transition 
from aa implicit trust in the internal powers of man's 
mind to a professed dependence upon external observation; 
and from an unbounded reverence for the wisdom of the 
past, to a fervid expectation of change and improve^ 
ment. The origin and progress of this disposition of 
mind ; the introduction of a state of things in which men 
not only obtained a body of indestructible truths from 
experience, and increased it from generation to genera* 
tion, but professedly, and we may say, ostentatiously. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 319 

declared such to be the source of their knowledge, and 
such their hopes of its destined career ; — ^the rise, in short> 
of Experimental Philosophy, not only as a habit, but as a 
Philosophy of Experience, is what we must now endea^ 
vour to exhibit. 



Chapter VII,' 
THE INNOVATORS OE THE MIDDLE AGES. 

General Itemarks.>-^ In the rise of Experimental 
Philosophy, understanding the term in the way just now 
stated, two features have already been alluded to : the 
disposition to cast off the prevalent reverence for the 
opinions and methods of preceding teachers with an eager 
expectation of some vast advantage to be derived from a 
change ; and the belief that this improvement must be 
sought by drawing our knowledge from external observa- 
tion rather than from mere intellectual efforts; — the 
Jmutrection agaimt Authority y and the Appeal to Ea?pe^ 
rience. These two movements were closely connected ; 
but they may easily be distinguished, and in fact, persons 
were very prominent in the former part of the task, who 
had no comprehension of the latter principle, from which 
alone the change derives its value. There were many 
Malcontents who had no temper, talent or knowledge, 
which fitted them to be Beformers. 

The authority which was questioned, in the struggles 
of which we speak, was that of the Scholastic System, 
the combination of Philosophy with Theology ; of which 
Aristotle, presented in the form and manner which the 
Doctors of the Church had imposed upon him, is to be 
considered the representative. When there was demanded 
of men a submission of the mind, such as this system 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



320 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

claimed, the natural love of freedom in man's bosom, 
and the speculative tendencies of his intellect, rose in 
rebellion, from time to time, against the ruling oppres- 
sion. We find in all periods of the scholastic ages ex- 
amples of this disposition of man to resist overstrained 
authority; the tendency being mostly, however, com- 
bined ^^th a want of solid thought, and showing itself 
in extravagant pretensions and fantastical systems put 
forwards by the insurgents. We have pointed out one 
such opponent* of the established systems, even among 
the Arabian schoolmen, a more servile race than ever the 
Europeans were. We may here notice more especially 
an extraordinary character who appeared in the thirteenth 
century, and who may be considered as belonging to the 
Prelude of the Reform in Philosophy, although he had 
no share in the Reform itself. 

Raymond LuOy. — Raymond LuUy is perhaps tradi- 
tionally best known as an Alchemist, of which art he 
appears to have been a cultivator. But this was only 
one of the many impulses of a spirit ardently thirsty ' 
of knowledge and novelty. He hadf, in his youth, 
been a man of pleasure, but was driven by a sudden 
shock of feeling to resolve on a complete change of life. 
He plunged into solitude, endeavoured to still the re- 
morse of his conscience by prayer and penance, and soon 
had his soul possessed by visions which he conceived 
were vouchsafed him. In the feeling of religious enthu- 
siasm thus excited, he resolved to devote his life to the 
diffusion of Christian truth among Heathens and Maho- 
medans. For thus purpose, at the age of thirty he betook 
himself to the study of Grammar, and of the Arabic 
language. He breathed earnest supplications for au 
illumination from above ; and these were answered by his 

* Algazd. See HuU Ind. Set., i., 251. 
t Tennrman, viii. 830. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF TDE MIDDLE AGES. 321 

receiving from heaven, as his admirers declare, his Ars 
Magna, by which he was able without labour or effort to 
learn and apply all knowledge. The real state of the case 
is, that he put himself in opposition to the established 
systems, and propounded a New Art, from which he 
promised the most wonderful results ; but that his Art 
really is merely a mode of combining ideal conceptions 
without any reference to real sources of knowledge, or any 
possibility of real advantage. In a Treatise addressed, in 
A.D. 1310, to King Philip of France, entitled Liber Lamm- 
tationis Dttodecim Principiorum Philosophice contra Ave)'- 
roistas, Lully introduces Philosophy, accompanied by her 
twelve Principles, (Matter, Form, Generation, &c.) uttering 
loud complaints against the prevailing system of doctrine ; 
and represents her as presenting to the king a petition 
that she may be upheld and restored by her favourite, the 
Author. His Tabtda Generalis ad omnes Sdentias appli- 
cahilis was begun the 15th September, 1292, in the 
Harbour of Tunis, and finished in 1293, at Naples. In 
order to frame an Art of thus tabulating all existing 
sciences, arid indeed all possible knowledge, he divides 
into various classes the conceptions with which he has to 
deal. The first class contains nine Absolute Conceptions :. 
Goodness, Greatness, Duration, Power, Wisdom, Will, 
Virtue, Truth, Majesty. The second class has nine Mela- 
five Conceptions : Difference, Identity, Contrariety, Be- 
ginning, Middle, End, Majority, Equality, Minority. The 
third class contains nine Questions: Whether? What? 
Whence? Why? How great? How circumstanced? 
When ? Where ? and How ? The fourth class contains 
the nine Most Genei^al Subjects: God, Angel, Heaven, 
Man, Imaginativuniy Sensitivum, Vegetativum, Elementa- 
tivum, Instrumentativum. Then come nine Prcedicaments^ 
nine Moral Qualities^ and so on. These conceptions are 

VOL. II. Y 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



322 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWXBPaE. 

arranged in the compartments of certain conQ^ntrip movf- 
able circles, and give various combinations by meant of 
triangles and other figures, and thus propositions are con- 
structed. 

It must be clear at once, that no real knowledge, 
which is the union of facts and ideas, can result from 
this machinery for shifting about, joining and dii^oining, 
empty conceptions. This, and all similar schemes go 
upon the supposition that the logical combinations of 
notions do of themselves compose knowledge ; and that 
really existing things may be arrived at by a successive 
system of derivation from our most general ideas. It is 
imagined that by distributing the nomenclature of abstract 
ideas according to the place which they can hold in our 
propositions, and by combining them according to certain 
conditions, we may obtain formulae including all possible 
truths, and thus fabricate a science in which all aeienoea 
are contained. We thus obtain the means of talking and 
writing upon all subjects, without the trouble of thinking : 
the revolutions of the emblematical figures are substi- 
tuted for the operations of the mind. Both exertion of 
thought, and knowledge of iacts, become superfluous. 
And this reflection, adds an intelligent author*, explains 
the enormous number of books which Lully is said to 
have written ; for he might have written those even 
during his sleep, by the aid of a moving power which 
should, keep his machine in motion. Having once deviae4 
this invention for manufacturing science, Lully varied it 
in a thousand ways, and followed it into a variety of 
developments. Besides Synoptical Tables, he employs 
Genealogical Treefa, which he dignifies with the name of 
the Tree of Science. The only requisite for the applica^ 
tion of his Syst^n was a certsiin agreement in the num<- 
bers of the classes into which different subjects were 

* Deoerando, iv. 535. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



IMNOVATOBS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 323 

distributed ; and as this syminetry does not really exist 
in the operations of our thoughts, some violenoe was 
done to the natural distinction and subordination of eon-* 
ceptions, in order to fit them for the use of the System. 

Thus Lully, while he professed to teach an Art which 
was to shed new light upon every part of sdence, was in 
ftct employed in a pedantic and trifling repetition of 
known truths or truisms; and while he complained of 
the errors of existing methods, he proposed in their place 
one which was far more empty, barren, and worthless, 
than the customary processes of hmnan thought. Yet 
bis method is spoken of* with some praise by Leibnitz, 
who indeed rather delighted in the region of ideas and 
words, than in the world of realities. But Francis Bacon 
speaks £ar otherwise and more justly on this subject f. 
^^ It is not to be omitted that some men, swollen with 
emptiness rather than knowledge, have laboured te pro- 
duce a certain Method, not deserving the name of a 
Intimate Method, since it is rather a method of impos- 
ture: which yet is doubtless highly grateful to certain 
would-be philosophers. This method scatters about cer- 
tain little drops of science in such a manner tha^t a smat- 
t^rer may make a perverse and ostentatious use of them 
with a certain show of lemming. Such wa3 the Art of 
Lully, which consisted of nothing but a mass and heap of 
the words of each science ; with the intention that he who 
can readily produce the words of any science shall be 
supposed to know the science itself. Such collections 
are like a rag shop, where you find a patch of everything, 
but nothing which is of any value." 

Roger Bacon. — We now come to a philosopher of 
a very different character, who was impelled to declare 
his dissent from the reigning philosophy by the abundance 
of hi& knowledge, and by his clear apprehension of the 

* Operoy V. 10. t Works, vii. 296. 

Y 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



324 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

mode in which real knowledge had been acquired ajid 
must be increased. 

Roger Bacon was bom in 1214, near Ilchester, in 
Somersetshire, of an old family. In his youth he was a 
student at Oxford, and made extraordinary progress in 
all branches of learning. He then went to the Univer- 
sity of Paris, as was at that time the custom of learned 
Englishmen, and there received the degree of Doctor of 
Theology. At the persuasion of Robert Grostete, bishop 
of Lincoln, he entered the brotherhood of Franciscans in 
Oxford, and gave himself up to study with extraordinary 
fervour. He was termed by his brother monks Doctor 
Mirabilis. We know from his own works, as well as from 
the traditions concerning him, that he possessed an inti- 
mate acquaintance with all the science of his time which 
could be acquired from books ; and that he had made 
many remarkable advances by means of his own experi^ 
mental labours. He was acquainted with Arabic, as well 
as with the other languages common in his time. In the 
titles of his works, we find the whole range of science 
and philosophy, Mathematics and Mechanics, Optics, 
Astronomy, Geography, Chronology, Chemistry, Magic, 
Music, Medicine, Grammar, Logic, Metaphysics, Ethics, 
and Theology ; and judging from those which are pub- 
lished, these works are full of sound and exact knowledge. 
He is, with good reason, supposed to have discovered, or 
to have had some knowledge of, several of the most 
remarkable inventions which were made generally known 
soon afterwards, as gunpowder, lenses, burning specula, 
telescopes, clocks, the correction of the calendar, and the 
explanation of the rainbow. 

Thus possessing, in the acquirements and habits of 
his own mind, abundant examples of the nature of know- 
ledge and of the process of invention. Bacon felt also a 
deep interest in the growth and progress of science. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. ^25 

a spirit of inquiry respecting the causes which produced 
or prevented its advance, and a fervent hope and trust 
in its future destinies ; and these feelings impelled him 
to speculate worthily and wisely respecting a reform of 
the method of philosophizing. The manuscripts of his 
works have existed for nearly six hundred years in many 
of the libraries of Europe, and especially in those of 
England ; and for a long period the very imperfect poi> 
tions of them which were generally known, left the 
character and attainments of the author shrouded in a 
kind of mysterious obscurity. About a century ago, how- 
ever, his Optis Majus was published* by Dr. S. Jebb, 
principally from a manuscript in the library of Trinity 
College, Dublin ; and this contained most or all of the 
separate works which were previously known to the 
public, along with others still more peculiar and charac- 
teristic. We are thus able to judge of Bacon's knowledge 
and of his views, and they are in every way well worthy 
our attention. 

The Ofos Majus is addressed to Pope Clement the 
Fourth, whom Bacon had known when he was legate in 
England as Cardinal-bishop of Sabina, and who admired 
the talents of the monk, and pitied him for the persecu- 
tions to which he was exposed. On his elevation to the 
papal chair, this account of Bacon's labours and views 
was sent, at the earnest request of the pontiff. Besides 
the Opus Majusj he wrote two others, the Opiis Minus 
and Opus Tertium ; which were also sent to the pope, as 
the author saysf , •* on account of the danger of roads, 
and the possible loss of the work." These works still 
exist unpublished, in the Cottonian and other libraries. 

? Frairis BogeH Bacon Ordinis Minorum Opus Majub ad Cle- 
mentem Quarium^ Pontificem Eomanumy ex MS. Codice Dubliniensi 
cum aliis quibusdam coltato nunc primum edidit S. Jebb, M.D. 
Londliri, 1733. t Opu$ Majus, Praef. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



826 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

The Opus Majus is a work equally wonderful with 
regard to its general sohemey and to the speciltl treatises 
witli which the outlines of the plan are filled up. The 
professed object of the work is to urge the necessity of a 
reform in the mode of philosophizing, to set forth the 
reasons why knowledge had not made a greater progress, to 
draw bkck attention to the sources of knowledge which had 
been unwisely neglected, to discover other sources which 
were yet almost untouched, and to animate men in the 
undertaking, by a prospect of the vast advantages which 
it offered In the development of this plan, all the lead- 
ing portions of science are expounded in the most com- 
plete shape which they had at that time assumed ; and 
Improvements of a very wide and striking kind are pro- 
posed in some of the principal of these departments. 
Even if the work had had no leading purpose, it would 
have been highly valuable as a treasure of the most solid 
knowledge and Boundest speculations of the time; even 
if it had contained no such details, it would have been a 
^ork most remarkable for its getieral views and scope. 
It may be considered sM, at the same time, the JEnct/clch- 
p^dta and the No^wm Organon.of^e thirteenth century. 

I^nee tibls work is thus so important in the history 
of inductive philosophy I shall give, in a note, a view* oiF 

* Contents of Roger Bacon's 0pm Mc^us, 
Pwt 1. On the fonr caiises of human ignorance : — Anthority, 
Custcm), Popular Opinion^ and tie Pride d suppossd 
Knowledge. 
Part n. On the source of perfect wisdom in the Sacred Scripture. 
Part ni. On the tTsefulness of Grammar. 
Port IV. On th6 tTsefuhiesa of Mathemati<». 

(1.) The necessity of Mathematics in Human Things (pub- 
lished separately as the Spectda Mathematica), 
(2J) The necessity of Mathematics in Divine Things. — 1^. 
This study has occupied holy men : 2**. Geography : 
3**. Chronology: 4*. Cycles; the Golden Number, 
&c. : 5^ Natural phenomena, as the Bainbow: 6\ 
AriUunetic : 7°. Music. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 827 

its diviniotiB and contents. But I must now endeavour 
to point out more especially the way in wliich the various 
principles, which the reform of scientific method involyed^ 
are here brought into view. 

One df the first points to be noticed for this purpose, 
is the resistance to authority ; and at the stage of philo-» 
sophical history with wliich we here have to do, this means 
resistance to the authority of Aristotle, as adopted and 
interpreted by the Doctors of the Schools. Bacon's work* 
is divided into Six Parts ; and of these Parts, the First is^ 
Of the four universal Causes of all Human Ignorance. 
The causes thus enumerated f are: — ^the force of unworthy 
authority ;— traditionary habit ; — the imperfection of the 
undisciplined senses ; — and the disposition to conceal our 
ignorance and to make an ostentatious show of our know- 
ledge. These influences involve every man, occupy every 
coiidition. They prevent our obtaining the most useful 
tod large and fair doctrines of wisdom, the secrets of all 
Sciences and arts. He then proceeds to argue, from the 
testimony of philosophers themselves, that the authority 
of antiquity, and especially of Aristotle, is not infallible. 
** We find:|: their books full of doubts, obscurities, and 
perplexities. They scarce agree with each other in one 

(3.) The Necessity of Mathematios in Ecclesiastitifd Things. 
1^. The Certification of Faith : 2°. The Correction of 
the Calendar. 
(4.) The Necessity of Mathematics in the State. — P. Of 
Climaies: 2^. ?Hydrography : 3**. Geography: 4^ 
Astrology. 
Part v. On Perspective (published separately as Pertpeetiva), 
(1.) The orgahs of vision. 
(3.) Vision in straight lines. 
(3.) Vision reflected and refracted. 

(4.) De multiplicatione specienim (on the propagation of 
the impressions of lights heat, &c*) 
Part VI. On EzperimeBtal Science. 

? Op. if4, p. 1. t /6., p. 2. X lb., p. 10. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



328 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

empty question or one worthless sophism, or one opieration 
of science, as one man agrees with another in the practicid 
operations of medicine, surgery, and the like arts of secu- 
lar men. Indeed," he adds, " not only the philosophers, 
but the saints have fallen into errors which they have 
afterwards retracted," and this he instances in Augustin, 
Jerome, and others. He gives an admirable sketch of the 
progress of philosophy from the Ionic school to Aristotle ; 
whom he speaks of with great applause. " Yet," he adds*, 
" those who came after him corrected him in some things, 
and added many things to his works, and shall go on 
adding to the end of the world." Aristotle, he adds, is 
now called peculiarly f the Philosopher, "yet there was a 
time when his philosophy was silent and unregarded, either 
on account of the rarity of copies of his works, or their 
diflSculty, or from envy ; till after the time of Mahomet, 
when Avicenna and Averroes, and others, recalled this 
philosophy into the full light of exposition. And although 
the Logic, and some other works were translated by 
Boethius from the Greek, yet the philosophy of Aristotle 
first received a quick increase among the Latins at the 
time of Michael Scot ; who, in the year of our Lord 
1230, appeared, bringing with him portions of the 
books of Aristotle on Natural Philosophy and Mathema- 
tics. And yet a small part only of the works of this 
author is translated, and a still smaller part is in the 
hands of common students." He adds further:]^ (in the 
Third Part of the Optis Majus^ which is a Dissertation on 
Language) that the translations which are current of these 
writings, are very bad and imperfect. With these views, 
he is moved to express himself somewhat impatiently { 

* Op. Mc^,^ p. 36. t Autonomatice. % Op, Maj,, p. 46. 

§ See Pref, to Jebb's edition. The passages there quoted, however, 
are not extracts from the Optis Majus^ but (apparently) from the Optit 
Minus (MS, CotU Tib. c. 5.^ "Si haberem potestatem supra libros 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES- '829 

respecting these works: '*If I had," he says, "power over 
the works of Aristotle, I would have them all burnt ; for 
it is only a loss of time to study in them, and a course of 
error, and a multiplication of ignorance beyond expres- 
sion." " The common herd of students," he says, " with 
their heads, have no principle by which they can be ex- 
cited to any worthy employment ; and hence they mope 
atid make asses of themselves over their bad translations, 
and lose their time, and trouble, and money." 

The remedies which he recommends for these evils, 
are, in the first place, the study of that only perfect 
wisdom which is to be found in the sacred Scripture*, 
in the next place, the study of mathematics and the use 
of experiment f. By the aid of these methods. Bacon 
tmticipates the most splendid progress for human know- 
ledge. He takes up the strain of hope and confidence 
which we have noticed as so peculiar in the Roman 
writers ; and quotes some of the passages of Seneca which 
we adduced in illustration of this : — ^that the attempts in 
science were at first rude and imperfect, and were after- 
wards improved ; — that the day will come, when what is 
still unknown shall be brought to light by the progress of 
time and the labours of a longer period ; — that one age 
does not sufllice for inquiries so wide and various; — ^that the 
people of future times shall know many things unknown 
to us; — and the time shall arrive when posterity will 
'wonder that we overlooked what was so obvious. Bacon 
himself adds anticipations more peculiarly in the spirit of 
his own time. " We have seen," he says, at the end of 

Aristotelis, ego facerem omnes cremari; quia non est nisi tcmpons 
amissio studere in illis, et cause erroris, et multiplicatio ignorantisB, ultra 

id quod valeat explicari Vulgus studentum cum capitibus suis 

non habet unde excitetur ad aliquid dignum, et ideo languet et asininat 
circa male translata, et tenipus et studium amittit in omnibus et ex- 
pensrw.' 

* Part ii. t Parts iv., v. and vi. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



330 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

the Work, ** how Aristotle, by the ways which wisdom 
teaches, could give to Alexander the empire of the world. 
Atfd this the Chiirch ought to take into consideration 
against the infidels and rebels, that there may be a sparing 
of Christian blood, and especially on account of the 
troubles that shall come to pass in the days of Antichrist ; 
which by the grace of God, it would be easy to obviate^ 
if prelates and princes would encourage study, and join 
in searching out the secrets of nature and art." 

It may not be improper to observe here that this 
belief in the appointed progress of knowledge, is not 
combined with any overweening belief in the unbounded 
and independent power of the human intellect. On the 
(Contrary, one of the lessons which Bacon draws from the 
state and prospects of knowledge, is the duty of faith and 
humility. "To him,'* he says*, "who denies the truth of 
the faith because he is unable to understand it, I will 
propose in reply the course of nature, and as we have seen 
it in examples." And after giving some instances, he 
adds, " These, and the like, ought to move men and 16 
excite them to the reception of divine truths. For if, in 
the vilest objects of creation, truths are found, before 
which the inward pride of man must bow, and believe 
though it cannot understand, how much more should man 
humble his mind before the glorious truths of God!** He 
had before saidt: "Man is incapable of perfect wisdom 
in this life ; it is hard for him to ascend towards perfection, 
easy to glide downwards to falsehoods and vanities : let 
him then not boast of his wisdom, or extol his knowledge* 
What he knows is little and worthless, in respect of that 
which he believes without knowing; and still less, in 
respect of that which he is ignorant of. He is mad Who 
thinks highly of his wisdom ; he most mad, who exhibits 

* Op. Mt^., p. 476- t Ih\^ p. 15. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 884 

it as something to be wondered at " Ite adds, as another 
l^eason for humility, that be has proved by trial, he could 
teach in one year, to a poor boy, the marrow of all that 
the most diligent person could acquire in forty years 
laborious and expensive study. 

To proceed somewhat more in detail with re^rd 
to Roger Bacoti's views of a Reform in Scientific inquiry; 
we may observe that by making Mathematics and Experi-i' 
ment the two great points of his recommendation, he di- 
rected his improvement to the two essential parts of all 
knowledge, Ideas and Facts, and thus took the course 
which the most enlightened philosophy would have sug- 
gested. He did not urge the prosecution of experiment, 
to the comparative neglect of the existing mathematical 
sciences and conceptions; a fault which there is some 
ground for ascribing to his great namesake and successor 
Francis Bacon : still less did he content himself with a 
mere protest against the authority of the schools, and a 
vague demand for change, which was almost all that was 
done by those who put themselves forward as reformers 
in the intermediate time. Roger Bacon holds his way 
steadily between the two poles of human knowledge; 
which, as we have seen, it is far jfrom easy to do. " There 
are two modes of knowing," says he*; " by argument, and 
by experiment. Argument concludes a question ; but it 
does not make us feel certain, or acquiesce in the con- 
templation of truth, except the truth be also found to b^ 
so by experience." It is not easy to express more deci- 
dedly the clearly seen union of exact conceptions with 
certain facts, which, as we have explained, constitutes 
real knowledge. 

* Op, Maj„ p. 445, see also p. 448. " Scientiae aliae sciunt sua 
principia invenire per experimenta, sed conclusiones per argumenta facta 
tx. priAoipiis inventis. Si vero debeant ^bere experientiam conclu* 
sionum suarum particular em et completam, tunc oportet <juod habeant 
per adjutoriam istitia scientiso nobilis, (ezperimentalis.)-' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



332 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE- 

One large division of the Opm Mentis is " On the 
Usefulness of Mathematics/' which is shown by a copious 
enumeration of existing branches of knowledge, as Chro- 
nology, Geography, the Calendar, and (in a separate Part) 
Optics, There is a chapter * " in which it is proved by 
reason, that all science requires mathematics." And the 
arguments which are used to establish this doctrine, show 
a most just appreciation of the office of mathematics iu 
science. They are such as follows : — ^That other sciences 
use examples taken from mathematics as the most 
evident: — ^That mathematical knowledge is, as it were^ 
innate in us, on which point he refers to the well known 
dialogue of Plato, as quoted by Cicero : — ^That this science, 
being the easiest, offers the best introduction to the more 
difficult : — ^That in mathematics, things as known to us are 
identical with things as known to nature : — ^That we can 
here entirely avoid doubt and error, and obtain certainty 
and truth : — ^That mathematics is prior to other sciences 
iu nature, because it takes cognizance of quantity, which 
is apprehended by intuition, {intuitu intellectus.) "More- 
over," he adds,f " there have been found famous men, as 
Robert, bishop of Lincoln, and Brother Adam Marshman, 
(de Marisco) and many others, who by the power of ma- 
thematics have been able to explain the causes of things; 
as may be seen in the writings of these men, for instance^ 
concerning the Rainbow and Comets, and the generatioii 
of heat, and climates, and the celestial bodies." 

But undoubtedly the most remarkable portion of the 
Optis Majtis is the Sixth and last Part, which is entitled 
" De Scientia experimentali." It is indeed an extraordi- 
nary circumstance to find a writer of the thirteenth cen- 
tury, not only recognizing experiment as one source of 
knowledge, but urging its claims as far more important 
than men had yet been aware, exemplifying its value by 

* Of. Maj,^ IX 60. t lb., p. M. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OP THE MIDDLE AGES. 333 

striking and just examples, and speaking of its authority 
with a dignity of diction which sounds like a foremumiur 
of the Baconian sentences uttered neariy four hundred 
years later. Yet this is the character of what we here 
find*. " Experimental science, the sole mistress of specu- 
lative sciences, has three great Prerogatives among other 
parts of knowledge : First she tests by experiment the 
noblest conclusions of all other sciences : Next she dis- 
covers respecting the notions which other sciences deal 
with, magnificent truths to which these sciences of them- 
selves can by no means attain : her Third dignity is, that 
she by her own power and without respect of other 
sciences, investigates the secrets of nature." 

The examples which Bacon gives of these "Prerogatives" 
are very curious, exhibiting, among some error and credu- 
lity, sound and clear views. His leading example of the First 
Prerogative, is the Rainbow, of which the cause, as given by 
Aristotle, is tested by reference to experiment with a skill 
which is, even to us now, truly admirable. The examples of 
the Second Prerogative are three i—firsU the art of making 
an artificial sphere which shall move with the heavens by 
natural influences, which Bacon trusts may be done, 
though astronomy herself cannot do it — " et tunc," he 
says, " thesaurum unius regis valeret hoc instrumentum ;" 
-"-^seoondlt/, the art of prolonging life, which experiment 
may teach, though medicine has no means of securing it 
except by regimen f; — thirdly^ the art of making gold finer 

* " Yeritatis magnificas in terminis aliarum Bcientianim in quas per 
Dullam viam possunt illsa scientia, heec sola scieniiarum domina specu- 
latiraram, potest dare." Op, Maj,^ p. 465. 

t One of the in^predients of a preparation here mentioned, is the 
flesh of a dragon, which, it appears, is used as food by the Ethiopians. 
The mode of preparing this food cannot fail to amuse the reader. 
** "Where there are good flying dragons, by the art which they possess, 
they draw them out of their dens, and have bridles and saddles in 
readiness, and they ride upon them, and make them bound about in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



334 REVIEWS OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

tban^line gold, which goes t)eyond the power of aloliomy- 
Xhe Third Prerogative of experimental science, arts ind^ 
pendent of the received sciences, is exemplified in many 
curious examples, many of them whimsical traditions. 
Thus it is said that the character of a people may be 
altered by altering the air^. Alexander, it seems, applied 
to Aristotle, to know whether he should exterminate 
certain nations which he had discovered, as being irre- 
claimably barbarous ; to which the philosopher replied, 
" If you can alter their air, permit them to live, if not, 
put them to death." In this part, we find the suggestion 
that the fire-works made by children, of saltpetre, might 
lead to the invention of a formidable military weapon. 

It could not be expected that Roger Bacon, at a time 
when experimental science hardly existed, could give any 
precepts for the discovery of truth by experiment. But 
nothing can be a better example of the method of such 
investigation, than his inquiry concerning the cause of the 
Rainbow. Neither Aristotle, nor Avicenna, nor Senecm 
he says, have given us any clear knowledge of this matter, 
but experimental science can do so. Let the experimenter 
(experimentator) consider the cases in which he finds the 
same colours, as the hexagonal crystals from Ireland and 
India ; by looking into these he will see colours like these 
of the rainbow. Many think that this arises from some 
special virtue of these stones and their hexagonal figure ; 
let therefore the experimenter go on, and he will find the 
same in other transparent stones, in dark ones as well as 
in light coloured. He will find the same effect also in 
other forms than the hexagon, if they be furrowed in the 
surface, as the Irish crystals are. Let him consider too, 

the air in a violent manner, that the hardness and toughness of the 
flesh may be reduced, as boars are hunted and bulls are baited b«for» 
they are killed for eating." Op. iffl^'., p. 470. 
* Ih,, p. 473. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 335 

that he sees the same colours in the drops which are 
dashed from oars in the sunshine ; — and in the spray thrown 
by a mill wheel ; — and in the dew drops which lie on the 
grass in a meadow on a summer morning ; — and if a man 
takes water in his moutli and projects it on one side into 
a simbeam ; — ^and if in an oil lamp hanging in the air, the 
rays fall in certain positions upon the suri^Eu^e of the oil ; 
-r-and in many other ways, are colours produced. We 
have here a oollecticm of instances, which are almost all 
examples of the same kind as the phenomenon under 
consideration ; and by the help of a principle collected 
by induction from these facts, the colours of the rainbow 
were afterwards really explained. 

With regard to the form and other circumstances of 
the bow he is still more precise, He bids us measure the 
height of the bow and of the sun, to show that the centre 
of the bow is exactly opposite to the sun. He explains 
the circular form of the bow, — its being independent of 
the form of the cloud, its moving when we move, its flying 
when we follow, — ^by its consisting of the reflections firom 
a vast number of minute drops. He does not, indeedi 
trace the course of the rays through the drop, or aocpunt 
for the precise magnitude which the bow assumes ; but 
he approaches to the verge of this part of the explanation ; 
and must be considered as having given a most happy 
example of experimental inquiry into nature, at a timQ 
when such examples were exceedingly scanty. In this 
respect, he was more fortunate than Francis Bacon, as we 
shall hereafter see. 

We know but little of the biography of Roger Bacon» 
but we have every reason to believe that his inftuencQ 
upon his age was not great He was suspected of magic, 
and is said to have been put into close confinement in 
consequence of this charge. In his work he speaks of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



336 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Astrology, as a science well worth cultivating. " But," 
says he, " Theologians and Decretists, not being learned 
in such matters, and seeing that evil as well as good may 
be done, neglect and abhor such things, and reckon them 
among Magic Arts.'* We have already seen, that at the 
very time when Bacon was thus raising his voice against 
the habit of blindly following authority, and seeking for 
all science in Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas was employed 
in fashioning Aristotle's tenets into that fixed form in 
which they became the great impediment to the progress 
of knowledge. It would seem, indeed, that something 
of a struggle between the progressive and stationary 
powers of the human mind was going on at this time 
Bacon himself says*, "Never was there so great an 
appearance of wisdom, nor so much exercise of study in 
so many Faculties, in so many regions, as for this last 
forty years. Doctors are dispersed everywhere, in every 
castle, in every burgh, and especially by the students of 
two Orders, (he means the Franciscans and Dominicans, 
who were almost the only religious orders that distin- 
guished themselves by an application to study f,) which 
has not happened except for about forty years. And yet 
there was never so much ignorance, so much error." And 
in the part of his work which refers to Mathematics, he 
says of that study t, that it is the door and the key of 
the sciences ; and that the neglect of it for thirty or 
forty years has entirely ruined the studies of the Latins. 
According to these statements, some change, disastrous 
to the fortunes of science, must have taken place about 
1230, soon after the foundation of the Dominican and 
Franciscan Orders J. Nor can we doubt that the adoption 

* Quoted by Jebb, Pr^. to Op, Maj, 

t MosHEiM, IliH, iii. 361. J Op, 3/a;., p. 57. 

§ MosHEiM, iii. 161. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 337 

of the Aristotelian philosophy by these two Orders, in 
the form in which the Angelical Doctor had systematized 
it, was one of the events which most tended to defer, for 
three centuries, the reform which Roger Bacon urged as 
a matter of crying necessity in his own time. 



Chapter VIII. 

THE REVIVAL OP PLATONISM. 

Causes of Dday in the Advance of Knowledge. — In 
the insight possessed by learned men into the method 
by which truth was to be discovered, the fourteenth 
and fifteenth centuries went backwards, rather than 
forwards, from the point which had been reached in 
the thirteenth. Roger Bacon had urged them to have 
recourse to experiment; but they returned with addi- 
tional and exclusive zeal to the more favourite employ- 
ment of reasoning upon their own conceptions. He had 
called upon them to look at the world without ; but their 
eyes forthwith turned back upon the world within. In 
the constant oscillation of the human mind between Ideas 
and Facts, after having for a moment touched the latter, 
it seemed to swing back more impetuously to the former. 
Not only was the philosophy of Aristotle firmly established 
for a considerable period, but when men began to ques- 
tion its authority, they attempted to set up in its place a 
philosophy still more purely ideal, that of Plato. It was 
not till the actual progress of experimental knowledge for 
some centuries had given it a vast accumulation of force, 
that it was able to break its way fully into the circle 
of speculative science. The new Platonist schoolmen 
had to run their course, the practical discoverers had to 
prove their merit by their works, the Italian innovators 

VOL. II. z 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S38 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

had to utter their aapirationB for a change, before the 
second Bacon could truly declare that the time for a fun- 
damental reform was at length arrived. 

It cannot but seem strange, to any one who attempts 
to trace the general outline of the intellectual progress 
of man, and who considers him as under the guidance of 
a Providential sway, that he should thus be permitted to 
wander so long in a wilderness of intellectual darkness ; 
and even to turn back, by a perverse caprice as it might 
seem, when on the very border of the brighter and better 
land which was his destined inheritance. We do not 
attempt to solve this difficulty: but such a course of 
things naturally suggests the thought, that a progress ia 
physical science is not the main object of man's career, in 
the eyes of the Power who directs the fortunes of our 
race. We can easily conceive that it may have been 
necessary to man's general welfare that he should con- 
tinue to turn his eyes inwards upon his own heart and 
faculties, till Law and Duty, Religion and Government, 
Faith and Hope, had been fully incorporated with all the 
past acquisitions of human intellect ; rather than that he 
should have rushed on into a train of discoveries tending 
to chain him to the objects and operations of the material 
world. The systematic Law* and philosophical Theology 
which acquired their ascendancy in men's minds at the 
time of which we speak, kept them engaged in a region of 
speculations which perhaps prepared the way for a pro- 
founder and wider civilization, for a more elevated and 
spiritual character, than might have been possible without 
such a preparation. The great Italian poet of the four- 
teenth century speaks with strong admiration of the 
founders of the system which prevailed in his time. 

* Oration published the DeerHaU in the twelfth eentury ; and the 
Canon and CivU Law beeame a regular study in the wiversities soon 
afterwards. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MHOVAt OF PLATONlftM. 839 

Thomas, Albert, Oratian, Peter Lombard, occupy distiB*^ 
guished places in the Paradise. The firsts who io the 
poet's instructor, says,*-* 

Io fiii degli agni della santa greggia 
Ohe Damenioo mena per oaramino 
U' ben sHmpingua se non ai vaneggia. 

Queato che m*e a destra pin viciuo 
Frate e maestro fummi ; ed esso Alberto 
E di Cologna, ed io Tomas d'Aquino. . . . , 

Qaell' altro fiammeggiar esce del riao 
De Qzazian, che Tuno et Valtro foro 
Ajuto si che place in Paradise. 

I, tbeii, was of the lambs that Dominio 
Leadsj for his saintly flock, along the way 
Where well they thrive not swoln with Tani^y. 
He nearest on my right hand brother was 
And master to me ; Albert of Cologne 
Is this ; and of Aquinum Thomas, L « • , , 
That next resplendence issues from the smile 
Of Qratian who to either forum lent 
Such help as favour wins in Paradise. 

It appears probable that neither poetry, nor painting, 
nor the other arts which require for their perfection a 
lofty and spiritualized imagination, would hare appeared 
in the noble and beautiful forms which they assumed in 
the fourteenth and fifteenth century, if men of genius 
had, at the beginning of that period, made it their main 
business to discover the laws of nature, and to reduce 
them to a rigorous scientific form. Yet who can doubt 
that the absence of these touching and impressive works 
would have left one of the best and purest parts of man's 
nature without its due nutriment and development? 
It may perhaps be a necessary condition in the progress 
of man, that the Arts which aim at beauty reach their 
excellence before the Sciences which seek speculative 
truth ; and if this be so, we inherit, from the middle 
ages» treasures which may well reconcile us to the delay 

Z 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S40 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

which took place in their cultivation of experimental 
science. 

However this may be, it is our business at present 
to trace the circumstances of this very lingering advance. 
We have already noticed the contest of the Nominalists 
and Realists, which was one form, though, with regard to 
scientific methods, an unprofitable one, of the antithesis 
of Ideas and Things. Though, therefore, this struggle 
continued, we need not dwell upon it. The Nominalists 
denied the real existence of Ideas, which doctrine was to 
a great extent implied in the prevailing systems ; but the 
controversy in which they thus engaged, did not lead 
them to seek for knowledge in a new field and by new 
methods. The arguments which Occam the Nominalist 
opposes to those of Duns Scotus the Realist, are marked 
with the stamp of the same system, and consist only in 
permutations and combinations of the same elementary 
conceptions. It was not till the impulse of external cir- 
cumstances was added to the discontent, which the more 
stirring intellects felt towards the barren dogmatism of 
their age, that the activity of the human mind was again 
called into full play, and a new career of progression 
entered upon, till then undreamt of, except by a few 
prophetic spirits. 

Causes of Progress. — ^These circumstances were prin- 
cipally the revival of Greek and Roman literature, the 
invention of printing, the Protestant Reformation, and a 
great number of curious discoveries and inventions in 
the arts, which were soon succeeded by important steps 
in speculative physical science. Connected with the first 
of these events, was the rise of a party of learned men 
who expressed their dissatisfaction with the Aristotelian 
philosophy, as it was then taught, and manifested a 
strong preference for the views of Plato. It is by no 
means suitable to our plan to give a detailed account of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



KEVrVAL OP PLATONISM. 341 

this new Platonic school ; but we may notice a few of 
the writers who belong to it, so far at least as to indicate 
its influence upon the Methods of pursuing science* 

In the fourteenth century*, the frequent intercourse 
of the most cultivated persons of the Eastern and West- 
ern Empire, the increased study of the Greek language 
in Italy, the intellectual activity of the Italian States, the 
discovery of manuscripts of the classical authors, wei*e 
circumstances which excited or nourished a new and 
zealous study of the works of Greek and Roman genius. 
The genuine writings of the ancients, when presented in 
their native Kfe and beauty, instead of being seen only in 
those lifeless fragments and dull transformations which 
the scholastic system had exhibited, excited an intense 
enthusiasm. Europe, at that period, might be reprer 
sented by Plato's beautiful allegory, of a man who, after 
being long kept in a dark cavern, in which his knowledge 
of the external world is gathered from the images which 
stream through the chinks of his prison, is at last led 
forth into the full blaze of day. It was inevitable that 
such a change should animate men's efforts and enlarge 
their faculties. Greek literature became more and more 
known, especially by the influence of learned men wlio 
came from Constantinople into Italy: these teachei-s, 
though they honoured Aristotle, reverenced Plato no 
less, and had never been accustomed to follow with 
servile submission of thought either these or any other 
leaders. The effect of such influences soon reveals itself 
in the works of that period. Dante has woven into his 
Divina Comedia some of the ideas of Platonism. Petrarch* 
who had formed his mind by the study of Cicero, and 
had thus been inspired with a profound admiration fo^r 
the literature of Greece, learnt Greek from Barlaam, a 
monk who came as ambassador from the Emperor of the 

* Tennemait, ix. 14. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



842 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

East to the Pope, ia 1339. With this instructor, the 
poet read the works of Plato; struck by their beauty, 
he contributed, by his writings and his conyersation, to 
awake in others an admiration and love for that philoso- 
pher, which soon became strongly and extensively pre- 
valent among the learned in Italy. 

Hermolam Barbarusj Sfc. — ^Along with this feeling 
there prevailed also, among those who had learnt to relish 
the genuine beauties of the Greek and Latin writers, a 
strong disgust for the barbarisms in which the scholastic 
philosophy was clothed. Hermolaus Barbarus*, who 
was bom in 1454, at Venice, and had formed his taste 
by the study of classical literature, translated, among 
other learned works, Themistius's paraphrastic exposition 
of the Physics of Aristotle ; with the view of trying 
whether the Aristotelian Natural Philosophy could not 
be presented in good Latin, which the scholastic teachers 
denied. In his Preface he expresses great indignation 
against those philosophers who have written and disputed 
on philosophical subjects in barbarous Latin, and in 
an uncultured style, so that all refined minds are 
repelled from these studies by weariness and disgust. 
They have, he says, by this barbarism, endeavoured to 
secure to themselves, in their own province, a supremacy 
without rivals or opponents. Hence they maintain that 
mathematics, philosophy, jurisprudence, cannot be ex- 
pounded in correct Latin ;— that between these sciences 
and the genuine Latin language there is a great gulf, as 
between things that cannot be brought together: and 
on this ground they blame those who combine the study 
of philology and eloquence with that of science. This 
opinion, adds Hermolaus, perverts and ruins our studies; 
and is highly prejudicial and unworthy in respect to 
the state. Hermolaus awoke in others, as for instance 

? TBNin5MA2f, ix. 25. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EEVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 343 

in John Picus of Mirandula, the same dislike to the 
reigning school philosophy. As an opponent of the 
same land, we may add Marias Nizolius of Bersallo, a 
scholar who carried his admiration of Cicero to an exag'^ 
gerated extent^ and who was led> by a controversy with 
the defenders of the scholastic philosophy, to publish 
(1558) a work On the True Principles and True Method 
qf Philosophizing. In the title of this work, he professes 
to give ^^ the true principles of almost all arts and sciences^ 
refuting and rejecting almost all the false principles of 
the Logicians and Metaphysicians/* But although, in the 
work, he attacks the scholastic philosophy^ he does little 
or nothing to justify the large pretensions of his title ; 
and he excited, it is said, little notice. It is therefore 
curious that Leibnitz should have thought it worth his 
while to re-edit this work, which he did in 1670, adding 
remarks of his own. 

Nicdaus CWant^.— Without dwelling upon this oppo- 
sition to the scholastic system on the ground of taste^ 
I shall notice somewhat further those writers who put 
forwards Platonic views, as fitted to complete or to 
replace the doctrines of Aristotle. Among these, I may 
place Nicolaus Cusanus» so called from Cus, a village 
on the Moselle, where he was bom in 1401 ; who was 
afterwards raised to the dignity of cardinal. We mighty 
indeed, at first be tempted to include Cusanus among 
those persons who were led to reject the old philosophy 
by being themselves agents in the progressive movement 
of physical science. For he published, before Copernicus, 
and independently of him, the doctrine that the earth is 
in motion*. But it should be recollected that in order 
to see the possibility of this doctrine, and its claims to 
acceptance, no new reference to observation was requisite. 

* '^ Jam nobis manifestum est terram istam in veritate moveri/' &c. 
— 2>6 Doctd I^n^rantidy lib. \u cap. 12. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



344 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

The Heliocentric System was merely a new mode oif 
representing to the mind facts with which all astronomers 
had long been familiar. The system might very easily 
have been embraced and inculcated by Plato himself; as 
indeed it is said to have been actually taught by Pytha- 
goras. The mere .adoption of the Heliocentric view, 
therefore, without attempting to realize the system iii 
detail, as Copernicus did, cannot entitle a writer of the 
fifteenth century to be looked upon as one of the authors 
of the discoveries of that period ; and we niust consider 
Cusanus as a speculative anti-Aristotelian, rather than as 
a practical reformer. 

The title of Cusanus's book, De Doctd Ignorantidy 
shows how far he was from agreeing with those who con- 
ceived that, in the works of Aristotle, they had a full and 
complete system of all human knowledge. At_ the out- 
set of this book*, he says, after pointing out some diffi- 
culties in the received philosophy, " If, therefore, the case 
be so, (as even the most profound Aristotle, in his First 
Phihsophy^ affirms,) that in things most manifest by 
nature, there is a difficulty, no less than for an owl to 
look at the sun ; since the appetite of knowledge is not 
implanted in us in vain, we ought to desire to know that 
we are ignorant* If we can fully attain to this, we shall 
Ctrrive at Instructed Ignorance'^ How far he was from 
placing the source of knowledge in experience, as opposed 
to ideas, we majr see in the following passage f from 
another work of his. On Conjectures. "Conjectures must 
proceed from our mind, as the real world proceeds from 
the infinite Divine Reason. For since the human mind, 
the lofty likeness of God, participates, as it may, in the 
fruitfulness of the creative nature, it doth from itself, as 
the image of the Omnipotent Form, bring forth reason- 
able thoughts which have a similitude to real existences. 
• De Doct. Ignor,, lib. i. c. 1. t De Conjecturi$, 1. i. c. 3, 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 345 

Thus the Human Mind exists as a conjectural form of 
the world, as the Divine Mind is its real form." We 
have here the Platonic or ideal side of knowledge put 
prominently and exclusively forwards. 

Marsilius FicinuSy Sfc. — ^A person who had much 
more influence on the diflnsion of Platonism was Marsi- 
lius Ficinus, a physician of Florence. In that city there 
prevailed, at the time of which we speak, the greatest 
enthusiasm for Plato. George Gemistius Pletho, when 
in attendance upon the Council of Florence, had imparted 
to many persons the doctrines of the Greek philosopher ; 
and, among others, had infused a lively interest on this 
subject into the elder Cosmo, the head of the family of 
the Medici. Cosmo formed the plan of founding a 
Platonic academy. Ficinus*', well instructed in the 
works of Plato, Plotinus, Proclus, and other Platonists, 
was selected to further this object, and was employed in 
translating the works of thes3 authors into Latin. It is 
not to our present purpose to consider the doctrines of 
this school, except so far as they bear upon the nature 
and methods of knowledge; and therefore I must pass 
by, as I have in other instances done, the greater part of 
their speculations, which related to th§ nature of God, 
the immortality of the soul, the principles of Goodness 
and Beauty, and other points of the same order. The 
object of these and other Platonists of this school, how- 
ever, was not to expel the authority of Aristotle by that 
of Plato. Many of them had come to the conviction 
that the highest ends of philosophy were to be reached 
only by bringing into accordance the doctrines of Plato 
and of Aristotle. Of this opinion was John Picus, Count 
of Mirandula and Concordia ; and under this persuasion 
he employed the whole of his life in labouring upon a 
work, D0 Concordid Phtonis et Aristotelis^ which was not 
^ Bom in 1433. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



846 REVIEW OF OPINION« ON KNOWLEDGE. 

completed at the time of his death, in 1494; and hsus 
never been published. But about a centuiy later, 
another writer of the same school, Francis Patricius^, 
pointing out the discrepancies between the two Greek 
teachers, urged the propriety of deposing Aristotle from 
the supremacy he had so long eiyoyed. " Now all these 
doctrines, and others not a few," he says f, " since they 
are Platonic doctrines, philosophically most true, and 
consonant with the Catholic faith, whilst the Aristotelian 
tenets are contrary to the faith, and philosophically felse, 
who will not, both as a Christian and a philosopher, 
prefer Plato to Aristotle? And why should not here- 
after, in all the colleges and monasteries of Europe, the 
reading and study of Plato be introduced ? Why should 
not the philosophy of Aristotle be forthwith exiled from 
such places? Why must men continue to drink the 
mortal poison of impiety from that source?" with much 
more in the same strain. 

The Platonic school, of which we have spoken, had, 
however, reached its highest point of prosperity before 
this time, and was already declining. About 1500, the 
Platonists appeared to triumph over the Peripatetics J; 
but the death of their great patron, Cardinal Bessarion, 
about this time, and we may add, the hollowness of their 
system in many points, and its want of fitness for the 
wants and expectations of the age, turned men's thoughts 
partly back to the established Aristotelian doctrines, and 
partly forwards to schemes of bolder and fresher promise. 

Francis Patricim, — Patricius, of whom we have just 
spojien, was one of those who had arrived at the convic- 
tion that the formation of a new philosophy, and not 
merely the restoration of an old one, was needed. In 
1598, appeared his Nova de Universis PhUosophia ; and 

* Bom 1529, died 1597- + Ari$totele8 Bxoiericusy p. 50. 

t TiRABOSOBi, t. vii* pait ii. p. 411. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 347 

the mode in Avliich it begins* can hardly fail to remind 
118 of the expressions which Francis Bacon soon after- 
wards used in the opening of a work of the same nature, 
" Francis Patricias, being about to found anew the true 
philosophy of the universe, dared to begin by announcing 
the following indisputable principles." Here, however, 
the resemblance between Patricius and true inductive 
philosophers ends. His principles are barren a priori 
axioms; and his system has one main element, Light, 
{LtuPy or Lufnen^) to which all operations of nature are 
referred. In general cultivation, and practical knowledge 
of nature, he was distinguished among his contemporaries. 
In various passages of his works he relates f observations 
which he had made in the course of his travels, in Cyprus, 
Corfu, Spain, the mountains of the Modenese, and Dal- 
matia, which was his own country ; his observations relate 
to lights the saltness of the sea, its flux and refluxi and 
other points of astronomy, meteorology, and natural his- 
tory. He speaks of the sex of plants J; rejects judicial 
astrology; and notices the astronomical systems of Co- 
pernicus, Tycho, Fracastoro, and Torre. But the mode in 
which he speaks of experiments proves, what indeed is 
evident from the general scheme of hiB system, that he 
had no due appreciation of the place which observation 
must hold in real natural philosophy. 

PicuSi Agrippdy Sfc. — It had been seen in the later 

* '' Franciscus Patricius, novam veram integram de universis condi- 
turus philosophiam, sequentia uti verissima prcenuntiare est ausus. 
Praenunciata ordine persecutus, divinis oraculis, geometricis rationibus^ 
darissimisque experitnentis comprobavit. • . 

Ante primum nihil, 
Post primum omnia, 
A principio omnia,'' &c. 
His other works are Panaujia^ Pancotmia^ Dmettatione$ PmpaMieof. 
t TiAABosOHi, t. vii. part ii. p. 411. 
t Dii$eri. Fer^xUet.^ t, iii Ub, t« sub in. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



348 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

philosophical history of Greece, how readily the ideas of 
the Platonic school lead on to a system of un&thomable 
and unbounded mysticism. John Picus, of Mirandula*, 
added to the study of Plato and the Neoplatonists, a mass 
of allegorical interpretations of the Scriptures, and the 
dreams of the Cabbala, a Jewish systemf , which pretends 
to explain how all things are an emanation of the Deity. 
To this his nephew, Francis Picus, added a reference to 
inward illumination t, by which knowledge is obtained, 
independently of the progress of reasoning. John 
Reuchlin, or Capnio, born 1455 ; John Baptist Helmont, 
bom 1577; Francis Mercurius Helmont, bom 1618, 
and others, succeeded John Picus in his admiration of the 
Cabbala: while others, as Jacob Bcehmen, rested upon 
internal revelations like Francis Picus. And thus we 
have a series of mystical writers, continued into modem 
times, who may be considered as the successors of the 
Platonic school; and who all exhibit views altogether 
erroneous with regard to the nature and origin of know- 
ledge. Among the various dreams of this school are certain 
wide and loose analogies of terrestrial and spiritual things. 
Thus in the writings of Cornelius Agrippa (who was bom 
1487, at Cologne) we have such systems as the following^: 
— " Since there is a threefold world, elemental, celestial, 
and intellectual, and each lower one is governed by that 
above it, and receives the influence of its powers : so that 
tlie very Archetype and Supreme Author transfuses the 
virtues of his omnipotence into us through angels, 
htavens, stars, elements, animals, plants, stones, — into 
us, I say, for whose service he has framed and created all 
these things ; — the Magi do not think it irrational that 
we should be able to ascend by the same degrees, the 
same worlds, to this Archetype of the world, the Author 

? Tenmeman, IX. 148. t 7ft., 167. t 7ft., 158. 

§ Agrippa, De Occult, PkiL, lib. i. c. 1. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REVIVAL OF PLATONISM. 349 

and First Cause of all, of whom all things are, and from 
whom they proceed ; and should not only avail ourselves 
of those powers which exist in the nobler works of crea- 
tion, but also should be able to attract other powers, and 
add them to these." 

Agrippa's work, De VanUate Scientiarum, may be said 
rather to have a sceptical and cynical, than a platonic, 
character. It is a declamation^, in a melancholy mood, 
against the condition of the sciences in his time. His 
indignation at the worldly success of men whom he con- 
sidered inferior to himself, had, he says, metamorphosed 
him into a dog, as the poets relate of Hecuba of Troy, 
so that his impulse was to snarl and bark. His professed 
purpose, however, was to expose the dogmatism, the 
servility, the self-conceit, and the neglect of religious 
truth which prevailed in the reigning Schools of philo- 
sophy. His views of the nature of science, and the 
modes of improving its cultivation, are too imperfect and 
vague to allow us to rank him among the reformers of 
science. 

ParaceUuSy Fluddy Sfc. — ^The celebrated Paracelsus f 
put himself forwards as a reformer in philosophy, and 
obtained no small niunber of adherents. He was, in 
most respects, a shallow and impudent pretender; and 
had small knowledge of the literature or science of hi§ 
time : but by the tone of his speaking and writing he 
manifestly belongs to the mystical school of which we are 
now speaking. Perhaps by the boldness with which he 
proposed new systems, and by connecting these with the 
practical doctrines of medicine, he contributed something 
to the introduction of a new philosophy. We have seen 
in the History of Chemistry that he was the author of 

* Written in 1526. 

t Philip Anrelius Theophrastos Bombastns von Hohenheim, also 
called Paracelsus Eremita, bom at Einsiedlen in Switzerland, in 1493. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



350 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

the system of Three Principles, (salt, sulphur, and mer- 
cury,) which replaced the ancient doctrine of Four Ele- 
ments, and prepared the way for a true science of che- 
mistry. But the salt, sulphur, and mercury of Paracelsus 
were not, he tells his disciples, the visible bodies which 
we call by those names, but certain invisible, astral, or 
sidereal elements. The astral salt is the basis of the 
solidity and incombustible parts in bodies; the astral 
sulphur is the source of combustion and vegetation ; the 
astral mercury is the origin of fluidity and volatility. And 
again, these three elements are analogous to the three 
elements of man, — Body, Spirit, and. Soul. 

A writer of our own country, belonging to this mjrsti- 
cal school, is Robert Fludd, or De Fluctibus, who waa 
bom in 1571, in Kent, and after pursuing his studies at 
Oxford, travelled for several years. Of all the Theoso* 
phists and Mystics, he is by much the most learned ; and 
was engaged in various controversies with Mersenne, 
Gbssendi, Kepler, and others. He thus brings us in 
contact with the next class of philosophers whom we have 
to consider, the practical reformers of philosophy ;— those 
who furthered the cause of science by making, promul- 
gating or defending the great discoveries which now 
began to occupy men. He adopted the principle, which 
we have noticed elsewhere*, of the analogy of the Macro- 
cosm and Microcosm, the world of nature and the world 
of man. His system contains such a mixture and con- 
fusion of physical and metaphysical doctrines as might be 
expected from his ground plan, and from his school. 
Indeed his object, the general object of mystical specula- 
tors, is to identify physical with spiritual truths. Yet the 
influence of the practical experimental philosophy which 
was now gaining ground in the world may be traced in 
him. Thus he refers to experiments on distillation to 

* B. ix. c. 2. s. 1. Th© Mystical School of Biology. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REVIVAL OF PLAT0NI8M. 351 

prove the existence and relation of the regions of water, 
air, and fire, and of the spirits which correspond to them ; 
and is conceived, by some persons*, to have anticipated 
Torricelli in the invention of the Barometer. 

We need no further follow the speculations of this 
school. We see already abundant reason why the reform 
of the methods of pursuing science could not proceed 
from the Platonists. Instead of seeking knowledge by 
experiment, they immersed themselves deeper than even 
the Aristotelians had done in traditionary lore, or turned 
their eyes inwards in search of an internal illumination. 
Some attempts were made to remedy the defects of phi- 
losophy by a recoui-se to the doctrines of other sects of 
antiquity, when men began to feel more distinctly the 
need of a more connected and solid knowledge of nature 
than the established system gave them. Among these 
attempts were those of Berigardf, Magemus, and espe^ 
cially Gassendi, to bring into repute the philosophy of 
the Ionian school, of Democritus and of Epicurus. But 
these endeavours were posterior in time to the new im-- 
pulse given to knowledge by Copernicus, Kepler, and 
Galileo, and were influenced by views arising out of the 
success of these discoveries, and they must, therefore, be 
considered hereafter. In the mean time, some inde^ 
pendent efforts (arising from speculative rather than 
practical reformers) were made to cast off the yoke of the 
Aristotelian dogmatism, and to apprehend the true form 
of that new philosophy which the most active and hope- 
ful minds saw to be needed; and we must give some 
account of these attempts, before we can commit our- 
selves to the full stream of progressive philosophy. 

* Tennemak, ix. 221. ' t Ih.y 265. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



352 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Chapter IX. 
THE THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 

We have already seen tliat Patricius, about the middle 
of the sixteenth century, announced his purpose of found- 
ing anew the whole fabric of philosophy ; but that, in 
executing this plan, he ran into wide and baseless hypo- 
theses, suggested by a prioii conceptions rather than by 
external observation ; and that he was further misled by 
fanciful analogies resembling those which the Platonic 
mystics loved to contemplate. The same time, and the 
period which followed it, produced several other essays 
which were of the same nature, with the exception of 
their being free from the peculiar tendencies of the 
Platonic school: and these insurrections against the 
authority of the established dogmas, although they did not 
directly substitute a better positive system in the place of 
that which they assailed, shook the authority of the Aris- 
totelian system, and led to its overthrow; which took 
place as soon as these theoretical were aided by other 
practical reformers. 

Bernardinus Telesitcs. — Italy, always, in modem times, 
fertile in the beginnings of new systems, was the soil on 
which these innovators arose. The earliest and most 
conspicuous of them is Bernardinus Telesius, who was 
born in 1508, at Cosenza, in the kingdom of Naples. 
His studies, carried on with great zeal and ability, first at 
Milan and then at Rome, made him well acquainted with 
the knowledge of his times ; but his own reflections con- 
vinced him that the basis of science, as then received, was 
altogether erroneous ; and led him to attempt a reform, 
with which view, in 1666, he published, at Rome, his 
work*, ''Bernardinus Telesius, of Cosenza, on the Nature 

* BERNARDUf I Telesii Oonsentini De Berum JVatura juxta pro* 
pria Principia. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 358 

of Things^ according to principles of his own'' In the 
preface of this work he gives a short account* of the 
train of reflection by which he was led to put himself in 
opposition to the Aristotelian philosophy. This kind of 
autobiography occurs not unfrequently in the writings of 
theoretical reformers ; and shows how livelily they felt the 
novelty of their undertaking. After the storm and sack 
of Rome in 1527, Telesius retired to Padua, as a peaceful 
seat of the muses ; and there studied philosophy and ma- 
thematics, with great zeal, under the direction of Jerom 
Amalthaeus and Frederic Delphinus. In these studies he 
made great progress ; and the knowledge which he thus 
acquired threw a new light upon his view of the Aristote- 
lian philosophy. He undertook a closer examination of the 
Physical Doctrines of Aristotle ; and as the result of this, 
he was astonished how it could have been possible that so 
many excellent men, so many nations, and even almost the 
whole human race, should, for so long a time, have allowed 
themselves to be carried away by a blind reverence for a 
teacher, who had committed errors so numerous and grave 
as he perceived to exist in "the philosopher." Along with 
this view of the insufficiency of the Aristotelian philoso- 
phy, arose, at an early period, the thought of erecting a 
better system in its place. With this purpose he left 
Padua, when he had received the degree of Doctor, and 
went to Rome, where he was encouraged in his design by 
the approval and friendly exhortations of distinguished 
men of letters, amongst whom were Ubaldino Bandinelli 
and Giovanni della Casa. From Rome he went to his 
native place, when the incidents and occupations of a 
married life for a while interrupted his philosophical pro- 
ject. But after his wife was dead, and his eldest son 

* I take this account from Tenneman : this Proem was omitted in 
subsequent editions of Telesius, and is not in the one ^hich I have 
consulted. Tenneman, Gesch. d, PhiLy ix. 230. 

VOL. n. 2 A 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



S54 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

grown to manhood, he resumed with ardour the scheme 
of his youth ; again studied the works of Aristotle and 
other philosophers, and composed and published the two 
first books of his treatise. The opening to this work 
sufficiently exhibits the spirit in which it was conceived. 
Its object is stated in the title to be to show, that " the 
construction of the world, the magnitude and nature of 
the bodies contained in it, are not to be investigated by 
reasoning, which was done by the ancients, but are to be 
apprehended by the senses, and collected from the things 
themselves.'* And the Proem is in the same strain. 
" They who before us have inquired concerning the con- 
struction of this world and of the things which it contains, 
seem indeed to have prosecuted their examination with 
protracted vigils and great labour, but never to have looked 
at it^ And thus, he observes, they found nothing but 
error. This he ascribes to their presumption. " For, as 
it were, attempting to rival God in wisdom, and venturing 
to seek for the principles and causes of the world by the 
light of their own reason, and thinking they had found 
what they had only Invented, they made an arbitrary 
world of their own.** " We then,** he adds, " not relying 
on ourselves, and of a duller intellect than they, propose 
to ourselves to turn our rega^rds to the world itself and 
its parts.'* 

The execution of the work, however, by no means 
corresponds to the announcement. The doctrines of 
Aristotle are indeed attacked; and the objections to 
these, and to othey received opinions, form a large part of 
the work. But thes^ objections are supported by a priori 
reasoning, and not by experiments. And thus, rejecting 
the Aristotelian physics, he proposes a system at least 
equally baseless; idthough, no doubts grateful to the 
author from its sweeping and apparently simple character. 
He assumes three principles. Heat, Cold, and Matter: 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TfiEonenoAL reformers of scisncs. 855 

Heat is the principle of motion, Cold of immobility, and 
Matter is the corporeal substratum, in which these incor- 
poreal and active principles produce their effects. It is 
easy to imagine that, by combining and separating these 
abstractions in various ways, a sort of account of many 
natural phenomena may be given ; but it is impossible to 
ascribe any real value to such a system. The merit of 
Telesius must be considered to consist in his rejection of 
the Aristotelian errors, in his perception of the necessity 
of a reform in the method of philosophising, and in his 
persuasion that this reform must be founded on experi-* 
ments rather than on reasoning. When he said*, ?* We 
propose to ourselves to turn our eyes to the world itself, 
and its parts, their passions, actions, operations and spe- 
cies," his view of the course to be followed was righ ; 
but his purpose remained but ill fulfilled, by the arbitrary 
edifice of abstract conceptions which his system exhibits. 
Bacon, who, about half a century later, treated the 
subject of a reform of philosophy in a far more penetrating 
and masterly manner, has given us his judgment of Tele- 
sius. In his view, he considers Telesius as the restorer 
of the Atomic philosophy, which Democritus and Parme- 
nides taught among the ancients ; and according to his 
custom, he presents an image of this philosophy in an 
adaptation of a portion of ancient mythology f. The 
Celestial Cupid, who, with Coelus, "^bs the parent of the 
Gods and of the Universe, is exhibited as a representation 
of matter and its properties, according to the Democritean 
philosophy. "Concerning Telesius,** says Bacon, "we 
think well, and acknowledge him as a lover of truth, a 
useful contributor to science, an amender of some tenets, 

^ Pfoem* 

t ^^ De Principiis atqne Onginibtts decUndam fabulas Cupidinls ei 
Coeli : siye Parmenidis et Telesii et prsecipue Democriti Philosophia 
tractata in Fabula de Cupidine." 

2 A 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



356 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

the first of recent men. But we have to do with him as 
the restorer of the philosophy of Parmenides, to* whom 
much reverence is due." With regard to this philosophy, 
he pronounces a judgment which very truly expresses the 
cause of its rashness and emptiness. " It is," he says, 
"such a system* as naturally proceeds from the intellect, 
abandoned to its own impulse, and not rising from 
experience to theory continuously and successively." 
Accordingly, he says that, " Telesius, although learned in 
the Peripatetic philosophy (if that were anything), which, 
indeed, he has turned against the teachers of it, is hindered 
by his affirmations, and is more successful in destroying 
than in building." 

The work of Telesius excited no small notice, and 
was placed in the Indea? Espurgatoritts. It made many 
disciples, a consequence probably due to its spirit of 
system-making, no less than to its promise of reform, or 
its acuteness of argument; for till trial and reflection 
have taught man modesty and moderation, he can never 
be content to receive knowledge in the small successive 
instalments in which nature gives it forth to him. It is 
the makers of large systems, arranged with an appearance 
of completeness and symmetry, who, principally, give rise 
to Schools of philosophy. 

{Thomas CampaneUa.) — Accordingly, Telesius may be 
looked upon as the founder of a School. His most dis- 
tinguished successor was Thomas CampaneUa, who was 
born in 1568, at Stilo, in Calabria. He showed great 
talents at an early age, prosecuting his studies at Cosenza, 
the birth-place of the great opponent of Aristotle and 
reformer of philosophy. He, too, has given us an 

* " Talia sunt qualia possunt esse ea qu© ab intcllectu sibi per- 
miss ), nee ab experimentis continenter et gradatim sublevato^ profccta 
videntur." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 357 

account* of the course of thought by which he was led 
to become an innovator. ^' Being afraid that not genuine 
truth, but falsehood in the place of truth, was the tenant 
of the Peripatetic School, I examined all the Greek, 
Latin, and Arabic commentators of Aristotle, and hesi- 
tated more and more, as I sought to learn whether what 
they have said were also to be read in the world itself, 
which I had been taught by learned men was the living 
book of God. And as my doctors could not satisfy my 
scruples, I resolved to read all the books of Plato, Pliny, 
Galen, the Stoics, and the Democriteans, and especially 
those of Telesius; and to compare them with thBtJirst 
and original writing^ the world; that thus from the 
primary autograph, I might learn if the copies contained 
anything false." Campanella probably refers here to an 
expression of Plato, who says, " the world is God's epistle 
to mankind." And this image, of the natural world as 
an original manuscript, while human systems of philoso- 
phy are but copies, and may be false ones, became a 
favourite thought of the reformers, and appears repeatedly 
in their writings from this time. "When I held my 
public disputation at Cosenza," Campanella proceeds, 
"and still more, when I conversed privately with the 
brethren of the monastery, I found little satisfaction in 
their answers ; but Telesius delighted me, on account of 
his freedom in philosophizing, and because he rested upon 
the nature of things, and not upon the assertions of men." 
With these views and feelings, it is not wonderful 
that Campanella, at the early age of twenty-two (1590,) 
published a work remarkable for the bold promise of its 
title : " Thomas CampaneUa's Philosophy demonstrated to 
the senses^ against those who have philosophized in a arbi- 
trary and dogmatical manner^ not taking nature for their 
guide; in which the errors of Aristotle and hi^ follower's 

* Thom. Campanella de LibrispropriU^ as qipoied in Tbmneman, 
ix.291. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



858 BEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

wre routed from their own Oisertions and the laws of 
native ; and all the imaginations feigned in the place of 
nature 6gf the Peripatetics are altogether rejected; toith a 
true defence ofBemardin Telesius of CosenzOy the greatest of 
philosophers ; confirmed by the opinions of the ancients, here 
ducidated and defended, especiaUy those of the Platonists'' 

This work was written in answer to a book against 
Telesius by a Neapolitan professor named Marta; and 
it was the boast of the young author that he had only 
employed eleven months in the composition of his 
defence^ while his adversary had been engaged eleven 
years in preparing his attadc Gampanella found a 
favourable reception in the house of the Marchese La« 
velli, and there employed himself in the composition 
of an additional work, entitled On the Sense of Things 
a$id Magic, and in other literary labours. These, how** 
ever, are full of the indications of an enthusiastic tern* 
per, inclined to mystical devotion, and of opinions 
bearing the cast of pantheism. For instance, the title of 
the book last quoted sets forth as demonstrated in the 
course of the work, that ^^ the world is the living and 
intelligent statue of God; and that all its parts, and 
particles of parts, are endowed some with a clearer, some 
with a more obscure sense, such as suffices for the pre- 
servation of each and of the whole." Besides these 
opinions, which could not fail to make him obnoxious to 
the religious authorities, Gampanella* engaged in schemes 
of political revolution, which involved him in danger and 
ciilamity. He took part in a conspiracy, of which the 
object was to cast off the tyranny of Spain, and to make 
Calabria a republic. This design was discovered; and 
Campanella, along with others, was thrown into prison 
and subjected to torture. He was kept in confinement 
twenty-seven years; and at last obtained his liberation 
* EcoKOMisn ItaUani, torn. i. p. zzziii. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL BEFORlfEBS OF SCIENCE. 259 

by the interposition of Pope Urban VIII. He was^ 
however, still in danger from the Neapolitan Inquisition ; 
and escaped in disguise to Paris, where he received a 
pension from the king, and lived in intercourse with the 
most eminent men of letters. He died there in 1639. 

Campanella was a contemporary of Francis Bacon^ 
whom we must consider as belonging to an epoch to 
which the Calabrian school of innovators was only a 
prelude. I shall not therefore farther follow the con- 
nexion of writers of this order. Tobias Adami, a Saxon 
writer, an admirer of Campanella's works» employed him- 
self, about 1620, in adapting them to the German public, 
and in recommending them strongly to German philoso- 
phers. Descartes, and even Bacon, may be considered as 
successors of Campanella ; for they too were theoretical 
reformers ; but they enjoyed the advantage of the light 
which had, in the mean time, been thrown upon the 
philosophy of science, by the great practical advances of 
Kepler, Galileo, and others. To these practical reformers 
we must soon turn our attention ; but we may first notice 
one or two additional circumstances belonging to our 
present subject. 

Campanella remarks that both the Peripatetics and 
the Platonists conducted the learner to knowledge by a 
long and circuitous path, which he vdshed to shorten by 
Betting out from the sense. Without speaking of the 
methods which he proposed, we may notice one maxim* 
of considerable value which he propounds, and to which 
we have already been led. " We begin to reason from 
sensible objects, and definition is the end and epilogue of 
science. It is not the begining of our knowing, but Only 
of our teaching.*' 

{Andrew C^esalpinus.y^The same maxim had already 
been announced by Csesalpinus, a contemporary of Tele- 
sius ; (he was bom at Arezzo in 1520, and died at Borne 

* Tbi^neman, ix. 305. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



360 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

in 1603.) CsBsalpinus is a great name in science, though 
professedly an Aristotelian. It has been seen in the 
History of Science*, that he formed the first great 
epoch of the science of botany by his systematic arrange- 
ment of plants, and that in this task he had no successor 
for nearly a century. He also approached near to the 
great discovery of the circulation of the blood f. He 
takes a view of science which •includes the remark that 
we have just quoted from Campanella : " We reach per- 
fect knowledge by three steps : Induction, Division, De- 
finition. By Induction, we collect likeness and agreement 
from observation ; by Division, we collect unlikeness and 
disagreement ; by Definition, we learn the proper sub- 
stance of each object. Induction makes universals from 
particulars, and offers to the mind all intelligible matter ; 
Division discovers the difference of universals, and leads 
to species ; Definition resolves species into their principles 
and elements t." Without asserting this to be rigorously 
correct, it is incomparably more true and philosophical 
than the opposite view, which represents definition as the 
beginning of our knowledge ; and the establishment of 
such a doctrine is a material step in inductive philosophy f. 
{CHordano Bruno.) — ^Among the Italian innovators of 
this time we must notice the unfortunate Giordano Bruno, 
who was bom at Nola about 1550, and burnt at Rome 
in 1600. He is, however, a reformer of a different school 
from Campanella; for he derives his philosophy from 
Ideas and not from Observation. He represents himself 
as the author of a new doctrine, which he terms the Nolan 
Philosophy. He was a zealous promulgator and defender 
of the Copernican system of the universe, as we have 
noticed in the History of Science ||. Campanella also 
wrote in defence of that system. 

* Hist, Ind. Sci.y iii. 280. f /^., iii. 306. 

t Qu<Bit. Peripatetiew, i. 1. § Tenneman, ix. 108. 

II Biit. Ind. Set., i. 384, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 361 

It is worthy of remark that a thought which is often 
quoted from Francis Bacon, occurs in Bruno's Cena di 
Cenercj published in 1584; I mean, the notion that the 
later times are more aged than the earlier. In the course 
of the dialogue, the Pedant, who is one of the interlocu- 
tors, says, " In antiquity is wisdom f to which the Philo- 
sophical Character replies, " If you knew what you were 
talking about, you would see that your principle leads to 
the opposite result of that which you wish to infer ; — I 
mean, that we are older, and have lived longer, than our 
predecessors." He then proceeds to apply this, by tracing 
the course of astronomy through the earlier astronomers 
up to Copernicus. 

{Peter Hamus.) — ^I will notice one other reformer of 
this period, who attacked the Aristotelian system on 
another side, on which it was considered to be most 
impregnable. This was Peter Ramus, (bom in Picardy 
in 1515,) who ventured to denounce the Logic of Aris- 
totle as unphilosophical and useless. After showing an 
extraordinary aptitude for the acquirement of knowledge 
in his youth, when he proceeded to the degree of Master 
of Arts, he astonished his examiners by choosing for the 
subject of the requisite disputation the thesis*, " that all 
which Aristotle has said is not true." This position, so 
startling in 1535, he defended for the whole day, without 
being defeated. This was, however, only a formal acade- 
mical exercise, which did not necessarily imply any per- 
manent conviction of the opinion thus expressed. But 
his mind was really labouring to detect and remedy the 
errors which he thus proclaimed. From him, as from 
the other reformers of this time, we have an account of 
this mental struggle f. He says, in a work on this sub- 
ject, "I will candidly and simply explain how I was 

* Tenneman, IX. 420. 
t Rami, Animadversiones ArUiotelicw^ i. iv. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



362 REVIEW OF OPINIONfil ON KNOWLEDGB, 

delivered from the darkness of Aristotle. When, accord- 
ing to the laws of our university^ I had spent three years 
and a half in the Aristotelian philosophy, and was now 
invested with the philosophical laurel as a Master of 
Arts, I took an account of the time which I had consumed 
in this study; and Considered on what subjects I should 
employ this logical art of Aristotle, which I bad learnt 
with so much labour and noisor I found it made me not 
more versed in history or antiquities, more eloquent in 
discourse, more ready in verse, more wise in any subject. 
Alas for me ! how was I overpowered, how deeply did I 
groan, how did I deplore my lot and my nature, how did 
I deem myself to be by some unhappy and dismal fate 
and frame of mind abhorrent from the Muses, when I 
found that I was one who, after all my pains, could reap 
no benefit from that wisdom of which I heard so much, 
as being contained in the Logic of Aristotle." He then 
relates, that he was led to the study of the Dialogues of 
Plato, and was delighted with the kind of analysis of the 
subjects discussed which Socrates is there represented as 
executing. " Well," he adds, " I began thus to reflect 
within myself — (I should have thought it impious to say 
it to another)— What, I pray you, prevents me from 
mcraiizing; and from asking, without regard to Aris* 
totle^s authority, whether Aristotle's Logic be true and 
correct ? It may be that that philosopher leads us wrong ; 
and if so, no wonder that I cannot find in his books the 
treasure which is not there. What if his dogmas be 
mere figments? Do I not tease and torment myself in 
vain, tr}ing to get a harvest from a barren soil ?" He 
convinced himself that the Aristotelian logic was worth- 
less : and constructed a new system of Logic, founded 
mainly on the Platonic process of exhausting a subject by 
analytical classification of its parts. Both works, his Ani- 
madversions on Aristotle^ and his Zogrec, appeared in 1543. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL REFOllMEBS OF SOIENGE. 863 

The learned world was startled and shocked to find a young 
man, on his first entrance into life, condemning as faulty^ 
fallacious, and useless, that part of Aristotle's works which 
had always hitherto been held as a masterpiece of philo- 
sophical acuteness, and as the Organon of scientific rea« 
soning. And in truth, it must be gmnted that Ramus 
does not appear to have understood the real nature and 
object of Aristotle's Logic ; while his own system could 
not supply the place of the old one, and was not of much 
real value. This dissent from the established doctrines 
was, however, not only condemned but punished. The 
printing and selling of his books was forbidden through 
France ; and Ramus was stigmatized by a sentence^ which 
declared him rash, arrogant, impudent, and ignorant, and 
prohibited from teaching lo^c and philosophy. He was, 
however, afterwards restored to the office of professor : 
and though much attacked, persisted in his plan of re-» 
forming, not only Logic but Physics and Metaphysics. 
He made his position still more dangerous by adopting the 
reformed religion ; and during the unhappy civil wars of 
France, he was deprived of his professorship, driven from 
Paris, and had his library plundered. He endeavoured, 
but in vain, to engage a German professor, Schegk, to 
undertake the reform of the Aristotelian Physics ; a por- 
tion of knowledge in which he felt himself not to be 
strong. Unhappily for himself, he afterwards returned 
to Paris, where he perished in the massacre of St. Bar- 
tholomew in 1672. 

Ramus's main objection to the Aristotelian Logic is, 
that it is not the image of the natural process of thought ; 
an objection which shows little philosophical insight ; for 
the course by which we obtain knowledge may well differ 
from the order in which our knowledge, when obtained, 
is exhibited. We have already seen that Ramus's con- 
temporaries, Ceesalpinus and Campanella, had a wiser 
* See Hut. Jnd. /8W., i. 327. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



864 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

view ; placing definition as the last step in knowing, but 
the first in teaching. But the effect which Ramus pro- 
duced was by no means slight. He aided powerfully in 
turning the minds of men to question the authority of 
Aristotle on all points ; and had many followers, espe- 
cially among the Protestants. Among the rest, Milton, 
our great poet, published " Artis Logicae plenior Insti- 
tutio ad Petri Rami methodum concinnata ;" but this work, 
appearing in 1672, belongs to a succeeding period. 

{Tlte Reformers in general.) — It is impossible not to bo 
struck with the series of misfortunes which assailed the 
reformers of philosophy of the period we have had to 
review. Roger Bacon was repeatedly condemned and im- 
prisoned ; and, not to speak of others who suffered under 
the imputation of magical arts, Telesius is said* to have 
been driven from Naples to his native city by calumny 
and envy; Csesalpinus was accused of atheism f; Campa- 
nella was imprisoned for twenty-seven years and tortured ; 
Giordano Bruno was burnt at Rome as a heretic ; Ramus 
was persecuted during his life, and finally murdered by 
his personal enemy Jacques Charpentier, in a massacre of 
which the plea was religion. It is true, that for the 
most part these misfortunes were not principally due to 
the attempts at philosophical reform, but were connected 
rather with politics or religion. But we cannot doubt 
that the spirit which led men to assail the received philo- 
sophy, might readily incline them to reject some tenets 
of the established religion ; since the boundary line of 
these subjects is difficult to draw. And as we have 
seen, there was in most of the persons of whom we have 
spoken, not only a well-founded persuasion of the de- 
fects of existing systems, but an eager spirit of change, 
and a sanguine anticipation of some wide and lofty phi- 
losophy, which was soon to elevate the minds and con- 
ditions of men. The most unfortunate were, for the most 

* Tenneman, ix. 200. t Ih. ix. 108. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 865 

i)art, the least temperate and judicious reformers. Patri- 
cius, who, as we have seen, declared himself against the 
Aristotelian philosophy, lived and died at Rome in peace 
and honour*. 

(Melanchtkon.) — It is not easy to point out with pre- 
cision the connexion between the efforts at a Reform in 
Philosophy, and the great Reformation of Religion in the 
sixteenth century. The disposition to assert (practically 
at least) a freedom of thinking, and to reject the corrup- 
tions which tradition had introduced and authority main- 
tained, naturally extended its influence from one subject 
to another ; and especially in subjects so nearly connected 
as theology and philosophy. The Protestants, however, 
did not reject the Aristotelian system ; they only reformed 
it, by going back to the original works of the author, 
and by reducing it to a conformity with Scripture. In 
this reform, Melanchthon was the chief author, and wrote 
works on Logic, Physics, Morals, and Metaphysics, which 
were used among Protestants. On the subject of the 
origin of our knowledge, his views contained a very phi- 
losophical improvement of the Aristotelian doctrines. 
He recognized the importance of Ideas, as well as of 
Experience. "We could not," he saysf, "proceed to 
reason at all, except there were by nature innate in man 
certain fixed points, that is, principles of science ; — as 
Number, the recognition of Order and Proportion, logi- 
cal, geometrical, physical and moral Principles. Physical 
principles are such as these, — everything which exists 
proceeds from a cause, — a body cannot be in two places 
at once, — ^time is a continued series of things or of mo- 
tions, — and the like." It is not difficult to see that such 
Principles partake of the nature of the Fundamental 
Ideas which we have attempted to arrange and enume- 
rate in a previous part of this work. 

* Tenneman, IX. 246. 
t Melanchthon, De Anima^ p. 207, qnoted in Tenneman, ix. 121. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



366 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Before we proceed to the next chaptei; which treats 
of the Practical Reformers of Scientific Method, let us 
for an instant look at the strong persuasion that the 
time of a philosophical revolution was at hand, implied 
in the titles of the works of this period. Telesius pub- 
lished De Metnim Naturaju^th propria principia ; Francis 
Helmont, PhUosophia vulgaris refutata; Patricius, Nof>a 
de Univerm PhUosophia ; Campanella, PhUosophia sensilms 
demonstratOy adversus errores Aristotelis : Bruno professed 
himself the author of a Nolan Philosophy; and Ramus 
of a New Logic. The age announced itself pregnant ; 
and the eyes of all who took an interest in the intellectual 
fortunes of the race, were looking eagerly for the expected 
offspring. 



Chapter X- 

THE PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 

Character of the Practical Reformers. — We now come 
to a class of speculators who had perhaps a greater share 
in bringing about the change from stationary to progres- 
sive knowledge, than those writers who so loudly an- 
nounced the revolution. The mode in which the philoso- 
phers of whom we now speak produced their impressions 
on men's minds, was very different from the procedure of 
the theoretical reformers. What these talked of, they did ; 
what these promised, they performed. While the theo* 
rists concerning knowledge proclaimed that great advances 
were to be made, the practical discoverers went steadily 
forwards. While one class spoke of a complete Reform 
of scientific Methods, the other, boasting little, and often 
thinking little of Method, proved the novelty of their 
instrument by obtaining new results. While the meta- 
physicians were exhorting men to consult experience and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTICAL REFORMERS OP SCIENCE. 367 

the senses, the physicists were examining nature by such 
means with unparalleled success. And while the former, 
even when they did for a moment refer to fects,soon rushed 
back into their own region of ideas, and tried at once to 
seize the widest generalizations, the latter, fastening their 
attention upon the phenomena, and tr]dng to reduce them 
to laws, were carried forwards by steps measured and 
gradual, such as no conjectural view of scientific method 
had suggested; but leading to truths as profound and 
comprehensive as any which conjecture had dared to 
anticipate. The theoretical reformers were bold, self* 
confident, hasty, contemptuous of antiquity, ambitious of 
ruling all future speculations, as they whom they sought 
to depose had ruled the past. The practical reformers 
were cautious, modest, slow, despising no knowledge, 
whether borrowed from tradition or observation, confident 
in the ultimate triumph of science, but impressed with 
the conviction that each single person could contribute 
a little only to its progress. Yet though thus working 
rather than speculating, — dealing with particulars more 
than with generals,— employed mainly in adding to know- 
ledge, and not in defining what knowledge is, or how 
adcUtions are to be made to it, — these men, thoughtful, 
curious, and of comprehensive minds, were constantly led 
to important views on the nature and methods of science. 
And these views, thus suggested by reflections on their 
own mental activity, were gradually incorporated with 
the more abstract doctrines of the metaphysicians, and 
had a most important influence in establishing an improved 
philosophy of science. The indications of such views we 
must now endeavour to collect from the writings of the 
discoverers of the times preceding the seventeenth cen- 
tury. 

Some of the earliest of these indications are to be 
found in those who dealt with Art rather than with Science. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



368 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGp. 

I have already endeavoured to show that the. advance of 
the arts which give us a command over the powers of 
nature, is generally prior to the formation of exact and 
speculative knowledge concerning those powers. But 
Art, which is thus the predecessor of Science, is, among 
nations of acute and active intellects, usually its parent. 
There operates, in such a cases, a speculative spirit, lead- 
ing men to seek for the reasons of that which they find 
themselves able to do. How slowly, and with what 
repeated deviations men follow this leading, when under 
the influence of a partial and dogmatical philosophy, the 
late birth and slow growth of soimd physical theory shows. 
But at the period of which we now speak, we find men, 
at length, proceeding in obedience to the impulse which 
thus drives them from practice to theory ; — ^from an ac- 
quaintance with phenomena to a free and intelligent 
inquiry concerning their causes. 

Leonardo da Vinci. — I have already noticed, in the 
History of Science, that the Indistinctness of Ideas, 
which was long one main impediment to the progress of 
science in the middle ages, was first remedied among 
architects and engineers. These men, so far at leajst as 
mechanical ideas were concerned, were compelled by their 
employments to judge rightly of the relations and proper- 
ties of the materials with which they had to deal ; and 
would have been chastised by the failure of their works, 
if they had violated the laws of mechanical truth. It 
Avas not wonderful, therefore, that these laws became 
known to them first. We have seen, in the History, 
that Leonardo da Vinci, the celebrated painter, who was 
also an engineer, is the first writer in whom we find the 
true view of the laws of equilibrium of the lever in the 
most general case. This artist, a man of a lively and 
discursive mind, is led to make some remarks* on the 

* His works have never been published, and exist in manuscript in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTIGAL ItfiFORMEBS OF SCIENCE. 36d 

farmation of our knowledge, which may show the opinions 
on that subject that already offered themselves at the 
beginning of the sixteenth century *"• He expresses 
himself as follows :— " Theory is the general. Experiments 
are the soldiers. The interpreter of the artifices of 
nature is Experience : she is never deceived. Our judg- 
ment sometimes is deceived, because it expects effects 
which Experience refuses to allow.** And again, ** We 
must consult Experience, and vary the circumstances till 
we have drawn from them- genend rules ; for it is she 
who furnishes true rules. But of what use, you ask, are 
these rules ? I reply, that they direct us in the researches 
of nature and the operations of art. They prevent our 
imposing upon ourselves and others, by promising our- 
selves results which we cannot obtain." 

^ In the study of the sciences which depend on mathe- 
matics, those who do not consult nature but authors, are 
not the children of nature, they are only her grand- 
children. She is the true teacher of inen of genius. 
But see the absurdity of men ! ISiey turn up their noses 
at a man who prefers to learn from nature herself rather 
than from authors who are only her clerks." 

In another place, in reference to a particular case, he 
says, *^ Nature begins from the Reason and ends in Ex- 
perience; but for all that, we must take the opposite 
course ; begin from the Experiment and try to discover 
the Reason." 

Leonardo was bom forty-six years before Telesius; 
yet \re have here an estimate of the value of experience 
far more just and substantial than the Calabrian school 
ever reached. The expressions contained in the above 
extracts, are well worthy our notice ; — ^that experience is 

the library of the Institute at Paris. Some extracts were published 
hy Yenturi, E$iai $ur lei Oavrage$ de Leonard da Vinci. Paris, 1797- 
* Leonardo died in 1620, at the age of 78. 
VOL. n. 2 B 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



870 ED^VIBW OF OPmiOKS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

never deceived;^ — ^tbat we must varj onr experiments, 
and draw from them general rules ;- — ^that nature is the 
original source of knowledge, and books only a derivative 
substitute ; — ^itith the lively iniage of the sons and grand- 
sons of nature* Some of these assertions have been 
deemed, and not without reason^ very siniilar to those 
made by Bacon a century later. Yet it is probable that 
the import of such Expressions,- in Leonardo's mind, was 
less clear and definite than that whioh they acquired by 
the progress of sound philosophy. When he says that 
theory is the general and experiments the soldiers, be 
probably me&nt that theory directs men what experiments 
to make ; and had not In his inind the notion of a theo- 
retical Idea ordering and brigading the Facts. When he 
says that Experieilce is the interpreter of Nature, we may 
reeoUect, that in a more correct use of this image, Expe- 
rience Und Nature are the writing, and the Intellect of 
man the interpreter. We may add, that the clear appre- 
hension of the importance of Experience led, in this as in 
other cases, to an unjust depreciation of the value of what 
science owed to books. Leonardo would have made little 
progress, if h^ had attempted to master a complex science, 
astronomy for instancie, by means of observation alone^ 
without the aid of books. 

But in spite of such criticism, Leonardo's maxims 
show extraordinary siigacity and insight ; and they appear 
to us the more remarkable, when we find hbw rare suoh 
vieWs are for a century ufter his time. 

Copernicus. — For we by no means find, even in those 
practical discoverers to whom, in reality, the revolution 
in science, and consequently in the philosophy of science, 
was due, this prompt and vigorous recognition of the 
supreme authority of observation as a ground of belief; 
this bold estimate of the probable worthlessness of tradi- 
tional knowledge ; and this plain assertion of the reality 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTICAL REFOBMBBS OF SCIENCE. 371 

of theory founded upon experience. Among such dis- 
coverers, Copernicus must ever hold a most distinguished 
place. The heliocentric theory of the universe, established 
by him with vast labour and deep knowledge, was, for the 
succeeding century, the field of discipline and exertion 
of all the most active speculative ininds« Men^ during 
that time, proved their freedom of thought, their hopeful 
spirit, and their comprehensive view, by adopting, incul- 
cating, and following out the philosophy which this theory 
suggested. But in the first promulgation of the theory, 
in the works of Copernicus himself^ we find a iar more 
cautious and reserved temper. He does not, indeed, give 
up the reality of his theory, but he expresses himself so 
as to avoid shocking those who might (as some afterwards 
did) think it safe to speak of it as an hypotbem rather 
than a truth. In his preface addressed to the Pope*, 
after speaking of the difficulties in the old and received 
doctrines, by which he was led to his own theory, he 
says, <^ Hence I began to think of the mobility of the 
«arth ; and although the opinion seemed absurd, yet be- 
cause I knew that to others before me this liberty had 
been ccmceded, of imagining any kinds of circles in order 
to explain the phenomena of the stars, I thought it would 
also be readily granted me, that I might try whether, by 
supposing the earth to be in motion, I might not arrive 
at a better ejcplanation than theinii of the revolutions of 
the celestial orbs." Nor does he anywhere assert that 
the seeming absurdity had become a certain truth, or 
betray any feeling of triumph over the mistiJcen belief 
of his predecessors. And, as I have elsewhere shown, 
his disciples t indignantly and justly defended him from 
the charge of disrespect towards Ptolemy and other an- 
cient astronomers. Yet Copernicus is far from compro« 
mising the value or evidence of the great truths which 
• Paul III., in 1643. + Hist, Ind. Set., i. 375. 

2 B ^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Q72 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

fae intioduced to general acceptance ; and from sinking 
in his ^position of his discoveries below the temper 
which had led to them. His quotation from Ptolemy, 
that ** He who is to follow philosc^hy must be a freeman 
in mind,** is a grand and noble maxim, which it well 
became him to utter. 

FoMeius.^^In another of the great discoverers of this 
period, though employed on a very different subject^ we 
discern much of the same temper. Fabricius of Acqua- 
pendente*", the tutw and forerunner of our Harvey, and 
one of that illustrious series of Paduan professors who were 
the fathers of anatomy f, exhibits something of the same 
respect for antiquity, in the midst of his original specula- 
tions. Thus in a dissertation t On the Action of the 
JointSy he quotes Aristotle's Mechanical Problems to 
prove that in all animal motion there must be some 
quiescent frdcrum; and finds merit even in Aristotle's 
ignorance. ^^ Aristotle," he says j, *'did not know that 
motion was produced by the miuscle ; and after staggering 
about frt)m one supposition to another, at last is com- 
pelled by the facts themselves to recur to an innate spirit^ 
which, he ccmceives, is contracted, and which pulls and 
pushes. And here we cannot help admiring the genius 
of Aristotle, who, though ignorant of the muscle, invents 
something which produces nearly the same effect as the 
muscle, namely, contraction and pulling." He then, 
with great acuteness, points out the distinction between 
Aristotle's opinions, thus favourably interpreted, and 
those of Galen. In all this, we see something of the 
wish to find all truths in the writings of the ancients, 
but nothing which materially interferes with freedom of 
inquiry. The anatomists have in all age's and countries 
been practically employed in seeking knowledge from 

? Bom 1537, died 1619. f ffUt. Jnd. Set., iii. 396. 

X FABBXCXU0, DeHotti Loc^^ p. 1^. ^ p, 299 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACnOAL BBFOSMERS OF 8CIBN0E. S73 

obseryatiQn. Facts hare ever been to them a sulject of 
careful and profitable study ; while the ideas which enter 
into the wider truths of the science, are, as we have seen, 
even still involved in obscurity, doubt, and contest. 

Mawtolycus. — Francis Maurolycus of Messana, whose 
mathematical works were published in 1576, was one of 
the great improvers of the science of optics in his time. 
In his Prefoce to his Treatise on the Spheres, he speaks 
of previous writers on the same subject ; and observes 
that as they have not superseded one another, they have 
not rendered it unfit for any one to treat the subject 
afresh. ^^ Yet," he says, 'Mt is impossible to amend the 
errors of all who have preceded us* This wonM be a task 
too hard for Atlas, although he supports the heavens. 
Even Copernicus is tolerated, who makes the sun to be 
fixed, and the earth to move round it in a circle ; and 
who is more worthy of a whip or a scouiffe than of a 
refutation.** The mathematicians and astronomers of that 
time were not the persons most sensible of the progress 
of physical knowledge, for the bases of their science, and 
a great part of its substance, were contained in the 
writings of the ancients; and till the time of Kepler, 
Ptolemy's woric was, very justly, looked upon as indud* 
ing all that was essential in the science. 

Benedetti. — But the writers on Mechanics were 
naturally led to present themselves as innovators and 
experimenters; for aU that the ancients had taught con- 
cerning the doctrine of motion was erroneous; whfle 
those who sought their knowledge from experiment, 
were constantly led to new truths. John Baptist Bene- 
detti, a Venetian nobleman, in 1599, published Ms 
SpeculaUonum Liber, containing, among other matter, a 
treatise on Mechanics, in which several of the Aristo- 
telian errors were refuted. In the Preface to this 
Treatise, he says, *'Many authors have written much, 
and with great ability, on Mechanics ; but since nature is 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



374 REVIEW OP 0PINI0K8 ON KNOWLEDGE. 

constantlj bringing to light something either new, or 
before unnoticed, I too wished to put forth a few things 
hitherto unattempted, or not sufficiently explained.** In 
the doctrine of motion he distinctly and at some length 
condemns and arguet^againit all the Aristotelian doctrines 
conceming^ motion, weight, and many other fundamental 
principles of physics. Benedetti is also an adherent of 
the Copemican doctrine. He states'*^ the enormous 
velocity which the heavenly bodies must have, if the 
earth be the centre of their motions; and adds, ^* which 
difficulty does not occur according to the beautiful theory 
of the Samian Aristarchus, expounded in a divine man- 
ner by Nicolas Copernicus; against which the reasons 
alleged by Aristotle are of no weight:** Benedetti 
throughout shows no want of the courage or ability which 
were needed in order to rise in opposition against the 
dogmas of the Peripatetics. He does not, however, refer 
to experiment in a very direct manner ; indeed most of 
the £ftcts on which the elementary truths of mechanics 
rest, were known and admitted by the Aristotelians ; and 
therefore could not be adduced as novelties. On the con- 
trary, he begins with d priori maxims, which experience 
would not have confirmed. " Since," he saysf, " we have 
undertaken the task of proving that Aristotle is wrong in 
his opinions concerning motion, there are certain absolute 
truths, the objects of the intellect known of themselves, 
which we must lay down in the first place.'* And. then, 
as an example of these truths, he states this : *' Any two 
bodies of equal size and figure, but of different materials, 
will have their natural velocities in the same proportion 
as their weights;** where by their natural velocities, he 
means the velocities with which they naturally fall down- 
wards. 

GWJerfc— The greatest of these practical reformers 
of, science is our countryman, William Gilbert; if, 
? Speeuie^ionnm Liber, p. 196. t P. 109. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTICAL UEPORMEBS OF SCIENCE. 37& 

indeed, in virtue of the clear views of the prospects 
which were then opening to science, and of the methods 
by which her ftiture progress was to be secured, while 
he exemplified those views by physical discoveries, he 
do not rather deserve the still higher praise of being 
at the same time a theoretical and a practical reformed. 
Gilbert's physical researches and speculations were em- 
ployed principally upon subjects on which the ancients 
had known little or nothing ; and on which therefore it 
could not be doubtful whether tradition or observation 
was the source of knowledge. Such was magnetism ; for 
the ancients were barely acquainted with the attractive 
property of the magnet. Its polarity, including repulsion 
as well as attraction, its direction towards the north, its 
limited variation from this direction, its declination from 
the horizontal position, were all modern discoveries. 
Gilbert's work* on the magnet and on the magnetism of 
the earth, appeared in 1600 ; and in this, he repeatedly 
maintains the superiority of experimental knowledge over 
the physical philosophy of the ancients. His preftice 
opens thus : ** Since in making discoveries and searching 
out the hidden causes of things, stronger reasons are 
obtained from trustworthy experiments and demonstrable 
arguments, than from probable conjectures and the dog- 
mas of those who philosophize in the usual manner," he 
has, he says, ** endeavoured to proceed from common 
magnetical experiments to the inward constitution of the 
earth.** As I have stated in the History of Magnetism f, 
Gilbert's work contains all the fundamental fa6ts of that 
science, so fully stated, that we have, at this day, little to 
add to them. He is not, however, by the advance which 

* QvLiKLUi GiLBBRTt, Colceiirienm, Medid Landinetuisy D$ Mag* 
tuie^ Magneikiiqm CarparUmty 0i de Magno MagnsU TeUure^ Pky$io- 
kgia Nova^ plurimis et Argumenik et ExperimmUis demomtrata. 

t Hut. Ind. Sci., iii. 45. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



^76 ItI!VISW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

he thus made, led to depreciate the ancients, but only to 
claim for himself the same liberty of philosophizing which 
they had enjoyed*. *^ To those ancient and first parents 
of philosophy, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Ptolemy, Hippo- 
crates, Galen, be all due honour; from them it was that 
the stream of wisdom has been deriyed down to posterity. 
But our age has discovered and brought to light many 
things which they, if they were yet aUve, would gladly 
embrace. Wherefore we also shall not hesitate to ex- 
pound, by probable hypotheses, those things which by 
long experience we have ascertained." 

In this work the author not only adopts the Copemican 
doctrine of the earth's motion, but speaksf of the con- 
trary supposition as utterly absurd, founding his argu- 
ment mainly on the vast velocities which such a suppo- 
sition requires us to ascribe to the celestial bodies. Dr. 
Gilbert was physician to Queen Elizabeth and to James 
the First, and died in 1603. Sometime after his death 
the executors of his brother published another work of 
his, De Mundo nostra Stcblunari PhilosopAia NovOy in which 
similar views are still more comprehensively presented. 
In this he says, " The two lords of philosophy, Aristotle 
and Galen, are held in worship like gods, and mle the 
schools; — the former by some destiny obtained a sway 
and influence among philosophers, like that of his pupil 
Alexander among the kings of the earth ; — Galen, with 
like success, holds his triumph among the physicians of 
Europe." This comparison of Aristotle to Alexander 
was also taken hold of by Bacon. Nor is Gilbert an 
unworthy precursor of Bacon in the view he gives'of the 
History of Science, which occupies the first three chap- 
ters of his Philosophy. He traces this history from •* the 
simplicity and ignorance of the ancients," through ** the 
fabrication of the fable of the four elements," to Aristotle 
? Pref. ¦»• De Ma^ete^ lib. vi. c. 3, 4 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACnCAL REFOKISRS OF SCIBKCE^ 377 

and Gralen. He mentions with due disapproval the host 
of commentators which succeeded^ the alchemists, the 
" shipwreck of science in the deluge of the Goths," and 
the revival of letters and genius in the time of " our 
grandfathers.'' " This later age,** he says, " has exploded 
the Barbarians, and restored the Greeks and Latins to 
their pristine grace and honour. It remains, that if they 
have written aught in error, this should be remedied by 
better and more productive processes {frugiferis institu- 
tis,) not to be contemned for their novelty ; (for nothing 
which is true is really new, but is perfect from eternity, 
though to weak man it may be unknown ;) and that thus 
Philosophy may bear her fruit.'' The reader of Bacon 
will not fail to recognize, in these references to " fruit- 
bearing" knowledge, a similarity of expression with the 
Novum Organon. 

Bacon does not appear to me to have done justice to 
his contemporary. He nowhere recognises in the labours 
of Gilbert a community of purpose and spirit with his 
own. On the other hand, he casts upon him a reflection 
which he by no means deserves. In the Advancement of 
Leaming'^^ he says, "Another error is, that men have 
used to infect their meditations, opinions, and doctrines, 
with some conceits which they have most admired, or 
some sciences to which they have most applied; and 
given all things else a tincture according to them, utterly 

untrue and nnproper So have the alchemists made a 

philosophy out of a few experiments of the furnace; 
and Gilbertus, our countryman, hath made a philosophy 
out of the observations of a loadstone," (in the Latin, 
philosophiam etiam e magnete elicuit.) And in the same 
manner he mentions him in the Novum Organonf^ as 
affording an example of an empirical kind of philosophy, 
which appears to those daily conversant with the experi- 
* Book i. '^ Book i. Aphorism 64. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



378 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

ments, probable, but to other persons incredible and 
empty. But instead of blaming Gilbert for disturbing 
and narrowing science by a too constant reference to 
roagnetical rules, we might rather censure Bacon, for not 
seeing how important in all natural philosophy are those 
laws of attraction and repulsion of which magnetical phe- 
nomena are the most obvious illustration. We may find 
ground for such a judgment in another passage in which 
Bacon speaks of Gilbert. In the Second Book* of the 
Novum Organony having classified motions, he gives, as 
one kind, what he calls, in his figurative language, motion 
for gain^ or motion of need^ by which a body shuns hete- 
rogeneous, and seeks cognate bodies. And he adds, 
" The Electrical operation, concerning which Gilbert and 
others since him have made up such a wonderful story, 
is nothing else than the appetite of a body, which, excited 
by friction, does not well tolerate the air, and prefers 
another tangible body if it be found near.*" Bacon's 
notion of an appetite in the body is certainly much less 
philosophical than Gilbert's, who speaks of light bodies 
as drawn towards amber by certain material radii f; and 
we might perhaps venture to say that Bacon here mani- 
fests a want of clear mechanical ideas. Bacon, too; 
showed his inferior aptitude for physical research in 
rejecting the Copemican doctrine which Gilbert adopted. 
In the Advancement of LeamingX^ suggesting a history of 
the opinions of philosophers, he says that he would have 
inserted in it even recent theories, as those of Paracelsus ; 
of Telesius, who restored the philosophy of Parmenides ; 
or Patricius, who resublimed the fumes of Platonism; 
or Gilbert, who brought back the dogmas of Philolaus. 
But Bacon quotes $ with pleasure Gilbert's ridicule of the 
Peripatetics' definition of heat. They had said, that heat 

* Vol. \x. 185. t DeMoffnete, p. 60. 

J Book iii. o. 4. § Nov. Org., book ii. Apb. 48. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACnOAL REFOmCGBS OF SCIENCE. 879 

is that whicfh separates heterogeneous and unites homoge- 
neous matter ; which, said Gilbert, is if any one were to 
define man as that which sows wheat and plants vines. 

Gtilileo, another of Gilbert's distinguished contem- 
poraries, had a higher opinion of him. He says*, "I 
extremely admire and envy this author. I think him 
worthy of the greatest praise for the many new and true 
observations which he has made, to the disgrace of so 
many vain and febling authors; who write, not from 
their own knowledge only, but repeat everything they 
hear from the foolish and vulgar, without attempting to 
satisfy themselves of the same by experience; perhaps 
that they may not diminish the size of their books.** 

Croliko. — Gtilileo was content with the active and 
successful practice of experimental inquiry ; and did not 
demand that such researches should be made expressly 
subservient to that wider and more ambitious philo- 
sophy, on which the author of the Novum Organon 
employed his powers. But still it now becomes our 
business to trace those portions of Galileo's views which 
have reference to the theory, as well as the practice 
of scientific investigation. On this subject, Galileo did 
not think more profoundly, perhaps, than several of his 
contemporaries; but in the liveliness of expression and 
illustration with which he recommended his opinions 
on such topics, he was unrivalled. Writing in the lan- 
guage of the people, in the attractive form of dialogue, 
with clearness, grace, and wit, he did far more than 
any of his predecessors had done to render the new 
methods, results, and prospects of science familiar to a 
wide circle of readers, first in Italy, and soon, all over 
Europe. The principal points inculcated by him were 
already becoming familiar to men of active and inquiring 
minds; such as,^— that knowledge was to be sought from 
? Drinkwater's Life of Galileo^ p. 18. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



880 REVIEW OF OPINIOKB ON KKOWLSDGE. 

observation, and not from books ; — that it was absurd to 
adhere to, and debate about, the physical tenets of Aris- 
totle and the rest of the ancients. On persons who Al- 
lowed this latter course, G^leo fixed the epithet of 
Paper Philosophers*; because^ as he wrote in a letter to 
Kepler, this sort of men fancied that philosophy wad to 
be studied like the JSneid or Odyuee, and that the true 
reading of nature was to be detected by the coliati<HV of 
texts. Nothing so much shook the authority of the 
received system of Physics as the experimental discove- 
ries, directly contradicting it, ^diich Galileo made. By 
experiment, as I have elsewhere statedf, he disproved 
the Aristotelian doctrine that bodies fsM quickly or 
slowly in proportion to their weight. And when he had 
invented the telescope, a number of new discoveries of 
the most striking kind (the inequalities of the moon's 
surface, the spots in] the sun, the moon-like phases of 
Venus, the satellites of Jupiter, the ring of Saturn) 
showed, by the evidence of the eyes, how inadequate were 
the conceptions, and how erroneous the doctrines, of the 
ancients respecting the constitution of the xmiverse. 
How severe the blow was to the disciples of the aacient 
schools, we may judge by the extraordinary forms of 
defence in which they tried to intrench themselves. They 
would not look through Galileo's glasses; they main- 
tained that what was seen veas an illusion of witchcraft ; 
and they tried, as Galileo sayst» with logical arguments, 
as if with magical incantations, to charm the new planets 
out of the sky. No one could be better fitted than 
Galileo for such a warfigure. His great knowledge, clear 
intellect, gaiety, and light irony, (with the advantage of 
being in the right,) enabled him to play vrith his adver- 
saries as he pleased. Thus when an Aristotelian j 

? Life of Galileo^ p. 9. + HiH. Ind. Set., ii. 46. 

t Life of Oalileoj p. 29. § /J., p. 33. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PBACRCAL B£F(»KMdBS OP SCIENCE. 381 

rejected the disooyery of the irregularities in the moon's 
surftuse, because, according to the ancient doctrine, her 
form was a perfect sphere, and held that the apparent 
cavities were filled with an invisible crystal substance ; 
Galileo replied, that he I^ no olgection to assent to this, 
but that then he diould require his adversary in return 
to believe that there were on the same surfitce invisible 
erystal mountains ten times as high as those visible ones 
which he had actually observed and measured. 

We find in Galileo many thoughts which have since 
become established maxims of modem philosophy. 
^' Philosophy,'' he says*, ** is written in that great book, 
I mean the Universe, which is constantly open before our 
eyes ; but it cannot be understood, except we first know 
the language and learn the characters in which it is 
written." With this thought he combines some other 
lively images. One of his interlocutors says concerning 
ai^ol^er, '^ Sarsi perhaps thinks that philosophy is a book 
made up of the fiuicies of men, like the liiad or Orlando 
FuriasOf in which the matter of least importance is, that 
what is written be true." And again, with regard to the 
system of authority, he says, ^* I think I discover in him 
a firm belief that, in philosophizing, it is necessary to 
lean upon the opinion of some celebrated author ; as if 
our mind must necessarily remain unfruitful and barren 
till it be married to anoUier man's reason." — " No," he 
says, ** the case is not so. — ^When we have the decrees of 
Nature, authority goes for nothing ; reason is absolutef." 

In the course of Galileo^s controversies, questions of 
the l<>gio of science came under discussion. Vincenzio 
di Grasia objected to a proof from induction iVhich 
Galileo adduced, because aU the particulars were not 
enumerated ; to which the latter justly replies^ that if 
induction were required to pass through all the cases, it 

* IlSa^iore^ ii 24?. t Ib.j iL 200. t Ib.^ i. 501. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



382 RjBVI£W OF OPINIONS ON ENOWLED0E. 

would be either ufleless or impossible;*— impossible when 
the cases are innumerable; useless when they have each 
already been verified, since then the general proposition 
adds nothing to our knowledge. 

One of the most novel of the characters which Science 
assumes in Galileo's hands is, that she becomes caiitious. 
She not only proceeds leaning upon Experience, but die 
is content to proceed a little way at a time. She already 
begins to perceive that she must rise to the heights of 
knowledge by many small and separate steps. The phi- 
losopher is desirous to know much, but resigned to be 
Ignorant for a time of that which cannot yet be known. 
Thus when Galileo discovered the true law of the motion 
of a falling body*, that the velocity increases proportion- 
ally to the time from the beginning of the fall, he did not 
insist upon immediately assigning the cause of this law. 
*^ The cause of the acceleration of the motions of fidling 
bodies is not," he says, *' a necessary part of the investi- 
gation." Yet the conception of this acceleration, as the 
result of the continued action of the force of gravity upon 
the falling body, could hardly fail to suggest itself to one 
who had formed the idea of force. In like manner, the 
truth that the velocities, acquired by bodies Calling down 
planes of equal heights, are all equal, was known to 
Galileo and his disciples, long before he accounted for 
itf, by the principle, apparently so obvious, that the 
momentum generated is as the moving force which 
generates it. He was not tempted to rush at once, from 
an experimental truth to a universal system. Science 
had learnt that she must move step by step ; and the 
gravity of her pace already indicated her approaching 
maturity and her consciousness of the long path which 
lay before her. 

But besides the genuine philosophical prudence which 

• HUt. Ind. Set., ii. 20, t lb., n. 49. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTICAL BEFOBMEBS OF SCIENCE. 388 

thus witheld Gralileo from leaping hastily from one infer- 
ence to another^ he had perhaps a preponderating incli- 
nation towards facts ; and did not feel, so much as some 
other persons of his time, the need of reducing them to 
ideas. He could bear to contemplate laws of motion 
without being urged by an uncontrollable desire to refer 
them to conceptions of force. 

Kepler.— In this respect his friend Kepler differed 
from him ; for Kepler was restless and unsatisfied till he 
had reduced facts to laws, and laws to causes ; and never 
acquiesced in ignorance, though he tested with the most 
rigorous scrutiny that which presented itself in the shape 
of knowledge to fill the void. It may be seen in the 
History of Astronomy* with what perseverance, energy, 
and fertility of invention, Kepler pursued his labours, 
(enlivened and relieved by the most curious freaks of 
fancy,) with a view of discovering the rules which regulate 
the motions of the planet Mars. He represents this 
emplojrment under the image of a war&re ; and describesf 
his object to be ^ to triumph ovot Mars, and to prepare 
for him, as for one altogether vanquished, tabular prisons 
and equated eccentric fetters ;" and when ^^ the enemy, 
left at home a despised captive, had burst all the chains 
of the equations, and broken forth of the prisons of the 
tables ;"«— when ^' it was buxzed here and there that the 
victory is vain, and that the war is raging anew as vio* 
lently as before ;"•— that is, when the rules which he had 
proposed did not coincide with the facts ; — ^he by no means 
desisted ftom his attempts, but '^ suddenly sent into the 
field a reserve of new physical reasonings on the rout 
and dispersion of the veterans," that is, tried new suppo- 
sitions suggested by such views as he then entertained of 
the celestial motions. His efforts to obtain the formal 

• Hiit. Ind. Sei., i., 426. 
t De Stell. Mart.9 p. iv. c. 51. (1609.) DaiNKWATEa'a Kepler^^. 33. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



384 BEVIEW OF OPINIONS OK KNOWLEDGE. 

laws of the planetary motioDS resulted in some of tke 
most important discoveries ever made in astronomy ; and 
if bis physical reasonings were for the time fruiUeflB> this 
arose only from the want of that discipline in mechanical 
ideas which the minds of mathematicians had still to 
undergo; for the great discoveries of Newton in the 
next generation showed that, in reality, the next step of 
the advance was in this direction. Among all Kepler's 
fantastical expressions, the fundamental thoughts were 
sound and true ; namely, that it was his business, as a 
physical investigator, to discover a mathematical rule 
which governed and included all the special facts ; and 
that the rules of the motions of the planets must conform 
to some conception of causation. 

The same characteristics, — the conviction of rule and 
cause, perseverance in seeking these, inventiveness in 
devising hypotheses, love of truth in trying and rejecting 
them, and a lively Fancy playing with the Reason without 
interrupting her, — appear also in his work on Optics; in 
which he tried to discover the exact law of optical refrac* 
tion*. In this undertaking he did not succeed entirely ; 
nor does he profess to have done so. He ends his nume- 
rous attempts by saying, " Now, reader, you and I have 
been detained sufficiently long while I have been attempt- 
ing to collect into one fagot the measures of different 
reifractions.** 

In this and in other expressions, we see how clearly 
he apprehended that ccUigation of facts which is the main 
business of the practical discoverer. And by his peculiar 
endowments and habits, Kepler exhibits an essential por- 
tion of this process, which hardly appears at all in Galileo. 
In order to bind together facts, theory is requisite as well 
as observation, — the cord as well as the fitgots. And the 
true theory is often, if not always, obtained by trying 
• Published 1604. HUu Ind. Sci., ii. 346. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 385 

several and selecting the right. Now of this portion of 
the discoverer's exertions Kepler is a most conspicuous 
example. His fertility in devising suppositions, his 
undaunted industry in calculating the results of them, 
his entire hcAiesty and candour in resigning them if these 
results disagreed with the facts, are a very instructive 
spectacle; and are fortunately exhibited to us in the 
most lively manner in his own garrulous narratives. 
Galileo urged men by precept as well as example to begin 
their philosophy from observation ; Kepler taught them 
by his practice that they must proceed from observation 
by means of hypotheses. The one insisted upon facts; 
the other dealt no less copiously with ideas. In the prac- 
tical, as in the speculative portion of our history, this 
antithesis shows itself; although in the practical part we 
cannot have the two elements separated, as in the specu- 
lative we sometimes have. 

In the History of Science*, I have devoted several 
pages to the intellectual character of Kepler, inasmuch 
as his habit of devising so great a multitude of hypotheses, 
so fancifully expressed, had led some writers to look upon 
him as an inquirer who transgressed the most fixed rules 
of philosophical inquiry. This opinion has arisen, I 
conceive, among those who have forgotten the necessity 
of Ideas as well as Facts for all theory; or who have 
overlooked the impossibility of selecting and explicating 
our ideas without a good deal of spontaneous play of the 
nund. It must, however, always be recollected that 
Kepler^s genius and fancy derived all their scientific value 
from his genuine and unmingled love of truth. These 
qualities appeared, not only in the judgment he passed 
upon hypotheses, but also in matters which more imme- 
diately concerned his reputation. Thus when Galileo's 
discovery of the telescope disproved several opinions 

? Hut. hid. Sci.y i. 410. 
VOL. II. 2 C 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



586 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE- 

which Kepler had published and strenuously maintained, 
he did not hesitate a moment to retract his assertions 
and range himself by the side of Galileo, whom he vigo- 
rously supported in his warfare against those who were 
incapable of thus cheerfully acknowledging'the triumph 
of new facts over their old theories. 

Tycho. — There remains one eminent astronomer, 
the friend and fellow-labourer of Kepler, whom we must 
not separate from him as one of the practical reformers 
of science, I speak of Tycho Brahe, who is, I think, not 
justly appreciated by the literary world in general, in 
consequence of his having made a retrograde step in that 
portion of astronomical theory which is most familiar to 
the popular mind. Though he adopted the Copemican 
view of the motion of the planets about the sun, he 
refused to acknowledge the annual and diurnal motion of 
the earth. But notwithstanding this mistake, into which 
he was led by his interpretation of Scripture rather than 
of nature, Tycho must ever be one of the greatest names 
in astronomy. In the philosophy of science also, the 
influence of what he did is far from inconsiderable ; and 
especially its value in bringing into notice these two 
points :-^that not oioly are observations the beginning of 
science, but that the progress of science may often depend 
upon the observer's pursuing his task regularly and care- 
fully for a long time, and with well devised instruments ; 
and again, that observed facts offer a succession of laws 
which we discover as our observations become better, and as 
our theories are "better adapted to the observations. With 
regard to the former point, Tycho's observatory was tkr 
superior to all that had preceded it*, not only in the 
optical, but in the mechanical arrangements ; a matter of 
almost equal consequence. And hence it was that his 
observations inspired in Kepler that confidence which led 
• HUt. Ind. Sci., ii. 266. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PBACnCAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE. 887 

him to all his labours and all his discoveries. ^^ Since/' 
he says*, ** the divine goodness has given us in Tycho 
Brahe an exact observer, from whose observations this 
^rror of eight minutes in the calculations of the Ptole- 
maic hypothesis is detected, let us acknowledge and make 
use of this gift of God : and since this error cannot be 
neglected, these eight minutes alone have prepared the 
way for an entire reform of Astronomy, and are to be the 
main subject of this work." 

With regard to Tycho's discoveries respecting the 
moon, it is to be recollected that besides the first inequa- 
lity of the moon's motion, (the equation of the ventre^ 
arising from the elliptical form of her orbit,) Ptolemy 
had discovered a second inequality, the evection, which, 
as we have observed in the History of this subjectf, 
might have naturally suggested the suspicion that there 
were still other inequalities. In the middle ages, how- 
ever, such suggestions, implying a constant progress in 
science, were little attended to ; and, we have seen, that 
when an Arabian astronomer;}; had really discovered 
another inequality of the moon, it was soon forgotten, 
because it had no place in the established systems. Tycho 
not only rediscovered the lunar inequality, (the variation^) 
thus once before won and lost, but also two other in- 
equalities; namely $, ihQchange of inclination oi the mooii\ 
orbit as the line of nodes moves round, and an inequality 
in the motion of the line of nodes. Thus, as I have else- 
where said, it appeared that the discovery of a rule is a 
step to the discovery of deviations from that rule, which 
require to be expressed in other rules. It became mani- 
fest to astronomers, and through them to all philosophers, 
that in the fq)plication of ^^theory to observation, we find, 
not only the stated phenomena, for which the theory does 

• De Stdl Mart.y p. 11, c. 19. t Hi$t. Ind. Set., i. 21?. 

X Ih.y i. 228. § MoNTUCLA, i. b^. 

2 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



388 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

account, but also residtsal phenomena^ which are unac- 
counted for, and remain over and above the calculation* 
And it was seen further, that these residual phenomena 
might be, altogether or. in part, exhausted by new theories. 
These were valuable lessons ; and the more valuable 
inasmuch as men were now trying to lay down maxims 
and methods for the conduct of science. A revolution 
was not only at hand, but had really taken place, in the 
great body of real cultivators of science. The occasion 
now required that this revolution should be formally 
recognized ; — that the new intellectual power should be 
clothed with the forms of government ; — that the new 
philosophical republic should be acknowledged as a sister 
state by the ancient dynasties of Aristotle and Plato. 
There was needed some great Theoretical Reformer, to 
speak in the name of the Experimental Philosophy ; to 
lay before the world a declaration of its rights and a 
scheme of its laws. And thus our eyes are turned to 
Francis Bacon, and others who like him attempted this 
great office. We quit those august and venerable names 
of discoverers, whose appearance was the prelude and 
announcement of the new state of things then opening ; 
and in doing so, we may apply to them the language 
which Bacon applies to himself*: — 

Hail Heralds, Messengers of Gods and Men I 



Chapter XI. 
FRANCIS BACON. 



1. It is a matter of some difficulty to speak of the 
character and merits of this illustrious man, as regards 
his place in that philosophical history with which we are 
? De Au^m.y lib. iv. c. 1. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 389 

here engaged. If we were to content ourselves with 
estimating him according to the oflSce which, as we have 
just seen, he claims for himself*, as merely the harbinger 
and announcer of a sounder method of scientific inquiry 
than that which was recognized before him, the task 
would be comparatively easy. For we might select from 
his writings those passages in which he has delivered 
opinions and pointed out processes, then novel and 
strange, but since confirmed by the experience of actual 
discoverers, and by the judgments of the wisest of suc- 
ceeding philosophers; and we might pass by, without 
disrespect, but without notice, maxims and proposals which 
have not been found available for use ; — views so indistinct 
and vague, that we are even yet unable to pronounce 
upon their justice ; — and boundless anticipations, dictated 
by the sanguine hopes of a noble and comprehensive 
intellect. But if we thus reduce the philosophy of Bacon 
to that portion which the subsequent progress of science 
has rigorously verified, we shall have to pass over many 
of those declarations which have excited most notice in 
his writings, and shall lose sight of many of those striking 
thoughts which his admirers most love to dwell upon. 
For he is usually spoken of, at least in this country, as a 
teacher who not only commenced, but in a great measure 
completed, the Philosophy of Induction. He is con- 
sidered, not only as having asserted some general prin- 
ciples, but laid down the special rules of scientific investi- 
gation ; as not only one of the Founders, but the supreme 
Legislator of the modern Republic of Science ; not only 
the Hercules who slew the monsters that obstructed the 
earlier traveller, but the Solon who established a consti- 
tution fitted for all fiature time. 

2. Nor is it our purpose to deny that of such praise 

* And in other passages : fchus, '*Ego enim buccinator tantum pugnam 
non ineo." Nov. Org. lib. iv. c. 1 . 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



390 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

he deserves a share which, considering the period at which 
he lived, is truly astonishing. But it is necessary for us 
in this place to discriminate and select that portion of his 
system which, bearing upon physical science, has since 
been confirmed by the actual history of science. Many 
of Bacon's most impressive and captivating passages con- 
template the extension of the new methods of discovering 
truth to intellectual, to moral, to political, as well as to 
physical science. And how far, and how, the advantages 
of the inductive method may be secured for those im- 
portant branches of speculation, it will at some future 
time be a highly interesting task to examine. But our 
plan requires us at present to omit the consideration of 
these ; for our purpose is to learn what the genuine 
course of the formation of science is, by tracing it iu 
those portions of human knowledge, which, by the con- 
fession of all, are most exact, most certain, most complete. 
Hence we must here deny ourselves the dignity and inte- 
rest which float about all speculations in which the great 
moral and political concerns of men are involved. It 
cannot be doubted that the commanding position which 
Bacon occupies in men's estimation arises from his pro- 
claiming a reform in philosophy of so comprehensive a 
nature ; — a reform which was to infuse a new spirit into 
every part of knowledge. Physical Science has tranquilly 
and noiselessly adopted many of his suggestions ; which 
were, indeed, her own natural impulses, not borrowed from 
him ; and she is too deeply and satisfactorily absorbed in 
contemplating her results, to talk much about the methods 
of obtaining tliem which she has thus instinctively pur- 
sued. But the philosophy which deals with mind, with 
manners, with morals, with polity, is conscious still of 
much obscurity and perplexity; and would gladly borrow 
aid from a system in which aid is so confidently promised. 
The aphorisms and phrases of the Novum Organon are 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 391 

fer more frequently quoted by metaphysical, ethical, and 
even theological writers, than they are by the authors of 
works on physics. 

3. Again, even as regards physics. Bacon's fame rests 
upon something besides the novelty of the maxims which 
he promulgated. That a revolution in the method of 
scientific research was going on, all the greatest physical 
investigators of the sixteenth century were fully aware, 
as we have shown in the last chapter. But their writings 
conveyed this conviction to the public at large somewhat 
slowly. Men of letters, men of the world, men of rank, 
did not become familiar with the abstruse works in 
which these views were published ; and above all, they 
did not, by such occasional glimpses as they took of the 
State of physical science, become aware of the magnitude 
and consequences of this change. But Bacon's lofty 
eloquence, wide learning, comprehensive views, bold pic- 
tures of the coming state of things, were fitted to make 
men turn a far more general and earnest gaze upon the 
passing change. When a man of his acquirements, of 
his talents, of his rank and position, of his gravity and 
caution, poured forth the strongest and loftiest expres- 
sions and images which his mind could supply, in order 
to depict the "Great Instauration" which he announced; 
—in order to contrast the weakness, the blindness, the 
ignorance, the wretchedness, under which men had la- 
boured while they followed the long beaten track, with 
the light, the power, the privileges, which they were to 
find in the paths to which he pointed ; — it was impossible 
that readers of all classes should not have their attention 
arrested, their minds stirred, their hopes warmed ; and 
should not listen with wonder and with pleasure to the 
strains of prophetic eloquence in which so great a subject 
was presented. And when it was found that the prophecy 
was verified ; when it appeared that an immense change 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



392 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

in the methods of scientific research really had occurred ; 
— that vast additions to man's knowledge and power had 
been acquired, in modes like those which had been spoken 
of; — ^that further advances might be constantly looked 
for ; — and that a progress, seemingly boundless, was going 
on in the direction in which the seer had thus pointed ; 
— it was natural that men should hail him as the leader 
of the revolution ; that they should identify him with the 
event which he was the first to announce ; that they i^uld 
look upon him as the author of that which he had, as they 
perceived, so soon and so thoroughly comprehended. 

4. For we must remark, that although (as we have 
seen) he was not the only, nor the earliest writer, who 
declared that the time was come for such a change, he 
not only proclaimed it more emphatically, but understood 
it, in its general character, much more exactly, than aujF 
of his contemporaries. Among the maxims, suggestions 
and anticipations which he threw out, there were many 
of which the wisdom and the novelty were alike striking 
to his immediate successors ; — ^there are many which 
even now, from time to time, we find fresh reason to . 
admire, for their acuteness and justice. Bacon stands 
far above the herd of loose and visionary speculators who, 
before and about his time, spoke of the establishment of 
new philosophies. If we must select some one philoso- 
pher as the Hero of the revolution in scientific method, 
beyond all doubt Francis Bacon must occupy the place 
of honour. 

We shall, however, no longer dwell upon these general' 
considerations, but shall proceed to notice some of the 
more peculiar and characteristic features of Bacon's phi-, 
losophy; and especially those views, which, occurring for 
the first time in his writings, have been fully illustrated 
and confirmed by the subsequent progress of science, and 
have become a portion of the }>ermanent philosophy of 
our times. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FBANCiffi BACON. 363 

6. (I.) The first great feature which strikes us in 
Bacon's philosophical views is that which we have already 
noticed ; — ^his confident and emphatic announcement of 
a Neu) Era in the progress of science, compared with 
which the advances of former times were poor and 
trifling. This was with Bacon no loose and shallow 
opinion, taken up on light grounds and involving only 
vague general notions. He had satisfied himself of the 
justice of such a view by a laborious course of research 
and reflection. In 1606, at the age of twenty-eight, he 
published his Treatise of the Advancement of Learning^ in 
which he takes a comprehensive and i^irited survey of 
the condition of all branches of knowledge which had 
been cultivated up to that time. This work was com- 
posed with a view to that reform of the existing philo- 
sophy which Bacon always had before his eyes ; and in 
the Latin edition of his works, forms the First Part of 
the Instauratio Magna. In the Second Part of the 
Instauratio, the Novum Organon^ published in 1620, he 
more explicitly and confidently states his expectations on 
this subject. He points out how slightly and feebly the 
examination of nature had been pursued up to his time, 
and with what scanty fruit. He notes the indications of 
this in the very limited knowledge of the Greeks who 
had till then been the teachers of Europe, in the com- 
plaints of authors concerning the subtility and obscurity 
of the secrets of nature, in the dissensions of sects, in the 
absence of useful inventions resulting from theory, in the 
fixed form which the sciences had retained for two thou- 
sand years. Nor, he adds*, is this wonderful ; for how 
little of his thought and labour has man bestowed upon 
science ! Out of twenty-five centuries scarce six have 
been favourable to the progi-ess of knowledge. And even 
in those favoured times, natural philosophy received the 

* Lib. i. Aphor. 78 et seq. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



394 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

smallest share of man's attention ; while the portion so 
given was marred by controversy and dogmatism; and even 
those who have bestowed a little thought upon this philo- 
sophy, have never made it their main study, but have used 
it as a passage or drawbridge to serve other objects. And 
thus, he says, the great Mother of the Sciences is thrust 
down with indignity to the offices of a handmaid; is 
made to minister to the labours of medicine or mathema- 
tics, or to give the first preparatory tinge to the immature 
minds of youth. From these and similar considerations 
of the errors of past time, he draws hope for the future, 
employing the same argument which Demosthenes uses 
to the Athenians. " That which is worst in the events 
of the past, is the best as a ground of trust in the future. 
For if you had done all that became you, and still had 
been in this condition, your case might be desperate ; but 
since your failure is the result of your own mistakes, 
there is good hope that, correcting the error of your 
course, you may reach a prosperity yet unknown to 
you.'' 

6. (II.) All Bacon's hope of improvement in.deed was 
placed in an entire change of the Method by which science 
was pursued ; and the boldness, and at the same time, 
(the then existing state of science being considered) the 
definiteness of his views of the change that was requisite 
are truly remarkable. 

That all knowledge must begin with observation, is 
one great principle of Bacon's philosophy ; but I hardly 
think it necessary to notice the inculcation of this maxim 
as one of his main services to the cause of sound know* 
ledge, since it had, as we have seen, been fully insisted 
upon by others before him, and was growing rapidly into 
general acceptance without his aid. But if he was not 
the first to tell men that they must collect their know- 
ledge from observation, he had no rival in his peculiar 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 305 

office of teaching them how science must thus be gathered 
from experience. 

It appears to me that by &r the most extraordinary 
parts of Bacon's works are those in which, with extreme 
earnestness and clearness, he insists upon a graduated and 
successive induction^ as opposed to a hasty transit from 
special facts to the highest generalizations. The nine^ 
teenth Axiom of the First Book of the Novum Organon 
contains a view of the nature of true science most exact 
and profound ; and, so &r as I am aware, at the time 
perfectly new. " There are two ways, and can only be 
two, of seeking and finding truth. The one, fr*om sense 
and particulars, takes a flight to the most general axioms, 
and from those principles and their truth, settled once for 
all, invents and judges of intermediate axioms. The 
other method collects axioms from sense and particulars, 
ascending continuouslt/ and by degrees^ so that in the end 
it arrives at the most general axioms ; this latter way is 
the true one, but hitherto untried." 

It is to be remarked, that in this passage Bacon em- 
ploys the term ojrioms to express any propositions collected 
from facts by induction, and thus fitted to become the 
starting-point of deductive reasonings. How far propo- 
sitions so obtained may approach to the character of 
axioms in the more rigorous sense of the term, we have 
already in some measure examined ; but that question does 
not here immediately concern us. The truly remarkable 
circumstance is to find this recommendation of a con- 
tinuous advance from observation, by limited steps, through 
successive gradations of generality, given at a time when 
speculative men in general had only just begun to perceive 
that they must begin their course from experience in 
some way or other. How exactly this description repre- 
sents the general structure of the soundest and most 
comprehensive physical theories, all persons who have 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



390 KEVIEW OF OPINIONB ON KNOWLEDGE. 

studied the progress of science up to modern times can 
bear testimony; but perhaps this structure of science 
cannot in any other way be made so apparent as by those 
Tables of successive generalizations in which we have exhi- 
bited the history and constitution of some of the principal 
physical sciences, in the Chapter of the preceding Book 
which treats of the Logic of Induction. And the view 
which -Bacon thus took of the true progress of science 
was not only new, but, so far as I am aware, has never 
been adequately illustrated up to the present day. 

7. It is true, as I observed in the last Chapter, that 
Galileo had been led to see the necessity, not only of 
proceeding from experience in the pursuit of knowledge, 
but of proceeding cautiously and gradually ; and he had 
exemplified this rule more than once, when, having made 
one step in discovery, he held back his foot, for a time, 
from the next step, however tempting. But Galileo had 
not reached this wide and commanding view of the suc- 
cessive subordination of many steps, all leading up at 
last to some wide and simple general truth. In catching 
sight of this principle, and in ascribing to it its due 
importance, Bacon's sagacity, so far as I am aware, wrought 
unassisted and unrivalled. 

8. Nor is there any wavering or vagueness in Bacon's 
assertion of this important truth. He repeats it over and 
over again ; illustrates it by a great number of the most 
lively metaphors and emphatic expressions. Thus he 
speaks of the successive flow^s {tabtdata) of induction; 
and speaks of each science as a pyramid''^ which has obser- 
vation and experience for its basis. No images can better 

* Aug, Sc.y lib. iii. c. 4. p. 194. So in other places, os Nov. Org,., 
i. Aphorism 104. ** De scientiis tiim demum bene sperandum est quan- 
do por scalaui vcram et per gradiis continuos, et non intennissos aut 
biulcos a parti ciil an bus ascendctur ad axiomata minora, et deinde ad 
media, alia aliis snpcriora, et postremo demum ad generalissima." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 897 

exhibit the relation of general and particular truths, as 
our own Inductive Tables may serve to show. 

9. (IIIO Again ; not less remarkable is his contrasting 
this true Method of Science (while it was almost, as he 
says, yet untried) with the ancient and vicious Metlhod, 
which began, indeed, with facts of observation, but rushed 
at once, and with no gradations, to the most general 
principles. For this was the course which had been 
actually followed by all those speculative reformers who 
had talked so loudly of the necessity of beginning our 
philosophy from experience. All these men, if they 
attempted to frame physical doctrines at all, had caught 
up a few facts of observation, and had erected a universal 
theory upon the suggestions which these oflTered. This 
process of illicit generalization, or, as Bacon terms it, 
Anticipation of Nature {anticipatio naturce), in opposition 
to the Interpretation of Nature, he depicts with singular 
acuteness, in its character and causes. " These two ways," 
he says f, "both begin from sense and particulars; but 
their discrepancy is immense. The one merely skims 
over experience and particulars in a cursory transit ; the 
other deals with them in a due and orderly manner. The 
one, at its very outset, frames certain general abstract 
principles, but useless ; the other gradually rises to those 
principles which have a real existence in nature." 

"The former path," he addst, "that of illicit and 
hasty generalization, is one which the intellect follows 
when abandoned to its own impulse; and this it does 
from the requisitions of logic. For the mind has a yearn- 
ing which makes it dart forth to generalities, that it may 
have something to rest in ; and after a little dallying with 
experience, becomes weary of it ; and all these evils are 
augmented by logic, which requires these generalities to 
make a show vnth in its disputations." 

t Nov. Orff,, i. Aph, 22. lb., Aph. 20. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



398 REVIEW OE OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

" In a sober, patient, grave intellect,'* lie further adds, 
" the mind, by its own impulse, (and more especially if 
it be not impeded by the sway of established opinions) 
attempts in some measure that other and toue way, of 
gradual generalization ; but this it does with small profit; 
for the intellect, except it be regulated and aided, is a 
faculty of unequal operation, and altogether unapt to 
master the obscurity of things." 

The profound and searching wisdom of these remarks 
appears more and more, as we apply them to the various 
attempts which men have made to obtain knowledge; when 
they begin with the contemplation of a few facts, and pur- 
sue their speculations, as upon most subjects they have 
hitherto generally done ; for almost all such attempts have 
led immediately to some process of illicit generalization, 
which introduces an interminable course of controversy. In 
the physical sciences, however, we have the further ines- 
timable advantage of seeing the other side of the contrast 
exemplified : for many of them, as our Inductive Tables 
show us, have gone on according to the most rigorous 
conditions of gradual and successive generalization ; and 
in consequence of this circumstance in their constitution, 
possess, in each part of their structure, a solid truth, 
which is always ready to stand the severest tests of rea- 
soning and experiment. 

We see how justly and clearly Bacon judged con- 
cerning the mode in which facts are to be employed in 
the construction of science. This, indeed, has ever been 
deemed his great merit: insomuch that many persons ap- 
pear to apprehend the main substance of his doctrine to 
reside in the maxim that facts of observation, and such 
facts alone, are the essential elements of all true science. 

10. (IV.) Yet we have endeavoured to establish the 
doctrine that facts are but one of two ingredients of 
knowledge both equaUy necessary ;— that Ideas are no 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 399 

less indispensable than fiacts themselves ; and that except 
these be duly unfolded and applied, facts are collected in 
vain. Has Bacon then neglected this great portion of 
his subject ? Has he been led by some partiality of view, 
or some peculiarity of circumstances, to leave this curious 
and essential element of science in its pristine obscurity? 
Was he unaware of its interest and importance? 

We may reply that Bacon's philosophy, in its effect 
upon his readers in general, does not give due weight or 
due attention to the ideal element of our knowledge. 
He is considered as peculiarly and eminently the asserter 
of the value of experiment and observation. He is always 
understood to belong to the experiential, as opposed to 
the ideal school. He is held up in contrast to Plato and 
others who love to dwell upon that part of knowledge 
which has its origin in the intellect of man. 

11. Nor can it be denied that Bacon has, in the 
finished part of his Novum Organum, put prominently 
forwards the necessary dependence of all our knowledge 
upon Experience, and said little of its dependence, equally 
necessary, upon the Conceptions which the intellect itself 
supplies. It will appear, however, on a close examination, 
that he was by no means insensible or careless of this 
internal element of all connected speculation. He held 
the balance, with no partial or feeble hand, between 
phenomena and ideas. He urged the Colligation of 
Facts, but he was not the less aware of the value of the 
Explication of Conceptions. 

12. This appears plainly from some remarkable Apho- 
risms in the Novum Organum. Thus, in noticing the 
causes of the little progress then made by science, he 
states this: — "In the current Notions, all is unsound, 
whether they be logical or physical. Substance^ quality^ 
action^ passion^ even beings are not good Conceptions ; still 
less are heavj/y lights dense, rare, moist, dry, generatior^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



4^0 REVIEW OF OPINIOJfS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

cwruption, attraction^ repuUion, element, mdtier, Jhrm^ an4 
others of that kind; all are fantastical and ill-deftned.*^ 
And in his attempt to exemplify his own sjrstem, he hesi- 
tates* in accepting or rejecting the notions of eleme$Jtmyy 
celestial, rar^ as belonging to fire» sinee^ as be says, thi^ 
are vague and ill-defined notions {notiones im^ nee bene 
terminata). In that part of his work which appears to 
be completed, there is not, so far as I have notieed, any 
attempt to fix and define any notions thus oomplaiaed of 
as loose and obscure. But yet such an undertaking ap« 
pears to have formed part of his plan ; and in the Abeee- 
darium Natur(e\9 which consists of the heads of various 
portions of his great scheme, marked by letters of the 
alphabet, we find the titles of a series of dissertations 
" On the Conditions of Beings," which must have had for 
their object the elucidation of divers Notions essential to 
science, and which would have been contributions to the 
Explication of Conceptions, such as we have attempted 
in a former part of this work. Thus some of the sdbrjects 
of these dissertations are ; — Of Much and Little ;--0f 
Durable and Transitory ; — Of Natural and Monstrous ; — • 
Of Natural and Artificial. When the philosopher of 
induction came to discuss these, considered as condiHom 
of eanstencej he could not do other than develop, limit, 
methodize and define the Ideas involved in these Notions, 
so as to make them consistent with themselvesi, and a fit 
basis of demonstrative reasoning. His task would have 
been of the same nature as ours has been, in that part of 
this work which treats of the Fundamental Ideas of the 
various classes of sciences. 

13. Thus Bacon, in his speculative philosophy, took 
firmly hold of both the handles of science; and if he had 
completed his scheme, would probably have given due 

* Nov, Org,^ Ifl). li. Apli. 19. 
t /«#<. Mag., par. iii. (vol. viiL p. 244) 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 401 

attention to Ideas, no less than to Facts, as an ielement 
of onr knowledge;, while in his view of the general 
method of asoending from &cts to principles, he displayed 
a sagacity truly wonderful. But wd cannot be surprised, 
that in attempting to exemplify the method which he 
recommended, he should have failed. For the method 
could be ez^nplified only by some important discovery 
in physical science ; and great discoveries, even with the 
most perfect methods, do not come at command. More- 
over although the general structure of his scheme was 
correct, the precise import of some of its details could 
hardly be understood, till the actual progress of science 
had made men somewhat familiar with the kind of steps 
which it included. 

14. (V.) Accordingly, Bacon's Inquisition into the 
Nature of Heat, which is given in the Second Book of 
the Novum Organon as an example of the mode of inter- 
rogating Nature, cannot be looked upon otherwise than 
as a complete failure. This will be evident if we con- 
sider that, although the exact nature of heat is still an 
obscure and controverted matter, the science of Heat 
now consists of many important truths ; and that to none 
of these truths is there any approximation in Bacon's 
essay. From his process he arrives at this, as the " forma 
or true definition** of heat; — "that it is an expansive, 
restrained motion, modified in certain ways, and exerted in 
the smaller particles of the body.** But the steps by which 
the science of Heat really advanced were, (as may be seen 
in the history* of the subject,) these; — ^The discovery 
of a measure of heat or temperature (the thermometer); 
The establishment of the laws of conduction and radia- 
tion ; of the hms of specific heat, latent heat, and the 
like. Such steps have led to Ampere's hypothesis f-, that 
heat consists in the vibrations of an imponderable fluid ; 

? Hiit. Ind. Sci.^ ii. 468. t lb., 529. 

VOL. II. 2 P 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



402 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

and to Laplace's ht/pothesi^^ that temperature consists in 
the internal radiation t>{ such a fluid. TTiese hypotheses 
eannot yet be said to be even probable ; but at least they 
are so modified as to indude some of the preceding laws 
which are firmly established ; Mliereas Bacon's hypo- 
thetical motion includes no laws of phehomena, es:plain9 
no process, and is indeed itself an example of illicit 
generalisation. 

15. One main ground of Bacon's ill fortune in this 
undertaking appears to be, that he was not aware of an 
Important maxim of inductive science, that we must first 
obtain the measure and aaffeertain the hws of phenomena, 
before we end^vour to discover their eenises. The whole 
history of thermotics up to the present time has been 
occupiied with the former step^ and the task is not yet 
completed : it is no Wonder, therefore, that Bacon fistiled 
entirely, when he so prematurely attempted the seconds 
His sagacity had taught him that the progress of science 
must be gradual ; but it had not led him to judge ade-> 
quately how gradual it must be, nor of what different 
kinds of inquiries, taken in due order, it must needs con- 
sist. In order to obtain success. . 

Another mistake, which could not fail to render it 
unlikely that BaoOn should really exemplify his precepts 
by iany actual advance in science, was, that he did not 
justly appreciate the sagacity, the invehtiye genius, which 
all discovery requires. He coned ved that he could 
supersede the necessity of such peculiar endowments. 
•* Our method of discovery in science,** he says*, ••is of 
such a nature, that there is not much left to acuteness 
and strength of genius, but all degrees of genius and 
intellect are brought nearly to the same level." And he 
illustrates this by comparing his method to a pair of 
compasses, by iheans of which a person with no manual 
skill may draw a perfect circle. In the same spirit he 
? Nov. Or^., Mh.i. Aph. 61. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FttAKCIS BAOOM. 408 

iqpeaks of proceeding by due rejeetUms; and qipears to 
imagine that when we have obtained a collection of facts, 
if we go on succeislTely rejecting what is ialse, we shall 
at last find that we have, left in pnr hands, that scientific 
thith which we seek. I need not observe how far this 
view is rmnoved from the real state of the case^ The 
necessity of a cmeepHon which mnst be furnished by the 
mind in order to bind together the foots, conld hardly 
have escaped die ejre of Bacon, if he had cultivated more 
carefully the ideal side of his own philosophy. And any 
attempts which he coidd have made to construct such 
conceptions by tiiere rule and imethod, must have ended 
in convincing him that nothing but a peculiar inventive 
talent could supply that which was thus not contained in 
tiie £EM^ts» and yet was needed for the discovery. 

16. (VL) Since Bacon, with all his acuteness, had 
not divined droumstances so important in the formation 
of science, it is not wonderful that his attempt to reduce 
this process to a Teehnicd Form is of little value. In 
tiie first place, he says^, we must prepare a natural and 
exp^mental history, good and snlBScient; in the next 
place, the instances thus collected are to be arranged in 
Tables in some orderly way; and then we must apply a 
legitimate and true induction. And in his examplef , he 
first c<^ects a great number of cases in which heat 
appears under various circumstances, which he calls '' a 
Must^ of Instances before the intellect,'' (comparentia 
iiutantiarum ad inteUectum^) or a TMe o^ the Presence of 
the thing sought. He then adds a Table of its Absence 
in proitimate cases, containing instances where heat does 
not appear; then a Table of Degrees^ in which it appears 
with greater or less intensity. He then addst, that we 
must try to exclude several obvious suppositions, which 

* N(y9. Org., Ub. ii. Aph. 10. t Aph. 11. 

X Apk. 15, p. 105. 

2 D 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



404 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

he does by reference to some of the instances he has col- 
lected ; and this step he calls the Escbmve^ or the RejectUm 
of Natures. He then observes, (and justly,) that whereas 
truth emerges more easily from error than from confusion, 
we may, after this preparation, give play to the intellect^ 
(fiat permissio intellectus,) and make an attempt at 
induction, liable afterwards to be corrected ; and by thir 
step, which he terms his First Vindemiation^ or Inchoate 
Induction^ he is led to th^ proposition concerning heat, 
which we have stated above. 

17. In all the details of his example he is unfortunate. 
By proposing to himself to examine at once into the 
nature of heat, instead of the laws of special classes of 
phenomena, he makes, as we have said, a fundamental 
mistake ; which is the less surprising since he had befora 
him so few examples of the right course in the. previous 
history of scienccf. But further, his collection of instances 
is very loosely brought together ; for he includes in his list 
the hot taste of aromatic plants, the caustic effects of acidg^ 
and many other facts which cannot be ascribed to heat 
without a studious laxity in the use of the word. And 
when he comes to that point where he permits his intellect 
its range, the conception of motion upon which it at once, 
fastens, appears to be selected with little choice or skill, 
the suggestion being taken from flame*, boiling liquids, f^ 
blo^vn fire, and some other cases. If from such examples: 
we could imagine heat to be motion, we ought at least 
to have some gradation to cases of heat where no motion 
is visible, as in a red-hot iron. It would seem that, after 
a large collection of instances had been looked at, the 
intellect, even in its first attempts, ought not to havQ 
dwelt upon such an hypothesis as this. 

18. After these steps. Bacon speaks of several classes 
of instances which, singling them out of the general and 

* Page 1 10. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 405 

indiscriminate collection of facts, he terms Instances with 
Prerogative ; and these he points out as peculiar aids and 
guides to the intellect in its task. These Instances with 
Prerogative have generally been much dwelt upon by 
those who have commented on the Novum Organdn. Yet, 
in reality, such a classification, as has been observed 
by one of the ablest writers of the present day*, is of 
little service in the task of induction. For the instances 
are, for the most part, classed, not according to the ideas 
which they involve, or to any obvious circumstance in the 
facts of which they consist, but according to the extent 
or manner of their influence upon the inquiry in which 
they are employed. Thus we have Solitary Instances, 
Migrating Instances, Ostensive Instances, Clandestine 
Instances, so termed according to the degree in which 
they exhibit, or seem to exhibit, the property whose 
nature we would examine. We have Guide-Post In- 
stances, {InstanticB Crucisy) Instances of the Parted Road, 
of the Doorway, of the Lamp, according to the guidance 
they supply to our advance. Such a classification is much 
of the same nature as if, having to teach the art of build- 
ing, we were to describe tools with reference to the 
amount and place of the work which they must do, 
instead of pointing out their construction and use : — as if 
we were to inform the pupil that we must have tools for 
lifting a stone up, tools for moving it sideways, tools for 
laying it square, tools for cementing it firmly. Such an 
enumeration of ends would. convey little instruction as 
to the means. Moreover, many of Bacon's classes of 
instances are vitiated by the assumption that the " form," 
that is, the general law and cause of the property which 
is the subject of investigation, is to be looked for directly 
in the instances ; which, as we have seen in his inquiry 
concerning heat, is a fundamental error. 

? Hbrschbl, On the Study of Nat. Phil., Art. 192. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



4d6 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE- 

10. Yet liis phraseology in some casds, as in the instant 
tia cnmSi serves well to mark the place which certain 
experiments hoW in our reasonings: and many of the 
special examples which he gives are full of acuteness and 
sagacity. Thus he suggests swinging a pendulum in a 
mine, in order to determine whether the attraction of the 
earth arises from the attraction of its parts ; and observing 
the tide at the same moment in different parts of the worH 
in order to ascertain whether the motion of the water 19 
expansive or progressive; with other ingenious proposals. 
These marks of genius may serve to counterbalance the 
unfavourable judgment of Bacon's aptitude for physical 
science which we are sometimes tempted to form, in con- 
sequence of his false views on other points ; as his rejec- 
tion of the Copemicau system, and his undervaluing 
Gilbert's magnetical speculations. Most of these errorp 
arose from a too ambitious habit of intellect, which 
would not be contented with any except very vrtde and 
general truths ; and from an indistinctness of mechanical, 
and perhaps, in general, of mathematical ideas :-*<-defects 
which Bacon's own philosophy was directed to remedy, 
and which, in the progress of time, it has remedied ia 
others. 

20. (VII.) Having thus freely given our judgment 
concerning the most exact and definite portion of Bacon's 
precepts, it cannot be necessary for us to discuss at any 
length the value of those more vague and general WarU' 
ings against prejudice and partiality, against intellectual 
indolence and presumption, with which his works abounds 
His advice and exhortations of this kind are always ex- 
pressed with energy and point, often clothed iq the hap^ 
piest fonns of imagery ; and hence it has come to pass^ 
that such passages are perhaps more familiar to the 
general reader th^in any other parts of his writings. Nor 
^re Bacon's counsels without their importancci when we 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 407 

hkre to do with those Subjects in which prejudice and 
partiality exerci^ their peculiar sway- Questions of 
politics and morals, of manners, taste, or history, cannot 
be subjected to a scheme of rigorous induction; and 
though on such matters we venture to assert general 
principles, these are commonly obtained with some degree 
of insecurity, and depend upon special habits of thought^ 
not upon mere logical connexion. Here, therefore, the 
intellect may be perverted, by mixing, with the pure 
reason, our gregarious affections, or our individual propen- 
sities ; the false suggestions involved in language, or the 
imposing delusions of received theories. In these dim 
and complex labyrinths of human thought, ffie Idol of the 
Tribcy or of the Den^ of the Forum^ or of the Theatre^ may 
occupy men's minds with delusive shapes, and may obscure 
or pervert their vision of truth. But in that Natural Phi^ 
losophy with which we are here concerned, there is littl^ 
opportunity for such influences. As far as a physical 
theory is completed through air the steps of a just induc*- 
tion, there is a clear daylight diffused over it which leaves 
no lurking-place for prejudice. Each part can be exa- 
mined separately and repeatedly ; and the theory is not 
to be deemed perfect till it will bear the scrutiny of all 
sound minds alike. Although, therefore. Bacon, by 
warning men against the idols or fallacious images above 
spoken of, may have guarded them from dangerous error, 
his precepts have little to do with Natural Philosophy : 
and we cannpt agree with him when he says*, that the 
doctrine, concerning these idols bears the satne relation 
to the interpretation of nature as the doctrine concerning 
sophistical paralogisms bears to common logic. 

21. (VIII.) There is one very prominent feature in 
Bacon's speculations which we must not omit to notice; 
it is a leading and constant object ^vith him to apply his 
* Nov. Ory.y lib. i. Aph. 40. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



408 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

kaowledge to Use. The inBight which he oUainB into 
iiature, he would employ in commandiDg nature for th^ 
service of man. He wishes to have not only principles 
but works. The phrase which best describes the aim 
of his philosophy is his own^i ^ Ascendendo ad €uimmat€i, 
descendendo ad operaP This disposition appears in the 
^t aphorism of the Nomtm Organon^ and runs through 
the work. '^ Man, the minister and interpreter of natore, 
does and understands, so &r as he has, in fact or in 
thought, observed the course of nature; and he cannot 
know or do more than this." It is not necessary for us 
to dwell much upon this turn of mind ; for the whole of 
our present inquiry goes upon the supposition that an 
acquaintance with the laws of nature is worth our having 
for its own sake. It may be universally tru^ that know«- 
ledge is power ; but we have to do with it not as power, 
but as knowledge. It is the formation of Science, not of 
Art, with which we are here concerned. It may give a 
peculiar interest to the history of science, to show how it 
constantly tends to provide better and better for the 
wants and comforts of the body ; but that is not the in- 
terest which engages us in our present inquiry into the 
nature and course of philosophy. The consideration of 
the means which promote man's material well-being 
often appears to be invested with a kind of dignity, by 
the discovery of general laws which it involves ; and the 
satis&ction which rises in our minds at Uie cont^npla*- 
tion of such cases, men sometimes ascribe, with a false 
ingenuity, to the love of mere bodily enjoyment. But it 
is never difficult to see that this baser and coarser element 
is not the real source of our admiration. Those who 
hold that it is the main business of science to construct 
instruments for the uses of life, appear sometimes to be 
willing to accept the consequence which follows from 

? Nov. Org,^ lib. i. Ax. 103. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FlRANCia BACON. ' 409 

moh a doctrine, that the fest shoemaker was a philoso- 
pher worthy of the highest admiration*. But those who 
maintain sttch paradoxes, often, by a happy inconsistency, 
make it their own aim, not to deyise some improTed 
covering for the feet, but to deKght the mind with acute 
i^>eculat]on9, exhibited in all the graces of wit and £Euicy. 

It has been saidf that the key of the Baconian doc-» 
triiie consists in two words. Utility and Progress. With 
regard to the latter point, we have already seen that the 
hope and prospect of a boundless progress in human 
knowledge had sprung up in men's minds, even in the 
early times of imperial Ilome ; and were most emphati- 
«dly expressed by that very Seneca who disdained to 
reckon the worth of knowledge by its value in food and 
clothing. And when we say that Utility was the great 
bodiness of Bacon's philosophy, we forget one-half of his 
eharaeteristic phrase. "Ascendendo ad axiomata," no 
less than *' descendendo ad opera,'* was, he repeatedly 
declared, the scheme of his path. He constantly spoke, 
we are told by his secretary:]:, of two kinds of experi- 
ments, earperimenta/ruetifera^ and ea^erimenta Itcdfera. 

Again; when we are told by modern writers that 
Bacon merely recommended such induction as all men 
iuBtinctively practise, we ought to recollect his own 
earnest and incessant declarations to the contrary. The 
induction hitherto practised is, he says, of no use for ob- 
taitting solid science. There are two ways J, " hoec via in 
Tisu est," "altera vera, sed intentata." Men have con- 
Btantiy been employed in anticipatwn ; in illicit induction. 
The intellect left to itself rushes on in this road || ; the 
conclusions so obtained are persuasive^ ; fkr more persua- 
sive than inductions made with due caution**. But still 

* Edvnh, Jien.f No. cx:^xii. p. 65. t lb. 

t Pref. to the Nat. HUt., i. 243. § Nov. Org., lib. i. Aph. 19. 

II Aph. 20. nr Aj^ 27. ** lb., 28. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



410 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

this method must be rejected if we Would obtltiQ true 
knowledge. We shall then at length have ground of 
good hope for science when we proceed in another man*^ 
ner'*^. We must rise, not bj a leap» but bj small step% 
by successive Advances, by a gradation of ascents, tryhif 
our facts, and clearing our notions at every interval. The 
scheme of true philosophy, according to Bacon, is not 
obvious and simple, but long and technical, requiring 
constant care and self-denial to follow it And we have 
seen that, in this opinion, his judgment is confirmed by 
the i>adt history and present condition of science. 

Again ; it is by no means a just view of Bacon's cha^ 
racter to place him in contrast to Plato. Plato's philo* 
Sophy was the philosophy of Ideas ; but it was not left 
for Bacon to set up the philosophy of Facts in opposition 
to that of Ideas. That had been done fully by the spe« 
culative reformers of the sixteenth century. Bacon had 
the merit of showing that Facts and Ideas must be.com* 
bined ; and not only so, but of divining many of the spe- 
cial rules and forms of this combination, when as yet 
there were no examples of them, with a sagacity hitherto 
quite unparalleled. 

22. (IX.) With Bacon's unhappy political life we 
have here nothing to do. But we cannot but notice with 
pleasure how faithfully, how perseveringly, how energeU<*> 
cally he discharged his great philosophical oflSice of a 
Reformer of Methods. He had conceived the purpose of 
making this his object at an early period. When medi- 
tating the continuation of his Novum (hgcmon^ and speak- 
ing of his reasons for trusting that his work will reach some 
completeness of effect, he saysf , '^ I am by two arguments 
thus persuaded. First, I think thus from the seal and 

* Aph. 104. So Aph. 105. " In const! tucndo aziomate forma 
inductionU alia quani adhuc in usu fuit excogitanda est/' &c. 
t Ep.adP. JPulgmtium, Op,^ x. 330. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BAOON. 41 1 

contt&ncy of my miady which has not waxed old in thici 
design, nor, after so many years, grown cold and indif- 
ferent ; I remember that about forty years ago I com^ 
posed a juvenile work about these things, which witU 
great contrivance and a pompous title Z called tempom 
partum mojpimum, or the most considerable birth of time ( 
Next, that on account of its usefulness, it may hope the 
Divine blessing." In stating the grounds of hope foir 
future progress in the sciences, he says* : ^^ Some hope 
may, we conceive, be ministered to men by our own 
example: and this we say, not for the sake of boastings 
but because it is useful to be said. If any despond, le^ 
them look at me, a man among all others of my age most 
occupied with civil affairs, nor of very sound healthi 
(which brings a great loss of time ;) also in this attempt 
the first eicplorer, following the footsteps of no man, nor 
communicating on these subjects with any mortal ; yet| 
having steadily entered upon the true road and made my 
mind submit to things themselves, one who has, in this 
undertaking, made, (as we think,) some progress." He 
then proceeds to speak of what may be done by the 
combined and more prosperous labours of others, in that 
strain of noble hope and confidence, which rises again 
and again, like a chorus, at intervals in every part of his 
writings. In the Advancement of Learning he had said, 
** I could not be true and constant to the argument I 
handle, if I were not willing to go beyond others, but yet 
not more willing than to have others go beyond me 
again." In the Prefiace to the Instauratio Mayna^ he had 
placed among his postulates those expressions which have 
more than once warmed the breast of a philosophical 
reformerf. " Concerning ourselves we speak not ; but 
as touching the matter which we have in hand, this we 

? Nat>. Org,y \. Aph. 113. 
f See the niotip to Kakt's Kri^ d$r Beinm Vemunft. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



41^ REVIEW OF Opinions on kkowledge. 

ksk; — ^that men be of good hope, neither feign and ima-^ 
gine to themselves this our Reform as something of 
infinite dimension and beyond the grasp of mortal man, 
when in truth it is the end and true limit of infinite 
error ; and is by no means unmindful of the condition of 
mortality and humanity, not confiding that such a thing 
can be carried to its perfect close in the space of a single 
age, but assigning it as a task to a succession of generap- 
tions." In a later portion of the Instauratio he says: 
f^ We bear the strongest love to the human repttblic^ our 
jcommon country ; and we by no means abandon the hope 
that there will arise and come forth some man among 
posterity, who will be able to receive and digest all that 
is best in what we deliver; and whose care it will be to 
cultivate and perfect such things. Therefore, by the 
blessing of the Deity, to tend to this object, to open up 
the fountains, to discover the useful, to gather guidance 
for the way, shall be our task ; and from this we shall 
•never, while we remain in life, desist." 

23. (X.) We may add, that the spirit of piety as well 
as of hope which is seen in this passage, appears to have 
been habitual to Bacon at all periods of his life. We 
find in his works several drafts of portions of his great 
scheme, and several of them begin with a prayer. One 
of these entitled, in the edition of his works, **The 
Student's Prayer," appears to me to belong probably to 
bis early youth. Another, entitled "The Writer's Prayer," 
is inserted at the end of the Preface of the Instauratio^ as 
it was finally published. I will conclude my notice of 
this wonderful man by inserting here these two prayers. 

"To God the Father, God the Word, God the Spirit, 
we pour forth most humble and hearty supplications; 
that he, remembering the calamities of mankind, and the 
pilgrimage of this our life, in which we wear out days 
few and evil, would please to open to us new refresh- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FRANCIS BACON. 413 

ments out of the fountains of his goodness for the 
all(.'vlating of our miseries. This also we humbly and 
earnestly beg, that human things may not prejudice such 
as are divine ; neither that, from the unlocking of the 
gates of sense, and the kindling of a greater natural light, 
anything of incredulity, or intellectual nighty may arisef 
in our minds towards divine mysteries. But rather, that 
by our mind thoroughly cleansed and purged from fancy 
and vanities, and yet sulg^^ ^^ perfectly given up to 
the Divine oracles, there m&y be given unto faith the 
things that are faith's." 

" Thou, O Father^ who gavest the visible light as the 
fii*st->born of thy creatures^ and didst pour into man the 
intellectual light as the top and consummation of thy 
workmanship, be pleased to protect and govern this work, 
which coming from thy goodness, returneth to thy glory; 
Thou, after thou hadst reviewed the works which thy 
hands had made, beheldest that everything was very goodj 
and thou didst rest with complacency in them. But 
man, reflecting on the works which he had made, saw that 
all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and could by no 
means acquiesce in them. Wherefore, if we labour in 
thy works with the sweat of our brows, thou wilt make 
us partakers of thy vision and thy Sabbath, We humbly 
beg that this mind may be stedfastly in us ; and that 
thou, by our hands, and also by the hands of others ou 
whom thou shalt bestow the same spirit, wilt please to 
convey a largess of new alms to thy family of mankind. 
These things we commend to thy everlasting love, by our 
Jesiis, thy Christ, God with us. Amen.** 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



414 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Chapter XII. 
PROM BACON TO NEWTON. 

I. Hcervey. — We have already seen that Bacon was 
\rj no means the first mover or principal author of the 
revolution in the method of philosophixing which to<dc 
place in his time ; but onlj the writer who proclaimed In 
the most impressive and comt»rehensive manner, the 
scheme^ the profit, the dignity, and the prospects of the 
new philosophy. Those, therefore^ who after him took 
tip the same views are not to be considered as his succes- 
sors, but as his fellow labourers ; and the line of historical 
succession of opinions must be pursued without special 
reference to any one leading character, as the principal 
figure of the epoch. I resume this line, by noticing a 
contemporary and fellow countryman of Bacon, Harvey, 
the discoverer of the circulation of the blood* Has dis* 
covery was not published and generally accepted till near 
the end of Bacon's life ; but the anatomist's refleetiont on 
the method of pursuing science, though strongly marked 
with the character of the revolution that was taking 
place, belong to a very different school from the Chan- 
oellor's. Harvey was a pupil of Fabricius of Aequapen- 
dente, whom we noticed among the practical reformers 
of the sixteenth century. He entertained, like his mas^ 
f er, a strong reverence for the great names which had 
ruled in philosophy up to that time, Aristotle imd Galen ; 
and was disposed rather to recommend his own method 
by exhibiting it as the true interpretation of ancient 
wisdom, than to boast of its novelty. It is true, that he 
assigns, as his reason for publishing some of his researches*, 
" that by revealing the method I use in searching into 

* AnaUmiical Exercxtationi concerning the Generation of Living 
Creatures, 1663. Preface. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACJON TO NEWTON* 415 

things, I might propose to studious men, a new and (if I 
mistake not) a surer path to the attainment of know- 
ledge* ;" but he soon proceeds to fortifj himself with the 
autJioritj of Aristotle. In doing this, however, he has 
the very great merit of giving a living and practical eha« 
raeter to truths which exist in the Aristotelian works, but 
which had hitherto been barren and emptj professions* 
We have seen that Aristotle had asserted the importance 
^ experience as one root of knowledge ; and in this had 
been followed by the schoolmen of the middle ages : but 
this assertion came with very different force and efiect 
from a man, the whole of whose life had been spent in 
obtaining, by means of ezperiebce, knowledge which no 
man had possessed before. In Harvey's general reflect 
tions, the necessity of both the elements of knowledge, 
sensations and ideas, experience and reason, is fully 
brought into view, and rightly connected with the meta« 
phydcs of Aristotle. He puts the antithesis of these two 
elements with great clearness. ** Universals are chiefly 
known to us, for science is begot by reasoning from 

* He used similar expressions in conversation. George Ent, who 
edited his Generation of Animals, visited him, " at that time residing 
not far from the city ; and found him very intent upon the perscruta^ 
tion of nature's works, and with a countenance as cheerful, as mind 
imperturbedi Democritus like, chiefly searching into the cause of 
natural things." In the course of conversation the writer said, *« It 
hath always heen your choice, about the secrets of Nature, to oonsuH 
Nature herself." " 'Tis true^" replied he ; " and I have constantly been 
of opinion that from thence we might acquire not only the knowledge of 
those less considerable secrets of Nature, but even a certain admiration 
of that Supreme Essence, the Creator. And though I have ever been 
i«ady to acknowledge, that many things have been discovered by 
Ifamed men of former times ; yet do I still believe that the number of 
those which remain yet conceited in the darkness of impervestigable 
Nature is much greater. Nay, I cannot forbear to wonder, and some- 
times smile at those, who persuade themselves, that all things were so 
consummately and absolutely delivered by Aristotle, Galen, or some 
other great name, as that nothing was left to the superaddition of 
any that succeeded." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



416 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

universals to particulars ; yet that very comprehension of 
universale in the understanding springs from the percep-' 
tion of singulars in our sense." Again, he quotes Aris- 
totle's apparently opposite assertions : — ^that made in his 
Pkt/sics\ " that we must advance from things which are 
first known to us, tliough confusedly, to things more dis- 
tinctly intelligible in themselves ; from the whole to the 
part; from the universal to the particular;" and that 
made in the Analytics-f; that " Singulars are more known 
to us and do first exist according to sense : for nothing id 
in the understanding which was not before in the sense.** 
Both, he says, are true, though at first they seem to 
clash : for ** though in knowledge we begin with sense, 
sensation itself is a universal thing." This he further 
illustrates; and quotes Seneca, who says, that "Art 
itself is nothing but the reason of the work, implanted in 
the Artistes mind :" and adds, " the same way by which 
we gain an Art, by the very same way we attain any kind 
of science or knowledge whatever ; for as Art is a habit 
whose object is something to be done, so Science is a 
habit whose object is something to be known ; and as the 
former proceedeth from the imitation of examples, so 
this latter, from the knowledge of things natural. The 
source of both is from sense and experience ; since [but] 
it is impossible that Art should be rightly purchased by 
the one or Science by the other without a direction from 
ideas." Without here dwelling on the relation of Art 
and Science, (very justly stated by Harvey, except that 
ideas exist in a very different form in the mind of the 
Artist and the Scientist) it will be seen that this doctrine, 
of science springing from experience with a direction 
from ideas, is exactly that which we have repeatedly 
urged, as the true view of the subject. From this view, 
Harvey proceeds to infer the importance of a reference 

? Lib. i. c. 2, 3. t Anal. Po9t^ ii. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



f 

FBOJI BACON TO l^JBWTON. 417 

to sense in his own subject, not only for first discovering, 
but for receiving knowledge : " Without experience, not 
other men's but our own, no man is a proper disciple of 
any part of natural knowledge; without experimental 
skill in anatomy, he will no better apprehend what I 
shall deliver concerning generation, than a man born 
blind can judge of the nature and difference of colours, 
or one bom deaf, of sounds." " If we do otherwise, we 
may get a humid and floating opinion, but never a solid 
and infallible knowledge : as is happenable to those who 
see foreign countries only in maps, and the bowels of 
men falsely described in anatomical tables. And hence 
it comes about, that in this rank age, we have many 
sophisters and bookwrights, but few wise men and philo- 
sophers.'' He had before declared " how unsafe and 
degenerate a thing it is, to be tutored by other men's 
commentaries, without making trial of the things them- 
selves ; especially since Nature's book is so open and 
legible." We are here reminded of Galileo's condemna- 
tion of the " paper philosophers." The train of thought 
thus expressed by the practical discoverers, spread rapidly 
with the spread of the new knowledge that had suggested 
it, and soon became general and unquestioned. 

II. Descartes. — Such opinions are now among the 
most familiar and popular of those which are current 
among writers and speakers ; but we should err much if 
we were to imagine that after they were once propounded 
they were never resisted or contradicted. Indeed, even 
in our own time, not only are such maxims very fre- 
quently practically neglected or forgotten, but the oppo- 
site opinions, and views of science quite inconsistent with 
those we have been explaining, are often promulgated 
and widely accepted. The philosophy of pure ideas has 
its commonplaces, as well as the philosophy of experience. 
And at the time of which we speak, the former philo- 
VOL. II. 2 E 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



418 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

sopky, no lesi than the latter, bad its great asserter and 
expounder ; a man in his own time more admired than 
Baoom regarded with more deference by a large body of 
dlsoiples all over Europe, and more powerful in stirring 
mp men's minds to a new activity of inqniiy. I speak of 
Descartes, whose labours, considered as a philosophical 
system, were an endeavour to revive the method of ob« 
talning knowledge by reasoning from our own ideas only, 
and to erect it in opposition to the method of observation 
and experiment. The Cartesian philosophy contained an 
attempt at a counter-revolution. Thus in this author's 
Prineipia PhilosaphirB^^ he says that "he will give a 
short account of the principal phenomena of the world, 
not that he may use them as reasons to prove anything ; 
for," adds he, " we desire to deduce effects from causes, 
not causes from effects ; but only in order that out of the 
innumerable effects which we learn to be capable of re- 
sulting from the same causes, we may determine our 
mind to consider some rather than others." He had 
before said, ** The principles which we have obtained [by 
pure it priori reasoning] are so vast and so fruitful, that 
many more consequences follow from them than we see 
contained in this visible worid, and even many more than 
our mind can ever take a full survey of.** And be pro- 
fesses to apply this method in detail. Thus in attempt- 
ing to state the three ftmdamental laws of motion, he 
employs only d priori reasonings, and is in fact led into 
error in the third law which he thus obtainsf . And in 
his DioptricsX he pretends to deduce the laws of reflec- 
tion and refraction of light from certain comparisons 
(which are, in truth, arbitrary,) in which the radiation of 
Kght is represented by the motion of a ball impinging 
upon the reflecting or refracting body. It might be 
represented as a curious instance of the caprice of fortune, 
? Pars iii. p. 45. f See EiH. Ind. Set., ii. 50. J Cap. i. ii. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 419 

which appears in scientific as in other history, that Kep- 
ler, professing to derive all his knowledge from experi- 
ence, and exerting himself with the greatest energy and 
perseverance, failed in detecting the law of refraction ; 
while Descartes, who professed to ^be able to despise 
experiment, obtained the tme law of sines. Bat as we 
have stated in the History*, Descartes appears to have 
learnt this law from SnelPs papers. And whether this 
be so or not, it is certain that notwithstanding the pro* 
fession of independence which his philosophy made, i^ 
was in reality constantly guided and instrocted by expe* 
rience. Thns in explaining the Rainbow (in which his 
portion of the discovery merits great praise) he speaksf 
of taking a globe of glass, allowing the sun to shine on 
one side of it, and noting the colours produced by rays 
after two refr-actions and one reflection. And in many 
other instances, indeed in all that relates to physics, the 
reasonings and explanations of Descartes and his f(d- 
lowers were, consciously or unconsciously, directed by 
the known facts, which they had observed themselves or 
learnt from others. 

But since Descartes thus, i^culatively at least, set 
himself in opposition to the great reform of scientific 
method which was going on in his time, how, it may be 
asked, did he acquire so strong an influence over the 
most active minds of his time ? How is it that he be* 
came the founder of a large and distinguished school of 
philosophers ? How is it that he not only was mainly 
instrumental in deposing Aristotle from his intellectual 
throne, but for a time appeared to have established hinfr* 
self with almost equal powers, and to have rendered the 
Cartesian school as firm a body as the Peripatetic bad 
been ? 

* Hist. Ind. Set., 11. 347. + Meleorum^ C 8, p. 187. 

2 E 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



420 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

The causes to be assigned for this remarkable result 
are, I eonceive, the following. In the first place, the 
physicists of the Cartesian school did, as I have just 
stated, found their philosophy upon experiment ; and did 
not practically, nor indeed, most of them, theoretically, 
assent to their master's boast of showing what the phe- 
nomena must be, instead of looking to see what they are. 
And as Descartes had really incorporated in his philo- 
sophy all the chief physical discoveries of his own and 
preceding times, and had delivered, in a more general and 
systematic shape than any one before him, the principles 
which he thiis established, the physical philosophy of his 
school was in reality far the best then current ; and was 
an immense improvement upon the Aristotelian doctrines, 
which had not yet been displaced as a system. Another 
circumstance which gained him much favour, was the 
bold and ostentatious manner in which he professed to 
begin his philosophy by liberating himself from all pre- 
conceived ^prejudice. The first sentence of his philo- 
sophy contains this celebrated declaration : " Since," he 
says, "we begin life as infants, and have contracted 
various judgments concerning sensible things before we 
possess the entire use of our reason, we are turned aside 
from the knowledge of truth by many .prejudices: from 
which it does not appear that we can be any otherwise 
delivered, than if once in our life we make it our business 
to doubt of everything in which we discern tlie smallest 
suspicion of uncertainty." With this sweeping rejection 
or unhesitating scrutiny of all preconceived opinions, the 
power of the ancient authorities and masters in philo- 
sophy must obviously shrink away; and thus Descartes 
came to be considered as the great hero of the overthrow 
of the Aristotelian dogmatism. But in addition to these 
causes, and perhaps more powerful than all in procuring 
the assent of men to his doctrines, came the deductive and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 421 

systematic character of his philosophy. For although 
all knowledge of the external world is in reality only 
to be obtained from observation, by inductive step9,-~ 
minute, perhaps, and slow, and many, as Galileo and 
Bacon had already taught ; — the human mind conforms 
to these conditions reluctantly and unsteadily, and is ever 
ready to rush to general principles, and then to employ 
itself in deducing conclusions from these by synthetical 
reasonings; a task grateful, from the distinctness and 
certainty of the result, and the accompanying feeling of 
our own sufficiency. Hence men readily overlooked the 
precarious character of Descartes' fundamental assump- 
tions, in their admiration of the skill with which a varied 
and complex universe was evolved out of them. And 
the complete and systematic character of this philosophy 
attracted men no less than its logical connexion. I may 
quote here what a philosopher* of our own time has 
said of another writer : " He owed his influence to various 
causes ; at the head of which may be placed that genius 
for system which, though it cramps the growth of know- 
ledge, perhaps finally atones for that mischief by the zeal 
and activity which it rouses among followers and oppo- 
nents, who discover truth by accident when in pursuit of 
weapons for their warfare. A system which attempts a 
task so hard as that of subjecting vast provinces of human 
knowledge to one or two principles, if it presents some 
striking instances of conformity to superficial appearance^ 
is sure to delight the framer ; and for a time to subdue 
and captivate the student too entirely for sober reflection 
and rigorous examination. In the first instance consist- 
ency passes for truth. When principles in some instances 
have proved sufficient to give an unexpected explanation 
of facts, the delighted reader is content to accept as 
true all other deductions from the principles. Specious 

* Mackintosh, Dissertation on Ethical Science. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



422 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

premises being assumed to be true^ nothing more can be 
required than logical inference. Mathematical forms 
pass current as the equivalent of mathematical certainty. 
The unwarj admirer is satisfied with the completeness 
and symmetry of the plan of his house, unmindful of the* 
need of examining the firmness of the foundation and the 
soundness of the materials. The system-maker, like the 
conqueror, long dazzles and overawes the world; but 
when their sway is past, the vulgar herd, unable to 
measure their astonishing fitculties, take revenge by 
trampling on fallen greatness/* Bacon had showed his 
wisdom in his reflections on this subject, when he said 
that "Method, carrying a show of total and perfect 
knowledge, hath a tendency to generate acquiescence." 

The main value of Descartes* physical doctrines con- 
sisted in their being arrived at in a way inconsistent with 
his own professed method, namely, by a reference to 
observation. But though he did in reality begin from 
facts, his system was nevertheless a glaring example 
of that error which Bacon had called Anticipation; that 
illicit generalization which leaps at once from special 
tiacts to principles of the widest and remotest kind ; such, 
for instance, as the Cartesian doctrine, that the world is 
an absolute plenum^ every part being full of matter of 
some kind, and that all natural effects depend on the 
laws of motion. Against this fault, to which the human 
mind is so prone. Bacon had lifted his warning voice 
in vain, so fer as the Cartesians were concerned; as indeed, 
to this day, one theorist after another pursues his course, 
and turns a deaf ear to the Verulamian injunctions ; per- 
haps even complacently boasts that he founds his theory 
upon observation; and forgets that there are, as the 
aphorism of the Novum Organon declares, two ways by 
which this may be done ; — the one hitherto in use and 
suggested by our common tendencies, but barren and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 428 

worthless ; the other almost untried^ to be pursued only 
with effort and self-denial) but alone capable of producing 
true knowledge* 

III. Oassendi. — ^Thus the lessons which Bacon taught 
were far from being generally accepted and applied at 
first. The amount of the influence of these two men^ 
Bacon and Descartes, upon their age, has often been a 
subject of discussion. The fortunes of the Cartesian 
school, have been in some measure traced in the History 
of Science. But I may mention the notice taken of these 
two philosophers by Gassendi, a contemporary and coun- 
tryman of Descartes. Qassendi^ as I have elsewhere 
stated,* was associated with Descartes in public opinion, 
as an opponent of the Aristotelian dogmatism ; but was 
not in &ct a follower or profound admirer of that writer. 
In a Treatise on Logic, Gassendi gives an account of the 
Logic of various sects and authors ; treating, in order, of 
the Logic of Zeno (the Eleatic), of Euclid (the Mega- 
rean), of Plato, of Aristotle, of the Stoics, of Epicurus, 
of LuUius, of Ramus ; and to these he adds the Logic of 
Verulam, and the Logic of Cartesius. " We must not," he 
says, ** on account of the celebrity it has obtained, pass 
over the Organon or Logic of Francis Bacon Lord Veru- 
lam, High Chancellor of England, whose noble purpose 
in our time it has been, to make an Instauration of the 
Sciences." He then gives a brief account of the Novum 
Organon^ noticing the principal features in its rules, and 
especially the distinction between the vulgar induction 
which leaps at once from particular experiments to the 
more general axioms, and the chastised and gradual in- 
duction, which the author of the Organon recommends. 
In his account of the Cartesian Logic, he justly observes, 
that " He too imitated Verulam in this, that being about 
to build up a new philosophy from the foundation, he 

? Hist. Ind.Sd.,x\. lit 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



424 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

wished in the first place to lay aside all prejudice : and 
having then found some solid principle, to make that the 
ground-work of his whole structure. But he proceeds 
by a very different path from that which Verulam follows ; 
for while Verulam seeks aid from things, to perfect the 
cogitation of the intellect, Cartesius conceives, that when 
we have laid aside all knowledge of things, there is, in our 
thoughts alone, such a resource, that the intellect may by 
its own power arrive at a perfect knowledge of all, even 
the most abstruse things.'* 

The writings of Descartes have been most admired, 
and his method most commended, by those authors who 
have employed themselves upon metaphysical rather than 
physical subjects of inquiry. Perhaps we might say that, 
in reference to such subjects, this method is not so vicious 
as at first, when contrasted with the Baconian induction, it 
seems to be : for it might be urged that the thoughts from 
which Descartes begins his reasonings are, in reality ea;- 
periments of the kind whidi the subject requires us to 
consider: each such thought is a fact in the intellectual 
world; and of such fects, the metaphysician seeks to 
discover the laws. I shall not here examine the validity of 
this plea ; but shall turn to the consideration of the actual 
progress of physical science and its effect on men's minds. 

IV. Actual progress in Science. — ^The practical discover- 
ers were indeed very active and very successful during the 
seventeenth century which opened with Bacon's survey 
and exhortations. The laws of nature, of which men had 
begun to obtain a glimpse in the preceding century, were 
investigated with zeal and sagacity, and the consequence 
was that the foundations of most of the modem physical 
sciences were laid. That mode of research by experiment 
and observation, which had, a little time ago, been a 
strange, and to many, an unwelcome innovation, was now 
become the habitual course of philosophers. The revolu- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 425 

tion from the philosophy of tradition to the philosophy 
of experience was completed. The great discoveries of 
Kepler belonged to the preceding century. They are 
not, I believe, noticed, either by Bacon or by Descartes ; 
but they gave a strong impulse to astronomical and me- 
chanical speculators, by showing the necessity of a sound 
science of motion. Such a science Galileo had already 
begun to construct. At the time of which I speak, his 
disciples* were still labouring at this task, and at other 
problems which rapidly suggested themselves. They had 
already convinced themselves that air had weight; in 
1643 Torricelli proved this practically by the invention 
of the Barometer; in 1647, Pascal proved it still further 
by sending the Barometer to the top of a mountain. 
Pascal and Boyle brought into clear view the fundamental 
laws of fluid equilibrium; Boyle and Mariotte determined 
the law of the compression of air as regulated by its elas- 
ticity. Otto Guericke invented the air pump, and by 
his " Magdeburg Experiments " on a vacuum, illustrated 
still further the effects of the air. Guericke pursued what 
Gilbert had begun, the observation of electrical pheno- 
mena ; and these two physicists made an important step, 
by detecting repulsion as well as attraction in these phe- 
nomena. Gilbert had already laid the foundations of the 
science of Magnetism. The law of refraction, at which 
Kepler had laboured in vain, was, as we have seen, dis- 
covered by Snell (about 1621), and published by Descartes. 
Mersenne had discovered some of the more important 
parts of the theory of Harmonics. In sciences of a differ- 
ent kind, the same movement was visible. Chemical 
doctrines tended to assume a proper degree of generality, 
when Sylvius in 1679 taught the opposition of acid and 
alkali, and Stahl, soon after, the phlogistic theory of com^ 

* Castelli, TorriceUi, Yiyiani, Baliani, Gassendj, Mersenne, Borelli, 
Cavalleri. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



42® REVIEW OF OWNIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

bustion. Steno had remarked the most important law of 
crystallography in 1669, that the angles of the same kind 
of crystak are always equal. In the sciences of classi- 
fication, about 1680, Bay and Morison in England 
resumed the attempt to form a systematic botany, which 
had been interrupted for a hundred years, from the time 
of the memorable essay of Csesalpinus. The grand dis- 
covery of the circulation of the blood by Harvey about 
1619, was followed in 1651 by Pecquet's discovery of the 
course of tlie chyle. There could now no longer be any 
question whether science was progressive, or whether 
observation could lead to new truths. 

Among these cultivators of science, such sentiments as 
have been already quoted became very familiar ; — that 
knowledge is to be sought from nature herself by obser- 
vation and experiment ; — that in such matters tradition 
is of no force when opposed to experience, and that mere 
reasonings without facts cannot lead to solid knowledge. 
But I do not know that we find in these writers any more 
special rules of induction and scientific research which 
have since been confirmed and universally adopted. 
Perhaps too, as was natural in so great a revolution, the 
writers of this time, especially the second-rate ones, were 
somewhat too prone to disparage the labours and talents 
of Aristotle and the ancients in general, and to overlook 
the ideal element of our knowledge, in their zealous study 
of phenomena. They urged, sometimes in an exaggerated 
manner, the superiority of modern times in all that regards 
science, and the supreme and sole importance of facts in 
scientific investigations. There prevailed among them 
also a lofty and dignified tone of speaking of the condition 
and prospects of science, such as we are accustomed to 
admire in the Verulamian writings; for this, in a less 
degree, is epidemic among those who a little after his 
time speak of the new philosophy. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON, 427 

V. Otto Gttmickey Sfc. — I need not illustrate these 
characteristics at any great length. I may as an example 
notice Otto Guericke's Preface to his Experimenta Mag^ 
dedurffica (1670). He quotes a passage from Kircher's 
Treatise on the Magnetic Art, in which the author says, 
?* Hence it appears how all philosophy, except it be sup- 
ported by experiments, is empty, fallacious, and useless ; 
what monstrosities philosophers, in other respects of the 
highest and subtlest genius, may produce in philosophy by 
neglecting experiment. Thus Experience alone is the 
Dissolver of Doubts, the Reconciler of Difficulties, the 
sole Mistress of Truth, who holds a torch before us in 
obscurity, unties our knots, teaches us the true causes of 
things." Guericke himself reiterates the same remark^ 
adding that *^ philosophers, insisting upon their own 
thoughts and arguments merely, cannot come to any 
sound conclusion respecting the natural constitution of 
the world." Nor were the Cartesians slow in taking up 
the same train of reflection. Thus Gilbert Clark who, in 
1660, published* a defence of Descartes' doctrine of a 
plenum in the universe, speaks in a tone which reminds 
us of Bacon, and indeed was very probably caught from 
him. " Natural philosophy formerly consisted entirely of 
loose and most doubtful controversies, carried on in high 
i9ounding words, fit rather to delude than to instruct men. 
But at last (by the favour of the Deity) there shone forth 
some more divine intellects, who taking as their counsel- 
lors reason and experience together, exhibited a new 
method of philosophizing. Hence has been conceived a 
strong hope that philosophers may embrace, not a shadow 
or empty image of Truth, but Truth herself: and that 
Physiology (Physics) scattering these controversies to the 

* De Plmitudins Mundi^ in qua defender CarteHana PhiUmphia 
contra 9ententia$ FrancUci Baconi, Th, Hohbii et Sethi Wardi, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



428 REVIEW OF O'PINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

winds, will contract an alliance with Mathematics. Yet 
this is hardly the work of one age ; still less of one man. 
Yet let not the mind despond, or doubt not that, one 
party of investigators after another following the same 
method of philosophizing, at last, under good auguries, 
the mysteries of nature being daily unlocked as far as 
human feebleness will allow, Truth may at last appear in 
full, and these nuptial torches may be lighted." 

As another instance of the same kind, I may quote 
the Preface to the First volume of the Transactions of 
the Academy of Sciences at Paris. " It is only since the 
present century,'* says the writer, ** that we can reckon 
the revival of Mathematics and Physios. M. Descartes 
and other great men have laboured at this work with so 
much success, that in this department of literature, the 
whole face of things has been changed. Men have quitted 
a sterile system of physics, which for several generations 
had been always at the same point ; the reign of words 
and terms is passed ; men will have things ; they estab- 
lish principles which they understand, they follow those 
principles ; and thus they make progress. Authority has 
ceased to have more weight than Reason: that which 
was received without contradiction because it had been 
long received, is now examined, and often rejected : and 
philosophers have made it their business to consult, res- 
pecting natural things, Nature herself rather than the 
Ancients." These had now become the commonplaces of 
those who spoke concerning the course and method of the 
Sciences. 

VI. HooJce. — In England, as might be expected, the 
influence of Francis Bacon was more directly visible. We 
find many writers, about this time, repeating the truths 
which Bacon had proclaimed, and in almost every case 
shovnng the same imperfections in their views which we 
have noticed in him. We may take as an example of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO ^ NEWTON. 429 

this Hooke's Essay, entitled ^^ A Oeneral Scheme or Idea 
of the present state of Natural Philosophy, and how its 
defects may be remedied by a Methodical proceeding in 
the making Experiments and collecting Observations ; 
whereby to compile a Natural History as a solid basis for 
the superstructure of true Philosophy." This Essay may 
be looked upon as an attempt to adapt the Novum Or- 
ganon to the age which succeeded its publication. We 
have in. this imitation, as in the original, an enumeration 
of various mistakes and impediments which had in pre- 
ceding times prevented the progress of knowledge ; ex- 
hortations to experiment and observation as the only solid 
basis of Science ; very ingenious suggestions of trains of 
inquiry, and modes of pursuing them ; and a promise of 
obtaining scientific truths when facts have been duly 
accumulated. This last part of his scheme the author 
calls a Philosophical Algebra; and he appears to have 
imagined that it might answer the purpose of finding 
unknown causes from known facts, by means of certain 
regular processes^ in the same manner as Common Alge- 
bra finds unknown from known quantities. But this part 
of the plan appears to have remained unexecuted. The 
suggestion of such a method was a result of the Baconian 
notion that invention in a discoverer might be dispensed 
with. We find Hooke adopting the phrases in which this 
notion is implied : thus he speaks of the understanding 
as " being very prone to run into the affirmative way of 
judging, and wanting patience to follow and prosecute 
the negative way of inquiry, by rejection of disagreeing 
natures.** And he follows Bacon also in the error of 
attempting at once to obtain from the &cts the discovery 
of a " nature," instead of investigating first the measures 
and the laws of phenomena. I return to more general 
notices of the course of men's thoughts on this subject. 
VII. Royal Society. — ^Those who associated themselves 



Digitized by VjOOQIC — 



430 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

together for the prosecution of science quoted Bac6n as 
their leader, and exulted in the progress made hj tlie phi* 
losophy which proceeded upon his principles* Thus in 
Oldenburg^s Dedication of the Transactions of the Bojat 
Society of London for 1670, to Robert Bojle, he sajs ; 
^^ I am informed by silch as weU remember the best and 
worst days of the famous Lord Bacon, that though he 
wrote his AdcancemeiU of Learning and his Imtamratio 
Mayna in the time of his greatest power, yet his greatest 
reputation rebounded first from the most intelligent 
foreigners in many parts of Christendom:" and afler 
speaking of his practical talents and his public employ^ 
ments, he adds, '^ much more justly still may we wonder 
how, without any great skill in Chemistry, without much 
pretence to the Mathematics or Mechanics, without optio 
aids or other engines of late inyention, he should so much 
transcend the philosophani then liying, in judicious 
and clear instructions, in so many useful observations 
and discoveries, I think I may say beyond the records of 
many ages." And in the end of the Preface to the same 
volume, he speaks with great exultation of the advance 
of science all over Europe, referring undoubtedly to facts 
then familiar. ^^ And now let envy snarl, it cannot stop 
the wheels of active philos^hy, in no part of the known 
world ; — ^not in France, either in Paris or in Caen : — ^not 
in Italy, either in Rome, Naples, Milan, Florence, Venice, 
Bononia or Padua ; — in none of the Universities either on 
this or on that side of the seas, Madrid and Lisbon, all 
the best spirits in Spain and Portugal, and the spacious 
and remote dominions to them belonging ; — the Imperial 
Court and the Princes of Germany ; the Northern Kings 
and their best luminaries ; and even the frozen Moscovito 
and Russian have all taken the operative ferment : and 
it works high and prevails every way, to the encourage^ 
ment of all sincere Iovots of knowledge and virtue/* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



FROM BACON TO NEWTON. 431 

Again, in the Preface for 1672> be pursues the same 
thought into detail. *^ We must grant that in the last 
age, when operative philosophy begau to recover ground, 
and to tread on the heels of triumphant Philology; emer- 
gent adventures and great successes were encountered 
by dangerous oppositions and strong obstructions. Gali- 
Iseus and others in Italy suffered extremities for their 
celestial discoveries; and here in England Sir Walter 
Balei^y when he was in his greatest lustre, was noto« 
riously slandered to have erected a school of atheism, 
because he gave countenance to chemistry, to practical 
arts, and to curious mechanical operations, and designed 
to form the best of them into a college. And Queen 
Elizabeth's Gilbert wm a long time esteemed extra- 
vagant for his magnetisms ; and Harvey for his diligent 
researches in pursuance of the circulation of the blood. 
But when our renowned Lord Bacon had demonstrated 
the methods for a perfect restoration of all parts of real 
knowledge; and the generous and philosophical Peire- 
skius had, soon after, agitated in all parts to redeem the 
most instructive antiquities, and to excite experimental 
essays and fresh discoveries; the success became on a 
sudden stupendous; and effective philosophy began to 
sparkle, and even to flow into beams of shining light all 
over the world.** 

The formation of the Royal Society of London and 
of the Academy of Sciences of Paris, from which pro- 
ceeded the declamations just quoted, were among many 
indications, belonging to this period, of the importance 
which states as well as individuals had by this time 
begun to attach to the cultivation of science. The 
English Society was established almost immediately 
when the restoration of the monarchy appeared to give a 
promise of tranquillity to the nation (in 1660), and the 
French Academy very soon afterwards (in 1666). These 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



432 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

measures were very soon followed by the establishment 
of the Observatories of Paris and Greenwich (in 1667 
and 1675); which may be considered to be a kind of public 
recognition of the astronomy of observation, as an object 
on which it was the advantage and the duty of nations 
to bestow their wealth. 

VIII. Bacon^s New Atalantis. — When philosophers had 
their attention turned to the boundless prospect of increase 
to the knowledge and powers and pleasures of man which 
the cultivation of experimental philosophy seemed to pro- 
mise, it was natural that they should think of devising 
institutions and associations by which such benefits might 
be secured. Bacon had drawn a picture of a society 
organized with a view to such purpose, in his fiction of the 
** New Atalantis." The imaginary teacher who explains 
this institution to the inquiring traveller, describes it by 
the name oi Solomon's Home; and says *, " The end of our 
foundation is the knowledge of causes and secret motions 
of things; and the enlarging the bounds of the human 
empire to efiecting of things possible." And, as parts 
of this House, he describes caves and wells, chambers 
and towers, baths and gardens, parks and pools, dispen- 
satories and furnaces, and many other contrivances, pro- 
vided for the purpose of making experiments of many 
kinds. He describes also the various employments of the 
Fellows of this College, who take a share in its re- 
searches. There are merchants of lighty who bring books 
and inventions from foreign countries ; depredators, who 
gather the experiments which exist in books ; mystery^ 
men, who collect the experiments of the mechanical arts ; 
pioneers or miners, who invent new experiments ; and 
compilers, " who draw the experiments of the former into 
titles and tables, to give the better light for the drawing 
of observations and axioms out of them." There are 

* Bacon's Work$, vol. ii. Ill, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



fnoM BACON TO NEWTOl^, 433 

also doimy-men or benefactors^ that cast about bow to 
draw out of the experiments of their fellows things of 
use and practice for man's life ; lamps^ that direct new 
experiments of a more penetrating light than the former; 
ifioculatorSf that execute the experiments so directed. 
Finally, there are the interpreters of nature, that raise the 
former discoveries by experiments into greater obser- 
vations (that is, more general truths) axioms and aphor- 
isms. Upon this scheme we may remark, that fictitious 
as it undisguisedly is, it still serves to exhibit very 
clearly some of the main features of the author's philo- 
sophy: — namely, his steady view of the necessity of 
ascending from facts to the most general truths by se- 
veral stages; — an exaggerated opinion of the aid that 
could be derived in such a task from technical separation 
of the phenomena and a distribution of them into 
tables ; — a belief, probably incorrect, that the offices of 
experimenter and interpreter may be entirely separated, 
and pursued by different persons with a certainty of 
obtaining success ; — and a strong determination to make 
knowledge constantly subservient to the uses of life. 

IX. Cowley. — Another project of the same kind, less 
ambitious but apparently more directed to practice, was 
published a little later (1657) by another eminent man 
of letters in this country. I speak of Cowley's " Propo- 
sition for the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy." 
He suggests that a College should be established at a 
short distance from London, endowed with a revenue 
of four thousand pounds, and consisting of twenty pro- 
fessors with other members. The objects of the labours 
of these professors he describes to be, first, to examine 
all knowledge of nature delivered to us from former 
ages and to pronounce it sound or worthless ; second, to 
recover the lost inventions of the ancients; third, to 
improve all arts that we now have ; lastly, to discover 
VOL. II. 2 P 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



434 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Others that we yet have not* In this proposal we cannot 
help marking the visible declension from Bacon's more 
philosophical view. For we have here only a veiy vague 
indication of improving old arts and discovering new, 
instead of the two clear Verulamian antitheses, Expe- 
riments and Axioms deduced from them, on the one 
hand, and on the other an ascent to general Laws, and a 
derivation, from these, of Arts for daily use. Moreover 
the prominent place which Cowley has assigned to the 
verifying the knowledge of former ages and recovering 
" the lost inventions and drowned laws of the ancients,"* 
implies a disposition to think too highly of traditionary 
knowledge; a weakness which Bacon's scheme shows 
him to have fully overcome. And thus it has been up 
to the present day, that with all Bacon's mistakes, in the 
philosophy of scientific method few have come up to 
him, and perhaps none have gone beyond him. 

Cowley exerted himself to do justice to the new phi- 
losophy in verse as well as prose, and his Poem to the 
Royal Society expresses in a very noble manner those 
views of the history and prospects of philosophy which 
prevailed among the men by whom the Royal Society 
was founded. The fertility and ingenuity of comparison 
which characterise Cowley's poetry are well known ; and 
these qualities are in this instance largely employed for 
the embellishment of his subject. Many of the com- 
parisons which he exhibits are apt and striking. Philo- 
sophy is a ward whose estate (human knowledge) is, in 
his nonage, kept from him by his guardians and tutors; 
(a case which the ancient rhetoricians were fond of 
taking as a subject of declamation;) and these wrong- 
doers retain him in unjust tutelage and constraint for 
their own purposes ; until 

Bacon at last^ a mighty man, arose, 

(Whom a wise King, and Nature, chose 

Lord Chancellor of both their laws,) 
And boldly undertook the injured pupil's cause* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



fr6m bacon to newtok. 485 

Again, Bacon is one who breaks a scarecrow Priapus 
which stands in the garden of knowledge. Again, Bacon 
is one who, instead of a picture of painted grapes, gives 
us real grapes from which we press " the thirsty soul's 
refreshing wine." Again, Bacon is like Moses, who led 
the Hebrews forth from the barren wilderness, and 
ascended Plsgah; — 

Did on the very border stand 

Of the blest promised land, 
And from tbe mountain's top of his exalted wit 
Baw it himself and showed us it. 

The poet however adds, that Bacon discovered, but 
did not conquer this new world; and that the men 
whom he addresses must subdue these regions. These 
" champions '* are then ingeniously compared to Gideon's 
band: 

Their old and empty pitchers first they brake 
And with their hands then lifted up the light. 

There were still at this time some who sneered at or 
condemned the new philosophy; but the tide of popular 
opinion was soon strongly in its favour. I have else- 
where • noticed a pasquinade of the poet Boileau in 
1682, directed against the Aristotelians. At this time, 
and indeed for long afterwards, the philosophers of France 
were Cartesians. The English men of science, although 
partially and for a time they accepted som^ of Descartes' 
opinions, for the most part carried on the reform inde« 
pendently, and in pursuance of their own views. And 
they very soon found a much greater leader than Des- 
cartes to place at their head, and to take as their au- 
thority, 80 far as they acknowledged authority, in their 
speculations. I speak of Newton, whose influence upon 
the philosophy of science I must now consider. 

• Hiit. Ind. Set., 11. 137. 

2 P 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



43c review of opixions on knowledge, 

Chapter XIII. 
NEWTON. 

1. BoLB and extensive as had been the anticipations 
of those whose minds were excited by the promise of the 
new philosophy, the discoveries of Newton respecting 
the mechanics of the universe, brought into view truths 
more general and profound than those earlier philoso- 
phers had hoped or imagined. With these vast acces- 
sions to human knowledge, men's thoughts were again 
set in action ; and philosophers made earnest and various 
attempts to draw, from these extraordinary advances in 
science, the tnie moral with regard to the conduct and 
limits of the human understanding. They not only en- 
deavoured to verify and illustrate, by these new portions 
of science, what had recently been taught concerning the 
methods of obstaining sound knowledge ; but they were 
also led to speculate concerning many new and more 
interesting questions relating to this subject. They saw, 
for the first time, or at least far more clearly than 
before, the distinction between the inquiry into the laws^ 
and into the causes of phenomena. They were tempted 
to ask, how far the discovery of causes could be carried ; 
and whether it would soon reach, or clearly point to, tlie 
ultimate cause. They were driven to consider whether 
the properties which they discovered were essential pro- 
perties of all matter, necessarily and primarily involved 
in its essence, though revealed to us at a late period by 
their derivative effects. These questions even now agi- 
tate the thoughts of speculative men. Some of them 
have already, in this work, been discussed, or arranged 
in the places which our view of the phil6sophy of these 
subjects assigns to them. But we must here notice them 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 437 

as they occurred to NewtoA himself and his immediate 
followers. 

2* The general Baconian notion of the method of 
philosophizing, that it consists in ascending from pheno* 
mena, through various stages of generalization, to truths^ 
of the highest order, received, in Newton's discovery of 
the universal mutual gravitation of every particle of 
matter, that pointed actual exemplification, for want of 
which it had hitherto been almost overlooked, or at 
least very vaguely understood. That great truth, and 
the steps by which it was established, afford, even now, 
by £Etr the best example of the successive ascent, from 
one scientific truth to another, — of the repeated tran«« 
sition from less to more general propositions, — ^which W0 
can yet produce ; as may be seen in the Table which 
exhibits the relation of these steps in Book XL Newton 
himself did not fail to recognize this feature in the 
truths which he exhibited. Thus, he says*, **By the way 
of Analysis we proceed from compounds to ingredients, 
as from motions to the forces producing them; and in 
general, from effects to their causes, and from particular 
causes to more general ones, till the argument end in the 
most general." And in like manner in another Queryf : 
"The main business of natural philosophy is to argue 
from phenomena without feigning hypotheses, and to 
deduce causes from effects, till we come to the First 
Cause, which is certainly not mechanical." 

3. Newton appears to have had a horror of the term 
hypothesis^ which probably arose from his acquaintance 
with the rash and illicit general assumptions of Descartes. 
Thus in the passage just quoted, after declaring that 
gravity must have some other cause than matter, he 
says, "Later philosophers banish the consideration of 
such a cause out of Natural Philosophy, feigning hypo- 

* Optkiy Qn. 31, near the end. t Qu. 28. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



438 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

theses for explaining all thingi mechanically, and referring 
other causes to metaphysics.** In the celebrated Scho- 
lium at the end of the Princtpiot he says, " Whatever is 
not deduced from the phenomena, is to be termed hypo-' 
thesis ; and hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, 
or occult causes, or mechanical, have no place in experi- 
mental philosophy. In this philosophy, propositions are 
deduced from phenomena, and rendered general by induc- 
tion." And in another place, he arrests the course of his 
otm suggestions, saying, " Verum hypotheses non fingo.'* 
I have already attempted to show that this is, in reality, 
a superstitious and self-destructive spirit of speculation. 
Some hypotheses are necessary, in order to connect the 
facts which are observed ; some new principle of unity 
must be applied to the phenomena, before induction can 
be attempted. What is requisite is, that the hypothesis 
should be close to the facts, and not connected with them 
by other arbitrary and untried facts; and that the philoso- 
pher should be ready to resign it as soon as th© facts refuse 
to confirm it. We have seen in the History, that it was by 
such a use of hypotheses, that both Newton himself, and 
Kepler, on whose discoveries those of Newton were 
based, made their discoveries. The suppositions of a force 
tending to the sun and varying inversely as the square of 
the distance ; of a mutual force between all the bodies of 
the solar system ; of the force of each body arising from 
the attraction of all its parts ; not to mention others, also 
propounded by Newton, — were all hypotheses before they 
were verified as theories. It is related that when New- 
ton was asked how it was that he saw into the laws of 
nature so much further than other men, he replied, that 
if it were so, it resulted from his keeping his thoughts 
steadily occui)ied upon the subject which was to be thus 
penetrated. But what is this occupation of the thoughts, 
if it be not the process of keeping the phenomena clearly 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEAVTON. 430 

in view, and trying^ one after another, all the plausible 
hypotheses which seem likel j to connect them, till at last 
the true law is discorered ? Hypotheses so used are a 
necessary element of disoovery. 

4. With regard to the details of the process of dis^ 
coTery, Newton has giren us some of his views^ which are 
well worthy of notice, on account of their coming from 
him ; and which are real additions to the philosophy of 
this subject. He speaks repeatedly of the analt/su and 
sf/fUheii$ of obsenred facts ; and thus marks certain steps 
in scientific research, very important, and not, I think, 
clearly pointed out by his predecessors. Thus he says'*^^ 
^As in Mathematics, so in Naturd Philosophy, the 
investigation of difficult things by the method of analysis 
ought ever to precede the method of composition. This 
analysis consists in making experiments and observations, 
and in drawing general conclusions from them by induc- 
tion, and admitting of no objections against the conclu- 
sions, but such as are taken from experiments or other 
certain truths. And although the arguing horn experi- 
ments and observations by induction be no demonstration 
of general conclusions ; yet it is the best way of arguing 
which the nature of things admits o^ and may be looked 
upon as so much the stronger, by how much the induction 
is more general** And he then observes, as we have 
quoted above, that by this way of analysis we proceed 
from compounds to ingredients, from motions to forces, 
from effects to causes, and from less to more general 
causes. The anafysU here spoken of includes the steps 
which in this work we call the decomposition of facts, 
the exact observation and tneasurement of the pheno- 
mena, and the coUigatum of facts; the necessary in- 
termediate step, the sdectien and erplicaUon of the 
appropriate conception, being passed over, in the fear of 

* Op,, Qu, 31. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



440 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

seeming to encourage the fabrication of hypotheses. The 
synthesis of which Newton here speaks consists of those 
steps of dedtictive reasoning^ proceeding from the con- 
ception once assumed, which are requisite for the compa- 
rison of its consequences with the observed facts. This 
statement of the process of research, is, as far as it goes, 
perfectly exact. 

5. In speaking of Newton's precepts on the subject, 
we are naturally led to the celebrated " Rules of Philo- 
sophizing," inserted in the second edition of the Principia, 
These rules have generally been quoted and commented 
on with an almost unquestioning reverence. Such Rules, 
coming from such an authority, cannot fail to be highly 
interesting to us ; but at the same time, we cannot here 
evade the necessity of scrutinizing their truth and value, 
according to the principles which our survey of this 
subject has brought into view. The Rules stand at the 
beginning of that part of the Principia (the Third Book) 
in which he infers the mutual gravitation of the sun, 
moon, planets, and all parts of each. They are as follows : 

" Rule I. We are not to admit other causes of natural 
things than such as both are true, and suffice for explain- 
ing their phenomena. 

" Rules II. Natural effects of the same kind are to 
be referred to the same causes, as far as can be done. 

" Rule III. The qualities of bodies which cannot be 
increased or diminished in intensity, and which belong to 
all bodies in which we can institute experiments, are to 
be held for qualities of all bodies whatever. 

" Rule IV. In experimental philosophy, propositions 
collected from phenomena by induction, are to be held as 
true either accurately or approximately, notwithstanding 
contrary hypotheses; till other phenomena occur by 
which they may be rendered either more accurate or 
liable to exception." 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 441 

In considering these Rules, we cannot help remarking, 
in the first place, that they are constructed with an inten- 
tional adaptation to the case with which Newton has to 
deal, — the induction of Universal Grayitation ; and are 
intended to protect the reasonings before which they 
stand. Thus the first Rule is designed to strengthen the 
inference of gravitation from the celestial phenomena, hy 
describing it as a vera causdy a true cause ; the second 
countenances the doctrine that the planetary motions are 
governed by mechanical forces^ as terrestrial motions are ; 
the third rule appears intended to justify the assertion of 
gravitation, as a universal quality of bodies; and the 
fourth contains, along with a general declaration of the 
authority of induction, the author's usual protest against 
hypotheses, levelled at the Cartesian hypotheses especially. 

6. Of tlie First Rule. — We, however, must consider 
these Rules in their general application, in M'hich point 
of view they have often been referred to, and have 
had very great authority allowed them. One of the 
points which has been most discussed, is that maxim 
which requires that the causes of phenomena which we 
assign should be true causes, tcrcB causa. Of course this 
does not mean that they should be the true or right 
cause ; for although it is the philosopher's aim to discover 
such causes, he would be little aided in his search of 
truth, by being told that it is truth which he is to seek. 
The rule has generally been understood to prescribe that 
in attempting to account for any class of phenomena, we 
must assume such causes only, us from other considerations^ 
we know to exist. Thus gravity, which was employed in 
explaining the motions of the moon and planets, was 
already known to exist and operate at the earth's surface. 

Now the Rule thus interpreted is, I conceive, an 
injurious limitation of the field of induction. For it 
forbids us to look for a cause, except among the cause's 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



442 BEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

with which we are already familiar. But if we follow this 
rule, how shall we ever become acquainted with any new 
cause ? Or how do we know that the phenomena which 
we contemplate do really arise from some cause which 
we already truly know ? If they do not, must we still 
insist upon making them depend upon some of our known 
causes ; or must we abandon the study of them altoge« 
ther? Must we, for example, resolve to refer the action 
of radiant heat to the air, rather than to any peculiar 
fluid or ether, because the fonner is known to exist, the 
latter is merely assumed for the purpose of explanation? 
But why should we do this ? Why should we not endea- 
vour to learn the cause from the effects, even if it be not 
already known to us? We can infer causes, which are 
new when we first became acquainted with them. Che- 
mical Forces, Optical Forces, Vital Forces, are known to 
us only by chemical and optical and vital phenomena; must 
we, therefore, reject their existence or abandon their 
study ? They do not conform to the double condition, 
that they shall be sufficient and also real : they are true, 
only so far as they explain the facts, but are they, there- 
fore, unintelligible or useless ? Are they not highly im- 
portant and instructive subjects of speculation ? And if 
the gravitation which rules the motions of the planets 
had not existed at the earth's surface ; — ^if it had been 
there masked and concealed by the superior effect of 
magnetism, or some other extraneous force, might not 
Newton still have inferred, from Kepler^s laws, the ten- 
dency of the planets to the sun ; and from their pertur- 
bations, their tendency to each other ? His discoveries 
would still have been immense, if the cause which he 
assigned had not been a vera causa in the sense now 
contemplated. 

7. But what, do we mean by calling gravity a **true 
cause ?" How do we learn its reality ? Of course, by its 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWT0N4 443 

effects, with which we are familiar ; — by the weight and 
fall of bodies about us. These strike even the most 
careless observer. No one can fail to see that all bodies 
which we come in contact with are heavy ; — that gravity 
acts in our neighbourhood here upon earth. Hence, it 
may be said, this cause, is at any rate a true cause, whether 
it explains the celestial phenomena or not. 

But if this be what is meant by a vera causa, it appears 
strange to require that in all cases we should find such a 
one to account for all classes of phenomena. Is it rea- 
sonable or prudent to demand that we shall reduce every 
set of phenomena, however minute, or abstruse, or com- 
plicated, to causes so obviously existing as to strike the 
most incurious, and to be familiar among men? How 
can we expect to find such vertB causa for the delicate 
and recondite phenomena which an exact and skilful 
observer detects in chemical, or optical, or electrical 
experiments? The facts themselves are too fine for 
vulgar apprehension; their relations, their symmetries, 
their measures require a previous discipline to understand 
them. How then can their causes be found among those 
agencies with which the common unscientific herd of 
mankind are familiar? What likelihood is there that 
causes held for real by such persons, shall explain facts 
which such persons cannot see or cannot understand? 

Again : if we give authority to such a rule, and require 
that the causes by which science explains the facts which 
she notes and measures and analyses, shall be causes 
which men, without any special study, have already come 
to believe in, from the effects which they casually see 
around them, what is this, except to make our first rude 
and unscientific persuasions the criterion and test of our 
most laborious and thoughtful inferences? What is it,, 
but to give to ignorance and thoughtlessness the right of 
pronouncing upon the convictions of intense study and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



444 BEVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGF, 

long disciplined thought? "Electrical atmospheres' 
surrounding electrized bodies, were at one time held to 
be a " true cause" of the effects which such bodies produce. 
These atmospheres, it was said, are obvious to the senses ;- 
we feel them like a spider's web on the hands and iace< 
-Sipiniis had to answer such persons, by proving that there 
are no atmospheres, no effluvia, but only repulsion. 
He thus, for a true cause in the vulgar sense of the term, 
substituted an hypothesis ; yet who doubts that what he 
did was an advance in the science of electricity ? 

8, Perhaps some persons may be disposed to say, that 
Newton's Rule does not enjoin us to take those causes 
only which we clearly know, or suppose we know, to be 
really existing and operating, but only causes of such kinds 
as we have already satisfied ourselves do exist in nature. 
It may be urged that we are entitled to infer that the 
planets are governed in their motions by an attractive 
force, because we find, in the bodies immediately subject to 
observation and experiment, that such motions are produced 
by attractive forces, for example by that of the earth. It 
may be said that we might on similar grounds infer forces 
•which unite particles of chemical compounds, or deflect 
particles of light, because we see adhesion and deflection 
produced by forces. 

But it is easy to show that the Rule, thus laxly un- 
derstood, loses all significance. It prohibits no hypothe- 
sis ; for all hypotheses suppose causes such as, in some 
case or other, we have seen in action. No one would think 
of explaining phenomena by referring them to forces and 
agencies altogether different from any which are known; 
for on this supposition, how could he pretend to reason 
about the effects of the assumed causes, or undertake to 
prove that they would explain the fects? Some close 
similarity with some known kind of cause is requisite, in 
order that the hypothesis may have the appearance of an 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 445 

explanation. No forces, or virtues, or sympathies, or 
fluids, or ethers, would be excluded by this interpretation 
of vera causa. Least of all, would such an interpreta- 
tion reject the Cartesian hypothesis of vortices; which 
undoubtedly, as I conceive, Newton intended to condemn 
by his Rule. For that such a case as a whirling fluid, 
carrying bodies round a centre in orbits, does occur, is too 
obvious to require proof. Every eddying stream, or blast 
that twirls the dust in the road, exhibits examples of such 
action, and would justify the assumption of the vortices 
which carry the planets in their courses ; as indeed, with- 
out doubt, such fects suggested the Cartesian explanation 
of the solar system. The vortices, in this mode of con- 
sidering the subject, are at the least as real a cause of 
motion as gravity itself. 

9. Thus the Rule which enjoins " true causes," is nuga- 
tory, if we take vera causes in the extended sense of any 
causes of a real Mnd^ and unphilosophical if we under- 
stand the term of those very causes which we femiliarly 
suppose to exist. But it may be said that we are to 
designate as " true causes," not those which are collected 
in a loose, confused and precarious manner, by undisci- 
plined minds, from obvious phenomena, but those which 
are justly and rigorously inferred. Such a cause, it may 
be added, gravity is; for the facts of the downward 
pressures and downward motions of bodies at the earth's 
surface lead us, by the plainest and strictest induction, to 
the assertion of such a force. Now to this interpretation 
of the Rule there is no olyection ; but then, it must be 
observed, that on this view, terrestrial gravity is inferred 
by the same process as celestial gravitation ; and the 
cause is no more entitled to be called " true," because it is 
obtained from the former, than because it is obtained from 
the latter class of facts. We thus obtain an intelligible 
and tenable explanation of a vera causa ; but then, by this 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



446 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

explanation its f)erity ceases to be distinguishable from 
its other condition, that it ** suffices for the explanation of 
the phenomena.'' The assumption of imiversal gravitation 
accounts for the fall of a stone ; it also accounts for the 
rerolutions of the Moon or of Saturn ; but since both these 
explanations are of the same kind, we cannot with justice 
make the one a criterion or condition of the admissibility 
of the other. 

10. But still, the Rule, so understood, is so fiar from 
being unmeaning or frivolous, that it expresses one of the 
most important tests which can be given of a sound 
physical theory. It is true, the explanation of one set of 
facts may be of the same nature as the explanation of the 
other class : but then, that the cause explains both classes, 
gives it a very different claim upon our attention and 
assent from that which it would have if it explained one 
class only. The very circumstance that the two explana- 
tions coincide, is a most weighty presumption in their 
favour. It is the testimony of two witnesses in behalf of 
the hypothesis; and in proportion as these two vdtnesses 
are separate and independent^ the conviction produced by 
their agreement is more and more complete. When the 
explanation of two kinds of phenomena, distinct and not 
apparently connected, leads us to the same cause, such a 
coincidence does give a reality to the cause, which it has 
not while it merely accounts for those appearances which 
suggested the supposition. This coincidence of propo- 
sitions inferred from separate classes of facts, is exactly 
what we noticed in the last Book, as one of the most 
decisive characteristics of a true theory, under the name 
of the Consilience of Inductions. 

That Newton's First Rule of Philosophizing, so under* 
stood, authorizes the inferences which he himself made, is 
really the ground on which they are so firmly believed 
by philosophers. Thus when the doctriae of a gravity 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 447 

Tarying inversely as the square of the distance irom the 
body, accounted at the same time for the relations of 
times and distances in the planetary orbits and for the 
amount of the moon's deflection from the tangent of her 
orbit, such a doctrine became most convincing : or again, 
when the doctrine of the universal gravitation of all parts 
of matter, which explained so admirably the inequalities 
of the moon's motions, also gave a satisfactory account of 
a phenomenon utterly different, the precession of the 
equinoxes. And of the same kind is the evidence in 
favour of the undulatory theory of light, when the as- 
sumption of the length of an undulation, to which we are 
led by the colours of thin plates, is found to be identical 
with that length which explains the phenomena of dif&ac* 
tion ; or when the hypothesis of transverse vibrations, 
suggested by the facts of polarization, explains also the 
laws of double refraction* When such a convergence of two 
trains of induction points to the same spot, we can no 
longer suspect that we are wrong. Such an accumula- 
tion of proof really persuades us that we have to do with 
a vera causa. And if this kind of proof be multiplied ; — if 
we again find other facts of a sort uncontemplated in 
framing our hypothesis, but yet clearly accounted for when 
we have adopted the supposition ; — we are still further 
confirmed in our belief; and by such accumulation of 
proof we may be so far satisfied, as to believe without 
conceiving it possible to doubt. In this case, when the 
validity of the opinion adopted by us has been repeatedly 
confirmed by its sufficiency in unforeseen cases^ so that 
all doubt is removed and forgotten, the theoretical cause 
takes its place among the realities of the world, and 
becomes a true came. 

11. Newton's Rule then, to avoid mistakes, might be 
thus expressed ; That " we may, provisorily, assume such 
hypothetical cause as will account for any given class of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



448 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

natural phenomena ; but that when two different classes 
of facts lead us to the same hypothesis, we may hold it 
to be a true causeJ^' And this Rule will rarely or never 
mislead us. There are no instances, in which a doctrine 
recommended in this manner has afterwards been discov- 
ered to be false. There have been hypotheses which have 
explained many phenomena, and kept their ground long, 
and have afterwards been rejected. But these have been 
hypotheses which explained only one class of phenomena ; 
and their fall took place when another kind of facts 
was examined and brought into conflict with the former. 
Thus the system of eccentrics and epicycles accounted for 
all the observed motions of the planets, and was the means 
of expressing and transmitting all astronomical knowledge 
for two thousand years. But then, how was it overthrown ? 
By considering the distances as well as motions of the 
heavenly bodies. Here was a second class of facts ; and 
when the system was adjusted so as to agree with the one 
class, it was at variance with the other. These cycles and 
epicycles could not be true, because they could not be 
made a just representation of the facts. But if the mea- 
sures of distance as well as of position had conspired in 
pointing out the cycles and epicycles, as the paths of the 
planets, the paths so determined could not have been 
^ otherwise than their real paths ; and the epicyclical theory 
would have been, at least geometrically, true. 

12. Of the Second Ride. — Newton's Second Rule di- 
rects that " natural events of the same kind are to be 
referred to the same causes^ so far as can be done." iSuch a 
precept at first appears to help us but little ; for all sys- 
tems, however little solid, profess to conform to such a 
rule. When any theorist undertakes to explain a class 
of facts, he assigns causes which according to him, will by 
their natural action, as seen in other cases, produce the 
effects in question. The events which he accounts for by 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 449 

bis hypothetical cause, are, he holds, of the same kind as 
those which such a cause is known to produce. Kepler, 
in ascribing the planetary motions to magnetism, Descar- 
tes, in explaining them by means of vortices, held that 
they were referring celestial motions to the causes which 
give rise to terrestrial motions of the same kind. The 
question is. Are the effects of the same kind ? This once 
settled, there will be no question about the propriety of 
assigning them to the same cause. But the difficulty is, 
to determine when events are of the same kind. Are the 
motions of the planets of the same kind with the motion 
of a body moving freely in a curvilinear path, or do they 
not rather resemble the motion of a floating body swept 
round by a whirling current ? The Newtonian and the 
Cartesian answered this question differently. How then 
can we apply this Rule with any advantage ? 

13. To this we reply, that there is no way of escaping 
this uncertainty and ambiguity, but by obtaining a clear 
possession of the ideas which our hypothesis involves, and 
by reasoning rigorously from them. Newton asserts that 
the planets move in free paths, acted on by certain forces. 
The most exact calculation gives the closest agreement 
of the results of this hypothesis with the facts. Descartes 
asserts that the planets are carried round by a fluid. The 
more rigorously the conceptions of force and the laws of 
motion are applied to this hypothesis, the more signal is 
its failure in reconciling the facts to one another. With- 
out such calculation we can come to no decision between 
the two hypotheses. If the Newtonian hold that the 
motions of the planets are emdendy of the same kind as 
those of a body describing a curve in free space, and 
therefore, like that, to be explained by a force acting 
upon the body ; the Cartesian denies that the planets do 
move in free space. They are, he maintains, immersed 
in a plenum. It is only when it appears that comets 
VOL. II. 20 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



450 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

pass through this plenum in all directions with no impe- 
diment, and that no possible form and motion of its 
whirlpools can explain the forces and motions which are 
observed in the solar system, that he is compelled tQ 
allow the Newtonian's classificatioa of events of the same 
kind. 

Thus it does not appear that this Rule of Newton 
ean be interpreted in any distinct and positive manner, 
otherwise than as enjoining that, in the task of induction, 
we employ clear ideas, rigorous reasoning, and close and 
feir comparison of the results of the hypothesis with the 
facts. These are, no doubt, important an4 fundamental 
conditions of a just induction ; but in this ii\junption we 
find no peculiar or technici^l criterion by which we may 
satisfy ourselves that we are rights or detect our errors. 
Still, of such general prudential rules, none can be 
more wise than one which thus, in the task of connecting 
facts by means of ideas, recommends that the ideas bo 
clear, the facts correct, and the chain of reasoning whicl^ 
connects them without a flaw. 

14. 0/ the Third Bule.— The Third Rule, that " qua- 
lities which are observed without exception be h^d to 
be universal,'' as I have already said, seems to be 
intended to authorize the assertion of gravitation as a 
universal attribute of matter. We formerly stated, in 
treating of Mechanical Ideas*, that this application of 
such a Rule appears to be a mode of reasoning far from 
conclusive. The assertion of the universality of any pro- 
perty of bodies must be grounded upon the reason of the 
ease, and not upon any arbitrary maxim. Is it intended 
by this Rule to prohibit any further examination how &t 
gravity is an original property of matter, and how &r it 
may be resolved into the result of other i^noies? We 
know pecfeotly well that this was not Newton's intontioQ ; 

* Book lii. 0. 10. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



KEWTOK* 461 

since the cause of gmvitj was a point which he proposed 
to himself as ^ subject of inquiry. It would (Certainly be 
very unphilosophioal to pretend, by this Rule of Philo- 
sophizing, to prejudge the question of such hypotheses as 
that of Mosotti, That gravity is the excess of the elee^ 
trical attraction over electrical repulsion: and yet to 
adopt this hypothesis, would be to suppose electrical 
forces more truly universal than gravity ; for according 
to the hypothesis, gravity, being the inequality of the 
attraction and repulsion, is only an accidental and partial 
relation of these forces. Nor would it be allowable to 
urge this Rule as a reason of assuming that double stars 
are attracted to each other by a force varying according 
to the inverse square of the distance ; without examining^ 
as Herschel and others have done, the orbits which they^ 
really describe. But if the Rule is not available in such 
cases, what is its real value and authority? and in tirhat 
eases are they exemplified ? 

15. In a former part of this work*, it was shown that 
the fundamental laws of motion, and the properties of 
matter which these involve, are, after a full consideration 
of the sulgeet, unavoidably assumed as univm*sally true. 
It was further shown> that although our knowledge of 
these laws and properties be gathered from experience; 
we are strongly impelled, some philosophers tidnk autho^^ 
riMd, to look upon these as not only universally, but 
oeoessarily true. It was also stated, that the l^w of gra^ 
vitation, though its universality may be deemed pvobable^ 
does not apparently involve the same necessity as the 
fundamental lawa of motion. But it was pointed out 
that these are some of the most abstruse and difficult 
questions of the whole of philosophy ; involving the pror 
found, perhaps insoluble, problem of the identity or diveiw 
sity of ideas and thingt. It cannot, therefore, be deoBiod 

? Bookiih c. 9, 10, 11. 

2 GS 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



452 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

philosophical to cut these Gordiaa knots by peremptory 
maximSy which encourage us to decide without rendering 
a reason. Moreover, it appears clear that the reason 
which is rendered for this Rule by the Newtonians is 
quite untenable ; namely, that W0 know extension, hard- 
ness, and inertia, to be universal qualities of bodies by 
experience alone, and that we have the same evidence of 
experience for the universality of gravitation. We have 
already observed that we cannot, with any propriety, say 
that we find by experience all bodies are extended. This 
could not be a just assertion, except we could conceive 
the possibility of our finding the contrary. But who can 
conceive our finding by experience some bodies which 
are not extended? It appears, then, that the reason 
given for the Third Rule of Newton involves a mistake 
respecting the nature and authority of experience. And 
the Rule itself cannot be applied without attempting to 
decide by the casual limits o^ observation, questions which 
necessarily depend upon the relations of ideas. 

16. Of the Fourth /Zttfe.— Newton's Fourth Rule is, 
that ** Propositions collected from phenomena by induc- 
tion, shall be held to be true, notwithstanding contrary 
hypotheses ; but shall be liable to be rendered more accu- 
rate, or to have their exceptions pointed out, by addi- 
tional study of phenomena.'' This Rule contains little 
more than a general assertion of the authority of induc- 
tion, accompanied by Newton's usual protest against 
hypotheses. 

The really valuable part of the Fourth Rule is that 
which implies that a constant verification, and, if neces- 
sary, rectification, of truths discovered by induction, should 
go on in the scientific world. Even when the law is, or 
appears to be, most certainly exact and universal, it should 
be constantly exhibited to us afresh in the form of expe- 
rience and observation. This is necessary, in order to 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON, 45S 

discover exceptions and modifications if such exist ; and 
if the law be rigorously true, the contemplation of it, as 
exemplified in the world of phenomena, will best give us 
that clear apprehension of its bearings which may lead us 
to see the ground of its truth. 

The concluding clause of this Fourth Rule appears, at 
first, to imply that all inductive propositions are to be 
considered as merely provisional and limited, and never 
secure from exception. But to judge thus would be to 
underrate the stability and generality of scientific truths ; 
for what man of science can suppose that we shall here- 
after discover exceptions to the universal gravitation of 
all parts of the solar system ? And it is plain that the 
author did not intend the restriction to be applied so 
rigorously ; for in the Third Rule, as we have just seen, 
he authorizes us to infer universal properties of matter 
from observation, and carries the liberty of inductive 
inference to its full extent. The Third Rule appears to 
encourage us to assert a law to be universal, even in cases 
in which it has not been tried ; the Fourth Rule seems 
to warn us that the law may be inaccurate, even in cases 
in which it has been tried. Nor is either of these sug- 
gestions erroneous; but both the universality and the 
rigorous accuracy of our laws are proved by reference to 
Ideas rather than to Experience ; a truth which, perhaps, 
the philosophers of Newton's time were somewhat dis- 
posed to overlook. 

17. The disposition to ascribe all our knowledge to 
Experience, appears in Newton and the Newtonians by 
other indications ; for instance, it is seen in their extreme 
dislike to the ancient expressions by which the principles 
and causes of phenomena were described, as the occidt 
causes of the Schoolmen, and i\ie forms of the Aristotelians, 
which had been adopted by Bacon. Newton says*, that 

? Optk$^ Qu. 31. , 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



454 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

the particles of matter not only possess inertia, but also ac- 
tive principles, as gravity, fermentation, cohesion ; he adds, 
" These principles I consider not as Occult Qualities, sup- 
posed to result from the Specific Forms of things, but as 
General Laws of Nature, by which the things themselves 
are formed : their truth appearing to us by phenomena, 
though their causes be not yet discovered. For these 
are manifest qualities, and their causes only are occult. 
And the Aristotelians gave the name of occidt qnditiesy 
not to manifest qualities, but to such qualities only as 
they supposed to lie hid in bodies, and to the unknown 
causes of manifest efiects : such as would be the causes 
of gravity, and of magnetick and electrick attractions, 
and of fermentations, if we should suppose that these 
forces or actions arose from qualities unknown to us, and 
incapable of being discovered and made manifest. Such 
occult qualities put a stop to the improvement of Natural 
Philosophy, and therefore of late years have been rejected. 
To tell us that every species of things is endowed with 
an occult specific quality by which it acts and produces 
manifest effects, is to tell us nothing : but to derive two 
or three general principles of motion from phenomena, 
and afterwards to tell us how the properties and actions 
of all corporeal things follow from these manifest prin- 
ciples, would be a great step in philosophy, though the 
causes of those principles were not yet discovered : and 
therefore I scruple not to propose the principles of motion 
above maintained, they being of very general extent, and 
leave their causes to be found out." 

18. All that is here said is highly philosophical and 
valuable; but we may observe that' the investigation of 
specific formSy in the sense in which some writers had 
used the phrase, was no means a frivolous or unmeaning 
object of inquiry. Bacon and others had used form as 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NEWTON. 456 

equivalent to law*. If vre could ascertain that arrange- 
ment of the particles of a crystal from which its external 
crystalline form and other properties arise, this arrange- 
ment would be the internal form of the crystal. If the 
undulatory theory be true, the form of light is transverse 
vibrations : if the emission theory be maintained, the form 
of light is particles moving in straight lines, and deflected 
by various forces. Both the terms, form and law, imply 
an ideal connexion of sensible phenomena ; form supposes 
matter which is moulded to the form; law supposes 
objects which are governed by the law. The former 
term refers more precisely to existences, the latter to 
occurrences. The latter term is now the more familiar, 
and is, perhaps, the better metaphor : but the former also 
contains the essential antithesis which belongs to the 
subject, and might be used in expressing the same con- 
clusions. 

But occult causes, employed in the way in which 
Newton describes, had certainly been very prejudicial to 
the progress of knowledge, by stopping inquiry with a 
mere word. The absurdity of such pretended explaua.- 
tions had not escaped ridicule. The pretended physician 
in the comedy gives an example of an occult cause or 
virtue. 

Mihi demandatur 
A doctissimo Doctore 
Quar0 Opium facit donnire : 

* Nov. Org., lib. il. Apb. 2. Licet enim in natura nihil ezistet 
prseter corpora individua, edentia actus puros individuos ex lege; in 
doctrinis tamen ilia ipsa lex, ej usque inquisitio^ et inventio, et expli- 
catio, pro fundamento est tarn ad sciendum quam ad operandum. 
Eam autem legem, ejusque paragraphoiyformarum nomine intelligimus ; 
prsesertim cum hoc vocabulum invaluerit^ et familiter occurrat. 

Apb. 17. Eadem res est forma calidi vel forma luminis, et kx 
calidi aut lex luminis. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



466 KEVIBW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

Et ego respondeo. 
Quia est in eo 
Virtus dormitiva,' 
Cujus natura est sensus asBOupire. 

19. But the most valuable part of the view presented 
to us in the quotation just given from Newton is the 
distinct separation, already noticed as peculiarly brought 
into prominence by him, of the determination of the 
laws of phenomena, and the investigation of their causes. 
The maxim, that the former inquiry must precede the 
latter, and that if the general laws of facts be discovered, 
the result is highly valuable, although the causes remain 
unknown, is extremely important ; and had not, I think, 
ever been so strongly and clearly stated, till Newton both 
repeatedly promulgated the precept, and added to it the 
weight of the most striking examples. 

We have seen that Newton, along with views the 
most just and important concerning the nature and 
methods of science, had something of the tendency, pre- 
valent in his time, to suspect or reject, at least specula- 
tively, all elements of knowledge except observation. 
This tendency was, however, in him so corrected and 
restrained by his own wonderful sagacity and mathema- 
tical habits, that it scarcely led to any opinion which we 
might not safely adopt. But we must now consider the 
cases in which this tendency operated in a more unba- 
lanced manner, and led to the assertion of doctrines 
which, if consistently followed, would destroy the very 
foundations of all general and certain knowledge. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



457 

Chapter XIV. 
LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 

1. In the constant opposition and struggle of the 
schools of philosophy, which consider our Senses and our 
Ideas, respectively, as the principal sources of our know- 
ledge, we have seen that at the period of which we now 
treat, the tendency was to exalt the external and dis- 
parage the internal element. The disposition to ascribe 
our knowledge to observation alone, had already, in 
Bacon's time, led him to dwell to a disproportionate 
degree upon that half of his subject; and had tinged 
Newton's expressions, though it had not biassed his pracr 
tice. But this partiality soon assumed a more prominent 
shape, becoming extreme in Locke, and extravagant in 
those who professed to follow him. 

Indeed Locke appears to owe his popularity and 
influence as a popular writer mainly to his being one of 
the first to express, in a plain and unhesitating manner, 
opinions which had for some time been ripening in the 
minds of a large portion of the cultivated public. Hobbes 
had already promulgated the main doctrines, which 
Locke afterwards urged, on the subject of the origin and 
nature of our knowledge: but in him these doctrine^ 
were combined with offensive opinions on points of 
morals, government, and religion, so that their access to 
general favour was impeded : and it was to Locke that 
they were indebted for the extensive influence which they 
soon after obtained. Locke owed this authority mainly 
to the intellectual circumstances of the time. Although 
a writer of great merit, he by no means possesses such 
metaphysical acuteness or such philosophical largeness of 
view, or such a charm of writing, as to give him the high 
place he has held in the literature of Europe. But he 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



458 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

came at a period when the reign of Ideas was tottering 
to its fall. All tlie most actiye and ambitious spirits had 
gone over to the new opinions, and were prepared to 
follow the fortunes of the Philosophy of Experiment, 
then in the most prosperous and brilliant condition, and 
full of still brighter promise. There wore, indeed, a few 
learned and thoughtful men who still remained faithful 
to the empire of Ideas; partly, it may be, from a too 
fond attachment to ancient systems; but partly, also, 
because they knew that there were subjects of vast im- 
portance in which experience did not form the whole 
foundation of our knowledge. They knew, too, that 
many of the plausible tenets of the new philosophy were 
revivals of fallacies which had been discussed and refuted 
in ancient times. But the advocates of mere experience 
came on with a vast store of weighty truth among their 
artillery, and with the energy which the advance usually 
bestows. The ideal system of philosophy could, for the 
present, make no effectual resistance ; Locke, by putting 
himself at the head of the assault, became the hero of his 
day : and his name has been used as the watchword of 
those who adhere to the philosophy of the senses up to 
our own times. 

2. Locke himself did not assert the exclusive autho- 
rity of the senses in the extreme unmitigated manner in 
which some who call themselves his disciples have done. 
But this is the common lot of the leaders of revolutions, 
for they are usually bound by some ties of affection and 
habit to the previous state of things, and would not 
destroy all traces of that condition : while their followers 
attend, not to their inconsistent wishes, but to the mean- 
ing of the revolution itself; and carry out, to their genu- 
ine and complete results, the principles which won the 
victory, and which have been brought out more sharp 
from the conflict. Thus Locke himself does not assert 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 459 

that all our ideas are derired from sensation, but from 
sensation and reflection. But it was easily seen that, in 
this assertion, two very heterogeneous elements werd 
conjoined : that while to pronounce Sensation thiB origin 
of ideas is a clear decided tenet, the acceptance or rejec- 
tion of which determines the general character of our 
philosophy; to make the same declaration concerning 
Reflection is in the highest degree vague and ambiguous, 
since reflection may either be l-esolved into a mere modi- 
fication of sensation, as was done by one school, or may 
mean all that the opposite school oppose to sensation, 
under the name of Ideas. Hence the clear and strong 
Impression which fastened upon men's minds, and which 
does in fact represent all the systematic and consistent 
part of Locke's philosophy, was, that in it all our ideas 
are represented as derived from Sensation. 

3. We need not spend much time in pointing out 
the inconsistencies into which Locke fell; as all must 
fall into inconsistences who recognize no source of know- 
ledge except the senses. Thus ho maintains that our 
Idea of Space is derived from the senses of sight and 
touch ; our Idea of Solidity from the touch alone. Our 
Notion of Substance is an unknown support of unknown 
qualities, and is illustrated by the Indian fable of the 
tortoise which supports the elephant, which supports the 
world. Our Notion of Power or Cause is in like manner 
got from the senses. And yet, though these ideas are 
thus mere fragments of our experience, Locke does not 
hesitate to ascribe to them necessity and universality 
when they occur in propositions. Thus he maintains the 
necessary truth of geometrical properties : he asserts that 
the resistance arising from solidity is absolutely insuF- 
mountable*; he conceives that nothing short of Omni- 
potence can annihilate a particle of matter f; and he has 

* Book xl. c. 4y eeoS 3. f Jb., c. 13, secf* 22. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



460 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

HO misgivings in arguing upon the axiom that Every thing 
must have a cause. He does not perceive that, upon his 
own account of the origin of our knowledge, we can have 
no right to make any of these assertions. If our know- 
ledge of the truths which concern the external world 
were wholly derived from experience, all that we could 
venture to say would be, — ^that geometrical properties of 
figures are true as far as we have tiied them; — that we 
have seen no example of a solid body being reduced to 
occupy less space by pressure, or of a material substance 
9,nnihilated by natural means; — and that wherecer we 
have examined^ we have found that every change has had 
a cause. Experience can never entitle us to declare that 
what she has not seen is impossible ; still less, that things 
which she can not see are certain. Locke himself 
intended to throw no doubt upon the certainty of either 
human or divine knowledge; but his principles, when 
men discarded the temper in which he applied them, 
and the checks to their misapplication which he con- 
ceived that he had provided, easily led to a very com- 
prehensive scepticism. His doctrines tended to dislodge 
from their true bases the most indisputable parts of 
knowledge; as, for example, pure and mixed mathe- 
matics. It may well be supposed, therefore, that they 
shook the foundations of many other parts of knowledge 
in the minds of common thinkers. 

It was not long before these consequences of the over- 
throw of ideas showed themselves in the speculative 
world. I have already in a previous part of this work* 
mentioned Hume's sceptical inferences from Locke's 
maxim, that we have no ideas except those which we 
acquire by experience ; and the doctrines set up in oppo- 
sition to this by the metaphysicians of Germany. I 
might trace the progress of the sensational opinions in 

* Book ill. 0. 3. Modem Opinions respecting the Idea of Cause. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 461 

Britain tUl the reaction took place here also: but 
they were so much more clearly and decidedly followed 
out in France, that I shall pursue their history in that 
country, 

4. The French Followers of Lockey CondiUaCy Sfc.^^ 
Most of the French writers who adopted Locke's leading 
doctrines, rejected the "Reflection/* which formed an 
anomalous part of his philosophy, and declared that sen- 
sation alone was the source of ideas. Among these 
writers Condillac was tlie most distinguished. He ex- 
pressed the leading tenet of their school in a clear and 
pointed manner by saying that " All ideas are tranformed 
sensations.'' We have already considered this point*, 
and need not here longer dwell upon it. 

Opinions such as these tend to annihilate, as we have 
seen, one of the two co-ordinate elements of our know- 
ledge. Yet they were &r from being so prejudicial to 
the progress of science, or even of the philosophy of 
science, as might have been anticipated. One reason of 
this was, that they were practically corrected, especially 
among the cultivators of Natural Philosophy, by the study 
of mathematics ; for that study did really supply all that 
was requisite on the ideal side of science, so far as the 
ideas of space, time, and number, were concerned, and 
partly also with regard to the idea of cause and others. 
And the methods of discovery, though the philosophy of 
them made no material advance, were practically employed 
with so much activity, and in so many various subjects, 
that a certain kind of prudence and skill in this employ- 
ment was very widely diffused. 

5. Importance of Language. — In one respect this 
school of metaphysicians rendered a very valuable service 
%o the philosophy of science. They brought into pro- 
minent notice the great importance of words and terms 

* B. i. c. 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



462 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE, 

in the fonpation and progvess of knowledge, and pointed^ 
out that the oflSce of language is not only to oonyey and 
preserve our thoughts, but to perfonn the analyms in 
which reasoning consists. They were led to this train of 
spepulatioui in fk great measure, by taking pure mathe- 
matical science as their standard example of substantial 
knowledge. Condillae, rejecting, as we hav6 said, almost 
all those ideas on which universal and demonstrable 
truths must be based, was still not at all disposed to 
question the reality of human knowledge ; but was, on 
the contrary, a aealous admirer of the evidence and con- 
nexion which appear in those sciences which have the 
ideas of space and number for their foundation, especially 
the latter. He looked for the grounds of the certainty 
and reality of the knowledge which these science con- 
tain ; and found them, as he conceived, in the nature of 
the language which they employ. The Signs which are 
used in arithmetic and algebra enable us to keep steadily 
in view the identity of the same quantity under all the 
forms which, by composition and decomposition, it may 
be made to assume ; and these Signs also not only express 
the operations which are performed, but suggest the ex<» 
tension of the operations according to analogy. Algebra, 
according to him, is only a very perfect language ; and 
language answers its purpose of leading us to truth, by 
possessing the characteristics of algebra. Words are the 
symbols of certain groups of impressions or facts ; they 
are so selected and applied as to exhibit the analogies 
which prevail among these facts ; and these analogies are 
the truths of which our knowledge consists. ^^ Every 
language is an analytical method ; every analytical method 
is a language*;" these were the truths ^^ alike new and 
simple," as be held, which he conceived that he had 
demonstrated. ^*The art of speaking, the art of writings 

* Langm d$$ CtJcttls^ p. 1. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWEBS. 463 

the art of reasoning, the art of thinking, are only, at 
bottom, one and the same art*." Each of these opera- 
tions consists in a succession of analytical operations; 
and words are the marks by which we are able to fix our 
minds upon the steps of this analysis. 

7. The analysis of our impressions and notions does 
in reality lead to truth, not only in virtue of the identity 
of the whole with its parts, as Condillac held, but also in 
virtue of certain Ideas which govern the synthesis of our 
sensations, and which contain the elements of universal 
truths^ as we have all along endeavoured to show. But 
although Condillao overlooked or rejected this doctrine, 
the importance of words, as marking the successive steps 
of this synthesis and analysis, is not less than he repre* 
sented it to be. Every truth, once established by induc- 
tion from facts, when it is become familiar under a brief 
and precise form of expression, becomes itself a fact ; and 
is capable of being employed, along with other facts of a 
like kind, as the materials of fresh inductions. In this 
successive process, the term, like the cord of a fagot, 
both binds together the facts which it includes, and makes 
it possible to manage the assemblage as a single things 
On occasion of most discoveries in science, the selection 
of a technical term is an essential part of the proceeding. 
In the History of Science, we have had numerous oppor-» 
tunities of remarking this ; and the List of technical 
terms given as an Index to that work, refers us, by almost 
every word, to one such occasion. And these terms, 
which thus have had so large a share in the formation of 
science, and which constitute its language, do also offer 
the means of analysing its truths, each into its con- 
stituent truths; and these into facts more special, till 
the original foundations of our most generd proposi- 
tions are clearly exhibited. The relations of general 

* Grammairey p. xxxvi. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



464 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

and particular truths are most evidently represented by 
the Inductive Tables given in Book XI. But each step 
in each of these Tables has its proper form of expression, 
familiar among the cultivators of science ; and the ana- 
lysis which our Tables display, is commonly performed in 
men's minds, when it becomes necessary, by fixing the 
attention successively upon a series of words, not upon 
the lines of a Table. Language offers to the mind such 
a scale or ladder as the Table offers to the eye ; and as 
such Tables present to us, as we have said, the Logic of 
Induction, that is, the formal conditions of the soundness 
of our reasoning from fitcts, we may with propriety say 
that a just analysis of the meaning of words is an essen- 
tial portion of Inductive Logic. 

In saying this, we must not forget that a decompo- 
sition of general truths into ideas, as well as into facts, 
belongs to our philosophy ; but the point we have here 
to remark, is the essential importance of words to the 
latter of these processes. And this point had not ever 
had its due weight assigned to it till the time of Condil- 
lac and other followers of Locke, who pursued their 
speculations in the spirit I have just described. The 
doctrine of the importance of terms is the most consider- 
able addition to the philosophy of science which has been 
made since the time of Bacon *. 

8. The French EncydoptBdists. — ^The French Encydo- 
pSdiSy published in 1751, of which Diderot and Dalem- 
bert were the editors, may be considered as representing 
the leading characters of European philosophy during the 
greater part of the eighteenth century. The writers in 

* Since the selection and construction of tenns is ihns a matter of 
80 mach consequence in the formation of science, it is proper that 
SjTstematic rules, founded upon sound principles, should be laid down 
for the performance of this operation. Some such rules have accord- 
ingly been suggested in another part of this work. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 465 

this work belong for the most part to the school of Locke 
and Condillac ; and we may make a few remarks upon 
them, in order to bring into view one or two points in 
addition to what we have already said of that school. 
The Discours Preliminaire^ written by Dalembert, is cele- 
brated as containing a view of the origin of our knowledge, 
and the connexion and classification of the sciences. 

A tendency of the speculations of the Encyclopedists, 
as of the School of Locke in general, is to reject all ideal 
principles of coniiexion among facts, as something which 
experience, the only source of true knowledge, does not 
give. Hence all certain knowledge consists only in the 
recognition of the same thing under different aspects, or 
different forms of expression. Axioms are not the result 
of an original relation of ideas, but of the use, or it may 
be the abuse*, of words. In like manner, the propo- 
sitions of Geometry are a series of modifications, — of dis- 
tortions so to speak, — of one original truth ; much as if 
the proposition were stated in the successive forms of 
expression presented by a language which was constantly 
growing more and more artificial. Several of the sciences 
which rest upon physical principles, that is, (says the 
writer) truths of experience or simple hypotheses, have 
only an experimental or hypothetical certainty. Impe- 
netrability added to the idea of extent is a mystery in 
addition : the nature of motion is a riddle for philosophers : 
the metaphysical principle of the laws of percussion is 
equally concealed from them. The more profoundly they 
study the idea of matter and of the properties which re- 
present it, the more obscure this idea becomes ; the more 
completely does it escape them. 

9. This is a very common style of reflection, even 
down to our own times. I have endeavoured to show that 
concerning the Fundamental Ideas of space, of force and 
* D%$c. Prelim,^ p. viii. 
VOL. IL 2 H 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



466 REVIEW OF OPlKtOKfi ON ESTOWLBMS. 

1*6918181106, of substance, ejtteftial quality, aud the Uki, W€ 
know enough to make these Ideas the grounds of cettaltl 
aud universal truths j — enough to supply ufl with ftxioms 
from which we can demonstfatitely ri^soili If Inen wish 
for flny other knowledge of the nature of matter than 
that which ideas, and facts couformable to ideas, give 
them, undoubtedly their desire will bei frustrated^ and 
they will be left in a mysterious vacancy; for it does not 
appear how such knowledge as they ask for could be 
knowledge at all. But in reality^ this complaint of our 
ignorance of the real nature of things proceeds from the 
rejection of ideas, and tke assumption of the senses aloUe 
as the ground of knowledge. •* Observation ttnd calcu- 
lation are the only sources of truth f- — this is the motto 
of the. school of which we now speftk* And. its import 
amounts to this : — that they reject all ideas except the idea 
of number, and recognize the modifications which part« 
undergo by addition and Subtraction M the only modes 
in which true propositions are generated* The laws of 
nature are assemblages of facts : the truths of science ai* 
assertions of the identity of things Which are the same. 
" By the avowal of almost all philosophers,*' says a writer 
of this school*, ^*the taost sublime truths, when once 
simplified and reduced to their lowest terms^ are converted 
into facts, and thenceforth present to the mind only thia 
proposition ; the white is white, the black is black." 

These statetiients are true in what they positively 
assert, but tbey intolte error in the denial which by im- 
plication they contey. It is true that observation and 
demonstration are the only sources of scientific truth ; but 
then, demonstration may be founded on other groundsi 
besides the elementary properties of number. It is true 
that the theoty of gravitation is but the assertion of ft 
general fact ; but this is so, not because a sound theory 
? HBLVBtius iSfur PHomn^ c. xxiii 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



tOt«fi AND HIS PRfilSrCfi FOLLOWfiRS. 467 

AteB not ihvolve ideas, but b^eftuse 6VLf itppi*ehetision of 
A fiict does. 

10. Anothei* characteristic indication of the temper of 
the Encyclopedists and of the age to which they belong* 
is the importanee by them assigned to those prsctical Arts 
which minister to man*s comfort and convenience. Not 
only in the body Of the Encyclopedia are the Mechanical 
Arts placed side by side with the Sciences, and treated at 
great length ; but in the Preliminary Discourse, the prefe- 
rence assigned to the liberal over the mechanical Arts is 
treated as a prejudice*, and the value of science is spoken 
of as measured by its utility. *' The discovery of the Ma- 
riner^s Compass is not less advantageous to the human 
race than the explanation of its properties would be to 
physhJs.^— Why should we not esteem those to whom we 
oWe the fusee and the escapement of watches as much as 
the inventors of Algebra ? " And in the classification of 
sciences which accompanies the Discourse, the labours of 
artisans of all kinds have a place. 

This cksslllcation of the various branches of science 
contained in the Dissertation is often spoken of. It 
has Ibr its basis the classification proposed by Bacon, 
in which the parts of human knowledge are arranged 
according to the faculties of the mind in which they 
originate ; and these fticulties are taken, both by Bacon 
and by Dalembert, as Memory, Reason, and Imagi- 
nation. The insufficiency of Bacon*s arrangement as a 
scientific classification is so glaring, that the adoption of 
it, with only superficial modifications, at the period of the 
Encyclopedia, is a remarkable proof of the want of origi- 
nal thought and real philosophy at the time of which we 
speak. 

11. We need not trace further the opinion which de- 
rives all our knowledge from the senses in its application 



* p. xiii. 



2 H 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



468 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE* 

to the philosophy of Science. Its decliured aim is to 
reduce all knowledge to the knowledge of Facts; and it 
rejects all inquiries which iuYolve the Idea of Cause, and 
similar Ideas, describing them as " metaphysical,** or in 
some other damnatory way. It professes, indeed, to dis^ 
card all Ideas ; but, as we have long ago seen, some Ideals 
or other are inevitably included even in the simplest 
Facts. Accordingly the speculations of this school aie 
compelled to retain tlie relations of Position, Succession, 
Number and Resemblance, which are rig(m>u8ly ideal 
relations. The philosophy of Sensation, in order to be 
consistent, ought to reject these Ideas along with the 
rest, and to deny altogether the possibility of general 
knowledge. 

When the opinions of the Sensational School had gone 
to an extreme length, a Reaction naturally began to take 
place in men's minds. Such have been the alternations 
of opinion, from the earliest ages of human speculation. 
Man may perhaps have existed in an original condition in 
which he was only aware of the impressions of Sense ; 
but his first attempts to analyse his perceptions brought 
under his notice Ideas as a separate element, ess^itial to 
the existence of knowledge. Ideas were thenceforth 
almost the sole subject of the study of philosophers ; of 
Plato and his disciples, professedly ; of Aristotle, and still 
more of the followers and commentators of Aristotle, 
)>ractically. And this continued till the time of Grahleo, 
when the authority of the Senses again began to be 
asserted ; for it was shown by the great discoveries which 
were then made, that the Senses had at least some shiu*e 
in the promotion of knowledge. As discoveries more 
numerous and more striking were supplied by Observation, 
the world gradually passed over to the opinion that the 
share which had been ascribed to Ideas in the formation of 
real knowledge was altogether a delusion, and that Sen- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS. 469 

sation alone was true. But when this was asserted as a 
general doctrine, both its manifest falsity and its alarming 
consequences roused men's minds, and made them recoil 
from the extreme point to which they were approaching. 
Philosophy again oscillated back towards Ideas ; and over 
a great part of Europe, in the clearest and most compre- 
hensive minds, this regressicm from the dogmas of the 
Sensational School is at present the prevailing movement. 
We shall conclude our review by noticing a few indica- 
tions of this state of tiiiings. 



Chapter XV. 

THE REACTION AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL 
SCHOOL. 

1. When Locke's Essay appeai'ed, it was easily seen 
that its tendency was to urge, in a much more rigorous 
sense than had previously been usual, the ancient maxim 
of Aristotle, adopted by the schoolmen of the middle ages, 
that ** nothing exists in the intellect but what has entered 
by the senses." Leibnitz expressed in a pointed manner 
the limitation \iith which this doctrine had always been 
understood. ^ Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius 
fuerit in sensu ;— wdw/w,** he added, "»wt intellectus ipse'' 
To this it has been objected*, that we cannot say that 
the intellect is in the intellect But this remark is 
obviously frivolous ; for the faculties of the understanding 
(which are what the argument against the Sensational 
School requires us to reserve) may be said to be in the 
understanding with aa much justice as we may assert 
there are in it the impressions derived from, sense. And 
when we take account of these faculties, aad of the Ideas 

? See Mr. Sharpb's E$$ay9. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



470 BEVrcW OF OPINIONS ON BajOWLEDGB. 

to wbiohi by tb^ir operation, we necessarily subordinate 
our apprehension of phenomena, we are led to a refuta* 
tion of the philosophy which makes phenomena, uneon- 
Dooted by Ideas, the source of all knowledge. The 
succeeding opponents of the Lockian school insisted upon 
and developed in various ways this remftrk of Leibnitz, 
or some equivalent view, 

2. It was by inquiries into the foundations of morals 
that English philosophers were led to question the truth 
of Locke's theory. Dr. Price, in his Review of the Prin^ 
cipal Questions in Morals^ first published in 1767, main- 
tained that we cannot with propriety assert all our ideas 
to be derived from sensation and reflection. He pointed 
out, very steadily, the other source*. "The power, I 
assert, that understands^ or the faculty within us that dis- 
cerns trut^9 and that compares all the objects of thought 
and judges of them, is a spring of new ideas." And he 
exhibits the antithesis in various forms. "Were not 
sense and knowledge entirely different, we should i-est 
satisfied with sensible impressions, such as light, colours 
and sounds, and inquire no further about them, at least 
when the impressions are strong and vigorous : whereas on 
the contrary we necessarily desire some further acquaint- 
ance with them, and can never be satisfied till we have 
subjected them to the survey of reason. Sense presents 
particular forms to the mind, but cannot rise to nxij general 
ideas. It is the intellect that examines and compares the 
pres^ited forms, that rises above individuals to universal 
fuid abstract ideas; and thus looks downward upon 
objects, takes in at one view an infinity of particukrs» 
and is capable of discovering general truths. Sense sees 
only the outside of things, reason acquaints itself with 
their natures. Sensation is only a mode of feeling in the 
^ind ; but knowledge implies an active and vital energy 
in the mind.'' 

? P. 16. t P. 18. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REACTION AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL SCHOOL. 471 

3. The necessity of refuting Hume's inferences from 
tll9 Qiere^sensf^tion system Ie4 other writers to limit, ia 
various ways, their assent to Jiocke, Especially was this 
the 0as€» with » oumber of intelligent metaphysicians in 
geotlaad, M Q^id, 9eattie, Dugald Stewart and Thomas 
Brown. Tims Reid asserts*, "th^t the account which 
Mr. Locke himself gives of the Idea of Power cannot be 
jreconcfled to his favourite doctrine, that all our simple 
ideas have their origin from sensation or reflection." 
Beid remarks^ that our memory and our reasoning power 
come in for a share in the origin of this idea : and in 
speaking of reasoning, he obviously assumes the axiom 
that eveiy evei^t must have a cause. By succeeding 
writers of this school, the assumption of the fundamental 
principles, to which our nature in such cases irresistibly 
directs us, is more clearly pointed out, Thus Stewart 
defends the form of expression used by Price f. ^^ A 
variety of intuitive judgments might be mentioned, invol- 
ving simple ideas, which it is impossible to trace to any 
origin hut to the power which enables us to form these 
judgments. Thus it is surely an intuitive truth that the 
sensations of which I am conscious, and all those I 
remember, belong to one and the same being, which I 
call mjfself. Here is an intuitive judgment involving the 
simple idea of Identiti/t In like manner, the changes 
which I perceive in the universe impress me with a con- 
viction that some cause must have operated to produce 
them. Here is an intuitive judgment involving the sim- 
ple Idea of Carnation. When we consider the adjacent 
angles made by a straight line standing upon another, and 
perceive that their sum is equal to two right angles, the 
judgment we form involves a simple idea of Eqtialitt/^ 
To say, therefore, that the Reason or the Understanding 

* B8$ay» on the Powers of the Human Mindy i. 31. 
t Oialinet of Moral Phil.y p. 188. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



472 REVIEW OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

is a source of new ideas, is not so exceptionable a -mode 
of speaking as has been sometimes supposed. According 
to Locke, Seme furnishes our ideas, and Reason perceives 
their agreements and disagreements. But the truth is, 
that these agreements and disagreements are in many 
instances, simple ideas, of which no analysis can be given ; 
and of which the origin must, therefore be referred to 
Reason, according to Locke's own doctrine." This view, 
according to which the Reason or Understanding is the 
source of certain simple ideas, such as Identity, Causation, 
Equality, which ideas are necessarily involved in the 
intuitive judgments which we form, when we recognize 
fundamental truths of science, approaches very near in 
effect to the doctrine which in this work we have pre- 
sented, of Fundamental Ideas belonging to each science, 
and manifesting themselves in the axioms of the science* 
It may be observed, however, that by attempting to enu- 
merate these ideas and axioms, so as to lay the founda^ 
tions of the whole body of physical science; and by 
endeavouring, as far as possible, to simplify and connect 
each group of such Ideas ; we have at least given a more 
systematic form to this doctrine. We have, moreover, 
traced it into many consequences to which it necessarily 
leads, but which do not appear to have been contemplated 
by the metaphysicians of the Scotch school. But I 
gladly acknowledge jny obligations to the writere of that 
school ; and I trust that in the near agreement of my 
views on such points with theirs, there is ground for 
believing the system of philosophy which I have in this 
work presented, to be that to which the minds of thought- 
ful men, who have meditated on such subjects, are gene- 
rally tending. 

4. As a further instance that such a tendency is at 
work, I may make a quotation from an eminent English 
philosophical writer of another school. "If you will be 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REACTION AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL SCHOOL. 473 

kt the pains,** says Archbishop Whately*, " carefully to 
analyse the simplest description you hear of any transac- 
tion or state of things, you Mill find that the process 
which almost invariably takes place is, in logical lan- 
guage, this ; that each individual has in his mind certain 
major premises or principles relative to the subject in 
question; — that observation of what actually presents 
itself to the senses, supplies minor premises ; and that the 
statement given (and which is reported as a thing experi- 
enced) consists, in fact, of the condtisions drawn from the 
combinations of these premises." The major premises 
here spoken of are the Fundamental Ideas, and the Axioms 
and Propositions to which they lead ; and whatever is 
regarded as a feet of observation is necessarily a conclu- 
sion in which these propositions are assumed ; for these 
contain, as we have said, the conditions of our experience. 
Our experience conforms to these axioms and their conse- 
quences, whether or not the connexion be stated in a 
logical manner, by means of premises and a conclusion. 

5. The same persuasion is also suggested by the 
course which the study of metaphysics has taken of late 
years in France; Tn that country, as we have seen, the 
Sensational System, which was considered as the necessary 
consequence of the revolution begun by Locke, obtained 
a more complete ascendancy than it did in England ; and 
in that country too, the reaction, among metaphysical and 
moral writers, when its time came, was more decided and 
rapid than it was among Locke's own countrymen. It 
would appear that M. Laromiguierc was one of the first 
to give expression to this feeling, of the necessity of a 
modification of the sensational philosophy. He began by 
professing himself the disciple of Condillac, even while 
he was almost unconsciously subverting the fundamental 
principles of that writer. And thus, as M. Cousin justly 

* PoUt. Ecofi., p. 70. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



474 REVIBW OF 0PINI0N8 ON KNOWLEDOB. 

observes ^, his opiiiious had the more powerful effect from 
being presented, not as thwarting and coutradieting, but 
as sharing and foUawing out the spirit of his age^ M. 
Laromiguiere^s work> entitled Mssai $m le$ FaculUs d$ 
fAme, consists of lectures glyeu to the Faculty of Letters 
of the Academy of Paris, in the years 1811, 1812 and 
1813. In the views which these lectures present, there 
is much which the author has in common with Condillae. 
But he is led by his inyestigation to assertt> that it is 
iiot true that sensatiou is the sole fundamental element 
of our thoughts and our unde?standiug. Attention also is 
requisite : and here we have au element of quite another 
Icind. For sensation is passive ; atte^tion is active. At« 
teution does not spring out of iseniiaUon; the passive 
principle is not the reason pf the active priuciple. Acti* 
vity and passivity are two facts entirely di^erent. Nor 
can this activity be defined or derived; being, as the 
author says, a fundamental idea. The distinction is 
manifest by its own nature ; and we may find evideqce of 
it in the very forms of language. To look is more than 
to see; to heathen is more than to hear. The French 
language marks this distinctiou with respect to other 
senses also. '^ On wit^ et Ton rega/rde ; on entend, et Ton 
eeoute: on sent, et Ton flaire; on goute, et Ton savoured 
And thus the mere sensation, or capacity of feeling, is 
only the occasion on which the attention is exercised ; 
while the attention is the fouudation of all the operation^ 
of the understanding. 

The reader of the former part of this work, will have 
seen how much we have insisted upon the activity of the 
mind, as the necessary basis of all knowledge. In all 
observation aud experience, the mind is active, and by its 
activity apprehends all sensations in subordination to its 
own ideas; and thus it becomes eapable of collectiiig 

* Fragmens Philoscpki^ueiy \. 63. t lb,, I 67. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EEACTIOK A&AIN8T THE SENSATIONAL BCQOOL. 47S 

knowledge fVom phenomena, sinoe ideas involve general 
relations and connexions, whieb sensations of themselves 
cannot involve. And thus we see that, in this respect 
also, our philosophy stands at that point to which the 
speculations of the most reftective men have of late 
constantly been verging, 

6. M. Cousin himself, from whom we have quoted 
the above account of Laromigui^re, shares in this ten^ 
denoy, and has argued very energetically and successfully 
against the doctrines of the Sensational School. He has 
made it his office once more to bring into notice among 
his countrymen, the doctrine of ideas as the sources of 
knowledge ; and has revived the study of Plato, who may 
still be considered as one of the great leaders of the ideal 
school. The large portion of M. Cousin's works which 
refers to questions out of the reach of our present review 
makes it suitable not to dwell longer upon them in this 
place. 

7. We turn to speculations more closely connected 
with our present subject. M. Ampere, a French man of 
science, well entitled by his extensive knowledge^ and 
large and profound views, to deal with the philosophy of 
the sciences, published in 1634, his Esmi sur la Philosth 
phie des Sciences^ ou Exposition andytique (Tun Cloisifieation 
NatureUe de ioutes le$ ConnaUsances Humaines. In this 
remarkable work we see strong evidence of the progress 
of the reaction against the system which derives our 
knowledge from sensation only. The author starts from 
a maxim, that in classing the sciences, we must not only 
regard the nature of the objects about which each science 
is concerned, but also the point of view under which it 
considers them: that is, the ideas which each science 
involves. M. Ampere also gives briefly his views of the 
intellectual constitution of man ; a subject on which he 
had long and sedulously employed his thoughts; and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



476 REVIEW OP OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

these views are fkr from belonging to the Sensatiofnal 
School. Human thought, he says, is composed of pheno- 
mena and of conceptions. Phenomena oxe extemal> or 
sensitive; and internal, or active. Conceptions are of four 
kinds ; primitive^ as space and motion, duration and cause ; 
objectivey as our idea of matter and substance ; onomaiic, 
or those which we associate with the general terms which 
language presents to us; and ea;plicative^ by which we 
ascend to causes after a comparative study of phenomena. 
He teaches further, that in deriving ideas from sensation, 
the mind is not passive ; but exerts an action which, 
when voluntary, is called attention, but when it is^ as it 
often is, involuntary, may be termed reaction. 

I shall not dwell upon the examination of these 
opinions* ; but I may remark, that both in the recogni- 
tion of conceptions as an original and essential element 
of the mind, and in giving a prominent place to the active 
function of the mind, in the origin of our knowledge, 
this view approaches to that which I have presented in 
the preceding part of this work ; although undoubtedly 
with considerable differences. 

8. The classification of the sciences which M. Ampere 
proposes, is founded upon a consideration of the sciences 
themselves; and is, the author conceives, in accordance 
with the conditions of natural classifications, as exhibited 
in Botany and other sciences. It is of a more symmetri- 
cal kind, and exhibits more steps of subordination, than 
that to which I have been led ; it includes also practical 
Art as well as theoretical Science ; and it is extended to 
moral and political as well as physical Sciences. It will 
not be necessary for me here to examine it in detail : 
but I may remark, that it is throughout a dichotomom 
division, each higher number being subdivided into two 

* See also tlie vigorous critique of LocKB'd Enay^ by Lbmaistre, 
SmVi'es de St, Petenhottrg, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REACTION AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL SCHOOL- 477 

lower ones, and so on. In this way, M. Ampere obtains 
sciences of the First Order, each of which is divided into 
two sciences of the Second, and four of the Third Order. 
Thus Mechanics is divided into Cmematics^ Statics^ Dyna- 
mics, and Molecular Mechanics ; Physics is divided into 
Experimental Physicsy Chemistry ^ Stereometry^ and Atomo^ 
logy ; Geology is divided into Physical Geography^ Mine- 
ralogy^ Oeonomy^ and Theory of the EartJi. Without here 
cntioizing these divisions or their principle, I may observe 
that Cinematics^ the doctrine of motion without reference 
to the force which produces it, is a portion of knowledge 
which our investigation has led us also to see the necessity 
of erecting into a separate science ; and which we have 
termed Pure Mechanism. Of the divisions of Geology, 
Physicd Geography^ especially as explained by M. Ampere, 
is certainly a part of the subject, both important and 
tolerably distinct from the rest. Geonamy contains what 
we have termed in the History, Descriptive Geology ; — 
the exhibition of the facts separate from the inquiry into 
their caoses ; while our Physical Geology agrees with M. 
Ampere's Theory oftlie Earth. Mineralogy appears to be 
placed by him in a different place from that which it 
occupies in our scheme : but in fact, he uses the term for 
a different science ; — he applies it to the classification not 
of simple mine^^als^ but of rocks^ which is a science auxi- 
liary to geology, and which has sometimes been called 
Petrology. What we have termed Mineralogy^ M. Am- 
pere unites with Chemistry. "It belongs," he says*, "to 
Chemistry, and not to Mineralogy, to inquire how many 
atoms of silicium and of oxygen compose silica ; to tell 
us that its primitive form is a rhombohedron of certain 
angles, that it is called qtia/rtz^ &c. : leaving, on one hand, 
to Molecular Geometry the task of explaining the differ- 
ent secondary forms which may result from this primitive 

* P. 210. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



478 REVIEW 09 ontnom oi^ itMoWfiSfidfl* 

form \ and on the oth^i* hftnd^ leaving to MineMlo^ ib« 
office of describing the difierent varieties of qnartSi atld 
the rocks in which they occur^ according as the quartz it 
crystallised^ transparent, coloured, amorphous, solid, or In 
land.'* But we may remark^ that by adopting this 
urangement^ we separate from Mineralogy^ almost Idl iht 
knowledge, afid absolutely all the general knoWledgi^ 
Which books professing to treat of that science have usually 
contained. The consideration of Mineralogical Olassifi* 
cations, which, as may be seen in the History of Science, 
Is so curious and instructive, is forced into the domain of 
Chemistry, although many of the persons who figure in it 
were not at all properly chemists. And we lose, in this 
way, the advantage of that peculiar office which, in our 
arrangement. Mineralogy fills; of forming a rlgoirous 
transition from the sciences of classification to those 
which consider the mathematical properties of bodies { 
and connecting the external characters and the Internal 
constitution of bodies by means of a system of important 
general truths. I conceive, therefore, that our disposition 
of this science, and our mode of applying the name, are 
far more convenient than those of M. Ampere. 

0. We have seen the reaction against the pure sensa* 
tional doctrines operating very powerfully In England 
and in France. But it was in Germany that these doc- 
trines were most decidedly rejected; and systems in 
extreme opposition to these put forth with confidence, 
and received with applause. Of the authors who gave 
this impulse to opinions in that coimtry, Kant was the 
first, and by far the most important. 1 have already 
endeavoured to explain how he was roused, by the scep- 
ticism of Hume, to examine wherein the fellacy lay 
which appeared to Invalidate all l-easoniflgs from eflfect to 
cause ; and how this inquiry tenninated in a conviction 
that the foundations of our reasonings on this and similar 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REACnOK AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL SOBtOOL. 479 

points Were to be Sought in the mind, and Hot iti th0 
phenomena J — in the subject and not in the object. The 
revolution in the customaty mode of contemplating 
human knowledge which Kant*8 opinions involved, Was 
most complete. He himself, with no small justice, Oom- 
pares* it Ivith the change produced by Copemicus's 
theory of the solar System. " Hitherto,'^ he says, "hien 
have assumed that all our knowledge must be regulated 
by th^ objects of it ; yet all attempts to make out any« 
thing donceming objects A priori by means of our con* 
ceptions," (as for instance their geometrical properties) 
" must, on this foundation, be unavailing. Let Us thett 
try whether we cannot tnake out something more in the 
problems of metaphysics, by assuming that objects must 
be regulated by our knowledge. Since this agrees bettef 
with that supposition, which we are prompted to mak^ 
that we can know something of them d priori. This 
thought is like that of Copernicus, Who, when he found 
that nothing was to be made of the phenomena of thd 
heavens so long as everything Was supposed to turti about 
the spectator, tried whether the matter might Hot be 
better explained if he made tlie spectator turn, and left 
the stars at rest. Wd may make the same essay in 
metaphysics, as to what concerns our intuitive knowledge 
respecting objects. If our apprehension of objects must 
be regulated by the properties of the objects, I cantlot 
comprehend how we can possibly know anything about 
them a priori. But if the object, as apprehended by us, 
be regulated by the constitution of our faculties of appre» 
hension, I can readily conceive this possibility.'^ From 
this he infers that our experience must be regulated by 
our conceptions. 

10. This view of the nature of knowledge soon super* 
seded entirely th6 dootdnes of tne Sensational Bchool 

* KrUik der Beinm Vemunfiy Pref., p. xv. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



480 REVIEWS OF OPINIONS ON KNOWLEDGE. 

among the metaphysicians of Germany. These philoso- 
phers did not gradually modify and reject the dogmas of 
Locke and Condillac, as was done in England and 
France* ; nor did they endeavour to ascertain the extent 
of the empire of Ideas by a careful survey of its several 
provinces, as we have been doing in the previous part of 
the present work. The German metaphysicians saw at 
once that Ideas and Things, the Subjective and the Ob- 
jective elements of our knowledge, were, by Kant's system, 
brought into opposition and correlation, as equally real 
and equally indispensable. Seeing this, they rushed at 
once to the highest and most difficult problem of philo- 
sophy, — to determine what this correlation is ; — ^to dis- 
cover how Ideas and Things are at the same time opposite 
and identical ; — ^how the world, while it is distinct from 
and independent of us, is yet, as an object of our know- 
ledge, governed by the conditions of our thoughts. The 
attempts to solve this problem, taken in the widest sense, 
including the forms which it assumes in Morals, Politics, 
the Arts, and Religion, as well as in the Material Sciences, 
have, since that time, occupied the most profound specu- 
lators of Germany ; and have given rise to a number of 
systems, which, rapidly succeeding each other, have, each 
in its day, been looked upon as a complete solution of 
the problem. To trace the characters of these various 
systems, does not belong to the business of the present 
Book : my task at present is ended when I have shown, 
as I have now done, how the progress of thought in the 
philosophical world, followed from the earliest up to the 
present time, has led to that recognition of the co-exist- 
ence and joint necessity of the two opposite elements of 

* The sensational system never acquired in Germany the ascend- 
ancy which it obtained in England and France ; but I am compelled 
here to pass over the history of philosophy in Germany, except so far 
as it affects ourselves. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



REACrnON AGAINST THE SENSATIONAL SCHOOL. 481 

our knowledge ; and when I have pointed out processes 
adapted to the extension of our knowledge, which a true 
view of its nature has suggested or may suggest. 
^ In the latter portion of my task something still 
remains to be done, which will be the subject of the 
ensuing Book. 



VOL, n. 2 1 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



482 



BOOK XII. 



OF METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMA- 
TION OF SCIENCE. 



Chapter I. 
INTRODUCTION, 



1. In the last Book but one of this work, we pointed 
out certain general Characters of scienti^c knowledge 
which may often serve to distinguish it from opinions of 
a looser or vaguer kind. In the last Book we traced the 
steps by which men were led to a perception, more or 
less clear, of those characteristics ; and in the course of 
this review, we had to consider various precepts and 
maxims offered by philosophers as fitted to guide us in 
the pursuit of exact and general truths. Other contri- 
butions of tlie same kind to the philosophy of science 
might be noticed, and some which contain more valuable 
suggestions, and indicate a more practical acquaintance 
with the subject than any which have yet been quoted. 
Among these, I must especially distinguish Sir John 
Herschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural 'Philosophy. 
But my object in this work is not so much to relate the 
history, as to present the really valuable results of pre- 
ceding labours. I shall, therefore, proceed no further 
with the criticism of other authors ; but shall endeavour 
to collect, both from them and from my own researches 
and reflections, such views and , such rules aa seem best 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTRODUCTION. 483 

adapted to assist us in the discovery and recognition of 
scientific truth ; or, at least, such as may enable us to 
understand the process by which this truth is obtained. 
We would present to the reader the Philosophy and, if 
possible, the Art, of Discovery. 

2. But, in truth, we must acknowledge, before we 
proceed with this subject, that, speaking with strictness, 
an Art of Discovery is not possible ; — that we can give 
no Rules for the pursuit of truth which shall be univer- 
sally and peremptorily applicable; — and that the helps 
which we can oflfer to the inquirer in such cases are 
limited and precarious. Still we trust it will be found 
that aids may be pointed out which are neither worthless 
nor uninstructive. The mere classification of examples 
of successful inquiry, to which our rules give occasion, is 
full of interest for the philosophical speculator. And if 
our maxims direct the discoverer to no operations which 
might not have occurred of themselves, they may still 
concentrate our attention on that which is most important 
and characteristic in these operations, and may direct us 
to the best mode of insuring their success. I shall, 
therefore, attempt to resolve the Process of Discovery 
into its parts, and to give an account as distinct as may 
be of Rules and Methods which belong to each portion 
of the process. 

3. In the Eleventh Book we considered the three 
main parts of the process by which science is constructed : 
namely, the Decomposition and Observation of Complex 
Facts; the Explication of our Ideal Conceptions; and 
the Colligation of Elementary Facts by means of those 
Conceptions. The first and last of these three steps are 
capable of receiving additional accuracy by peculiar pro- 
cesses. They may further the advance of science in a 
more effectual manner when directed by special technical 
Methods^ of which in the present Book we must give a 

2 I 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



484 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE, 

brief view. In this more technical form, the observation 
of facts involves the Measuremeni of Phenomena; and the 
Colligation of Facts includes all arts and rules by which 
the process of Induction can be assisted. Hence we 
shall have here to consider Methods of Otservatunh and 
Methods of Induction, using these phrases in the widest 
sense. The second of thq three steps above mentioned* 
the Explication of our Conceptions, does not admit of 
being much assisted by methods, although something may 
be done by Education and Discussion. 

4. The Methods of Induction, of which we have to 
speak, apply only to the first step in our ascent from phe- . 
noraena to laws of nature; — ^the discovery of Laws of 
Phenomena, A higher and ulterior step remains behind, 
and follows in natural order the discovery of Laws of 
Phenomena ; namely, the Discovery of Causes ; and this 
must be stated as a distinct and essential process in a 
complete view of the course of science. Agiun, when we 
have thus ascended to the causes of phenomena and of 
their laws, we can often reason downwards from the 
cause so discovered ; and we are tlius led to suggestions of 
new phenomena, or to new explanations of phenomena 
already known. Such proceedings may be termed Appli* 
cations of our Discoveries ; including in the phrase, Veti* 
fications of our Doctrines by such an application of them 
to observed facts. Hence we have the following series of 
processes concerned in the formation of science. 

(1.) Decomposition of Facts ; 

(2.) Measurement of Phenomena ; 

(3.) Explication of Conception3 ; 

(4.) Induction of Laws of Phenomena; 

(5.) Induction of Causes ; 

(6.) Application of Inductive Discoveries. 

5. Of these six processes, the methods by which the 
second and fourth may be assisted are here our peculiar 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTRODUCTION. 485 

object of attention. Tte treatment of these subjects in 
the present work must necessarily be scanty and imper- 
fect, although we may perhaps be able to add something 
to what has hitherto been systematically taught on these 
heads. Methods of Observation and of Induction might 
of themselves form an abundant subject for a treatise, 
and hereafter probably will do so, in the hands of future 
writers. A few remarks, offered as contributions to this 
subject, may serve to show how extensive it is, and how 
much more ready it now is than it ever before was, for a 
systematic discussion. 

Of the above steps of the formation of science, the 
first, the Decomposition of Facts, has already been suffi- 
ciently explained in the Eleventh Book : for if we pur- 
sue it into further detail and exactitude, we find that we 
gradually trench upon some of the succeeding parts. I, 
therefore, proceed to treat of the second step, the Mea- 
surement of Phenomena ;— of methods by which this work, 
in its widest sense, is executed, and these I shall term 
Methods of Observation. 



Chapter II. 
OF METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 

1. I SHALL speak, in this chapter, of Methods of 
exact and systematic observation, by which such facts 
are collected as form the materials of precise scientific 
propositions. These Methods are very various, according 
to the nature of the subject inquired into, and other cir-* 
cumstances : but a great portion of them agree in being 
processes of measurement. These I shall peculiarly con- 
sider: and in the first place those referring to Number, 
Space, and Time, which are at the same time objects and 
fnstram^its c^m^asiirement. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



486 METHODS EI£PLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE, 

2. But though we have to explain how observations 
may be made as perfect as possible, we must not forget 
that in most cases complete perfection is unattainable. 
Observations are never perfect. For we observe pheno- 
mena by our senses, and measure their relations in time 
and space ; but our senses and our measures are all, from 
various causes, inaccurate. If we have to observe the 
exact place of the moon among the stars, how much of 
instrumental apparatus is necessary ! This apparatus has 
been improved by many successive generations of astro- 
nomers, yet it is still far from being perfect And the 
senses of man, as well as his implements, are limited in 
their exactness. Two different observers do not obtain 
precisely the same measures of the time and place of a 
phenomenon ; as, for instance, of the moment at which 
the moon occults a star, and the point of her limb at 
which the occultation takes place. Here, then, is a 
source of inaccuracy and error, even in astronomy, where 
the means of exact observation are incomparably more 
complete than they are in any other department of human 
research. In other cases, the task of obtaining accurate 
measures is far more difficult. If we have to observe the 
tides of the ocean when rippled with waves, we can see 
the average level of the water first rise and then fall; but 
how hard is it to select the exact moment when it is at 
its greatest height, or the exact highest point which it 
reaches ! It is very easy, in such a case, to err by many 
minutes in time, and by several inches in space. 

Still, in many cases, good Methods can remove very 
much of this inaccuracy, and to these we now proceed. 

3. (I.) Number. — Number is the first step of measure- 
ment, since it measures itself, and does not, like space and 
time, require an arbitrary standard. Hence the first exact 
observations, and the first advances of rigorous knowledge, 
appear to have been made by means of number ; as for 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 487 

example, — the number of days in a month and in a year; 
— the cycles according to which eclipses occur; — the 
number of days in the revolutions of the planets; and 
the like. All these discoveries, as we have seen in the 
History of Astronomy, go back to the earliest period of 
the science, anterior to any distinct tradition ; and these 
discoveries presuppose a series, probably a very long series, 
of observations, nmde principally by means of number. 
Nations so rude as to have no other means of exact mea- 
surement, have still systems of numeration by which they 
can reckon to a considerable extent. Very often, such 
nations have very complex systems, which are capable of 
expressing numbers of great magnitude. Number supplies 
the means of measuring other quantities, by the assimip- 
tion of a unit of measure of the appropriate kind : but 
where nature supplies the unit, number is applicable di- 
rectly and immediately. Number is an important element 
in the Classificatory as well as in the Mathematical 
Sciences. The History of those Sciences shows how the 
formation of botanical systems was effected by the adop- 
tion of number as a leading element by Csesalpinus ; and 
how afterwards the Reform of Linnaeus in classifica- 
tion depended in a great degree on his finding, in the 
pistils and stamens, a better nimierical basis than those 
before employed. In like manner, the number of rays 
in the membrane of the gills*, and the number of rays in 
the fins of fish, were found to be important elements in 
ichthyological classification by Artedi and Linnaeus. 
There are innumerable instances, in all parts of Natural 
History, of the importance of the observation of number. 
And in this observation, no instrument, scale or standard 
is needed, or can be applied ; except the scale of natural 
numbers, expressed either in words or in figures, can be 
considered as an instrument. 

• Hirt. Ini. Soi, iii. 364—366. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



488 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FOEMATION OF SCIENCE. 

4. (II.) Measurement of Space. — Of quantities admit- 
ting of continuous increase and decrease, (for number is 
discontinuous,) space is the most simple in its mode of 
measurement, and requires most frequently to be mea* 
sured. The obvious mode of measuring space is by the re- 
peated application of a material measure, as when we take a 
foot-rule and measure the length of a room. And in this 
case the foot-rule is the unit of space, and the length of the 
room is expressed by the number of such units which it 
contains : or, as it may not contain an exact number, by 
a number with b, fraction. But besides this measurement 
of linear space, there is another kind of space which, for 
purposes of science, it is still more important to measure, 
namely, angular space. The visible heavens being consi- 
dered as a sphere, the portions and paths of the heavenly 
bodies are determined by drawing circles on the surfiaco 
of this sphere, and are expressed by means of the parts 
of these circles thus intercepted : by such measures the 
doctrines of astronomy were obtained in the very be- 
ginning of the science. The arcs of circles thus mea- 
sured, are not like linear spaces, reckoned by means of 
an arbitrary unit ; for there is a natwral umt^ the total 
circumference, to which all arcs may be referred. For 
the sake of convenience, the whole circumference is 
divided into 360 parts or degrees ; and by means of these 
degrees and their parts, all arcs are expressed. The ares 
are the measures of the angles at the centre, and the 
degrees may be considered indifferently as measuring the* 
one or the other of these quantities. 

5. In the History of Astronomy*, I have described 
the method of observation of celestial angles employed by 
the Greeks. They determined the lines in which the 
heavenly bodies were seen, by means either of Shadows, 
or of Sights ; and measured the angles between such lines 

* Siti.Ind.Sa., 1197. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 489 

by arcs or rules properly applied to them. The Armill, 
Astrolabe, Dioptra, and Parallactic Instrument of the 
ancients were some of the instruments thus constructed. 
Tycho Brahe greatly improYed the methods of astrono- 
mical observation by giving steadiness to the frame of his 
instruments, (which were large quadrants^) and accuracy 
to the divisions of the /ami*. But the application of the 
telescope to the astronomical quadrant and the fixation of 
the centre of the field by a cross of fine wires placed in the 
focus, was an immense improvement of the instrument, 
since it substituted a precise visual ray, pointing to the star, 
instead of the coarse coincidence of Sights. The accuracy 
of observationwas still further increased by applying to the 
telescope a micrometer which might subdivide the smaller 
divisions of the arc. 

6. By this means, the precision of astronomical obser- 
vation was made so great, that very minute angular spaces 
could be measured: and it then became % question 
whether discrepancies which appeared at first as defects 
in the theory, might not arise sometimes from a bending 
or shaking of the instrument, and from the degrees marked 
on the limb being really somewhat unequal, instead of 
being rigorously equal. Accordingly, the framing and 
balancing of the instrument, so as to avoid all possible 
tremor or flexure, and the exact division of an arc into 
equal parts, became great objects of those who wished to 
improve astronomical observations. The observer no 
longer gazed at the stars from a lofty tower, but placed 
his telescope on the solid ground, and braced and balanced 
it with various contrivance& Instead of a quadrant, an 
entire circle was introduced (by Ramsden;) and various 
processes were invented for the dividing of instruments. 
Among these we may notice Troughton's method of di- 
viding ; in which the visual ray of a microscope was substi« 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



490 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SaENOE. 

tuted for the points of a pair of compasses, and, by stepping 
round the circle, the partial arcs were made to bear their 
exact relation to the whole circumference. 

7. Astronomy is not the only science which depends 
on the measurement of angles. Crystallography also 
requires exact measures of this kind ; and the goniometery 
especially that devised by WoUaston, supplies the means 
of obtaining such measures. The science of Optics also, 
in many cases, requires the measurement of angles. 

8. In the measurement of linear space, there is no 
natural standard which offers itself. Most of the common 
measures appear to be taken fromfsome part of the human 
body ; as a foot^ a cvbity a fathom ; but such measures 
cannot possess any precision, and are altered by conven- 
tion : thus there were in ancient times many kinds of 
cubits; arid in modern Europe, there are a great number 
of different standards of the foot, as the Rhenish foot, 
the Paris 4>ot, the English foot. It is very desirable that, 
if possible, some permanent standard, founded in nature, 
should be adopted ; for the conventional measures are 
lost in the course of ages ; and thus, dimensions expressed 
by means of them become unintelligible. Two different 
natural standards have beeii employed in modem times : 
the French have referred their measures of length to the 
total circumference of a meridian of the earth ; a quadrant 
of this meridian consists of ten million units or metres. 
The English have fixed their linear measure by reference 
to the length of a pendulum which employs an exact 
second of time in its small osillation. Both these methods 
occasion considerable diflSculties in carrying them into 
effect; and are to be considered mainly as means of recover- 
ing the standard if it should ever be lost. For common 
purposes, some material standard is adopted as authority 
for the time : for example, the standard which in England 
possessed legal authority up to the year 1835 was pre- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 491 

served in the House of Parliament ; and was lost in the 
conflagration which destroyed that edifice. The standard 
of length now generally referred to by men of science 
in England is that which is in the possession of the Astro- 
nomical Society of London. 

. 9. A standard of length being established, the artifices 
for applying it, and for subdividing it in the most accurate 
manner, are nearly the same as in the case of measures of 
arcs : as for instance, the employment of the visual rays 
of microscopes instead of the legs of compasses and the 
edges of rules ; the use of micrometers for minute mea- 
surements; and the like. Many different modes of avoid-* 
ing error in such measurements have been devised by 
various observers, accordinjg to the nature of the cases 
with which they had to deal*. 

10. (III.) Measurement of Time. — The methods of 
measuring Time are not so obvious as the methods of 
measuring space ; for we cannot apply one portion of time 
to another, so as to test their equality. We are obliged 
to begin by assuming some change as the measure of time. 
Thus the motion of the sun in the sky, or the length and 
position of the shadows of objects, were the first modes 
of measuring the parts of the day. .But what assurance 
had men, or what could they have, that the motion of the 
sun or of the shadow was uniform ? They could have no 
such ai^urance, till they had adopted some measure of 
smaller times; which smaller times, making up larger times 
by repetition, they took as the standard of uniformity;— 
for example, an hour-glass, or a clepsydra which answered 
the same purpose among the ancients. There is no appa- 
rent reason why the successive periods measured by the 
emptying of the hour-glass should be unequal ; they are 

* On tlic precautions employed in astronomical instruments for the 
measure of space, see Sir J. Herschel's Astronom^^ (in the Cahinet 
Cijclopcedia,) Art. 103—110. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



492 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OP SCIENCE. 

implicitly accepted as equal ; and by reference to these, 
the uniformity of the sun*8 motion may be verified. But 
the great improvement in the measurement of time was 
the use of a pendulunj for the purpose by Galileo, and 
the application of this device to clocks by Huyghens in 
1 656. For the successive oscillations of a pendulum are 
rigorously equal, and a clock is only a train of machinery 
employed for the purpose of counting these oscillations. 
By means of this invention, the measure of time in astro- 
nomical observations became as accurate as the measure 
of space. 

1 1 . What is the natural unit of time ? It was assumed 
from the first by the Greek astronomers, that the sidereal 
days, measured by the revolution of a star from any me- 
ridian to the same again, are exactly equal ; and all im- 
provements in the measure of time tended to confirm this 
assumption. The sidereal day is therefore the natural 
standard of time. But the solar day, determined by the 
diurnal revolution of the sun, although not rigorously 
invariable as the sidereal day is, undergoes scarcely any 
perceptible variation ; and since the course of daily occur- 
rences is regulated by the sun, it is far more convenient 
to seek the basis of our unit of time in his motions. 
Accordingly the solar day (the mean solar day) is divided 
into 24 hours, and these, into minutes and seconds ; and 
this is our scale of time. Of such time, the sidereal day 
has 23 hours 56 minutes 4*09 seconds. And it is plain 
that by such a statement the length of the hour is fixed, 
with reference to a sidereal day. The standard of time 
(and the standard of space in like manner) equally answers 
its purpose, whether or not it coincides with any tvhole 
number of units. 

12. Since the sidereal day is thus the standard of our 
measures of time, it becomes desirable to refer to it, con- 
stantly and exactly, the instruments by which timQ 1$ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSBRVATIOK. 493 

measured, in order that we may secure ourselves against 
error. For this purpose in astronomical observatories, ob- 
servations are constantly made of the transit of stars across 
the meridian ; the transit imtrument with which this is done 
being adjusted with all imaginable regard to accuracy*. 

13. When exact measures of time are required in 
other than astronomical observations, the same instru- 
ments are still used, namely, clocks and chronometers. 
In chronometers, the regulating part is an oscillating 
body ; not, as in clocks, a pendulum oscillating by the 
force of gravity, but a wheel swinging to and fro on its 
centre, in consequence of the vibrations of a slender coil 
of elastic wire. To divide time into still smaller portions 
than these vibrations, other artifices are used ; some of 
which will be mentioned under the next head. 

14. (IV.) Conversion of Space and TVm^.— Space and 
time agree in being extended quantities, which are made 
up and measured by the repetition of homogeneous parts. 
If a body move uniformly, whether in the way of revolv- 
ing or otherwise, the space which any point describes, is 
proportional to the time of its motion ; and the space and 
the time may each be taken as a measure of the other. 
Hence in such cases, by taking space instead of time, 
or time instead of space, we may often obtain more con- 
venient and precise measures, than we can by measuring 
directly the element with which we are concerned. 

The most prominent example of such a conversion, is 
the measurement of the Bight Ascension of stars, (that 
is, their angular distance from a standard meridian f on 
the celestial sphere,) by means of the time employed in 
their coming to the meridian of the place of observation. 

* On the precautions employed in the measure of time by astrono- 
mers, see Hbrschbl's Astnm.y Art. 115 — 127. 

t A meridian is a circle passing through the poles about which the 
celestial sphere revolves. The meridian of any place on the earth is 
that meridian v\rhich is exactly over the place. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



494 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

Since, as we have already stated, the visible celestial 
sphere, carrying the fixed stars, revolves with perfect uni- 
formity about the pole ; if we observe the stars as they 
cpme in succession to a fixed circle passing through the 
poles, the intervals of time between these observations 
will be proportional to the angles which the meridian 
circles passing through these stars make at the poles 
where they meet ; and hence, if we have the means of 
measuring time with great accuracy, we can, by watching 
the times of the transits of successive stars across some 
visible mark in our own meridian, determine the angular 
distances of the meridian circles of all the stars from one 
another. 

Accordingly, now that the pendulum clock affords 
astronomers the means of determining time exactly, a 
measurement of the Right Ascensions of heavenly bodies 
by means of a clock and a transit instrument, is a part of 
the regular business of an observatory. If the sidereal 
clock be so adjusted that it marks the beginning of its 
scale of time when the first point of Right Ascension is 
upon the visible meridian of our observatory, the point 
of the scale at which the clock points when any other 
star is in our meridian, will truly represent the Right 
Ascension of the star. 

Thus as the motion of the stars is our measure of 
time, we employ time, conversely, as our measure of the 
places of the stars. The celestial machine and our ter- 
restrial machines correspond to each other in their move- 
ments ; and the star steals silently and steadily across our 
meridian line, just as the pointer of the clock steals past 
the mark of the hour. We may judge of the scale of 
this motion by considering that the full moon employs 
about two minutes of time in sailing across any fixed line 
sden against the sky, transverse to her path : and all the 
celestial bodies, carried along by the revolving sphere, 
travel at the same rate. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OP OBSERVATION. 495 

15. In this case, up to a certain degree, we render 
our measures of astronomical angles more exact and 
convenient by substituting time for space ; but when, in 
the very same kind of observation, we wish to proceed 
to a greater degree of accuracy, we find that it is best 
done by substituting space for time. In observing the 
transit of a star across the meridian, if we have the clock 
•within hearing, we can count the beats of the pendulum 
by the noise which they make, and tell exactly at which 
second of time the passage of the star across the visible 
thread takes place ; and thus we measure Right Ascen- 
sion by means of time. But our perception of time does 
not allow us to divide a second into ten parts, and to pro- 
nounce whether the transit takes place three-tenths, six- 
tenths, or seven-tenths of a second after the preceding 
beat of the clock. This, however, can be done by the 
usual mode of observing the transit of a star. The 
observer, listening to the beat of his clock, fastens his 
attention upon the star at each beat, and especially at 
the one immediately before and the one immediately 
after the passage of the thread : and by this means he 
has these two positions and the positions of the thread so 
far present to his intuition at once, that he can judge in 
what proportion the thread is nearer to one position than 
than the other, and can thus divide the intervening second 
in its due proportion. Thus if he observe that at the 
beginning of the second the star is on one side of the 
thread, and at the end of the second on the other side ; 
and that the two distances from the thread are as two to 
three, he knows that the transit took place at two-fifths 
(or four-tenths) of a second after the former beat. In 
this way a second of time in astronomical observations 
may, by a skilful observer, be divided into ten equal parts ; 
although when time is observed as time, a tenth of a 
second appears almost to escape our senses. From the 
above explanation, it will be seen that the reason why 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



496 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FOBMATIOK OP SCIENCE- 

the subdivision is possible in the way thus described, is 
this : — ^that the moment of time thus to be divided is so 
small, that the eye and the mind can retain, to the end of 
this moment, the impression of position which it received 
at the beginning. Though the two positions of the star, 
and the intermediate thread, are seen successively, they 
can be contemplated by the mind as if they were seen 
simultaneously : and thus it is precisely the smallness of 
this portion of time which enables us to subdivide it by 
means of space. 

16. There is another case, of somewhat a different 
kind, in which time is employed in measuring space; 
namely, when space, or the standard of space, is defined 
by the length of a pendulum oscillating in a given time. 
We might in this way define any space by the time which 
a pendulum of such a length would take in oscillating ; 
and thus we might speak, as was observed by those who 
suggested this device, of five minutes of cloth, or a rope 
half an hour long. We may observe, however, that in 
this case, the space is not proportional to the time. And 
we may add, that though we thus appear to avoid the 
arbitrary standard of space (for as we have seen, the 
standard of measures of time is a natural one,) we do not 
do so in fact : for we assume the invariableness of gravity, 
which really varies (though very slightly,) from place to 
place. 

17. (V.) The Method of Repetition in Measurement. 
—In many cases we can give great additional accuracy 
to our measurements by repeatedly adding to itself the 
quantity which we wish to measure. Thus if we wished 
to ascertain the exact breadth of a thread, it might not 
be easy to determine whether it was one-ninetieth, or one* 
ninety-fifth, or one-hundredth part of an inch ; but if we 
find that ninety-six such threads placed side by side 
occupy exactly an inch, we have the precise measure of 
the breadth of the thread. In the same manner, if two 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 



497 



clocks are going nearly at the same rate, we may not be 
able to distinguish the excess of an oscillation of one of 
the pendulums over an oscillation of the other : but when 
the two clocks have gone for an hour, one of them may 
have gained ten seconds upon the other; thus showing 
that the proportion of their times of oscillation is 3610 
to 3600- 

In the latter of these instances, we have the principle 
of repetition truly exemplified, because (as has been 
justly observed by Sir J. Herschel*,) there is then "a 
juxtaposition of units without error," — "one vibration 
commences exactly where the last terminates, no part of 
time being lost or gained in the addition of the units so 
counted." In space, this juxtaposition of units without 
error cannot be rigorously accomplished, since the imits 
must be added together by material contact (as in the 
case of the threads,) or in some equivalent manner. Yet 
the principle of repetition has been applied to angular 
measurement with considerable success in Borda's Re- 
peating Circle. In this instrument, the angle between 
two objects which we have to observe, is repeated along 
the graduated limb of the circle by turning the telescope 
from one object to the other, alternately fastened to the 
circle (by its damp) and loose from it (by unclamping). 
In this manner the errors of graduation may (theore- 
tically) be entirely got rid of: for if an angle repeated 
nine times be found to go twice round the circle, it must 
be exactly eighty degrees : and where the repetition does 
not give an exact number of circumferences, it may still 
be made to subdivide the error to any required extent. 

18. Connected with the principle of repetition, is the 
Method of coincidences or interferences. If we have two 
Scales, on one of which an inch is divided into 10, and 
on the other into 11 equal parts ; and if, these Scales 

* t>'m. Nat. Phil., Art. 121. 
VOL. II. 2 K 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



498 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

being placed side by 6ide> it appear that the beginning of 
the latter Scale is between the 2nd and 3rd division of 
the former, it may not be apparent what fraction added 
to 2 determines the place of beginning of the second 
Scale as measured on the first. But if it appear also 
that the 8rd division of the second Scale coifwides with a 
certain division of the first, (the 5th,) it is certain that 2 
and tkree-tenths is the ea;act place of the beginning of the 
second Scale, measured on the first Scale. The 3rd 
division of the 11 Scale will coincide (or interfere with) 
a division of the 10 Scale, when the beginning or zero of 
the 11 divisions is three-tenths of a division beyond tlie 
preceding line of the 10 Scale ; as will be plain on a 
little consideration. And if we have two Scales of equal 
units, in which each unit is divided into nearly, but not 
quite, the same number of equal parts (as 10 and 11, 19 
and 20, 29 and 30,) and one sliding on the other, it will 
always happen that some one or other of the diviaon linee 
will coincide, or very nearly coincide ; and thus the exact 
position of the beginning of one unit, measured on the 
other scale, is determined. A sliding scale, thus divided 
for the purpose of subdividing the units of that on which 
it slides, is called a Vefmiery from the name of its inventor. 
19. The same Principle of Coincidence or Interfe- 
rence is applied to the exact measurement of the length 
of time occupied in the oscillation of a pendulum. If a 
detached pendulum, of such a length as to swing in little 
less than a second, be placed before the seconds' pendu- 
lum of a clock, and if the two pendulums begin to move 
together, the former will gain upon the latter, and in a 
little while their motions will be quite discordant. But 
if we go on watching, we shall find them, after a time, 
to agree again exactly; namely, when the detached pen- 
dulum has gained one complete oscillation (back and 
forwards,) upon the clock pendulum, and again coincides 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. ^ 4d9 

with it in its motion. If this happen after 5 minutes^ 
ve know that the times of oscillation of the two pen- 
dulums are in the proportion of 300 to 302, and there- 
fore the detached pendulum oscillates in \^ of a second. 
The accuracy which can be obtained in the measure of 
an oscillation by this means is great ; for the clock can 
be compared (by observing transits of the stars or other- 
wise) with the natural standard of time, the sidereal day. 
And the moment of coincidence of the two pendulums 
may, by proper arrangements, be very exactly determined. 
We have hitherto spoken of methods of measuring 
time and space, but other elements also may be very 
precisely measured by various means. 

20. (VI.) Measurement of Weight.— Weight, like 
space and time, is a quantity made up by addition of 
parts, and may be measured by similar methods. The 
principle of repetition is applicable to the measurement 
of weight ; for if two bodies be put in the same pan of a 
balance, their weights are exactly added. 

There may be difficulties of practical workmanship in 
carrying into effect the mathematical conditions of a per- 
fect balance ; for example, in securing an exact equality 
of the effective arms of the beam in all positions. These 
difficulties are evaded by the Met/iod of double weighing ; 
according to which the standard weights, and the body 
which is to be weighed, are successively put in the same 
pan, and made to balance by a third body in the opposite 
scale. By this means the different lengths of the arms 
of the beam, and other imperfections of the balance, 
become of no consequence*. 

21. There is no natural Standard of weight The 
conventional weight taken as the standard, is the weight 
of a given bulk of some known substance ; for instance, 

* For other methods of measuring weights accurately, see Fara- 
day's Chemical Afanipuiatiofiy p. 25. 

2 K 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



600 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

a cubic foot of water. But in order that this may be defi- 
nite, the water must not contain any portion of hetero- 
geneous substance : hence it is required that the water 
be distilled water. 

22. (VII.) Measurement of Secondary Qualities. — We 
have already seen* that secondary qualities are estimated 
by means of conventional Scales, which refer them to 
space, number, or some other definite expression. Thus 
the Thermometer measures heat ; the Musical Scale, with 
or without the aid of number, expresses the pitch of a 
note ; and we may have an exact and complete Scale of 
Colours, pure and impure. We may remark, however, 
that with regard to sound and colour, the estimates of the 
ear and the eye are not superseded, but only assisted : 
for if we determine what a note is, by comparing it with 
an instrument known to be in tune, we still leave the ear 
to decide when the note is in unison with one of the notes 
of the instrument. And when we compare a colour with 
our chromatometer, we judge by the eye which division 
of the chromatometer it matches. Colour and sound have 
their Natural Scales, which the eye and ear habitually 
apply ; what science requires is, that those scales should 
be systematized. We have seen that several conditions 
are requisite in such scales of qualities: the observer's 
skill and ingenuity are mainly shown in devising such 
scales and methods of applying them. 

23. The Method of Coincidences is employed in har- 
monics: for if two notes are nearly, but not quite, in 
unison, the coincidences of the vibrations produce an 
audible undulation in the note, which is called the howl; 
and the exactness of the unison is known by this howl 
vanishing. 

24. (VIII.) Manipulation. — ^The process of applying 
practically methods of experiment and observation, is 

* Book iii. c. 2. Of the Measure of Secondary Qualities. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBSERVATION. 501 

termed Manipulation ; and the value of observations 
depends much upon the proficiency of the observer m 
this art. This skill appears, as we have said, not only in 
devising means and modes of measuring results, but also 
in inventing and executing arrangements by which ele- 
ments are subjected to such conditions as the investiga- 
tion requires : in finding and using some material combi- 
nation by which nature shall be asked the question which 
we have in our minds. To do this in any subject may be 
considered as a peculiar Art, but especially in Chemistry; 
where "many experiments, and even whole trains of 
research, are essentially dependent for success on mere 
manipulation*." The changes which the chemist has to 
study, — compositions, decompositions, and mutual actions, 
affecting the internal structure rather thian the external 
form and motion of bodies, — are not familiarly recognized 
by common observers, as those actions are which operate 
upon the total mass of a body : and hence it is only when 
the chemist has become, to a certain degree, familiar 
with his science, that he has the power of observing. He 
must learn to interpret the effects of mixture, heat, and 
other chemical agencies, so as to see in them those facts 
which chemistry makes the basis of her doctrines. And 
in learning to interpret this language, he must also learn 
to call it forth ; — to place bodies under the requisite con- 
ditions, by the apparatus of his own laboratory and the 
operations of his own fingers. To do this with readiness 
and precision, is, as we have said, an Art, both of the 
mind and of the hand, in no small degree recondite and 
difficult. A person may be well acquainted with all the 
doctrines of chemistry, and may yet fail in the simplest 
experiment. How many precautions and observances, 
what resource and invention, what delicacy and vigilance, 

* Faraday's Chemical Manipulatmiy p. 3, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



502 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

are requisite in chemical manipulation, may be seen by 
reference to Dr. Faraday's work on that subject. 

25. The same qualities in the observer are requisite 
in some other departments of science ; for example, in 
the researches of Optics: for in these, after the first 
broad facts have been noticed, the remaining features of 
the phenomena are both very complex and very minute ; 
and require both ingenuity in the invention of experi- 
ments, and a keen scrutiny of their results. We have 
instances of the application of these qualities in most of 
the optical experimenters of recent times, and certainly in 
no one more than Sir David Brewster. Omitting here all 
notice of his succeeding labours^ his Treatise on New Phi-- 
lasophical Instruments, published in 1813, is an excellent 
model of the kind of resource and skill of which we now 
speak. I may mention as an example of this skill, his 
mode of determining the refractive power of an irregtilar 
fragment of any transparent substance. At first this 
might appear an impossible problem ; for it would seem 
that a regular and smooth surface are requisite, in (Nrder 
that we may have any measurable refraction. But Sir 
David Brewster overcame the difficulty by immersing the 
fragment in a combination of fluids, so mixed, that they 
had the same refractive power as the specimen. The 
question, when they had this power, was answered by no- 
ticing when the fragment became so transparent that its 
surface could hardly be seen ; for this happened when, 
the refractive power within and without the frttgment 
being the same, there was no refraction at the surface. 
And this condition being obtained, the refractive power 
of the fluid, and therefore of the fragment, was easily 
ascertained. 

26. (IX.) The Education of the Senses. — Colour and 
Musical Tone are, as we have seen, determined by means 
of the Senses, whether or not Systematical Scales are 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MBTHODS OF OBSERVATION. 503 

used in expressing the observed fact. SystematiciJ Scales 
of sensible qualities, however, not only give precision to 
the record, but to the observation. Btit for this purpo(M3 
such an Education of the Senses is requisite as may 
enable us to apply the scale immediately. The memory 
must retain the sensation or perception to which the 
technical term or degree of the scale refers. Thus with 
regard to colour, as we have said already^, when we find 
such terms as tin-white or pinchbeck-browny the metallic 
colour so denoted ought to occur at once to our recollec- 
tion without delay or search. The observer's senses, 
therefore, must be educated, at first by an actual exhibi- 
tion of the standard, and afterwards by a familiar use of 
it, to understand readily and clearly each phrase and 
degree of the scales which in his observations he has to 
apply. This is not only the best, but in many cases the 
only way in which the observation can be expressed. 
Thus glassy htsire^ fatty lustre^ adamantine lustre^ denote 
certain kinds of shining in minerals, which appearances 
we should endeavour iti vain to describe by periphrasis ; 
and which the terms, if considered as terms in common 
language, would by no means clearly discriminate : for who, 
in common language, would say that coal has a fatty 
lustre ? But these terms, in their conventional sense, are 
perfectly definite ; and when the eye is once familiarized 
with this application of them, are easily and clearly intel- 
ligible. 

27. The education of the senses, which is thus requi- 
site in order to understand well the terminology of any 
science, must be acquired by an inspection of the objects 
which the science deals with ; and is, perhaps^ best pro- 
moted by the practical study of Natural History. In the 
different departments of Natural History, the descriptions 
of species are given by means of an extensive techuicid 
* Book viii. c. 3. Temiinology. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



604 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

terminology: and that education of which we now speak, 
ought to produce the effect of making the observer as 
familiar with each of these terms as we are with the 
words of our common language. The terms have a much 
more precise meaning than other terms, since they are 
defined by express convention, and not learnt by common 
usage merely. Yet though they are thus defined, not the 
definition, but the perception itself, is that which the term 
suggests to the proficient. 

In order to use the terminology to any good purpose, 
the student must possess it, not as a dictionary, but as a 
language. The terminology of his sciences must be the 
natural historian's most familiar tongue. He must learn 
to think in such language. And when this is achieved, 
the terminology, as I have elsewhere said*, though to an 
uneducated eye cumbrous and pedantical, is felt to be a 
useful implement, not an oppressive burden. The im- 
patient schoolboy looks upon his grammar and vocabulary 
as irksome and burdensome ; but the accomplished stu- 
dent who has learnt the language by means of them, 
knows that they have given him the means of expressing 
what he thinks, and even of thinking more precisely. 
And as the study of language thus gives precision to the 
thoughts, the study of Natural History, and especially of 
the descriptive part of it, gives precision to the senses. 

The Education of the Senses is also greatly promoted 
by the practical pursuit of any science of experiment and 
observation, as chemistry or astronomy. The methods of 
manipulating, of which we have just spoken, in chemistry, 
and the methods of measuring extremely minute portions 
of space and time which are employed in astronomy, and 
which are described in the former part of this chapter, are 
among the best modes of educating the senses for purposes 
of scientific observation. 

* Hi9L Ind. Sci.y iii. 307. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF OBMRVATION. 505 

28. By the various Methods of precise observation 
which we have thus very briefly described, facts are col- 
lected, of an exact and definite kind ; they are then bound 
together in general laws, by the aid of general ideas and 
of such methods as we have now to consider. It is true, 
that the ideas which enable us to combine facts into 
general propositions, do commonly operate in our minds 
while we are still engaged in the oflice of observing. 
Ideas of one kind or other are requisite to connect our 
phenomena into facts, and to give meaning to the terms 
of our descriptions : and it frequently happens, that long 
before we have collected all the facts which induction 
requires, the mind catches the suggestion which some of 
these ideas offer, and leaps forwards to a conjectural law 
while the labour of observation is yet unfinished. But 
though this actually occurs, it is easy to see that the 
process of combining and generalizing facts is, in the 
order of nature, posterior to, and distinct from, the pro- 
cess of observing &cts. Not only is this so, but there is 
an intermediate step which, though inseparable from all 
successful generalization, may be distinguished from it in 
our survey; and may, in some degree, be assisted by 
peculiar methods. To the consideration of such methods 
we now proceed. 



Chapter III. 

OF METHODS OF ACQUIRING CLEAR SCIENTIFIC 

IDEAS; and first OF INTELLECTUAL 

EDUCATION. 

The ways in which men become masters of those 
clear and yet comprehensive conceptions which the for- 
mation and reception of science require, are mainly two ; 
which, although we cannot reduce them to any exact 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



606 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

scheme^ we may still, in a loose use of the term, call 
Methodi of acquiring clear Ideas. These two ways are 
Education and discussion. 

1. (I.) Idea of Spojce. — It is easily seen that Education 
may do at least something to render our ideas distinct 
and precise. To learn Geometry in youth, tends, mani* 
f^tly, to render our idea of space clear and exact. By 
such an education, all the relations, all the consequences 
of this idea, come to be readily and steadily apprehended ; 
and thus it becomes easy for us to understand portions of 
science which otherwise we should by no means be able 
to comprehend. The conception of similar triangles was 
to be mastered, before the disciples of Thales could see 
the validity of his method of determining the height of 
lofty objects by the length of their shadows. The con- 
ception of the sphere with its circles had to become familiar, 
before the annual motion of the sun and its influence upon 
the lengths of days could be rightly traced. The proper- 
ties of circles, combined with the pure* doctrine ^motimt^ 
were required as an introduction to the theory of Epicy- 
cles : the properties of conic sections were needed, as a 
piPeparation for the discoveries of Kepler. And not only 
was it necessary that men should possess a knowledge of 
certain figures and their properties ; but it was equally 
necessary that they should have the habit of reasoning with 
perfect steadiness, precision, and conclusiveness concern- 
ing the relations of space. No small discipline of the 
mind is requisite, in most cases, to accustom it to go, 
with complete insight and security, through the demon- 
strations respecting intersecting planes and lines, dihedral 
and trihedral angles, which occur in solid geometry. Yet 
how absolutely necessary is a perfect mastery of such 
reasonings, to him who is to explain the motions of the 
moon in latitude and longitude ! How necessary, agmn, 

? See b. 11. c. 12. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 507 

is the same fbcnlty to the student of crystallographj ! 
Without mathematical habits of conception and of think- 
ing, these portions of science are perfectly inaccessiblew 
But the eariy study of plane and solid geometry gives to 
all tolerably gifted persons, the habits which are thus 
needed. The discipline of following the reasonings of 
didactic works on this subject, till we are quite familiar 
with them, and of devising for ourselves reasonings of the 
same kind, (as, for instance, the solutions of problems 
proposed,) soon gives the mind the power of discoursing 
with perfect facility concerning the most complex and 
multiplied relations of space, and enables us to refer to 
the properties of all plane and solid figures as surely as 
to the visible forms of objects. Thus we have here a 
signal instance of the efficacy of education in giving to 
our Conceptions that clearness, which the formation and 
existence of science indispensably require. 

2. It is not my intention here to enter into the details 
of the form which should be given to education, in order 
that it may answer the purposes now contemplated. But 
I may make a remark, which the above examples naturally 
suggest, that in a mathematical education, considered as 
a preparation for furthering or understanding physical 
science, Geometry is to be cultivated, fkr rather than 
Algebra : — the properties of space are to be studied and 
reasoned upon as they are in diemselves, not as they are 
replaced and disguised by symbolical representations* It 
is true, that when the student is become quite familiar 
with elementary geometry, he may often enable himself 
to deal in a more rapid and comprehensive manner with 
the relations of space, by using the language of symbols 
and the principles of symbolical calculation : but this is 
an ulterior step, which may be added to, but can never 
be substituted for, the direct cultivation of geometry. 
The method of symbolical reasoning employed upon sub- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



508 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

jects of geometry and mechanics, has certainly achieved 
some remarkable triumphs in the treatment of the theory 
of the universe. These successful applications of symbols 
in the highest problems of physical astronomy appear to 
have made some teachers of mathematics imagine that it 
is best to begin the pupil's course with such symbolical 
generalities. But this mode of proceeding will be so far 
from giving the student clear ideas of mathematical rela- 
tions, that it will involve him in utter confusion, and 
probably prevent his ever obtaining a firm footing in geo- 
metry. To commence mathematics in such a way, would 
be much as if we should begin the study of a language by 
reading the highest strains of its lyrical poetry. 

3. (II.) Idea of Number^ Sfc. — ^The study of mathe- 
matics, as I need hardly observe, develops and renders 
exact, our conceptions of the relations of number, as well 
as of space. And although, as we have already noticed, 
even in their original form the conceptions of number are 
for the most part very distinct, they may be still further 
improved by such discipline. In complex cases, a metho- 
dical cultivation of the mind in such subjects is needed : 
for instance, questions concerning cycles, and intercala^ 
tions, and epacts, and the like, require very great steadi- 
ness of arithmetical apprehension in order that the rea- 
soner may deal with them rightly. In the same manner, 
a mastery of problems belonging to the science of Pure 
Motion, or, as I have termed it. Mechanism, requires 
either great natural aptitude in the student, or a mind 
properly disciplined by suitable branches of mathematical 
study. 

4. Arithmetic and Geometry have long been standard 
portions of the education of cultured persons throughout 
the civilized world; and hence all such persons have 
been able to accept and comprehend those portions of 
science which depend upon the idea of space : for instance. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 509 

the doctrine of the globular form of the earth, with its 
consequences, such as the measures of latitude and longi- 
tude ; — the heliocentric system of the universe in modern, 
or the geocentric in ancient times ; — the explanation of 
the rainbow ; and the like. In nations where there is no 
such education, these portions of science cannot exist as 
a part of the general stock of the knowledge of society, 
however intelligently they may be pursued by single 
•philosophers dispersed here and there in the community. 
5. (III.) Idea of Force. — As the idea of Space is 
brought out in its full evidence by the study of Geometry, 
so the idea of Force is called up and developed by the study 
of the science of Mechanics. It has already been shown, 
in our scrutiny of the Ideas of the Mechanical Sciences, 
that Force, the Cause of motion or of equilibrium, involves 
an independent Fundamental Idea, and is quite incapable of 
being resolved into any mere modification of our concep- 
tions of space, time, and motion. And in order that the 
student may possess this idea in a precise and manifest 
shape, he must pursue the science of Mechanics in the 
mode which this view of its nature demands ; — ^that is, 
he must study it as an independent science, resting on 
solid elementary principles of its own, and not built upon 
some other unmechanical science as its substructure. He 
must trace the truths of Mechanics from their own axioms 
and definitions ; these axioms and definitions being con- 
sidered as merely means of bringing into play the Idea 
on which the science depends. The conceptions of force 
and matter, of action and reaction, of momentum and 
inertia, with the reasonings in which they are involved, 
cannot be evaded by any substitution of lines or symbols 
for the conceptions. Any attempts at such substitution 
would render the study of Mechanics useless as a prepa- 
ration of the mind for physical science ; and would, in- 
deed, except counteracted by great natural clearness of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



510 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OP SCIENCE. 

thought on such subjects, fill the mind with confused and 
Yague notions, quite unavailing for any purposes of sound 
reasoning. But, on the other hand, the study of Mecha- 
nics, in its genuine form, as a branch of education, is fitted 
to give a most useful and valuable precision of thought 
on such subjects ; and is the more to be recommended, 
since, in the general habits of most men's minds, the 
mechanical conceptions are tainted with far greater ob- 
scurity and perplexity than belongs to the conceptions of 
number, space, and motion. 

6. As habitually distinct conceptions of space and 
motion were requisite for the reception of the doctrines 
of formal astronomy, (the Ptolemaic and Copemican 
system,) so a clear and steady conception of force is 
indispensably necessary for understanding the Newtonian 
system of physical astronomy. It may be objected that 
the study of Mechanics as a science has not commonly 
formed part of a liberal education in Europe, and yet 
that educated persons have commonly accepted the New- 
tonian system. But to this we reply, that although most 
persons of good intellectual culture have professed to 
assent to the Newtonian system of the universe, yet they 
have, in fact, entertained it in so vague and perplexed a 
manner as to show very clearly that a better mental 
preparation than the usual one is necessary, in order that 
such persons may really understand the doctrine of 
universal attraction. I have already spoken of Uie pre- 
valent indistinctness of mechanical conceptions*; and 
need not here dwell upon the indications, constantly 
occurring in conversation and in literature, of the utter 
inaccuracy of thought on such subjects which may often 
be detected ; for instance, in the mode in which many 
men speak of centrifugal and centripetal forces ; — of pro- 
jectile and central forces ;— of the effect of the moon 
? Vol. i. p. 267. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATiaN. 511 

upon the waters of the ocean ; and the like. The inco- 
herence of ideas which we frequently witness on such 
points, shows us clearly that, in the minds of a great 
number of men, well educated according to the present 
standard, the acceptance of the doctrine of universal 
gravitation is a result of traditional prejudice, not of 
rational conviction. And those who are Newtonians on 
such grounds, are not at all more intellectually advanced 
by being Newtonians in the nineteenth century, than 
they would have been by being Ptolemaics in the fif- 
teenth. 

7. It is undoubtedly in the highest degree desirable 
that all great advances in science shotdd become the 
common property of all cultivated men. And this can 
only be done by introducing into the course of a liberal 
education such studies as unfold and fix in men's minds 
the fundamental ideas upon which the new discovered 
truths rest. The progress made by the ancients in geo- 
graphy, astronomy, and other sciences, led them to assign, 
wisely and well, a place to arithmetic and geometry 
among the steps of an ingenuous education. The dis- 
coveries of modem times have rendered these steps still 
more indispensable ; for we cannot consider a man as 
cultivated up to the standard of his times, if he is not 
only ignorant of, but incapable of comprehending, the 
greatest achievements of the human intellect. And as 
innumerable discoveries of all ages have thus secured to 
Geometry her place as a part of good education, so the 
great discoveries of Newton make it proper to introduce 
Elementary Mechanics as a part of the same course. If 
the education deserve to be called good, the pupil will 
not remain ignorant of those discoveries, the most remarb- 
able extensions of the field of human knowledge which 
have ever occurred. Yet he cannot by possibility com- 
prehend them, except his mind be previously disciplined 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



612 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

by n^echanical studies. The «period appears now to be 
arrived when we may venture, or rather when we are 
bound to endeavour, to include a new class of funda- 
mental ideas in the elementary discipline of the human 
intellect. This is indispensable, if we wish to educe the 
powers which we know that it possesses, and to enrich it 
with the wealth which lies within its reach*. 

8. By the view which is thus presented to us of the 
nature and objects of intellectual education, we are led 
to consider the mind of man as undergoing a progress 
from age to age. By the discoveries which are made, 
and by the clearness and evidence which, after a time, 
(not suddenly nor soon,) the truths thus discovered 
acquire, one portion of knowledge after another becomes 
elementary ; and if we would really secure this progress, 
and make men share in it, these new portions must be 
treated as elementary in the constitution of a liberal 
education. Even in the rudest forms of intelligence, 
man is immeasurably elevated above the unprogressive 
brute, for the idea of number is so far developed that he 
can count his flock or his arrows. But when number is 
contemplated in a speculative form, he has made a vast 
additional progress; when he steadily apprehends the 
relations of space, he has again advanced; when in 
thought he carries these relations into the vault of the 
sky, into the expanse of the universe, he reaches a higher 
intellectual position. And when he carries into these 
wide regions, not only the relations of space and time, 
but of cause and effect, of force and reaction, he has again 
made an intellectual advance ; which, wide as it is at first, 
is accessible to all ; and with which all should acquaint 
themselves, if they really desire to prosecute with energy 
the ascending path of truth and knowledge which lies 

* The University of Cambridge has, by a recent hiw, made an 
examination in Elementary Mechanics requisite for the Degree of B. A. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 613 

before them. This should be an object of exertion to all 
ingenuous and hopeful minds. For that exertion is 
necessary, — ^that after all possible facilities have been 
afforded, it is still a matter of toil and struggle to appro- 
priate to ourselves the acquisitions of great discoverers, 
is not to be denied. Elementary medianics, like elemen- 
tary geometry, is a study accessible to all ; but like that 
too, or perhaps more than that, it is a study which requires 
effort and contention of mind, — a forced steadiness of 
thought. It is long since one complained of this labour 
in geometry ; and was answered that in that region there 
is no Royal Road. The same is true of Mechanics, and 
must be true of all branches of solid education. But we 
should express the truth more appropriately in our days 
by saying that there is no Popular Road to these sciences. 
In the mind, as in the body, strenuous exercise alone can 
give strength and activity. The art of exact thought can 
be acquired only by the labour of close thinking. 

9. (IV.) Chemical Ideas. — ^We appear then to have 
arrived at a point of human progress in which a liberal 
education of the scientific intellect should include, besides 
arithmetic, elementary geometry and mechanics. The 
question then occurs to us, whether there are any other 
Fundamental Ideas, among those belonging to other 
sciences, which ought also to be made part of such an 
education; — whether, for example, we should strive to 
develop in the minds of all cultured men the ideas of 
polarity^ mechanical and chemical, of which we spoke in 
a former part of this work. 

The views to which we have been conducted by the pre- 
vious inquiry lead us to reply that it would not be well to 
make cA^;wtW polarities, at any rate, a subject of elementary 
instruction. For even the most profound and acute phi- 
losophers who have speculated upon this subject, — they 
who are leading the van in the march of discovery, do 

VOL. n. 2 L 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



514 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FOUMATION OF SCIEKCE. 

not seem yet to have reduced their thoughts on this 
subject to a consistency, or to have taken hold of this idea 
of polarity in a manner quite satisfactory to their own 
minds. This part of the sul^ject is, therefore, by no means 
ready to be introduced into a course of general elementary 
education; for, with a view to such a purpose, nothings 
less than the most thoroughly luminous and transparent 
condition of the idea will suffice. Its whole efficacy, 
as a means and object of disciplinal study, depends upon 
there being no obscurity, perplexity, or indefiniteness with 
regard to it, beyond that transient deficiency which at first 
exists in the learner^s minii, and is to be removed by his 
studies. The idea of chemical polarity is not yet in this 
condition ; and therefore is not yet fit for a place in edu- 
cation. Yet since this idea of polarity is the most 
general idea which enters into chemistry, and appears to 
be that Which includes almost all the others, it would be 
unphilosophical, and inconsistent with all sound views of 
science, to introduce into education some chemical con- 
ceptions, and to omit those which depend upon this idea : 
indeed such a partial adoption of the science could hardly, 
take place without not only omitting, but misrepresenting, 
a great part of our chemical knowledge. The conclusion 
to which we are necessarily led, therefore, is this : — that 
at present chemistry cannot with any advantage, form a 
portion of a general intellectual education*. 

10. (V.) Natural-Histoiy Ideas. — But there remains 
still another class of Ideas, with regard to which we may 
very properly ask whether they may not advantageously 
foim a portion of a liberal education : I mean the Ideas- 

* I do not here stop to prove that an education (if it be so called) 
in which the memory only retains the verhal expression of r^olts, 
-while the mind does not apprehend the principles of the subject, and 
therefore cannot even understand the words in which its doctrines are 
oxpTssed, is of no value whatever to the intellect, but rather, is liighly 
hurtful to the habits of think 'ii^^ an. I reasonin^j;. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTBIiLEClUAL EDUCATION. 516 

of definite lE^emhlance and Difference^ and of one set 
of resemblances subordinate to another, >vhich form the 
ba^es of- the olassificatorj sciences. These Ideas are 
developed by the study of the various branches of Natural 
History^ as Botany, and Zoology ; and beyond all doubt, 
those pursuits, if assiduously followed, very materially 
affect the mental habits. There is this obvious advantage 
to be looked for from the study of Natural History, con- 
sidered as a means of intellectual discipline: — that it 
gives, us, in a precise and scientific form, examples of 
tlie clasi^iig and naming of objects; which operations the 
use of common language leads us constantly to perform 
n aloose and inexact way. In the usual habits of our 
minds and tongues, things- are distinguished or brought 
together, and names are applied, in a manner very indefi- 
nite^ vacillating, and seemingly capricious : and we may 
»aturally be led to doubt whether such defects can be 
avoided; — ^whether exact distinctions of things, and rigo- 
rous use of wordd be possible. Now upon this point . we 
may receive the instruction of Natural History ; which 
proves to us, by the actual performance of the task, that 
a precise classification and nomenclature are attainable, 
at least for a mass of objects of the same kind. Further^ 
we also learn from this study, that there may exist not 
only an exact distinction of kinds, of things, but a series 
of distinctions, one set subordinate to another, and the 
more general induding the more special, so as to form a 
system of classification. All these are valuable lessons. ^ 
If by the study of Natural History we evolve, in a clear 
and well defined form, the conceptions of genus^ species^ 
and of higJier and lower steps of classification, we commu- 
nicate precision, clearness, and method to the intellect, 
through a great range of its operations. 

11. It must be observed, that in order to attain the 
disciplinal benefit which the study of Natural History is 

2 L 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



616 M^HODS EMPLOYBD IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

fitted to bestowi we must teach the naiurai not the aiii« 
ficial da$s^caH(ms ; or at least the natural as well as the 
artificial. For it is important for the stodenfe to peroeire 
that there are classifications, not merely arbitrary, founded 
upon some a$$Hfned character, but naturd, recognised by 
some discovered character ; he ou j^t to see that our classes 
being collected according to one mark, are confirmed by 
many marks not originally stated in our scheme ; and are 
thus found to be grouped together, not by a single resem* 
blance, but by a mass of resemblances, indicating s 
natural affinity. That ol]r|ects may be collected into such 
groups, is a highly important lesson, which Natural Histoiy 
ulone, pursued as the science of fuUural da$se$f can teach* 
12. Natural History has not unfrequently been made 
a portion of education t and has in some degree produced 
such effects as we haTO pointed out. It would appear 
however, that its lessons have in general been very im« 
perfectly lewnt or understood by persons of general edu- 
cation: and that there are perverse intellectual habits 
very generally prevalent in the cultivated classes, which 
ought ere now to have been corrected by the general 
teaching of Natural History. We may detect among 
speculative men many prejudices respecting the nature 
and rules of reasoning, which arise from pure mathema- 
tics having been so long and so universally the instrument 
of intellectual cultivation. Pure Mathematics reasons 
from definitions : whatever term is introduced into her 
pages, as a eirdef or a square^ its definition comes along 
with it : and this definition is supposed to supply all that 
the reasober needs to know, respecting the term. If 
there be any doubt concerning the validity of the conclu- 
sion, the doubt is resolved by recurring to the definitions. 
Hence it has come to pass that in other subjects also, men 
seek for and demand definitions as the most secure foun- 
dation of reasoning. The definition and the term defined 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLBCTUAL EDUOATIOK. 517 

are conceived to be so far identical, that in all cafies the 
one may be substituted for the other ; and such a subiti-* 
tution is held to be the best mode of detecting fltllacies. 

13. It has been already shown that even geometry ii 
not founded upon definitions alone : and we shall not 
here again analyse the fallacy of this belief in the supreme 
value of definitions. But we may remark that the study 
of Natural History appears to be the proper remedy for 
this erroneous habit of thought. For in every department ^ 
of Natural History the object of our study is kindi of 
things, not one of which kinds can be rigorously definedi 
yet all of them are sufficiently definite. In these cases 
we may indeed give a specific description of one of the 
kinds, and may call it a definition ; but it is clear that 
such a definition does not contain the essence of the 
thing. We say* that the Rose Tribe are ** Polypetalous 
dicotyledons, with lateral styles, superior simple ovaria, 
regular perigynous stamens, exalbuminous definite seeds, 
and alternate stipulate leaves.'* But no one would say 
that this was our essential conception of a rose, to be sub- 
stituted for it in all cases of doubt or obscurity, by way 
of making our reasonings perfectly clear. Not only so ; 
but as we have already seen f, the definition does not evert 
apply to all the tribe. For the stipule are absent in 
Lowea: the albumen is present in Neillia: the fruit of 
Spiwea sorbifolia is capsular. If, then, we can possess any 
certain knowledge in Natural History, (which no cultiva^ 
tor of the subject will doubt,) it is evident that our know* 
ledge cannot depend on the possibility of laying down 
exact definitions and reasoning from them. 

14. But it may be asked, if we cannot define a word, 
or a class of things which a word denotes, how can we 
distinguish what it does mean from what it does not 
mean? How can we say that It signifies one thing 

* Lindley's N<U. Syti. Bo*., p. 81. + B. viii., c. 2., p. 475. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



518 METHODS E3IPL0YED IK THE FOEMATION OF SCIENCE. 

rather than another, except we declare what U its sig-- 
nification? 

The answer to this question involves the general prin-' 
ciple of a natural method of classification, which has 
already been stated^ and need not here be again dwelfe 
on. It has been shown t^at names of kinds of things 
(genera) associate them according to total resemblances^' 
TOt partial charactei'S. The principle which connects a 
group of objects in natural history is not a definition, but 
a type. Thus we take as the type of the Rose family, it 
may be, the common wild rose ; all species which resemble, 
this more than they resemble any other group of species 
are also roses, and form one genus. All genera which 
resemble Roses more than they resemble any other group 
of genera are of the same family. And thus the Rose 
jRamily is collected about some one species, which is the 
type or central point of the group. 

In such an arrangement, it may readily be conceived 
that though the nucleus of each group may cohere firmly 
together, the outskirts of contiguous groups may approach, 
and may even be intermingled, so that some species may. 
doubtfully adhere to one group or another. Yet this un^ 
certainty does not all affect the truths which we find our- 
selves enabled to assert with regard to the general mas» 
of each group. And thus we ai*e taught that there may 
be very important differences between two groups of 
objects, although we are unable to tell where the one. 
group ends and where the other begins ; and that there 
may be propositions of indisputable truth, in which it is 
impossible to give unexceptionable definitions of the 
terms employed. 

15. These lessons are of the highest value with 
regard to all employments of the human mind ; for the 
mode in which words in common use acquire their mean- 
? B. Tiii., c. 2„ p. 476. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INT^LECTUAL EDUCATION. 61 9 

iugy approaches far more nearly to the Method of Type 
than to the method of definition. The terms which belong 
to our practical concerns, or to onr spontaneous and un- 
scientific speculations, are rarely capable of exact defini- 
tion. They have been devised in order to express asser- 
fious» often very important, yet very vaguely conceived : 
and the signification of the word is extended, as far as the 
assertion conveyed by it can be extended, by apparent 
connexion or by analogy. And thus in all the attempts 
of man to grasp at knowledge, we hietve an exemplification 
of that which we have stated as the rule of induction^ 
that Definition iand Proposition are mutually dependent, 
each adjusted so as to give value and meaning to the 
other : and this is so, even when both the elements of 
truth are defective in precision : the Definition being re- 
placed by an incomplete description or a loose reference 
to a Type ; and the Proposition being in a corresponding 
degree insecure. , 

16. Thus the study of Natural History, as a corrective 
of the belief that definitions are essential to substantial 
truth, might be of great use ; and the advantage which 
might thus be obtained is such as well entitles this study 
to a place in a liberal qdoeation. We may further 
observe, that in order that l^atural History may produce 
such an efiect, it must be studied by inspection of the 
obfects themselves, and not by the reading of books only. 
Its lesson is, that we must in all cases of doubt or obscu- 
rity refer, i^ot to words or definitions, but to things. The 
Book of Nature is its • dictionary : it is there that the 
natural historian looks, to find the meaning of the words 
which he uses*. So long as a plant, in its most essential 

' ' * It is a coriotis example of the inflaence of the belief in definitions, 
that elementary books have been written in which Natural Histoiy ia 
taught in the way of question and answer, and consequently by me^na 
of words alone. In such a scheme, of course all objeots are defined : and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



fiSO METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

partem is more like a rose than anything else, it is a rose* 
He knows no other definition. 

17. (VI.) WdUstMish&l Idea$ done to be used^ — 
We toay iMS^ert in general what we have above stated 
speoitlly with referenee to the fundamental principles of 
chemistry* — no Ideas are suited to become the elements 
of dementary education^ till they have not only become 
perfectly distinct and fixed in the minds of the leading 
cultivators of the science to which they belong ; but till 
ttiey have been so for some considerable period. The 
entire clearness and steadiness of view which is essential 
to sound science, must have time to extend itself to a 
wide cirde of disciples. The views and principles which 
Are detected by the most profound and acute philosophers, 
are soon appropriated by all the most intelligent mid 
active minds of their own and of the following genera* 
tions ; and when this has taken place, (and not till then,) 
it is right, by a proper constitution of our liberal educa- 
tion, to extend a general knowledge of such principles to 
all cultivated persons. And it follows, from this view of 
the matter^ that we are by no means to be in haste to 
adopt, into our course of education, all new discoveries 
as soon as they are made. They require some time, in 
order to settle into their proper place and position in 
men's minds, and to show themselves under their true 
aspects ; and till this is done, we confuse and disturb, 
rather than eiilighten and unfold, the ideas of learners, 
by introducing the discoveries into our elementary instruc- 
tion. Hence it was perhaps reasonable that a centurj 
should elapse from the time of Galileo before the rigor- 

we may eaMly anticipate the Take of the knowledge thus conreyed. 
Thus; ^ Iron it a well-known bard metal, of a darkiah gray odlour, and 
yery elastic :" " Copper is an orange-coloured metal, more sonorooa 
than any other, and the most elastic of any except iron." This is to 
perrert the meaning of education, and to make it a business of mem 
words. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTELLECTUAL EDUCATIOK. 521 

OU8 teaching of mechanics became a general element of 
intellectual training ; and the doctrine of universal gra^ 
vitation was hardly ripe for such an employment till the 
end of the last century. We must not direct the un- 
formed youthful mind to launch its little bark upon . the 
waters of speculation, till all the agitation of discoyery^ 
with its consequent fluctuation and controversy, has well 
subsided. 

18. But it may be asked, How is it that time operates 
to give distinctness and evidence to scientific ideas ? In 
what way does it happen that views and principles^ 
obscure and wavering at first, after a while become 
luminous and steady? Can we point out any process, 
any intermediate steps, by which this result is produced ? 
If we can, this process must be an important portion of 
the subject now under our consideration. 

To this we reply, that the transition from the hesi- 
tation and contradiction with which true ideas are first 
received, to the general assent and clear apprehension 
which they afterwards obtain, takes place through various 
arguments for and against them, and various modes of 
presenting and testing them, all which we may include 
under the term Discussion, which we have already men- 
tioned as the second of the two ways by which scientiflo 
views are developed into full maturity. 



Chapter IV. 

OP METHODS OF ACQUIRING CLEAR SCIENTIFIC 
IDEAS, continued.— OF THE DISCUSSION OP IDEAS. 

1. It is easily seen that in every part of science, the 
establishment of a new set of ideas has been accompanied 
with much of doubt and dissent. And by means of dis- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



522 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORBIATION OF SCIENCE- 

cusaions so oceasioned, the new conceptions, and the 
opinions M'hich invidve .them, liave gradually become 
definite and clear. The authors and asserters of the new 
opinions, in order to make them defensible, have been 
compelled to make them consistent : in order to recom-^ 
toend them to others, they have been obliged to make 
them more entirely intelligible to themselves. And thus 
the terms which formed the main points of the contro- 
versy, although applied in a loose and vacillating manner 
at first, have in the end become perfectly definite and 
exact. The opinions discussed have been, in their main 
features, the same throughout the debate ; but they havd 
at first been dimly, and at last clearly apprehended: 
like the objects of a landscape, at which we look through 
a telescope ill adjusted, till, by sliding the tube backwards 
and forwards, we at last bring it into focus, and perceive 
every feature of the prospect sharp and bright. 

2. We have in the last Book but one* fully exem* 
plified this gradual progress of conceptions fi^om obscurity 
to clearness by means of Discussion. We have seen, too; 
that this mode of treating the subject has never been 
successful, except when it has been associated with an 
appeal to facts as well as to reasonings. A combination 
of experiment with ailment, of observation with demon- 
stration, has always been found requisite in order that 
men should arrive at those distinct conceptions which 
give them substantial truths. The arguments used led 
to the rejection of undefined, ambiguous, self-contradictory 
notions ; but the reference to facts led to the selection, or 
at least to the retention, of the conceptions which were 
both true and useful. The two correlative processes, 
definition and true assertion, the formation of clear ideas 
and the induction of laws, went on' together. 

* B. xi, c. 2, Of the Explication of Conceptions. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WSCU3S10N OT IDEAS* 623 

Thus those discassions by which scientific conceptions 
are rendered nltimately quite distinct and fixed, include 
both reasonings from principles and illustrations fronr 
facts. At pres^it we turn our attention more peculiarlj! 
to the former part of the process; according to th^ 
distinction already drawn, between the explication of 
' conceptions and the colligation of facts, llie Discussions 
of which we here speak, are the Method (if they may ba 
called a method) by which the Explication of Conceptions 
IS carried to the requisite point among philosophers. r 

8. In the scrutiny of the Fundamental Ideas of the 
Sciences which forms the previous Part of this work, an4 
in the Hutory of the Inductive Sciences, I have, in several 
instances, traced the steps by which, historically speaking! 
these Ideas have obtained their ultimate and permanent 
place in the minds of speculative men. I have thus 
exemplified the reasonings and controveries which con-r 
stitute such Discussion as we now speak of. I have 
stated, at considerable length, the various attempts, failt 
ures, and advances, by which the ideas which enter into 
the science of mechanics were evolved into their present 
evidence. In like manner we have seen the conception 
of refracted rays of light, obscure and confused in Seneca^ 
growing clearer in Roger Bacon, more ddSnite in Defrr 
cartes, perfectly distinct in Newton. The polarity of 
light, at first contemplated with some perplexity, became^ 
very distinct to Malus, Young, and Fresnel; yet the^ 
phenomena of circular polarization, and still more, the 
circular polarization of fluids, leave us, even at present,^ 
some difficulty in fully mastering this conception. The. 
related polarities of electricity and magnetisna are not yet 
fully comprehended, even by our greatest philosophers.. 
One of Mr. Faraday's late papers (the Fourteenth Series* 
of his Researches) is employed in an experimental dis- 
cussion of this subject, which leads to no satisfactory 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



624 METHODS EMPLOYED IK THE POEMATION OF SCIENCE, 

result. The controversy between Biot and AmpSre*, 
on the nature of the elementary forces in electro^^jmamic 
action, is another evidence that the discussion of this 
subject has not yet reached its termination. With regard 
to chemical polarity, I have already stated that this idea 
is as yet very far from being brought to an ultimate con-* 
dition of definiteness ; and the subject of chemical forces, 
(for the whole subject must be included in this idea of 
polarity,) which has already occasioned much perplexity 
and controversy, may easily occasion much more, before it 
is settled to the satisfaction of the philosophical world. 
The ideas of the classificatory sciences also have of late 
been undergoing much, and very instructive discussion^ 
in the controversies respecting the relations and offices of 
the natural and artificial methods. And with regard to 
physiological ideas, it would hardly be too much to say, 
that the whole history of physiology up to the present 
time has consisted of the discussion of the fundamental 
ideas of the science, such as vital forces, nutrition, repro- 
duction, and the like. We have had before us at some 
length, in the present work, a review of the opposite 
opinions which have been advanced <Jn this subject ; and 
have attempted in some degree to estimate the direction 
in which these ideas are permamently settling. But 
without attaching any importance to this attempt, the 
account there given may at least serve to show, how 
important a share in the past progress of this subject the 
discussion of its fundamental ideas has hitherto had. 

4. There is one reflection which is very pointedly 
suggested by what has been said. The manner in which 
our scientific ideas acquire their distinct and ultimata 
form being such as has been described, — ^always involving 
much abstract reasoning and analysis of our conceptions, 
often much opposite argumentation and debate; — ^how 

? ffUt. Ind. ScLf lii. 287. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



J>ISCU0»IOK OF IDBA8. 625 

unpbilosophical i8 it to apeak of abstraction and analysis, 
of dispute and controversy, as frivolous and unprofitable 
processes, by which true science can never be benefitted ; 
«nd to put such employments in antithesis with the study 
of facts! 

Yet some vmtera are accustomed to talk vrith con« 
tempt of all past controversies, and to wonder at the blind- 
ness of those who did not at first take the view whidi 
was established at last Such persons forget that it was 
precisely the controversy, which established among specu* 
lative men that final doctrine which they themselves have 
quietly accepted. It is true, they have had no difficulty 
in thoroughly adopting the truth ; but that has occurred 
because all dissentient doctrines have been suppressed 
and forgotten ; and because system^, and books, and lan*« 
guage itself, have been accommodated peculiarly to the 
expression of the accepted truth* To despise those who 
have, by their mental struggles and conflicts, brought the 
subject into a condition in which error is almost out of 
our reach, is to be ungrateful exactly in proportion to the 
amount of the benefit received. It ia as if a child^ when 
its teacher had with many trials and much trouble pre-^ 
pared a telescope so that the vision through it was dis* 
tinot, should wonder at his stupidity in pushing the tube 
of the eye-glass out and in so often. 

6. Again, some persons condemn all that we have 
here spoken of as the discusnon of ideas, terming it meUh 
pht/sical : and in this spirit, one writer* has i^)oken of 
the '< metaphysical period" of each science, as preceding 
the period of '< positive knowledge.'' But as we have 
seen, that process which is here termed ** metaphysical," 
•~the analysis of our conceptions and the exposure of 
their inconsistencies, — (accompanied with the study of 
facts,) — ^has always gone on most actively in the most 

* M. AuausTE CoMTE, Coun do PhUofophie Poritivc. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



626 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

prosperous periods of each science. There is, ^ Gilileo, 
Kepler, Grassendi, and the other iathers of mecbanieal 
philosophj, as muoh of metaphjrsios as in their adveisarieflL 
The main difference is, that the metaphysics is of ft better 
kind; it is more conformable to inetaphjeical trutfa« 
And the same is the case in other sciences. Nor can it 
be otherwise. For all truth, before it can be consi^ent 
with facts, must be consistent Tfith itself: and idthough 
this rule is of undeniable authority, its implication' is often 
far from easy. The perplexities and ambiguities which 
arise from our having the same idea presented to us 
under different aspects, are often difficult to disentangle : 
and no common acuteness and steadiness of thought 
must be expended on the ta^. It would b^ ^aay to 
adduce, from the works of all great discoverers, passages 
more profoundly metaphysical than any which are to be 
found in the pages of barren a priori reasoners. 

6. As we have said, these metaphysical discossions 
are not to be put in opposition to the study of facts ; but 
are to be stimulated, nourished and directed by a con- 
stant recourse to experiment and observation. The cul- 
tivation of ideas is to be conducted as having for its 
object the connexion of &cts; never to be pursued as a 
mere exercise of the subtilty of the mind, striving to 
build up a world of its own, and neglecting that which 
exists about us. For although man may in this way please 
himself, and admire the creations of his own brain, he 
can never, by this course, hit upon the real scheme of 
nature. With his ideas unfolded by education^ sharpened 
by controversy, rectified by metaphysics, he may under- 
stand the natural world, but he cannot inveni it. At- 
every step, he must try the value of the advances he haa 
made in thought, by applying his thoughts to tilings. 
The Explication of Conceptions must be carried on witlf 
a perpetual reference to the Colligation of Facts. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



mSCUSSION OF IDEAS. 527 

Having bere treated of Education and Discussion as 
the methods by which the former of these two processes 
is to be promoted, we have now to explain the methods 
which science employs in order most successfully to 
execute the latter. But the Colligation of Facts, as 
already istated, may offer to us two steps of a very different 
kind, — ^the laws of Phenomena, and their Causes. We 
shall first describe some of the methods employed in 
obtaining truths of the former of these two kinds. 



Chapter V. 
ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 

Sect. I. The Three Steps of Induction. 

1. When facts have been decomposed and phenomena 
measured, the. philosopher endeavours to combine them 
into general laws, by the aid of ideas and conceptions, 
these being illustrated and regulated by such means m 
we have spoken of in the last two chapters. In this task, 
of gathering laws of nature from observed facts, as we 
have already said*, the natural sagacity of gifted minds is 
the power by which the greater part of the successful 
results have been obtained ; and this power will probably, 
always be more efficacious than any Method can be. 
Still there are certain methods of procedure which may. 
in such investigations give us no inconsiderable aid, and 
these I shall endeavour to expound. 

2. For this purpose, I remark that the Colligation of 
ascertained facts into general propositions may be con- 
sidered as containing three steps, which I shall term the 
Selection of the Idea, the Construction of the Conception, 
and the Determination of the Magnitudes. It will be recol- 

* B. xi. c. 6. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



528 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

looted that by the word Ideay (or Fundamental Idea,) 
used in a peculiar sense^ I mean certain wide and general 
fields of intelligible relation, such as Space, Number, 
Cause, Likeness; while by Conception I denote more 
special modifications of these ideas, as a cinie^ a square 
number^ a uniform force^ a like form of flower. Now in 
order to establish any law by reference to facts, we must 
select the true Idea and the true Conception. For exam- 
ple; when Hipparchus found* that the distance of the 
bright star Spica Virginis from the equinoxial point had 
increased by two degrees in about two hundred years, 
and desired to reduce this change to a law, he had first 
to assign, if possible, the idea on which it depended ; — 
whether it was regulated for instance, by space^ or by 
time : whether it was determined by the positions of other 
stars at each moment, or went on progressively with the 
lapse of ages. And when there was found reason to 
select ti$ne as the regulative idea of this change^ it wm 
then to be determined how the change went on with the 
time; — whether uniformly, or in some other manner: 
the conception^ or the rule of the progression, was to be 
rightly constructed. Finally, it being ascertained that 
the change did go on uniformly, the question then occurred 
what was its amount: — ^whether exactly a degree in a 
century, or more, or less, and how much : and thus the 
determination of the magnitude completed the discoyery 
of the law of phenomena respecting this star. 

3. Steps similar to these three may be discerned in 
all other discoveries of laws of nature. Thus, in investi- 
gating the laws of the motions of the sun, moon or 
planets, we find that these motions may be resolved, 
besides a uniform motion, into a series of partial motions, 
or Inequalities ; and for each of these Inequalities, we 
have to learn upon what it directly depends, whether 

? Hi9t. Ind. Set., 1. 187. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 629 

Upon the progress of time only, or upon some configura- 
tion of the heavenly bodies in space ; then, we have to 
ascertain its law ; and finally, we have to determine what 
is its amount. In the case of such Inequalities, the 
fundamental element on which the Inequality depends, is 
called the Argument. And when the Inequality has been 
fiilly reduced to known rules, and expressed in the form 
of a Table, the Argument is the fundamental series of 
numbers which stands in the margin of the Table, and by 
means of which we refer to the other numbers which 
express the Inequality, Thus, in order to obtain from a 
Solar Table the Inequality of the sun's annual motion, 
the Argument is the number which expresses the day of 
the year; the Inequalities for each day being (in the 
Table) ranged in a line corresponding to the days. More- 
over, the Argument of an Inequality being assumed to 
be known, we must, in order to calculate the Table, that 
is, in order to exhibit the law of nature, know also the 
Law of the Inequality, and its Amount And the inves- 
tigation of these three things, the Argument, the Law, 
and the Amount of the Inequality, represents the three 
steps above described, the Selection of the Idea, the Con- 
struction of the Conception, and the Determination of 
the Magnitude. 

4. In a great body of cases, mathematical language and 
calculation are used to express the connexion between 
the general law and the special fects. And when this is 
done, the three steps above described may be spoken of 
as the Selection of the Independent Variahley the Con- 
struction of the Foimula^ and the Determination of the 
Coefficients. It may be worth our while to attend to an 
exemplification of this. Suppose then, that, in such 
observations as we have just spoken of, namely, the shift- 
ing of a star from its place in the heavens by an unknown 
law, astronomers had, at the end of three successive years, 
VOL. II. 2 M 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



530 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

found that the star had removed by 3, by 8, and by 15 
minutes from its original place- Suppose it to be ascer- 
tained also, by methods of which we shall hereafter treat, 
that this change depends upon the time ; we must theii 
take the time^ (which we may denote by the symbol /,) for 
the independent variable. But though the star changes its 
place with the time, the change is not proportional to 
the time ; for its motion which is only 3 minutes in the 
first year, is 5 minutes in the second year, and 7 in the 
third. But it is not difficult for a person a little versed 
in mathematics to perceive that the series 3, 8, 15, may 
be obtained by means of two terms, one of which is pro* 
portional to the time, and the other to the square of the 
time ; that is, it is expressed by the forfnula at ^ bit, 
The question then occurs, what are the values of the 
coefficienis a and b ; and a little examination of the case 
shows us that a must be 2, and b^ 1 : so that the formuk 
is 2t + tt. Indeed if We add together the series 2, 4, ^ 
which expresses the change proportional to the time, and 
1, 4, 9, which is proportional to the square of the time^ 
we obtdn the series 3, 8, 15, which is the series of num- 
bers given by observation. And thus the three st^>8 
which give us the Idea, the Conception, and the Magni* 
tudes ; or the Argument, the Law, and the Amount^ of 
the change ; give us the Independent Variable, the For- 
mula, and the Coefficients, respectively. 

We now proceed to offer some suggestions of methods 
by which each of these steps may be in some degree 
promoted. 

Sect. IL Of the Selection of^ Fundamental Idea. 

5. When we turn our thoughts upon any asseinMage 
of facts, with a view of collecting from theni some con- 
nexion or law, the most important step, and at the same 
time that in which rules can least aid us, is the Selection 
of the Idea by which they are to be collected. So long 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALYSIS OP THE PfiOCESS OF INDUOTION. 531 

as this idea has not been detected, all seems to be hope* 
less confusion or insulated facts; when the connecting 
idea has been caught sight of^ we constantly regard the 
facts with reference to their connexion, and wonder that 
it should be possible for auj one to consider them in anj 
other point of view. 

Thus the different seasons, and the yarious aspects of 
the heavenly bodies, might at first appear to be direct 
manifestations from some superior power, which man 
could not even understand : but it was soon found that 
the ideas of time and space, of motion and recurrence^ 
would give coherency to many of the phenomena. Yet 
this took place by successive steps. Eclipses, for a long 
period, seemed to follow no law ; and being very remark- 
able events, continued to be deemed the indications of a 
supernatural will, after the common motions of the 
heavens were seen to be governed by relations of time 
and space. At length, however, the Chaldeans discovered 
that, after a period of eighteen years, similar sets of 
eclipses recur ; and, thus selecting the idea of time^ simply, 
as that to which these events were to be referred, they 
were able to reduce them to rule ; and from that time 
eclipses were recognized as parts of a regular order of 
things. We may, in the same manner, consider any other 
course of events, and may inquire by what idea they are 
bound together. For example, if we take the weather, 
years peculiarly wet or dry, hot and cold, productive and 
unproductive, follow each other in a manner which, at 
first sight at least, seems utterly lawless and irregular. 
Now can we in any way discover some rule and order In 
these occurrence? Is there, for example, in these events, 
as In eclipses, a certain cycle of years, after vrtilch like 
seasons come round again? or does the weather depend 
upon the force of some extraneous body— -for instanee, 
the moon-^and follow in some way her aspects? or 

2 H 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



532 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OP SCIENCE. 

would the most proper way of investigating this subject 
be to consider the effect of the moisture and heat of 
various tracts of the earth's surface upon the ambient air? 
It is at our choice to try these and other modes of obtain- 
ing a science of the weather : that is, we may refer the 
phenomena to the idea of time^ introducing the conception 
of a cycle ; — or to the idea of external fofi^ce^ by the con- 
ception of the moon's action ; — or to the idea of mutual 
aetion^ introducing the conceptions of thermotical and 
atmological agencies, operating between different regions 
of earth, water, and air. 

6. It may be asked. How are we to decide in such 
alternatives? How are we to select the one right idea 
out of several conceivable ones ? To which we can only 
reply, that this must be done by tfytny which will succeed. 
If there really exist a cycle of the weather, as well as of 
eclipses, it must be established by comparing the asserted 
cycle with a good register of the seasons, of sufficient 
extent. Or if the moon really influence the meteoro- 
logical conditions of the air, the asserted influence must 
be compared with the observed facts, and so accepted or 
rejected. When Hipparchus had observed the increase 
of longitude of the stars, the idea of a motion of the 
celestial sphere suggested itself as the explanation of the 
change ; but this thought was verified only by observing 
several stars. It was conceivable that each star should 
have an independent motion, governed by time only, or 
by other circumstances, instead of being regulated by its 
place in the sphere ; and this possibility could be rejected 
by trial alone. In like manner, the original opinion of the 
composition of bodies supposed the compounds to derive 
their properties from the elements according to the law 
of likeness ; but this opinion was overturned by a thousand 
facts ; and thus the really applicable idea of chemical com- 
position was introduced in modern times. lu what has 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 633 

already been said on the History of Ideas, we have seen 
how each science was in a state of confusion and darkness 
till the right idea was introduced. 

7. No general method of evolving such ideas can be 
given. Such events appear to result from a peculiar 
sagacity and felicity of mind; — never without labour, 
never without preparation ; — ^yet with no constant depend- 
ence upon preparation, or upon labour, or even entirely 
upon personal endowments. Newton explained the 
colours which refraction produces, by referring each 
colour to a peculiar angle of refraction^ thus introducing 
the right idea. But when the same philosopher tried to 
explain the colours produced by diffraction, he erred, by 
attempting to apply the same idea, (the cowrse of a single 
ray^ instead of applying the truer idea of the interference 
of two rays. Newton gave a wrong rule for the double 
refraction of Iceland spar, by making the refraction 
depend on the edges of tlie rhombohedron : Huyghens, 
more happy, introduced the idea of the axis of symmetry 
of the solid, and thus was able to give the true law of the 
phenomena. 

8. Although the selected idea is proved to be the 
right one, only when the true law of nature is established 
by means of it, yet it often happens that there prevails 
a settled conviction respecting the relation which must 
afford the key to the phenomena, before the selection has 
been confirmed by the laws to which it leads. Even 
before the empirical laws of the tides were made out, it 
was not doubtful that these laws depended upon the 
places and motions of the sun and moon. We know that 
the crystalline form of a body must depend upon its che- 
mical composition, though we are as yet unable to assign 
the law of this dependence. 

. Indeed in most cases of great discoveries, the right 
idea to which the facts were to be referred, was selected 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



634 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION Oy SCIENCE. 

by many philosophers, before the decisive demonstration 
that it toas the right idea, was given by the discoverer. 
Thus Newton showed that the motions of the planets 
might be explained by means of a central force in the 
sun : but though he established, he did not first select 
the idea involved in the conception of a central force. 
The idea had already been sufficiently pointed out, dimly 
by Kepler, more clearly by Borelli, Huyghens, Wren, 
and Hooke. Indeed this anticipation of the true idea is 
always a principal part of that which, in the History of 
the Sciences, we have termed the Prelude of a Discovery. 
The two steps, of proposing a philosophical problem, and 
of sdlmng it, are, as we have elsewhere said, both import- 
ant, and are often performed by different persons. The 
former step is, in fact, the Selection of the Idea. In 
explaining any change, we have to discover first the Argu- 
tnentf and then the Law of the change. The selection of 
the Argument is the step of which we here speak ; and 
is that in which inventiveness of mind and justness of 
thought are mainly shown. 

9. Although, as we have said, we can give few precise 
directions for this cardinal process, the Selection of the 
Idea, in speculating on phenomena, yet there is one Role 
which may h&ve its use: it is this: — The idea and the 
facts must be homogeneous: the elementary Conceptions, 
into which the facts have been decomposed, must be of 
the same nature as the Idea by which we attempt to 
collect them into laws. Thus, if facts have been observed 
and measured by reference to space, they must be bound 
together by the idea of space: if we would obtain a 
knowledge of mechanical forces in the solar sjrstem, we 
must observe mechanical phenomena. Kepler erred 
against this rule in his attempts at obtaining physical 
faiws of the system ; for the facts which he took were Uie 
tdMli$$9 iMt the changes of wiociUf, which are reidly the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESS OF INDUCTION. 535 

mechanical facts. Again, there has been a transgression 
of this Rule committed by all chemical philosophers who 
have attempted to assign the relative position of the ele- 
mentary particles of bodies in their component molecules. 
For their purpose has been to discover the relations of the 
particles in space ; and *yet they have neglected the only 
facts in the constitution of bodies which have a reference 
to space— namely, cvystaUine form^ and optical properties. 
No progress can be made in the theory of the elementary 
structure of bodies, without making these classes of facts 
the main basis of our speculations. 

10. The only other Rule which I have to offer on this 
subject, is that which I have already given : — the Idea 
must be tested by the facts. It must be tried by applying 
to the facts the conceptions which are derived from the 
idea, and not accepted till some of these succeed in giving 
the law of the phenomena. The justice of the suggestion 
cannot be known otherwise than by making the trial. 
If we can discover a true law by employing any concep- 
tions, the idea from which these conceptions are derived 
is the right one ; nor can there be any proof of its rlght- 
ness so complete and satisfactory, as that we are by it led 
to a solid and permanent truth. 

This, however, can hardly be termed a Rule ; for when 
we would know, to conjecture and to try the truth of 
-out conjecture by a comparison with the facts, is the 
natural and obvious dictate of common sense. 

Supposing the Idea which we adopt, or which we 
would try, to be now fixed upon, we still have before us 
the range of many Conceptions derived from it; many 
Formulae may be devised depending on the same Inde- 
pendent Variable, and we must now consider how our 
sel9ctio^ ano^ong these is to be made. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



536 methods employed in the forication of science. 

Chapter VL 

GENERAL RULES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF 
THE CONCEPTION. 

1. In speakiug of the discovery of laws of nature, 
those which depend upon quantity^ as number, space, and 
the like, are most prominent and most easily conceived, 
and therefore in speakiug of such researches we shall 
often use language which applies peculiarly to the cases 
in which quantities numerically measurable are concerned, 
leaving it for a subsequent task to extend our principles 
to ideas of other kinds. 

Hence we may at present consider the Construction 
of a Conception which shall include and connect the 
facts, as being the construction of a Mathematical For- 
mula, coinciding with the numerical expression of the 
facts ; and we have to consider how this process can be 
facilitated, it being supposed that we have already before 
us the numerical measures given by observation. 

2. We may remark, however, that the construction 
of the right Formula for any such case, and the deter- 
mination of the Coefficients of such formula, which we 
have spoken of as two separate steps, are in practice 
almost necessarily simultaneous ; for the near coincidence 
of the results of the theoretical rule with the observed 
facts confirms at the same time the Formula and its Coeffi- 
cients. In this case also, the mode of arriving at truth 
is to try various hypotheses ; — ^to modify the hypotheses so 
as to approximate to the facts, and to multiply the facts 
60 as to test the hypotheses. 

The Independent Variable, and the Formula which 
we would try, being once selected, mathematicians have 
devised certain special and technical processes by which 
the value of the coefficients may be determined. These 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BULES FOB THE CONSTRUCmON OF THE CONCEPTION. 537 

we shall treat of in the next Chapter ; but in the mean 
time we may note, in a more general manner, the mode 
in which, in physical researches, the proper formula may 
be obtained. 

3. A person somewhat versed in mathematics, hajV- 
ing before him a series of numbers, will generally be able 
to devise a formula which approaches near to those 
numbers. If, for instance, the series is constantly pro- 
gressive, he will be able to see whether it more nearly 
resembles an arithmetical or a geometrical progression. 
For example, MM. Dulong and Petit, in their investiga- 
tion of the law of cooling of bodies, obtained the following 
series of measures. A thermometer was placed in an 
inclosure of which the temperature was degrees, and 
the rapidity of cooling of the thermometer was noted for 
many temperatures. It was found that 

For the temperature 240 the rapidity of cooling was 10*09 
220 „ 8-81 

200 „ 7-40 

J80 „ 610 

160 „ 4-89 

140 „ 3-88 

and so on. Now this series of numbers manifestly in- 
creases with greater rapidity as we proceed from the 
lower to the higher parts of the scale. The numbers do 
not, however, form a geometrical series, as we may easily 
ascertain. But if we were to take the differences of the 
successive terms we should find them to be — 

1-88, 1-41, 1-30, 1-21, 101, &c. 
and these numbers are very nearly the terms of a geome- 
tric series. For if we divide each term by the succeeding 
one, we find these numbers, 

1-33, 109, 107, 1-20, 1-27, 
in which there does not appear to be any constant ten- 
dency to diminish or increase. And we shall find that a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



538 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FOBMATION OF SCISNCS. 



geometrical series in which the ratio is 1*165, may be 
made to approach very near to this series, the deviations 
from it being only such as may be accounted for by con- 
ceiving them as errors of observation. In this manner 
a certain formula* is obtained, giving results which very 
nearly coincide with the observed facts, as may be seen 
in the margin. 

The physical law expressed by the formula just spoken 
of is this : — that when a body is cooling in an empty 
inclosure at a constant temperature, the quickness of the 
cooling, for excesses of temperature in arithmetical pro- 
gression, increases as the terms of a geometrical progres- 
sion, diminished by a constant number. 

3. In the actual investigation of Dulong and Petit, 
however, the formula was not obtained in precisely the 
manner just described. For the quickness of cooling 
depends upon two elements, the temperature of the hot 
body and the temperature of the inclosure ; not merely 
upoji the ea^cess of one of these over the other. And it 
was found most convenient, first, to make such experi- 
ments as should exhibit the dependence of the velocity 
of cooling upon the temperature of the inclosure ; which 



* The fonnula is 


V = 2,037 (^— l) where v is the velocity of 


cooling, t the temperature of the thermometer expressed in degrees, 


and a is the quantity 1,0077- 




The degree of coincidence is as follows :— 




Excess of teiqperaturc 


of Observed 


Calculated 


the thermometer, or values 


values 


values of/. 


of e. 


ofc. 


240 


10-69 


10-68 


220 


8-81 


8-89 


SCO 


7-40 . 


7-34 


180 


610 


603 


160 


4-89 


4-87 


140 


. . 8-88 . 


3-89 


120 


302 


306 


100 


2-30 


2-33 


80 


. . 1-74 . 


1.72 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RULEd FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION. 639 

dependence is contained in the following law: — ^The 
quickness of cooling of a thermometer in vacuo for a 
constant excess of temperature, increases in geometric . 
progression, when the temperature of the inclosure in- 
creases in arithmetic progression. From this law the 
preceding one follows by necessary consequence*. 

This example may serve to show the nature of the 
artifices which may be used for the construction of for- 
mulce, when we have a constantly progressive series of 
numbers to represent. We must not only endeavour by 
trial to contrive a formula which will answer the con- 
ditions, but we must vary our experiments so as to 
determine, first one factor or portion of the formula, and 
then the other; and we must use the most probable 
hypothesis as means of suggestion for our formulae. 

4. In a progressive series of numbers, except the 
formula which we adopt be really that which expresses 
the law of nature ; the deviations of the formula from 
the fiEtcts will generally become enormous, when the 
experiments are extended into new parts of the scale. 
True formulae for a progressive series of results can hardly 
ever be obtained from a very limited range of experi- 
ments : just, as the attempt to guess the general course 
of a road or a river, by knowing two or three points of it 
in the neighbourhood of one another, would generally 
fail. In the investigation respecting the laws of the 
cooling of bodies just noticed, one great advantage of 

* For if be the temperature of the inclosure, and t the excess of 
temperature of the hot body, it appears, by this law, that the radiation 

of heat is as A . And hence the quickness of cooling, which is as the 

excess of radiation, is as « — fl ; that is, as ^ (a — l) which 
agrees with the formula given in the last note. 

The whole of this series of researches of Dulong and Petit is full of 
the most beautiful and instructiro artifices for the constntction of the 
proper formulas in physical research. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



540 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE* 

the course pursued by the experimenters "was, that their 
experiments included so great a range of temperatures. 
The attempts to assign the law of elasticity of steam 
deduced from experiments made with moderate tempe- 
ratures, were found to be enormously wrong, when very 
high temperatures were made the subject of experiment. 
It is easy to see that this must be so : an arithmetical 
and a geometrical series may nearly coincide for a few 
terms moderately near each other : but if we take remote 
corresponding terms in the two series, one of these will 
be very many times the other. And hence, from a narrow 
range of experiments, we may infer one of these series when 
we ought to infer the other ; and thus obtain a law which 
is widely erroneous. 

6. In astronomy, the serieses of observations which 
we have to study are, for the most part, not progressive, 
but recurrent The numbers observed do not go on con- 
stantly increasing ; but after increasing up to a certain 
amount they diminish; then, after a certain space, increase 
again; and so on, changing constantly through certain 
cycles. In cases in which the observed numbers are of 
this kind, the formula which expresses them must be a 
circular function^ of some sort or other ; involving, for in- 
stance, sines, tangents, and other forms of calculation, 
which have recurring values when the angle on which 
they depend goes on constantly increasing. The main 
business of formal astronomy consists in resolving the 
celestial phenomena into a series of terms of this kind, in 
detecting their arguments^ and in determining their coeffi^ 
cients. 

6. In constructing the formulae by which laws of 
nature are expressed, although the first object is to assign 
the law of the phenomena, philosophers have, in almost 
all cases, not proceeded in a purely empirical manner, to 
connect the observed numbers by some expression of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EULES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION. 541 

calculation, but have been guided, in the selection of their 
formula, by some hypothesis respecting the mode of con- 
nexion of the facts. Thus the formula of Dulong and 
Petit above given was suggested by the theory of ex- 
changes; the first attempts at the resolution of the 
heavenly motions into circular functions were clothed in 
the hypothesis of epicycles. And this was almost inevi- 
table. "We must confess," says Copernicus*, " that the 
celestial motions are circular, or compounded of several 
circles, since their inequalities observe a fixed law, and 
recur in value at certain intervals, which could not be 
except they were circular : for a circle alone can make 
that quantity which has occurred recur again." In like 
manner the first publication of the law of the sineSy the 
true formula of optical refraction, was accompanied by 
Descartes with an hypothesis, in which an explanation of 
the law was pretended. In such cases, the mere com- 
parison of observations may long fail in suggesting the 
true formulae. The fringes of shadows and other diffracted 
colours were studied in vain by Newton, Grimaldi, Com- 
paretti, the elder Herschel, and Mr. Brougham, so long as 
these inquirers attempted merely to trace the laws of the 
facts as they appeared in themselves ; while Young, 
Fresnel, Fraunhofer, Schwerdt, and others, detennined 
these laws in the most rigorous manner, when they applied 
to the observations the hypothesis of interferences. 

7. But with all the aid that hypotheses and calcula- 
tion can afford, the construction of true formulae, in those 
cardinal discoveries by which the progress of science has 
mainly been caused, has been a matter of great labour 
and difficulty, and of good fortune added to sagacity. In 
the History of Science, we have seen how long and how 
hard Kepler laboured, before he converted the formula 
for the planetary motions, from an epicyclical combination, 
? Be Rev. L i., c. 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



542 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

to a simple ellipse. The same philosopher, labooriog 
with equal zeal and perserverance to disoover the formula 
of optical refraction, which now appears to us so simple, 
was utterly foiled. Malus sought in vain the formula 
determining the angle at which a transparent surface po^ 
larizes light : Sir D. Brewster*, with a happy sagacity, di»- 
covered the formula to be simply this, that the index of 
refraction is the tuigent of the angle of polarization. 

Though we cannot give rules which will be of much 
service when we have thus to divine the general form of 
the relation by which phenomena are connected, there are 
certain methods by which, in a narrower field, our inves- 
tigations may be materially promoted ;— -certain special 
methods of obtaining laws from observations. Of these 
we shall now proceed to treat. 



Ohapter yil. 

SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION APPLICABLE 
TO QUANTITY. 

In cases where the phenomena admit of numerical 
measurement and expression, certain mathematical me- 
thods may be employed to facilitate and give accuracy to 
the determination of the formula by which the observa* 
tions are connected into laws. Among the most usual 
and important of tiiese Methods are the following :— ^ 
I. The Method of Curves. 
II. The Method of Means. 

III. The Method of Lea$t Squares. 

IV. The Method of Besidbes. 
Sect. L The Metiad of Cisrees. 

1. Tlie Method <^ Curves proceeds upon this basis ; 
that when one quantity undeigoes a series of changes 
* ffi8t.Ind.Sci./ik. 377. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. — QUANTTTY. 543 

depending on the progress of another quantity, (a^ for 
instance, the Deviation of tb^ Moon from her equable 
place depends upon the progress of Time^) this depend-* 
enee may be expressed by means of a curve. In the 
language of mathen^iticians, the variable quantity, whose 
changes we would i;6nsider, is made the ardimUe of th^ 
curve, and the quantity on which the changes depend is 
made the abseissa. In this manner^ the curve will exhibit 
in its form a series .^f undulations, rising and felling so as 
to correspond with the alternate increase and diminution 
of the quantity represented, at intervals of space which 
correspond to the intervals of time, or other quantity by 
which the changes are regulated. Thus, to take another 
example, if we set up, at equal intervals, a series of ordi* 
nates representing the height of all the successive high 
waters brought by the tides ata given place, for a year, 
the curve which connects the summits of all these ordi« 
nates will exhibit a series of undulatitms, ascending and 
descending once in about each fortnight ; since, in that 
interval, we have, in succession, the high spring tides and 
the low n^ip tides. The curve thus drawn offers to the 
eye a picture of the order and magnitude of the dianges 
to which the quantity \mder contemplation, (the height of 
high water,) is subject. 

2. Now the peculiar facility and efficacy of the Me^- 
thod of Curves depends lipon this circumstance;— 4hat 
order and regularity are more readily and clearly recog- 
niaed, when thus exhibited to the eye in a picture, than 
they are when presented to the mind in any other manner. 
To detect the relations of Number considered directly aS 
Number, is not easy: and we might conteniplate for a 
long time a Table of recorded Numbers vrithout peroeiv- 
ing the order of tbdr increase and diminution, even if the 
law were moderately simple; as any one may satisfy hiub- 
self by looking at a Tide Table. But if these Numbers 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



544 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

are expressed by the magnitude of Lines^ and if these Lines 
are arranged in regular order, the eye readily discovers the 
rule of their changes : it follows the curve which runs 
along their extremities, and takes note of the order in 
which its convexities and concavities succeed each other, 
if any order be readily discoverable. The separate obser- 
vations are in this manner compared and generalized and 
reduced to rule by the eye alone. And the eye, so em- 
ployed, detects relations of order and succession with a 
peculiar celerity and evidence. If, for example, we thus 
arrange as ordinates the prices of com in each year for a 
series of years, we shall see the order, rapidity, and 
amount of the increase and decrease of price, far more 
clearly than in any other manner. And if there were any 
recurrence of increase and decrease at stated intervals of 
years, we should in this manner perceive it. The eye, 
constantly active and busy, and employed in making into 
shapes the hints and traces of form which it contemplates, 
runs along the curve thus offered to it ; and as it travels 
backwards and forwards, is ever on the watch to detect 
some resemblance or contrast between one part and 
another. And these resemblances and contrasts, when 
discovered, are the images of laws of phenomena ; which 
are made manifest at once by this artifice, although the 
mind could not easily catch the indications of their 
existence, if they were not thus reflected to her in the 
clear mirror of space. 

Thus when we have a series of good observations, and 
know tlie argument upon which their change of magni- 
tude depends, the Method of Curves enables us to ascer- 
tain, almost at a glance, the law of the change ; and by 
further attention, may be made to give us a formula with 
great accuracy. The Method enables us to perceive 
among our observations an order which ^vithout the 
method is concealed in obscurity and perplexity. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. QUANTITY. 546 

3. But the Method of Curves not only enables us to 
obtain laws of nature from good observations, but also, in 
a great degree, from observations which are very imperfect. 
For the imperfection of observations may in part be cor- 
rected by this consideration ; — that though they may 
appear irregular, the correct fects which they imperfectly 
represent, are really regular. And the Method of Curves 
enables us to remedy this apparent irregularity, at least 
in part. For when observations thus imperfect are laid 
down as ordinates, and their extremities connected by a 
line, we obtain, not a smooth and flowing curve, such as we 
should have if the observations contained only the rigo- 
rous results of regular laws ; but a broken and irregular 
line, full of sudden and capricious twistings, and bearing 
on its face marks of irregularities dependent, not upon 
law, but upon chance. Yet these irregular and abrupt 
deviations in the curve are, in most cases, but small in 
extent, when compared with those bondings which denote 
the effects of regular law. And this circumstance is one 
of the great grounds of advantage in the Method of 
Curves. For when the observations thus laid down 
present to the eye such a broken and irregular line, we 
can still see, often wHth great ease and certainty, what 
twistings of the line are probably due to the irregular 
errors of observation ; and can at once reject these, by 
drawing a more regular curve, cutting off all such small 
and irregular sinuosities, leaving some to the right and 
some to the left ; and then proceeding as if this regular 
curve, and not the irregular one, expressed the observa- 
tions. In this manner, we suppose the errors of obser- 
vation to balance each other; some of our corrected 
measures being too great and others too small, but with 
no great preponderance either way. We draw our main 
regular curve, not through the points given by our obser- 
vations, but among them : drawing it, as has been said by 
VOL. II. 2 N 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



546 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

one of the philosophers* who first systematically used 
this method, " with a bold but careful hand.*' The regular 
curve which we thus obtain, thus freed from the casual 
errors of observation, is that in which we endeavour to 
discover the laws of change and succession. 

4. By this method, thus getting rid at once, iu a 
great measure, of errors of observation, we obtain data 
which are more true than the individual facts themselves. 
The philosopher's business is to compare his hypotheses 
with facts, as we have often said. But if we make the 
comparison with separate special facts, we are liable to be 
perplexed or misled, to an unknown amount, by the 
errors of observation ; which may cause the hypothetical 
and the observed result to agree, or to disagree, when 
otherwise they would not do so. If, however, we thus 
take the whole mass of the facts, and remove the errors of 
actual observation!, by making the curve which expresses 
the supposed observation regular and smooth, we have 
the separate facts corrected by their general tendency. 
We are put in possession, as we have said, of something 
more true than any fact by itself is. 

One of the most admirable examples of the use of 
this Method of Curves is found in Sir John Herschers 
Investigation of the orbits of doiMe starsX. The author 
there shows how far inferior the direct observations of the 
angle of position are, to the observations corrected by a 
curve in the manner above stated. "This curve once 
drawn," he says, " must represent, it is evident, the law 
of variation of the angle of position, with the time, not 
t»nly for instants intermediate between the dates of obser- 
vations, but even at the moments of observation theio- 
selves, much better than the individual raw observations 
can possibly (on an average) do. It is only requisite to 

* Sir J. Herschel, Ast. Soe. Trans, t. v. p. I . 
t lb., t. V. p. 4. t ^• 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OP INDUCTION.— QUANnTT. 647 

try a caise or two, to be satisfied that bj substituting the 
curve for the points, we have made a nearer approach to 
nature, and in a great measure eliminated errors of obser- 
vation." " In following the graphical process," he addfi^ 
*^we have a conviction almost approaching to moral 
certainty that we cannot be greatly misled." Again, 
having thus corrected the raw observations, he makes 
another use of the graphical method, by trying whether 
an ellipse can be drawn ^^ if not throuffky at least among 
the points, so as to approach tolerably near them all ; and 
thus approaching to the orbit which is the subject of 
investigation." 

6. The obstacles which principally impede the appli- 
cation of the method of curves are (I.) our ignorance of 
the argument of the changes, and (II.) the complication of 
several laws with one another. 

(I.) If we do not know on what quantity those changes 
depend which we are studying, we may fail entirely in 
detecting the law of the changes, although we throw the 
observations into curves. For the true argument of the 
change should, in feet, be made the abscissa of the curve. 
If we were to express, by a series of ordinates, the hour 
of high water on successive days, we should not obtain, 
or should obtain very imperfectly, the law which these 
times follow ; for the real argument of this change is not 
the solar hour^ but the hour at which the moon passes the 
meridian. But if we are supposed to be aware that this 
is the argument, (which theory suggests and trial instantly 
confirms) we then do immediately obtain the primary 
rules of the time of high water/ by throwing a series of 
observations into a curve, with the hour of the moon*s 
transit for the abscissa. 

In like manner, when we have obtained the first great 
or semi-menstrual inequality of the tides, if we endeavour 
to discover the laws of other inequalities by means of 

2 N 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



548 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OP SCIENCE. 

(turves, we must take from theory the suggestion that the 
Arguments of such inequalities will probably be the 
paralkue and the dedination of the moon. This suggestion 
again is confirmed by trial ; but if we were supposed to 
be entirely ignorant of the dependence of the changes of 
the tide on the distance and declination of the moon, the 
curves would exhibit unintelligible and seemingly capri- 
cious changes. For by the effect of the inequality arising 
from the parallax, the convexities of the curves which 
belong to the spring tides, are in some years made altera 
nately greater and less all the year through ; while in 
other years they are made all nearly equal. This differ- 
ence does not betray its origin, till we refer it to the 
parallax; and the same difficulty in proceeding would 
arise if we were ignorant that the moon's declination is 
one of the arguments of tidal changes. 

In like manner, if we try to reduce to law any meteoro- 
logical changes, those of the height of the barometer for 
instance, we find that we can make little progress in the 
investigation, precisely because we do not know the 
Argument on which these changes depend. That there 
is a certain regular diurnal change of small amount we 
know ; but when we have abstracted this inequality, (of 
which the Argument is the time of day,) we find far 
greater changes left behind, from day to day and from 
hour to hour ; and we express these in curves, but we 
cannot reduce them to rule, because we cannot discover 
on what numerical quantity they depend. The assiduous 
study of barometrical observations, thrown into curves, 
may perhaps hereafter point out to us what are the rela- 
tions of time and space by which these variations are 
determined; but in the mean time, this subject exem- 
plifies to us our remark, that the method of curves is of 
comparatively small use, so long as we are in ignorance 
of the real Arguments of the Inequalities. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OF INDUCTION. — QUANTITY. 549 

6. (II.) In the next place, I remark that a difficulty 
is thrown in the way of the method of curves by the com" 
bination of several laws one with another. It will readily 
be seen that such a cause will produce a complexity in 
the curves which exhibit the succession of facts. If, for 
example, we take the case of the tides, the height of high 
water increases and diminishes with the approach of the 
sun to, and its recess from, the syzygies of the moon. 
Again, this height increases and diminishes as the moon's 
pamllax increases and diminishes; and again, the height 
diminishes when the declination increases, and vice versa ; 
and all these Arguments of change, the distance from 
syzygy, the parallax, the declination, complete their 
circuit and return into themselves in different periods. 
Hence the curve which represents the height of high 
water has not any periodical interval in which it com- 
pletes its changes and commences a new cycle. The 
sinuosity which would arise from each inequality sepa- 
rately considered, interferes with, disguises, and conceals 
the others ; and when we first cast our eyes on the curve 
of observation, it is very far from offering any obvious 
regularity in its form. And it is to be observed that we 
have not yet enumerated aU the elements of this com- 
plexity : for there are changes of the tide depending upon 
the parallax and declination of the sun as well as of the 
moon« Again ; besides these changes, of which the argu- 
ments are obvious, there are others, as those depending 
upon the barometer and the wind, which follow no known 
regular law, and which constantly affect and disturb the 
results produced by other laws. 

In the tides, and in like manner in the motions of the 
moon, we have very eminent examples of the way in 
which the discovery of laws may be rendered difficult by 
the number of them which operate to affect the same 
quantity. In such cases, the inequalities are generally 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



050 BCSTHODB BMPLOTED IN THB FORMATION OF 8CIBNCE. 

picked out in succession, nearly in the order of t^eir 
magnitudes. In this way there were successively col* 
lectedi from the study of the moon*s motions by a series 
of astronomers, those Inequalities ^hich we term the 
Equation of the Centre, the Ihection, the Variation^ and 
the Annual Equation. These Inequalities were not, in 
flict, obtained by the application of the Method of Curves; 
but the Method of Curves might have been applied to 
such a case with great advantage. The Method has been 
applied with great industry and with remarkable success 
to the investigation of the laws of the tides ; and by the 
use of it, a series of Inequalities both of the Times and 
of the Heights of high water has been detected, which 
explain all the main features of the observed facts. 

Sect. II. The Method of Means. 

7. The Method of Curves, as we have endeavoured 
to explain above, frees us from the casual and extraneous 
irregularities which arise from the imperfection of obser- 
vation ; and thus lays bare the results of the laws which 
really operate, and enables us to proceed in search of 
those laws. But the Method of Curves is not the only one 
which effects such a purpose. The errOTS arising from 
detached observations may be got rid of, and the addi- 
tional accuracy which multiplied observations give may 
be obtained, by operations upon the observed numbers 
without expressing them by spaces. The process of 
curves assumes that the errors of observation balance 
each other; — ^that the accidental excesses and defects are 
nearly equal in amount ; — ^that the true quantities which 
would have been observed if all accidental causes of 
irregularity were removed, are obtained, exactly or nearly, 
by selecting quantities, upon the whole, equally distant 
fVom the extremes of great and small which our imperfect 
observations oflfer to us. But when, among a number of 
unequal quantities, we take a quantity equally distant from 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL MFTHODS OF INDUCTION. — QUANTTTy, 551 

the greater and the smaller, this quantity is termed the 
Mean of the unequal quantities* Hence the correction of 
onr obsenrations by the method of curves consists in taking 
the Mean of the observations. 

8. Now without employing curves, we may proceed 
arithmetically to take the Mean of all the observed 
numbers of each class. Thus, if we wished to know the 
height of the spring tide at a given place, and if we found 
that four different spring tides were measured as being of 
the height of ten, thirteen, eleven, and fourteen feet, we 
should conclude that the true height of the tide was 
the Mean of these numbers, — namely, twelve feet ; and 
we should suppose that the deviation from this height, 
in the individual cases, arose from the accidents of 
weather, the imperfections of observation, or the oper^ 
ation of other laws, besides the alternation of spring and 
neap tides. 

This process of finding the Mean of an assemblage of 
observed numbers is much practised in discovering, and 
still more in confirming and correcting, laws of pheno- 
mena. We shall notice a few of its peculiarities. 

9. It requires a knowledge of the Argument of the 
changes which we would study; for the numbers must 
be arranged in certain Classes, before we find the Mean of 
each Class ; and the principle on which this arrangement 
depends is the Argument. This knowledge of the Argu- 
ment is more indispensably necessary in the Method of 
Means than the Method of Curves ; for when curves are 
drawn, the eye often spontaneously detects the law of re- 
currence in their sinuosities; but when we have collections 
of numbers, we must divide them into classes by a selection 
of our own. Thus, in order to discover the law which the 
heights of the tide follow, in the progress from spring to 
neap, we arrange the observed tides according to the 
day of the moon's age ; and we then take the niean of all 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



552 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

those which thus happen at the same period of the moon's 
revolution. In this manner we obtain the law which we 
seek ; and the process is very nearly the same in all other 
applications of this Method of Means. In all cases, we 
begin by assuming the Classes of measures which we 
wish to compare, the Law which we could confirm or 
correct, the Formula of which we would determine the 
coefficients. 

10. The Argument being thus assumed, the Method 
of Means is very efficacious in ridding our inquiry of 
errors and irregularities which would impede and perplex 
it. Irregularities which are altogether accidental, or at 
least accidental with reference to some law which we 
have under consideration, compensate each other in a 
very remarkable way, when we take the means of many 
observations. If we have before us a collection of ob- 
served tides, some of them may be elevated, some 
depressed by the wind, some noted too high and some 
too low by the observer, some augmented and some dimi- 
nished by uncontemplated changes in the moon's distance 
or motion : but in the course of a year or two at the 
longest, all these causes of irregularity balance each 
other ; and the law of succession, which runs through the 
observations, comes out as precisely as if those disturbing 
influences did not exist. In any particular case, there 
appears to be no possible reason why the deviation should 
be in one way, or of one moderate amount, rather than 
another. But taking the mass of observations together, 
the deviations in opposite ways will be of equal amount, 
with a degree of exactness very striking. This is found 
to be the case in all inquiries where we have to deal with 
observed numbers upon a large scale. In the progress of 
the population of a country, for instance, what can appear 
more inconstant, in detail, than the causes which produce 
births and deaths ? yet in each country, and even in each 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPfiCUL METHODS OP INDUCTION.— QUANTITY. 553 

province of a country, the proportions of the whole num« 
bers of births and deaths remain nearly constant. What 
can be more seemingly beyond the reach of rule than the 
occasions which produce letters that cannot find their 
destination ? yet it appears that the number of " dead 
letters " is nearly the same from year to year. And 
the same is the result when the deviations arise, not 
from mere accident, but from laws perfectly regular, 
though not contemplated in our investigation'^. Thus 
the effects of the Moon's Parallax upon the Tides, some- 
times operating one way and sometimes another, accord- 
ing to certain rules, are quite eliminated by taking the 
Means of a long series of observations ; the excesses and 
defects neutralizing each other so far as concerns the 
effect upon any law of the tides which we would investi- 
gate. 

11. In order to obtain very great accuracy, very large 
masses of observations are often employed by philoso- 
phers, and the accuracy of the result increases with the 
multitude of observations. The immense collections of 
astronomical observations which have in this manner 
been employed in order to form and correct the tables of 
the celestial motions are perhaps the most signal instances 
of the attempts to obtain accuracy by this accumulation 
of observations. Delambre's Tables of the Sun are 
founded upon nearly 3000 observations; Bttrg's Tables 
of the Moon upon above 4000. 

But there are other instances hardly less remarkable. 
Mr. Lubbock's first investigations of the laws of the tides 
of London f, included above 13,000 observations, extend- 
ing through nineteen years ; it being considered that this 
large number was necessary to remove the effects of 

* Provided the argument of the law which we neglect have no 
coincidence with the argument of the law which we would determine. 
+ Phil 2V.1831. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



664 MfiTHODS fiMP£0T£O IN THE FORMATION OF flCHNCE. 

accidental causes^. And the attempts to discoYer the 
laws of change in the barometer have led to the perform* 
ance of labours of equal amount : Laplace and Bonvard 
examined this question by means of observations made 
at the Observatory of Paris, four times every day for 
eight years. 

12. We may remark one striking evidence of the 
accuracy thus obtained by emplojring large masses of obser- 
vations. In this wQj we may often detect inequalities 
much smaller than the errors by which they are encumbered 
and concealed. Thus the diurnal oscillations of the bfux>- 
meter were discovered by the comparison of observations 
of many days, classified according to the hours of the 
day; and the result was a clear and incontestable proof 
of the existence of such oscillations, although the dif- 
ferences which these oscillations produce at different 
hours of the day are far smaller than the casual changes, 
hitherto reduced to no law, which go on from hour to 
hour and from day to day. The effect of law, operating 
incessantly and steadily, makes itself more and more felt 
as we give it a longer range; while the eflfect of acci- 
dent, followed out in the same manner, is to annihilate 
itself, and to disappear altogether from the result. 

Sect. III. The Method of Least Squares. 

13. The Method of Least Squares is in fact a method 
of means, but with some peculiar characters. Its object 
is to determine the best Mean of a number of observed 
quantities; or the most probable Law derived from a number 

* This period of nineteen years was also selected for a reason which 
is alluded to in a former note. (p. .553.) It was thought that this 
period secured the inquirer from the errors which might he prodnced 
by the partial coincidence of the arguments of different irregularities ; 
for example, those due to the moon's parallax and to the moon's decli- 
nation. It has since been found (Phil, Tr. 1838. On the Detenmna- 
turn of the Law$ of the Tides from Short Series of ObeertKUums,) that with 
regard to parallax at least, the Means of one year give suffioient accuracy. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OP INDUCTION. — QUANTITY. 555 

of observations, of which some, or all, are allowed to be 
more or less imperfect. And the method proceeds upon 
this supposition ;-?<-that all errors are not eqiudb^ probable, 
but that small errors are more probable than large ones. 
By reasoning mathematically upon this ground, we find 
that the best result is obtained (since we cannot obtain a 
result in which the errors vanish) by making, not the 
Errors themselves, but the Sum of their Squares of the 
smallest possible amount. 

14. An example may illustrate this. Let a quantity 
which is known to increase uniformly, (as the distance of 
a star from the meridian at successive instants,) be mea^ 
sured at equal intervals of time, and he found to be suc- 
cessively 4, 12, 14. It is plain, upon the face of these 
observations that they are erroneous ; for they ought to 
form an arithmetical progression, but they deviate vridely 
from such a progression. But the question then occurs, 
what arithmetical progression do they most probably repre- 
sent : for we may assume several arithmetical progressions 
which more or less approach the observed series ; as for 
instance, these three; 4, 9, 14; 6, 10, 14; 6, 10, 16. 
Now in order to see the claims of each of these to the 
truth, we may tabulate them thus. 

Observation 





4, 12, 14 


Errors. 


Sums of Sums of squares 
errors. of errors. 


Series (1) 


4, 9, 14 ... 


0, 3, 


... 3 ... 9 


» (2) 


6, 10, 14 ... 


2, 2, 


... TC . , O 


» (3) 


5, 10, 15 ... 


1, 2, 1 


... 4 ... 6 



Here, although the first series gives the sum of the errors 
less than the others, the third series gives the sum of the 
squares of the errors least ; and is therefore, by the pro- 
position on which this Method depends, the most probable 
series of the three. 

This Method, in more extensive and complex cases, is a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



556 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

great aid to the calculator in his inferences from facts, and 
removes much that is arbitrary in the Method of Means. 

Sect. IV. The Method of Residues. 

16. By either of the preceding Methods we obtain, 
from observed facts, such laws as readily offer themselves; 
and by the laws thus discovered, the most prominent 
changes of the observed quantities are accounted for. 
But in many cases we have, as we have noticed already, 
several laws of nature operating at the same time, and 
combining their influences to modify those quantities 
which are the subjects of observation. In these cases we 
may, by successive applications of the Methods already 
pointed out, detect such laws one after another: but this 
successive process, though only a repetition of what we 
have already described, offers some peculiar features which 
make it convenient to consider it in a separate Section, 
as the Method of Residues. 

16. When we have, in a series of changes of a variable 
quantity, discovered one Law which the changes follow, 
detected its argument, and determined its magnitude so 
as to explain most clearly the course of observed facts, 
we may still find that the observed changes are not fully 
accounted for. When we compare the results of our 
Law with the observations, there may be a difference, or 
as we may term it, a Residue^ still unexplained. But 
this Residue being thus detached from the rest, may be 
examined and scrutinized in the same manner as the 
whole observed quantity was treated at first : and we may 
in this way detect in it also a Law of change. If we can 
do this, we must accommodate this new found Law as 
nearly as possible to the Residue to which it belongs ; and 
this being done, the difference of our Rule and of the 
Residue itself, forms a Second Residue. This Second Re- 
sidue we may again bring under our consideration ; and 
may perhaps in it also discover some Law of change by 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SPECIAL METHODS OP INDUCTION. QUANTITY. 667 

which its alterations may be in some measure accounted 
for. If this can be done, so as to account for a large 
portion of this Residue, the remaining unexplained part 
forms a Third Residtie ; and so on. 

17. This course has really been followed in various 
inquiries, especially in those of Astronomy and Tidology. 
The Equation of the Centre^ for the moon, was obtained 
out of the Residue of the Longitude, which remained 
when the Mean Anomaly was taken away. This Equa- 
tion being applied and disposed of, the Second Residue 
thus obtained, gave to Ptolemy the Ejection. The Third 
Residue^ left by the Equation of the Centre and the Evec- 
tion, supplied to Tycho the Variation and the Annuul 
Equation. And the Residue, remaining from these, 
has been exhausted by other equations, of various argu- 
ments, suggested by theory or by observation. In 
this case, the successive generations of astronomers 
have gone on, each in its turn executing some step in 
this Method of Residues. In the examination of the 
Tides, on the other hand, this method has been applied 
systematically and at once. * The observations readily 
gave the Semimenstrual Inequality; the Residue of this 
supplied the corrections due to the Moon's ParaJlaw and 
Declination ; and when these were determined, the r^- 
maining Residue was explored for the law of the Solar 
Correction. 

18. In a certain degree, the Method of Residues and 
the Method of Means are opposite to each other, For 
the Method of Residues extricates Laws from their com- 
bination, bringing them into view in succession ; while the 
Method of Means discovers each Law, not by bringing 
the others into view, but by destroying their effect through 
an accumulation of observations. By the Method of Re- 
sidues we should first extract the Law of the Parallax 
Correction of the Tides, and then^ from the Residue left 
by this, obtain the Declination Correction. But we 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



558 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

might at once employ the Method of Means, and put 
together all the cases in which the Declination was the 
same ; not allowing for the Parallax in each case, but 
taking for granted that the Parallaxes belonging to the 
same Declination would neutralize each other ; as many 
falling above as below the mean parallax. In cases like 
this, where the Method of Means is not impeded by a 
partial coincidence of the Arguments of different unknown 
Inequalities, it may be employed with almost as much 
success as the Method of Residues. But still, when the 
Arguments of the Laws are clearly known, as in this 
instance, the Method of Residues is more clear and direct, 
and is the rather to be recommended. 

19. If for example, we wish to learn whether the 
Height of the Barometer exerts any sensible influence on 
the Height of the Sea's Sur&ce, it would appear that the 
most satisfactory mode of proceeding, must be to subtract, 
in the first place, what we know to be the effects of the 
Moon's Age, Parallax and Declination, and other ascer- 
tained causes of change ; and to search in the unexplained 
Residue for the effects of barometrical pressure. The con- 
trary course has, however, been adopted, and the effect of 
the barometer on the ocean has been investigated by the 
direct application of the Method of Means, classing the 
observed heights of the water according to the corres- 
ponding heights of the barometer without any previous 
reduction. In this manner, the suspicion that the tide of 
the sea is effected by the pressure of the atmosphere, has 
been confirmed. This investigation must be looked upon 
as a remarkable instance of the efficacy of the Method 
of Means» since the amount of the barometrical effect is 
much smaller than the other changes from among which 
it was by this process extricated. But an application of 
the Method of Residues would still be desirable on a 
subject of such extent and difficulty. 

20. Sir John Herschel, in bis Discourse on the Study 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SPECIAL METHODS OP INDUCTION, — QUANTITY, 559 

of Natural PhUosophjf (Articled 158—161), has poiuted 
out the mode of making discoyeries by studying Residual 
Phenomena; and has given several iUustrations of the 
process. In some of these, he has also considered this 
method in a wider sense than we have done ; treating it 
as not applicable to quantity only, but to properties and 
relations of different kinds. 

We likewise shall proceed to offer a few remarks on 
Methods of Induction applicable to other relations than 
those of quantity. 



Chaptbb VIIL 

METHODS OP INDUCTION DEPENDING ON 
RESEMBLANCE. 

Sect. I. The Law of ConHnuUy. 

1. The Law of Continuity is applicable to quantity 
primarily, and therefore might be associated with th^ 
methods treated of in the last chapter: but inasmuch aj9 
its inferences are made by a transition from one degree to 
another among contiguous cases, it will be found to 
belong more properly to the Methods of Induction of 
which we have now to speak* 

The Law of Continuiigf consists in this proposition,—^ 
That a quantity cannot pass from one amount to another 
by any change of conditions, without passing through all 
intermediate degrees of magnitude according to the inter- 
mediate conditions. And this law may often be employed 
to correct inaccurate inductions, and to reject distinctions 
which have no real foundation in nature. For example^ 
the Aristotelians made a distinction between motions 
according to nature, as that of a body falling vertically 
downwards, and motions contrary to nature, as that of a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



560 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

body moving along a horizontal plane : the former, they 
held, became naturally quicker and quicker, the latter 
naturally slower and slower. But to this it might be 
replied, that a horizontal line may pass, by gradual motion, 
through various inclined positions, to a vertical position : 
and thus the retarded motion may pass into the accele- 
rated ; and hence there must be some inclined plane on 
which the motion downwards is naturally uniform : which 
is false, and therefore the distinction of such kinds of 
motion is unfounded. Again, the proof of the First Law 
of Motion depends upon the Law of Continuity : for since, 
by diminishing the resistance to a body moving on a 
horizontal plane, we diminish the retardation, and this 
without limit, the law of continuity will bring us at the 
same time to the case of no resistance and to the case of 
no retardation. 

2. The Law of Continuity is asserted by Galileo in a 
particular application ; and the assertion which it suggests 
is by him referred to Plato; — ^namely*, that a moveable 
body cannot pass from rest to a determinate degree of 
velocity without passing through all smaller degrees of 
velocity. This law, however, was first asserted in a more 
general and abstract form by Leibnitz f: and was em- 
ployed by him to show that the laws of motion propounded 
by Descartes must be ialse. The Third Cartesian Law 
of Motion was thisj : that when one moving body meets 
another, if the first body have a less momentum than the 
second, it will be reflected with its whole motion : but if 
the first have a greater momentum than the second, it 
vnll lose a part of its motion, which it will transfer to 
the second. Now each of these cases leads, by the Law 
of Continuity, to the case in which the two bodies have 
equal momentums : but in this case, by the first part of 

? i>w%. iii. 150. iv. 32 f Opera, i. 366. 

J Cartes. Prtn,, p. 35. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF INDUCTION. — ^RESEMBLANCE. 561 

the law the body would retain all its motion ; and by the 
second part of the law it would lose a portion of it : hence 
the Cartesian Law is false. 

3. I shall take another example of the application of 
this Law from Professor Plajrfair's Dissertation on the 
History of Mathematical and Physical Science*. "The 
Academy of Sciences at Paris having (in 1724) proposed, 
as a Prize Question, the Investigation of the Laws of the 
Communication of Motion, John Bernoulli presented an 
Essay on the subject very ingenious and profound; in 
which, however, he denied the existence of hard bodies, 
because in the collision of such bodies, a finite change of 
motion must take place in an instant : an event which, on 
the principle just explained, he maintained to be impos- 
sible." And this reasoning was justifiable : for we can 
form a continuous transition from cases in which the 
impact manifestly occupies a finite time, (as when we 
strike a large soft body) to cases in which it is apparently 
instantanedus. Maclaurin and others are disposed, in 
order to avoid the conclusion of Bernoulli, to reject the 
Law of Continuity. This, however, would not only be, 
as Playfair says, to deprive ourselves of an auxiliary, com- 
monly useful though sometimes deceptive ; but what is 
much worse, to acquiesce in false propositions, from the 
want of clear and patient thinking. For the Law of 
Continuity, when rightly interpreted, is never violated in 
actual fact. There are not really any such bodies as have 
been termed perfectly hard: and if we approach towards 
such cases, we must learn the laws of motion which rule 
them by attending to the Law of Continuity, not by 
rejecting it. 

4. Newton used the Law of Continuity to suggest, 
but not to prove, the doctrine of universal gravitation. 
Let, he said, a terrestrial body be carried as high as the 

? In the Bncy. Brit.^ p. 637. 
VOL. II. 2 O 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



562 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

moon : will it not still fall to the earth ? and does not the 
moon fall by the same force* ? Again : if any one says 
that there is a material ether which does not gravitatef, 
this kind of matter, by condensation, may be gradnally 
transmuted to the density of the most intensely gravi- 
tating bodies : and these gravitating bodies, by taking the 
internal texture of the condensed ether, may cease to 
gravitate ; and thus the weight of bodies depends, not 
on their quantity of matter, but on their texture ; which 
doctrine Newton conceived he had disproved by expe- 
riment. 

5. The evidence of the Law of Continuity resides 
in the universality of those ideas, which enter into our 
apprehension of Laws of Nature. When, of two quan« 
tities» one depends upon the other, the Law of Continuity 
necessarily governs this dependence. Every philosopher 
has the power of applying this law, in proportion as he has 
the faculty of apprehending the ideas which he employs 
in his induction, vrith the same clearness and steadiness 
which belong to the fundamental ideas of quantity, space 
and number. To those who possess this faculty, the Law 
is a Rule of very wide and decisive application. Its use, as 
has appeared in the above examples, is seen rather in the 
disproof of erroneous views, and in the correction of fSedse 
propositions, than in the invention of new truths. It is a 
test of truth, rather than an instrument of discovery. 

Methods, however, approaching very near to the Law 
of Continuity may be employed as positive means of ob- 
taining new truths ; and these I shall now describe. 

Sect. II. The Method of Gradation. 

6. To gather together the cases which resemble each 
other, and to separate those which are essentially distinct, 
has often been described as the main business of science ; 
and may, in a certain loose and vague manner of speaking; 
pass for a description of some of the leading procedures ia 

* Princtpioy 1. iii. prop. 6. t /J., Ck>r. 2. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF IKDUCTION. — RE8EMBLAK0E« 663 

the acquirement of knowledge. The selection of instances 
which agree, and of instances which differ, in some pro- 
minent point or property, are important steps in the 
formation of science. But when classes of things add 
properties have been established in virtue of such com- 
parisons, it may still be doubtful whether these classes are 
separated by distinctions of opposites, or by differences of 
degree. And to settle such questions, the Methtki of 
Gradation is employed; which consists in taking inter- 
mediate stages of the properties in question, so as to 
ascertain by experiment whether, in the transition from 
one class to another, we have td leiap over a manifest gap, 
or to follow a continuous road. 

7. Thus for instance, one of the early Divisions estab- 
lished by electrical philosophers was that of Electrics and 
Conductors. But this division Faraday has overturned as 
an essential opposition. He takes* a Gradation which 
carries him from Conductors to Non-conductors. Sul- 
phur, or lac, he says, are held to be non-conductors, but 
are not rigorously so. Spermaceti is a bad conductor : 
ice or water better than spermaceti: metals so much 
better that they are put in a different class. But even in 
metals the transit of the electricity is not instantaneous : 
we have in them proof of a retardation of the electrlo 
current: "and what reason," Mr. Faraday asks, "why 
this retardation should not be of the same kind as that 
in spermaceti, or in lac, or sulphur? But as, in them^ 
retardation is insulation, [and insulation is induction f] 
why should we refuse the same relation to the same 
exhibitions of force in the metals ?** 

Tlie process employed by the same sagacious philo- 
sopher to show the identity of Voltaic and Franklinic 

? Researches^ 12tb Series, Art. 1328. 

t These words refer to another proposition, also established by the 
Method of Gradation. 

2 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



564 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

electricity is another example of the same kind*. Ma- 
chine [Franklinic] electricity was made to exhibit the 
same phenomena as Voltaic electricity, by causing the 
discharge to pass through a bad conductor, into a very 
extensive discharging train : and thus it was clearly shown 
that Franklinic electricity, not so conducted, differs from 
the other kinds, only in being in a state of successive 
tension and explosion instead of a state of continued 
current. 

Again ; to show that the decomposition of bodies in 
the voltaic circuit was not due to the Attraction of the 
Polesf , Mr. Faraday devised a beautiful series of experi- 
ments, in which these supposed Poles were made to 
assume all possible electrical conditions : — in which the 
decomposition took place against air, which according to 
common language is not a conductor, nor is decomposed ; 
---against the metallic poles, which are excellent conduc- 
tors but undecomposable : and hence he infers that the 
decomposition cannot justly be considered as due to the 
Attraction, or Attractive Powers, of the Poles. 

8. The reader of the Novum Organon may perhaps, in 
looking at such examples of the Rule, be reminded of 
some of Bacon's classes of instances, as his instanH<B 
absentice in proa?imo^ and his insfanti^B migrantes. But we 
may remark that instances classed and treated as Bacon 
recommends in those parts of his work, could hardly lead 
to scientific truth. His processes are vitiated by his 
proposing to himself the fo}'m or catise of the property 
before him, as the object of his inquiry ; instead of being 
content to obtain, in the first place, the law of phenomena 
Thus his example :|: of a migrating instance is thus given. 
*' Let the naiure inquired into be that of whiteness ; an 
instance migrating to the production of this property is 
glass, first whole, and then pulverized ; or plain water, and 

? Hi$i. Ind. Set,, iii. 164. t lb., 165. Bmarches, Art. 497. 

t Nov. Org,, lib. ii. Aph. 28. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF INDUCTION.— RESEMBLANCE. 565 

water agitated into a foam ; for glass and water are trans- 
parent, and not white; but glass powder and foam are 
white, and not transparent. Hence we must inquire 
what has happened to the glass or water in that migra^ 
tion. For it is plain that the f&rm of whiteness is con- 
veyed and induced by the crushing of the glass and 
shaking of the water.'* 

9. We may easily give examples from other subjects 
in which the method of gradation has been used to esta- 
blish, or to endeavour to establish, very extensive propo- 
sitions. Thus Laplace's Nebular Hypothesis, — ^that sys- 
tems like our solar system are formed by gradual conden- 
sation from diffused masses, such as the nebulae among 
the stars, — is founded by him upon an application of this 
Method of Gradation. We see, he conceives, among 
these nebulae, instances of all degrees of condensation, 
from the most loosely diffused fluid, to that separation 
and solidification of parts by which suns, and satellites, 
and planets are formed: and thus we have before us 
instances of systems in all their stages ; as in a forest we 
see trees in every period of growth. How far the exam- 
ples in this case satisfy the demands of the Method of 
Gradation, it remains for astronomers and philosophers to 
examine. 

Again ; this method was used with great success by 
Maculloch and others to refute the opinion, put in cur- 
rency by the Wemerian school of geologists, that the 
rocks called trap rocks must be classed with those to 
which a sedimentary origin is ascribed. For it was shown 
that a gradual transition might be traced from those 
examples in which trap rocks most resembled stratified 
rocks, to the lavas which have been recently ejected from 
volcanoes : and that it was impossible to assign a different 
origin to one portion, and to the other, of this kind of 
mineral masses ; and as the volcanic rocks were certainly 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



566 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

not sedimentary, it followed that the trap rocks were not 
of that nature. 

Again; we have an attempt of a still larger kind 
made by Mr. Lyell, to apply this Method of Gradation so 
as to disprove all distinction between the causes by which 
geological phenomena have been produced, atid the causes 
which are now acting at the earth's surface. He has 
collected a very remarkable series of changes which have 
taken place, and are still taking place, by the action of 
water, volcanoes, earthquakes, and other terrestrial opera- 
tions ; and he conceives he has shown in these a gradation 
which leads, with no wide chasm or violent leap, to the 
state of things of which geological researches have sup- 
plied the evidence. 

10. Of the value of this Method in geological specu- 
lations, no doubt can be entertained. Yet it must still 
require a grave and profound consideration, in so vast an 
application of the Method as that attempted by Mr. Lyell, 
to determine what extent we may allow to the steps of 
our gradation ; and to decide how Ikr the changes which 
have taken place in distant parts of the series may exceed 
those of which we have historical knowledge, before they 
cease to be of the same kind. Those who, dwelling in a 
city, see, from time to time, one house built and another 
pulled down, may say that such eansting causes^ operating 
through past time, sufficiently explain the existing condi- 
tion of the city. Yet we arrive at important political and 
historical truths, by considering the origin of a city as an 
event of a different order firom those daily changes. The 
causes which are now working to produce geological 
results, may be supposed to have been, at some former 
epoch, so far exaggerated in their operation, that the 
changes should be paroxysms, not degrees ; — that they 
should violate, not continue, the gradual series. And 
we have no kind of evidence whether the duration of our 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OP INDUCrnON. — ^RESEMBLANCE. 567 

historical times is sufficient to give us a just measure of 
the limits of such degrees; — whether the terms which we ' 
have under our notice enable us to ascertain the average 
Jate of progression. 

11. The result of such considerations seems to be 
this: — that we may apply the Method of Gradation in 
the investigation of geological causes, provided we leave 
the Limits of the Gradation undefined. But, then, this 
is equivalent to the admission of the opposite hypothesis : 
for a continuity of which the successive intervals are not 
limited, is not distinguishable from discontinuity. The 
geological sects of recent times have been distinguished 
as uniformitariam and catastropAists: the Method of 
Gradation seems to prove the doctrine of the uniformi- 
tarians ; but then, at the same time that it does this, it 
breaks down the distinction between them and the cata- 
Btrophists. 

There are other exemplifications of the use of grada- 
tions in Science which well deserve notice: but some of 
them are of a kind somewhat different^ and may be con- 
sidered under a separate head. 

Sect. III. The Method of Natural Classification. 

12. The method of natural classification consists, as 
we have seen, in grouping together objects, not according 
to any selected properties, but according to their most 
important resemblances ; and in combining such grouping 
with the assignation of certain marks of the classes thus 
formed. The examples of the successful application 
of this method are to be found in the Classificatory 
Sciences through their whole extent; as, for example, 
in framing the Genera of plants and animals. The 
same method, however, may often be extended to 
other sciences. Thus the classification of crystalline 
fbrms, according to their degree of symmetry, (which 
is really an important distinction,) as introduced by 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



568 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

Mohs and Weiss, was a great improvement upon Hauys 
arbitrary division according to certain assumed primary 
forms. Sir David Brev«^ster was led to the same distinc- 
tion of crystals by the study of their optical properties ; 
and the scientific value of the classification was thus 
strongly exhibited. Mr. Howard's classification of clouds 
appears to be founded in their real nature, since it enables 
him to express the laws of their changes and successions. 
As we have elsewhere said, the criterion of a true classifi- 
cation is, that it makes general propositions possible. 
One of the most prominent examples of the beneficial 
influence of a right classification, is to be seen in the 
impulse given to geology by the distinction of strata 
according to the organic fossils which they contain*: 
which, ever since its general adoption, has been a leading 
principle in the speculations of geologists. 

13. The mode in which, in this and in other cases, the 
Method of Natural Classification directs the researches of 
the philosopher, is this : — ^his arrangement being adopted, 
at least as an instrument of inquiry and trial, he follows 
the course of the different members of the classification, 
according to the guidance which Nature herself offers; 
not prescribing beforehand the marks of each part, but 
distributing the facts according to the total resemblances, 
or according to those resemblances which he finds to be 
most important. Thus, in tracing the course of a series 
of strata from place to place, we identify each stratum, 
not by any single character, but by all taken together ; — 
texture, colour, fossils, position, and any other circum- 
stances which offer themselves. And if, by this means, 
we come to ambiguous cases, where different indications 
appear to point different ways, we decide so as best to 
inreserve undamaged those general relations and truths 
which constitute the value of our system. Thus although 

? ffUt. Ind. /8b»., ill. 507. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF INDUCTION. —RESEMBLANCE. 569 

we consider the organic fossils in each stratum as its 
most important characteristic, we are not prevented, by 
the disappearance of some fossils, or the addition of others, 
or their total absence, from identifying strata in distant 
countries, if the position and other circumstances autho- 
rize us to do so. And by this Method of Classification, 
the doctrine of Gedogicd Equivalents* has been applied 
to a great part of Europe. 

14. We may further observe, that the same method 
of natural classification which thus enables us to identify 
strata in remote situations, notwithstanding there may be 
great differences in their material and contents, also for- 
bids us to assume the identity of the series of rocks which 
occur in different countries, when it has not been verified 
by such a continuous exploration of the component mem- 
bers of the series. It would be in the highest degree 
unphilosophical to apply the special names of the Eng- 
lish or German strata to the rocks of India, or America, 
or even of southern Europe, till it has appeared that in 
those countries the geological series of northern Europe 
really exists. In each separate country, the divisions of 
the formations which compose the crust of the earth must 
be made out, by applying the Method of Natural Arrange- 
ment to that particular casCy and not by arbitrarily extend- 
ing to it the nomenclature belonging to another case. It 
is only by such precautions, that we can ever succeed in 
obtaining geological propositions, at the same time true 
and comprehensive ; or can obtain any sound general views 
respecting the physical history of the earth. 

15. The method of natural classification, which we thus 
recommend, falls in with those mental habits which we 
formerly described as resulting from the study of natural 
history. The method was then termed the Method of 
Type^ and was put in opposition to the Method of Defi^ 

niiion. 

? Hist. Ind. ScL, iii. 532. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



670 METHODS BMPLOYfiD IK THE FORMATION OF 8CIENCS. 

The Method of Natural Classification is directly op- 
posed to the process in which we assume and apply anW- 
trary definitions ; for in the former Method, we find our 
elasses in nature, and do not make them by marks of our 
own imposition. Nor can any advantage to the progress 
ef knowledge be procured, by laying down our characters 
when our arrangements are as yet quite loose and un- 
formed. Nothing was gained by the attempts to define 
Metals by their weight, their hardness, their ductility, 
their colour ; for to all these marks, as fast as they were 
proposed, exceptions were found, among bodies which 
still could not be excluded from the list of Metals. It 
was only when elementary substances were divided into 
Natural Chsses^ of which classes Metals were one, that a 
true view of their distinctive characters was obtuned. 
Definitions in the outset of our examination of nature 
are almost always, not only useless, but prejudicial. 

16. When we obtain a law of nature by indaction 
from phenomena, it commonly happens, as we have 
already seen, that we introduce, at the same time, a Pro- 
position and a Definition. In this case, the two are cor* 
relative, each giving a real value to the other. In such 
cases, also, the Definition, as well as the Proposition, may 
become the basis of rigorous reasoning, and may lead to 
a series of deductive truths. We have examples of such 
Definitions and Propositions in the laws of motion, and 
in many other cases. 

17. When we have established Natural Classes of 
objects, we seek for Characters of our classes ; and these 
Characters may, to a certain extent, be called the Ikfifd^ 
Hans of our classes. This is to be understood, however, 
only in a limited sense : for these Definitions are not 
absolute and permanent. They are liable to be modified 
and superseded. If we find a case which manifestly be- 
longs to our Natural Class, though violating our Defini- 
tion, we do not shut out the case, but alter our defini- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



METHODS OF INDUCTION.^ — ^RESEMBLANCE. 671 

tion. Thus, when we have made it part of our Definition 
of tlie Rose family, that they have alternate stipulate leaves^ 
we do not, therefore, exclude from the family the genus 
Low^a, which has 710 stipultE. In Natural Classifications, 
our Definitions are to be considered as temporary and 
provisional only. When Mr. Lyell established the dis- 
tinctions of the tertiary strata, which he termed Eocene^ 
Mwcmiey and Pliocene^ he took a numerical criterion (the 
proportion of recent species of shells contained in those 
strata) as the basis of his division. But now that those 
kinds of strata have become, by their application to a 
great variety of cases, a series of Natural Classes, we must, 
in our researches, keep in view the natural connexion 
of the formations themselves in different places; and 
must by no means allow ourselves to be governed by the 
numerical proportions which were originally contemplated; 
or even by any amended numerical criterion equally arbi- 
trary ; for however amended, Definitions in natural his- 
tory are never immortal. The etymologies of Pliocene 
and Miocene may, hereafter, come to have merely an his- 
torical interest ; and such a state of things will be no 
more inconvenient, provided the natural connexions of 
each class are retained, than it is to call a rock oolite or 
porphyry^ when it has no roelike structure and no fiery 
spots. 

The Methods of Induction which are treated of in 
this and the preceding chapter, and which are specially 
applicable to causes governed by relations of Quantity or 
of Resemblance, commonly lead us to Law$ of Plienomena 
only. Inductions founded upon other ideas, those of 
Substance and Cause for example, appear to conduct us 
somewhat further into a knowledge of the essential 
nature and real connexions of things. But before we 
speak of these, we shall say a few words respecting the 
way in which inductive propositions, once obtained, may 
be verified and carried into effect by their application. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



572 



Chapter IX. 
OF THE APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 

1. By the application of inductive truths, we here 
mean, according to the arrangement given in page 484^ 
those steps, which in the natural order of science, follow 
the discovery of each truth. These steps are, the verificor- 
Hon of the discovery by additional experiments and rea- 
sonings, and its extension to new cases, not contemplated 
by the original discoverer. These processes occupy that 
period, which, in the history of each great discovery, we 
have termed the Seqtid of the epoch ; as the collection 
of facts, and the elucidation of conceptions, form its 
Prelude. 

2. It is not necessary to dwell at length on the pro- 
cesses of the verification of discoveries. When the law of 
nature is once stated, it is far easier to devise and execute 
experiments which prove it, than it was to discern the 
evidence before. The truth becomes one of the standard 
doctrines of the science to which it belongs, and is veri- 
fied by all who study or who teach the science experi- 
mentally. The leading doctrines of chemistry are con- 
stantly exemplified by each chemist in his Laboratory ; 
and an amount of verification is thus obtained of which 
books give no adequate conception. In astronomy, we 
have a still stronger example of the process of verifying 
discoveries. Ever since the science assumed a systematic 
form, there have been Observatories^ in which the conse- 
quences of the theory were habitually compared with the 
results of observation. And to facilitate this comparison. 
Tables of great extent have been calculated, vrith immense 
labour, from each theory, showing the place which the 
theory assigned to the heavenly bodies at successive 
times ; and thus, as it were, challenging nature to deny 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPLICATION OP INDUCTIVE TRUTHS. 573 

the truth of the discovery. In this way, as I have else- 
where stated, the continued prevalence of an error in the 
systematic parts of astronomy is impossible*. An error, 
if it arise, makes its way into the tables, into the ephe- 
meris, into the observer's nightly list, or his sheet of re- 
ductions ; the evidence of sense flies in its face in a thou- 
sand Observatories ; the discrepancy is traced to its source, 
and soon disappears for ever. 

3. In these last expressions, we suppose the theory, 
not only to be tested, but also to be corrected when it is 
found to be imperfect. And this also is part of the busi- 
ness of the observing astronomer. From his accumulated 
observations, he deduces more exact values than had pre- 
viously been obtained, of the Coefficients of these Ine- 
qualities of which the Argument is already known. This 
he is enabled to do by the methods explained in the fifth 
chapter of this Book ; the Method of Means, and espe- 
cially the Method of Least Squares. In other cases, he 
finds, by the Method of Residues, some new Inequality ; 
for if no change of the CoeflScients will bring the Tables 
and the observation to a coincidence, he knows that a 
new Term is wanting in his formula. He obtains, as far 
as he can, the law of this unknown Term ; and when its 
existence and its law have been fully established, there 
remains the task of tracing it to its cause. 

4. The condition of the science of Astronomy, with 
regard to its security and prospect of progress, is one of 
singular felicity. It is a question well worth our con- 
sideration, as regarding the interests of science, whether, 
in other branches of knowledge also, a continued and con-- 
nected system of observation and calculation^ imitating the 
system employed by astronomers, might not be adopted. 
But the discussion of this question would involve us in a 
digression too wide for the present occasion. 

? iK#^./iw;.«W.,ii. 287. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



574 METHODS BlIPLOYED IN THB FOOUkTlOH OF 8CIEKCE. 

6. There is another mode of application of true theo* 
ries after their discovery, of which wo must also speak ; I 
mean the process of showing that foots, not included in 
the original induction, and apparently of a different kind^ 
are explained by reasonings founded upon the theory. 
The history of physical astronomy is full of such events. 
Thus after Bradley and Wargentin had observed a cer- 
tain cycle among the perturbations of Jupiter's satellites, 
Laplace explained this cycle by the doctrine of universal 
gravitation*. The long inequality of Jupiter and Saturn, 
the diminution of the obliquity of the ecliptic, the acce- 
leration of the moon's mean motion, were in like manner 
accounted for by Laplace. The coincidence of the nodes 
of the moon's equator with those of her orbit was proved 
to result from mechanical principles by Lagrange. The 
motions of the recently-discovered planets, and of comets, 
shown by various mathematicians to be in exact accord- 
ance with the theory, are verifications and extensions still 
more obvious. 

6. In many of the cases just noticed, the consistency 
between the theory, and the consequences thus proved to 
result from it, is so far from being evident, that the most 
consummate command of all the powers and aids of ma- 
thematical reasoning is needed, to enable the philosopher 
to arrive at the result. In consequence of this eifcum<* 
stance, the labours just referred to, of Laplace, Lagrange, 
and others, have befen the object of very gi-eat and very 
just admirdtion. Moreover, the necessary connexion of 
new facts, at first deemed inexplicable, with principles al- 
ready known to be true ; — a connexion utterly invisible at 
the outset, and yet at last established with the certainty 
of demonstration ; — strikes us with the delight of a new 
discovery ; and at first sight appears no less admirable 
than an original induction. Accordingly, men sometimes 

? Hist. Ind. ScL, ii. 220. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPLICATION OF INDUCTIVB TRUTHS. 576 

appear tempted to consider Laplace and other great 
inatheniaticians as persons of a kindred genius to Newton. 
We must not forget, however, that therd is a great and 
essential difference between inductive and deductive pro^ 
cesses of the mind. The discovery of a new theory^ 
which is true, is a step widely distinct from any mere 
development of the consequences of a theory already 
invented and established. 

7. As an example, in another field, of the extension 
of a discovery by applying it to the explanation of new 
phenomena, we may adduce Wells's Inquiry into the Cause 
qf Dew. For this investigation, although it has some- 
times been praised as an original discovery, was, in fact» 
only resolving the phenomenon into principles already 
discovered. The atmologists of the last century were 
aware* that the vapour which exists in air in an invisible 
state may be condensed into water by cold ; and they had 
noticed that there is always a certain temperature, lower 
than that of the atmosphere, to which if we depress 
bodies, water forms upon them in fine drops. This tem** 
perature is the limit of that which is necessary to consti* 
tute vapour, and is hence called the constituent temperature. 
But these principles were not generally familiar in Eng- 
land till Dr. Wells introduced them into his JEssay on 
Dew^ published in 1814; having indeed been in a great 
measure led to them by his own experiments and reason- 
ings. His explanation of Dew, — that it arises from the 
coldness of the bodies on which it settles, — was established 
with great ingenuity; and is a very elegant confirmation 
of the Theory of Constituent Temperature. 

8. The example of all the best writers who have pre- 
viously treated of the philosophy of sciences, from Bacon 
to Herschel, draws our attention to those instanced of the 
application of scientific truths, which are subservient to 

• Hi$U Ind. Set., ii. 510. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



676 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

the uses of practical life ; to the support, the preserva- 
tion, the pleasure of nmn. It is well known in how 
large a degree the furtherance of these objects constituted 
the merit of the Novum Organon in the eyes of its author ; 
and the enthusiasm with which men regard these visible 
and tangible manifestations of the power and advantage 
which knowledge may bring, has gone on increasing up to 
our own day. Such useful inventions as we here refer to 
must always be objects of great philosophical, as well as 
practical interest ; and it might be well worth our while, 
did our present limits allow, to discuss the bearing of such 
inventions upon the formation and progress of science. 
For the present, it must suffice to observe that those 
practical inventions which are of most importance in the 
Arts, are rarely or never of any material consequ^ice to 
Science; for they are either mere practical processes, 
^hich the artist practises, but which the scientist can- 
not account for : or at most, they depend upon some of 
the inferior generalizations of science for their reason, 
and do not tend to confirm or illustrate the higher points 
at which theory has arrived. These considerations must 
be our apology for not entering into this discussion at the 
present advanced stage of our undertaking. As we have 
already said, knowledge is power ; but its interest for us 
in the present work, is not that it is power, but that it is 
knowledge. The effect which the application of science 
to general practical uses has in diffusing a knowledge of 
theoretical principles, and thus in giving to men's minds 
an intellectual culture, is indeed well worthy our attention; 
but the consideration of this subject must be reserved 
for some future occasion. 

We must now conclude our task by a few words on 
the subject of inductions involving Ideas ulterior to those 
already considered. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



577 

Chapter X. 
OF THE INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 

1. We formerly* stated the objects of the researches 
of Science to be Laws of Phenomena and Causes ; and 
showed the propriety and the necessity of not resting in 
the former object, but extending our inquiries to the 
latter also. Inductions, in which phenomena are con- 
nected by relations of Space, Time, Number and Resem- 
blance, belong to the former class ; and of the Methods 
applicable to such Inductions we have treated already. 
In proceeding to Inductions governed by any ulterior 
Ideas, we can no longer lay down any Special Methods 
by which our procedure may be directed. A few general 
remarks are all that we shall offer. 

The principal Maxim in such cases of Induction is 
the obvious one : — that we must be careful to possess and 
to apply, with perfect clearness and precision, the Funda- 
mental Idea on which the Induction depends. 

We may illustrate this in a few cases. 

2. Induction of Substance. — ^The Idea of Substance f 
involves this axiom, that the weight of the whole com- 
pound must be equal to the weights of the separate 
elements, whatever changes the composition or separation 
of the elements may have occasioned. The application 
of this Maxim we may term the Method of the Balance. 
We have seen:]: how the memorable revolution in Chemis- 
try, the overthrow of phlogiston, and the establishment of 
the oxygen theory, was produced by the application of this 
Method. We have seen too^ that the same Idea leads 
us to this Maxim ; — ^that Imponderable Fluids are not to 
be admitted as chemical elements of bodies. 

? Book xi. c. 7. t Ih. 71. c. 3. t ^*- vol. i. p. 397. 

§ lb, vol. i. p. 400. 

VOL. II. 2 P 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



578 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF SCIENCE. 

Whether those which have been termed Imponderable 
Fluids, — the supposed fluids which produce the pheno- 
mena of Light, Heat, Electricity, Galvanism, Magnetism, — 
really exist or no, is a question, not merely of the LatoSy 
but of the Causes of Phenomena. It is, as has already 
been shown, a question which we cannot help discussing, 
but which is at present involved in great obscurity. Nor 
does it ^pear at all likely that we shall obtain a true 
view of the cause of Light, Heat, and Electricity, till we 
have discovered precise and general laws connecting 
optical, thermotical, and electrical phenomena with those 
chemical doctrines to whi6h the Idea of Substance is 
necessarily applied. 

3. Induction of Force. — ^The inference of Mechaniod 
Forces from phenomena has been so abundantly practised, 
that it is perfectly familiar among scientific inquirers. 
From the time of Newton, it has been the most common 
aim of mathematicians ; and a persuasion has grown np 
among them, that mechanical forces, attraction and re- 
pulsion, are the only modes of action of the particles of 
bodies which we shall ultimately have to consider. I 
have attempted to show that this mode of conception is 
inadequate to the purposes of sound philosophy ; — that 
the particles of crystals, and the elements of chemical 
compounds, must be supposed to be comUned in some 
other way than by mere mechanical attraction and 
repulsion. Faraday has gone further in shaking the 
usual conceptions of the force exerted, in well-known 
cases. Among the most noted and conspicuous instances 
of attraction and repulsion exerted at a distance, were 
thos6 'which take place between electrized bodies. But 
the eminent electrician just mentioned has endeavoured 
to establish, by experiments of which it is very difficult 
to elude the weight, that the action in these cases does 
not take place at a distance, but is the result of a chain 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INDUCTION OF CAUSB6. 579 

of intermediate particles connected at ereiy point hj 
forces of another kind*. 

4. Induction of Polarify.-^^The forcee to which Mr, 
Faraday ascribes the action in these cases are Polar 
Forces. We have already endeavoured to explain the 
Idea of Polar Forces ; which implies f that at everjr point 
forces exactly equal act in opposite directions ; and thus» 
in the greater part of their course^ neutralize and conceal 
each other ; while at the extremities of the line, being by 
some cause liberated, they are manifested, still equal and 
opposite. And the criterion by which this polar cha- 
racter of forces is recognized, is implied in the reasoning 
of Faraday, on the question of one or two electricities, 
of which we formerly spoke |. The maxim is thisr^-^that 
in the action of polar forces, along with every manifesta- 
tion of force or property, there exists a corresponding and 
simultaneous manifestation of an equal and opposite force 
or property. 

5. As it was the habit of the last age to reduce all 
action to mechanical forces, the present race of physi- 
cal speculators appears inclined to reduce all forces to 
polar forces. Mosotti has endeavoured to show that the 
positive and negative electoicities pervade all bodies, and 
that gravity is only an apparent excess of one of the kinds 
over the other. As we have seen, Faraday has given 
strong experimental grounds for believing that the sup- 
posed remote actions of electrized bodies are really the 
effects of polar forces among contiguous particles. If this 
doctrine were established with regard to all electrical, 
magnetical and chemical forces, we might ask^ whether^ 
while all other forces are polar, gravity really affords a 
single exception to the universal rule ? Is not the uni- 
verse pervaded by an omnipresent antagonism, a funda- 

? Ee$€arch€9, 12th Series. t ffia. Ind. fiW., i. 841. 

t Ih. i. 336. 

2 P 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



580 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FO&MATION OF SCIENCE. 

mental conjunction of contraries, everywhere opposite, 
nowhere independent? We are, as yet, far from the 
position in which Inductive Science can enable us to 
answer such inquiries. 

6. Induction of Ulterior Causes. — ^The first Induction 
of a Cause does not close the business of scientific 
inquiry. Behind proximate causes, there are ulterior 
causes, perhaps a succession of such. Gravity is the 
cause of the motions of the planets; but what is the 
cause of gravity ? This is a question which has occupied 
men's minds from the time of Newton to the present day. 
Earthquakes and volcanoes are the causes of many geolo- 
gical phenomena ; but what is the cause of those subter- 
raneous operations ? This inquiry after ulterior causes is 
an inevitable result from the intellectual constitution of 
man. He discovers mechanical causes, but he cannot 
rest in them. He must needs ask, whence it is that 
matter has its universal power of attracting matter. He 
discovers polar forces : but even if these be universal, 
he still desires a further insight into the cause of this 
polarity. He sees, in organic structures, convincing marks 
of adaptation to an end : whence, he asks, is this adapta- 
tion ? He traces in the history of the earth a chain of 
causes and effects operating through time : but what, he 
inquires, is the power which holds the end of this chain ? 
Thus we are referred back from step to step, in 
the order of causation, in the same manner as, in the 
palsetiological sciences, we were referred back in the 
order of time. We make discovery after discovery in 
the various regions of science ; each, it may be, satisfac- 
tory, and in itself complete, but none final. Something 
always remains undone. The last question answered, the 
answer suggests still another question. The strain of 
music from the lyre of Science flows on, rich and sweet, 
full and harmonious, but never reaches a close : no 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INDUCTION OF CAUSES, 581 

cadence is heard with which the intellectual ear can feel 
satisfied. 

Of the Supreme Cause. — In the utterance of Science* 
no cadence is heard with which the human mind can 
feel satisfied. Yet we cannot but go on listening 
for and expecting a satisfactory close. The notion of a 
cadence appears to be essential to our relish of the music. 
The idea of some closing strain seems to lurk among our 
own thoughts, waiting to be articulated in the notes 
which flow from the knowledge of external nature. The 
idea of something ultimate in our philosophical researches, 
something in which the mind can acquiesce, and which will 
leave us no further questions to ask, of whence^ and irAy, 
and hy what power^ seems as if it belonged to us ; — as if 
we could not have it withheld from us by any imperfec- 
tion or incompleteness in the actual performances of 
science. What is the meaning of this conviction ? What 
is the reality thus anticipated? Whither does the deve- 
lopment of this Idea conduct us ? 

We have already seen that a difficulty of the same 
kind, which arises in the contemplation of causes and 
effects considered as forming an historical series, drives 
us to the assumption of a First Cause, as an Axiom to 
which our Idea of Causation in time necessarily leads. 
And as we were thus guided to a First Cause in order of 
Succession, the same kind of necessity directs us to a 
Supreme Cause in order of Causation. 

On this most weighty subject it is difficult to speak 
fitly ; and the present is not the proper occasion, even for 
most of that which may be said. But there are one or 
two remarks which flow from the general train of the 
contemplations we have been engaged in, and with which 
this Work must conclude. 

We have seen how different are the kinds of cause to 
which we are led by scientific researches. Mechani&il 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



582 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORBCATION OF SCIENCE. 

Forces are insufficient without Chemical AJflnUies ; Che- 
mical agencies feil us, and we are compelled to hare 
recourse to Vital Powers; Vital Powers cannot be merely 
physical, and we must believe in something hyperphysical, 
something of the natare of a Sotd. Not only do biological 
inquiries lead us to assume an animal soul, but they drive 
us much further; they bring before us Percqfftion^ and 
WiU evoked by Perception. Still more, these inquiries 
disclose to us Ideas as the necessary forms of Perception, 
in the actions of which we ourselves are conscious. We 
are aware, we cannot help being aware, of our Ideas and 
our Volitions as belonging to tiSy and thus we pass 
from things to persons ; we have the idea of Personalify 
awakened. And the idea of Design and Purpose^ of 
which we are conscious in our ovra minds, we find reflected 
back to us, with a distinctness which we cannot overlook, 
in all the armngements which constitute the frame of 
organized beings. 

We cannot but reflect how widrfy diverse are the 
kinds of principles thus set before us ; — ^by what vast 
strides we mount from the lower to the higher, as we 
proceed through that series of causes which the range 
of the sciences thus brings under our notice. Yet we 
know how narrow is the range of these sciences when 
compared with the whole extent of human knowledge. 
We cannot doubt that on many other subjects, besides 
those included in physical speculation, man has made 
out solid and satisfactory trains of connexion ;•— ^as dis- 
covered clear and indisputable evide^e of causation. It 
is manifest, therefore, that, if we are to attempt to 
ascend to the Supreme Cause — if we are to try to frame 
an idea of the Cause of all these subordinate causes ;--^ 
we must conceive it as more different from any of them, 
than the most diverse are from each other {^--more elevated 
above the highest, than the highest in above the low^tt 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 68S 

But further ; — though the Supreme Cause must thus 
be inconceivably different from all subordinate causes* 
and immeasurably elevated above them all, it must still 
include in itself all that is essential to each of them, by 
virtue of that very circumstance that it is the Cause of 
their Causality. Time and Space, — Infinite Time and 
Infinite Space, — ^must be among its attributes ; for we 
cannot but conceive Infinite Time and Space as attributed 
of the Infinite Cause of the Universe. Force and 
Matter must depend upon it for their efficacy ; for we 
cannot conceive the activity of Force, or the* resistance of 
Matter, to be independent powers. But these are its 
lower attributes. The Vital Powers, the Animal Soul, 
which are the Causes of the actions of living things, are 
only the Effects of the Supreme Cause of Life. And this 
Cause, even in the lowest forms of organized bodies, and 
still more in those which stand higher in the scale, in- 
volves a reference to Ends and Purposes, in short, to mani- 
fest Final Causes. Since this is so, and since, even when we 
contemplate ourselves in a view studiously narrowed, we 
still find that we have Ideas, and Will and Personality, 
it would render our philosophy utterly incoherent and 
inconsistent with itself, to suppose that Personality, and 
Ideas, and Will, and Purpose, do not belong to the 
Supreme Cause from which we derive all that we have 
and all that we are. 

But we may go a step farther ; — ^though, in our pre- 
sent field of speculation, we confine ourselves to know- 
ledge founded on the fitcts which the external world 
presents to us, we cannot forget, in speaking of such 
a theme as that to which we have thus been led, that 
these are but a small, and the least signtficant portion 
of the facts which bear upon it. We cannot ftdl to 
recollect that there are facts belonging to the world 
^ithin us, which more readily and strongly direct our 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



684 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OF 8CIENCB. 

thoughts to the Supreme Cause of all things. We can 
plainly discern that we have Ideas elevated aboYO the 
region of mechanical causation, of animal existence, 
even of mere choice and will, which still have a clear and 
definite significance, a permanent and indestructible vali- 
dity. We perceive as a fact, that we have a Conscience, 
judging of Right and Wrong; that we have Ideas of 
Moral Good and Evil ; that we are compelled to conceive 
the organization of the moral world, as well as of the vital 
frame, to be directed to an end and governed by a purpose. 
And since the Supreme Cause is the cause of these facts, 
the Origin of these Ideas, we cannot refuse to recognize 
Him as not only the Maker, but the Governor of the 
World ; as not only a Creative, but a Providential Power ; 
as not only a Universal Father, but an Ultimate Judge. 

We have already passed beyond the boundary of 
those speculations which we proposed to ourselves as 
the basis of our conclusions. Yet we may be allowed 
to add one other reflection. If we find in ourselves 
Ideas of Good and Evil, manifestly bestowed upon us 
to be the guides of our conduct, which guides we yet 
find it impossible consistently to obey; — if we find 
ourselves directed, even by our natural light, to aim 
at a perfection of our moral nature from which we are 
constantly deviating through weakness and perverseness ; 
— if, when we thus lapse and err, we can find, in the 
region of human philosophy, no power which can efiace 
our aberrations, or reconcile our actual with our ideal 
being, or pve us any steady hope and trust with regard 
to our actions, after we have thus discovered their incon- 
gruity ynth their genuine standard ; — if we discern that 
this is our condition, how can we fail to see that it is in 
the highest degree consistent with all the indications 
supplied by such a philosophy as that of which we have 
been attempting to lay the foundationss tha4^ the Supreme 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INDUCTION OF CAUSES. 585 

Cause, through whom man exists as a moral being of vast 
capacities and infinite hopes, should have Himself pro^ 
vided a teaching for our ignorance, a propitiation for our 
sin, a support for our weakness, a purification and sancti-- 
fication of our nature ? 

And thus, in concluding our long survey of the 
grounds and structure of science, and of the lessons which 
the study of it teaches us, we find ourselves brought to a 
point of view in which we can cordially sympathize, and 
more than sympathize, with all the loftiest expressions of 
admiration and reverence and hope and trust, which have 
been uttered by those who in former times have spoken 
of the elevated thoughts to which the contemplation of 
the nature and progress of human knowledge gives rise. 
We can not only hold with Galen, and Harvey, and all 
the great physiologists, that the organs of animals give 
evidence of a purpose; — not only assert with Cuvier that 
this conviction of a purpose can alone enable us to under- 
stand every part of every living thing ; — ^not only say with 
Newton that " every true step made in philosophy brings 
us nearer to the First Cause, and is on that account 
highly to be valued ;" — and that " the business of natural 
philosophy is to deduce causes from effects, till we come 
to the very First Cause, which certainly is not mechanical:" 
— ^but we can go much further, and declare, still with 
Newton, that " this beautiful system could have its origin 
no other way than by the purpose and command of an 
intelligent and powerful Being, who governs all things, 
not as the soul of the world, but as the Lord of the 
Universe ; who is not only God, but Lord and Governor." 
When we have advanced so far, there yet remains one 
step. We may recollect the prayer of one, the master in 
this school of the philosophy of science: **This also we 
humUy and earnestly beg ; — that human things may not 
prc^cBce such as are divine; — neither that from the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



580 METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE FORMATION OP SCIENCE. 

Tiiilocking of the gates of sense, and the kindling of a 
greater natural light, anything may arise of incredulity or 
intellectual night towards divine mysteries ; but rather 
that by our minds thoroughly purged and cleansed frona 
fancy and vanity, and yet subject and perfectly given up 
to the divine oracles, there may be given unto faith the 
things that are faith's." When we are thus prepared for 
a higher teaching, we may be ready to listen to a greater 
than Bacon, when he says to those who have sought their 
God in the material universe, "Whom ye ignorantly 
worship, him declare I unto you." And when we recol- 
lect how utterly inadequate all human language has been 
shown to be, to express the nature of that Supreme 
Cause of the Natural, and Rational, and Moral, and 
Spiritual world, to which our Philosophy points with 
trembling finger and shaded eyes, we may receive, with 
the less wonder but with the more reverence, the decla- 
ration which has been vouchsafed to us : 

EN APXH HN 'O AOrOS, KAI 'O AOrOS HN HPOS TON BEON, KAI 
BEOS HN 'O A0r02. 



THE END. 



Loxpoar: BAnnmtm am» eo.» Puarns, Br. MAmTHCS L^nb. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WORKS by the REV. W. WHEWELL, £.D., FM-S- 

Psoi'EaioR OP Moral Philosopht in tbb Unitbrsitt 
OF Gambridgk. 



I. 
A HISTORY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES, 

From the Earliest Times to the Present. Three Volumes, 
Octavo. £2. 2«. 

II. 

ON THE PRINCIPLES OF ENGLISH UNIVER- 
SITY EDUCATION. 

New Edition. 6*. 

III. 
THE MECHANICAL EUCLID; 

The Elemeota of Maokanics and HjdioeUiios ; and the Propositions 
requisite for a Degree at Cambridge. 

To which are added NOTES on the LOGIC of INDUCTION 
and DEDUCTION. New Edition. 5$. 6d. 

IV. 

THE DOCTRINE OF LIMITS, 

With its Ap}dieations ; 

Namelj, The First Three Sections of Newton — Conic Sections^- 
The Differential Calculus. 9i. 

V. 

ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF MORALS. 

Four Sermoas preached before the University of Cambridge, 
New Edition, with a Preface. 8*. 6rf. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



2 A SELECTED LlffT OF BOOKS, 

THE VICTORY of FAITH, and other SERMONS. By 

JULIUS CHARLES HARE, M.A., Archdeacon of Lewes, and Rector 
of Herstmonceux, Sussex. Octavo, lOv. 6</. 

ON THE EARLY FATHERS: an Introductory Lecture to 
the Course Delivered in the Univcreity of Camhridge. By the Rer. 
J. J. BLUNT, B.D., Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity in the 
University of Camhridge. Octavo, 2f. 

DISCOURSES ON TRADITION AND EPISCOPACY; 

By C. BENSON, A.M., Master of the Temple. Third Edition. 4r. 

LIFE of ARCHBISHOP SANCROFT. By Dr. D'OYLY, 

F.R.S., Rector of Lamheth. New Edition, Revised. 9#. 

THE WORKS OF DOCTOR DONNE; with a Memoir of 

his Life. By HENRY ALFORD, M.A., Vicar of Wymeswold, and 
late Fellow of Trinity College, Camhridge. In Six Volumes Octavo, with 
a fine Portrait, after an Original Picture by Vandyke. 31. 12f . 

MEMOIRS of the LIFE and WRITINGS of BISHOP 

BUTLER, Author of The Analogy. By THOMAS BARTLETT, M.A., 
one of the Six Preachers of Canterbury Cathedral^ and Rector of Kingstone, 
Kent. Dedicated by permisnon to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Oct. 12r. 

FULLER'S HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAM- 
BRIDGE. By the Rev. M. PRICKETT, M.A., and T, WRIGHT, 
M.A., Trinity College, Camhridge. A new Edition, with Notes. 12#. 

THE EVIDENCE of PROFANE HISTORY to the TRUTH 

of REVELATION. With numerous Graphic Illustrations. Dedicated 
by permiision, to her Majesty the Queen, 10#. 6d, 

THE EARLY CHRISTIANS; their Manners, Customs, Trials, 

and Sufferings. By the Rev. W. PRIDDEN, M. A. Third Edition. 4s. 

THE STANDARD OF CATHOLICITY; or, an Attempt to 

point out in a plain Manner, certain safe and leading Principles, amidst the 
conflicting Opinions hy which the Church is at present agitated. By the 
Rev. G. E. BIBER, LL.D. Octavo, 14r, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PUBLISHED BY JOHN W. PARKER. 3 



A HISTORY OF POPERY : Origin, Growth, and Progress of 

the Papal Power; its Political Influence, and its Effects on the Progress of 
Civilization; Present State of the Romish Church in Ireland; History of 
the Inquisition; Monkish Legends. 9s. 6d. 

THE BOOK OF THE FATHERS of the Christian Churcli, 

and the Spirit of their Writings. 9$. Qd. 

LUTHER and HIS TIMES ; a History of the Rise and Progress 
of the German Reformation. By the Rev. J. E. RIDDLE, M.A., Author 
of The Manual 0/ Christian Antiquities, First Sundays at Church, ^c. bs. 

?LIVES OF EMINENT CHRISTIANS. By R. B. HONE, 

M.A., Vicar of Hales Owen. New Edition. Three Volumes, 4*. 6d. each. 



Vol. I. 
ARCHBISHOP USHER, 
DOCTOR HAMMOND, 
JOHN EVELYN, 
BISHOP WILSON. 



Vol. IL 
BERNARD GILPIN, 
PHILIP DE MORNAY, 
BISHOP BEDELL, 
DOCTOR HORNECK. 



Vol. IIL 
BISHOP RIDLEY, 
BISHOP HALL, 
The Hokobable ROBERT 
BOYLE. 



EXPLANATORY NOTES on the PRAYER-BOOK VER- 
SION of the BOOK of PSALMS, with copious Marginal References. 
By WILLIAM KEATING CLAY, B.D., Minor Canon of Ely. 7*. ^d. 

ORIGINAL FAMILY SERMONS; by ONE HUNDRED 
AND FIFTY CONTEMPORARY DIVINES OF THE ESTA- 
BLISHED CHURCH. Five Volumes, at 6s. 6d. each. 

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC DOCTRINE of the EUCHARIST. 

The Scriptural Argument considered, in reply to Dr. Wiseman. By 
THOMAS TURTON, D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity, Cambridge, 
and Dean of Peterborough. Ss. 6d, Also, the Author's 

OBSERVATIONS on Dr. WISEMAN^S Reply to Dr. 
TURTON on the EUCHARIST. By the same; also, 4*. 6d. 

NATURAL THEOLOGY considered principally with reference 
to Lord BROvonAM's Discourse on that Subject. Second Edition, 8s. 

ARCHBISHOP USHER'S ANSWER TO A JESUIT 

with other Tracts on Popery. 13*. 6rL 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



4 A S8LBCTBD LIST OF BOOKB» 

AN ILLUSTRATION of tbe METHOD of EXPLAINING 

the NEW TESTAMENT by the Early Opinions of Jews and Chriatians 
concerning Christ. By WILLIAM WILSON, B.D., kte FeUow of St. 
John's College, Cambridge. A New Edition, carefully revised. 8#. 

SCRIPTURAL BREVIATES; or, SHORT COMPENDIUMS 

of FAITH and PRACTICE, for the SICK; consisting of ExhorUtions, 
Passages of Scripture, and Prayers, applicable to the several circumstances 
of their Visitations. Price 1«» per Set, Noe. I to 50; or Two ShiHingi 
per 100 copies of any selected number; or, a set, bound in a YoL, 2f. 
New Edition. 

The ol\Jeot of the Soriptonl Brevlatee if to Msitt the Puochlal Clagj in the Pastoral oaro, and the number 
of them will be inortaaedehonldth^ prove to be genevally acceptable. 

EPITAPHS, Original and Selected; with a large Selection of 
strikiiij; and appropriate Texts of Scripture, and an Historical and Moral 
Ee8a7 on the Subject. B7 a CLERGYMAN. 5t. 

THE DISTRICT VISITOR'S MANUAL; a Compendium 

of Practical Information for tbe Guidance of District Visitors, and a 
Library of interesting matter for tbe objects of tbeir care. With a Prbpaob, 
by tbe Rev. PROFESSOR DALE, King's CoUege, London. 4$. 6d. 

TRADITION UNVEILED; a candid Inquiry into the Ten- 
dency of tbe Doctrines advocated in tbe Oxford Tracts. By tbe Rer. 
BADEN POWELL, M.A., SaviUan Professor of Geometry in tbe Uni- 
versity of Oxford. 3^. 

THE CONNEXION of NATURAL and DIVINE TRUTH; 

or, tbe Principles of tbe Inductive Pbilosophy, and tbe Study of Secondary 
Causes, considered as subservient to tbe Proof of a First Cause and tbe 
Evidences of Religion. By tbe Autbor of tbe Above. Octavo, 9*. 

STATE EDUCATION, considered with special Reference to 
some Prevalent Misconceptions. By tbe Same. 

THE EDUCATIONAL ECONOMY of ENGLAND. By 

tbe Rev. J. S. BOONE, Secretary to tbe London Diocesan Board of 
Education. St. Qd. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



PUBLISHED BY JOHN W. PARKER. 



A DISCOURSE on the STUDIES of the UNIVERSITY of 
CAMBRIDGE. By PROFESSOR SEDGWICK. Fourth Edit. 4s. 

CUD WORTH ON FREEWILL,; now first Edited from the 
Original MS., and with Notes, by JOHN ALLEN, M.A., Chaplain of 
King's College, London; Inspector of Schools aided by Public Grants. 3#. 

THE IPHIGENIA IN AULIS of EURIPIDES, with English 
Notes. 8*. 

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS and ANSWERS, from MO- 
SHEIM'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, for the Use of Students in 
Divinity. By the Author of Quettion* and Antteert/rom Burnet on the 
Thirty-Nine Artieles. 4t. 6d. 

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS and ANSWERS, from 
BURNET on the THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES. By the Author of 
Quettiotu and An$wer$Jrom MoeMm't Eeekiiai^cal Hi*(qry. 3». 

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS and ANSWERS on BUT- 
LER'S ANALOGY. By the Rev. G. W. CRAUPURD, M.A. 2f . 6rf. 

PALEY'S EVIDENCES of CHRISTIANITY EPITOMISED; 

with a view to exhibit his Argument in a small compass, without omitting 
or weakening any of its component parts. 5#. 

BISHOP HALLIFAX ON THE CIVIL LAW ; a New Edi- 
tion, with Additions, by JAMES WILLIAM GELDART, LL.D., the 
Queen's Professor of the Civil Law in the University of Cambridge. - 8*. Qd, 

LETTERS, STATUTES, and other DOCUMENTS, from the 

MS. Library of Corp. Christ. Coll. illustrative of the History of the Uni- 
versity of CakbridoB) during the time of the Reformation. By JOHN 
LAMB, D.D., Master of Corp. Christ. Coll. Camb., Dean of Bristol. 10#.66?. 

UNIVERSAL MYTHOLOGY; an Account of the most im- 
portant Mytholo^cal Systems, and an Inquiry into their Origin and Con- 
nexion ;, with Considerations on the KORAN and the TALMUD. By the 
Rev. HENRY CHRISTMAS, F.S.A., St. John's CoU., Camb. 7*. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



6 A SELECTED LIST OF BOOKS. 

THE ELEMENTS of ALGEBRA, chiefly intended for School: 
and the Junior Claaees in Colleges. By the Rev. T. G. HATJi^ M.A- 
Professor of Mathematics, King's College, London. fo. 6</. 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE on the DIFFERENTIAL 
and INTEGRAL CALCULUS. By the Same. 12#. 6d. 

LECTURES upon TRIGONOMETRY, and the APPLICA- 
TION of ALGEBRA to GEOMETRY. Second Edition, corrected, 7*- 6<£ 

DYNAMICS, or a TREATISE on MOTION; to which is 
added, a SHORT TREATISE on ATTRACTIONS. By SAMUEL 
EARNSHAW, M.A., of St. John's College, Cambridge. Octavo, 1-k 

THEORY OF HEAT. By PHILLIP KELLAND, M.A. 

F.R.S., Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Edinburgli ; 
late Fellow and Tutor of Queen's College, Cambridge. 9>». 

LECTURES on ASTRONOMY, delivered at KINGS COL- 
LEGE, London, by the Rev. HENRY MOSELEY, M.A., F.RJ3. 

Professor of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy. With nnmeron? 
Illustrations. 5s. 6d. 

?MECHANICS APPLIED TO THE ARTS. By PRa 

FESSOR MOSELEY, of King s College, London. A New Edition, 
corrected and improved. With numerous Engravings. 6s, 6d. 

BIBLE CYCLOPAEDIA; a Comprehensive Digest of the Civil 
and Natural History, Geography, Statistics, and General Literary Infor- 
mation connected with the Sacred Writings. 

This Work is printed in small Folio, In a distinct and readable type, but with doe regard to teanamjol 
space. It will be completed in about Thirty Monthly Nmnbers, prioe U. Sd. each ; and will fbim On* «r Tm 
handsome volumes, at the option of the Porchaaer. 

*»• A detailed Prospectus of the Bulb Cyclopjbdia, wiU be MQt (postage fre^,) upon appUcatSoa, post 
paid, to the Publisher. 

THE CAMBRIDGE PORTFOLIO; comprising Papers iUus- 

trative of the Scholastic and Social System of the University ; Noticea <rf 
Eminent Characters; Gleanings from Manuscripts in the Libraries; and 
Contributions by contemporary Members. With descriptiye Aoconnta of 
the principal Buildings, and numerous Etchings, by Lewis, Incb, Cookb, 
and other Artists. In Parts, at 5s. • 



London: JOHN W. PARKER, Publisher, West Strand. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



.OCKEO 




» . ••• ) 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 