THE 



PHILOSOPHY 



OF THE 



INDUCTIVE SCIENCES, 



FOUNDED UPON THEIR HISTORY. 



BY THE 

REV. WILLIAM WHEWELL, B.D., 

KliLLOW Ofr TRINITY COLLKGE, AND PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CAMBRIDGE, VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY 

OF LONDON. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 




VOLUME THE FIRST. 



LONDON: 

JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND. 
CAMBRIDGE : J. AND J. J. DEIGHTON. 



M.DCCC.XL. 



LONDON : 

HARRISON AND Co., POINTERS, 
ST. MARTIN'S LANK. 



TO THE 

REV. ADAM SEDGWICK, M.A., 

SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, 

WOODWARDIAN PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF 
CAMBRIDGE, AND PREBENDARY OF NORWICH. 



MY DEAR SEDGWICK, 

When I showed you the last sheet of my History of the In- 
ductive Sciences in its transit through the press, you told me that 
I ought to add a paragraph or two at the end, by way of Moral 
to the story ; and I replied that the moral would be as long as 
the story itself. The present work, ihe Moral which you then 
desired, I have, with some effort, reduced within a somewhat 
smaller compass than I then spoke of; and I cannot dedicate it 
to any one with so much pleasure as to you. 

It has always been my wish that, as far and as long as men 
might know anything of me by my writings, they should hear of me 
along with the friends with whom I have lived, whom I have loved, 
and by whose conversation I have been animated to hope that I 
too might add something to the literature of our country. There 
is no one whose name has, on such grounds, a better claim than 
yours to stand in the front of a work, which has been the subject 
of my labours for no small portion of our long period of friend- 
ship. But there is another reason which gives a peculiar pro- 
priety to this dedication of my Philosophy to you. I have little 
doubt that if your life had not been absorbed in struggling 
with many of the most difficult problems of a difficult science, 
you would have been my fellow-labourer or master in the work 
which I have here undertaken. The same spirit which dictated 
your vigorous protest against some of the errors which I also 
attempt to expose, would have led you, if your thoughts had been 
more free, to take a leading share in that Reform of Philosophy, 

a 2 



7832 



iv DEDICATION. 

which all who are alive to such errors, must see to be now indis- 
pensable. To you I may most justly inscribe a work which con- 
tains a criticism of the fallacies of the ultra-Lockian school. 

I will mention one other reason which enters into the satisfac- 
tion with which I place your name at the head of my Philosophy. 
By doing so, I may consider myself as dedicating it to the College 
to which we both belong, to which we both owe so much of all 
that we are, and in which we have lived together so long and^so 
happily ; and that, be it remembered, the College of Bacon and of 
Newton. That College, I know, holds a strong place in your affec- 
tions, as in mine ; and among many reasons, not least on this 
account ; we believe that sound and enduring philosophy ever 
finds there a congenial soil and a fostering shelter. If the doc- 
trines which the present work contains be really true and valu- 
able, my unhesitating trust is, that they will spread gradually 
from these precincts to every part of the land. 

That this office of being the fosterer and diffuser of truth may 
ever belong to our common Nursing Mother, and that you, my 
dear S^dgvvick, may long witness and contribute to these bene- 
ficial influences, is the hearty wish of 

Yours affectionately, 

W. WHEWELL. 
Trinity College, May 1, 1840. 



CONTENTS 



OF 



THE FIRST VOLUME. 



Page 

PREFACE ....... ix 

Aphorisms respecting Ideas .... xvii 

Aphorisms respecting Knowledge .... xxxvii 

Aphorisms respecting the Language of Science . . xLviii 

Aphorism I. relative to the Ancient Period . . xLix 

1. Common Words . . . XLIX 

2. Descriptive Terms . . . . Lii 

3. Theoretical Terms .... Liv 
Aphorism II. relative to the Modern Period . . Lix 

1. Systematic Nomenclature . . LX 

2. Systematic Terminology .... Lxi 

3. Systematic Modification . . . LXIV 
Aphorisms (III., IV., V., VI., VII.,) relative to the Ap- 
propriation of Common Words . . . Lxvii 

Aphorisms (VIII., IX., X., XI., XII., XIII., XIV.,) 

relative to the Construction of New Terms . Lxxiii 

Aphorism XV., relative to the Form of Terms . . xcvi 

1. Terms derived from Latin and Greek . xcvi' 

2. German Terms ..... xcvii 

3. Descriptive Terms .... c 

4. Nomenclature. Zoology . . . c 

5. Mineralogy ... cii 

6. Botany . . . .cii 

7. Chemistry ... cii 

8. Crystallography . . ciii 

Aphorism XVI., relative to the composition and inflexion 

of Terms ..... cv 

1. Hybrids . . . . cvi 

2. Terminations of Adjectives . . . cvii 

3. Formation of Substantives (names of things) . cviii 

4. Abstract Substantives .... cxiii 

5. Rules of derivation from Greek and Latin . cxiv 

6. Modifications of Terminations . . . cxv 
Aphorism XVII., relative to the mode of introducing 

Changes ..... cxvii 



VI CONTENTS. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 

PART I. OF IDEAS. 
BOOK I. OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

Page 

CHAP. 1. INTRODUCTION . . . . .3 

2. Of Facts and Theories .... 18 

3. Of Sensations and Ideas . . . .25 

4. Of the Difference and Opposition of Sensation and Ideas 28 

5. Of Ideal Conceptions . . . .36 

6. Of Induction ..... 41 

7. Of Successive Generalizations . . .45 

8. Of Technical Terms . . 50 

9. Of Necessary and Contingent Truths . . 53 

10. Of Experience ..... 59 

11. Of the Grounds of Necessary Truths . . 63 

12. The Fundamental Ideas are not derived from Experience 71 

13. Of the Philosophy of the Sciences . . -75 

BOOK II. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

CHAP. 1. Of the Pure Sciences . . . . 79 

2. Of the Idea of Space . . . . .81 

3. Of some Peculiarities of the Idea of Space . .. 85 

4. Of the Definitions and Axioms which relate to Space 88 

5. Of some Objections to the Previous Doctrines . 98 

6. Of the Perception of Space . . .108 
* 6. Of the Idea of Time . . . .121 

7. Of some Peculiarities of the Idea of Time . 124 

8. Of the Axioms which relate to Number . .128 

9. Of the Perception of Time and Number . 131 

10. Of Mathematical Reasoning . . . .135 

11. Of the Foundations of the Higher Mathematics . 139 

12. Of the Doctrine of Motion .... 144 

13. Of the Application of Mathematics to the Inductive 

Sciences . . . . .147 

BOOK III. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

CHAP. 1. Of the Mechanical Sciences . . . .157 

2. Of the Idea of Cause . . . ]59 

3. Modern Opinions respecting the Idea of Cause . ] 63 

* The number repeated by mistake. 



CONTENTS. Vii 

Page 

4. Of the Axioms which relate to the Idea of Cause . 169 

5. Of the Origin of our Conceptions of Force and Matter 177 

6. Of the Establishment of the Principles of Statics . 184 

7. Of the Establishment of the Principles of Dynamics 207 

8. Of the Paradox of Universal Propositions established 

by Experience .... 237 

9. Of the Establishment of the Law of Universal Gravi- 

tation ... . . .246 

]0. Of the General Diffusion of Clear Mechanical Ideas 253 



BOOK IV. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SECONDARY MECHANICAL 
SCIENCES. 

CHAP. 1. Of the Idea of a Medium as commonly employed . 267 

2. Of Peculiarities in the Perceptions of the Different 

Senses ...... 275 

3. Successive Attempts at the Application of the Idea of 

a Medium ..... 295 

4. Of the Measure of Secondary Qualities . . 306 

BOOK V. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

CHAP. 1 . Attempts at the Scientific Application of the Idea of 

Polarity ..... 331 

2. Of the Connexion of Polarities . . 343 

BOOK VI. THE PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

CHAP. 1. Attempts to conceive Elementary Composition . 361 

2. Establishment and Development of the Idea of Che- 

mical Affinity . . . 373 

3. Of the Idea of Substance . . . . 388 

4. Application of the Idea of Substance in Chemistry 396 

5. The Atomic Theory . . .405 

BOOK VII. THE PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY, INCLUDING 
CRYSTALLOGRAPHY. 

CHAP. 1. Explication of the Idea of Symmetry . . 423 

2. Application of the Idea of Symmetry to Crystals . 431 

3. Speculations founded upon the Symmetry of Crystals 436 



Vlll CONTENTS. 



BOOK VIII. PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

Page 

CHAP. 1 . Of the Idea of Likeness as governing the use of Com- 
mon Names ..... 449 

2. Of the Methods of Natural History as regulated by the 

Idea of Likeness .... 462 

3. Application of the Natural History Method to Mine- 

ralogy . . . . . 494 

4. Of the Idea of Natural Affinity . . .510 



PREFACE. 



THE Work now before the Reader is intended as an 
application of the Plan of Bacon's Novum Organum to 
the present condition of Physical Science. The progress 
of such Science during the last three centuries has given 
us the means of inquiring, with advantages which former 
generations did not possess, what that Organ, or intellec- 
tual method, is, by which solid truth is to be extracted 
from the observation of Nature ; and though the attempt 
to discover this cannot but be an arduous undertaking, it 
is so plainly required of the present generation, that any 
one engaging in it with sobriety and industry, may claim 
to have his labours soberly and tolerantly estimated. I 
shall, therefore, make no apology for what might otherwise 
appear the presumption of such a design. My scheme is, 
however, narrower than Bacon's in this respect, that I 
have in the present work confined myself to those 
branches of human knowledge which have external 
nature for their object, and are often exclusively termed 
Sciences. The reason given for this limitation in the 
following pages, (namely, that it seemed proper to collect 
our philosophy of knowledge from the most certain and 
distinct portions of knowledge alone,) will, I trust, be 
considered as an adequate justification of the course 
pursued. 

VOL. i. b 



X PREFACE. 

Many writers, both before and since Bacon, have 
employed themselves upon the subjects with which we 
are here concerned ; the philosophy of knowledge, and 
the methods of arriving at science : and I have availed 
myself of their conclusions, where they appeared to be real 
additions to sound philosophy. I must add, that I have 
not scrupled to subject their speculations to a critical 
examination, and to reject all that was thus found to be 
erroneous or worthless. A system which professes to give 
a view of the nature of knowledge, supplies canons of 
criticism by which all other philosophical doctrines must 
be tried, in order to determine their import and reality. 
It is an office essentially connected with the exposition of 
such a system, to pronounce on the value of previous 
essays of the same kind. Hence I have not hesitated, 
on some occasions, to dissent from the great masters of 
the philosophy of science, from Bacon, from Cuvier, and 
even from Newton himself; believing that they, upon 
maturer consideration, would have been led to those doc- 
trines and precepts which I have preferred to theirs. In 
like manner, although I have adopted Kant's reasoning 
respecting the nature of Space and Time, it will be found 
by any one acquainted with the system of that acute 
metaphysician, that my views differ widely from his. I 
have also ventured to condemn some of the opinions 
respecting physical philosophy, published by another emi- 
nent German writer (Schelling) to whose works I have in 
other subjects great obligations. 

The present work was announced in the outset of a 



PREFACE Xi 

History of the Inductive Sciences which was published three 
years ago. That History was, indeed, the result of labours 
undertaken with a view to the formation of a PJiilosophy 
of Science, and was intended from the first as an intro- 
duction to a work on that subject. I may therefore take 
the liberty of saying* that I have as yet seen no reason to 
wish to make any material change in the History, as it is 
now before the world. I will not omit this opportunity 
of expressing my obligations to the German translator of 
the History*. It is a testimony which may well give an 
author some confidence in the value of his work, that 
one of the most eminent men of science in Europe should 
spontaneously postpone other tasks in order to give it, 
with the most flattering expressions, to the public of his 
own country. I may add that a Review of my History 
which has appeared in our own language has tended in 
no small degree to convince me that the work contains 
few material errors, and none which are of any importance 
with regard to its general scope. The Reviewer, ob- 
viously an enemy eager to find faults, was able to detect 
but very few passages which are really mistakes f. 

Other critics have made objections of various kinds to 

* The History of the Inductive /Sciences has been translated into 
German by M. Yon Littrow, Director of tlie Imperial Observatory at 
Vienna, and author of many well-known mathematical works. 

t See Edinburgh Review, No. cxxxiii. p. 129 ; also No. cxxxvi., p. 
274. But I am compelled by justice to acknowledge that the value of 
this testimony is materially weakened by the Reviewer's extreme laxity 
and obscurity of view with regard to the nature of science ; defects 
which make his judgment on such subjects nearly worthless. 

b 2 



Xll PREFACE. 

that part of the History which relates to Physiology ; but 
none which it is necessary to notice here. I regret that 
my plan should again lead me, in the present work, to 
trespass upon the domain of the physiologists. Those who 
have well studied that subject, feel a persuasion, a very 
natural and just one, that nothing less than a life profes- 
sionally devoted to the science, can entitle a person to 
decide the still controverted questions which it involves ; 
and hence they look, with a reasonable jealousy, upon 
attempts to discuss such questions, made by a lay specu- 
lator. I trust it will be found that I have not, in the 
present work, asserted any opinions on such subjects, with- 
out alleging sufficient reasons. Such discussions as I 
have introduced, appeared to me to be requisite to com- 
plete the philosophy of science : the value of the opinions 
thus delivered, it must be left to physiologists, present 
and future, to decide. 

In writing the History, I was led, on several occasions, 
to pass on from the facts to the lessons of philosophy which 
they suggest. I have now, in three or four instances, 
taken the liberty of restoring reflections so made to their 
proper place, by incorporating a few phrases, or here 
and there a sentence, from the History, in the present 
work. I think it right to mention this, that those who 
read both works may not deem me guilty of careless 
repetition. 

Perhaps I shall be charged with having employed the 
term Idea in an unusual manner in these pages. Almost 
every writer who has introduced that term into his spe- 



PREFACE. Xiii 

dilations, has been accused, by succeeding critics, of 
some degree of vagueness and vacillation in its use. The 
mode in which I have applied it appears to me very defi- 
nite. The grounds of the universal and necessary truths 
which we are able to assert in various departments of 
knowledge, reside in certain general forms of apprehen- 
sion, or relations of our conceptions; as Space, Time, 
Cause ; and these I term Ideas ; or, when ambiguity is to 
be guarded against, Fundamental Ideas. If I could have 
found any other word or phrase which, in common usage, 
came nearer to this meaning, I should have been glad to 
adopt it. I have employed the word Conception to ex- 
press that which is, I think, its common signification ; 
our Conceptions are that, in the mind, which we denote by 
our General Terms, as a Triangle, a Square Number, 
a Force. But still, this term, in the present work, implies 
principles which have not been employed, at least not 
commonly, by previous writers. For in the course of my 
speculations, I am further led to speak of such Concep- 
tions as Modifications of our Fundamental Ideas ; and as 
deriving from the Ideas their power of leading to uni- 
versal and necessary truths. In instances in which no 
obscurity appeared likely to arise, I may, perhaps, occa- 
sionally have employed the terms Idea, Conception, 
Notion, and others, with less discrimination. 

Bacon's purpose and promise was, that his New Organ 
should produce material as well as intellectual profit ; 
works, as well as knowledge. That the study of the 
order of nature does add to man's power, the history of 



XIV PREFACE. 

the sciences since Bacon has abundantly shown. But 
though this hope of derivative advantages may stimulate 
our exertions, it cannot govern our methods of seeking 
knowledge, without leading us away from the most gene- 
ral and genuine forms of knowledge. The nature of 
knowledge must be studied in itself and for its own sake, 
before we attempt to learn what external rewards it will 
bring us. I have, therefore, not aimed at imitating Bacon 
in those parts of his work, in which he contemplates the 
increase of man's dominion over nature, as the main 
object of natural philosophy ; being fully persuaded that 
if Bacon himself had had unfolded before him the great 
theories which have been established since his time, he 
would have acquiesced in the contemplation of them ; 
and would have readily proclaimed the real reason for 
aiming at the knowledge of such truths to be, that they 
are true. Thus I have ventured to separate his first 
Aphorism* into two ; to consider the Interpretation as our 
primary object, not the ministration; tlie knowing, not the 
doing ; the Intelligence, not the Power. 

The mode of delivering the philosophy of science in 
Aphorisms which Bacon has adopted, would not well suf- 
fice for the treatment of the subject at present, since 
many questions must be discussed, many perplexities ex- 
plained. No writer upon such subjects can expect to be 
either understood or assented to, beyond the limits of a 

* Homo naturae minister et interpres tantum facit et intelligit 
quantum de naturae ordine re vel mente observaverit; nee amplius scit 
aut potest. 



PREFACE. XV 

narrow school, who is not prepared with good arguments, 
as w r ell as magisterial decisions, upon the many obscure 
and controverted points which the subject brings before 
him. But though an Aphoristic Philosophy, unsupported 
by reasoning, is thus unsuited to the time, it may be satis- 
factory to many readers to see the Philosophy to which in 
the present work we are led, presented in the Aphoristic 
form. I have, therefore, expressed in Aphorisms a large 
part of the doctrines resulting from the discussions which 
occupy the following pages. These Aphorisms are given 
at the end of this Preface. 

Along with these, I shall add some other Aphorisms 
on the subject of the Language of Science ; a subject in 
which it appears to be time to collect, from the usage of 
the most judicious writers, some rules which may tend to 
preserve the purity and analogies of scientific language 
from wanton and needless violation. As this subject is 
not discussed in the work itself, I have given, along with 
these Aphorisms, such examples as may tend to confirm 
and illustrate them, and have applied them to some cases 
at present unsettled. 



APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS. 



I. 

MAN is the Interpreter of Nature, Science the right interpre- 
tation. 

II. 

The Senses place before us the Characters of the Book of 
Nature ; but these convey no knowledge to us, till we have dis- 
covered the Alphabet by which they are to be read. 

III. 

The Alphabet, by means of which we interpret Phenomena, 
consists of the Ideas existing in our own minds; for these give to 
the phenomena that coherence and significance which is not an 
object of sense. 

IV. 

The antithesis of Sense and Ideas is the foundation of the 
Philosophy of Science. No knowledge can exist without the 
union, no philosophy without the separation, of these two ele- 
ments. 

V. 

Fact and Theory correspond to Sense on the one hand, and to 
Ideas on the other, so far as we are conscious of our Ideas : but 
all facts involve ideas unconsciously ; and thus the distinction of 
Facts and Theories is not tenable, as that of Sense and Ideas is. 

VI. 

Sensations and Ideas in our knowledge are like Matter and 
Form in bodies. Matter cannot exist without Form, nor Form 



XV111 APHORISMS 

without Matter : yet the two are altogether distinct and opposite. 
There is no possibility either of separating, or of confounding 
them. The same is the case with Sensations and Ideas. 

VII. 

Ideas are not transformed, but ^formed Sensations ; for with- 
out ideas, sensations have no form. 

VIII. 

The Sensations are the Objective, the Ideas the Subjective part 
of every act of perception or knowledge. 

IX. 

General terms denote Ideal Conceptions, as a circle, an orbit, 
a rose. These are not images of real things, as was held by the 
Realists, but conceptions : yet they are conceptions, not bound 
together by mere name, as the Nominalists held, but by an idea. 

X. 

It has been said by some, that all Conceptions are merely 
states or feelings of the mind, but this assertion only tends to con- 
found what it is our business to distinguish. 

XI. 

Observed Facts are connected so as to produce new truths, by 
superinducing upon them an Idea : and such truths are obtained 
by Induction. 

XII. 

Truths once obtained by legitimate Induction are Facts : 
these Facts may be again connected, so as to produce higher truths : 
and thus we advance to Successive Generalizations. 

XIII. 

Truths obtained by Induction are made compact and perma- 
nent by being expressed in Technical Terms. 



CONCERNING IDEAS. 



XIV. 

Experience cannot conduct us to universal and necessary 
truths : Not to universal, because she has not tried all cases : 
Not to necessary, because necessity is not a matter to which expe- 
rience can testify. 

XV. 

Necessary truths derive their necessity from the Ideas which 
they involve ; and the existence of necessary truths proves the 
existence of Ideas not generated by experience. 

XVI. 

In Deductive Reasoning, we cannot have any truth in the 
conclusion which is not virtually contained in the premises. 

XVII. 

In order to acquire any exact and solid knowledge, the student 
must possess with perfect precision the ideas appropriate to that 
part of knowledge : and this precision is tested by the student's 
perceiving the axiomatic evidence of the axioms belonging to each 
Fundamental Idea. 

XVIII. 

The Fundamental Ideas which it is most important to con- 
sider, as being the Bases of the Material Sciences, are the Ideas 
of Space, Time (including Number), Cause (including Force and 
Matter), Outness of Objects, and Media of Perception of Secondary 
Qualities, Polarity (Contrariety), Chemical Composition and 
Affinity, Substance, Likeness and Natural Affinity, Means and 
Ends (whence the notion of Organization), Symmetry, and the 
Ideas of Vital Poicers. 

XIX. 

The Sciences which depend upon the Ideas of Space and 
Number are Pure Sciences, not Inductive Sciences : they do not 
infer special Theories from Facts, but deduce the conditions of all 
theory from Ideas. The Elementary Pure Sciences, or Elemen- 
tary Mathematics, are Geometry, Theoretical Arithmetic and 
Algebra. 



XX APHORISMS 



XX. 

The Ideas on which the Pure Sciences depend, are those of 
Space and Number ; but Number is a modification of the concep- 
tion of Repetition, which belongs to the Idea of Time. 

XXI. 

The Idea of Space is not derived from experience, for expe- 
rience of external objects presupposes bodies to exist in Space. 
Space is a condition under which the mind receives the impres- 
sions of sense, and therefore the relations of space are necessarily 
and universally true of all perceived objects. Space is a form of 
our perceptions, and regulates them, whatever the matter of them 
may be. 

XXII. 

Space is not a general notion collected by abstraction from 
particular cases ; for we do not speak of Spaces in general, but of 
universal or absolute Space. Absolute space is infinite. All 
special spaces are in absolute space, and are parts of it. 

XXIII. 

Space is not a real object or thing, distinct from the objects 
which exist in it ; but it is a real condition of the existence of 
external objects. 

XXIV. 

We have an Intuition of objects in space ; that is, we con- 
template objects as made up of spatial parts, and apprehend their 
spatial relations by the same act by which we apprehend the 
objects themselves. 

XXV. 

Form or figure is space limited by boundaries. Space has 
necessarily three dimensions, length, breadth, depth; and no 
ethers which cannot be resolved into these. 



CONCERNING IDEAS, Xxi 



XXVI. 

The Idea of Space is exhibited for scientific purposes, by the 
Definitions and Axioms of Geometry ; such, for instance, as 
these : the Definition of a Right Angle, and of a Circle ; the 
Definition of Parallel Lines, and the Axiom concerning them; 
the Axiom that two straight lines cannot inclose a space. These 
Definitions are necessary, not arbitrary; and the Axioms are 
needed as well as the Definitions, in order to express the neces- 
sary conditions which the Idea of Space imposes. 

XXVII. 

The Definitions and Axioms of Elementary Geometry do not 
completely exhibit the Idea of Space. In proceeding to the 
Higher Geometry, we may introduce other additional and inde- 
pendent Axioms ; such as that of Archimedes, that a curve line 
u'hich joins tic o points is less than any broken line joining the same 
points and including the curve line. 

XXVIII. 

The perception of a solid object by sight requires that act of 
mind by which, from figure and shade, we infer distance and 
position in space. The perception of figure by sight requires that 
act of mind by which we give an outline to each object. 

XXIX. 

The perception of form by touch is not an impression on the 
passive sense, but requires an act of our muscular frame by which 
we become aware of the position of our own limbs. The percep- 
tive faculty involved in this act has been called the muscular sense. 

XXX. 

The Idea of Time is not derived from experience, for expe- 
rience of changes jo/vsupposes occurrences to take place in Time. 
Time is a condition under which the mind receives the impres- 
sions of sense, and therefore the relations of tin\e are necessarily 



XXH APHORISMS 

and universally true of all perceived occurrences. Time is a. form 
of our perceptions, and regulates them, whatever the matter of 
them may be. 

XXXI. 

Time is not a general notion collected by abstraction from 
particular cases. For we do not speak of particular Times as 
examples of time in general, but as parts of a single and infinite 
Time. 

XXXII. 

Time, like Space, is a form, not only of perception, but of 
Intuition. We consider the whole of any time as equal to the 
sum of the parts ; and an occurrence as coinciding with the por- 
tion of time which it occupies. 

XXXIII. 

Time is analogous to Space of one dimension: portions of 
both have a beginning and an end, are long or short. There is 
nothing in Time which is analogous to Space of two, or of three, 
dimensions, and thus nothing which corresponds to Figure. 

XXXIV. 

The Repetition of a set of occurrences, as, for example, strong 
and weak, or long and short sounds, according to a steadfast order, 
produces Rhythm, which is a conception peculiar to Time, as 
Figure is to Space. 

XXXV. 

The simplest form of Repetition is that in which there is no 
variety, and this gives rise to the conception of Number. 

XXXVI. 

The simplest numerical truths are seen by Intuition ; when 
we endeavour to deduce the more complex from these simplest, 
we employ such maxims as these : If equals be added to equah 
the wholes are equal: If equals be subtracted from equals the 
remainders are equal: The whole is equal to the sum of all its parts. 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXili 



XXXVII. 

The Perception of Time involves a constant and latent kind 
of memory, which may be termed a Sense of Succession. The 
Perception of Number also involves this Sense of Succession, 
although in small numbers we appear to apprehend the units 
simultaneously and not successively. 

XXXVIII. 

The Perception of Rhythm is not an impression on the pas- 
sive sense, but requires an act of thought by which we connect 
and group the strokes which form the Rhythm. 

XXXIX. 

Intuitive is opposed to discursive reason. In intuition, we 
obtain our conclusions by dwelling upon one aspect of the funda- 
mental Idea ; in discursive reasoning, we combine several aspects 
of the Idea, (that is, several axioms,) and reason from the combi- 
nation. 

XL. 

Geometrical deduction (and deduction in general) is called 
synthesis, because we introduce, at successive steps, the results of 
new principles. But in reasoning on the relations of space, we 
sometimes go on separating truths into their component truths, 
and these into other component truths ; and so on ; and this is 
geometrical analysis. 

XLI. 

Among the foundations of the Higher Mathematics, is the 
Idea of Symbols considered as general Signs of Quantity. This 
idea of a Sign is distinct from, and independent of other ideas. 
The axiom to which we refer in reasoning by means of Symbols 
of quantity is this : The interpretation of such symbols must be 
perfectly general. This Idea and Axiom are the bases of Algebra 
in its most general form. 



XXIV APHORISMS 

XLII. 

Among the foundations of the Higher Mathematics is also 
the Idea of a Limit. The Idea of a Limit cannot be superseded 
by any other definitions or Hypotheses. The Axiom which we 
employ in introducing this Idea into our reasoning is this: 
What is true up to the Limit is true at the Limit. This Idea and 
Axiom are the bases of all Methods of Limits, Fluxions, Diffe- 
rentials, Variations, and the like. 

XLIII. 

There is a pure Science of Motion, which does not depend 
upon observed facts, but upon the Idea of motion. It may 
also be termed Pure Mechanism, in opposition to Mechanics 
Proper, or Machinery, which involves the mechanical conceptions 
of force and matter. It has been proposed to name this Pure 
Science of Motion, Kinematics. 

XLIV. 

The pure mathematical sciences must be successfully culti- 
vated, in order that the progress of the principal inductive sciences 
may take place. This appears in the case of Astronomy, in 
which Science, both in ancient and in modern times, each advance 
of the theory has depended upon the previous solution of problems 
in pure mathematics. It appears also inversely in the Science of 
the Tides, in which, at present, we cannot advance in the theory, 
because we cannot solve the requisite problems in the Integral 
Calculus. 

XLV. 

The Idea of Cause, modified into the conceptions of mecha- 
nical cause, or Force, and resistance to force, or Matter, is the 
foundation of the Mechanical Sciences ; that is, Mechanics, 
(including Statics and Dynamics,) Hydrostatics, and Physical 
Astronomy. 

XLVI. 

The Idea of Cause is not derived from experience ; for in 
judging of occurrences which we contemplate, we consider them 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXV 

as being, universally and necessarily, Causes and Effects, which 
a finite experience could not authorize us to do. The Axiom, 
that every event must have a cause, is true independently of 
experience, and beyond the limits of experience. 

XLVII. 

The Idea of Cause is expressed for purposes of science by 
these three Axioms : Every Event must have a Cause : Causes 
are measured by their Effects : Reaction is equal and opposite to 
Action. 

XLVIIT. 

The Conception of Force involves the Idea of Cause, as applied 
to the motion and rest of bodies. The conception of force is 
suggested by muscular action exerted : the conception of matter 
arises from muscular action resisted. We necessarily ascribe to 
all bodies solidity and inertia, since we conceive Matter as that 
which cannot be compressed or moved without resistance. 

XLIX. 

Mechanical Science depends on the Conception of Force ; 
and is divided into Statics, the doctrine of Force preventing 
motion, and Dynamics, the doctrine of Force producing motion. 

L. 

The Science of Statics depends upon the Axiom, that Action 
and Reaction are equal, which in Statics assumes this form : 
When two equal weights are supported on the middle point 
between them, the pressure on the fulcrum is equal to the sum of the 
weights. 

LI. 

The Science of Hydrostatics depends upon the Fundamental 
Principle that fluids press equally in all directions. This Prin- 
ciple necessarily results from the conception of a Fluid, as a body 
of which the parts are perfectly moveable in all directions. For 
since the Fluid is a body, it can transmit pressure ; and the trans- 
mitted pressure is equal to the original pressure, in virtue of the 
VOL. I. c 



XXVi APHORISMS 

Axiom that Reaction is equal to Action. That the Fundamental 
Principle is not derived from experience, is plain both from its 
evidence and from its history. 

LII. 

The Science of Dynamics depends upon the three Axioms 
above stated respecting Cause. The First Axiom, that every 
change must have a Cause, gives rise to the First Law of 
Motion, that a body not acted upon by a force will move with a 
uniform velocity in a straight line. The Second Axiom, that 
Causes are measured by their Effects, gives rise to the Second 
Law of Motion, that when a force acts upon a body in motion, 
the effect of the force is compounded with the previously existing 
motion. The Third Axiom, that Reaction is equal and opposite 
to Action, gives rise to the Third Law of Motion, which is 
expressed in the same terms as the Axiom ; Action and Reaction 
being understood to signify momentum gained and lost. 

LIII. 

The above Laws of Motion, historically speaking, were esta- 
blished by means of experiment : but since they have been dis- 
covered and reduced to their simplest form, they have been con- 
sidered by many philosophers as self-evident. This result is 
principally due to the introduction and establishment of terms 
and definitions, which enable us to express the Laws in a very 
simple manner. 

LIV. 

In the establishment of the Laws of Motion, it happened, in 
several instances, that Principles were assumed as self-evident 
which do not now appear evident, but which have since been de- 
monstrated from the simplest and most evident principles. Thus 
it was assumed that a perpetual motion is impossible ; that the 
velocities of bodies acquired by falling down planes or curves of the 
same vertical height are equal ; that the actual descent of the 
centre of gravity is equal to its potential ascent. But we are not 
hence to suppose that these assumptions were made without 
ground : for since they really follow from the laws of motion, 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXVll 

they were probably, in the minds of the discoverers, the results 
of undeveloped demonstrations which their sagacity led them to 
divine. 

LV. 

It is a Paradox that Experience should lead us to truths con- 
fessedly universal, and apparently necessary, such as the Laws of 
Motion are. The Solution of {his paradox is, that these laws are 
interpretations of the Axioms of Causation. The Axioms are 
universally and necessarily true, but the right interpretation of 
the terms which they involve, is learnt by experience. Our 
Idea of Cause supplies the Form, Experience, the Matter, of these 
Laws. 

LVI. 

Primary Qualities of Bodies are those which we can con- 
ceive as directly perceived ; Secondary Qualities are those which 
we conceive as perceived by means of a Medium. 

LVII. 

We necessarily perceive bodies as without us : the Idea of 
Externality is one of the conditions of perception. 

LVIII. 

We necessarily assume a Medium for the perceptions of Light, 
Colour, Sound, Heat, Odours, Tastes ; and this Medium must 
convey impressions by means of its mechanical attributes. 

LIX. 

Secondary Qualities are not extended but intensive ; their 
effects are not augmented by addition of parts, but by increased 
operation of the medium. Hence they are not measured directly, 
but by scales; not by units, but by degrees. 

LX. 

In the Scales of Secondary Qualities, it is a condition (in 
order that the scale may be complete,) that every example of the 
quality must either agree with one of the degrees of the Scale, 
or lie between two contiguous degrees. 

c 2 



XXV111 APHORISMS 

LXI. 

We perceive by means of a medium and by means of impres- 
sions on the nerves : but we do not (by our senses,) perceive 
either the medium or the impressions on the nerves. 

LXII. 



The Prerogatives of the Sight are, that by this sense we neces- 
sarily and immediately apprehend the position of its objects : and 
that from visible circumstances, we infer the distance of objects 
from us, so readily that we seem to perceive and not to infer. 

LXIII. 

The Prerogatives of the Hearing are, that by this sense we 
perceive relations perfectly precise and definite between two notes, 
namely, Musical Intervals (as an Octave, a Fifth) ; and that when 
two notes are perceived together, they are apprehended as dis- 
tinct, (a Chord,) and as having a certain relation, (Concord or 
Discord.) 

LXIV. 

The Sight cannot decompose a compound colour into simple 
colours, or distinguish a compound from a simple colour. The 
Hearing cannot directly perceive the place, still less the distance, 
of its objects. We infer these obscurely and vaguely from 
audible circumstances. 

LXV. 

The First Paradox of Vision is, that we see objects upright, 
though the images on the retina are inverted. The solution is, 
that we do not see the image on the retina at all, we only see by 
means of it. 

LXVL 

The Second Paradox of Vision is, that we see objects single, 
though there are two images on the retinas, one in each eye. 
The explanation is, that it is a Law of Vision that we see (small 
or distant) objects single, when their images fall on corresponding 
points of the two retinas. 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXIX 

LXVIL 

The law of single vision for near objects is this : When the 
two images in the two eyes are situated, part for part, nearly but 
not exactly, upon corresponding points, the object is apprehended 
as single and solid if the two images are such as would be pro- 
duced by a single solid object seen by the eyes separately. 

LXVIII. 

The ultimate object of each of the Secondary Mechanical 
Sciences is, to determine the nature and laws of the processes by 
which the impression of the Secondary Quality treated of is con- 
veyed : but before we discover the cause, it may be necessary to 
determine the laws of the phenomena ; and for this purpose a 
Measure or Scale of each quality is necessary. 

LXIX. 

Secondary qualities are measured by means of such effects as 
can be estimated in number or space. 

LXX. 

The Measure of Sounds, as high or low, is the Musical Scale, 
or Harmonic Canon. 

LXXI. 

The Measures of Pure Colours are the Prismatic Scale ; the 
same, including Fraunhofer 1 s Lines ; and Newton's Scale of Colours. 
The principal Scales of Impure Colours are Werner's Nomencla- 
ture of Colours, and Merimee^s Nomenclature of Colours. 

LXXII. 

The Idea of Polarity involves the conception of contrary pro- 
perties in contrary directions : the properties being, for example, 
attraction and repulsion, darkness and light, synthesis and analy- 
sis ; and the contrary directions being those which are directly 
opposite, or, in some cases, those which are at right angles. 



XXX APHORISMS 

LXXIII. (Doubtful.) 
Coexistent polarities are fundamentally identical. 

LXXIV. 

The Idea of Chemical Affinity, as implied in Elementary 
Composition, involves peculiar conceptions. It is not properly 
expressed by assuming the qualities of bodies to resemble those of 
the elements, or to depend on the figure of the elements, or on 
their attractions. 

LXXV. 

Attractions take place between bodies, affinities between the 
particles of a body. The former may be compared to the alli- 
ances of states, the latter to the ties of family. 

LXXVI. 

The governing principles of chemical affinity are, that it is 
elective ; that it is definite ; that it determines the properties of the 
compound; and that analysis is possible. 

LXXVII. 

We have an Idea of Substance : and an axiom involved in this 
Idea is, that the weight of a body is the sum of the weights of all its 



LXXVIII. 

Hence Imponderable Fluids are not to be admitted as che- 
mical elements. 

LXXIX. 

The Doctrine of Atoms is admissible as a mode of expressing 
and calculating laws of nature ; but is not proved by any fact, 
chemical or physical, as a philosophical truth. 

LXXX. 

We have an Idea of Symmetry ; and an axiom involved in this 
Idea is, that in a symmetrical natural body, if there be a ten- 
dency to modify any member in any manner, there is a tendency 
to modify all the corresponding members in the same manner. 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXXI 



LXXXI. 

All hypotheses respecting the manner in which the elements 
of inorganic bodies are arranged in space, must be constructed 
with regard to the general facts of crystallization. 

LXXXII. 

When we consider any object as one, we give unity to it by 
an act of thought. The condition which determines what this 
unity shall include, and what it shall exclude, is'this ; that asser- 
tions concerning the one thing shall be possible. 

LXXXIII. 

We collect individuals into kinds by applying to them the 
Idea of Likeness. Kinds of things are not determined by defini- 
tions, but by this condition ; that general assertions concerning 
such kinds of things shall be possible. 

LXXXIV. 

The names of kinds of things are governed by their use ; and 
that may be a right name in one use which is not so in another. 
A whale is not a fish in natural history, but it is a fish in com- 
merce and law. 

LXXXV. 

We take for granted that each kind of things has a special 
character which may be expressed by a Definition. The ground 
of our assumption is this ; that reasoning must be possible. 

LXXXVI. 

The " Five Words," genus, species, difference, property, acci- 
dent, were used by the Aristotelians, in order to express the sub- 
ordination of kinds, and to describe the nature of definitions and 
propositions. In modern times, these technical expressions have 
been more referred to by Natural Historians than by Metaphy- 
sicians. 



XXXII APHORISMS 

LXXXVII. 

The construction of a Classificatory Science includes Termi- 
nology , the formation of a descriptive language; Diataxis, the 
Plan of the System of Classification, called also the Systematic^ ; 
Diagnosis, the Scheme of the Characters by which the different 
Classes are known, called also the Characteristic^. Physiography 
is the knowledge which the System is employed to convey. 
Diataxis includes Nomenclature. 

LXXXVIII. 

Terminology must be conventional, precise, constant ; copious 
in words, and minute in distinctions, according to the needs of 
the science. The student must understand the terms, directly 
according to the convention, not through the medium of explana- 
tion or comparison. 

LXXXIX. 

The Diataxis, or Plan of the System, may aim at a Natural 
or an Artificial System. But no classes can be absolutely arti- 
ficial, for if they were, no assertions could be made concerning 
them. 

XC. 

An Artificial System is one in which the smaller groups (the 
Genera) are natural ; and in which the wider divisions (Classes, 
Orders) are constructed by the peremptory application of selected 
Characters ; (selected, however, so as not to break up the smaller 
groups.) 

XCI. 

A Natural System is one which attempts to make all the 
divisions natural, the widest as well as the narrowest ; and there- 
fore applies no characters peremptorily. 

XCII. 

Natural Groups are best described, not by any definition which 
marks their boundaries, but by a Type which marks their centre. 
The Type of any natural group is an example which possesses in 
a marked degree all the leading characters of the class. 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXX111 



XCIII. 

A Natural Group is steadily fixed, though not precisely 
limited ; it is given in position, though not circumscribed ; it is 
determined, not by a boundary without, but by a central point 
within ; not by what it strictly excludes, but by what it emi- 
nently includes ; by a Type, not by a Definition. 

XCIV. 

The prevalence of Mathematics as an element of education 
has made us think Definition the philosophical mode of fixing the 
meaning of a word : if (Scientific) Natural History were intro- 
duced into education, men might become familiar with the fixa- 
tion of the signification of words by Types ; and this agrees more 
nearly with the common processes by which words acquire their 
significations. 

xcv. 

The attempts at Natural Classification are of three sorts; 
according as they are made by the process of blind trial, of general 
comparison, or of subordination of characters. The process of 
Blind Trial professes to make its classes by attention to all the 
characters, but without proceeding methodically. The process of 
General Comparison professes to enumerate all the characters, and 
forms its classes by the majority. Neither of these methods can 
really be carried into effect. The method of Subordination of 
Characters considers some characters as more important than 
others ; and this method gives more consistent results than the 
others. This method, however, does not depend upon the Idea 
of Likeness only, but introduces the Idea of Organization or 
Function. 

XCVI. 

A Species is a collection of individuals which are descended 
from a common stock, or which resemble such a collection as 
much as these resemble each other : the resemblance being 
opposed to a definite difference. 



XXXIV APHORISMS 

XCVII. 

A Genus is a collection of species which resemble each other 
more than they resemble other species : the resemblance being 
opposed to a definite difference. 

XCVIII. 

The Nomenclature of a Classificatory Science is the collection 
of the names of the Species, Genera, and other divisions. The 
binary nomenclature, which denotes a species by the generic and 
specific name, is now commonly adopted in Natural History. 

XCIX. 

The Diagnosis, or Scheme of the Characters, comes, in the 
order of philosophy, after the Classification. The characters do 
not make the classes, they only enable us to recognize them. The 
Diagnosis is an Artificial Key to a Natural System. 

C. 

The basis of all Natural Systems of Classification is the Idea 
of Natural Affinity. The Principle which this Idea involves is 
this : Natural arrangements, obtained from different sets of cha- 
racters, must coincide with each other. 

CI. 

In order to obtain a Science of Biology, we must analyse the 
Idea of Life. It has been proved by the biological speculations 
of past time, that organic Life cannot rightly be resolved into 
mechanical or chemical forces, or the operation of a vital fluid, or 
of a soul. 

CII. 

Life is a System of Vital Forces ; and the conception of such 
Forces involves a peculiar Fundamental Idea. 

cm. 

Mechanical, chemical, and vital Forces form an ascending 
progression, each including the preceding. Chemical Affinity 



CONCERNING IDEAS. XXXV 

includes in its nature Mechanical Force, and may often be prac- 
tically resolved into Mechanical Force. (Thus the ingredients of 
gunpowder, liberated from their chemical union, exert great 
mechanical Force : a galvanic battery acting by chemical pro- 
cess does the like.) Vital Forces include in their nature both 
chemical Affinities and mechanical Forces : for Vital Powers 
produce both chemical changes, (as digestion,) and motions which 
imply considerable mechanical force, (as the motion of the sap 
and of the blood.) 

CIV. 

In voluntary motions, Sensations produce Actions, and the 
connexion is made by means of Ideas : in reflected motions, the 
connexion neither seems to be nor is made by means of Ideas : in 
instinctive motions, the connexion is such as requires Ideas, but 
we cannot believe the Ideas to exist. 

CV. 

The assumption of a Final Cause in the structure of each part 
of animals and plants is as inevitable as the assumption of an 
Efficient Cause for every event. The maxim that in organized 
bodies nothing is in vain, is as necessarily true as the maxim that 
nothing happens by chance. 

CVI. 

The idea of living beings as subject to disease includes a 
recognition of a Final Cause in organization ; for disease is a 
state in which the vital forces do not attain their proper ends. 

CVII. 

The Palsetiological Sciences depend upon the Idea of Cause ; 
but the leading conception which they involve is that of historical 
cause, not mechanical cause. 

CVIII. 

Each Palsetiological Science, when complete, must possess 
three members : the Phenomenology, the ^Etiology >, and the 
Theory. 



XXXVI APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS. 

CIX. 

There are, in the Palsetiological Sciences, two antagonist doc- 
trines : Catastrophes and Uniformity. The doctrine of a uniform 
course of nature is tenable only when we extend the notion of 
uniformity so far that it shall include catastrophes. 

CX. 

The Catastrophist constructs Theories, the Uniformitarian 
demolishes them. The former adduces evidence of an Origin, the 
latter explains the evidence away. The Catastrophist's dogmatism 
is undermined by the Uniformitarian' > s skeptical hypotheses. 
But when these hypotheses are asserted dogmatically, they cease 
to be consistent with the doctrine of uniformity. 

CXI. 

In each of the Palsetiological Sciences, we can ascend to 
remote periods by a chain of causes, but in none can we ascend 
to a beginning of the chain. 

CXII. 

In contemplating the series of causes and effects which con- 
stitutes the world, we necessarily assume a First Cause of the 
whole series. 

CXIII. 

The Palaetiological Sciences point backwards with lines which 
are broken, but which all converge to the same invisible point : 
and this point is the Origin of the Moral and Spiritual, as well as 
of the natural world. 



XXXV11 



APHORISMS CONCERNING SCIENCE. 



I. 

The two processes by which Science is constructed are the 
Explication of Conceptions and the Colligation of Facts. 

II. 

The Explication of Conceptions, as requisite for the progress 
of science, has been effected by means of discussions and contro- 
versies among scientists ; often by debates concerning definitions ; 
these controversies have frequently led to the establishment of a 
Definition ; but along with the Definition, a corresponding Pro- 
position has always been expressed or implied. The essential 
requisite for the advance of science is the clearness of the Concep- 
tion, not the establishment of a Definition. The construction of 
an exact Definition is often very difficult. The requisite condi- 
tions of clear Conceptions may often be expressed by Axioms as 
well as by Definitions. 

III. 

Conceptions, for purposes of science, must be appropriate as 
well as clear : that is, they must be modifications of that Funda- 
mental Idea, by which the phenomena can really be interpreted. 
This maxim may warn us from error, though it may not lead to 
discovery. Discovery depends upon the previous cultivation or 
natural clearness of the appropriate Idea, and therefore no dis- 
covery is the work of accident. 

IV. 

Facts are the materials of science, but all Facts involve Ideas. 
Since, in observing Facts, we cannot exclude Ideas, we must, for 
the purposes of science, take care that the Ideas are clear and 
rigorously applied. 



XXXVlli APHORISMS 



V. 

The last Aphorism leads to such Rules as the following : 
That Facts, for the purposes of material science, must involve 
Conceptions of the Intellect only, and not Emotions : That Facts 
must be observed with reference to our most exact conceptions, 
Number, Place, Figure, Motion : That they must also be ob- 
served with reference to any other exact conceptions which the 
phenomena suggest, as Force, in mechanical phenomena, Concord, 
in musical. 

VI. 

The resolution of complex Facts into precise and measured 
partial Facts, we call the Decomposition of Facts. This process 
is requisite for the progress of science, but does not necessarily 
lead to progress. 

VII 

Science begins with common observation of facts ; but even at 
this stage, requires that the observations be precise. Hence the 
sciences which depend upon space and number were the earliest 
formed. After common Observation, come scientific Observation 
and Experiment . 

VIII. 

The Conceptions by which Facts are bound together, are sug- 
gested by the sagacity of discoverers. This sagacity cannot be 
taught. It commonly succeeds by guessing; and this success 
seems to consist in framing several tentative hypotheses and select- 
ing the right one. But a supply of appropriate hypotheses cannot 
be constructed by rule, nor without inventive talent. 

IX. 

The truth of tentative hypotheses must be tested by their 
application to facts. The discoverer must be ready, carefully to 
try his hypotheses in this manner, and to reject them if they will 
not bear the test, in spite of indolence and vanity. 



CONCERNING SCIENCE. XXXIX 

X. 

The process of scientific discovery is cautious and rigorous, not 
by abstaining from hypotheses, but by rigorously comparing 
hypotheses with facts, and by resolutely rejecting all which the 
comparison does not confirm. 

XL 

Hypotheses may be useful, though involving much that is 
superfluous, and even erroneous : for they may supply the true 
bond of connexion of the facts ; and the superfluity and error may 
afterwards be pared away. 

XII. 

It is a test of true theories not only to account for, but to 
predict phenomena. 

XIII. 



Induction is a term applied to describe the process of a true 
Colligation of Facts by means of an exact and appropriate Con- 
ception. An Induction is also employed to denote the proposition 
which results from this process. 

XIV. 

The Consilience of Inductions takes place when an Induction, 
obtained from one class of facts, coincides with an Induction, 
obtained from another different class. This Consilience is a test 
of the truth of the Theory in which it occurs. 

XV. 

An Induction is not the mere sum of the Facts which are 
colligated. The Facts are not only brought together, but seen in 
a new point of view. A new mental Element is superinduced ; 
and a peculiar constitution and discipline of mind are requisite in 
order to make this Induction. 

XVI. 

Although in Every Induction a new conception is superin- 
duced upon thfr Facts ; yet this once effectually done, the novelty 



XL APHORISMS 

of the conception is overlooked, and the conception is considered 
as a part of the fact. 

XVII. 

The Logic of Induction consists in stating the Facts and the 
Inference in such a manner, that the evidence of the Inference is 
manifest ; just as the Logic of Deduction consists in stating the 
Premises and the Conclusion in such a manner that the Evidence 
of the Conclusion is manifest. 

XVIII. 

The Logic of Deduction is exhibited by means of a certain 
Formula ; namely, a Syllogism ; and every train of deductive 
reasoning, to be demonstrative, must be capable of resolution into 
a series of such Formulae legitimately constructed. In like man- 
ner, the Logic of Induction may be exhibited by means of certain 
Formulas , and every train of inductive inference, to be sound, 
must be capable of resolution into a scheme of such Formulae, 
legitimately constructed. 

XIX. 

The inductive act of thought by which several Facts are col- 
ligated into one Proposition, may be expressed by saying : The 
several Facts are exactly expressed as onetFact, if, and only if, we 
adopt the Conceptions and the Assertion of the Proposition. 

XX. 

The One Fact, thus inductively obtained from several Facts, 
may be combined with other Facts, and colligated with them 
by a new act of Induction. This process may be indefinitely 
repeated : and these successive processes are the Steps of Induc- 
tion, or of Generalization, from the lowest to the highest. 

XXL 

The relation of the successive Steps of Induction may be 
exhibited by means of an Inductive Table, in which the several 
Facts are indicated, and tied together by a Bracket, and the In- 
ductive Inference placed on the other side of the Bracket ; and 



CONCERNING SCIENCE. XLi 

this arrangement repeated, so as to form a genealogical Table of 
each Induction, from the lowest to the highest. 

XXII. 

The Logic of Induction is the Criterion of Truth inferred 
from Facts, as the Logic of Deduction is the Criterion of Truth 
deduced from necessary Principles. The Inductive Table enables 
us to apply such a Criterion ; for we can determine whether each 
Induction is verified and justified by the Facts which its Bracket 
includes; and if each induction in particular be sound, the 
highest, which merely combines them all, must necessarily be 

sound also. 

XXIII. 

The distinction of Fact and Theory is only relative. Events 
and phenomena, considered as particulars which may be colligated 
by Induction, are Facts ; considered as generalities already ob- 
tained by colligation of other Facts, they are Theories. The 
same event or phenomenon is a Fact or a Theory, according as it 
is considered as standing on one side or the other of the Inductive 

Bracket. 

XXIV. 

Inductive truths are of two kinds, Laws of Phenomena, and 
Theories of Causes. It is necessary to begin in every science 
with the Laws of Phenomena; but it is impossible that we 
should be satisfied to stop short of a Theory of Causes. In Phy- 
sical Astronomy, Physical Optics, Geology, and other sciences, 
we have instances showing that we can make a great advance in 
inquiries after true Theories of Causes. 

XXV. 

Art and Science differ. The object of Science is Knowledge; 
the objects of Art, are Works. In Art, truth is a means to an 
end ; in Science, it is the only end. Hence the Practical Arts are 
not to be classed among the Sciences. 

XXVI. 

Practical Knowledge, such as Art implies, is not Knowledge 
such as Science includes. Brute animals have a practical know- 
VOL. I. d 



XL11 APHORISMS 

ledge of relations of space and force ; but they have no know- 
ledge of Geometry or Mechanics. 

XXVII. 

The Methods by which the construction of Science is pro- 
moted are, Methods of Observation, Methods of obtaining clear 
Ideas, and Methods of Induction. 

XXVIII. 

The Methods of Observation of Quantity in general, are 
Numeration, which is precise by the nature of Number; the 
Measurement of Space and of Time, which are easily made pre- 
cise ; the Conversion of Space and Time, by which each aids the 
measurement of the other ; the Method of Repetition ; the 
Method of Coincidences or Interferences. The measurement of 
Weight is made precise by the Method of Double-weighing. 
Secondary Qualities are measured by means of Scales of Degrees ; 
but in order to apply these Scales, the student requires the Edu- 
cation of the Senses. The Education of the Senses is forwarded 
by the practical study of Descriptive Natural History, Chemical 
Manipulation, and Astronomical Observation. 

XXIX. 

The Methods by which the acquisition of clear Scientific 
Ideas is promoted, are mainly two ; Intellectual Education and 
Discussion of Ideas. 

XXX. 

The Idea of Space becomes more clear by studying Geometry; 
the Idea of Force, by studying Mechanics; the Ideas of Likeness, 
of Kind, of subordination of Classes, by studying Natural History. 

XXXI. 

Elementary Mechanics should now form a part of intellectual 
education, in order that the student may understand the Theory 
of Universal Gravitation : for an intellectual education should 
cultivate such ideas as enable the student to understand the 
most complete and admirable portions of the knowledge which 
the human race has attained to. 



CONCERNING SCIENCE. 

XXXII. 

Natural History ought to form a part of intellectual educa- 
tion, in order to correct certain prejudices which arise from cul- 
tivating the intellect by means of mathematics alone-; and in 
order to lead the student to see that the division of things into 
kinds, and the attribution and use of names, are processes sus- 
ceptible of great precision. 

XXXIII. 

The conceptions involved in scientific truths have attained 
the requisite degree of clearness by means of the Discussions 
respecting ideas which have taken place among discoverers 
and their followers. Such discussions are very far from being 
unprofitable to science. They are metaphysical, and must be so : 
the difference between discoverers and barren reasoners is, that 
the former employ good, and the latter bad metaphysics. 

XXXIV. 

The Process of Induction may be resolved into three steps ; 
the Selection of the Idea, the Construction of the Conception, and 
the Determination of the Magnitudes. 

XXXV. 

These three steps correspond to the determination of the In- 
dependent variable, the Formula, and the Coefficients, in mathema- 
tical investigations; or to the Argument, the Law, and the 
Numerical Data, in a Table of an Inequality. 

XXXVI. 

The Selection of the Idea depends mainly upon inventive 
sagacity : which operates by suggesting and trying various hypo- 
theses. Some inquirers try erroneous hypotheses; and thus, 
exhausting the forms of error, form the Prelude to Discovery. 

XXXVII. 

The following Rules may be given, in order to the selection 
of the Idea for purposes of Induction : the Idea and the Facts 
must be homogeneous ; and the Rule must be tested by the Facts. 

d 2 



XL1V APHORISMS 

XXXVIII. 

The Construction of the Conception very often includes, in a 
great measure, the Determination of the Magnitudes. 

XXXIX. 

When a series of progressive numbers is given as the rasult 
of observation, it may generally be reduced to law by combina- 
tions of arithmetical and geometrical progressions. 

XL. 

A true formula for a progressive series of numbers cannot 
commonly be obtained from a narrow range of observations. 

XLI. 

Recurrent series of numbers must, in most cases, be expressed 
by circular formulae. 

XLII. 

The true construction of the conception is frequently sug- 
gested by some hypothesis ; and in these cases, the hypothesis 
may be useful, though containing superfluous parts. 

XLIII. 

There are special Methods of Induction applicable to Quan- 
tity ; of which the principal are, the Method of Curves, the 
Method of Means, the Method of Least Squares, and the Method 
of Residues. 

XLIV. 

The Method of Curves consists in drawing a curve, of which 
the observed quantities are the ordinates, the quantity on which 
the change of these quantities depends being the abscissa. Its 
efficacy depends upon the faculty which the eye possesses, of 
readily detecting regularity and irregularity in forms. It may be 
used to detect the laws which the observed quantities follow ; 
and also, when the observations are inexact, it may be used to 
correct these observations, so as to obtain data more true than the 
observed facts themselves. 



CONCERNING SCIENCE. XLV 

XLV. 

The Method of Means gets rid of irregularities by taking the 
arithmetical mean of a great number of observed quantities. Its 
efficacy depends upon this ; that in cases in which observed quan- 
tities are affected by other inequalities, besides that of which we 
wish to determine the law, the excesses above and defects below 
the quantities which the law in question would produce, will, in 
a collection of many observations, balance each other. 

XLVI. 

The Method of Least Squares is a Method of Means, in which 
the mean is taken according to the condition, that the sum of the 
squares of the errors of observation shall be the least possible 
which the law of the facts allows. It appears, by the doctrine of 
chances, that this is the most probable mean. 

XLVII. 

The Method of Residues consists in subtracting, from the quan- 
tities given by observation, the quantity given by any law already 
discovered ; and then examining the remainder, or Residue, in 
order to discover the leading law which it follows. When this 
second law has been discovered, the quantity given by it may be 
subtracted from the first Residue ; thus giving a Second Residue, 
which may be examined in the same manner ; and so on. The 
efficacy of this method depends principally upon the circumstance 
of the laws of variation being successively smaller and smaller in 
amount (or at least in their mean effect) ; so that the ulterior 
undiscovered laws do not prevent the law in question from being 
prominent in the observations. 

XLVIII. 

The Method of Means and the Method of Least Squares can- 
not be applied without our knowing the Arguments of the Inequa- 
lities which we seek. The Method of Curves and the Method of 
Residues, when the Arguments of the principal Inequalities are 
known, often make it easy to find the others. 



XLY1 APHORISMS 



XLIX. 

The Law of Continuity is this : that a quantity cannot pass 
from one amount to another by any change of conditions, without 
passing through all intermediate magnitudes according to the 
intermediate conditions. It may often be employed to disprove 
distinctions which have no real foundation. 

L. 

The Method of Gradation consists in taking a number of stages 
of a property in question, intermediate between two extreme 
cases which appear to be different. It is employed to determine 
whether the extreme cases are really distinct or not. 

LI. 

The Method of Gradation, applied to decide the question, 
whether the existing geological phenomena arise from existing 
causes, leads to this result : That the phenomena do appear to 
arise from existing causes, but that the action of existing causes 
may, in past times, have transgressed, to any extent, their 
recorded limits of intensity. 

LIL 

The Method of Natural Classification consists in classing 
cases, not according to any assumed definition, but according to 
the connexion of the facts themselves, so as to make them the 
means of asserting general truths. 

LIII. 

In the Induction of Causes the principal maxim is, that we 
must be careful to possess, and to apply, with perfect clearness, 
the Fundamental Idea on which the Induction depends. 

LIV. 

The Induction of Substance, of Force, of Polarity, go beyond 
mere laws of phenomena, and may be considered as the Induction 
cf Causes. 



CONCERNING SCIENCE. XLvii 

LV. 

The Cause of certain phenomena being inferred, we are led to 
inquire into the Cause of this Cause, which inquiry must be con- 
ducted in the same manner as the previous one ; and thus we 
have the Induction of Ulterior Causes. 

LVI. 

In contemplating the series of Causes which are themselves 
the effects of other causes, we are necessarily led to assume a 
Supreme Cause in the Order of Causation, as we assume a First 
Cause in Order of Succession. 



XLY111 

APHORISMS 
CONCERNING THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 



INTRODUCTION. 

IT has been shown in the History of Science, and will 
further appear in the course of the present work, that almost 
every step in the progress of science is marked by the formation 
or appropriation of a technical term. Common language has, 
in most cases, a certain degree of looseness and ambiguity ; as 
common knowledge has usually something of vagueness and 
indistinctness. In common cases too, knowledge usually does 
not occupy the intellect alone, but more or less interests some 
affection, or puts in action the fancy ; and common language, 
accommodating itself to the office of expressing such knowledge, 
contains, in every sentence, a tinge of emotion or of imagina- 
tion. But when our knowledge becomes perfectly exact and 
purely intellectual, we require a language which shall also be 
exact and intellectual ; which shall exclude alike vagueness and 
fancy, imperfection and superfluity ; in which each term shall 
convey a meaning steadily fixed and rigorously limited. Such a 
language that of science becomes through the use of technical 
terms. And we must now endeavour to lay down some maxims 
and suggestions, by attention to which technical terms may be 
better fitted to answer their purpose. In order to do this, we 
shall in the first place take a rapid survey of the manner in 
which technical terms have been employed from the earliest 
periods of scientific history. 

The progress of the use of technical scientific language offers 
to our notice two different and successive periods ; in the first of 
which, technical terms were formed casually, as convenience in 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. XIJX 

each case prompted ; while in the second period, technical lan- 
guage was constructed intentionally, with set purpose, with a 
regard to its connexion, and with a view of constructing a system. 
Though the casual and systematic formation of technical terms 
cannot be separated by any precise date of time, (for at all periods 
some terms in some sciences have been framed unsystematically,) 
we may, as a general description, call the former the ancient and 
the latter the modern period. In illustrating the two following 
Aphorisms, I will give examples of the course followed in each 
of these periods. 

APHORISM I. 

In the Ancient Period of Science, Technical Terms were formed in 
three different ways: by appropriating common words and 
fixing their meaning; by constructing terms containing a 
description ; by constructing terms containing reference to a 
theory. 

THE earliest sciences offer the earliest examples of technical 
terms. These are Geometry, Arithmetic, and Astronomy; to 
which we have soon after to add Harmonics, Mechanics, and 
Optics. In these sciences, we may notice the above-mentioned 
three different modes in which technical terms were formed. 

I. The simplest and first mode of acquiring technical terms, 
is to take words current in common usage, and by rigorously 
defining or otherwise fixing their meaning, to fit them for the 
expression of scientific truths. In this manner almost all 
the fundamental technical terms of Geometry were formed. 
A sphere, a cone, a cylinder, had among the Greeks, at first, 
meanings less precise than those which geometers gave to 
these words, and besides the mere designation of form, implied 
some use or application. A sphere (cr<f>alpa) was a hand-ball 
used in games; a cone (KWVOS) was a boy's spinning-top, or the 
crest of a helmet ; a cylinder (fcv\wSpos) was a roller ; a cube 
(tcvftos) was a die : till these words were adopted by the geo- 
meters, and made to signify among them pure modifications of 



t, APHORISMS CONCERNING 

space. So an angle (ywvia) was only a corner ; 
was a signal ; a line (ypapprj) was a mark ; a straight line 
(evOela) was marked by an adjective which at first meant only 
direct. A plane (eV/TreSoy) is the neuter form of an adjective, 
which by its derivation means on the ground, and hence flat. In 
all these cases, the word adopted as a term of science has its 
sense rigorously fixed ; and where the common use of the term is 
in any degree vague, its meaning may be modified at the same 
time that it is thus limited. Thus a rhombus (po^fios) by its 
derivation, might mean any figure which is ticisted out of a regular 
form ; but it is confined by geometers to that figure which has 
four equal sides, its angles being oblique. In like manner, a tra- 
pezium (rpaTretyov) originally signifies a table, and thus might 
denote any form ; but as the tables of the Greeks had one side 
shorter than the opposite one, such a figure was at first called a 
trapezium. Afterwards the term was made to signify any figure 
with four unequal sides ; a name being more needful in geometry 
for this kind of figure than for the original form. 

This class of technical terms, namely, words adopted from 
common language, but rendered precise and determinate for pur- 
poses of science, may also be exemplified in other sciences. Thus, 
as was observed in the early portion of the history of astronomy *, 
a day, a month, a year, described at first portions of time marked 
by familiar changes, but afterwards portions determined by rigor- 
ous mathematical definitions. The conception of the heavens as 
a revolving sphere, is so obvious, that we may consider the terms 
which involve this conception as parts of common language ; as 
the pole (TTO\OS) of the arctic circle, which includes the stars that 
never set-)-; the horizon (6plcov) a boundary, applied technically 
to the circle bounding the visible earth and sky. The turnings 
of the sun (rpoTral rjeXloio), which are mentioned by Hesiod, gave 
occasion to the term tropics, the circles at which the sun in his 
annual motion turns back from his northward or southward advance. 
The zones of the earth, (the torrid, temperate, and frigid ;) the 
gnomon of a dial ; the limb (or border) of the moon, or of a circular 

* Hist. Ind. Set., i. 112. t Hist. Ast., i. 144. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Ll 



instrument, are terms of the same class. An eclipse (&X{f^if) is 
originally a deficiency or disappearance, and joined with the name 
of the luminary, an eclipse of the sun or of the moon, described 
the phenomenon ; but when the term became technical, it suf- 
ficed, without addition, to designate the phenomenon. 

In Mechanics, the Greeks gave a scientific precision to very 
few words : we may mention weights (ftapea), the arms of a lever 
(^'%ea), its fulcrum (uTroyu-o^XtW), and the verb to balance 
(lo-oppoirelv). Other terms which they used, as momentum 
(poTrrj) said, force (Swa/jus), did not acquire a distinct and definite 
meaning till the time of Galileo, or later. We may observe that 
all abstract terms, though in their scientific application expressing 
mere conceptions, were probably at first derived from some word 
describing external objects. Thus the Latin word for force, vis, 
seems to be connected with a Greek word, is, or Fls, which often 
has nearly the same meaning ; but originally, as it would seem, 
signified a sinew or muscle, the obvious seat of animal strength. 

In later times, the limitation imposed upon a word by its 
appropriation to scientific purposes, is often more marked than 
in the cases above described. Thus the variation is made to 
mean, in astronomy, the second inequality of the moon's motion ; 
in magnetism, the variation signifies the angular deviation of the 
compass-needle from the north ; in pure mathematics, the varia- 
tion of a quantity is the formula which expresses the result of any 
small change of the most general kind. In like manner, parallax 
(TrapaXXagis) denotes a change in general, but is used by astro- 
nomers to signify the change produced by the spectator's being 
removed from the centre of the earth, his theoretical place, to the 
surface. Alkali at first denoted the ashes of a particular plant, 
but afterwards, all bodies having a certain class of chemical pro- 
perties ; and, in like manner, acid, the class opposed to alkali, 
was modified in signification by chemists, so as to refer no longer 
to the taste. 

Words thus borrowed from common language, and converted 
by scientific writers into technical terms, have some advantages 
and some disadvantages. They possess this great convenience, 
that they are understood after a/ very short explanation, and 



Lll APHORISMS CONCERNING 

retained in the memory without effort. On the other hand, they 
lead to some inconvenience ; for since they have a meaning! in 
common language, a careless reader is prone to disregard the 
technical limitation of this meaning, and to attempt to collect 
their import in scientific hooks, in the same vague and conjectural 
manner in which he collects the purpose of words in common 
cases. Hence the language of science, when thus resembling 
common language, is liable to be employed with an absence of that 
scientific precision which alone gives it value. Popular writers 
and talkers, when they speak of force, momentum, action and 
reaction, and the like, often afford examples of the inaccuracy 
thus arising from the scientific appropriation of common terms. 

II. Another class of technical terms, which we find occurring 
as soon as speculative science assumes a distinct shape, consists of 
those which are intentionally constructed by speculators, and 
which contain some description or indication distinctive of the 
conception to which they are applied. Such are a parallelogram 
(7rapa\\r}\6ypaiJ,fj,ov), which denotes a plane figure bounded by 
two pairs of parallel lines ; a parallelepiped (TrapdKKrfKo'jri'jTe^ov), 
which signifies a solid figure bounded by three pairs of parallel 
planes. A triangle (rplycovos) and a quadrangle (rerp dycovos) 
were perhaps words invented independently of the mathemati- 
cians : but such words extended to other cases, pentagon, decagon, 
heccwdecagon, polygon, are inventions of scientific men. Such 
also are tetrahedron, hexahedron, dodecahedron, tesseracontaocto- 
hedron, polyhedron, and the like. These words being con- 
structed by speculative writers, explain themselves, or at least 
require only some conventional limitation, easily adopted. Thus 
parallelogram might mean a figure bounded by any number of 
sets of parallel lines, but it is conventionally restricted to a figure 
of four sides. So a great circle in a sphere means one which 
passes through the centre of the sphere ; and a small circle is any 
other. So in trigonometry, we have the hypotenuse (juTrorei- 
vovcra), or subtending line, to designate the line subtending an 
angle. In this branch of mathematics we have many invented 
technical terms ; as complement, supplement, cosine, cotangent, a 
sphtrical angle, the pole of a circle, or of a sphere. The word sine 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Liii 

itself appears to belong to the class of terms already described as 
scientific appropriations of common terms, although its origin is 
somewhat obscure. 

Mathematicians were naturally led to construct these and 
many other terms by the progress of their speculations. In like 
manner, when astronomy took the form of a speculative science, 
words were invented to denote distinctly the conceptions thus in- 
troduced. Thus the sun's annual path among the stars, in which 
not only solar, but also all lunar eclipses occur, was termed the 
ecliptic. The circle which the sun describes in his diurnal motion, 
when the days and nights are equal, the Greeks called the equi- 
diurnal (la-ypepivos,) the Latin astronomers the equinoctial, and 
the corresponding circle on the earth was the equator. The 
ecliptic intersected the equinoctial in the equinoctial points. The 
solstices (in Greek rpoTral) were the times when the sun 
arrested his motion northwards or southwards ; and the solstitial 
points (ra rpoTriica o-Tj/Aeia) were the places in the ecliptic 
where he then was. The name of meridians was given to circles 
passing through the poles of the equator ; the solstitial colure 
(tco\ovpos, curtailed), was one of these circles which passes 
through the solstitial points, and is intercepted by the horizon. 

We have borrowed from the Arabians various astronomical 
terms, as Zenith , Nadir, Azimuth, Almacantar. And these words, 
which among the Arabians probably belonged to the first class, 
of appropriated scientific terms, are for us examples of the second 
class, invented scientific terms ; although they differ from most 
that we have mentioned, in not containing an etymology corre- 
sponding to their meaning in any language with which European 
cultivators of science are generally familiar. Indeed, the distinc- 
tion of our two classes, though convenient, is in a great measure, 
casual. Thus most of the words we formerly mentioned, asparal- 
lax, horizon, eclipse, though appropriated technical terms among 
the Greeks, are to us invented technical terms. 

In the construction of such terms as we are now considering, 
those languages have a great advantage which possess a power of 
forming words by composition. This was eminently the case 
with the Greek language ; and hence most of the ancient terrm 



L1V APHORISMS CONCERNING 

of science in that language, when their origin is once explained, 
are clearly understood and easily retained. Of modern European 
languages, the German possesses the greatest facility of com- 
position ; and hence scientific authors in that language are 
able to invent terms which it is impossible to imitate in the 
other languages of Europe. Thus Weiss distinguishes his vari- 
ous systems of crystals as zwei-und-zwei-gliedrig, ein-und-zwei- 
gliedrig, drey-und-drey-gliedrig, &c., (two-and-two-membered, 
one-and-two-membered, three-and-three-membered.) And Hes- 
sel, also a writer on crystallography, speaks of doubly-one-mem- 
bered edges, four-and-three spaced rays, and the like. 

How far the composition of words, in such cases, may be 
practised in the English language, and the general question, what 
are the best rules and artifices in such cases, I shall afterwards 
consider. In the mean time, I may observe that this list of in- 
vented technical terms might easily be much enlarged. Thus in 
harmonics we have the various intervals, as a Fourth, a Fifth, an 
Octave, (Diatessaron, Diapente, Diapason.) a Comma, which is the 
difference of a major and minor Tone ; we have the various 
Moods or Keys, and the notes of various lengths, as Minims, 
Breves, Semibreves, Quavers. In chemistry, gas was at first a 
technical term invented by Van Helmont, though it has now 
been almost adopted into common language. I omit many 
words which will perhaps suggest themselves to the reader, 
because they belong rather to the next class, which I now proceed 
to notice. 

III. The third class of technical terms consists of such as are 
constructed by men of science, and involve some theoretical idea 
in the meaning which their derivation implies. They do not 
merely describe, like the class last spoken of, but describe with 
reference to some doctrine or hypothesis which is accepted as a 
portion of science. Thus latitude and longitude, according to 
their origin, signify breadth and length ; they are used, however, 
to denote measures of the distance of a place on the earth's sur- 
face from the equator, and from the first meridian, of w T hich dis- 
tances, one cannot be called length more properly than the other. 
But this appropriation of these words may be explained by recol- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LV 

lecting that the earth, as known to the ancient geographers, was 
much further extended from east to west than from north to south. 
The Precession of the equinoxes is a term which implies that the 
stars are fixed, while the point which is the origin of the measure 
of celestial longitude moves backward. The Eight Ascension of a 
star is a measure of its position corresponding to terrestrial longi- 
tude ; this quantity is identical with the angular ascent of the 
equinoctial point, when the star is in the horizon in a right sphere; 
that is, a sphere which supposes the spectator to be at the equa- 
tor. The Oblique Ascension (a term now little used), is derived 
in like manner from an oblique sphere. The motion of a planet 
is direct or retrograde, in consequentia (signa), or in antecedentia, 
in reference to a certain assumed standard direction for celestial 
motions, namely, the direction opposite to that of the sun's daily 
motion, and agreeing with his annual motion among the stars ; or 
with what is much more evident, the moon's monthly motion. 
The equation of time is the quantity which must be added to or 
subtracted from the time marked by the sun, in order to reduce 
it to a theoretical condition of equable progress. In like manner 
the equation of the centre of the sun or of the moon is the angle 
which must be added to, or subtracted from, the actual advance of 
the luminary in the heavens, in order to make its motion equable. 
Besides the equation of the centre of the moon, which represents 
the first and greatest of her deviations from equable motion, there 
are many other equations, by the application of which her motion 
is brought nearer and nearer to perfect uniformity. The second 
of these equations is called the ejection, the third the variation, 
the fourth the annual equation. The motion of the sun as affected 
by its inequalities is called his anomaly, which term denotes ine- 
quality. In the History of Astronomy, we find that the ine- 
quable motions of the sun, moon, and planets were, in a great 
measure, reduced to rule and system by the Greeks, by the aid of 
an hypothesis of circles, revolving, and carrying in their motion 
other circles which also revolved. This hypothesis introduced 
many technical terms, as deferent, epicycle, eccentric. In like 
manner, the theories which have more recently taken the place of 
the theory of epicycles have introduced other technical terms, as 



LV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

the elliptical orbit, the radius vector, and the equable description 
of areas by this radius, which phrases express the true laws of the 
planetary motions. 

There is no subject on which theoretical views have been so 
long and so extensively prevalent as astronomy, and therefore no 
other science in which there are so many technical terms of 
the kind we are now considering. In other subjects, so far as 
theories have been established, they have been accompanied by 
the introduction or fixation of technical terms. Thus, as we have 
seen in the examination of the foundations of mechanics, the 
terms force and inertia derive their precise meaning from a recog- 
nition of the first law of motion ; accelerating force and compo- 
sition of motion involve the second law ; moving force, momentum, 
action and reaction, are expressions which imply the third law. 
The term vis viva was introduced to express a general property of 
moving bodies ; and other terms have been introduced for like pur- 
poses, as impetus by Smeaton, and work done, by other engineers. 
The proposition which was termed the hydrostatic paradox had 
this name in reference to its violating a supposed law of the action 
of forces. The verb to gravitate, and the abstract term gravitation, 
sealed the establishment of Newton's theory of the solar system. 

In some of the sciences, opinions, either false or disguised in 
very fantastical imagery, have prevailed ; and the terms which 
have been introduced during the reign of such opinions, bear the 
impress of the time. Thus in the days of alchemy, the sub- 
stances with which the operator dealt were personified ; and a 
metal when exhibited pure and free from all admixture was con- 
sidered as a little king, and was hence called a regulus, a term 
not yet quite obsolete. In like manner, a substance from which 
nothing more of any value could be extracted, was dead, and was 
called a caput mortuum. Quick silver, that is, live silver (argen- 
tum vivum), was killed by certain admixtures, and was revived 
when restored to its pure state. 

We find a great number of medical terms which bear the 
mark of opinions formerly prevalent among physicians ; and 
though these opinions hardly form a part of the progress of 
science, and were not presented in our History, we may notice 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LVl'i 

some of these terms as examples of the mode in which words 
involve in their derivation obsolete opinions. Such words as 
hysterics, hypochondriac, melancholy, cholera, colic, quinsey (squinan- 
tia, o-vvdy^rj, a suffocation), megrim, migraine (hemicranium, the 
middle of the skull), rickets, (rachitis, from a%W, the backbone), 
palsy, (paralysis, Trapakvat,?,) apoplexy (airoir^ti^ia, a stroke), 
emrods (ai^oppoi^es, hemorrhoids, a flux of blood), imposthume, 
(corrupted from aposteme, airo^^a, an abscess), phthisic ((f>0cans, 
consumption), tympany (rv^avia, swelling), dropsy (hydropsy, 
vSpw-ty), sciatica, isciatica (laxtaSitcrj, from tV%/ov, the hip), 
catarrh (tcardppovs, a flowing down), diarrhoea (Siappola, a 
flowing through), diabetes (Biaftr)Trjy, a passing through), dysentery 
(Svcrevrepia, a disorder of the entrails), arthritic pains (from 
apOpa, the joints), are names derived from the supposed or real 
seat and circumstances of the diseases. The word from which 
the first of the above names is derived (vcnepa, the last place,) 
signifies the womb, according to its order in a certain systematic 
enumeration of parts. The second word, hypochondriac, means 
something affecting the viscera below the cartilage of the breast- 
bone, which cartilage is called ^ovSpos ; melancholy and cholera 
derive their names from supposed affections of %oX^, the bile. 
Colic is that which affects the colon (/cwXov), the largest member 
of the bowels. A disorder of the eye is called gutta serena (the 
" drop serene" of Milton), in contradistinction to gutta turbida, 
in which the impediment to vision is perceptibly opake. Other 
terms also record the opinions of the ancient anatomists, as duode- 
num, a certain portion of the intestines, which they estimated as 
twelve inches long. We might add other allusions, as the tendon 
of Achilles. 

Astrology also supplied a number of words founded upon 
fanciful opinions ; but this study having been expelled from the 
list of sciences, such words now survive only so far as they have 
found a place in common language. Thus men were termed mer- 
curial, martial, jovial, or saturnine, accordingly as their characters 
were supposed to be determined by the influence of the planets, 
Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn. Other expressions, such as 
disastrous, ill-starred, exorbitant, lord of the ascendant, and hence 

VOL. i. e 



APHORISMS CONCERNING 

mcenclancy, influence, a sphere of aitloji, and the like, may serve 
to show how extensively astrological opinions have affected lan- 
guage, though the doctrine is no longer a recognized science. 

The preceding examples will make it manifest that opinions, 
even of a recondite and complex kind, are often implied in the 
derivation of words ; and thus will show how scientific terms, 
framed by the cultivators of science, may involve received hypo- 
theses and theories. When terms are thus constructed, they 
serve not only to convey with ease, but to preserve steadily and 
to diffuse widely, the opinions which they thus assume. More- 
over, they enable the speculator to employ these complex con- 
ceptions, the creations of science, and the results of much labour 
and thought, as readily and familiarly as if they were convictions 
borrowed at once from the senses. They are thus powerful 
instruments in enabling philosophers to ascend from one step of 
induction and generalization to another ; and hereby contribute 
powerfully to the advance of knowledge and truth. 

It should be noticed, before we proceed, that the names of 
natural objects, when they come to be considered as the objects of 
a science, are selected according to the processes already enume- 
rated. For the most part, the natural historian adopts the com- 
mon names of animals, plants, minerals, gems, and the like, and 
only endeavours to secure their steady and consistent application. 
But many of these names imply some peculiar, often fanciful, 
belief respecting the object. 

Various plants derive their names from their supposed virtues, 
as herniaria^ rupture-wort; or from legends, as herba Sancti Jo- 
kannis, St. John's wort. The same is the case with minerals : 
thus the topaz was asserted to come from an island so shrouded 
in mists that navigators could only conjecture (roTrd&w) where it 
was. In these latter cases, however, the legend appears not to 
be the true origin of the name, but to be suggested by it. 

The privilege of constructing names where they are w r anted, 
belongs to natural historians no less than to the cultivators of 
physical science ; yet in the ancient world, writers of the former 
class appear rarely to have exercised this privilege, even when 
they felt the imperfections of the current language. Thus Aris- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LlX 

totle repeatedly mentions classes of animals which have no name, 
as co-ordinate with classes that have names ; but he hardly ven- 
tures to propose names which may supply these defects*. The 
vast importance of nomenclature in natural history was not recog- 
nized till the modern period. 

We have, however, hitherto considered only the formation or 
appropriation of single terms in science ; except so far as several 
terms may in some instances be connected by reference to a com- 
mon theory. But when the value of technical terms began to be 
fully appreciated, philosophers proceeded to introduce them into 
their sciences more copiously and in a more systematic manner. 
In this way, the modern history of technical language has some 
features of a different aspect from the ancient ; and must give rise 
to a separate Aphorism. 

APHORISM II. 

in the Modern Period of Science, besides the three processes 
anciently employed in the formation of technical terms, there 
have been introduced Systematic Nomenclature, Systematic 
Terminology, and the Systematic Modification of Terms to 
express theoretical relations-^. 

WRITERS upon science have gone on up to modern times 
forming such technical terms as they had occasion for, by the 
three processes above described; namely, appropriating and 
limiting words in common use ; constructing for themselves 
words descriptive of the conception which they wished to con- 
ve y . or framing terms which by their signification imply the 

* In his History of Animals, (book i. chap. 6), he says that the great 
classes of animals are Quadrupeds, Birds, Fishes, Whales (Cetaceans}, Oysters 
( Testaceans), animals like crabs which have no general name (Crustaceans), 
iL'oft animals (Mollusks and Insects}. He does, however, call the Crustaces 
by a name (Malacostraca, soft-shelled) which has since been adopted by 
Naturalists. 

t On the subject of Terminology and Nomenclature, see also Apho- 
risms Lxxxviii and xcviii concerning Ideas, and book viii. chap. 2 of the 
Philosophy. 

e 2 



LX APHORISMS CONCERNING 

adoption of a theory. Thus among the terms introduced by 
the study of the connexion between magnetism and electricity, 
the word pole is an example of the first kind ; the name of the 
subject, electro-magnetism, of the second ; and the term current, 
involving an hypothesis of the motion of a fluid, is an instance 
of the third class. In chemistry, the term salt was adopted 
from common language, and its meaning extended to denote 
any compound of a certain kind; the term neutral salt implied 
the notion of a balanced opposition in the two elements of the 
compound ; and such words as subacid and superacid, invented 
on purpose, were introduced to indicate the cases in which this 
balance was not attained. Again, when the phlogistic theory of 
chemistry was established, the term phlogiston was introduced to 
express the theory, and from this such terms as phlogisticated and 
dephlogisticated were derived, exclusively words of science. But 
in such instances as have just been given, we approach towards a 
systematic modification of terms, which is a peculiar process of 
modern times. Of this, modern chemistry forms a prominent 
example, which we shall soon consider, but we shall first notice 
the other processes mentioned in the Aphorism. 

I. In ancient times, no attempt was made to invent or select 
a Nomenclature of the objects of Natural History which should 
be precise and permanent. The omission of this step by the 
ancient naturalists gave rise to enormous difficulty and loss of 
time when the sciences resumed their activity. We have seen 
in the history of the sciences of classification, and of botany in 
especial*, that the early cultivators of that study in modern times 
endeavoured to identify all the plants described by Greek and 
Roman writers with those which grow in the north of Europe ; 
and were involved in endless confusion -J-, by the multiplication 
of names of plants, at the same time superfluous and ambiguous. 
The Synonymies which botanists (Bauhin and others) found it 
necessary to publish, were the evidences of these inconveniences. 
In consequence of the defectiveness of the ancient botanical 
nomenclature, we are even yet uncertain with respect to the iden- 

* Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 272. f /., 293. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE Lxi 

tification of some of the most common trees mentioned by classical 
writers *. The ignorance of botanists respecting the importance of 
nomenclature operated in another manner to impede the progress 
of science. As a good nomenclature presupposes a good system 
of classification, so, on the other hand, a system of classification 
cannot become permanent without a corresponding nomenclature. 
Csesalpinus, in the sixteenth century (, published an excellent sys- 
tem of arrangement for plants ; but this, not being connected with 
any system of names, was never extensively accepted, and soon 
fell into oblivion. The business of framing a scientific botanical 
classification was in this way delayed for about a century. In 
the same manner, Willoughby's classification of fishes, though, as 
Cuvier says, far better than any which preceded it, was never 
extensively adopted, in consequence of having no nomenclature 
connected with it. 

II. Probably one main cause which so long retarded the work 
of fixing at the same time the arrangement and the names of 
plants, was the great number of minute and diversified particulars 
in the structure of each plant which such a process implied. The 
stalks, leaves, flowers, and fruits of vegetables, with their appen- 
dages, may vary in so many ways, that common language is quite 
insufficient to express clearly and precisely their resemblances 
and differences. Hence botany required not only a fixed system 
of names of plants, but also an artificial system of phrases fitted 
to describe their parts : not only a Nomenclature, but also a 
Terminology. The Terminology was, in fact, an instrument indis- 
pensably requisite in giving fixity to the Nomenclature. The 
recognition of the kinds of plants must depend upon the exact 
comparison of their resemblances and differences ; and to become 
a part of permanent science, this comparison must be recorded in 
words. 

The formation of an exact descriptive language for botany 
was thus the first step in that systematic construction of the 
technical language of science, which is one of the main features 

* For instance whether the fagus of the Latins be the beech or the 
chesnut. 

t Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 281. 



APHORISMS CONCERNING 

in the intellectual history of modern times. The ancient botan- 
ists, as Decandolle* says, did not make any attempt to select 
terms of which the sense was rigorously determined ; and each 
of them employed in his descriptions the words, metaphors, or 
periphrases which his own genius suggested. In the History of 
Botany f, I have noticed some of the persons who contributed 
to this improvement. " Chasms," it is there stated, " first taught 
botanists to describe well. He introduced exactitude, precision, 
neatness, elegance, method : he says nothing superfluous ; he 
omits nothing necessary." This task was further carried on by 
Jung and RayJ. In these authors we see the importance which 
began to be attached to the exact definition of descriptive terms ; 
for example, Ray quotes Jung's definition of Caulis, a stalk. 

The improvement of descriptive language, and the formation 
of schemes of classification of plants, went on gradually for some 
time, and was much advanced by Tournefort. But at last 
Linnaeus embodied and followed out the convictions which had 
gradually been accumulating in the breasts of botanists ; and by 
remodelling throughout both the terminology and the nomencla- 
ture of botany, produced one of the greatest reforms which ever 
took place in any science. He thus supplied a conspicuous 
example of such a reform, and a most admirable model of a lan- 
guage, from which other sciences may gather great instruction. 
I shall not here give any account of the terms and words intro- 
duced by Linnaeus. They have been exemplified in the History 
of Science^ ; and the principles which they involve I shall con- 
sider separately hereafter. I will only remind the reader that 
the great simplification in nomenclature which was the result of 
his labours, consisted in designating each kind of plant by a binary 
term consisting of the name of the genus combined with that of 
the species : an artifice seemingly obvious, but more convenient 
in its results tfran could possibly have been anticipated. 

Since Linnaeus, the progress of Botanical Anatomy and of 



* Theor. lem. de la Bot.> p. 327. 

t Hist. Ind. Sci. t iii. 289. J 75., 297 (about A.D. 1660). 

/&., 307311. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Lxiii 

Descriptive Botany have led to the rejection of several inexact 
expressions, and to the adoption of several new terms, especially 
in describing the structure of the fruit and the parts of cryptoga- 
mous plants. Hedwig, Medikus, Necker, Desvaux, Mirbel, and 
especially Gsertner, Link, and Richard, have proposed several 
useful innovations, in these as in other parts of the subject ; but 
the general mass of the words now current consists still, and will 
probably continue to consist, of the terms established by the 
Swedish Botanist*. 

When it was seen that botany derived so great advantages 
from a systematic improvement of its language, it was natural 
that other sciences, and especially classificatory sciences, should 
endeavour to follow its example. This attempt was made in 
Mineralogy by Werner, and afterwards further pursued by Mohs. 
Werner's innovations in the descriptive language of Mineralogy 
were the result of great acuteness, an intimate acquaintance 
with minerals, and a most methodical spirit: and were in 
most respects great improvements upon previous practices. Yet 
the introduction of them into Mineralogy was far from rege- 
nerating that science, as Botany had been regenerated by the 
Linnsean reform. It would seem that the perpetual scrupulous 
attention to most minute differences, (as of lustre, colour, frac- 
ture,) the greater part of which are not really important, fetters 
the mind, rather than disciplines or arms it for generalization. 
Cuvier has remarked -f- that Werner, after his first Essay on the 
Characters of Minerals, wrote little ; as if he had been afraid of 
using the system which he had created, and desirous of escaping 
from the chains which he had imposed upon others. And he 
justly adds, that Werner dwelt least, in his descriptions, upon that 
which is really the most important feature of all, the crystalline 
structure. This, which is truly a definite character, like those 
of Botany, does, when it can be clearly discerned, determine the 
place of the mineral in a system. This, therefore, is the character 
which, of all others, ought to be most carefully expressed by an 
appropriate language. This task, hardly begun by Werner, has 
since been fully executed by others, especially by Rome de FJsle, 

* DECANDOLLE, Th.-Elem., p. 307. t Elogcs, ii. 314. 



LX1V APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Hauy, and Mohs. All the forms of crystals can be described 
in the most precise manner by the aid of the labours of these 
writers and their successors. But there is one circumstance 
well worthy our notice in these descriptions. It is found that 
the language in which they can best be conveyed is not that of 
words, but of symbols. The relations of space which are involved 
in the forms of crystalline bodies, though perfectly definite, are so 
complex and numerous, that they cannot be expressed, except in 
the language of mathematics : and thus we have an extensive 
and recondite branch of mathematical science, which is, in fact, 
only a part of the terminology of the mineralogist. 

The terminology of Mineralogy being thus reformed, an at- 
tempt was made to improve its nomenclature also, by following the 
example of Botany. Professor Mohs was the proposer of this 
innovation. The names framed by him were, however, not com- 
posed of two but of three elements, designating respectively the 
Species, the Genus, and the Order*: thus he has such species as 
RJiombohedral Lime Haloide, Octahedral Fluor Haloide, Prismatic 
Hal Baryte. These names have not been generally adopted ; nor 
is it likely that any names constructed on such a scheme will find 
acceptance among mineralogists, till the higher divisions of the 
system are found to have some definite character. We see no 
real mineralogical significance in Mohs's Genera and Orders, and 
hence we do not expect them to retain a permanent place in 
the science. 

The only systematic names which have hitherto been generally 
admitted in Mineralogy, are those expressing the chemical consti- 
tution of the substance ; and these belong to a system of technical 
terms different from any we have yet spoken of, namely to terms 
formed by systematic modification. 

III. The language of Chemistry was already, as we have seen, 
tending to assume a systematic character, even under the reign of 
the phlogiston theory. But when the oxygen theory succeeded to 
the throne, it very fortunately happened that its supporters had the 
courage and the foresight to undertake a completely new and sys- 
tematic recoinage of the terms belonging to the science. The new 
* Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 240. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXV 

nomenclature \vas constructed upon a principle hitherto hardly 
applied in science, but eminently commodious and fertile ; namely, 
the principle of indicating a modification of relations of elements, 
by a change in the termination of the word. Thus the new che- 
mical school spoke of sulphuric and sulphurous acids ; of sulphates 
and sulphites of bases ; and of sulphurets of metals ; and in like 
manner, of phosphoric and phosphorous acids, of phosphates, phos- 
phites, phosphurets. In this manner a nomenclature was produced, 
in which the very name of a substance indicated at once its con- 
stitution and place in the system. 

The introduction of this chemical language can never cease to 
be considered one of the most important steps ever made in the 
improvement of technical terms ; and as a signal instance of the 
advantages which may result from artifices apparently trivial, if 
employed in a manner conformable to the laws of phenomena, and 
systematically pursued. It was, however, proved that this lan- 
guage, with all its merits, had some defects. The relations of 
elements in composition were discovered to be more numerous 
than the modes of expression which the terminations supplied. 
Besides the sulphurous and sulphuric acids, it appeared there were 
others ; these were called the hyposulphurous and hyposulphuric : 
but these names, though convenient, no longer implied, by their 
form, any definite relation. The compounds of Nitrogen and 
Oxygen are, in order, the Protoxide, the Deutoxide or Binoxide; 
Hyponitrous Acid, Nitrous Acid, and Nitric Acid. The nomen- 
clature here ceases to be systematic. We have three oxides of 
Iron, of which we may call the first the Protoxide, but we cannot 
call the others the Deutoxide and Tritoxide, for by doing so we 
should convey a perfectly erroneous notion of the proportions of 
the elements. They are called the Protoxide, the Black Oxide, 
and the Peroxide. We are here thrown back upon terms quite 
unconnected with the system. 

Other defects in the nomenclature arose from errors in the 
theory ; as for example the names of the muriatic, oxymuriatic, 
and hyperoxymuriatic acids ; which, after the establishment of the 
new theory of chlorine, were changed to hydrochloric acid, chlo- 
rine, and chloric acid. 



LXVi APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Thus the chemical system of nomenclature, founded upon the 
oxygen theory, while it shows how much may he effected by a 
good and consistent scheme of terms, framed according to the real 
relations of objects, proves also that such a scheme can hardly be 
permanent in its original form, bnt will almost inevitably become 
imperfect and anomalous, in consequence of the accumulation of 
new facts, and the introduction of new generalizations. Still, 
we may venture to say that such a scheme does not, on this 
account, become worthless ; for it not only answers its purpose 
in the stage of scientific progress to which it belongs : so far 
as it is not erroneous, or merely conventional, but really sys- 
tematic and significant of truth, its terms can be translated at 
once into the language of any higher generalization which is after- 
wards arrived at. If terms express relations really ascertained to 
be true, they can never lose their value by any change of the 
received theory. They are like coins of pure metal, which, even 
when carried into a country which does not recognize the sove- 
reign whose impress they bear, are still gladly received, and may, 
by the addition of an explanatory mark, continue part of the 
common currency of the country. 

These two great instances of the reform of scientific language, 
in Botany and in Chemistry, are much the most important and 
instructive events of this kind which the history of science offers. 
It is not necessary to pursue our historical survey further. Our 
remaining Aphorisms respecting the Language of Science will be 
collected and illustrated indiscriminately, from the precepts and 
the 'examples of preceding philosophers of all periods. 

We may, however, remark that Aphorisms III., IV., V., 
VI., VII., respect peculiarly the Formation of Technical Terms 
by the Appropriation of Common Words, while the remaining 
ones apply to the Formation of New Terms. 

It does not appear possible to lay down a system of rules 
which may determine and regulate the construction of all techni- 
cal terms, on all the occasions on which the progress of science 
makes them necessary or convenient. But if we can collect a few 
maxims such as have already offered themselves to the minds of 
philosophers, or such as may be justified by the instances by which 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXV11 

we shall illustrate them, these maxims may avail to guide us in 
doubtful cases, and to prevent our aiming at advantages which arc 
unattainable, or being disturbed by seeming imperfections which 
are really no evils. I shall therefore state such maxims of this 
kind as seem most sound and useful. 

APHORISM III. 

In framing scientific terms, the appropriation of old words is 
preferable to the invention of new ones. 

This maxim is stated by Bacon in his usual striking man- 
ner. After mentioning Metaphysic^ as one of the divisions of 
Natural Philosophy, he adds*: "Wherein I desire it may be 
conceived that I use the word metaphysic in a differing sense 
from that that is received : and in like manner I doubt not but 
it will easily appear to men of judgment that in this and other 
particulars, wheresoever my conception and notion may differ 
from the ancient, yet I am studious to keep the ancient terms. 
For, hoping well to deliver myself from mistaking by the order 
and perspicuous expressing of that I do propound ; I am otherwise 
zealous and affectionate to recede as little from antiquity, either in 
terms or opinions, as may stand with truth, and the proficience of 
knowledge. ... To me, that do desire, as much as lieth in my 
pen, to ground a sociable intercourse between antiquity and pro- 
ficience, it seemeth best to keep a way with antiquity usque ad 
aras ; and therefore to retain [the ancient terms, though I some- 
times alter the uses and definitions ; according to the moderate 
proceeding in civil governments, when, although there be some 
alteration, yet that holdetk which Tacitus wisely noteth, eadem 
magistratuum vocdbula" 

We have had before us a sufficient number of examples of 
scientific terms thus framed ; for they formed the first of three 
classes which we described in the First Aphorism. And we 
may again remark, that science, when she thus adopts terms 
which are in common use, always limits and fixes their meaning 
in a technical manner. We may also repeat here the warning 
* De Augm. y Lib. iii. c. 4. 



LXV111 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

already given respecting terms of this kind, that they are peculi- 
arly liable to mislead readers who do not take care to understand 
them in their technical instead of their common signification. 
Force, momentum, inertia, impetus, vis viva, are terms which are 
very useful, if we rigorously bear in mind the import which belongs 
to each of them in the best treatises on Mechanics ; but if the 
reader content himself with conjecturing their meaning from the 
context, his knowledge will be confused and worthless. 

In the application of this Third Aphorism, other rules are 
to be attended to, which I add. 

APHORISM IV. 

When common words are appropriated as technical terms, their 
meaning and relations in common use should be retained as far 
as can conveniently be done. 

I WILL state an example in which this rule seems to be appli- 
cable. Mr. Davies Gilbert* has recently proposed the term 
efficiency to designate the work which a machine, according to 
the force exerted upon it, is capable of doing ; the work being 
measured by the weight raised, and the space through which it 
is raised, jointly. The usual term employed among engineers for 
the work which a machine actually does, measured in the way 
just stated, is duty. But as there appears to be a little incon- 
gruity in calling that work efficiency which the machine ought to 
do, when we call that work duty which it really does, I have 
proposed to term these two quantities theoretical efficiency and 
practical efficiency, or theoretical duty and practical duty. 

Since common words are often vague in their meaning, I 
add as a necessary accompaniment to the Third Aphorism the 
following : 

* Phil Trans. 1827, p. 25. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXlX 

APHORISM Y. 

When common words are appropriated as technical terms, their 
meaning may be modified, and must be rigorously fixed. 

THIS is stated by Bacon in the above extract : "to retain the 
ancient terms, though I sometimes alter the uses and definitions" 
The scientific use of the term is in all cases much more precise 
than the common use. The loose notions of velocity and force 
for instance, which are sufficient for the usual purposes of lan- 
guage, require to be fixed by exact measures when these are made 
terms in the science of Mechanics. 

This scientific fixation of the meaning of words is to be looked 
upon as a matter of convention, although it is in reality often an 
inevitable result of the progress of science. Momentum is con- 
ventionally defined to be the product of the -numbers expressing 
the weight and the velocity ; but then, it could be of no use 
in expressing the laws of motion if it were defined otherwise. 

Hence it is no valid objection to a scientific term that the 
word in common language does not mean exactly the same as 
in its common use. It is no sufficient reason against the use of 
the term acid for a class of bodies, that all the substances belong- 
ing to this class are not sour. We have seen that a trapezium is 
used in geometry for any four-sided figure, though originally it 
meant a figure with two opposite sides parallel and the two others 
equal. A certain stratum which lies below the chalk is termed 
by English geologists the green sand. It has sometimes been 
objected to this denomination, that the stratum has very fre- 
quently no tinge of green, and that it is often composed of lime 
with little or no sand. Yet the term is a good technical term 
in spite of these apparent improprieties ; so long as it is care- 
fully applied to that stratum which is geologically equivalent to 
the greenish sandy bed to which the appellation was originally 
applied. 

When it appeared that geometry would have to be employed 
as much at least about the heavens as the earth, Plato exclaimed 
against the folly of calling the science by such a name ; since the 
word signifies " earth-measuring ;" yet the word geometry has 



LXX APHORISMS CONCERNING 

retained its place and answered its purpose perfectly welljip to 
the present day. 

But though the meaning of the term may be modified or 
extended, it must be rigorously fixed when it is appropriated to 
science. This process is most abundantly exemplified by the 
terminology of Natural History, and especially of Botany, in 
which each term has a most precise meaning assigned to it. 
Thus Linnaeus established exact distinctions between fasciculus, 
capitulum, racemus, thyrsus, paniculus, spica, amentum, corymbus, 
umbella, cyma, verticillus ; or, in the language of English Bo- 
tanists, a tuft, a head, a duster, a bunch, a panicle, a spike, a cat- 
kin, a corymb, an umbel, a cyme, a whorl. And it has since been 
laid down as a rule*, that each organ ought to have a separate and 
appropriate name ; so that the term leaf, for instance, shall never 
be applied to a leaflet, a bractea, or a sepal of the calyx. 

Botanists have not been content with fixing the meaning of 
their terms by verbal definition, but have also illustrated them 
by figures, which address the eye. Of these, as excellent modern 
examples, may be mentioned those which occur in the works of 
Mirbelf, and LmdleyJ. 

APHORISM VI. 

When common words are appropriated as technical terms, this must 
be done so that they are not ambiguous in their application. 

AN example will explain this maxim. The conditions of a 
body, as a solid, a liquid, and an air, have been distinguished as 
different forms of the body. But the word form, as applied to 
bodies, has other meanings ; so that if we were to inquire in what 
form water exists in a snow-cloud, it might be doubted whether 
the forms of crystallization were meant, or the different forms of 
ice, water, and vapour. Hence I have proposed to reject the 
term form in such cases, and to speak of the different consistence 
of a body in these conditions. The term consistence is usually 
applied to conditions between solid and fluid ; and may without 

* DECANDOLLE, Theor. EL, 328. t Elemens de Botanique. 

J Elements of Botany. Hist. Ind. Sci. 9 iii. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXi 

effort be extended to those limiting conditions. And though it 
may appear more harsh to extend the term consistence to the 
state of air, it may be justified by what has been said in speaking 
of Aphorism V. 

I may notice another example of the necessity of avoiding 
ambiguous words. A philosopher who makes method his study, 
would naturally be termed a methodist ; but unluckily this word 
is already appropriated to a religious sect : and hence we could 
hardly venture to speak of Csesalpinus, Ray, Morison, Rivinus, 
Tournefort, Linnaeus, and their successors, as botanical methodists 
Again, by this maxim, we are almost debarred from using the 
term physician for a cultivator of the science of physics, because 
it already signifies a practiser of physic. We might, perhaps* 
still use physician as the equivalent of the French physicien, 
in virtue of Aphorism V.; but probably it would be better to 
form a new word. Thus we may say, that while the Naturalist 
employs principally the ideas of resemblance and life, the Physicist 
proceeds upon the ideas of force, matter, and the properties of 
matter. 

Whatever may be thought of this proposal, the maxim which 
it implies is frequently useful. It is this. 

APHORISM VII. 

It is better to form new words as technical terms, than to employ 
old ones in which the last three Aphorisms cannot be complied 
with. 

THE principal inconvenience attending the employment of 
new words constructed expressly for the use of science, is the 
difficulty of effectually introducing them. Readers will not 
readily take the trouble to learn the meaning of a word, in which 
the memory is not assisted by some obvious suggestion connected 
with the common use of language. When this difficulty is 
overcome, the new word is better than one merely appropriated ; 
since it is more secure from vagueness and confusion. And in 
cases where the inconveniences belonging to a scientific use of 
common words become great and inevitable, a new word must 
be framed and introduced. 



LXX11 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

The Maxims which belong to the construction of such words 
will be stated hereafter ; but I may notice an instance or two 
tending to show the necessity of the Maxim now before us. 

The word Force has been appropriated in the science of 
Mechanics in two senses : as indicating the cause of motion ; and 
again, as expressing certain measures of the effects of this cause, 
in the phrases accelerating force and moving force. Hence we 
might have occasion to speak of the accelerating or moving force 
of a certain force ; for instance, if we were to say that the centre 
of force which governs the motions of the planets resides in the 
sun ; and that the accelerating force of this force varies only with 
the distance, but its moving force varies as the product of the 
mass of the sun and the planet. This is a harsh and incongruous 
mode of expression ; and might have been avoided, if, instead of 
accelerating force and moving force, single abstract terms had been 
introduced by Newton : if, for instance, he had said that the 
velocity generated in a second measures the acceleratimty of the 
force which produces it, and the momentum produced in a second 
measures the motimty of the force. 

The science which treats of heat has hitherto had no special 
designation : treatises upon it have generally been termed treatises 
On Heat. But this practice of employing the same term to denote 
the property and the science which treats of it, is awkward and 
often ambiguous. And it is further attended with this incon- 
venience, that we have no adjective derived from the name of the 
science, as we have in other cases, when we speak of acoustical 
experiments and optical theories. This inconvenience has led 
various persons to suggest names for the Science of Heat. M. 
Le Comte terms it Thermology. In the History of the Sciences, 
I have named it Thermotics, which appears to me to agree better 
with the analogy of the names of other corresponding sciences, 
Acoustics and Optics. 

Electricity is in the same condition as heat ; having only one 
word to express the property and the science. M. Le Comte 
proposes Electrology : for the same reason as before, I should 
conceive Electrics more agreeable to analogy. The coincidence 
of the word with the plural of Electric would not give rise to 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXX111 

ambiguity ; for Electrics ', taken as the name of a science, would 
be singular, like Optics and Mechanics. But a term offers itself 
to express common or machine Electrics, which appears worthy 
of admission, though involving a theoretical view. The received 
doctrine of the difference between voltaic and common electricity 
is, that in the former case the fluid must be considered as in 
motion, in the latter as at rest. The science which treats of the 
former class of subjects is commonly termed Electrodynamics, 
which obviously suggests the name Electrostatics for the latter. 

The subject of the Tides is, in like manner, destitute of any 
name which designates the science concerned about it. I have 
ventured to employ the term Tidology, having been much engaged 
in tidological researches. 

Many persons possess a peculiarity of vision, which disables 
them from distinguishing certain colours. On examining many 
such cases, we find that in all such persons the peculiarities are 
the same ; all of them confounding scarlet with green, and pink 
with blue. Hence they form a class, which, for the convenience 
of physiologists and others, ought to have a fixed designation. 
Instead of calling them, as has usually been done, "persons having 
a peculiarity of vision," we might take a Greek term implying 
this meaning, and term them Idiopts. 

But my business at present is not to speak of the selection of 
new terms when they are introduced, but to illustrate the maxim 
that the necessity for their introduction often arises. The con- 
struction of new terms will be treated of subsequently. 



APHORISM VIII. 

Terms must be constructed and appropriated so as to be fitted to 
enunciate simply and clearly true general propositions. 

THIS Aphorism may be considered as the fundamental prin- 
ciple and supreme rule of all scientific terminology. It is asserted 
by Cuvier, speaking of a particular case. Thus he says* of 

* Regne Animal, Introd. viii. 
VOL. I. / 



LXXiv APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Gmelin, that by placing the lamantin in the genus of morses, and 
the siren in the genus of eels, he had rendered every general pro- 
position respecting the organization of those genera impossible. 

The maxim is true of words appropriated as well as invented, 
and applies equally to the mathematical, chemical, and classifi- 
catory sciences. With regard to most of these, and especially the 
two former classes, it has been abundantly exemplified already, in 
what has previously been said, and in the History of the Sciences. 
For we have there had to notice many technical terms, with the 
occasions of their introduction ; and all these occasions have 
involved the intention of expressing in a convenient manner some 
truth or supposed truth. The terms of Astronomy were adopted 
for the purpose of stating and reasoning upon the relations of the 
celestial motions, according to the doctrine of the sphere, and the 
other laws which were discovered by astronomers. The few 
technical terms which belong to Mechanics, force, velocity, mo- 
mentum, inertia, See., were employed from the first with a view 
to the expression of the laws of motion and of rest ; and were, in 
the end, limited so as truly and simply to express those laws when 
they were fully ascertained. In Chemistry, the term phlogiston 
was useful, as has been shown in the History, in classing toge- 
ther processes which really are of the same nature ; and the 
nomenclature of the oxygen theory was still preferable, because it 
enabled the chemist to express a still greater number of general 
truths. 

To the connexion here asserted, of theory and nomenclature, 
we have the testimony of the author of the oxygen theory. In 
the Preface to his Chemistry, Lavoisier says : " Thus while I 
thought myself employed only in forming a Nomenclature, and 
while I proposed to myself nothing more than to improve the 
chemical language, my work transformed itself by degrees, with- 
out my being able to prevent it, into a Treatise on the Elements 
of Chemistry. 11 And he then proceeds to show how this hap- 
pened. 

It is, however, mainly through the progress of Natural History 
in modern times, that philosophers have been led to see the import- 
ance and necessity of new terms in expressing new truths. Thus 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXY 

Harvey, in the Preface to his work on Generation, says : " Be 
not offended if in setting out the History of the Egg I make use 
of a new method, and sometimes of unusual terms. For as they 
which find out a new plantation and new shores call them by 
names of their own coining, which posterity afterwards accepts 
and receives, so those that find out new secrets have good title to 
their compellation. And here, methinks, I hear Galen advising: 
If we consent in the things, contend not about the words." 

The Nomenclature which answers the purposes of Natural 
History is a systematic nomenclature, and will be further consi- 
dered under the next Aphorism. But we may remark, that the 
Aphorism now before us governs the use of words, not in science 
only, but in common language also. Are we to apply the name 
fish to animals of the whale kind I The answer is determined by 
our present rule : we are to do so, or not, accordingly as we can 
best express true propositions. If we are speaking of the internal 
structure and physiology of the animal, we must not call them 
fish ; for in these respects they deviate widely from fishes : they 
have warm blood, and produce and suckle their young as land 
quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent our speaking of the 
whale-fishery, and calling such animals fish on all occasion con- 
nected with this employment; for the relations thus arising depend 
upon the animal's living in the water, and being caught in a 
manner similar to other fishes. A plea that human laws which 
mention fish do not apply to whales, would be rejected at once by 
an intelligent judge. 



APHORISM IX. 

In the Classifcatory Sciences, a systematic Nomenclature is neces- 
sary ; and the System and the Nomenclature are each essential 
to the utility of the other. 

THE inconveniences arising from the want of a good Nomen- 
clature were long felt in Botany, and are still felt in Mineralogy. 
The attempts to remedy them by Synonymies are very ineffective, 



LXXV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

for such comparisons of synonymes do not supply a systematic no- 
menclature ; and such a one alone can enable us to state general 
truths respecting the objects of which the classificatory sciences 
treat. The system and the names ought to be introduced together ; 
for the former is a collection of asserted analogies and resem- 
blances, for which the latter provide simple and permanent ex- 
pressions. Hence it has repeatedly occurred in the progress of 
Natural History, that good systems did not take root, or produce 
any lasting effect among naturalists, because they were not accom- 
panied by a corresponding nomenclature. In this way, as we have 
already noticed, the excellent botanical system of Csesalpinus was 
without immediate effect upon the science. The work of Wil- 
loughby, as Cuvier says*, forms an epoch, and a happy epoch in 
Ichthyology ; yet because Willoughby had no nomenclature of his 
own, and no fixed names for his genera, his immediate influence 
was not great. Again, in speaking of Schlotheini's work con- 
taining representations of fossil vegetables, M. Adolphe Brong- 
niart observes -f- that the figures and descriptions are so good, that 
if the author had established a nomenclature for the objects he 
describes, his work would have become the basis of all succeeding 
labours on the same subject. 

As additional examples of cases in which the improvement of 
classification, in recent times, has led philosophers to propose new 
names, I may mention the term Pcecilite, proposed by Mr. Cony- 
beare to designate the group of strata which lies below the oolites 
and lias, including the new red or variegated sandstone, with the 
keuper above, and the magnesian limestone below it. Again, the 
transition districts of our island have recently been reduced to 
system by Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison ; and this step 
has been marked by the terms Cambrian system, and Silurian 
system, applied to the two great groups of formations which they 
have respectively examined, and by several other names of the 
subordinate members of these formations. 

Thus system and nomenclature are each essential to the other. 
Without nomenclature, the system is not permanently incor- 

* Hist, dcs Poissons, Pref. t Prjdrom. Veg. Foss., p. 3. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXvii 

porated into the general body of knowledge, and made an 
instrument of future progress. Without system, the names can- 
not express general truths, and contain no reason why they should 
he employed in preference to any other names. 

This has been generally acknowledged by the most philosophi- 
cal naturalists of modern times. Thus Linnaeus begins that part 
of his Botanical Philosophy in which Names are treated of, by 
stating that the foundation of botany is twofold, Disposition and 
Denomination ; and he adds this Latin line, 

Nomina si nescis perit et cognitio remm. 

And Cuvier, in the Preface to his Animal Kingdom, explains, in 
a very striking manner, how the attempt to connect zoology with 
anatomy led him, at the same time, to reform the classifications, 
and to correct the nomenclature of preceding zoologists. 

I have stated that in mineralogy we are still destitute of a 
good nomenclature generally current. From what has now been 
said, it will be seen that it may be very far from easy to supply 
this defect, since we have, as yet, no generally received system 
of mineralogical classification. Till we know what are really 
different species of minerals, and in what larger groups these spe- 
cies can be arranged, so as to have common properties, we shall 
never obtain a permanent mineralogical nomenclature. Thus 
Leucocydite and Tesselite are minerals previously confounded 
with apophyllite, which Sir John Herschel and Sir David 
Brewster distinguished by those names, in consequence of certain 
optical properties which they exhibit. But are these properties 
definite distinctions ? and are there any external differences cor- 
responding to them ? If not, can we consider them as separate 
species ? and if not separate species, ought they to have sepa- 
rate names ! In like manner, we might ask if Augite and Horn- 
blende are really the same species, as Gustavus Rose has main- 
tained? if Diallage and Hyperstkene are not definitely distin- 
guished, which has been asserted by Kobell ? Till such questions 
are settled, we cannot have a fixed nomenclature in mineralogy. 
What appears the best course to follow in the present state of the 
science, I shall consider when we come to speak of the form of 
technical terms. ^ - , 



LXXVlii APHORISMS CONCERNING 

I may, however, notice here that the main forms of systema- 
tic nomenclature are two : terms which are produced by com- 
bining words of higher and lower generality, as the binary names, 
consisting of the name of the genus and the species, generally 
employed by natural historians since the time of Linnaeus ; and 
terms in which some relation of things is indicated by a change 
in the form of the word, for example, an alteration of its termina- 
tion, of which kind of nomenclature we have a conspicuous 
example in the modern chemistry. 

APHORISM X. 

New terms and changes ofterms^ which are not needed in order to 
express truth, are to be avoided. 

As the Seventh Aphorism asserted that novelties in language 
may be and ought to be introduced, when they aid the enunciation 
of truths, we now declare that they are not admissible in any other 
case. New terms and new systems of terms are not to be intro- 
duced, for example, in virtue of their own neatness or symmetry, 
or other merits, if there is no occasion for their use. 

I may mention, as an old example of a superfluous attempt of 
this kind, an occurrence in the history of astronomy. In 1628 
John Bayer and Julius Schiller devised a Ccelum Christianum, 
in which the common names of the planets, &c., were replaced by 
those of Adam, Moses, and the Patriarchs. The twelve Signs 
became the twelve Apostles, and the constellations became sacred 
places and things. Peireskius, who had to pronounce upon the 
value of this proposal, praised the piety of the inventors, but did 
not approve, he said*, the design of perverting and confounding 
whatever of celestial information from the period of the earliest 
memory is found in books. 

Nor are slight anomalies in the existing language of science 
sufficient ground for a change, if they do not seriously interfere 
with the expression of our knowledge. Thus Linnaeus says-f- 
that a fair generic name is not to be exchanged for another 
though apter one : and J if we separate an old genus into several, 

* GASSENDI, Vita Pwreskii, 300. t Phil. Bot., 246. /&., 247. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 

we must try to find names for them among the synonyms which 
describe the old genus. This maxim excludes the restoration 
of ancient names long disused, no less than the needless in" 
vention of new ones. Linnaeus lays down this rule * ; and adds, 
that the botanists of the sixteenth century well nigh ruined botany 
by their anxiety to recover the ancient names of plants. In like 
manner Cuvier~f- laments it as a misfortune, that he has had to 
introduce many new names ; and declares earnestly that he has 
taken great pains to preserve those of his predecessors. 

The great bulk which the synonymy of botany and of mine- 
ralogy have attained, shows us that this maxim has not been 
universally attended to. In these cases, however, the multiplica- 
tion of different names for the same kind of object has arisen in 
general from ignorance of the identity of it under different circum- 
stances, or from the want of a system which might assign to it its 
proper place. But there are other instances, in which the multi- 
plication of names has arisen not from defect, but from excess, of 
the spirit of system. The love which speculative men bear 
towards symmetry and completeness is constantly at work, to 
make them create systems of classification more regular and more 
perfect than can be verified by the facts : and as good systems 
are closely connected with a good nomenclature, systems thus 
erroneous and superfluous lead to a nomenclature which is preju- 
dicial to science. For although such a nomenclature is finally 
expelled, when it is found not to aid us in expressing the true 
laws of nature, it may obtain some temporary sway, during 
which, and even afterwards, it may be a source of much confusion. 

We have a conspicuous example of such a result in the geo- 
logical nomenclature of Werner and his school. Thus it was 
assumed, in Werner's system, that his First, Second, and Third 
Flotz Limestone, his Old and New Red Sandstone, were universal 
formations ; and geologists looked upon it as their business to 
detect these strata in other countries. Names were thus assigned 
to the rocks of various parts of Europe, which created immense 
perplexity before they were again ejected. The geological terms 
which now prevail, for instance, those of Smith, are for the most 
* Phil. JBot.j 248. t Regne Anim.j Pref. p. xvi. 



LXXX APHORISMS CONCERNING 

part not systematic, but are borrowed from accidents, as localities, 
or popular names ; as Oxford Clay and Cornbrash ; and hence 
they are not liable to be thrust out on a change of system. On the 
other hand we do not find sufficient reason to accept the system of 
names of strata proposed by Mr. Conybeare m the Introduction to 
the Geology of England and Wales, according to which the Car- 
boniferous Rocks are the Medial Order, having above them the 
Supermedial Order (New Red Sand, Oolites and Chalk), and above 
these the Superior Order (Tertiary Rocks); and again, having 
below, the Submedial Order (the Transition Rocks), and the 
Inferior Order (Mica Slate, Gneiss, Granite). For though these 
names have long been proposed, it does not appear that they are 
useful in enunciating geological truths. We may, it would seem, 
pronounce the same judgment respecting the system of geological 
names proposed by M. Alexander Brongniart, in his Tableau, 
des Terrains qui composent Pecorce du Globe. He divides these 
strata into nine classes, which he terms Terrains Alluviens, 
Lysiens, Pyrogenes, Clysmiens, Yzemiens, Hemilysiens, Agaly- 
siens, Plutoniques, Vulcaniques. These classes are again variously 
subdivided : fhus the Terrains Yzemiens are Thalassiques, Pela- 
giques, and Abyssiques ; and the Abyssiques are subdivided into 
Lias, Keuper, Conchiliens, Pceciliens, Peneens, Rudimentaires, 
Entritiques, Houillers, Carbonifers and Gres Rouge Ancien. 
Scarcely any amount of new truths would induce geologists to 
burthen themselves at once with this enormous system of new 
names : but in fact, it is evident that any portion of truth, which 
any author can have brought to light, may be conveyed by means 
of a much simpler apparatus. Such a nomenclature carries its 
condemnation on its own face. 

Nearly the same may be said of the systematic nomencla- 
ture proposed for mineralogy by Professor Mohs. Even if all 
his Genera be really natural groups, (a doctrine which we can 
have no confidence in till they are confirmed by the evidence of 
chemistry,) there is no necessity to make so great a change in 
the received names of minerals. His proceeding in this respect, 
so different from the temperance of Linnaeus and Cuvier, has 
probably ensured a speedy oblivion to this part of his system. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXXL 

In crystallography, on the other hand, in which Mohs's improve- 
ments have been very valuable, there are several terms introduced 
by him, as rhombohedron, scalenohedron, hemihedral, systems of 
crystallization, which will probably be a permanent portion of 
the language of science. 

I may remark, in general, that the only persons who succeed 
in making great alterations in the language of science, are not 
these who make names arbitrarily and as an exercise of ingenuity, 
but those who have much new knowledge to communicate ; so 
that the vehicle is commended to general reception by the value 
of what it contains. It is only eminent discoverers to whom the 
authority is conceded of introducing a new system of names ; 
just as it is only the highest authority in the state which has the 
power of putting a new coinage in circulation. 

I will here quote some judicious remarks of Mr. Howard, which 
fall partly under this Aphorism, and partly under some which 
follow. He had proposed, as names for the kinds of clouds, the 
following : Cirrus, Cirrocumulus, Cirrostratus, Cumulostratus, 
Cumulus, Nimbus, Stratus. In an abridgment of his views, given 
in the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, English names 
were proposed as the equivalents of these ; Curlcloud, Sonder- 
cloud, Wanecloud, Twaincloud, Stackencloud, Eaincloud^ Fall- 
cloud. Upon these Mr. Howard observes : " I mention these, in 
order to have the opportunity of saying that I do not adopt them. 
The names for the clouds which I deduced from the Latin, are 
but seven in number, and very easy to remember. They were 
intended as arbitrary terms for the structure of clouds, and the 
meaning of them was carefully fixed by a definition. The ob- 
server having once made himself master of this, was able to apply 
the term with correctness, after a little experience, to the subject 
under all its varieties of form, colour, or position. The new 
names, if meant to be another set of arbitrary terms, are super- 
fluous ; if intended to convey in themselves an explanation in 
English, they fail in this, by applying to some part or circum- 
stance only of the definition ; the whole of which must be kept in 
view to study the subject with success. To take for an example 
the first of the modifications. The term cirrus very readily takes 



LXXX11 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

an abstract meaning, equally applicable to the rectilinear as to 
the flexuous forms of the subject. But the name of curl-cloud 
will not, without some violence to its obvious sense, acquire this 
more extensive one: and will therefore be apt to mislead the 
reader rather than further his progress. Others of these names 
are as devoid of a meaning obvious to the English reader, as the 
Latin terms themselves. But the principal objection to English 
or any other local terms, remains to be stated. They take away 
from the nomenclature its general advantage of constituting, as 
far as it goes, an universal language, by means of which the intel- 
ligent of every country may convey to each other their ideas 
without the necessity of translation."" 

I here adduce these as examples of the arguments against 
changing an established nomenclature. As grounds of selecting 
a new one, they may be taken into account hereafter. 

APHORISM XL 

Terms which imply theoretical views are admissible, as far as the 
theory is proved. 

IT is not unfrequently stated that the circumstances from 
which the names employed in science borrow their meaning, 
ought to be facts and not theories. But such a recommendation 
implies a belief that facts are rigorously distinguished from theories 
and directly opposed to them ; which belief, we have repeatedly 
seen, is unfounded. When theories are firmly established, they 
become facts ; and names founded on such theoretical views are 
unexceptionable. If we speak of the minor axis of Jupiter's 
orbit, or of his density, or of the angle of refraction, or the length 
of an undulation of red light, we assume certain theories ; but 
nasmuch as the theories are now the inevitable interpretation of 
ascertained facts, we can have no better terms to designate the 
conceptions thus referred to. And hence the rule which we must 
follow is, not that our terms must involve no theory, but that 
they imply the theory only in that sense in which it is the inter- 
pretation of the facts. 

For example, the term polarization of light was objected to, 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXXlil 

as involving a theory. Perhaps the term was at first suggested 
by conceiving light to consist of particles having poles turned in 
a particular manner. But among intelligent speculators, the 
notion of polarization soon reduced itself to the simple conception 
of opposite properties in opposite positions, which is a bare state- 
ment of the fact : and the term being understood to have this 
meaning, is a perfectly good term, and indeed the best which we 
can imagine for designating what is intended. 

I need hardly add the caution, that names involving theo- 
retical views not in accordance with facts are to be rejected. 
The following instances exemplify both the positive and the 
negative application of this maxim. 

The distinction of primary and secondary rocks in geology 
was founded upon a theory ; namely, that those which do not 
contain any organic remains were first deposited, and afterwards, 
those which contain plants and animals. But this theory was 
insecure from the first. The difficulty of making the separation 
which it implied, led to the introduction of a class of transition 
rocks. And the recent researches of geologists lead them to the 
conclusion, that those rocks which are termed primary, may be the 
newest, not the oldest, productions of nature. 

In order to avoid this incongruity, other terms have been pro- 
posed as substitutes for these. Mr. Lyell remarks*, that granite, 
gneiss, and the like, form a class which should be designated by 
a common name ; which name should not be of chronological 
import. He proposes hypogene^ signifying " nether-formed ;" and 
thus he adopts the theory that they have not assumed their 
present form and structure at the surface, but determines nothing 
of the period when they were produced. 

These hypogene rocks, again, he divides into unstratified or 
plutonic, and altered, stratified, or metamorphic ; the latter term 
implying the hypothesis that the stratified rocks to which it is 
applied have been altered, by the effect of fire or otherwise, since 
they were deposited. That fossiliferous strata, in some cases at 
least, have undergone such a change, is demonstrable from facts f. 

The modern nomenclature of chemistry implies the oxygen 

* Prim. GeoL, iv, 386. t JElem. Geol., p. 17. 



LXXX1V APHORISMS CONCERNING 

theory of chemistry. Hence it has sometimes been objected to. 
Thus Davy, in speaking of the Lavoisierian nomenclature, makes 
the following remarks, which, however plausible they may sound, 
will be found to be utterly erroneous*. " Simplicity and pre- 
cision ought to be the characteristics of a scientific nomenclature : 
words should signify things, or the analogies of things, and not 
opinions. ... A substance in one age supposed to be simple, in 
another is proved to be compound, and vice versa. A theoretical 
nomenclature is liable to continual alterations : oxygenated muri- 
atic acid is as improper a term as dephlogisticated marine acid. 
Every school believes itself to be in the right : and if every school 
assumes to itself the liberty of altering the names of chemical 
substances in consequence of new ideas of their composition, there 
can be no permanency in the language of the science ; it must 
always be confused and uncertain. Bodies which are similar to 
each other should always be classed together ; and there is a 
presumption that their composition is analogous. Metals, earths, 
alkalis, are appropriate names for the bodies they represent, and 
independent of all speculation : whereas oxides, sulphurets, and 
muriates are terms founded upon opinions of the composition of 
bodies, some of which have been already found erroneous. The 
least dangerous mode of giving a systematic form to a language 
seems to be to signify the analogies of substances by some com- 
mon sign affixed to the beginning or the termination of the word. 
Thus as the metals have been distinguished by a termination in 
um, as aurum, so their calciform or oxidated state might have 
been denoted by a termination in a, as aura : and no progress, 
however great, in the science could render it necessary that 
such a mode of appellation should be changed." 

These remarks are founded upon distinctions which have no 
real existence. We cannot separate things from their properties, 
nor can we consider their properties and analogies in any other 
way than by having opinions about them. By contrasting analo- 
gies with opinions, it might appear as if the author maintained 
that there were certain analogies about which there was no room 
for eironeous opinions. Yet the analogies of chemical compounds, 
* Elements of Chem. Phil., p. 46. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXXV 

arc, in fact, those points which have heen most the subject of differ- 
ence of opinion, and on which the revolutions of theories have 
have most changed men's views. As an example of analogies 
which are still recognized under alterations of theory, the writer 
gives the relation of a metal to its oxide or calciform state. But 
this analogy of metallic oxides, as Red Copper or Iron Ore, to Calx, 
or burnt lime, is very far from being self-evident ; so far indeed, 
that the recognition of the analogy was a great step in chemical 
theory. The terms which he quotes, oxygenated muriatic acid 
(and the same may be said of dephlogisticated marine acid?) if 
improper, are so not because they involve theory, but because they 
involve false theory ; not because those who framed them did 
not endeavour to express analogies, but because they expressed 
analogies about which they were mistaken. Unconnected names, 
as metals, earths, alkalis, are good as the basis of a systematic 
nomenclature, but they are not substitutes for such a nomencla- 
ture. A systematic nomenclature is an instrument of great utility 
and power, as the modern history of chemistry has shown. It 
would be highly unphilosophical to reject the use of such an in- 
strument, because, in the course of the revolutions of science, we 
may have to modify, or even to remodel it altogether. Its utility 
is not by that means destroyed. It has retained, transmitted, and 
enabled us to reason upon, the doctrines of the earlier theory, so 
far as they are true ; and when this theory is absorbed into a 
more comprehensive one, (for this, and not its refutation, is the 
end of a theory so far as it is true,) the nomenclature is easily tran- 
slated into that which the new theory introduces. "We have seen, 
in the history of astronomy, how valuable the theory of epicycles 
was, in its time : the nomenclature of the relations of a planet's 
orbit, which that theory introduced, was one of Kepler's resources 
in discovering the elliptical theory ; and, though now superseded, 
is still readily intelligible to astronomers. 

This is not the place to discuss the reasons for the form of 
scientific terms ; otherwise we might ask, in reference to the 
objections to the Lavoisierian nomenclature, if such forms as 
aurum and aura are good to represent the absence or presence of 
oxygen, why such forms as sulphite and sulphate are not equally 



LXXXV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

good to represent the presence of what we may call a smaller or 
larger dose of oxygen, so long as the oxygen theory is admitted in 
its present form ; and to indicate still the difference of the same 
substances, if under any change of theory it should come to be 
interpreted in a new manner. 

But I do not now dwell upon such arguments, my object in 
this place being to show that terms involving theory are not only 
allowable, if understood so far as the theory is proved, but of 
great value, and indeed of indispensable use, in science. The ob- 
jection to them is inconsistent with the objects of science. If, 
after all that has been done in chemistry or any other science, we 
have arrived at no solid knowledge, no permanent truth; if all 
that we believe now may be proved to be false tomorrow ; then 
indeed our opinions and theories are corruptible elements, on which 
it would be unwise to rest any thing important, and which we 
might wish to exclude, even from our names. But if our knowledge 
has no more security than this, we can find no reason why we 
should wish to have names of things, since the names are needed 
mainly that we may reason upon and increase our knowledge such 
as it is. If we are condemned to endless alternations of varying 
opinions, then, no doubt, our theoretical terms may be a source of 
confusion ; but then, where would be the advantage of their being 
otherwise? what would be the value of words which should 
express in a more precise manner opinions equally fleeting ? It 
will perhaps be said, our terms must express facts, not theories : 
but of this distinction so applied we have repeatedly shown the 
futility. Theories firmly established are facts. Is it not a fact 
that the rusting of iron arises from the metal combining with the 
oxygen of the atmosphere ? Is it not a fact that a combination of 
oxygen and hydrogen produces water ? That our terms should 
express such facts, is precisely what we are here inculcating. 

Our examination of the history of science has led us to a view 
very different from that which represents it as consisting in the 
succession of hostile opinions. It is, on the contrary, a progress, in 
which each step is recognized and employed in the succeeding one. 
Every theory, so far as it is true, (and all that have prevailed ex- 
tensively and long, contain a large portion of truth,) is taken up 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXXV11 

into the theory which succeeds and seems to expel it. All the 
narrower inductions of the first are included in the more compre- 
hensive generalizations of the second. And this is performed 
mainly by means of such terms as we are now considering ; 
terms involving the previous theory. It is by means of such 
terms, that the truths at first ascertained become so familiar and 
manageable, that they can be employed as elementary facts in the 
formation of higher inductions. 

These principles must be applied also, though with great cau- 
tion, and in a temperate manner, even to descriptive language. 
Thus the mode of describing the forms of crystals adopted by 
Werner and Rome de Tlsle was to consider an original form, from 
which other forms are derived by truncatiom of the edges and the 
angles. Haiiy^s method of describing the same forms, was to 
consider them as built up of rows of small solids, the angles being 
determined by the decrements of these rows. Both these methods 
of description involve hypothetical views ; and the last was 
intended to rest on a true physical theory of the constitution of 
crystals. Both hypotheses are doubtful or false : yet both these 
methods are good as modes of description : nor is Hatty's termi- 
nology vitiated, if we suppose (as in fact we must suppose in 
many instances,) that crystalline bodies are not really made up of 
such small solids. The mode of describing an octahedron of fluor 
spar, as derived from the cube, by decrements of one row on all the 
edges, would still be proper and useful as a description, whatever 
judgment we should form of the material structure of the body. 
But then, we must consider the solids which are thus introduced 
into the description as merely hypothetical geometrical forms, 
serving to determine the angles of the faces. It is in this way 
alone that Haiiy's nomenclature can now be retained. 

In like manner we may admit theoretical views into the 
descriptive phraseology of other parts of Natural History : and 
the theoretical terms will replace the obvious images, in propor- 
tion as the theory is generally accepted and familiarly applied. 
For example, in speaking of the Honeysuckle, we may say that 
the upper leaves are perfoliate> meaning that a single orbicular 
leaf is perforated by the stalk or threaded upon it. Here is an 



LXXXV111 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

image which sufficiently conveys the notion of the form. But it is 
now generally recognized that this apparent single leaf is, in fact, 
two opposite leaves joined together at their bases. If this were 
doubted, it may be proved by comparing the upper leaves with the 
lower, which are really separate and opposite. Hence the term 
connate is applied to these conjoined opposite leaves, implying that 
they grow together ; or they are called connato-perfoliate. Again ; 
formerly the corolla was called monopetalous or polypetalous, as it 
consisted of one part or of several : but it is now agreed among 
botanists that those corollas which appear to consist of a single 
part, are, in fact, composed of several soldered together ; hence 
the term gamopetalous is now employed (by Decandolle and his 
followers) instead of monopetalous*. 

In this way the language of natural history not only expresses, 
but inevitably implies, general laws of nature ; and words are 
thus fitted to aid the progress of knowledge in this, as in other 
provinces of science. 

APHORISM XII. 

If terms are systematically good, they are not to be rejected because 
they are etymologically inaccurate. 

TERMS belonging to a system are defined, not by the meaning 
of their radical words, but by their place in the system. That 
they should be appropriate in their signification, aids the processes 
of introducing and remembering them, and should therefore be 
carefully attended to by those who invent and establish them ; 
but this once done, no objections founded upon their etymo- 
logical import are of any material weight. We find no inconve- 
nience in the circumstance that geometry means the measuring of 
the earth, that the name porphyry is applied to many rocks which 
have no fiery spots, as the word implies, and oolite to strata which 
have no roelike -structure. In like manner, if the term pwcilite 

* On this subject, see ILLIGER, Versuch einer Systematischen Vollstandigen 
Terminologie fur das Thierreich und Pflanzenreich, (1810.) DECANDOLLE, 
Theorie Elementaire de la Botanique. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. LXXxix 

were already generally received, as the name of a certain group of 
strata, it would be no valid ground for quarreling with it, that this 
group was not always variegated in colour, or that other groups 
were equally variegated: although undoubtedly in introducing such 
a term, care should be taken to make it as distinctive as possible. 
It often happens, as we have seen, that by the natural progress of 
changes in language, a word is steadily confirmed in a sense quite 
different from its etymological import. But though we may 
accept such instances, we must not wantonly attempt to imitate 
them. I say, not wantonly : for if the progress of scientific iden- 
tification compel us to follow any class of objects into circum- 
stances where the derivation of the term is inapplicable, we may 
still consider the term as an unmeaning sound, or rather an his- 
torical symbol, expressing a certain member of our system. Thus 
if, in following the course of the mountain or carboniferous lime- 
stone, we find that in Ireland it does not form mountains nor 
contain coal, we should act unwisely in breaking down the 
nomenclature in which our systematic relations are already ex- 
pressed, in order to gain, in a particular case, a propriety of lan- 
guage which has no scientific value. 

All attempts to act upon the maxim opposite to this, and to 
make our scientific names properly descriptive of the objects, have 
failed and must fail. For the marks which really distinguish the 
natural classes of objects, are by no means obvious. The discovery 
of them is one of the most important steps in science; and when 
they are discovered, they are constantly liable to exceptions, 
because they do not contain the essential differences of the classes. 
The natural order Umbellatw^ in order to be a natural order, must 
contain some plants which have not umbels, as Eryngium*. " In 
such cases," said Linnaeus, " it is of small import what you call 
the order, if you take a proper series of plants, and give it some 
name which is clearly understood to apply to the plants you have 
associated." " I have," he adds, " followed the rule of borrowing 
the name a fortiori, from the principal feature." 

The distinction of crystals into systems according to the degree 
of symmetry which obtains in them, has been explained elsewhere. 
See Hist. Tnd, Sd. 9 iii. 324. 

VOL. i. g 



XC APHORISMS CONCERNING 

Two of these systems, of which the relation as to symmetry might 
be expressed by saying that one is square pyramidal and the other 
oblong pyramidal, or the first square prismatic and the second 
oblong prismatic, are termedby Mohs, the first, Pyramidal, and the 
second Prismatic. And it may be doubted whether it is worth 
while to invent other terms, though these are thus defective in 
characteristic significance. As an example of a needless rejection 
of old terms in virtue of a supposed impropriety in their mean- 
ing, I may mention the attempt made in the last edition of Haiiy's 
Mineralogy, to substitute autopside and heteropside for metallic and 
unmetattic. It was supposed to be proved that all bodies have 
a metal for their basis ; and hence it was wished to avoid the term 
unmetattic. But the words metallic and unmetattic may mean 
that minerals seem metallic and unmetallic, just as well as if they 
contained the element opside to imply this seeming. The old 
names express all that the new express, and with more simpli- 
city, and therefore should not be disturbed. 

The maxim on which we are now insisting, that we are not to 
be too scrupulous about the etymology of scientific terms, may, at 
first sight, appear to be at variance with our Fourth Aphorism, that 
words used technically are to retain their common meaning as far as 
possible. But it must be recollected, that in the Fourth Aphorism 
we spoke of common words appropriated as technical terms ; we 
here speak of words constructed for scientific purposes. And 
although it is, perhaps, impossible to draw a broad line between 
these two classes of terms, still the rule of propriety may be 
stated thus : In technical terms, deviations from the usual mean- 
ing of words are bad in proportion as the words are more familiar 
in our own language. Thus we may apply the term Cirrus 
to a cloud composed of filaments, even if these filaments are 
straight ; but to call such a cloud a Curl cloud would be much 
more harsh. 

Since the names of things, and of classes of things, when con- 
structed so as to involve a description, are constantly liable to be- 
come bad, the natural classes shifting away from the descriptive 
marks thus prematurely and casually adopted, I venture to lay 
down the following maxim. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 



APHORISM XIII. 

The fundamental terms of a system of Nomenclature may "be conve- 
niently borrowed from casual or arbitrary circumstances. 

FOR instance, the names of plants, of minerals, and of geolo- 
gical strata, may be taken from the places where they occur con- 
spicuously or in a distinct form ; as Parietaria^ Parnassia, Chal- 
cedony, Arragonite, Silurian system, Purbeck limestone. These 
names may be considered as at first supplying standards of refer- 
ence ; for in order to ascertain whether any rock be Purbeck lime- 
stone, we might compare it with the rocks in the Isle of Purbeck. 
But this reference to a local standard is of authority only till the 
place of the object in the system, and its distinctive marks, are 
ascertained. It would not vitiate the above names, if it were 
found that the Parnassia does not grow on Parnassus; that 
Chalcedony is not found in Chalcedon ; or even that Arragon- 
ite no longer occurs in Arragon ; for it is now firmly established 
as a mineral species. Even in geology such a reference is arbi- 
trary, and may be superseded, or at least modified, by a more sys- 
tematic determination. Alpine limestone is no longer accepted 
as a satisfactory designation of a rock, now that we know the 
limestone of the Alps to be of various ages. 

Again, names of persons, either casually connected with the 
object, or arbitrarily applied to it, may be employed as designa- 
tions. This has been done most copiously in botany, as for ex- 
am])\e,Nicotiana, Dalilia^FucJma^Jungermannia^ Lonicera. And 
Linnaeus has laid down rules for restricting this mode of per- 
petuating the memory of men, in the names of plants. Those 
generic names, he says*, which have been constructed to preserve 
the memory of persons who have deserved well of botany, are to 
be religiously retained. This, he adds, is the sole and supreme 
reward of the botanist's labours, and must be carefully guarded 
and scrupulously bestowed, as an encouragement and an 
honour. Still more arbitrary are the terms borrowed from 
the names of the gods and goddesses, heroes and heroines of 
* Phil Bot., 241. 

9* 



XC11 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

antiquity, to designate new genera in those departments of 
natural history in which so many have been discovered in 
recent times as to weary out all attempts at descriptive nomen- 
clature. Cuvier has countenanced this method. " I have had to 
frame many new names of genera and sub-genera," he says *, 
" for the sub-genera which I have established wer u so numerous 
and various, that the memory is not satisfied with numerical in- 
dications. These I have chosen either so as to indicate some cha- 
racter, or among the usual denominations, which I have latinized, 
or finally, after the example of Linnaeus, among the names of 
mythology, which are in general agreeable to the ear, and which 
are far from being exhausted." 

This mode of framing names from the names of persons to 
whom it was intended to do honour, has been employed also in 
the mathematical and chemical sciences ; but such names have 
rarely obtained any permanence, except when they recorded an 
inventor or discoverer. Some of the constellations, indeed, have 
retained such appellations, as Berenice's Hair ; and the new star 
which shone out in the time of Csesar, would probably have re- 
tained the name given to it, of the Julian Star, if it had not 
disappeared again soon after. In the map of the Moon, almost 
all the parts have had such names imposed upon them by those who 
have constructed such maps, and these names have very properly 
been retained. But the names of new planets and satellites thus 
suggested have not been generally accepted ; as the Medicean 
stars, the name employed by Galileo for the satellites of Jupiter, 
the Georgium Sidus, the appellation proposed by Herschel for 
Uranus when first discovered ; Ceres Ferdinandea, the name 
which Piazzi wished to impose on the small planet Ceres. The 
names given to astronomical tables by the astronomers who con- 
structed them have been most steadily adhered to, being indeed 
names of books, and not of natural objects. Thus there were 
the Ilchanic, the Alphonsine, the Rudolphine, the Carolinian 
Tables. Comets which have been ascertained to be periodical, 
have very properly had assigned to them the name of the person 
. who established this point ; and of these we have thus, Halle^s, 
* Regne An., p. xvi. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Xclii 

Enckes, and Gambarfs Comets; the latter is often unjustly 
called Bielas comet. 

In the case of discoveries in science or inventions of appa- 
ratus, the name of the inventor is very properly employed as the 
designation. Thus we have the Torricellian \ r acuum, the Voltaic 
Pile, Fahrenheit's Thermometer. And in the same manner with 
regard to laws of nature, we have Kepler's Laws, Boyle or Mari- 
ottes law of the elasticity of air, Huyghens's law of double refrac- 
tion, Newton's scale of colours. Descartes' law of refraction is an 
unjust appellation; for the discovery of the law of sines was made 
by Snell. In deductive mathematics, where the invention of a 
theorem is generally a more definite step than an induction, this 
mode of designation is more common, as Demoivre** Theorem, 
Maclaurin's Theorem, Lagrange^s Theorem, Eulerian Integrals. 

In the History of Science*, I have remarked that in the dis- 
covery of what is termed galvanism, Volta's office was of a higher 
and more philosophical kind than that of Galvani ; and I have, 
on this account, urged the propriety of employing the term vol- 
taic, rather than galvanic electricity. I may add that the elec- 
tricity of the common machine is often placed in contrast with 
this, and appears to require an express name. Mr. Faraday calls 
it common, or machine electricity ; but I think that franklinic 
electricity would form a more natural correspondence with vol- 
taic, and would be well justified by Franklin's place in the his- 
tory of that part of the subject. 

APHORISM XIV. 

In forming a Terminology, words may be invented when necessary, 
but they cannot be conveniently borrowed from casual or arbi- 
trary circumstances. 

IT will be recollected that Terminology is a language em- 
ployed for describing objects. Nomenclature, a body of names of 
the objects themselves. The names, as was stated in the last 
maxim, may be arbitrary; but the descriptive terms must be 



XC1V APHORISMS CONCERNING 

borrowed from words of suitable meaning in the modern or the 
classical languages. Thus the whole terminology which Linnaeus 
introduced into botany, is founded upon the received use of Latin 
words, although he defined their meaning so as to make it precise 
when it was not so, according to Aphorism V. But many of the 
terms were invented by him and other botanists, as Perianth, 
Nectary, Pericarp ; so many, indeed, as to form, along with the 
others, a considerable language. Many of the terms which are 
now become familiar were originally invented by writers on 
botany. Thus the word petal, for one division of the corolla, was 
introduced by Fabius Columna. The term sepal was devised by 
Neckar to express each of the divisions of the calyx. And up 
to the most recent times, new denominations of parts and con- 
ditions of parts have been devised by botanists, when they found 
them necessary, in order to mark important differences or resem- 
blances. Thus the general receptacle of the flower, as it is 
termed by Linnaeus, or torus, by Salisbury, is continued into organs 
\vhich carry the stamina and pistil, or the pistil alone, or the 
whole flower ; this organ has hence been termed* gonophore, 
carpophore, and anthophore, in these cases. 

In like manner when Cuvier had ascertained that the lower 
jaws of Saurians consisted always of six pieces having definite re- 
lations of form and position, he gave names to them, and termed 
them respectively the dental, the angular, the coronoid, the articu- 
lar, the complementary, and the opercular bones. 

In all these cases, the descriptive terms thus introduced have 
been significant in their derivation. An attempt to circulate a 
perfectly arbitrary word as a means of description would probably 
be unsuccessful. We have, indeed, some examples approaching 
to arbitrary designations, in the Wernerian names of colours, 
which are a part of the terminology of Natural History. Many 
of these names are borrowed from natural resemblances, as Auri- 
cula purple, Apple green, Straw yellow ; but the names of others 
are taken from casual occurrences, mostly, however, such as were 
already recognized in common language, as Prussian blue, Dutch 
orange, King's yellow. 

* DECANDOLLE'S Th. EL, 405. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. XCV 

The extension of arbitrary names in scientific terminology is 
by no means to be encouraged. I may mention a case in which 
it was very properly avoided. When Mr. Faraday's researches 
on Voltaic electricity had led him to perceive the great impro- 
priety of the term poles, as applied to the apparatus, since the 
processes have not reference to any opposed points, but to two 
opposite directions of a path, he very suitably wished to substi- 
tute for the phrases positive pole and negative pole two words end- 
ing in ode, from oSos, a way. A person who did not see the 
value of our present maxim, that descriptive terms should be de- 
scriptive in their origin, might have proposed words perfectly 
arbitrary, as Alphode and Betode : or, if he wished to pay a tribute 
of respect to the discoverers in this department of science, Gal- 
vanode and VoUaode. But such words would very justly have 
been rejected by Mr. Faraday, and would hardly have obtained 
any general currency among men of science. Zincode and Pla- 
tinode, terms derived from the metal which, in one modification 
of the apparatus, forms what was previously termed the pole, are 
to be avoided, because in their origin too much is casual; 
and they are not a good basis for derivative terms. The pole 
at which the zinc is, is the Anode or Cathode, according as it 
is associated with different metals. Either the zincode must some- 
times mean the pole at which the Zinc is, and at other times that 
at which the Zinc is not, or else we must have as many names 
for poles as there are metals. Anode and Cathode, the terms 
which Mr. Faraday adopted, were free from these objections; for 
they refer to a natural standard of the direction of the voltaic 
current, in a manner which, though perhaps not obvious at first 
sight, is easily understood and retained. Anode and Cathode, 
the rising and the setting way, are the directions which corre- 
spond to east and west in that voltaic current to which we must 
ascribe terrestrial magnetism. And with these words it was easy 
to connect ariion and catJiion, to designate the opposite elements 
which are separated and liberated at the two electrodes. 

The following Aphorisms respect the Form of Technical 
Terms. 

By the Form of Terms, I mean their philological conditions ; 



XCV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

as, for example, from what languages they may be borrowed, by 
what modes of inflexion they must be compounded, how their 
derivatives are to be formed, and the like. In this, as in other 
parts of the subject, I shall not lay down a system of rules, but 
shall propose a few maxims. 

APHORISM XV. 

The two main conditions of the Form of technical terms are, that 
they must be generally intelligible, and susceptible of such gram- 
matical relations as their scientific use requires. 

THESE conditions may at first appear somewhat vague, but it 
will be found that they are as definite as we could make them, 
without injuriously restricting ourselves. It will appear, more- 
over, that they have an important bearing upon most of the ques- 
tions respecting the form of the words which come before us ; 
and that if we can succeed in any case in reconciling the two 
conditions, we obtain terms which are practically good, whatever 
objections may be urged against them from other considerations. 

1. The former condition, for instance, bears upon the 
question whether scientific terms are to be taken from the 
learned languages, Greek and Latin, or from our own. 
And the latter condition very materially affects the same ques- 
tion, since in English we have scarcely any power of inflect- 
ing our words; and therefore must have recourse to Greek or 
Latin in order to obtain terms which admit of grammatical modi- 
fication. If we were content with the term Heat to express the 
science of heat, still it would be a bad technical term, for we 
cannot derive from it an adjective like thermotical. If bed or 
layer were an equally good term with stratum, we must still retain 
the latter, in order that we may use the derivative stratification, 
for which the English words cannot produce an equivalent sub- 
stitute. We may retain the words lime andyfoVztf, but their adjec- 
tives for scientific purposes are not limy and flinty, but calcareous 
and siliceous; and hence we are able to form a compound, as 
calcareo- siliceous, which we could not do with indigenous 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. XCVii 

words. We might fix the phrases bent back and broken to mean 
(of optical rays) that they are reflected and refracted ; but then 
we should have no means of speaking of the angles of reflection 
and refraction, of the refractive indices, and the like. 

Thus one of the advantages of going to the Greek and Latin 
languages for the origin of our scientific terms is, that in this way 
we obtain words which admit of the formation of adjectives and 
abstract terms, of composition, and of other inflexions. Another 
advantage of such an origin is, that such terms, if well selected, 
are readily understood over the whole lettered world. For this 
reason, the descriptive language of science, of botany for instance, 
has been, for the most part, taken from the Latin ; many of the 
terms of the mathematical and chemical sciences have been 
derived from the Greek ; and when occasion occurs to construct 
a new term, it is generally to that language" that recourse is had. 
The advantage of such terms is, as has already been intimated, 
that they constitute an universal language, by means of which 
cultivated persons in every country may convey to each other 
their ideas without the need of translation. 

On the other hand, the advantage of indigenous terms is, 
that so far as the language extends, they are intelligible much 
more clearly and vividly than those borrowed from any other 
source, as well as more easily manageable in the construction of 
sentences. In the descriptive language of botany, for example, 
in an English work, the terms drooping, nodding, one-sided, 
twining, straggling, appear better than cernuous, nutant, secund, 
wlubile, divaricate. For though the latter terms may by habit 
become as intelligible as the former, they cannot become more so 
to any readers ; and to most English readers they will give a far 
less distinct impression. 

2. Since the advantage of indigenous over learned terms, or 
the contrary, depends upon the balance of the capacity of inflexion 
and composition on the one hand, against a ready and clear signi- 
ficance on the other, it is evident that the employment of scientific 
terms of the one class or of the other may very properly be ex- 
tremely different in different languages. The German possesses 
in a very eminent degree that power of composition and derivation, 



XCV111 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

which in English can hardly be exercised at all, in a formal 
manner. Hence German scientific writers use native terms to a 
far greater extent than do our own authors. The descriptive 
terminology of botany, and even the systematic nomenclature of 
chemistry, are represented by the Germans by means of German 
roots and inflexions. Thus the description of Potentilla anserina, 
in English botanists, is that it has Leaves interruptedly pinnate, 
serrate, silky, stem creeping, stalks axillar, one-flowered. Here 
we have words of Saxon and Latin origin mingled pretty equally. 
But the German description is entirely Teutonic. Die Blume in 
Achsel ; die Blatter unterbrochen gefiedert, die Bldttchen scharf 
gesagt, die Stdmme kriechend, die Bluthenstiele eiiiblumig. We 
could imitate this in our own language, by saying brokenly- 
feathered, sharp-sawed ; by using threed for ternate, as the Ger- 
mans employ gedreit ; by saying fingered- feathered for digitato- 
pinnate, and the like. But the habit which we have, in common 
as well as in scientific language, of borrowing words from the 
Latin for new cases, would make such usages seem very harsh 
and pedantic. 

We may add that, in consequence of these different practices 
in the two languages, it is a common habit of the German reader 
to impose a scientific definiteness upon a common word, such as 
our Fifth Aphorism requires ; whereas the English reader expects 
rather that a word which is to have a technical sense shall be 
derived from the learned languages. Die Kelch and die Blume 
(the cup and the flower) easily assume the technical meaning of 
calyx and corolla ; die griffel (the pencil) becomes the pistil ; 
and a name is easily found for the pollen, the anthers, and the 
stamens, by calling them the dust, the dust-cases, and the dust- 
threads (der staub, die staub-beutel or staub-fdcher, and die staub- 
fdden). This was formerly done in English to a greater extent 
than is now possible without confusion and pedantry. Thus, in 
Grew's book on the Anatomy of Plants, the calyx is called the 
impalement, and the sepals the impalers ; the petals are called 
the leaves of the flower ; the stamens with their anthers are the 
seminiform attire. But the English language, as to such mat- 
ters, is now less flexible than it then was ; partly in conse- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. XC1X 

quence of having adopted the Linnsean terminology almost entire, 
without any attempt to naturalise it. For any attempt at idio- 
matic description would interfere with the scientific language now 
generally received in this country. In Germany, on the other 
hand, those who wrote upon science in their own language imi- 
tated the Latin words which they found in foreign writers, 
instead of transferring new roots into their own language. Thus 
the numerator and denominator of a fraction they called the namer 
and the counter (iienner and zahler). This course they pursued 
even where the expression was erroneous. Thus that portion 
of the intestines which ancient anatomists called duodenum, 
because they falsely estimated its length at twelve inches, the 
Germans also term zwolffingerdarm (twelve-inch-gut), though 
this intestine in a whale is twenty feet long, and in a frog not 
above twenty lines. As another example of this process in Ger- 
man, we may take the word muttersackbauchblatte, the uterine 
peritonaeum. 

It is a remarkable evidence of this formative power of the 
German language, that it should have been able to produce 
an imitation of the systematic chemical nomenclature of the 
French school, so complete, that it is used in Germany as fami- 
liarly as the original system is in France and England. Thus 
Oxygen and Hydrogen are Sauerstoff and Wafferstoff; Azote is 
Stickstoff (suffocating matter) ; Sulphuric and Sulphurous Acid 
are Schwefel-saure and Schwefelichte-sdure. The Sulphate and Sul- 
phite of Baryta, and Sulphuret of Baryum, are Schwefel-saure 
Barijterde, Schwefelichte-saure Baryterde, and Schwefel-baryum. 
Carbonate of Iron is Kohlen-sdures Eisenoxydul, and we may 
observe that, in such cases, the German name is much more agree- 
able to anology than the English one; for the Protoxide of 
Iron, and not the Iron itself, is the base of the salt. And the 
German language has not only thus imitated the established 
nomenclature of chemistry, but has shown itself capable of sup- 
plying new forms to meet the demands which the progress of 
theory occasions. Tims the Hydracids are Wasserstoff-sduren ; 
and of these, the Hyclriodic Acid is lodwasserstoff-saure, and so 
of the rest. In like manner, the translator of Berzelius has found 



C APHORISMS CONCERNING 

German names for the sulpho-salts of that chemist ; thus he has 
Wasserstoffschwefliges Schwef el-lithium, which would be (if we 
were to adopt his theoretical view,) hydro-sulphuret of sulphuret 
of lithium : and a like nomenclature for all other similar cases. 

3. In English we have no power of imitating this process, 
and must take our technical phrases from some more flexible 
language, and generally from the Latin or Greek. We are indeed 
so much accustomed to do this, that except a word has its origin 
in one of these languages, it hardly seems to us a technical term ; 
and thus by employing indigenous terms, even descriptive ones, 
we may, perhaps, lose in precision more than we gain in the vivid- 
ness of the impression. Perhaps it may be better to say cuneate, 
lunate, hastate, sagittate, reniform, than wedge-shaped, crescent- 
shaped, halbert-headed, arrow -headed, kidney-shaped. Ringent and 
personate are better than any English words which we could sub- 
stitute for them ; labiate is more precise than lipped would readily 
become. Urceolate, trochlear, are more compact than pitcher- 
shaped, pulley - shaped ; and infundibuliform, hypocrateriform, 
though long words, are not more inconvenient than funnel-shaped 
and saher-shaped. In the same way it is better to speak (with 
Dr. Prichard*,) of repent and progressive animals, than of creeping 
and progressive : the two Latin terms make a better pair of cor- 
relatives. 

4. But wherever we may draw the line between the proper use 
of English and Latin terms in descriptive phraseology, we shall 
find it advisable to borrow almost all other technical terms from 
the learned languages. We have seen this in considering the 
new terms introduced into various sciences in virtue of our Ninth 
Maxim. We may add as further examples the names of the 
various animals of which a knowledge has been acquired from 
the remains of them which exist in various strata, and which 
have been reconstructed by Cuvier and his successors. Such are 
the Palceotlierium, the Anoplotherium, the Megatherium, the 
Dinotherium, the Chirotherium, the Megalichthys, the Mastodon, 
the Ichthyosaurus, the Plesiosaurus, the Pterodactylus. To these 
others are every year added ; as, for instance, very recently, the 

* Researches, p. 69. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. ci 

Toxodon, Zeuglodon, and Phascolotherium of Mr. Owen, and the 
Thylacotherium of M. Valenciennes. The names of species, as well 
as of genera, are thus formed from the Greek : as the Plesiosau- 
rus dolickodeirus, (long-necked), Ichthyosaurus platyodon (broad- 
toothed), the Irish elk, termed Cervus megaceros (large-horned). 
But the descriptive specific names are also taken from the Latin, 
as Plesiosaurus brevirottrif, longirostris, crassirostris ; besides 
which there are arbitrary specific names, which we do not here 
consider. These names being all constructed at a period when 
naturalists were familiar with an artificial system, the standard 
language of which is Latin, have not been taken from modern 
language. But the names of living animals, and even of their 
classes, long ago formed in the common language of men, have 
been in part adopted in the systems of naturalists, agreeably to 
Aphorism Third. Hence the language of systems in natural 
history is mixed of ancient and modern languages. Thus Cuvier's 
divisions of the vertebrated animals are Mammiferes (Latin), 
Oiseaux, Beptiles, Poissons ; Bimanes, Qtiadrumanes, Carnassieres, 
Rongeurs, Pacliydermes (Greek), Euminans (Latin), Cetaces 
(Latin). In the subordinate divisions the distribution being 
more novel, the names are less idiomatic : thus the kinds of Rep- 
tiles are Cheloniens, Sauriens, Ophidiens, Batriciens, all which 
are of Greek origin. In like manner, Fish are divided into 
Chondropterygiens, Malacopterygiens, Acanihopterygiens. The 
unvertebrated animals are Mollusques or Animaux articules, and 
Animaux ray ounces ; and the former are divided into six classes, 
according to the position of their foot ; namely, Cephalopodes, 
Pteropodes, Gasteropodes, Acephales, Brachiopodes, Cirrhopodes. 

In transferring these terms into English, when the term is 
new in French as well as English, we have little difficulty ; for 
we may take nearly the same liberties in English which are 
taken in French; and hence we may say mammifers (rather 
mammals), cetaceans or cetaces, batracians (rather latrachians), 
using the words as substantives. But in other cases we must go 
back to the Latin : thus we say radiate animals, or radiata 
(rather radials), for rayonnees. These changes, however, rather 
refer to another Aphorism. 



Cli APHORISMS CONCERNING 

5. When new mineral species have been established in recent 
times, they have generally had arbitrary names assigned to them, 
derived from some person or places. In some instances, however, 
descriptive names have been selected ; and then these have been 
generally taken from the Greek, as Auglte, Stilbite, Diaspore, 
Dichrolte, Dioptase. Several of these Greek names imposed by 
Haiiy, refer to some circumstances, often fancifully selected, in 
his view of the crystallization of the substance, as Epidote, Peri- 
dote, Pleonast. Similar terms of Greek origin have been intro- 
duced by others, as Orthite, Anorthite, Periklin. Greek names 
founded on casual circumstances are less to be commended. 
Berzelius has termed a mineral Eschynite, from aiGyyvri, shame, 
because it is, he conceives, a shame for chemists not to have sepa- 
rated its elements more distinctly than they did at first. 

6. In Botany, the old names of genera of Greek origin are 
very numerous, and many of them are descriptive, as Glycyrhiza 
(<y\vicvs&\\& pla, sweet root) liquorice, Rhododendron (rose tree), 
Hcematoxylon (bloody wood), Chrysocoma (golden hair), Alope- 
curus (fox tail), and many more. In like manner there are 
names which derive a descriptive significance from the Latin, 
either adjectives, as Impatiens, Gloriosa, Sagittaria, or substan- 
tives irregularly formed, as Tussilago (atussis domatione), Urtica 
(ab urendo tactu), Salsola (a salsedine). But these, though good 
names when they are established by tradition, are hardly to be 
imitated in naming new plants. In most instances, when this is 
to be done, arbitrary or local names have been selected, as Stre- 
litzia. 

7. In Chemistry, new substances have of late had names 
assigned them from Greek roots, as Iodine, from its violet colour, 
Chlorine from its green colour. In like manner fluorine has by 
the French chemists been called Phthor, from its destructive 
properties. So the new metals, Chrome, Rhodium, Iridium, 
Osmium, had names of Greek derivation descriptive of their pro- 
perties. Some such terms, however, were borrowed from localities, 
as Strontia, Yttria, the names of new earths. Others have a 
mixed origin, as Pyrogallic, Pyroacetic, and Pyroligneous Spirit. 
In some cases the deviation has been extravagantly capricious. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Clll 

Thus in the process for making Pyrogallic Acid, a certain sub- 
stance is left behind, from which M. Braconnot extracted an acid 
which he called Ellagic Acid, framing the root of the name by 
reading the word Galle backwards. 

The new laws which the study of electro-chemistry brought 
into view, required a new terminology to express their conditions : 
and in this case, as we have observed in speaking of the Twelfth 
Maxim, arbitrary words are less suitable. Mr. Faraday very 
properly borrowed from the Greek his terms Electrolyte, Electrode, 
Anode, Cathode, An'ion, Catk'ion, Dilectric. In the mechanico- 
chemical and mechanical sciences, however, new terms are less 
copiously required than in the sciences of classification, and when 
they are needed, they are generally determined by analogy from 
existing terms. Thermo-electricity and Electro-dynamics were terms 
which very naturally offered themselves ; Nobili's thermo-mul- 
tiplier, Snow Harris's unit-jar, were almost equally obvious 
names. In such cases, it is generally possible to construct terms 
both compendious and descriptive, without introducing any new 
radical words. 

8. The subject of crystallography has inevitably given rise to 
many new terms, since it brings under our notice a great number 
of new relations of a very definite but very complex form. 
Haiiy attempted to find names for all the leading varieties of 
crystals, and for this purpose introduced a great number of new 
terms, founded on various analogies and allusions. Thus the 
forms of calc-spar are termed by him primitive, equia&e, inverse, 
metastatique, contrastante, imitable, birhomboidale, prismatique, 
apophane, uniternaire, bisunitaire, dodecaedre, contracted, dilatce, 
sexduodecimale, bisalterne, binoternaire, and many others. The 
want of uniformity in the origin and scheme of these denomina- 
tions would be no valid objection to them, if any general truth 
could be expressed by means of them : but the fact is, that there 
is no definite distinction of these forms. They pass into each 
other by insensible gradations, and the optical and physical pro- 
perties which they possess are common to all of them. And as 
a mere enunciation of laws of form, this terminology is insuffi- 
cient. Thus it does not at all convey the relation between the 



CIV APHORISMS CONCERNING 

bisalterne and the binoternaire, the former being a combination of 
the metastatique with the prismatique, the latter of the metastique 
with the contrastante : again, the contrastante, the mixte, the 
cuboide, the contractee, the dilatee, all contain faces generated by 
a common law, the index being respectively altered so as to be in 
these cases, 3, f , , - , -- ; and this, which is the most important geo- 
metrical relation of these forms, is not at all recorded or indicated 
by the nomenclature. The fact is, that it is probably impossible, 
the subject of crystallography having become so complex as it 
now is, to devise a system of names which shall express the rela- 
tions of form. Numerical symbols, such as those of Weiss or 
Naumann, or Professor Miller, are the proper ways of expressing 
these relations, and are the only good crystallographic terminology 
for cases in detail. 

The terms used in expressing crystallographic laws have 
been for the most part taken from the Greek by all writers except 
some of the Germans. These, we have already stated, have 
constructed terms in their own language, as zwei-und-ein gliedrig, 
and the like. 

In Optics we have some new terms connected with crystal- 
line laws, as uniaxal and biaxal crystals, optical axes, which 
offered themselves without any effort on the part of the discover- 
ers. In the whole history of the undulatory theory, very few 
innovations in language were found necessary, except to fix the 
sense of a few phrases, as plane-polarized light in opposition to 
circularly -polarized, and the like. 

This is still more the case in Mechanics, Astronomy, and pure 
mathematics. In these sciences, several of the primary stages of 
generalization being already passed over, when any new steps are 
made, we have before us some analogy by which we may frame 
our new terms. Thus when the plane of maximum areas was 
discovered, it had not some new arbitrary denomination assigned 
it, but the name which obviously described it was fixed as a 
technical name. 

The result of this survey of the scientific terms of recent 
formation seems to be this; that indigenous terms may be 
employed in the descriptions of facts and phenomena as they at 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. CV 

first present themselves ; and in the first induction from these ; 
but that when we come to generalize and theorize, terms borrowed 
from the learned languages are more readily fixed and made 
definite, and are also more easily connected with derivatives. 
Our native terms are more impressive, and at first more intelli- 
gible ; but they may wander from their scientific meaning, and 
are capable of little inflexion. Words of classical origin are 
precise to the careful student, and capable of expressing, by their 
inflexions, the relations of general ideas ; but they are unintelli- 
gible, even to the learned man, without express definition, and 
convey instruction only through an artificial and rare habit of 
thought. 

Since in the balance between words of domestic and of foreign 
origin so much depends upon the possibility of inflexion and 
derivation, I shall consider a little more closely what are the 
limits and considerations which we have to take into account in 
reference to that subject. 

APHORISM XVI. 

In the composition and inflexion of technical terms, philological 
analogies are to be preserved if possible, but modified according 
to scientific convenience. 

IN the language employed or proposed by writers upon sub- 
jects of science, many combinations and forms of derivation occur, 
which would be rejected and condemned by those who are careful 
of the purity and correctness of language. Such anomalies are 
to be avoided as much as possible ; but it is impossible to escape 
them altogether, if we are to have a scientific language which 
has any chance of being received into general use. It is better 
to admit compounds which are not philologically correct, than 
to invent many new words, all strange to the readers for whom 
they are intended : and in writing on science in our own lan- 
guage, it is not possible to avoid making additions to the voca- 
bulary of common life; since science requires exact names for 
many things which common language has not named. And 

VOL. I. h 



CV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

although these new names should, as much as possible, be 
constructed in conformity with the analogies of the language, 
such extensions of analogy can hardly sound, to the gram- 
marian's ear, otherwise than as solecisms. But, as our maxim 
indicates, the analogy of science is of more weight with us 
than the analogy of language : and although anomalies in our 
phraseology should be avoided as much as possible, innovations 
must be permitted wherever a scientific language, easy to acquire, 
and convenient to use, is unattainable without them. 

I shall proceed to mention some of the transgressions of strict 
philological rules, and some of the extensions of grammatical forms, 
which the above conditions appear to render necessary. 

I. The combination of different languages in the derivation 
of words, though to be avoided in general, is in some cases ad- 
missible. 

Such words are condemned by Quintilian and other gramma- 
rians, under the name of hybrids, or things of a mixed race ; as 
biclinium, from bis and K\lvri ; epitogium, from eVl and toga. 
Nor are such terms to be unnecessarily introduced in science. 
Whenever a homogeneous word can be formed and adopted with 
the same ease and convenience as a hybrid, it is to be preferred. 
Hence we must have ichthyology, not piscology, entomology, not 
insectology, insectivorous not insectophagous. In like manner, it 
would be better to say unoculus than monoculus, though the 
latter has the sanction of Linnaeus, who was a purist in such 
matters. Dr e Turner, in his Chemistry, speaks of protoxides and 
binoxides, which combination violates the rule for making the 
materials of our terms as homogeneous as possible ; protoxide 
and deutoxide would be preferable, both on this and on other 
accounts. 

Yet this rule admits of exceptions. Mineralogy, with its 
Greek termination, has for its root minera, a medieval Latin word 
of Teutonic origin, and is preferable to oryctology. Terminology 
appears to be better than glossology : which according to its deri- 
vation would be rather the science of language in general than of 
technical terms ; and horology, from opos, a term, would not be 
immediately intelligible, even to Greek scholars ; and is already 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. CVii 

employed to indicate the science which treats of horologes, or 
time-pieces. 

Indeed, the English reader is become quite familiar with the 
termination ology, the names of a large number of branches 
of science and learning having that form. This termination 
is at present rather apprehended as a formative affix in our 
own language, indicating a science, than as an element borrowed 
from a foreign language. Hence, when it is difficult or imposs- 
ible to find a Greek term which clearly designates the subject of a 
science, it is allowable to employ some other, as in Tidology, the 
doctrine of the tides. 

The same remark applies to some other Greek elements of 
scientific words : they are so familiar to us that in composition 
they are almost used as part of our own language. This natu- 
ralization has taken place very decidedly in the element arch, 
(dpxbs, a leader,) as we see in archbishop, archduke. It is effected 
in a great degree for the preposition anti : thus we speak of anti- 
slavery societies, anti-reformers, anti-bilious, or anti-acid, medi- 
cines, without being conscious of any anomaly. The same is the 
ease with the Latin preposition pro? or pre, as appears from such 
words as pre-engage, pre-arrange, pre-judge, pre-paid ; and in 
some measure with pro, for in colloquial language we speak of 
pro-catholics and anti-catholics. Also the preposition ante is simi- 
larly used, asante-nicene fathers. The preposition co, abbreviated 
from con, and implying things to be simultaneous or connected, 
is firmly established as part of the language, as we see in coexist, 
coheir, coordinate ; hence I have called those lines cotidal lines 
which pass through places where the high water of the tide 
occurs simultaneously. 

2. As in the course of the mixture by which our language 
has been formed, we have thus lost all habitual consciousness of 
the difference of its ingredients (Greek, Latin, Norman, French, 
and Anglo-Saxon) : we have also ceased to confine to each ingre- 
dient the mode of grammatical inflexion which originally belonged 
to it. Thus the termination ive belongs peculiarly to Latin 
adjectives, yet we say sportive, talkative. In like manner, able is 
added to words which are not Latin, as eatable, drinkable^ piti- 



CViii APHORISMS CONCERNING 

able, enviable. Also the termination al and ical are used with 
various roots, as loyal, royal, farcical, whimsical; hence we may 
make the adjective tidal from tide. This ending, al, is also 
added to abstract terms in ion, as occasional, provisional, inten- 
tional, national; hence we may, if necessary, use such words 
as educational, terminational. The ending ic appears to be suited 
to proper names, as Pindaric, Socratic, Platonic ; hence it may 
be used when scientific words are derived from proper names, as 
Voltaic or Galvanic electricity : to which I have proposed to add 
Franklinic. 

In adopting scientific adjectives from the Latin, we have not 
much room for hesitation ; for, in such cases, the habits of deri- 
vation from that language into our own are very constant ; ivus 
becomes ive, as decursive ; inus becomes ine, as in ferine ; atus 
becomes ate, as hastate; and us often becomes ous, as rufous; aris 
becomes ary, as axillary; ens becomes ent, as ringent. And in 
adopting into our language, as scientific terms, words which in 
another language, the French for instance, have a Latin origin 
familiar to us, we cannot do better than form them as if they 
were derived directly from the Latin. Hence the French adjec- 
tives cetace, crustace, testace, may become either cetaceous, crusta- 
ceous, testaceous, according to the analogy of farinaceous, preda- 
ceous, or else cetacean, crustacean, testacean, imitating the form 
of patrician. Since, as I shall soon have to notice, we require 
substantives as well as adjectives from these words, we must, at 
least for that use, take the forms last suggested. 

In pursuance of the same remark, rongeur becomes rodent, 
and edente would become edentate ; but that this word is rejected 
on another account : the adjectives bimane and guadrumane are 
bimanous and quadrumanous. 

3. There is not much difficulty in thus forming adjectives : 
but the purposes of Natural History require that we should have 
substantive words corresponding to these adjectives; and these 
cannot be obtained without some extension of the analogies of our 
language. We cannot in general use adjectives or participles as 
singular substantives. The happy or the doomed would, according 
to good English usage, signify those who are happy and those 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. cix 

who are doomed. Hence we could not speak of a particular 
scaled animal as the squamate, and still less could we call any such 
animal a squamate, or speak of squamates in the plural. Some 
of the forms of our adjectives, however, do admit of this substan- 
tive use. Thus we talk of Europeans, plebeians, republicans ; of 
divines and masculines ; of the ultramontanes ; of mordants and 
brilliants ; of abstergents and emollients ; of mercenaries and tribu- 
taries; of animals, manuals, and officials; of dissuasives and 
motives. We cannot generally use in this way adjectives in ous, 
nor in ate (though reprobates is an exception), nor English par- 
ticiples, nor adjectives in which there is no termination imitating 
the Latin, as happy, good. Hence, if we have, for purposes of 
science, to convert adjectives into substantives, we ought to 
follow the form of examples like these, in which it has already 
appeared in fact, that such usage, though an innovation at first, 
may ultimately become a received part of the language. 

By attention to this rule we may judge what expressions to 
select in cases where substantives are needed. I will take as an 
example the division of the mammalian animals into orders. 
These orders, according to Cuvier, are Bimanes, Quadrumanes, 
Carnassiers, Rongeurs, Edentes, Ruminans, Pachydermes, Cetaces. 
Bimanes, Quadrumanes, Rodents, Ruminants, are admissible as 
English substantives on the grounds just stated. Cetaceous 
could not be used substantively ; but Cetacean in such a usage is 
sufficiently countenanced by such cases as we have mentioned, 
patrician, &c. ; hence we adopt this form. We have no English 
word equivalent to the French Carnassiers : the English trans- 
lator of Cuvier has not provided English words for his technical 
terms ; but has formed a Latin word, Carnaria, to represent the 
French terms. From this we might readily form Carnaries ; 
but it appears much better to take the Linnsean name Ferce as 
our root, from which we may take Ferine, substantive as well as 
adjective ; and hence we call this order Ferines. The word for 
which it is most difficult to provide a proper representation, is 
Edente, Edentata : for, as we have said, it would be very harsh to 
speak of the order as the Edentates ; and if we were to abbreviate 
the word into edent, we should suggest a false analogy with 



CX APHORISMS CONCERNING 

rodent, for as rodent is quod rodit, that which gnaws, edent wouM 
be quod edit, that which eats. And even if we were to take 
edent as a substantive, we could hardly use it as an adjective :- 
we should still have to say, for example, the edentate form of 
head. For these reasons it appears best to alter the form of the 
word, and to call the order the Edentals, which is quite allow- 
able, both as adjective and substantive. 

There are several other words in ate about which there is the 
same difficulty in providing substantive forms. Are we to speak 
of Vertebrates ? or would it not be better, in agreement with what 
has been said above, to call these Vertebrals, and the opposite 
class Invertebrate ? 

There are similar difficulties with regard to the names of sub- 
ordinate portions of zoological classification ; thus the Ferines are 
divided by Cuvier into Cheiropteres, Insectiwres, Carnivores ; 
and these latter into Plantigrades, Digitigrades, Amphibies, Mar- 
mpiaux. There is not any great harshness in naturalizing these 
substantives as Chiropters, Insectivores, Carnivores, Plantigrades, 
Digitigrades, Amphibians, and Marsupials. The words Carni- 
vores and Insectivores are better, because of more familiar origin, 
than Greek terms; otherwise we might, if necessary, speak of 
Zoophagans and Entomophagans. 

It is only with certain familiar adjectival terminations, as ous 
and ate, that there is a difficulty in using the word as substantive. 
When this can be avoided, we readily accept the new word, as 
Pachyderms, and in like manner MollusJcs. 

If we examine the names of the Orders of Birds, we find that 
they are in Latin, Predator es or Accipitres, Passer es, Scansores, 
Easores or Gallinw, Grallatores, Palmipedes and Anseres : Cuvier's 
Orders are, Oiseaux de Proie, Passereaux, Grimpeurs, Gallina- 
ces, Echassiers, Palmipedes. These may be englished conveni- 
ently as Predators, Passerines, Scansors, Gallinaceans, (rather than 
Rasors,) Grallators, Palmipedans. Scansors, Grallators,&ndiRasor$ 
are better, as technical terms, than Climbers, Waders, and Scratch- 
ers. We might venture to anglicize the terminations of the 
names which Cuvier gives to the divisions of these Orders : thus 
the Predators are the Diurnals and the Nocturnals ; the Passer- 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. Cxi 

ines are the Dentirostres, the Fissirostres, the Conirostres, the 
Tenuirostres, and the Syndactyls : the word lustre showing that 
the former termination is allowable. The Scansors are not sub- 
divided, nor are the Gallinaceans. The Grallators are Pressirostres, 
Cultrirostres, and Macrodactyls. The Palmipedans are the Plung- 
ers, the Longipens, the Totipalmes and the Lamellirostres. 

The next class of Vertebrals is the Reptiles, and these are 
either Chelonians, Saurians, Ophidians, or Batrachians. Cuvier 
writes Batraciem, but we prefer the spelling to which the Greek 
word directs us. 

The next class is the Fishes, in which province Cuvier has 
himself been the great systematist, and has therefore had to devise 
many new terms. Many of these are of Greek or Latin origin, 
and can be anglicized by the analogies already pointed out, as 
Chondropterygians, Malacopterygians, Lophobranchs, Plectognaths, 
Gymnodonts, Scleroderms. Discoboles and Apodes may be Eng- 
lish as well as French. There are other cases in which the 
author has formed the names of families, either by forming a 
word in ides from the name of a genus, as Gadoides, Gobioides, 
or by gallicizing the Latin name of the genus, as Salmones from 
Salmo, Clupes from Clupea, Esoces from Esox, Cyprins from Cy- 
prinus. In both these cases the best procedure seems to be to 
form the English substantive in idan, as Gadoidans, Gobioidans, 
Salmonidans, Clupeidans, Esocidans, Cyprinidans. One of the 
orders of fishes, co-ordinate with the Chondropterygians and the 
Lophobranchs, is termed Osseux by Cuvier. It appears hardly 
worth while to invent a substantive word for this, when Bony 
Fishes is so simple a phrase, and may readily be understood as a 
technical name of a systematic order. 

The Mollusks are the next class ; and these are divided into 
Cephalopods, Gasteropods, and the like. The Gasteropods are Nu- 
dibranchs, Infer obranchs, Tectibranchs, Pectinibranchs, Scuti- 
branchs, and Cyclobranchs. In framing most of these terms 
Cuvier has made hybrids by a combination of a Latin word with 
branchiae, which is the Greek name for the gills of a fish ; and 
has thus avoided loading the memory with words of an origin not 
obvious to most naturalists, as terms derived from the Greek 



CX11 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

would have been. Another division of the Gasteropoda is Pul- 
mones, which we must make Pulmonians. In like manner the 
subdivisions of the Pectinibranchs are the Trochoidans and BUG- 
einoidans (Trochdides, Buccindides). The Acephales, another 
order of Mollusks, may be Acephals in English. 

After these comes the third grand division of Articulated Ani- 
mals , and these are Annelidans, Crustaceans, Arachnidans, and 
Insects. I shall not dwell upon the names of these, as the form 
of English words which is to be selected must be sufficiently 
obvious from the preceding examples. 

Finally, we have the fourth grand division of animals, the 
llayonnes, or Radiata; which, for reasons already given, we may 
call Radials. These are Echinoderms, Intestinals, Acalephes and 
Polyps. The Polyps, which are composite animals in which many 
gelatinous individuals are connected so as to have a common life, 
have, in many cases, a more solid framework belonging to the com- 
mon part of the animal. This framework, of which coral is a 
special example, is termed in French Polypier ; the word has been 
anglicized by the word polypary, after the analogy of amary and 
apiary. Thus Polyps are either Polyps with Polyparies or Naked 
Polyps. 

Any common kind of Polyps has usually in the English lan- 
guage been called Polypus, the Greek termination being retained. 
This termination in us, however, whether Latin or Greek, is to 
be excluded from the English as much as possible, on account of 
the embarassment which it occasions in the formation of the 
pluraL For if we say Polypi the word ceases to be English, 
while Polypuses is harsh : and there is the additional inconveni- 
ence, that both these forms would indicate the plural of individuals 
rather than of classes. If we were to say, " The Corallines are a 
Family of the Polypuses with Polyparies" it would not at once 
occur to the reader that the three last words formed a technical 
phrase. 

This termination us, which must thus be excluded from the 
names of families, may be admitted in the designation of genera ; 
of animals, as Nautilus, Echinus, Hippopotamus ; and of plants, as 
Crocus, Asparagus, Narcissus, Acanthus, Eanunculus, Fungus. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. CXiii 

The same form occurs in other technical words, as Fucus, Mucus, 
(Esophagus, Hydrocephalus, Callus, Calculus, Uterus, Foetus, 
Radius, Focus, Apparatus. It is, however, advisable to retain 
this form only in cases where it is already firmly established in 
the language ; for a more genuine English form is preferable. 
Hence we say, with Mr. Lyell, Icthyosaur, Plesiosaur, Ptero- 
dactyl. In like manner Mr. Owen anglicizes the termination 
erium, and speaks of the Anoplothere and Paleothere. 

Since the wants of science thus demand adjectives which 
can be used also as substantive names of classes, this consideration 
may sometimes serve to determine our selection of new terms. 
Thus Mr. LyelFs names for the subdivisions of the tertiary strata, 
Miocene, Pliocene, can be used as substantives ; but if such words 
as Mioneous, Plioneous had suggested themselves, they must have 
been rejected, though of equivalent signification, as not fulfilling 
this condition. 

4. (1.) Abstract substantives can easily be formed from ad- 
jectives : from electric we h&ve electricity ; from galvanic, galvan- 
ism ; from organic, organization ; velocity, lemty, gravity, are 
borrowed from Latin adjectives. Caloric is familiarly used for 
the matter of heat, though the form of the word is not supported 
by any obvious analogy. 

(2.) It is quite intolerable to have words regularly formed in 
opposition to the analogy which their meaning offers ; as when 
bodies are said to have conductibiliti/ or conducibility with regard 
to heat. The bodies are conduct^ and their property is con- 
ductivity . 

(3.) The terminations ize (rather than ise), ism, and ist are 
applied to words of all origins : thus we have to pulverize, to 
colonize, Witticism, Heathenism, Journalist, Tobacconist. Hence 
we may make such words when they are wanted. As we cannot 
use physician for a cultivator of physics, I have called him a 
physicist. We need very much a name to describe a cultivator 
of science in general. I should incline to call him a Scientist. 
Thus we might say, that as an Artist is a Musician, Painter, or 
Poet, a Scientist is a Mathematician, Physicist, or Naturalist. 

(4.) Connected with verbs in ize, we have abstract nouns in 



CX1V APHORISMS CONCERNING 

ization, as polarization, crystallization, These it appears proper 
to spell in English with z rather than s ; governing our practice 
by the Greek verbal termination /o> which we imitate. But we 
must observe that verbs and substantives in yse, (analyse,) belong 
to a different analogy, giving an abstract noun in ysis and an 
adjective ytic or ytical ; (analysis, analytic, analytical). Hence 
electrolyse is more proper than electrolyze. 

(5.) The names of many sciences end in ics after the analogy 
of Mathematics, Metaphysics ; as Optics, Mechanics. But these in 
most other languages, as in our own formerly, have the singular 
form Optice, I'Optique, Optik, Optick : and though we now write 
Optics, we make such words of the singular number : " Newton's 
Opticks is an example." As, however, this connexion in new 
words is startling, as when we say, " Thermo-electrics is now much 
cultivated," it appears better to employ the singular form, after 
the analogy of Logic and Rhetoric, when we have words to con- 
struct. Hence we may call the science of languages Linguistic, 
as it is called by the best German writers, for instance, William 
von Humboldt. 

5. In the derivation of English from Latin or Greek words, 
the changes of letters are to be governed by the rules which have 
generally prevailed in such cases. The Greek OL and ai, the 
Latin oe and ae, are all converted into a simple e, as in Economy, 
Geodesy, p^nal, Cesar. Hence, according to common usage, 
we should write phenomena, not phenomena, paleontology, not 
paleontology, miocene not miocome, pekilite not pcekilite. But 
in order to keep more clearly in view the origin of our terms, it 
may be allowable to deviate from these rules of change, especially 
so long as the words are still new and unfamiliar. Dr. Buckland 
speaks of the poikilitic, not pecilitic, group of strata : palaeontology 
is the spelling commonly adopted; and in imitation of this I 
have VfiiitQTipalwtiology. The diphthong et was by the Latins 
changed into i, as in Arist^des; and hence this has been the 
usual form in English. Some recent authors indeed (Mr. Mitford 
for instance) write Ariste^des ; but the former appears to be the 
more legitimate. Hence we write nuocene, pKocene, not meio- 
cene, pliocene. The Greek t> becomes y, and ov becomes u, in 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. CXV 

English as in Latin, as crystal, colure. The consonants K and % 
become c and ch according to common usage. Hence we write 
crystal, not chrystal, batrac/jian not batracian, cryolite, not Cryo- 
lite. As, however, the letter c before and i differs from k, which 
is the sound we assign to the Greek K, it may be allowable to use 
k in order to avoid this confusion. Thus, as we have seen, poi&ilite 
has been used, as well as pecilite. Even in common language 
some authors write sceptic, which appears to be better than scep- 
tic with our pronunciation, and is preferred by Dr. Johnson. 
For the same reason, namely to avoid confusion in the pronuncia- 
tion, and also, in order to keep in view the connexion with 
cathode, the elements of an electrolyte which go to the anode and 
cathode respectively may be termed the anion and catfaon ; 
although the Greek would suggest cation, (/car iov). 

6. The example of chemistry has shown that we have in the 
terminations of words a resource of which great use may be made 
in indicating the relations of certain classes of objects : as sul- 
-phurous and sulphur/0 acids ; sulphates, sulphites, and sulphurets. 
Since the introduction of the artifice by the Lavoisierian school, it 
has been extended to some new cases. Thus Chlorm^, Fluorine, 
Bromine, Iodine, had their names put into that shape in conse- 
quence of their supposed analogy : and for the same reason have 
been termed Chlore, Phtore, Brome, lode, by French chemists. 
In like manner, the names of metals in their Latin form have 
been made to end in um, as Osmium, Palladium ; and hence it is 
better to say Platimm, Molybdenum, than Plating, Molybdena. 
It has been proposed to term the basis of Boracic acid Boron; 
and those who conceive that the basis of Silica has an analogy 
with Boron have proposed to term it Silicon, while those who 
look upon it as a metal would name it Silicium. Selenium was 
so named when it was supposed to be a metal : as its analogies 
are now acknowledged to be of another kind, it would be desirable, 
if the change were not too startling, to term it Selen, as it is in 
German. Phospho/w in like manner might be Phosphor, which 
would indicate its analogy with Sulphur. 

The resource which terminations offer has been applied in 
other cases. The names of many species of minerals end in lite, 



CXV1 APHORISMS CONCERNING 

or ite, as Stauro&'te, Augite. Hence Adolphe Brongniart, in .order 
to form a name for a genus of fossil plants, has given this termi- 
nation to the name of the recent genus which they nearly resem- 
ble, as Zaanites from Zamia, Lycopodto from Lycopodium. 

Names of different genera which differ in termination only 
are properly condemned by Linnaeus*; as Alsine, Alsinoides, 
Alsinella, Alsinastrum ; for there is no definite relation marked 
by those terminations. Linnaeus gives to such genera distinct 
names, Alsine, Bufonia, Sagina, Elatine. 

Terminations are well adapted to express definite systematic 
relations, such as those of chemistry, but they must be employed 
with a due regard to all the bearings of the system. Davy 
proposed to denote the combinations of other substances with 
chlorine by peculiar terminations ; using ane for the smallest 
proportion of Chlorine, and anea for the larger, as Cuprane, 
Cupranea. In this nomenclature, common salt would be Sodane, 
and Chloride of Nitrogen would be Azotane. This suggestion 
never found favour. It was objected that it was contrary to the 
Linnsean precept, that a specific name must not be united to a 
generic as a termination. But this was not putting the matter 
exactly on its right ground ; for the rules of nomenclature of 
natural history do not apply to chemistry ; and the Linnsean rule 
might with equal propriety have been adduced as a condemnation 
of such terms as Sulphurous, Sulphur^. But Davy's terms were 
bad ; for it does not appear that Chlorine enters, as Oxygen does, 
into so large a portion of chemical compounds, that its relations 
afford a key to their nature, and may properly be made an 
element in their names. 

This resource, of terminations, has been abused, wherever it 
has been used wantonly, or without a definite significance in the 
variety. This is the case in M. Beudanfs Mineralogy. Among 
the names which he has given to new species, we find the follow- 
ing (besides many in ite), Scolexero^, Opsimose, Exanthelo^, 
&c.; Diacras^, Panabas^, Neopk&?; Neocl^,- Rhode/*?, Stibi- 
comX &c. ; Marcel^, Wilhelnuw*, Sec.; Exited, and many 
others. In addition to other objections which might be made 
* Phil. J3ot., 231. 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. CXV11 

to these names, their variety is a material defect : for to make 
this variety depend on caprice alone, as in those cases it does, is 
to throw away a resource of which chemical nomenclature may 
teach us the value. 

APHORISM XVII. 

When alterations in technical terms become necessary, it is desirable 
that the new term should contain in its form some memorial of 
the old one. 

WE have excellent examples of the advantageous use of this 
maxim in Linnseus^s reform of botanical nomenclature. His 
innovations were very extensive, but they were still moderated as 
much as possible, and connected in many ways with the names 
of plants then in use. He has himself given several rules of 
nomenclature, which tend to establish this connexion of the 
old and new in a reform. Thus he says, " Generic names 
which are current, and are not accompanied with harm to botany, 
should be tolerated*." "A passable generic name is not to be 
changed for another, though more apt-)-." New generic names 
are not to be framed so long as passable synonyms are at hand!." 
" A generic name of one genus, except it be superfluous, is not 
to be transferred to another genus, though it suit the other 
better ." " If a received genus requires to be divided into 
several, the name which before included the whole, shall be 
applied to the most common and familiar kind 1 1." And though 
he rejects all generic names which have not a Greek or Latin 
rootU, he is willing to make an exception in favour of those 
which from their form might be supposed to have such a root, 
though they are really borrowed from other languages, as Thea y 
which is the Greek for goddess ; Coffea, which might seem to come 
from a Greek word denoting silence (/e&>0o<?) ; Cheiranthus, 
which appears to mean hand-flower, but is really derived from 
the Arabic Keiri : and many others. 

As we have already said, the attempt at a reformation of the 

* Philosophia Botanica, Art. 242. t P. 246. J P. 247. 

P. 249. |j P. 249. 1T P. 232. 



CXviii APHORISMS CONCERNING 

nomenclature of Mineralogy made by Professor Mohs will pro- 
bably not produce any permanent effect, on this account amongst 
others, that it has not been conducted in this temperate mode ; 
the innovations bear too large a proportion to the whole of the 
names, and contain too little to remind us of the known appella- 
tions. Yet in some respects Professor Mohs has acted upon this 
maxim. Thus he has called one of his classes Spar, because 
Felspar belongs to it. I shall venture to offer a few suggestions 
on this subject of mineralogical nomenclature. 

It has already been remarked that the confusion and complexity 
which prevail in this subject render a reform very desirable. 
But it will be seen, from the reasons assigned under the Ninth 
Aphorism, that no permanent system of names can be looked for, 
till a sound system of classification be established. The best 
mineralogical systems recently published, however, appear to con- 
verge to a common point ; and certain classes have been formed 
which have both a natural-historical and a chemical significance. 
These Classes, according to Naumann, whose arrangement appears 
the best, are Hydrolytes, Haloids, Silicides, Oxides of Metals, 
Metals, Sulphurides (Pyrites, Glances, and Blendes), and Anthra- 
cides. Now we find ; that the Hydrolytes are all compounds, 
such as are commonly termed Salts ; that the Haloids are, many 
of them, already called Spars, as Calc Spar, Heavy Spar, Iron 
Spar, Zinc Spar ; that the Silicides, the most numerous and 
difficult class, are denoted for the most part, by single words, 
many of which end in ite ; that the other classes, or sub-classes, 
Oxides, Pyrites, Glances, and Blendes, have commonly been so 
termed ; as Red Iron Oxide, Iron Pyrites, Zinc Blende ; while 
pure metals have usually had the adjective Native prefixed, 
as Native Gold, Native Copper. These obvious features of 
the current names appear to afford us a basis for a systematic 
nomenclature. The Salts and Spars might all have the word 
salt or spar included in their name, as Natron Salt, Glauber 
Salt, Hock Salt ; Calc Spar, Bitter Spar (Carbonate of Lime 
and Magnesia), Fluor Spar, Phosphor Spar (Phosphate of 
Lime), Heavy Spar, Celestine Spar (Sulphate of Strontian), 
Chromic Lead Spar (Chromate of Lead) ; the Silicides might all 



THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 

have the name constructed so as to be a single word ending in ite, 
as Chabasite (Chabasie), Natr elite (Mesotype), Sommite (Nephe- 
line), Pistacite (Epidote) ; from this rule might be excepted the 
Gems, as Topaz, Emerald, Corundum, which might retain their 
old names. The Oxides, Pyrites, Glances, and Blendes, might be 
so termed ; thus we should have Tungstic Iron Oxide (usually 
called Tungstate of Iron), Arsenical Iron Pyrites (Mispickel), 
Tetrahedral Copper Glance (Fahlerz), Quicksilver Blende (Cinna- 
bar), and the Metals might be termed native, as Native Copper, 
Native Silver. 

Such a nomenclature would take in a very large proportion of 
commonly received appellations, especially if we were to select 
among the synonyms, as is proposed above in the case of Glauber 
Salt, Bitter Spar, Sommite, Pistacite, Natrolite. Hence it might 
be adopted without serious inconvenience. It would make the 
name convey information respecting the place of the mineral in 
the system; and by imposing this condition, would limit the 
extreme caprice, both as to origin and form, which has hitherto 
been indulged in imposing mineralogical names. 

The principle of a mineralogical nomenclature determined by 
the place of the species in the system, has been recognized by Mr. 
Beudant as well as Mr. Mohs. The former writer has proposed 
that we should say Carbonate Calcaire, Carbonate Witherite, Sul- 
phate Couperose, Silicate Stilbite, Silicate Chabasie, and so on. 
But these are names in which the part added for the sake of the 
system is not incorporated with the common name, and would 
hardly make its way into common use. 

We have already noticed Mr. Mohs's designations for two of 
the Systems of Crystallization, the Pyramidal and the Pris- 
matic, as not characteristic. If it were thought advisable to re- 
form such a defect, this might be done by calling them the 
Square Pyramidal and the Oblong Prismatic, which terms, while 
they expressed the real distinction of the systems, would be intel- 
ligible at once to those acquainted with the Mohsian terminology. 

I will mention another suggestion respecting the introduction of 
an improvement in scientific language. The term Depolarization 
was introduced, because it was believed that the effect of certain 



CXX APHORISMS CONCERNING THE LANGUAGE OF SCIENCE. 

crystals, when polarized light was incident upon them in certain 
positions, was to destroy the peculiarity which polarization had 
produced. But it is now well known that the effect of the second 
crystal in general is to divide the polarized ray of light into two 
rays, polarized in different planes. Still this effect is often spoken 
of as Depolarization, no better term having been yet devised. I 
have proposed and used the term Depolarization, which well ex- 
presses what takes place, and so nearly resembles the older word, 
that it must sound familiar to those already acquainted with 
writings on this subject. 

I may mention one term in another department of literature 
which it appears desirable to reform in the same manner. The 
theory of the Fine Arts, or the philosophy which speculates con- 
cerning what is beautiful in painting, sculpture or architecture, 
and other arts, often requires to be spoken of in a single word. 
Baumgarten and other German writers have termed this province 
of speculation ^Esthetics ; aicrddvecrOai, to perceive, being a word 
which appeared to them fit to designate the perception of beauty 
in particular. Since, however, aesthetics would naturally denote 
the doctrine of perception ; since this doctrine requires a name ; 
since the term aesthetics has actually been applied to it by other 
German writers (as Kant) ; and since the essential point in the 
philosophy now spoken of is that it attends to beauty; it appears 
desirable to change this name. In pursuance of the maxim now 
before us, I should propose the term Callwsthetics, or rather (in 
agreement with what was said in page cxiv.) Callwsthetic, the 
science of the perception of beauty. 

I may here notice a principle which may sometimes be allowed 
to influence us, in selecting one form rather than another for a 
technical term. It is convenient to make correlative terms re- 
semble each other in termination, even when the resemblance is 
only apparent ; thus we may speak of marine and terrene animals, 
rather than terrestrial or tellurian. Dr. Prichard speaks of car- 
nivorous wAphytiborous insects ; preferring the latter term to phy- 
tophagous, on account of its sound, I suppose, as well as for other 
reasons. 






THE 



PHILOSOPHY 



OF THE 



INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 



PART I. 

OF IDEAS. 



VOL. I. B 



adhuc inventa sunt in Scientiis, ea hujusmodi simt 
ut notionibus vulgaribus fere subjaceant : ut vero ad 
interiora et remotiora naturas penetretur, necesse est ut 
tarn NOTIONES quam AXIOMATA magis certa et munita 
via a particularibus abstrahantur ; atque omnino melior 
et certior intellectus adoperatio in ustim veniat. 

BACON, Nov. Org., Lib. 1. Aphor. xviii. 



BOOK I. 



OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 



CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTION. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE, if the phrase were to be 
understood in the comprehensive sense which most natu- 
rally offers itself to our thoughts, would imply nothing 
less than a complete insight into the essence and con- 
ditions of all real knowledge, and an exposition of the 
best methods for the discovery of new truths. We must 
narrow and lower this conception, in order to mould it 
into a form in which we may make it the immediate 
object of our labours with a good hope of success ; yet 
still it may be a rational and useful undertaking, to 
endeavour to make some advance towards such a Philo- 
sophy, even according to the most ample conception of it 
which we can form. The present work has been written 
with a view of contributing, in some measure, however 
small it may be, towards such an undertaking. 

But in this, as in every attempt to advance beyond 
the position which we at present occupy, our hope of 
success must depend mainly upon our being able to profit, 
to the fullest extent, by the progress already made. We 
may best hope to understand the nature and conditions 
of real knowledge, by studying the nature and conditions 
of the most certain and stable portions of knowledge 
which we already possess : and we are most likely to 
learn the best methods of discovering truth, by examin- 

B 2 



4: OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

ing how truths, now universally recognised, have really 
been discovered. Now there do exist among us doc- 
trines of solid and acknowledged certainty, and truths of 
which the discovery has been received with universal 
applause. These constitute what we commonly term 
Sciences; and of these bodies of exact and enduring 
knowledge, we have within our reach so large and varied 
a collection, that we may examine them, and the history 
of their formation, with a good prospect of deriving from 
the study such instruction as we seek. We may best 
hope to make some progress towards the Philosophy of 
Science, by employing ourselves upon THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF THE SCIENCES. 

The sciences to which the name is most commonly 
and unhesitatingly given, are those which are concerned 
about the material world; whether they deal with the 
celestial bodies, as the sun and stars, or the earth and its 
products, or the elements ; whether they consider the 
differences which prevail among such objects, or their 
origin, or their mutual operation. And in all these 
sciences it is familiarly understood and assumed, that 
their doctrines are obtained by a common process of col- 
lecting general truths from particular observed facts, 
which process is termed Induction. It is further assumed 
that both in these and in other provinces of knowledge, 
so long as this process is duly and legitimately performed? 
the results will be real substantial truth. And although 
this process, with the conditions under which it is 
legitimate, and the general laws of the formation of 
sciences, will hereafter be subjects of discussion in this 
work, I shall at present so far adopt the assumption of 
which I speak, as to give to the sciences from which our 
lessons are to be collected the name of Inductive sciences. 
And thus it is that I am led to designate my work as 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

The views respecting the nature and progress of 
knowledge, towards which we shall be directed by such a 
course of inquiry as I have pointed out, though derived 
from those portions of human knowledge which are more 
peculiarly and technically termed Sciences, will by no 
means be confined, in their bearing, to the domain of such 
sciences as deal with the material world, nor even to the 
whole range of sciences now existing. On the contrary, 
we shall be led to believe that the nature of truth is in all 
subjects the same, and that its discovery involves, in all 
cases, the like conditions. On one subject of human 
speculation after another, man's knowledge assumes that 
exact and substantial character which leads us to term it 
Science ; and in all these cases, whether inert matter or 
living bodies, whether permanent relations or successive 
occurrences be the subject of our attention, we can point 
out certain universal characters which belong to truth, 
certain general laws which have regulated its progress 
among men. And we naturally expect that even when we 
extend our range of speculation wider still, when we 
contemplate the world within us as well as the world 
without us, when we consider the thoughts and actions of 
men as well as the motions and operations of unintelli- 
gent bodies, we shall still find some general analogies 
which belong to the essence of truth, and run through 
the whole intellectual universe. Hence we have reason 
to trust that a just philosophy of the sciences may throw 
light upon the nature and extent of our knowledge in 
every department of human speculation. By considering 
what is the real import of our acquisitions, where they are 
certain and definite, we may learn something respecting 
the difference between true knowledge and its precarious 
or illusory semblances ; by examining the steps by which 
such acquisitions have been made, we may discover the 
conditions under which truth is to be obtained ; by 



6 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

tracing the boundary-line between our knowledge and 
our ignorance, we may ascertain in some measure the 
extent of the powers of man's understanding. 

But it may be said, in such a design there is nothing 
new ; these are objects at which inquiring men have often 
before aimed. To determine the difference between real 
and imaginary knowledge, the conditions under which w r e 
arrive at truth, the range of the powers of the human 
mind, has been a favourite employment of speculative 
men from the earliest to the most recent times. To 
inquire into the original, certainty, and compass of man's 
knowledge, the limits of his capacity, the strength and 
weakness of his reason, has been the professed purpose of 
many of the most conspicuous and valued labours of the 
philosophers of all periods up to our own day. It may 
appear, therefore, that there is little necessity to add one 
more to these numerous essays ; and little hope that any 
new attempt will make any very important addition to 
the stores of thought upon such questions, which have 
been accumulated by the profoundest and acutest thinkers 
of all ages. 

To this I reply, that without at all disparaging the 
value or importance of the labours of those who have 
previously written respecting the foundations and con- 
ditions of human knowledge, it may still be possible to 
add something to what they have clone. The writings of 
all great philosophers, up to our own time, form a series 
which is not yet terminated. The books and systems of 
philosophy which have, each in its own time, won the ad- 
miration of men, and exercised a powerful influence upon 
their thoughts, have had each its own part and functions 
in the intellectual history of the world ; and other 
labours w r hich shall succeed these may also have their 
proper office and useful effect. We may not be able to 
do much, and yet still it may be in our power to effect 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

something. Perhaps the very advances made by former 
inquirers may have made it possible for us, at present, to 
advance still further. In the discovery of truth, in the 
developement of man's mental powers and privileges, 
each generation has its assigned part; and it is for us to 
endeavour to perform our portion of this perpetual task 
of our species. Although the terms which describe our 
undertaking may be the same which have often been em- 
ployed by previous writers to express their purpose, yet 
our position is different from theirs, and thus the result 
may be different too. We have, as they had, to run our 
appropriate course of speculation with the exertion of 
our best powers ; but our course lies in a more advanced 
part of the great line along wiiich philosophy travels 
from age to age. However familiar and old, therefore, 
be the design of such a work as this, the execution 
may have, and if it be performed in a manner suitable 
to the time, will have, something that is new and not 
unimportant. 

Indeed, it appears to be absolutely necessary, in order 
to check the prevalence of grave and pernicious error, 
that the doctrines which are taught concerning the foun- 
dations of human knowledge and the powers -of the 
human mind, should be from time to time revised and 
corrected or extended. Erroneous and partial views are 
promulgated and accepted ; one portion of the truth is 
insisted upon to the undue exclusion of another; or 
principles true in themselves are exaggerated till they 
produce on men's minds the effect of falsehood. When 
evils of this kind have grown to a serious height, a reform- 
is requisite. The faults of the existing systems must be 
remedied by correcting what is wrong, and supplying 
what is wanting. In such cases, all the merits and ex- 
cellencies of the labours of the preceding times do not 
supersede the necessity of putting forth new views suited 



8 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

to the emergency which has arrived. The new form 
which error has assumed makes it proper to endeavour to 
give a new and corresponding form to truth. Thus the 
mere progress of time, and the natural growth of opinion 
from one stage to another, leads to the production of 
new systems and forms of philosophy. It will be found, 
I think, that some of the doctrines now most widely pre- 
valent respecting the foundations and nature of truth are 
of such a kind that a reform is needed. The present age 
seems, by many indications, to be called upon to seek a 
sounder philosophy of knowledge than is now current 
among us. To contribute towards such a philosophy is 
the object of the present work. The work is, therefore, 
like all works which take into account the most recent 
forms of speculative doctrine, invested with a certain 
degree of novelty in its aspect and import, by the mere 
time and circumstances of its appearance. 

But, moreover, we can point out a very important 
peculiarity by which this work is, in its design, distin- 
guished from preceding essays on like subjects ; and this 
difference appears to be of such a kind as may well en- 
title us to expect some substantial addition to our know- 
ledge as the result of our labours. The peculiarity of 
which I speak has already been announced ; it is this : 
that we purpose to collect our doctrines concerning the 
nature of knowledge, and the best mode of acquiring it, 
from a contemplation of the structure and history of 
those sciences (the material sciences), which are univer- 
sally recognised as the clearest and surest examples of 
knowledge and of discovery. It is by surveying and 
studying the whole mass of such sciences, and the vari- 
ous steps of their progress, that we now hope to approach 
to the true Philosophy of Science. 

Now this, I venture to say, is a new method of pur- 
suing the philosophy of human knowledge. Those who 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

have hitherto endeavoured to explain the nature of know- 
ledge, and the process of discovery, have, it is true, often 
illustrated their views by adducing special examples of 
truths which they conceived to be established, and by 
referring to the mode of their establishment. But these 
examples have, for the most part, been taken at random, 
not selected according to any principle or system. Often 
they have involved doctrines so precarious or so vague 
that they confused rather than elucidated the subject J 
and instead of a single difficulty, What is the nature 
of knowledge? these attempts at illustration introduced 
two, What was the true analysis of the doctrines thus 
adduced? and, Whether they might safely be taken as 
types of real knowledge ? 

This has usually been the case when there have been 
adduced, as standard examples of the formation of human 
knowledge, doctrines belonging to supposed sciences other 
than the material sciences ; doctrines, for example, 
of political economy, or philology, or morals, or the phi- 
losophy of the fine arts. I am very far from thinking 
that, in regard to such subjects, there are no important 
truths hitherto established : but it would seem that those 
truths which have been obtained in these provinces of 
knowledge, have not yet been fixed by means of 
distinct and permanent phraseology, and sanctioned 
by universal reception, and formed into a connected 
system, and traced through the steps of their gradual 
discovery and establishment, so as to make them in- 
structive examples of the nature and progress of truth 
in general. Hereafter we trust to be able to show that 
the progress of moral, and political, and philological, and 
other knowledge, is governed by the same laws as that 
of physical science. But since, at present, the former 
class of subjects are full of controversy, doubt, and 
obscurity, while the latter consist of undisputed truths 



10 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

clearly understood and expressed, it may be considered 
a wise procedure to make the latter class of doctrines 
the basis of our speculations. And on the having taken 
this course, is, in a great measure, my hope founded, of 
obtaining valuable truths which have escaped preceding 
inquirers. 

But it may be said that many preceding writers on 
the nature and progress of knowledge have taken their 
examples abundantly from the physical sciences. It 
would be easy to point out admirable works, which have 
appeared during the present and former generations, in 
which instances of discovery, borrowed from the physical 
sciences, are introduced in a manner most happily 
instructive. And to the works in which this has been 
done, I gladly give my most cordial admiration. But at 
the same time I may venture to remark that there still 
remains a difference between my design and theirs : and 
that I use the physical sciences as exemplifications of the 
general progress of knowledge in a manner very mate- 
rially different from the course which is followed in works 
such as are now referred to. For the conclusions stated 
in the present work, respecting knowledge and discovery, 
are drawn from a connected and systematic survey of the 
whole range of physical science and its history; whereas, 
hitherto, philosophers have contented themselves with 
adducing detached examples of scientific doctrines, drawn 
from one or two departments of science. So long as we 
select our examples in this arbitrary and limited manner 
we lose the best part of that philosophical instruction, 
which the sciences are fitted to afford when we consider 
them as all members of one series, and as governed by rules 
which are the same for all. Mathematical and chemical 
truths, physical and physiological doctrines, the sciences of 
classification and of causation, must alike be taken into 
our account, in order that we may learn what are the 



INTRODUCTION. 11 

general characters of real knowledge. When our con- 
clusions assume so comprehensive a shape that they apply 
to a range of subjects so vast and varied as these, we 
may feel some confidence that they represent the genuine 
form of universal and permanent truth. But if our 
exemplification is of a narrower kind, it may easily 
cramp and disturb our philosophy. We may, for instance, 
render our views of truth and its evidence so rigid and 
confined as to be quite worthless, by founding them too 
much on the contemplation of mathematical truth. We 
may overlook some of the most important steps in the 
general course of discovery, by fixing our attention too 
exclusively upon some one conspicuous group of dis- 
coveries, as, for instance, those of Newton. We may 
misunderstand the nature of physiological discoveries, by 
attempting to force an analogy between them and dis- 
coveries of mechanical laws, without attending to the 
intermediate sciences which fill up the vast interval 
between these extreme terms in the series of material 
sciences. In these and in many other ways, a partial 
and arbitrary reference to the material sciences in our 
inquiry into human knowledge may mislead us ; or at 
least may fail to give us those wider views, and that 
deeper insight, which should result from a systematic study 
of the whole range of sciences with this particular object. 

The design of the following work, then, is to form a 
Philosophy of Science, by analysing the substance and 
examining the progress of the existing body of the 
sciences. As a preliminary to this undertaking, a survey 
of the history of the sciences was necessary. This, 
accordingly, I have already performed ; and the result of 
the labour thus undertaken has been laid before the 
public as a History of the Inductive Sciences. 

In that work I have endeavoured to trace the steps 
by which men acquired each main portion of that know- 



12 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

ledge on which they now look with so much confidence 
and satisfaction. The events which that history relates, the 
speculations and controversies which are there described, 
and discussions of the same kind, far more extensive, 
which are there omitted, must all be taken into our 
account at present, as the prominent and standard 
examples of the circumstances which attend the progress 
of knowledge. With so much of real historical fact 
before us, we may hope to avoid such views of the pro- 
cesses of the human mind as are too partial and limited, 
or too vague and loose, or too abstract and unsubstantial, 
to represent fitly the real forms of discovery and of truth. 
Of former attempts, made with the same view of 
tracing the conditions of the progress of knowledge, that 
of Bacon is perhaps the most conspicuous : and his 
labours on this subject were opened by his book on the 
Advancement of Learning, which contains, among other 
matter, a survey of the then existing state of knowledge. 
But this review was undertaken rather with the object of 
ascertaining in what quarters future advances were to be 
hoped for, than of learning by what means they were to be 
made. His examination of the domain of human know- 
ledge was conducted rather with the view of discovering 
what remained undone, than of finding out how so much 
had been done. Bacon's survey was made for the purpose 
of tracing the boundaries, rather than of detecting the 
principles of knowledge. " I will now attempt," he says*, 
" to make a general and faithful perambulation of learn- 
ing, with an inquiry what parts thereof lie fresh and 
waste, and not improved and converted by the industry of 
man ; to the end that such a plot made and recorded to 
memory, may both minister light to any public designa- 
tion, and also serve to excite voluntary endeavours." 
Nor will it be foreign to our scheme also hereafter to 
* Achoncement of Learning ^ b. i. p. 74. 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

examine with a like purpose the frontier of man's intel- 
lectual estate. But the object of our perambulation in 
the first place, is not so much to determine the extent of 
the field, as the sources of its fertility. We would learn 
by what plan and rules of culture, conspiring with the 
native forces of the bounteous soil, those rich harvests 
have been produced which fill our garners. Bacon's 
maxims, on the other hand, respecting the mode in which 
he conceived that knowledge was thenceforth to be cul- 
tivated, have little reference to the failures, still less to 
the successes, which are recorded in his Review of the 
learning of his time. His precepts are connected with 
his historical views in a slight and unessential manner. 
His philosophy of the sciences is not collected from the 
sciences which are noticed in his survey. Nor, in truth, 
could this, at the time when he wrote, have easily been 
otherwise. At that period, scarce any branch of physics 
existed as a science, except astronomy. The rules which 
Bacon gives for the conduct of scientific researches are 
obtained, as it were, by divination, from the contempla- 
tion of subjects with regard to which no sciences as yet 
were. His instances of steps rightly or wrongly made in 
this path, are in a great measure cases of his own devis- 
ing. He could not have exemplified his Aphorisms by 
references to treatises then extant, on the laws of nature ; 
for the constant burden of his exhortation is, that men 
up to his time had almost universally followed an erro- 
neous course. And however we may admire the sagacity 
with which he pointed the way along a better path, we 
have this great advantage over him ; that we can interro- 
gate the many travellers who since his time have journeyed 
on this road. At the present day, when we have under 
our notice so many sciences, of such wide extent, so well 
established ; a Philosophy of the Sciences ought, it must 
seem, to be founded, not upon conjecture, but upon an 



14 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

examination of many instances ; should not consist of a 
few vague and unconnected maxims, difficult and doubt- 
ful. in their application, but should form a system of which 
every part has been repeatedly confirmed and verified. 

This accordingly it is the purpose of the present work 
to attempt. But I may further observe, that as my hope 
of making any progress in this undertaking is founded 
upon the design of keeping constantly in view the whole 
result of the past history and present condition of science, 
I have also been led to draw my lessons from my exam- 
ples in a manner more systematic and regular, as appears 
to me, than has been done by preceding writers. Bacon, 
as I have just said, was led to his maxims for the promo- 
tion of knowledge by the sagacity of his own mind, with 
little or no aid from previous examples. Succeeding 
philosophers may often have gathered useful instruction 
from the instances of scientific truths and discoveries 
which they adduced, but their conclusions were drawn 
from their instances casually and arbitrarily. They took 
for their moral any which the story might suggest. Bat 
such a proceeding as this cannot suffice for us, whose aim 
is to obtain a consistent body of philosophy from a con- 
templation of the whole of Science and its History. For 
our purpose it is necessary to resolve scientific truths into 
their conditions and ingredients, in order that we may see 
in what manner e*ach of these has been and is to be 
provided, in the cases which we may have to consider. 
This accordingly is necessarily the first part of our task ' 
to analyse scientific truth into its elements. This attempt 
will occupy the earlier portion of the present work ; and 
will necessarily be somewhat long, and perhaps, in many 
parts, abstruse and uninviting. The risk of such an 
inconvenience is inevitable ; for the inquiry brings before 
us many of the most dark and entangled questions in 
which men have at any time busied themselves. And 



INTRODUCTION. 15 

even if these can now be made clearer and plainer than 
of yore, still they can be made so only by means of men- 
tal discipline and mental effort. Moreover this analysis 
of scientific truth into its elements contains much, both in 
its principles and in its results, different from the doctrines 
most generally prevalent among us in recent times : but 
on that very account this analysis is an essential part 
of the doctrines which I have now to lay before the 
reader : and I must therefore crave his indulgence towards 
any portion of it which may appear to him obscure or 
repulsive. 

There is another circumstance which may tend to 
make the present work less pleasing than others on the 
same subject, in the nature of the examples of human 
knowledge to which I confine myself; all my instances 
being, as I have said, taken from the material sciences. 
For the truths belonging to these sciences are, for the 
most part, neither so familiar nor so interesting to the 
bulk of readers as those doctrines which belong to some 
other subjects. Every general proposition concerning 
politics or morals at once stirs up an interest in men's 
bosoms, which makes them listen with curiosity to the 
attempts to trace it to its origin and foundation. Every 
rule of art or language brings before the mind of culti- 
vated men subjects of familiar and agreeable thought, 
and is dwelt upon with pleasure for its own sake as well 
as on account of the philosophical lessons which it may 
convey. But the curiosity which regards the truths of 
physics or chemistry, or even of physiology and astro- 
nomy, is of a more limited and less animated kind. 
Hence, in the mode of inquiry which I have prescribed 
to myself, the examples which I have to adduce will not 
amuse and relieve the reader's mind as much as they 
might do, if I could allow myself to collect them from 
the whole field of human knowledge. They will have in 



16 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

them nothing to engage his fancy, or to warm his heart. 
I am compelled to detain the listener in the chilly air 
of the external world, in order that we may have the 
advantage of full daylight. 

But although I cannot avoid this inconvenience, so far 
as it is one, I hope it will be recollected how great are the 
advantages which we obtain by this restriction. We are 
thus enabled to draw all our conclusions from doctrines 
which are universally allowed to be eminently certain, 
clear, and definite. The portions of knowledge to which 
I refer are well known, and well established among men. 
Their names are familiar, their assertions uncontested. 
Astronomy and geology, mechanics and chemistry, optics 
and acoustics, botany and physiology, are each recognised 
as large and substantial collections of undoubted truths. 
Men are wont to dwell with pride and triumph on the 
acquisitions of knowledge which have been made in each 
of these provinces ; and to speak with confidence of the 
certainty of their results. And all can easily learn in 
what repositories these treasures of human knowledge are 
to be found. When, therefore, we begin our inquiry 
from such examples, we proceed upon a solid foundation. 
With such a clear ground of confidence, we shall not be 
met with general assertions of the vagueness and un- 
certainty of human knowledge ; with the question, what 
truth is and how we are to recognise it ; with complaints 
concerning the hopelessness and unprofitableness of such 
researches. We have, at least, a definite problem before 
us. We have to examine the structure and scheme, not 
of a shapeless mass* of incoherent materials, of which we 
doubt whether it be a ruin or a natural wilderness, but of 
a fair and lofty palace, still erect and tenanted, where 
hundreds of different apartments belong to a common 
plan, where every generation adds something to the 
extent and magnificence of the pile. The certainty and 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

the constant progress of science are things so unques- 
tioned, that we are at least engaged in an intelligible 
inquiry, when we are examining the grounds and nature 
of that certainty, the causes and laws of that progress. 

To this inquiry, then, we now proceed. And in 
entering upon this task, however our plan or our prin- 
ciples may differ from those of the eminent philosophers 
who have endeavoured, in our own or in former times, to 
illustrate or enforce the philosophy of science, we most 
willingly acknowledge them as in many things our 
leaders and teachers. Each reform must involve its own 
peculiar principles, and the result of our attempts, so far 
as they lead to a result, must be, in some respects, 
different from those of former works. But we may still 
share with the great writers who have treated this 
subject before us, their spirit of hope and trust, their 
reverence for the dignity of the subject, their belief in 
the vast powers and boundless destiny of man. And we 
may once more venture to use the words of hopeful 
exhortation, with which the greatest of those who have 
trodden this path encouraged himself arid his followers 
when he set out upon his way. 

" Concerning ourselves we speak not ; but as touching 
the matter which we have in hand, this we ask ; that 
men deem it not to be the setting up an Opinion, but the 
performing of a Work : and that they receive this as a 
certainty ; that we are not laying the foundations of any 
sect or doctrine, but of the profit and dignity of mankind. 
Furthermore, that being well disposed to what shall 
advantage themselves, and putting off factions and pre- 
judices, they take common counsel with us, to the end 
that being by these our aids and appliances freed and 
defended from wanderings and . impediments, they may 
lend their hands also to the labours which remain to be 
performed : and yet further, that they be of good hope ; 
VOL. i. c 



18 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

neither imagine to themselves this our Reform as some- 
thing of infinite dimension, and beyond the grasp of 
mortal man, when in truth it is the end and true limit of 
infinite errour; and is by no means unmindful of the 
condition of mortality and humanity, not confiding that 
such a thing can be carried to its perfect close in the 
space of one single age, but assigning it as a task to a 
succession of generations." 



CHAPTER II. 
OF FACTS AND THEORIES. 

1. I REGRET very much that I must begin my discus- 
sion by questioning the validity of a distinction which is 
usually considered to be clear and plain. For my pur- 
pose is to establish distinctions, not to obliterate them ; 
and with regard to such contrasts as are commonly 
recognised among men, it will generally be my business 
rather to point out their real import, and give them as 
much clefiniteness as possible, than to endeavour to 
involve them in doubt and confusion. And, indeed, 
though I am compelled at first to expose the obscurity 
of the supposed line which separates Fact and Theory, I 
shall afterwards have to show that the contrast which we 
mark by these terms does really involve an antithesis 
which is the foundation of the whole philosophy of know- 
ledge. 

Every one is familiar with the distinction of Fact and 
Theory as commonly understood. Facts offer themselves 
to our senses on every side : ingenious men have framed 
Theories, that is, modes of mental conception, by which 
the facts are interpreted, connected, and accounted for. 
Every moment offers us examples of the two. The day 



OF FACTS AND THEORIES. 19 

dawns; the sun's bright edge beams over the distant 
hills; that is the fact. The theory is that the earth's 
surface rolls round towards the sun, and thus brings him 
into view. The dew-drops hang on the blade and the 
leaf; their globular form is a fact. By our theory we 
see in this fact a mutual attraction of the minutest por- 
tion of the water which composes the drops. Each drop, 
as it hangs in the sunshine, has on its surface a bright 
spot which shifts as the beholder moves, and has behind 
it another bright speck which falls on some neighbouring 
object. These facts our theories make us contemplate 
as the reflected and refracted light of the sun. The 
plant thus hung with dew exhibits to us its leaves and 
flowers, but in our minds we compare it with other plants 
in which the leaves and flowers are more or less different ; 
we consider these facts as indicating the relation of this 
particular plant to some wider family of the vegetable 
system, such as in our theory we have arranged it. Or 
if we are acquainted with the plants of other regions, we 
may see in the existence and features of such a plant the 
confirmation of a theory by which we look upon some 
portion of our vegetable population as strangers wandered 
hither from a distant land. 

2. In all these cases, the distinction between the fact 
as it presents itself to our senses and the theoretical 
view, seems at first sight plain enough. Yet a little con- 
sideration may show us that this distinction is not in 
every case quite clear. Is it not a fact as well as a 
theory that we see the light reflected from the surface of 
a dew-drop, and do we not by our common language 
acknowledge it to be so ? And is not the refraction of 
the light through the water as much a fact as its reflection 
from the surface? Does not the manner in which the 
drop hangs from the leaf show that it is a fact that the 
particles of water adhere to or attract each other? Is not 

C 2 



20 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

tins as much a fact as the globular form of the drops, or 
indeed more so, for the drops are riot strictly globular? 
That they are not so, we learn from theory, and thus 
our theory corrects our facts. Is not the greater or less 
resemblance of one plant to another a fact ? and is not, 
therefore, a classification, which is merely a collection of 
such resemblances, a fact also ? And if the doctrine of 
the derivation of any particular plant from one region to 
another be a true theory, is it not a fact on that very 
account ? 

And with regard to the first mentioned of the above 
cases, the theoretical motion of the earth, is not that also 
a fact, if the theory be true ? It may be said that the 
theory contradicts the facts as noticed by our senses. 
But that our senses may misinform us respecting facts, 
we easily see. When we glide along smooth water in 
a barge, our senses inform us that the shore moves away 
from us ; but we know the fact to be otherwise. And if 
the motion of the barge be the fact in this case, is not 
the motion of the earth, by which the sun's rising is pro- 
duced, a fact no less ? 

Again, if it were said that that is a fact which our 
senses perceive, the question must be asked, whose senses? 
One man watches the stars all the night, and sees them 
describe circles about the pole ; another looks at them 
carelessly and at intervals, and sees no circles. Is not 
the diurnal circular motion of the stars a fact ? Again, 
a man may rightly apprehend the motion of the stars for 
one night, but may not notice the motion of the moon 
among the stars from night to night. Another man 
notices this latter motion also : to him the moon's 
monthly circuit through the heavens is a fact. And 
again, to another observer, more vigilant, the annual 
motion of the sun in the ecliptic is a fact just as much 
as the monthly motion of the moon in her orbit. For 



OF FACTS AND THEORIES. 21 

the only difference is, that the moon's light quenches 
only the smaller stars in her neighbourhood, while the 
sun obliterates all. And thus what is matter of theory 
to one observer is matter of fact to another. 

Is it not, indeed, evident that a theory, if it be true, 
is on that very account a fact? All the great theories 
which have successively been established in the world, 
are now thought of as facts. Is not the motion of the 
earth round the sun a fact ? Is not the elliptical form 
of the planets' orbits a fact ? Is not the attraction of the 
sun upon the planets a fact ? Is not the circulation of 
the blood a fact ? The definite and multiple proportions 
of the elements of bodies, which make up what is com- 
monly called the atomic theory, are not they facts? 

Thus, the opposition of fact and theory a contrast 
which at first appeared so broad and plain as we examine 
it, becomes wavering, obscure, and doubtful. The line of 
demarcation is invisible ; the application of the distinc- 
tion full of difficulty. That which is a fact under one 
aspect is a theory under another. The most recondite 
theories, when firmly established, are accepted as facts ; 
the simplest facts appear to involve something of the 
nature of theory. 

3. But yet, in what has been said, something of a 
difference between fact and theory still remains apparent. 
It is only when theories are firmly established, and recog- 
nised as indisputably true, that they become facts, The 
view, originally theoretical, becomes at length so con- 
vincing, that it occurs to us as the most natural view, and 
then it is theoretical no longer. The interpretation of 
appearances, which was at first a novelty and an effort, 
becomes at last so familiar that we are not conscious of 
it ; and then the distinction of theory and fact, in that 
instance, melts away. Theory is some interpretation 
of phenomena, or inference from them, which we make 



22 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

by a conscious act of thought, adding some new form of 
conception to that which at first offers itself. And as 
the doubt, and the effort, and the consciousness of the 
mental act gradually depart, the theory is a theory no 
longer, but becomes a fact. 

And thus, as we become more and more familiar with 
sound theoretical views, such views become to us as 
really facts as those which are most obvious to the senses. 
The astronomer, constantly observing the moon, and de- 
termining from her apparent her real motions, sees 
that she is drawn by the earth, as clearly as a common 
spectator sees the needle drawn by the magnet. That 
which is intellectual effort to others is unconscious habit 
in him. He sees the true motion in the apparent, and 
separates the compound course into the simple paths, with 
no more doubt than the voyager feels when, in judging of 
the course of a distant ship, he allows for the motion of 
his own vessel, and for his own movements as he walks 
the deck. And as this true motion of the paths of the 
earth and moon, which is to him an habitual and ine- 
vitable interpretation of their visible changes, is thus a 
fact, the mutual attraction of the two bodies, which is 
but a further interpretation, equally inevitable, of those 
motions, is also a fact to him : while to those less accus- 
tomed to such interpretations, and who, therefore, cannot 
apply them without a conscious act of thought, such a 
view of the case, even when accepted as true, is more 
properly described as theory. 

4. In this instance, the doctrine of which I have 
spoken, the attraction which the earth exerts upon the 
moon, would be termed a theory by most persons ; because 
those to whom this is a familiar and simple inference from 
the phenomena are only a few accomplished astronomers. 
But, in other similar cases, many, or most persons, per- 
form a similar act of interpretation, without being con- 



OF FACTS AND THEORIES. 23 

scions of it. When we assert that the magnet draws the 
needle, we see only the motion of the needle which oc- 
curs when the magnet is brought into its neighbourhood. 
It is by an act of our own minds that we ascribe this 
motion to a force. That in this case a force is exerted 
upon the needle, such as we could by our volition exert, 
is our unconscious interpretation of the phenomena, and 
is hence received by us as a fact. 

5. But it is not in such cases only that we interpret 
phenomena in our own way, without being conscious of 
what we do. We see a tree at a distance, and judge it 
to be a chestnut or a lime ; yet this is only an inference 
from the colour or form of the mass, according to precon- 
ceived classifications of our own. Our lives are full of 
such unconscious interpretations. The farmer recognises 
a good or bad soil ; the artist a picture of a favourite 
master ; the geologist a rock of a known locality, as we 
recognise the faces and voices of our friends ; that is, by 
judgments formed on what we see and hear ; but judg- 
ments in which we do not analyse the steps, or distinguish 
the inference from the appearance. And in these mix- 
tures of observation and inference, we speak of the 
judgment thus formed, as a fact directly observed. 

Even in the case in which our perceptions appear to 
be most direct, and least to involve any interpretations of 
our own, in the simple process of seeing, who does 
not know how much we, by an act of the mind, -add to 
that which our senses receive ? Does any one fancy that 
he sees a solid cube ? It is easy to show that the solidity 
of the figure, the relative position of its faces and edges 
to each other, are inferences of the spectator ; no more 
conveyed to his conviction by the eye alone, than they 
would be if he were looking at a painted representation of 
a cube. The scene of nature is a picture without depth 
of substance, no less than the scene of art; and in the 



24 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

one case as in the other, it is the mind which, by an act 
of its own, discovers that colour and shape denote dis- 
tance and solidity. Most men are unconscious of this 
perpetual habit of reading the language of the external 
world, and translating as they read. The draughtsman, 
indeed, is compelled, for his purposes, to return back in 
thought from the solid bodies which he has inferred, to 
the shapes of surface which he really sees. He knows 
that there is a mask of theory over the whole face of 
nature, if it be theory to infer more than we see. But 
other men, unaware of this masquerade, hold it to be a 
fact that they see cubes and spheres, spacious apartments 
and winding avenues. And these things are facts to 
them, because they are unconscious of the mental opera- 
tion by which they have penetrated nature's disguise. 

And thus we still have an intelligible distinction of 
fact and theory, if we consider theory as a conscious, and 
fact as an unconscious inference from the phenomena 
which are presented to our senses. 

6. Yet still the distinction thus stated is far from 
being rigorous and permanent, as, in truth, we have already 
seen that in practice it is very precarious and obscure. 
The difference of conscious and unconscious acts is by no 
means strongly marked. Education, habit, the degree of 
self-observation, the circumstances of the case, all serve 
to make the person unconscious or conscious of mental 
acts in innumerable degrees. The draughtsman sees in 
nature features and outlines which others do not see. 
The practised astrologer sees the moon walk from house 
to house in her path, as he sees his friend walk from house 
to house in the street ; the beginner in the study sees this 
with conscious effort. But one of these habits gradually 
passes into the other. The distinction of conscious and 
unconscious acts of thought fades away as we examine it. 
We may walk or talk, as well as see, without conscious 



OF FACTS AND THEORIES. 25 

effort ; yet walking and talking imply acts of thought, as 
we perceive when we walk on a rugged path, or talk in 
a foreign language. Hence if this greater or less consci- 
ousness of our own internal act be all that distinguishes 
fact from theory, we must allow that the distinction is still 
untenable. The boundary-line again melts away; the 
difference is unsubstantial ; the opposition loses its signi- 
ficance as we examine it. 

Still there appears to be something real in this anti- 
thesis, and we must return to the examination of it under 
another form. 



CHAPTER III. 
OF SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 

1. IT has appeared that facts as well as theories in- 
volve some act of the mind. But it is also clear that they 
must involve something else besides an act of the mind. 
If we must exercise an act of thought in order to see force 
exerted, or orbits described by bodies in motion, or even 
in order to see bodies in space, and to distinguish one 
kind of object from another, still the act of thought alone 
does not make these objects. There must be something 
besides, on which the thought is exerted. A colour, a 
form, a sound, are not produced by the mind, however 
they may be moulded, combined, and interpreted by our 
mental acts. A philosophical poet has spoken of 

All the world 

Of eye and ear, both what they half create, 
And what perceive. 

But it is clear that though they half create, they do not 
wholly create ; there must be an external world of colour 
and sound to give impressions to the eye and ear, as 
well as internal powers by which we perceive what is 



26 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

offered to those organs. The mind is in some way passive 
as well as active: there are sensations as well as acts of 
thought ; objects without, as well as faculties within. 

2. Indeed this is so far generally acknowledged, that 
according to common apprehension, the mind is passive 
rather than active in acquiring the knowledge which it 
receives concerning the material world. Its sensations are 
generally considered as more evident than its operations. 
The world without is held to be more clearly real than 
the faculties within. That there is something different 
from ourselves, something external to us, something in- 
dependent of us, something which no act of our minds 
can make or can destroy, is held by all men to be at 
least as evident as that our minds exert any effectual pro- 
cess in modifying and appropriating the impressions made 
upon them. Most persons are more likely to doubt 
whether the mind be always active in contemplating 
external objects, than whether it be always passive in 
perceiving them. 

This question, however, we have already, in some mea- 
sure, answered ; for we have shown, that in many in- 
stances where we are at the time unconscious of what we 
do, we are combining, interpreting, reasoning from the 
appearances which we have before our eyes ; and that 
without this operation we cannot know anything, nor even 
recognise any single body as existing in the space about us. 
This view of the process of perception will be further pro- 
secuted hereafter ; but, in the mean time, we have, it may 
be hoped, made it appear that in his apprehension of the 
objects which nature presents to him, man is both active 
and passive : that he has both Ideas and Sensations. 

3. I use the term Idea here to designate those 
inevitable general relations which are imposed upon our 
perceptions by acts of the mind, and which are different 
from anything which our senses directly offer to us. Thus 



OF SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 27 

we see various shades, and colours, and shapes before us ; 
but the outlines by which they are separated into distinct 
objects, the conception by which they are considered as solid 
bodies> at various distances from us ; these elements are not 
ministered by the senses, but supplied by the mind itself. 
And in drawing the outlines of bodies, in placing them at 
different distances from us, the mind proceeds in accord- 
ance with certain necessary general relations which are 
involved in the Idea of Space. In like manner when, seeing 
the motions of a needle towards a magnet, we conceive an 
attractive force exerted and obeyed, we form this concep- 
tion by referring these motions to the Idea of Cause. 

Our sensations are constantly apprehended in subor- 
dination to such ideas as these. And ideas of this wide 
and comprehensive nature, such as space and time, num- 
ber and figure, cause and resemblance, which are the 
source of an innumerable series of more limited concep- 
tions, I term Fundamental Ideas ; and I shall hereafter 
endeavour to enumerate and analyse some of the most 
important of them. 

4. I am thus using the term Idea in a very wide sense. 
But yet this use of it is far more limited than that which 
occurs in common language. For I restrict its applica- 
tion to the relations and conditions which are imposed on 
our sensations through the activity of the mind ; and 
thus I do not apply the term to any impressions made 
upon the mind in virtue of its passive nature merely. 
Whereas the term idea has often been used for almost all 
imaginable results of our passive and active powers com- 
bined. If we speak of an idea of any existing object, as 
for example, of St. Paul's cathedral, we denote by this 
use of the term, a combination of various recollected im- 
pressions of form and colour, as well as order and sym- 
metry, and we thus include in the word a mixture of 
Sensations, as well as Ideas in the more exact sense which 



28 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

I would assign to the term. But the word thus applied 
appears to answer no purpose of analysis ; or at least not 
the purpose which we have here in view. The distinction 
of Sensations which the mind passively receives, and Ideas 
which it actively employs, is of the highest importance in 
order to the prosecution of our investigations. And in 
order that we may keep this difference steadily before us, 
I shall trust to be allowed the liberty of assigning to these 
terms, in these pages, this definite and constant sense. 
I must now further consider the distinction and indepen- 
dence of these two elements. 



CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE DIFFERENCE AND OPPOSITION OF 
SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 

1. Ideas and Sensations are distinct* Thus Ideas are 
the active, Sensations the passive element of our minds. 
But it may be urged, that it is impossible to make such a 
separation of our consciousness. There are, as we have 
already said, few cases, if any, in which the mind is 
entirely passive ; some act of the mind accompanies the 
reception of our most tranquil perceptions. And on the 
other hand, it is clear that no act of the mind can be con- 
ceived without some impression previously made on the 
senses. Without the use of sight and touch, where 
would be our idea of space, or number, or resemblance, 
or cause? And thus, it may be said, ideas (in our sense 
of the term) without sensations, and sensations without 
ideas, are altogether idle and imaginary hypotheses. 
They can nowhere be found in reality. And a distinction 
where separation is impossible can be of no use or value. 

To this we reply, that although it is impossible com- 
pletely to separate, in any actual cases, sensations and 



OPPOSITION OP SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 29 

ideas, nevertheless tlie distinction is real, and the oppo- 
sition of the two is "a principle of the most essential im- 
portance in all philosophy. And this principle we must 
endeavour to illustrate further. 

The distinction has constantly exercised a very im- 
portant influence on the speculations respecting the nature 
of knowledge in which men have employed themselves in 
all ages ; and in the course of these speculations it has 
been illustrated by means of various images. One of the 
most ancient of these, and one still very instructive, is 
that which speaks of the sensations as the matter, and 
the ideas as the form of our knowledge : just as ivory 
is the matter, and a cube the form, of a die. And this 
comparison may at least show us how little force there is 
in the objection just stated, that sensations and ideas are 
not separable in fact, and therefore that their separation 
in our reasonings can be of no service. For the same is 
the case with respect to matter and form. These two 
things cannot, by any means, be detached from each 
other. The ivory must have some form ; if not a cube, 
a sphere, or some other. The cube, in order to be a cube, 
must be of some material or other. A figure without 
matter is merely a geometrical conception; an idea. 
Matter without figure is a mere abstract term ; a sup- 
posed union of sensible qualities which, so insulated from 
others, cannot exist. Yet the distinction of matter and 
form is real, for it is clear and plain as a subject of con- 
templation. And it is by no means useless. For the 
speculations which treat of materials are very widely 
separated from those which treat of figure. On each 
subject there may be much to be said ; and the two 
subjects would be, through their whole extent, distinct. 
The researches concerning the two may involve principles 
as different, for example, as the principles of chemistry and 
geometry. If, therefore, we were to refuse to consider the 



30 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

matter and the form of bodies separately, because we 
cannot exhibit matter and form separately, we should 
shut the door to all philosophy on such subjects. And 
the same is the case with the analogous instance of sensa- 
tions and ideas. 

2. Ideas are not Transformed Sensations. In a certain 
school of speculators there has existed a disposition to 
derive all our ideas from our sensations, the term idea 
having been used in its wider sense, so as to include all 
modifications and limitations of our Fundamental Ideas. 
The doctrines of this school have been summarily 
expressed by saying that " every idea is a transformed 
sensation." Now, even supposing this assertion to be 
exactly true, we easily see, from what has been said, how 
little we are likely to answer the ends of philosophy, by 
putting forward such a maxim as one of primary import- 
ance. For we might say, in like manner, that every 
statue is but a transformed block of marble, or every 
edifice but a collection of transformed stones. But 
what would these assertions avail us, if our object were to 
trace the rules of art by which beautiful statues were 
formed, or great works of architecture erected ? The 
question naturally occurs, What is the nature, the prin- 
ciple, the law of this transformation? In what faculty 
resides the transforming power? What train of ideas 
of beauty, and symmetry, and stability, in the mind of 
the statuary or the architect, has produced those great 
works which mankind look upon as among their most 
valuable possessions ; the Apollo of the Belvedere, the 
Parthenon, -the Cathedral of Cologne ? When this is what 
we want to know, how are we helped by learning that the 
Apollo is of Parian marble, or the Cathedral of basaltic 
stone ? We must know much more than this, in order 
to acquire any insight into the principles of statuary or of 
architecture. In like manner, in order that we may 



OPPOSITION OF SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 31 

make any progress in the philosophy of knowledge, which 
is our purpose, we must endeavour to learn something 
further respecting ideas than that they are transformed 
sensations, even if they were this. 

But, in reality, the assertion that our ideas are trans- 
formed sensations, is erroneous as well as frivolous. For 
it conveys, and is intended to convey, the opinion that 
our sensations have one form which properly belongs to 
them ; and that, in order to become ideas, they are con- 
verted into some other form. But the truth is, that our 
sensations, of themselves, without some act of the mind, 
such as involves what we have termed an idea, have no 
form. We cannot see one object without the idea of 
space ; we cannot see two without the idea of resem- 
blance or difference ; and space and difference are not 
sensations. Thus, if we are to employ the metaphor of mat- 
ter and form, which is implied in the expression to which 
I have referred, our sensations, from their first reception, 
have their form not changed, but given by our ideas. 
Without the relations of thought which we here term 
ideas, the sensations are matter without form. Matter 
without form cannot exist : and in like manner sensations 
cannot become perceptions of objects, without some forma- 
tive power of the mind. By the very act of being received 
as perceptions, they have a formative power exercised 
upon them, the operation of which might be expressed 
by speaking of them, not as transformed, but simply as 
formed; as invested with form, instead of being the 
mere formless material of perception. The word inform, 
according to its Latin etymology, at first implied this 
process by which matter is invested with form. Thus 
.Virgil* speaks of the thunderbolt as informed by the 

* Ferrum exercebant vasto Cyclopes in Antro 

Brontesque Steropesque et nudus membra Pyracmon ; 
His informattim manibus, jam parte polita 
Fulmen erat.-~-<&. viii. 424. 



32 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

hands of Brontes, and Steropes, and Pyracmon. And 
Dryden introduces the word in another place : 

Let others better mould the running mass 
Of metals, or inform the breathing brass. 

Even in this use of the word the form is something 
superior to the brute matter, and gives it a new signi- 
ficance and purpose. And hence the term is again used 
to denote the effect produced by an intelligent principle 
of a still higher kind : 

He informed 

This ill-shaped body with a daring soul. 

And finally even the soul itself, in its original condition, 
is looked upon as matter, when viewed with reference to 
education and knowledge, by which it is afterwards 
moulded ; and hence these are, in our language, termed 
information. If we confine ourselves to the first of these 
three uses of the term, we may correct the erroneous 
opinion of which we have just been speaking, and retain 
the metaphor by which it is expressed, by saying, that 
ideas are not transformed, but informed sensations. 

3. Subjective and Objective. There is another mode of 
expressing the distinction of our sensations and our 
ideas, which has been often used by writers on such 
topics, although, in our own country, of late years, it has 
not been familiar to general readers. According to the 
technical language of ancient philosophy, any one's quali- 
ties and acts are attributes of which he is the subject; 
and thus the mind is the subject to which its own ideas 
and operations appertain. But these ideas are employed 
upon external objects, and from external objects all his 
sensations proceed. Hence that part of man's mental 
occupation which springs from the faculties and operations 
of his own mind is subjective, while that which flows in 
upon him from the world external to him is objective. 
And as in his contemplation of nature there is always 



OPPOSITION OF SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 33 

some act of thought which depends ou himself, and 
some matter of thought which is independent of him, 
there is in every part of his knowledge a subjective and 
an objective element. 

This phraseology is very familiar in the philosophical 
writers of Germany and France, and is not uncommon in 
every age of our own literature. But whether or no we 
think fit to adopt these terms, the opposition which they 
imply is one of essential and fundamental importance, in 
all our speculations concerning the nature of knowledge. 
We may express the opposition in what terms we please ; 
we may speak, for instance, of internal and external 
sources of our knowledge ; of the world within and the 
world without us; of man and nature; of ideas and ex- 
perience ; and of many other antitheses. But, in what- 
ever way we denote the contrast of the subjective and 
objective part of our speculations, the distinction is real 
and solid, and we shall hereafter see how essential the 
principle of this contrast is, in order to express the laws 
of the successful prosecution of knowledge. 

The combination of the two, of ideas and experience, 
is, as we shall see, necessary, in order to give us any 
knowledge of the external world, any insight into the 
laws of nature. Different persons, according to their 
mental habits and constitution, may be inclined to dwell 
by preference upon one or the other of these two ele- 
ments. But no knowledge can exist without the prac- 
tical union of the two, nor any philosophy without their 
speculative separation. It may, perhaps, interest the 
reader to see this combination and this opposition illus- 
trated in the intercourse of two eminent men of genius 
of modern times, Gb'the and Schiller. 

Gb'the himself gives us the account to which I refer, 
in his history of the progress of his speculations concern- 
ing the metamorphosis of plants; a mode of viewing their 
VOL. i. D 



34 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

structure by which he explained, in a very striking and 
beautiful manner, the relations of the different parts of a 
plant to each other ; as has been narrated in the History 
of the Inductive Sciences. Gb'the felt a delight in the 
passive contemplation of nature, unmingled with the 
desire of reasoning and theorizing; a delight such as 
naturally belongs to those poets who merely embody the 
images which a fertile genius suggests, and do not mix 
with these pictures, judgments and reflections of their 
own. Schiller, on the other hand, both by his own strong 
feeling of the value of a moral purpose in poetry, and by 
his adoption of a system of metaphysics in which the sub- 
jective element was made very prominent, was well dis- 
posed to recognize fully the authority of ideas over 
external impressions. 

Gb'the for a time felt a degree of estrangement to- 
wards Schiller, arising from this contrariety in their views 
and characters. But on one occasion they fell into dis- 
cussion on the study of natural history; and Gb'the 
endeavoured to impress upon his companion his persua- 
sion that nature was to be considered, not as composed 
of detached and incoherent parts, but as active and alive, 
and unfolding herself in each portion, in virtue of prin- 
ciples which pervade the whole. Schiller objected that 
no such view of the objects of natural history had been 
pointed out by observation, the only guide which the 
natural historians recommended ; and was disposed on this 
account to think the whole of their study narrow and shal- 
low. "Upon this," says Go the, "I expounded to him, 
in as lively a way as I could, the metamorphosis of plants, 
drawing on paper for him, as I proceeded, a diagram to 
represent that general form of a plant which shows itself 
in so many and so various transformations. Schiller at- 
tended and understood ; and, accepting the explanation, 
he said, ' This is not observation, but an idea.' I replied," 



OPPOSITION OP SENSATIONS AND IDEAS. 35 

adds Gothe, "with some degree of irritation; for the 
point which separated us was most luminously marked by 
this expression: but I smothered my vexation, and 
merely said, ' I was happy to find that I had got ideas 
without knowing it ; nay, that I saw them before my 
eyes.' " Gothe then goes on to say, that he had been 
grieved to the very soul by maxims promulgated by 
Schiller, that no observed fact ever could correspond with 
an idea ; since he himself loved best to wander in the 
domain of external observation, he had been led to look 
with repugnance and hostility upon anything which pro- 
fessed to depend upon ideas. "Yet," he observes, "it 
occurred to me that if my observation was identical with 
his idea, there must be some common ground on which 
we might meet." They went on with their mutual ex- 
planations, and became intimate and lasting friends. 
" And thus," adds the poet, " by means of that mighty 
and interminable controversy between object and subject) 
we two concluded an alliance which remained unbroken, 
and produced much benefit to ourselves and others." 

The general diagram of a plant, of which Gothe here 
speaks, must have been a combination of lines and marks 
expressing the relations of position and equivalence among 
the elements of vegetable forms, -by which so many of 
their resemblances and differences may be explained. 
Such a symbol is not an Idea in that general sense in 
which we propose to use the term, but is a particular 
modification of the general ideas of symmetry, develope- 
ment, and the like; and we shall hereafter see, according 
to the phraseology which we shall explain in the next 
chapter, such a diagram might express the ideal conception 
of a plant. 

4. Other modes of expressing this antithesis. Besides 
this antithesis of subjective and objective, some of the 
more recent schools of German metaphysics have ex- 

D 2 



36 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

pressed the same opposition in other ways. They 
have, for instance, divided the universe into the Me and 
the Not-me (Ich and Nicht Ic/i). Upon such attempts, we 
may observe, that the fundamental distinction between 
our own thoughts and the objects of our thoughts is of 
the highest consequence; but that, if this distinction be 
clearly understood and recognised, little appears to be 
gained by expressing it in any novel manner. The most 
weighty part of the philosopher's task is to analyse the 
operations of the mind, and for this purpose, it can aid us 
but little to call it, instead of the mind, the subject, or the 
me. Whenever it appears that our views can be enun- 
ciated more clearly by the use of such phraseology, we 
shall not scruple to avail ourselves of it; but we shall not 
think it necessary to dilate upon these different modes of 
expressing the same truth. 



CHAPTER V. 
OF IDEAL CONCEPTIONS. 

1. BY what has been said, we are directed towards an 
analysis of our thoughts and our knowledge into two 
opposite elements Sensations, and Ideas. The latter ele- 
ment will require further examination ; and this must be 
the more carefully conducted, in consequence of the great 
vagueness and vacillation with which the term has com- 
monly been used. The word idea is not unfrequently 
employed to designate those conceptions which the mind 
forms, and which it expresses by means of general terms ; 
for example (taking, as our plan requires, instances 
from the sciences), an angle, a circle, a central force, a 
reflected or refracted ray, a neutral salt, a rose, a reptile. 
Or, again, we may employ this term idea to express cer- 



OF IDEAL CONCEPTIONS. 37 

tain wider fields of mental apprehension, each of which 
includes many such conceptions as the above; as when 
we speak of the idea of space, of time, of number, of 
cause, of composition, of resemblance, of symmetry, of 
organization. It will be necessary for our purpose to dis- 
tinguish these two modes of thought. The latter I shall 
term Fundamental Ideas ; and I shall, in the succeeding 
Books, enumerate and scrutinize such ideas in succession. 
The other class of notions I shall term Ideal Conceptions, 
for reasons which I shall soon state. 

Each of the Fundamental Ideas supplies us with many 
Ideal Conceptions. Thus straight lines, angles, polygons, 
cubes, tangents, curvatures, and the like, are all modifi- 
cations of the fundamental idea of space. In like manner, 
the fundamental idea of cause furnishes us with such con- 
ceptions as accelerating and moving force, pressure and 
inertia, attraction and repulsion. The fundamental idea 
of resemblance gives rise to the conceptions of class, genus, 
species; and when followed into futher detail, and deve- 
loped by the suggestions of observation, this, along with 
other ideas, produces the conception of a particular genus 
or species, as a rose ; and so on, in other cases. 

2. Much perplexity and difference of opinion have pre- 
vailed among metaphysicians respecting these ideal con- 
ceptions. It has been a matter of long and intricate 
discussion, what is the object, or act, of thought, which is 
denoted by general terms. Some have held that we have 
in our minds a real idea, something of the nature of an 
image, which we signify by such terms ; that we have, in 
this sense, a general idea of an angle, a polygon, a central 
force, a crystal, a rose. Others have held that in using 
such terms there is merely an act of the mind marked by 
a name; an act by which the mind collects and connects 
many impressions. These two views (that of thejRealists 
and that of the Nominalists) have prevailed, with various 



38 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

fluctuations and modifications, through all ages of philo- 
sophy. But that either opinion, in its extreme form, 
involves us in insuperable difficulties, is easily seen : and 
of late, both parties appear to be willing to adopt the 
word conception as expressing that which by such terms 
we intend. This word, indicating both an act of the 
mind by which unity is given to that which was previously 
scattered, and the result of the act abiding with us when 
the act is performed, partakes of both views, so far as 
each is true, and will most conveniently aid us in pro- 
ceeding with our analysis. 

3. But to the word Conception I join the adjective 
Ideal. For we have to use the term, not to describe the 
mental images of individual objects casually taken, but 
to denote those definite abstract conceptions which are 
the subjects of our general knowledge. These we can 
reason upon securely, precisely because they are modi- 
fications of our Fundamental Ideas ; for these Ideas, as we 
shall hereafter show, contain the grounds of demonstra- 
tive truth. The Conception of a Circle is determined 
by relations involved in the Idea of space, and hence its 
properties can be certainly known. The Conception of 
mutual attraction involves necessary principles derived 
from theldea of cause. The Conception of a crystalline 
arrangement of particles involves the Idea of symmetry ; 
and the case is similar in other examples. Hence I term 
these Ideal Conceptions ; intending by this designation to 
remind the reader that the unity which these conceptions 
give to the circumstances included in them, is not a casual 
or arbitrary unity, but is derived from the necessity of 
the case. There are ideal relations which necessarily 
form the foundation of our knowledge in each province 
of human thought ; and these relations govern our con- 
ceptions at first, as well as determine the scientific truths 
which, by means of our conceptions once formed, we are 
able to enunciate. 



OF IDEAL CONCEPTIONS. 39 

4. Since the Ideal Conceptions, of which we here speak, 
are only modifications and limitations of the Fundamental 
Ideas themselves, the reader will not think it strange 
that sometimes it may not be easy to draw a line of 
distinction between Ideas and Conceptions, in the senses 
in which we have used the terms. The modification 
may be of so comprehensive a character that it may 
appear almost as extensive as the idea itself, and as well 
fitted to supply a foundation for general truths. Thus, we 
may doubt whether Number be a modification of the Idea 
of Time, or an independent Idea ; and some persons may 
decide that the Idea of Number supplies us with principles 
which are the proper foundation of arithmetic, without 
any reference to the Idea of Time. In like manner, some 
may be of opinion that mechanical Force is a distinct 
Idea, distinguishable from the Idea of Cause, and capable 
of affording us those axioms on which the reasonings of 
the science of mechanics must rest. Now, with respect 
to doubts and ambiguities of this kind, we may observe, 
that it is of small moment to our view of the Philosophy 
of Science how they are decided. Whether Number 
and Force be called Ideas or Conceptions, they are funda- 
mental so far as the sciences founded upon them are 
concerned; and they partake of the nature of ideas 
at least so far as this, that they are the sources of 
necessary truth, as we shall hereafter show. We shall 
analyse the truths of arithmetic and of mechanics, so 
as to see that they depend upon our necessary mode 
of apprehending number and force. Whether we can 
analyse these modes of apprehension still further, is 
another question ; not without interest in itself, but not 
affecting our previous analysis. Hence it will not be 
inconsistent with the general course of our speculations, 
if number, force, and the like very general modifications 
of our ideas, should occasionally, in these pages, be 



40 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

themselves termed Ideas. To reduce our Fundamental 
Ideas to the smallest possible number, rigorously inde- 
pendent of each other, is a problem which, perhaps, we 
have not completely solved in the present work ; but any 
defect in the solution of this problem will by no means 
affect our general reasonings. 

5. It has been said by some writers*, that all concep- 
tions, whether ideal, (that is, of such a general kind as 
those just adduced,) or conceptions of particular objects, 
are merely states or feelings of the mind. That these 
conceptions all belong to the mind in some way, being 
its creations or acts, or, if any one prefers the expres- 
sion, its states or feelings, (although the latter terms appear 
far less appropriate,) it is superfluous to assert or to deny. 
But if it be meant, by saying that all conceptions are 
merely feelings of the mind, to imply that this general 
description of them supersedes or diminishes the neces- 
sity of examining minutely their differences, their pro- 
perties, and the very curious and complex principles 
which they involve, the opinion appears to be very 
unphilosophical ; and the phrase which suggests it is 
likely only to mislead us. We shall, we trust, show 
hereafter, that these acts or states of mind, by whatever 
name they be called, contain in them very fertile and 
varied elements of truth : and we are in no way for- 
warded in our pursuit of such elements, by being told 
that all conceptions about which we can reason are 
merely so many states of the mind. The question still 
remains, what are the peculiarities of each of those 
states? and to what conclusions do they entitle us to 
proceed? When we say that the conceptions of straight 
lines and circles are merely states of the mind, we rather 
increase, than diminish, the difficulty of understanding 

* BKOWN'SJ Lectures, vol. ii. 



OF IDEAL CONCEPTIONS. 41 

how these states of mind, and no other, make the whole 
body of geometrical knowledge possible. 

We must now endeavour to explain in what manner 
such Ideal Conceptions as those which we have pointed 
out, enter into the formation of our Knowledge. 



CHAPTER VI. 
OF INDUCTION. 

1 . WHEN we have become possessed of such ideal con- 
ceptions as those just described, cases frequently occur 
in which we can, by means of such conceptions, connect 
the facts which we learn from our senses, and thus 
obtain truths from materials supplied by experience. In 
such cases, the truth to which we are thus led is said 
to be collected from the observed facts, by Induction. 

Thus Hipparchus, tracing the unequal motion of the 
sun among the stars, in different parts of the year, as 
learnt from observation, found that this inequality 
might be fitly represented by the conception of an 
eccentric; a circle in which the sun had an equable 
annual motion, the spectator not being situated in the 
centre of the circle. And thus he established, by Induc- 
tion, the truth that the sun appears to move in such an 
eccentric. At a later period, Kepler, proceeding upon 
more exact observations, was able to show that, not a 
circle about an eccentric point, but an ellipse about the 
focus, was the conception which truly agreed with the 
motion of the earth, and of the other planets, about the 
sun. And thus the elliptical form of these orbits was 
established by Induction from many observed facts. 
Again, to take an example of another kind, the forms of 
flowers may have applied to them conceptions borrowed 



42 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

from the idea of symmetry of parts ; and this symmetry 
may contain three similar portions, as in the lily and its 
tribe; or five, as in the wild rose, and many others. 
Now, it appears by observation of many particular cases, 
that these differences in the kind of symmetry of the 
flower are conjoined with differences in the seed : the 
tripartite symmetry prevailing in those seeds which have 
only one cotyledon, or lobe enveloping the embryo ; and 
the quinquepartite symmetry in those seeds which have 
two cotyledons. Here, then, we have a truth concerning 
the laws of vegetable form, established by Induction*. 

In these, and in all cases of induction, the ideal con- 
ception which the mind itself supplies is superinduced 
upon the facts as they are originally presented to obser- 
vation. Before the inductive truth is detected, the facts 
are there, but they are many and unconnected. The 
conception which the discoverer applies to them gives 
them connexion and unity. Before Hipparchus, it was 
known that the motion of the sun was not equable ; but 
it appeared to be irregular and lawless : all parts of the 
motion became regular and orderly, by the introduction 
of the conception of the eccentric. In the case of Hip- 
parchus, we can only conjecture the nature of the efforts 
by which the conception was discovered and applied 
to the facts. But in Kepler's case we know from his 
own narrative how hard lie struggled and laboured to 
find the right conception ; how many conceptions he tried 
and rejected; what corrections and adjustments of his 
first guesses he afterwards introduced. In his case we 
see in the most conspicuous manner the philosopher 
impressing his own ideal conception upon the facts ; the 
facts being exactly fitted to this conception, although no 
one before had detected such a fitness. And in like 
manner, in all other cases, the discovery of a truth by 
* Hist. Inductive Sciences, iii. 338. 



OF INDUCTION. 43 

induction consists in finding a conception or combination 
of conceptions which agrees with, connects, and arranges 
the facts. 

2. Such ideal conceptions or combinations of concep- 
tions, superinduced upon the facts, and reducing them to 
rule and order, are theories. And thus we seem to have 
again brought before us, as a real and positive distinc- 
tion, that separation of fact and theory, which, in the 
outset of our inquiry (Chap. II.), we found ourselves com- 
pelled to reject. For we are at present led to this 
result : that a theory is a truth collected from facts by 
induction ; that is, by superinducing upon the facts ideal 
conceptions such as they truly agree with. 

Of the apparent contradiction thus brought before 
us, the explanation is this : that what we commonly 
term facts involve an act of the mind of the same 
kind as that which we have described as induction, 
and thus do not in that respect differ essentially from 
theory. Thus we speak of the eccentric theory of the 
sun's motions, as collected by induction from the facts of 
his unequal motion at different times of the year. But 
these facts are themselves theories collected by induction. 
For they depend upon the conception of an ecliptic, or 
circle passing round the heavens, in which ecliptic the sun's 
motion at each time is to be inferred by referring his 
places to the stars. But this ecliptic and these modes of 
reference are manifestly creations of the mind* And 
notwithstanding this artificial mode of measuring the 
sun's motion, the motion itself is as much a fact as the 
moon's motion among the stars, which is visible to the 
eye. Nor is there essentially any difference even in the 
mode of perceiving these motions. For in our apprehen- 
sion of the moon's motion among the stars, we assign to 
her a path and a velocity which are conceptions of our 
own minds, and no mere impressions upon the senses. 
And thus as theories are collected by induction from facts, 



44 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

facts are collected by an induction of the same kind from 
other facts, and so on, till we approach to bare impressions 
upon the senses, which yet w r e can never quite divest of 
some conception or other. The act of the mind, by 
which it converts facts into theories, is of the same kind 
as that by which it converts impressions into facts. In 
both cases there is a new principle of unity introduced 
by the mind, an ideal connexion established : that which 
was many becomes one ; that which was loose and law- 
less becomes connected and fixed by rule. And this is 
done by induction ; or, as we have described this process, 
by superinducing upon the facts, as given by observation, 
the conception of our own minds. 

3. It has already been noticed that there is in different 
cases a wide difference as to the degree in which we are 
conscious of this operation. In some cases we see the 
facts distinct and separate, before they are brought to- 
gether by the conception of our own minds. In other 
cases we never contemplate them thus detached, and 
can hardly conceive them under any other form than that 
which our conceptions give them. Yet it is easy to see 
that these two classes of cases pass into each other by in- 
sensible gradations. To take an example of this : if we 
had to decipher an ancient inscription, of which a few 
broken letters and imperfect marks only remained, we 
might possibly, by an intimate acquaintance with the lan- 
guage in which it was written, and with the usual forms 
of such inscriptions, and by the aid of great sagacity and 
perseverance, discover the meaning, so that no doubt 
should remain of the justness of our conjecture. In this 
case, we might with propriety assert the import of the 
legend to be obtained by induction from the few facts 
which were placed before us. If the inscription were 
entire and plainly legible, we should, without hesitation, 
assert it to be a fact that we had before cur eyes the 
declaration, whatever it was, which the legend might con- 



OF INDUCTION. 45 

tain. Yet in the latter case, as well as in the former, it is 
plain that there is much which the mind itself supplies, in 
addition to the impressions which it receives ; much which 
it brings, as well as that which it finds. In the one case, 
as in the other, the reader must be provided with know- 
ledge of the letters and of the language ; and, if not in 
the same degree as in the other case, yet no less neces- 
sarily, with attention and coherence of thought. If there 
be induction in the one case, it must exist, more obscurely, 
perhaps, but no less certainly, in the other also. 

And thus it appears that, understanding the term 
induction in that comprehensive sense in which alone it 
is consistent with itself, it is requisite to give unity to a 
fact, no less than to give connexion to a theory ; and the 
conclusion at which we formerly arrived, that fact ana 
theory pass into each other by insensible degrees, is not 
disturbed, but confirmed and illustrated by our view of 
induction, as the act of superinducing upon the impres- 
sions of observation an ideal conception, by which they 
receive connexion and unity. 



CHAPTER VII. 
OF SUCCESSIVE GENERALIZATIONS. 

1. THUS we are again led to the doctrine, that Fact and 
Theory have no essential difference, except in the degree 
of their certainty and familiarity. Theory, when it 
becomes firmly established and steadily lodged in the 
mind, becomes Fact ; and thus, as our knowledge becomes 
more sure and more extensive, we are constantly trans- 
ferring to the class of facts, opinions which were at first 
regarded as theories. 

Now we have, further to remark, that in the progress 



46 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

of human knowledge respecting any branch of speculation, 
there may be several such steps in succession, each 
depending upon and including the preceding. The 
theoretical views which one generation of discoverers 
establishes, become the facts from which the next gene- 
ration advances to new theories. As they rise from the 
particular to the general, they rise from what is general 
to what is more general. Each induction supplies the 
materials of fresh inductions ; each generalization, with 
all that it embraces in its circle, may be found to be but 
one of many circles, comprehended within the circuit of 
some wider generalization. 

This remark has already been made, and illustrated, 
in the History of the Inductive Sciences*; and, in truth, 
the whole of the history of science is full of suggestions 
and exemplifications of this course of things. It may be 
convenient, however, to select a few instances which may 
further explain and confirm this view of the progress of 
scientific knowledge. 

2. The most conspicuous instance of this succession is 
to be found in that science which has been progressive from 
the beginning of the world to our own times, and which 
exhibits by far the richest collection of successive disco- 
veries : I mean astronomy. It is easy to see that each of 
these successive discoveries depended on those antece- 
dently made, and that in each, the truths which were the 
highest point of the knowledge of one age were the fun- 
damental basis of the efforts of the age which came next. 
Thus we find, in the days of Greek discovery, Hipparchus 
and Ptolemy combining and explaining the particular 
facts of the motion of the sun, moon, and planets, by 
means of the theory of epicycles and eccentrics ; a highly 
important step, which gave an intelligible connexion and 
rule to the motions of each of these luminaries. When 

* Hist. Inductive Sciences, ii. 182. 



OF SUCCESSIVE GENERALIZATIONS. 47 

these cycles and epicycles, thus truly representing the 
apparent motions of the heavenly bodies, had accumulated 
to an inconvenient amount, by the discovery of many 
inequalities in the observed motions, Copernicus showed 
that their effects might all be more simply included, by 
making the sun the centre of motion of the planets, in- 
stead of the earth. But in this new view he still retained 
the epicycles and eccentrics which governed the motion 
of each body. Tycho Brahe's observations, and Kepler's 
calculations, showed that, besides the vast number of facts 
which the epicyclical theory could account for, there were 
some which it would not exactly include, and Kepler was 
led to the persuasion that the planets move in ellipses. 
But this view of motion was at first conceived by Kepler 
as a modification of the conception of epicycles. On one 
occasion he blames himself for not sooner seeing that such 
a modification was possible. " What an absurdity on my 
part !" he cries*; " as if libra tion in the diameter of the 
epicycle might not come to the same thing as motion in 
the ellipse." But again ; Kepler's laws of the elliptical 
motion of the planets were established ; and these laws 
immediately became the facts on which the mathema- 
ticians had to found their mechanical theories. From 
these facts Newton, as we have related, proved that the 
central force of the sun retains the planets in their orbits, 
according to the law of the inverse square of the dis- 
tance. The same law was shown to prevail in the gravi- 
tation of the earth. It was shown, too, by induction 
from the motions of Jupiter and Saturn, that the planets 
attract each other ; by calculations from the figure of the 
earth, that the parts of the earth attract each other; and, 
by considering the course of the tides, that the sun and 
moon attract the waters of the ocean. And all these 
curious discoveries being established as facts, the subject 
* Hist. Inductive Sciences, i. 428. 



48 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

was ready for another step of generalization. By an un- 
paralleled rapidity in the progress of discovery in this 
case, not only were all the inductions which we have first 
mentioned made by one individual, but the new advance, 
the higher flight, the closing victory, fell to the lot of the 
same extraordinary person. 

The attraction of the sun upon the planets, of the 
moon upon the earth, of the planets on each other, of the 
parts of the earth on themselves, of the sun and moon 
upon the ocean ; all these truths, each of itself a great 
discovery, were included by Newton in the higher gene- 
ralization, of the universal gravitation of matter, by which 
each particle is drawn to each other according to the law 
of the inverse square : and thus this long advance from 
discovery to discovery, from truths to truths, each justly 
admired when new, and then rightly used as old, was 
closed in a worthy and consistent manner, by a truth 
which is the most worthy admiration, because it includes 
all the researches of preceding ages of astronomy. 

3. We may take another example of a succession of 
this kind from the history of a science, which, though it 
has made wonderful advances, has not yet reached its goal, 
as physical astronomy appears to have done, but seems to 
have before it a long prospect of future progress. I now 
refer to chemistry, in which I shall try to point out how 
the preceding discoveries afforded the materials of the 
succeeding; although this subordination and connexion 
is, in this case, less familiar to men's minds than in astro- 
nomy, and is, perhaps, more difficult to present in a clear 
and definite shape. Sylvius saw, in the facts which 
occur, when an acid and an alkali are brought together, 
the evidence that they neutralize each other. But cases 
of neutralization, and acidification, and many other effects 
of mixture of the ingredients of bodies, being thus viewed 
as facts, had an aspect of unity and law given them by 



OF SUCCESSIVE GENERALIZATIONS. 49 

Geoffroy and Bergman*, who introduced the conception 
of the chemical affinity or elective attraction, by which 
certain elements select other elements, as if by preference. 
That combustion, whether a chemical union or a chemi- 
cal separation of ingredients, is of the same nature with 
acidification, was the doctrine of Beccher and Stahl, and 
was soon established as a truth which must form a part 
of every succeeding physical theory. That the rules of 
affinity and chemical composition may include gaseous 
elements, was established by Black and Cavendish. And 
all these truths, thus brought to light by chemical disco- 
verers, affinity, the identity of acidification and combus- 
tion, the importance of gaseous elements, along with all 
the facts respecting the weight of ingredients and com- 
pounds which the balance disclosed, were taken up, 
connected, and included as particulars in the oxygen 
theory of Lavoisier. Again, the results of this theory, and 
the quantity of the several ingredients which entered 
into each compound (such results, for the most part, 
being now no longer mere theoretical speculations, but 
recognised facts) were the particulars from which Dalton 
derived that wide law of chemical combination which we 
term the atomic theory. And this law, soon generally 
accepted among chemists, is already in its turn become 
one of t\\Q facts included in Faraday's theory of the identity 
of chemical affinity and electric attraction. 

It is unnecessary to give further exemplifications of 
this constant ascent from one step to a higher ; this per- 
petual conversion of true theories into the materials of 
other and wider theories. It will hereafter be our busi- 
ness to exhibit, in a more full and formal manner, the 
mode in which this principle determines the whole scheme 
and structure of all the most exact sciences. And thus, 
beginning with the facts of sense, we gradually climb to 

* Hist. Inductive Sciences, iii. 112. 
VOL. I. E 



50 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

the highest forms of human knowledge, and obtain from 
experience and observation a vast collection of the most 
wide and elevated truths. 

There are, however, truths of a very different kind, to 
which we must turn our attention, in order to pursue our 
researches respecting the nature and grounds of our 
knowledge. But before we do this, we must notice one 
more feature in that progress of science which we have 
already in part described. 



CHAPTER VIII. 
OF TECHNICAL TERMS. 

1. IT has already been stated that we gather know- 
ledge from the external world, when we are able to apply, 
to the facts which we observe, some ideal conception, 
which gives unity and connexion to multiplied and 
separate perceptions. We have also shown that our 
conceptions, thus verified by facts, may themselves be 
united and connected by a new bond of the same nature ; 
and that man may thus have to pursue his way from 
truth to truth through a long progression of discoveries, 
each resting on the preceding, and rising above it. 

It is now further to be noticed that each of these 
steps, in succession, is recorded, fixed, and made available, 
by some peculiar form of words ; and such words, thus 
rendered precise in their meaning, and appropriated to 
the service of science, we may call Technical Terms. It 
is in a great measure by inventing such Terms that men 
not only best express the discoveries they have made ? 
but also enable their followers to become so familiar 
with these discoveries, and to possess them so thoroughly, 
that they can readily use them in advancing to ulterior 
generalizations. 



OF TECHNICAL TERMS. 51 

Most of our ideal conceptions are described by exact 
and constant words or phrases, such as those of which we 
here speak. We have already had occasion to employ 
many of these. Thus we have had instances of technical 
terms expressing geometrical conceptions, as ellipsis, 
radius vector, axis, plane, the proportion of the inverse 
square, and the like. Other terms have described mecha- 
nical conceptions, as accelerating force and attraction. 
Again, chemistry exhibits (as do all sciences) a series of 
terms which mark the steps of her progress. The views 
of the first real founders of the science are recorded by 
the terms which are still in use, neutral salts, affinity, and 
the like. The establishment of Dalton's theory has pro- 
duced the use of the word atom in a peculiar sense, or 
of some other word, as proportion, in a sense equally 
technical. And Mr. Faraday has found it necessary, in 
order to expound his electro-chemical theory, to intro- 
duce such terms as anode and cathode, an'ion and cath'ion. 

2. I need not adduce any further examples, for my 
object at present is only to point out the use and influence 
of such language : its rules and principles I shall hereafter 
try, in some measure, to fix. But what we have here to 
remark is, the extraordinary degree in which the progress 
of science is facilitated, by thus investing each new dis- 
covery with a compendious and steady form of expression. 
These terms soon become part of the current language of 
all who take an interest in speculation. However strange 
they may sound at first, they soon grow familiar in our 
ears, and are used without any effort or recollection of the 
difficulty they once involved. They become as common 
as the phrases which express our most frequent feelings 
and interests, while yet they have incomparably more 
precision than belongs to any terms which express feel- 
ings; and they carry with them, in their import, the results 
of deep and laborious trains of research. They convey the 

E 2 



52 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

mental treasures of one period to the generations that 
follow ; and laden with this, their precious freight, they sail 
safely across gulfs of time in which empires have suffered 
shipwreck, and the languages of common life have sunk 
into oblivion. We have still in constant circulation 
among us the terms which belong to the geometry, the 
astronomy, the zoology, the medicine of the Greeks, and 
the algebra and chemistry of the Arabians. And we can 
in an instant, by means of a few words, call to our own 
recollection, or convey to the apprehension of another 
person, phenomena and relations of phenomena in optics, 
mineralogy, chemistry, which are so complex and abstruse, 
that it might seem to require the utmost subtlety of the 
human mind to grasp them, even if that were made the 
sole object of its efforts. By this remarkable effect of 
technical language, we have the results of all the labours 
of past times not only always accessible, but so prepared 
that we may (provided we are careful in the use of our 
instrument) employ what is really useful and efficacious 
for the purpose of further success, without being in any 
way impeded or perplexed by the length and weight of 
the chain of past connexions which we drag along 
with us. 

By such means, by the use of the inductive process, 
and by the aid of technical terms, man has been constantly 
advancing in the path of scientific truth. In a succeed- 
ing part of this work we shall endeavour to trace the 
general rules of this advance, and to lay down the maxims 
by which it may be most successfully guided and for- 
warded. But in order that we may do this to the best 
advantage, we must pursue still further the analysis of 
knowledge into its elements; and this will be our employ- 
ment in the first part of the work. 



CHAPTER IX. 
OF NECESSARY AND CONTINGENT TRUTHS. 

1. Course of the Argument. Every advance in human 
knowledge consists, as we have seen, in adapting 
new ideal conceptions to ascertained facts, and thus 
in superinducing the form upon the matter, the active 
upon the passive processes of our minds. Every such 
step introduces into our knowledge an additional portion 
of the ideal element, and of those relations which flow 
from the nature of ideas. It is, therefore, important for 
our purpose to examine more closely this element, and to 
learn what the relations are which may thus come to form 
part of our knowledge. An inquiry into those ideas 
which form the foundations of our sciences; into the 
reality, independence, extent, and principal heads of the 
knowledge which we thus acquire ; is a task on which we 
must now enter, and which will employ us for several of 
the succeeding Books. 

In this inquiry our object will be to pass in review all 
the most important fundamental ideas which our sciences 
involve ; and to prove more distinctly in reference to 
each, what we have already asserted with regard to 
all, that there are everywhere involved in our knowledge 
acts of the mind as well as impressions of sense ; and that 
our knowledge derives, from these acts, a generality, cer- 
tainty, and evidence which the senses could in no degree 
have supplied. But before I proceed to do this in par- 
ticular cases, I will give some account of the argument 
in its general form. 

We have already considered the separation of our 
knowledge into its two elements, Impressions of Sense 
and Ideas, as evidently indicated by this ; that all know- 
ledge possesses characters which neither of these elements 



54 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

alone could bestow. Without our ideas, our sensations 
could have no connexion ; without external impressions, 
our ideas would have no reality ; and thus both ingredi- 
ents of our knowledge must exist. But there is another 
mode in which we may prove the distinct and indepen- 
dent existence of these two elements, namely, by con- 
sidering that there are two large classes of truths which 
differ entirely from each other, and of which the differ- 
ence arises from this, that the one class derives its 
nature from the one, and the other from the other, of 
these two elements. These are what are technically 
termed necessary and contingent truths ; truths of demon- 
stration and truths of experience. I shall first point out 
the difference of these two kinds of truths, which differ- 
ence is briefly this, that the former are true universally 
and necessarily, the latter, only learnt from experience, 
and limited by experience. I shall show that upon vari- 
ous subjects we possess truths of the former kind ; that 
the universality and necessity which distinguish them can 
by no means be derived from experience ; that these cha- 
racters do in reality flow from the ideas which these 
truths involve ; and that when their necessity is exhibited 
in the way of logical demonstration, it is found to depend 
upon certain fundamental principles, (Definitions and 
Axioms,) which may thus be considered as expressing, 
n some measure, the essential characters of our ideas. 
These fundamental principles I shall afterwards proceed to 
discuss and to exhibit in each of the principal depart- 
ments of science. 

2. Of Necessary Truths. Necessary truths are those 
in which we not only learn that the proposition is 
true, but see that it must be true ; in which the negation 
of the truth is not only false, but impossible ; in which 
we cannot, even by an effort of imagination, or in a sup- 
position, conceive the reverse of that which is asserted. 



OF NECESSARY AND CONTINGENT TRUTHS. 55 

That there are such truths cannot be doubted. We 
may take, for example, all relations of number. Three 
and Two added together make Five. We cannot con- 
ceive it to be otherwise. We cannot, by any freak of 
thought, imagine Three and Two to make Seven. 

It may be said that this assertion merely expresses 
what we mean by our words ; that it is a matter of defi- 
nition ; that the proposition is an identical one. 

But this is by no means so. The definition of Five is 
not Three and Two, but Four and One. How does it 
appear that Three and Two is the same number as Four 
and One ? It is evident that it is so ; but why is it evi- 
dent? not because the proposition is identical; for if 
that were the reason, all numerical propositions must be 
evident for the same reason. If it be a matter of defi- 
nition that 3 and 2 make 5, it must be a matter of defi- 
nition that 39 and 27 make 66. But who will say that 
the definition of 66 is 39 and 27 ? Yet the magnitude 
of the numbers can make no difference in the ground of 
the truth. How do we know that the product of 13 and 
17 is 4 less than the product of 15 and 15 ? We see 
that it is so, if we perform certain operations by the rules 
of arithmetic ; but how do we know the truth of the 
rules of arithmetic? If we divide 123375 by 987 
according to the process taught us at school, how are we 
assured that the result is correct, and that the number 
125 thus obtained is really the number of times one 
number is contained in the other ? 

The correctness of the rule, it may be replied, can be 
rigorously demonstrated. It can be shown that the pro- 
cess must inevitably give the true quotient. 

Certainly this can be shown to be the case. And 
precisely because it can be shown that the result must be 
true, we have here an example of a necessary truth ; and 
this truth, it appears, is not therefore necessary because it 



56 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

is itself evidently identical, however it may be possible to 
prove it by reducing it to evidently identical propositions. 
And the same is the case with all other numerical propo- 
sitions ; for, as we have said, the nature of all of them is 
the same. 

Here, then, we have instances of truths which are not 
only true, but demonstrably and necessarily tr u e. Now such 
truths are, in this respect at least, altogether different 
from truths, which, however certain they may be, are 
learnt to be so only by the evidence of observation, in- 
terpreted, as observation must be interpreted, by our own 
mental faculties. There is no difficulty in finding ex- 
amples of these merely observed truths. We find that 
sugar dissolves in water, and forms a transparent fluid, 
but no one will say that we can see any reason beforehand 
why the result must be so. We find that all animals 
which chew the cud also have the divided hoof; but could 
any one have predicted that this would be universally the 
case ? or supposing the truth of the rule to be known, can 
any one say that he cannot conceive the facts as occurring 
otherwise? Water expands when it crystallizes, some 
other substances contract in the same circumstances ; but 
can any one know that this will be so otherwise than by 
observation ? We have here propositions rigorously true, 
(we will assume,) but can any one say they are necessarily 
true ? These, and the great mass of the doctrines esta- 
blished by induction, are actual, but so far as we can see, 
accidental laws ; results determined by some unknown se- 
lection, not demonstrable consequences of the essence of 
things, inevitable and perceived to be inevitable. According 
to the phraseology which has been frequently used by phi- 
losophical writers, they are contingent, not necessary truths. 

It is requisite to insist upon this opposition, because 
no insight can be obtained into the true nature of 
knowledge, and the mode of arriving at it, by any one 



OF NECESSARY AND CONTINGENT TRUTHS. 57 

who does not clearly appreciate the distinction. The 
separation of truths which are learnt by observation, and 
truths which can be seen to be true by a pure act of 
thought, is one of the first and most essential steps in 
our examination of the nature of truth, and the mode of 
its discovery. If any one does not clearly comprehend 
this distinction of necessary and contingent truths, he 
will not be able to go along with us in our researches 
into the foundations of human knowledge ; nor, indeed, 
to pursue with success any speculation on the subject. 
But, in fact, this distinction is one that can hardly fail 
to be at once understood. It is insisted upon by almost 
all the best modern, as well as ancient, metaphysicians*, 
as of primary importance. And if any person does not 
fully apprehend, at first, the different kinds of truth thus 
pointed out, let him study, to some extent, those sciences 
which have necessary truth for their subject, as geometry, 
or the properties of numbers, so as to obtain a familiar 
acquaintance with such truth ; and he will then hardly 
fail to see how different the evidence of the propositions 
which occur in these sciences, is from the evidence of 
the facts which are merely learnt from experience. 
That the year goes through its course in 365 days, can 
only be known by observation of the sun or stars : that 
365 days is 52 weeks and a day, it requires no expe- 
rience, but only a little thought to perceive. That bees 
build their cells in the form of hexagons, we cannot 
know without looking at them ; that regular hexagons 
may be arranged so as to fill space, may be proved with 
the utmost rigour, even if there were not in existence 
such a thing as a material hexagon. 

I have taken examples of necessary truths from the 
properties of number and space ; but such truths exist 
no less in other subjects, although the discipline of 

* Aristotle, Dr. Whately, Dugald Stewart, &c. 



58 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

thought which is requisite to perceive them distinctly, 
may not be so usual among men with regard to the 
sciences of mechanics and hydrostatics, as it is with 
regard to the sciences of geometry and arithmetic. Yet 
every one may perceive that there are such truths in 
mechanics. If I press the table with my hand, the 
table presses my hand with an equal force : here is a 
self-evident and necessary truth. In any machine, 
constructed in whatever manner to increase the force 
which I can exert, it is certain that what I gain in force 
I must lose in the velocity which I communicate. This 
is not a contingent truth, borrowed from and limited by 
observation ; for a man of sound mechanical views applies 
it with like confidence, however novel be the construc- 
tion of the machine. When I come to speak of the ideas 
which are involved in our mechanical knowledge, I 
may, perhaps, be able to bring more clearly into view 
the necessary truth of general propositions on such 
subjects. That reaction is equal and opposite to action 
is as necessarily true as that two straight lines cannot 
inclose a space ; it is as impossible theoretically to make 
a perpetual motion by mere mechanism as to make the 
diagonal of a square commensurable with the side. 

The existence of these two kinds of truth, necessary 
and contingent, and their separate nature, being estab- 
lished or allowed, we proceed onwards with the argument. 

Necessary truths must be universal truths. If any 
property belong to a right-angled triangle necessarily, it 
must belong to all right-angled triangles. And it shall be 
proved in the following Chapter, that truths possessing 
these two characters, of Necessity and Universality, can- 
not possibly be the mere results of experience. 



59 

CHAPTER X. 
OF EXPERIENCE. 

1. I HERE employ the term Experience in a more 
definite and limited sense than it possesses in common 
usage ; for I restrict it to matters belonging to the 
domain of science. In such cases, the knowledge which 
we acquire, by means of experience, is of a clear and 
precise nature ; and the passions and feelings and 
interests, which make the lessons of experience in prac- 
tical matters so difficult to read aright, no longer disturb 
and confuse us. We may, therefore, hope, by attending 
to such cases, to learn what efficacy experience really 
has, in the discovery of truth. 

That from experience (including intentional expe- 
rience, or observation,) we obtain much knowledge which 
is highly important, and which could not be procured 
from any other source, is abundantly clear. We have 
already taken several examples of such kuowledge. 
We know by experience that animals which ruminate 
are cloven-hoofed ; and we know this in no other 
manner. We know, in like manner, that all the 
planets and their satellites revolve round the sun from 
west to east. It has been found by experience that all 
meteoric stones contain chrome. Many similar portions 
of our knowledge might be mentioned. 

Now what we have here to remark is this ; that in 
no case can experience prove a proposition to be neces- 
sarily or universally true. However many instances we 
may have observed of the truth of a proposition, yet if it 
be merely observation, there is nothing to assure us that 
the next case shall not be an exception to the rule. If 
it be strictly true that every ruminant animal yet known 
has cloven hoofs, we still cannot be sure that some 



60 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

creature will not hereafter be discovered which has the 
first of these attributes without having the other. 
When the planets and their satellites, as far as Saturn, 
had been all found to move round the sun in one direc- 
tion, it was still possible that there might be other such 
bodies not obeying this rule ; and, accordingly, when the 
satellites of Uranus were detected, they appeared to 
offer an exception of this kind. Even in the mathe- 
matical sciences, we have examples of such rules sug- 
gested by experience, and also of their precariousness. 
However far they may have been tested, we cannot 
depend upon their correctness, except we see some 
reason for the rule. For instance, various rules have 
been given, for the purpose of pointing out prime 
numbers ; that is, those which cannot be divided by any 
other number. We may try, as an example of such a 
rule, this one any odd power of the number two, dimi- 
nished by one. Thus the third power of two, diminished 
by one, is seven ; the fifth power, diminished by one, is 
thirty-one; the seventh power so diminished is one 
hundred and twenty-seven. All these are prime num- 
bers : and we might be led to suppose that the rule is 
universal. But the next example shows us the falla- 
ciousness of such a belief. The ninth power of two, 
diminished by one, is five hundred and eleven, which is 
not a prime, being divisible by seven. 

Experience must always consist of a limited nnmber 
of observations. And, however numerous these may be, 
they can show nothing with regard to the infinite 
number of cases in which the experiment has not been 
made. Experience being thus unable to prove a fact to 
be universal, is, as will readily be seen, still more 
incapable of proving a truth to be necessary. Expe- 
rience cannot, indeed, offer the smallest ground for the 
necessity of a proposition. She can observe and record 



OF EXPERIENCE. 61 

what has happened ; but she cannot find, in any case, or 
in any accumulation of cases, any reason for what must 
happen. She may see objects side by side; but she 
cannot see a reason why they must ever be side by side. 
She finds certain events to occur in succession ; but the 
succession supplies, in its occurrence, no reason for its 
recurrence. She contemplates external objects ; but she 
cannot detect any internal bond, which indissolubly 
connects the future with the past, the possible with the 
real. To learn a proposition by experience, and to see it 
to be necessarily true, are two altogether different pro- 
cesses of thought. 

2. But it may be said, that we do learn by means of 
observation and experience many universal truths; 
indeed, all the general truths of which science consists. 
Is not the doctrine of universal gravitation learnt by 
experience ? Are not the laws of motion, the properties 
of light, the general principles of chemistry so learnt? 
How, with these examples before us, can we say that 
experience teaches no universal truths ? 

To this we reply, that these truths can only be 
known to be general, not universal, if they depend upon 
experience alone. Experience cannot bestow that uni- 
versality which she herself cannot have, and that necessity 
of which she has no comprehension. If these doctrines 
are universally true, this universality flows from the ideas 
which we apply to our experience, and which are, as we 
have seen, the real sources of necessary truth. How far 
these ideas can communicate their universality and 
necessity to the results of experience, it will hereafter be 
our business to consider. It will then appear, that when 
the mind collects from observation truths of a wide and 
comprehensive kind, which approach to the simplicity 
and universality of the truths of pure science ; she gives 



OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

them this character by throwing upon them the light of 
her own Fundamental Ideas. 

But the truths which we discover by observation of 
the external world, even when most strikingly simple 
and universal, are not necessary truths. Is the doctrine 
of universal gravitation necessarily true ? It was doubted 
by Clairaut (so far as it refers to the moon), when the pro- 
gression of the apogee in fact appeared to be twice as 
great as the theory admitted. It has been doubted, even 
more recently, with respect to the planets, their mutual 
perturbations appearing to indicate a deviation from the 
law. It is doubted still, by some persons, with respect 
to the double stars. But suppose all these doubts to be 
banished, and the law to be universal ; is it then proved 
to be necessary ? Manifestly not : the very existence of 
these doubts proves that it is not so. For the doubts were 
dissipated by reference to observation and calculation, 
not by reasoning on the nature of the law. Clairaut's 
difficulty was removed by a more exact calculation of 
the effect of the sun's force on the motion of the apogee. 
The suggestion of Bessel, that the intensity of gra- 
vitation might be different for different planets, was 
found to be unnecessary, when Professor Airy gave 
a more accurate determination of the mass of Jupiter. 
And the question whether the extension of the law of 
the inverse square to the double stars be true, (one of 
the most remarkable questions now before the scientific 
world,) must be answered, not by any speculations 
concerning what the laws of attraction must necessarily 
be, but by carefully determining the laws of the motion 
of these curious objects, by means of the observations 
such as those which Sir John Herschel has collected for 
that purpose, by his unexampled survey of both hemi- 
spheres of the sky. And since the extent of this truth is 



OF EXPERIENCE. 63 

thus to be determined by reference to observed facts, it 
is clear that no mere accumulation of them can make its 
universality certain, or its necessity apparent. 

Thus no knowledge of the necessity of any truths 
can result from the observation of what really happens. 
This being clearly understood, we are led to an import- 
ant inquiry. 

The characters of universality and necessity in the 
truths which form part of our knowledge, can never 
be derived from the experience by which so large a 
part of our knowledge is obtained. But since, as we 
have seen, we really do possess a large body of truths 
which are necessary, and because necessary, therefore 
universal, the question still recurs, from what source 
these characters of universality and necessity are 
derived. 

The answer to this question we will attempt to give 
in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XI. 
OF THE GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS. 

1. To the question just stated, I reply, that the necessity 
and universality of the truths which form a part of our 
knowledge, are derived from the Fundamental Ideas which 
those truths involve. These ideas entirely shape and cir- 
cumscribe our knowledge ; they regulate the active opera- 
tions of our minds, without which our passive sensations 
do not become knowledge. They govern these operations, 
according to rules which are not only fixed and perma- 
nent, but which may be expressed in plain and definite 
terms; and these rules, when thus expressed, may be made 
the basis of demonstrations by which the necessary rela- 
tions imparted to our knowledge by our ideas may be 



64 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

traced to their consequences in the most remote ramifi- 
cations of scientific truth. 

These enunciations of the necessary and evident con- 
ditions imposed upon our knowledge by the fundamental 
ideas which it involves, are termed Axioms. Thus the 
Axioms of Geometry express the necessary conditions 
which result from the idea of space; the Axioms of 
Mechanics express the necessary conditions which flow 
from the ideas of force and motion ; and so on. 

2. It will be the office of several of the succeeding 
Books of this work to establish and illustrate in detail what 
I have thus stated in general terms : I shall there pass in 
review many of the most important fundamental ideas 
on which the existing body of our science depends ; and 
I shall endeavour to show, for each such idea in succes- 
sion, that knowledge involves an active as well as a passive 
element; that it is not possible without an act of the 
mind, regulated by certain laws. I shall further attempt 
to enumerate some of the principal fundamental relations 
which each idea thus introduces into our thoughts, and 
to express them by means of definitions and axioms, and 
other suitable forms. 

I will only add a remark or two to illustrate further 
this view of the ideal grounds of our knowledge. 

3. To persons familiar with any of the demonstrative 
sciences, it will be apparent that if we state all the Defini- 
tions and Axioms which are employed in the demon- 
strations, we state the whole basis on which those 
reasonings rest. For the whole process of demonstrative 
or deductive reasoning in any science, (as in geometry, for 
instance,) consists entirely in combining some of these 
first principles so as to obtain the simplest propositions of 
the science ; then combining these so as to obtain other 
propositions of greater complexity; and so on, till we 
advance to the most recondite demonstrable truths ; these 



GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS. 65 

last, however intricate and unexpected, still involving no 
principles except the original definitions and axioms. 
Thus, by combining the definition of a triangle, and of 
equal lines and equal angles, namely, that they are such 
as when applied to each other, coincide, with the axiom 
respecting straight lines (that two such lines cannot 
inclose a space,) we demonstrate the equality of triangles, 
under certain assumed conditions. Again, by combining 
this result with the definition of parallelograms, and with 
the axiom that if equals be taken from equals the wholes 
are equal, we prove the equality of parallelograms between 
the same parallels and upon the same base. From this 
proposition, again, we prove the equality of the square on 
the hypotenuse of a triangle to the squares on the two 
sides containing the right angle. But in all this there is 
nothing contained which is not rigorously the result of 
our geometrical definitions and axioms. All the rest of 
our treatises of geometry consists only of terms and 
phrases of reasoning, the object of which is to connect 
those first principles, and to exhibit the effects of their 
combination in the shape of demonstration. 

4. This combination of first principles takes place 
according to the forms and rules of Logic. All the steps 
of the demonstration may be stated in the shape in which 
logicians are accustomed to exhibit processes of reasoning 
in order to show their conclusiveness, that is, in Syllo- 
gisms. Thus our geometrical reasonings might be resolved 
into such steps as the following : 

All straight lines drawn from the centre of a circle to 
its circumference are equal : 

But the straight lines AB, AC, are drawn from the 
centre of a circle to its circumference : 

Therefore the straight lines A B, AC, are equal. 

Each step of geometrical, and all other demonstrative 
reasoning, may be resolved into three such clauses as 
VOL. i. F 



66 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

these ; and these three clauses are termed respectively, 
the major premiss, the minor premiss, and the conclusion ; 
or, more briefly, the major, the minor, and the* con- 
clusion. 

The principle which justifies the reasoning when exhi- 
bited in this syllogistic form, is this : that a truth which 
can be asserted as generally, or rather as universally true, 
can be asserted as true also in each particular case. The 
minor only asserts a certain particular case to be an 
example of such conditions as are spoken of in the major; 
and hence the conclusion, which is true of the major by 
supposition, is true of the minor by consequence ; and 
thus we proceed from syllogism to syllogism, in each one 
employing some general truth in some particular instance. 
Any proof which occurs in geometry, or any other 
science of demonstration, may thus be reduced to a series 
of processes, in each of which we pass from some gene- 
ral proposition to the narrower and more special propo- 
sitions which it includes. And this process of deriving 
truths by the mere combination of general principles, 
applied in particular hypothetical cases, is called deduc- 
tion ; being opposed to induction, in which, as we have 
seen, a new general principle is introduced at every step. 

5. Now we have to remark that, this being so, however 
far we follow such deductive reasoning, we can never have 
in our conclusion any truth which is not virtually included 
in the original principles from which the reasoning started. 
For since at any step we merely take out of a general 
proposition something included in it, while at the pre- 
ceding step we have taken this general proposition out of 
one more general, and so on perpetually, it is manifest 
that our last result was really included in the principle 
or principles with which we began. I say principles, 
because, although our logical conclusion can only exhibit 
the legitimate issue of our first principles, it may, never- 



GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS. 67 

theless, contain the result of the combination of several 
such principles, and may thus assume a great degree of 
complexity, and may appear so far removed from the 
parent truths, as to betray at first sight hardly any rela- 
tionship with them. Thus the proposition which has 
already been quoted respecting the squares on the sides 
of a right-angled triangle, contains the results of many 
elementary principles ; as the definitions of parallels, tri- 
angle, and square ; the axioms respecting straight lines, 
and respecting parallels ; and, perhaps, others. The con- 
clusion is complicated by containing the effects of the 
combination of all these elements; but it contains no- 
thing, and can contain nothing, but such elements and 
their combinations. 

This doctrine, that logical reasoning produces no new 
truths, but only unfolds and brings into view those truths 
which were, in effect, contained in the first principles of 
the reasoning, is assented to by almost all who, in modern 
times, have attended to the science of logic. Such a view 
is admitted both by those who defend, and by those who 
depreciate the value of logic. " Whatever is established 
by reasoning, must have been contained and virtually 
asserted in the premises*," " The only truth which such 
propositions can possess consists in conformity to the 
original principles." 

In this manner the whole substance of our geo- 
metry is reduced to the definitions and axioms which we 
employ in our elementary reasonings ; and in like manner 
we reduce the demonstrative truths of any other science 
to the definitions and axioms which we there employ. 

6. But in reference to this subject, it has sometimes 
been said that demonstrative sciences do in reality depend 
upon Definitions only; and that 110 additional kind of 

* WHATELEY'S Logic, pp. 237, 238. 

F 2 



68 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

principle, such as we have supposed Axioms to be, is 
absolutely required. It has been asserted that in geo- 
metry, for example, the source of the necessary truth of 
our propositions is this, that they depend upon definitions 
alone, and consequently merely state the identity of the 
same thing under different aspects. 

That in the sciences which admit of demonstration, as 
geometry, mechanics, and the like, axioms as well as defi- 
nitions are needed, in order to express the grounds of 
our necessary convictions, must be shown hereafter by an 
examination of each of these sciences in particular. But 
that the propositions of these sciences, those of geometry 
for example, do not merely assert the identity of the same 
thing, will, I think, be generally allowed, if we consider 
the assertions which we are enabled to make. When 
we declare that " a straight line is the shortest distance 
between two points," is this merely an identical proposi- 
tion ? the definition of a straight line in another form ? 
Not so : the definition of a straight line involves the 
notion of form only, and does not contain anything about 
magnitude; consequently, it cannot contain anything 
equivalent to " shortest." Thus the propositions of geo- 
metry are not merely identical propositions; nor have 
we in their general character anything to countenance 
the assertion, that they are the results of definitions 
alone. And when we come to examine this and other 
sciences more closely, we shall find that axioms, such as 
are usually in our treatises made the fundamental prin- 
ciples of our demonstrations, neither have ever been, nor 
can be, dispensed with. Axioms, as well as definitions, 
are in all cases requisite, in order properly to exhibit the 
grounds of necessary truth. 

7. Thus the real logical basis of every body of demon- 
strated truths are the Definitions and Axioms which are 
the first principles of the reasonings. But when we are 



GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS. 69 

arrived at this point, the question further occurs, what is 
the ground of the truth of these Axioms ? It is not the 
logical but the philosophical, not the formal but the real 
foundation of necessary truth, which we are seeking. 
Hence this inquiry, What is the ground of the axioms of 
geometry, of mechanics, and of any other demonstrable 
science, necessarily comes before us. 

The answer which we are led to give, by the view 
which we have taken of the nature of knowledge, has 
already been stated. The ground of the axioms belong- 
ing to each science is the idea which the axiom involves. 
The ground of the axioms of geometry is the idea of 
space: the ground of the axioms of mechanics is the 
idea of force, of action and reaction, and the like. And 
hence these ideas are Fundamental Ideas; and since 
they are thus the foundations, not only of demonstration 
but of truth, an examination into their real import and 
nature is of the greatest consequence to our purpose. 

8. Not only the Axioms, but the Definitions which 
form the basis of our reasonings, depend upon our Funda- 
mental Ideas. And the definitions are not arbitrary defi- 
nitions, but are determined by a necessity no less rigorous 
than the axioms themselves. We could not think of 
geometrical truths without conceiving a circle; and we 
could not reason concerning such truths without defining 
a circle in some mode equivalent to that which is com- 
monly adopted. The definitions of parallels, of right 
angles, and the like, are quite as necessarily prescribed 
by the nature of the case, as the axioms which these defi- 
nitions bring with them. Indeed we may substitute one 
of these kinds of principles for another. We cannot 
always put a definition in the place of an axiom ; but we 
may always find an axiom which shall take the place of 
a definition. If we assume a proper axiom respecting 
straight lines, we need no definition of a straight line. 



70 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

But in whatever shape the principle appear, as definition 
or as axiom, it has about it nothing casual or arbitrary, 
but is determined to be what it is, as to its import, by the 
most rigorous necessity, growing out of the Idea of Space. 

7. These principles, definitions, and axioms, thus 
exhibiting the primary developements of a fundamental 
idea, do in fact express the idea, so far as its expression 
in words forms part of our science. They are different 
views of the same body of truth ; and though each prin- 
ciple, by itself, exhibits only one aspect of this body, 
taken together they convey a sufficient conception of it 
for our purposes. The idea itself cannot be fixed in 
words ; but these various lines of truth proceeding from 
it, suggest sufficiently to a fitly-prepared mind, the place 
where the idea resides, its nature, and its efficacy. 

It is true that these principles, our elementary defi- 
nitions and axioms, even taken altogether, express the 
idea incompletely. Thus the definitions and axioms of 
geometry, as they are stated in our elementary works, do 
not fully express the idea of space as it exists in our 
minds. For, in addition to these, other axioms, indepen- 
dent of these, and no less evident, can be stated ; and are 
in fact stated when we come to the higher geometry. 
Such, for instance, is the axiom of Archimedes that a 
curve line which joins two points is less than a broken 
line which joins the same points and includes the curve. 
And thus the idea is disclosed but not fully revealed, 
imparted but not transfused, by the use we make of it 
in science. When we have taken from the fountain so 
much as serves our purpose, there still remains behind a 
deep well of truth, which we have not exhausted, and 
which we may easily believe to be inexhaustible, 



71 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS ARE NOT DERIVED 
FROM EXPERIENCE. 

1. BY the course of speculation contained in the last 
three Chapters, we are again led to the conclusion which 
we have already stated, that our knowledge contains an 
ideal element, and that this element is not derived from 
experience. For we have seen that there are proposi- 
tions which are known to be necessarily true ; and that 
such knowledge is not, and cannot be, obtained by mere 
observation of actual facts. It has been shown, also, that 
these necessary truths are the results of certain funda- 
mental ideas, such as those of space, number, and the 
like. Hence it follows inevitably that these ideas and 
others of the same kind are not derived from experience. 
For these ideas possess a power of infusing into their 
developements that very necessity which experience can 
in no way bestow. This power they do not borrow from 
the external world, but possess by their own nature. Thus 
we unfold out of the idea of space the propositions of 
geometry, which are plainly truths of the most rigorous 
necessity and universality. But if the idea of space were 
merely collected from observation of the external world, 
it could never enable or entitle us to assert such proposi- 
tions : it could never authorize us to say that not merely 
some lines, but all lines, not only have, but must have, 
those properties which geometry teaches. Geometry in 
every proposition speaks a language which experience 
never dares to utter; and indeed of which she but half 
comprehends the meaning. Experience sees that the 
assertions are true, but she sees not how profound and 
absolute is their truth. She unhesitatingly assents to 
the laws which geometry delivers, but she does not pre- 



72 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

tend to see the origin of their obligation. She is always 
ready to acknowledge the sway of pure scientific prin- 
ciples as a matter of fact, but she does not dream of offer- 
ing her opinion on their authority as a matter of right ; 
still less can she justly claim to be herself the source of 
that authority. 

David Hume asserted*, that we are incapable of seeing 
in any of the appearances which the world presents any- 
thing of necessary connexion ; and hence he inferred that 
our knowledge cannot extend to any such connexion. 
It will be seen from what we have said that we assent to 
his remark as to the fact, but we differ from him alto- 
gether in the consequence to be drawn from it. Our 
inference from Hume's observation is, not the truth of 
his conclusion, but the falsehood of his premises ; not 
that, therefore, we can know nothing of natural con- 
nexion, but that, therefore, we have some other source of 
knowledge than experience : not that we can have no 
idea of connexion or causation, because, in his language, 
it cannot be the copy of an impression ; but that since 
we have such an idea, our ideas are not the copies of our 
impressions. 

Since it thus appears that our fundamental ideas are 
not acquired from the external world by our senses, but 
have some separate and independent origin, it is import- 
ant for us to examine their nature and properties, as they 
exist in themselves, and this it will be our business to do 
through a portion of the following pages. But it may be 
proper first to notice one or two objections w 7 hich may 
possibly occur. 

3. It may be said that without the use of our senses, 
of sight and touch, for instance, we should never have any 
idea of space ; that this idea, therefore, may properly be 
said to be derived from those senses. And to this I reply 

* Essay S) vol. ii. p. 70. 



FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS NOT DERIVATIVE. 73 

by referring to a parallel instance. Without light we 
should have no perception of visible figure; yet the 
power of perceiving visible figure cannot be said to be 
derived from the light, but resides in the structure of the 
eye. If we had never seen objects in the light, we should 
be quite unaware that we possessed a power of vision ; yet 
we should not possess it the less on that account. If we 
had never exercised the senses of sight and touch (if we 
can conceive such a state of human existence) we know 
not that we should be conscious of an idea of space. 
But the light reveals to us at the same time the existence 
of external objects and our own power of seeing. And 
in a very similar manner, the exercise of our senses dis- 
closes to us, at the same time, the external world, and 
our own ideas of space, time, and other conditions, with- 
out which the external world can neither be observed nor 
conceived. That light is necessary to vision, does not, in 
any degree, supersede the importance of a separate exa- 
mination of the laws of our visual powers, if we would 
understand the nature of our own bodily faculties and 
the extent of the information they can give us. In like 
manner, the fact that intercourse with the external world 
is necessary for the conscious employment of our ideas^ 
does not make it the less essential for us to examine those 
ideas in their most intimate structure, in order that we 
may understand the grounds and limits of our know- 
ledge. Even before we see a single object, we have a 
faculty of vision ; and in like manner, if we can suppose 
a man who has never contemplated an object in space or 
time, we must still assume him to have the faculties of 
entertaining the ideas of space and time, which faculties 
are called into play on the very first occasion of the use 
of the senses. 

4. In answer to such remarks as the above, it has 
sometimes been said that to assume separate faculties in 



74 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

the mind for so many different processes of thought, is to 
give a mere verbal explanation, since we learn nothing 
concerning our idea of space by being told that we have 
a faculty of forming such an idea. It has been said that 
this course of explanation leads to an endless multipli- 
cation of elements in man's nature, without any advan- 
tage to our knowledge of his true constitution. We 
may, it is said, assert man to have a faculty of walking, 
of standing, of breathing, of speaking ; but what, it is 
asked, is gained by such assertions ? To this I reply, that 
we undoubtedly have such faculties as those just named ; 
that it is by no means unimportant to consider them ; and 
that the main question in such cases is, whether they are 
separate and independent faculties, or complex and deri- 
vative ones ; and, if the latter be the case, what are the 
simple and original faculties by the combination of which 
the others are produced. In walking, standing, breath- 
ing, for instance, a great part of the operation can be re- 
duced to one single faculty ; the voluntary exercise of our 
muscles. But in breathing this does not appear to be 
the whole of the process. The operation is, in part at 
least, involuntary ; and it has been held that there is a 
certain sympathetic action of the nerves, in addition to 
the voluntary agency which they transmit, which is essen- 
tial to the function. To determine whether or no this 
sympathetic faculty is real and distinct, and if so, what 
are its laws and limits, is certainly a highly philosophical 
inquiry, and well deserving the attention which has been 
bestowed upon it by eminent physiologists. And just of 
the same nature are the inquiries with respect to man's 
intellectual constitution, on which we propose to enter. 
For instance, man has a faculty of apprehending time, and 
a faculty of reckoning numbers ; are these distinct, or is 
one faculty derived from the other? To analyse the vari- 
ous combinations of our ideas and observations into the 



FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS NOT DERIVATIVE. 75 

original faculties which they involve ; to show that these 
faculties are original, and not capable of further analysis ; 
to point out the characters which mark these faculties 
and lead to the most important features of our know- 
ledge ; these are the kind of researches on which we 
have now to enter, and these, we trust, will be found 
to be far from idle or useless parts of our plan. If we 
succeed in such attempts, it will appear that it is by 
no means a frivolous or superfluous step to distinguish 
separate faculties in the mind. If we do not learn much 
by being told that we have a faculty of forming the idea 
of space, we at least, by such a commencement, circum- 
scribe a certain portion of the field of our investigations, 
which, we shall afterwards endeavour to show, requires 
and rewards a special examination. And though we shall 
thus have to separate the domain of our philosophy into 
many provinces, these are, as we trust it will appear, 
neither arbitrarily assigned, nor vague in their limits, nor 
infinite in number. 



CHAPTER XIII. 
OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES. 

s 

WE proceed, in the ensuing Books, to the closer 
examination of a considerable number of those Funda- 
mental Ideas on which the sciences, hitherto most suc- 
cessfully cultivated, are founded. In this task, our 
objects will be to explain and analyse such Ideas so as 
to bring into view the Definitions and Axioms, or other 
forms, in which we may clothe the conditions to which 
our speculative knowledge is subjected. I shall also 
try to prove, for some of these Ideas in particular, what 
has been already urged respecting them in general, that 



76 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

they are not derived from observation, but necessarily 
impose their conditions upon that knowledge of which 
observation supplies the materials. I shall further, in 
some cases, endeavour to trace the history of these Ideas 
as they have successively come into notice in the progress 
of science ; the gradual developement by which they have 
arrived at their due purity and clearness ; and, as a neces- 
sary part of such a history, I shall give a view of some of 
the principal controversies which have taken place with 
regard to each portion of knowledge. 

An exposition and discussion of the Fundamental 
Ideas of each Science may, with great propriety, be 
termed the PHILOSOPHY of such science. These ideas 
contain in themselves the elements of those truths 
which the science discovers and enunciates ; and in the 
progress of the sciences, both in the world at large and in 
the mind of each individual student, the most important 
steps consist in apprehending these ideas clearly, and in 
bringing them into accordance with the observed facts. 
I shall, therefore, in a series of Books, treat of the Philo- 
sophy of the Pure Sciences, the Philosophy of the Mecha- 
nical Sciences, the Philosophy of Chemistry, and the like, 
and shall analyse and examine the ideas which these 
sciences respectively involve. 

In this undertaking, inevitably somewhat long, and 
involving many deep and subtle discussions, I shall take, 
as a chart of the country before me, by which my course 
is to be guided, the scheme of the sciences which I was 
led to form by travelling over the history of each in 
order*. Each of the sciences of which I then narrated 
the progress, depends upon several of the Fundamental 
Ideas of which I have to speak : some of these Ideas are 
peculiar to one field of speculation, others are common to 
more. A previous enumeration of Ideas thus collected 
* History of the Inductive Sciences. 



PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCES. 77 

may serve both to show the course and limits of this part 
of our plan, and the variety of interest which it offers. 

I shall, then, successively, have to speak of the ideas 
which are the foundation of geometry and arithmetic, 
(and which also regulate all sciences depending upon 
these, as astronomy and mechanics;) namely, the ideas 
of space, time, and number : 

Of the ideas on which the mechanical sciences (as 
mechanics, hydrostatics, physical astronomy) more pecu- 
liarly rest ; the ideas of force and matter, or rather the 
idea of cause, which is the basis of these : 

Of the ideas which the secondary mechanical sciences 
(acoustics, optics, and thermotics) involve; namely, the 
ideas of the externality of objects, and of the media by 
which we perceive their qualities : 

Of the ideas which are the basis of mechanico-chemi- 
cal and chemical science, polarity, chemical affinity, and 
substance; and the idea of symmetry, a necessary part of 
the philosophy of crystallography : 

Of the ideas on which the classificatory sciences pro- 
ceed (mineralogy, botany, and zoology) ; namely, the ideas 
of resemblance, arid of its gradations, and of natural 
affinity: 

Finally, of those ideas on which the physiological 
sciences are founded ; the ideas of separate vital powers, 
such as assimilation and irritability ; and the idea of final 
cause. 

We have, besides these, the Palsetiological sciences, 
which proceed mainly on the conception of historical 
causation. 

It is plain that when we have proceeded so far as 
this, we have advanced to the verge of those speculations 
which have to do with mind as well as body. The 
extension of our philosophy to such a field, if it can be 
justly so extended, will be one of the most important 



78 OF IDEAS IN GENERAL. 

results of our researches ; but on that very account we 
must fully study the lessons which we learn in those 
fields of speculation where our doctrines are most secure, 
before we venture into a region where our principles will 
appear to be more precarious, and where they are inevi- 
tably less precise. 

We now proceed to the examination of the above 
ideas, and to such essays towards the philosophy of each 
science as this course of investigation may suggest. 



79 



BOOK II. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE 
SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER I. 
OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

1. ALL external objects and events which we can 
contemplate are viewed as having relations of Space, 
Time, and Number; and are subject to the general 
conditions which these Ideas impose, as well as to the 
particular laws which belong to each class of objects and 
occurrences. The special laws of nature, considered under 
the various aspects which constitute the different sciences, 
are obtained by a mixed reference to experience and to 
the fundamental ideas of each science. But besides the 
sciences thus formed by the aid of special experience, the 
conditions which flow from those more comprehensive 
ideas first mentioned, space, time, and number, constitute 
a body of science, applicable to objects and changes of 
all kinds, and deduced without recurrence being had to 
any observation in particular. These sciences, thus 
unfolded out of ideas alone, unmixed with any reference 
to the phenomena of matter, are hence termed pure 
sciences. The principal sciences of this class are geome- 
try, theoretical arithmetic, and algebra considered in its 
most general sense, as the investigation of the relations 
of space and number by means of general symbols. 



80 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

2. These pure sciences were not included in our 
survey of the history of the sciences, because they are 
not inductive sciences. Their progress has not consisted 
in collecting* laws from phenomena, true theories from 
observed facts, and more general from more limited laws ; 
but in tracing the consequences of the ideas themselves, 
and in detecting the most general and intimate analogies 
and connexions which prevail among such conceptions as 
are derivable from the ideas. These sciences have no 
principles besides definitions and axioms, and no process 
of proof but deduction ; this process, however, assuming 
here a most remarkable character ; and exhibiting a com- 
bination of simplicity and complexity, of rigour and 
generality, quite unparalleled in other subjects. 

3. The universality of the truths, and the rigour of 
the demonstrations of these pure sciences, attracted 
attention in the earliest times ; and it was perceived that 
they offered an exercise and a discipline of the intellec- 
tual faculties, in a form peculiarly free from admixture 
of extraneous elements. They were strenuously culti- 
vated by the Greeks, both with a view to such a disci- 
pline, and from the love of speculative truth which pre- 
vailed among that people: and the name mafliematics, by 
which they are designated, indicates this their character 
of disciplined studies. 

4. As has already been said, the ideas which these 
sciences involve extend to all the objects and changes 
which we observe in the external world ; and hence the 
consideration of mathematical relations forms a large 
portion of many of the sciences which treat of the phe- 
nomena and laws of external nature, as astronomy, 
optics, and mechanics. Such sciences are hence often 
termed mixed mathematics, the relations of space and 
number being, in these branches of knowledge, combined 
with principles collected from special observation; 



OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 81 

while geometry, algebra, and the like subjects, which 
involve no result of experience, are called pure mathe- 
matics. 

5. Space, time, and number, may be conceived as 
forms by which the knowledge derived from our sensa- 
tions is moulded, and which are independent of the dif- 
ferences in the matter of our knowledge, arising from the 
sensations themselves. Hence the sciences which have 
these ideas for their subject may be termed formal 
sciences. In this point of view, they are distinguished 
from sciences in which, besides these mere formal laws 
by which appearances are corrected, we endeavour to 
apply to the phenomena the idea of cause, or some of the 
other ideas which penetrate further into the principles 
of nature. We have thus, in the History, distinguished 
Formal Astronomy and Formal Optics from Physical 
Astronomy and Physical Optics. 

We now proceed to our examination of the ideas 
which constitute the foundation of these formal or pure 
mathematical sciences, beginning with the idea of space. 



CHAPTER II. 
OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 

1 . BY speaking of space as an Idea, I intend to imply, 
as has already been stated, that the apprehension of 
objects as existing in space, and of the relations of posi- 
tion, &c., which thus prevail among them, is not a conse- 
quence of experience, but a result of a peculiar constitu- 
tion and activity of the mind, which is independent of all 
experience in its origin, though constantly combined with 
experience in its exercise. 

That the idea of space is thus independent of experi- 
ence, has already been pointed out in speaking of ideas 

VOL. I. G 



82 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

in general : but it may be useful to illustrate the doctrine 
further in this particular case. 

I assert, then, that space is not a notion obtained 
by experience. Experience gives us information con- 
cerning things without us: but our apprehending them 
as without us, takes for granted their existence in space. 
Experience acquaints us what are the form, position, 
magnitude of particular objects : but that they have form, 
position, magnitude, presupposes that they are in space. 
We cannot derive from appearances, by the way of 
observation, the habit of representing things to ourselves 
as in space ; for no single act of observation is possible 
any otherwise than by beginning with such a representa- 
tion, and conceiving objects as already existing in space. 

2. That our mode of representing space to ourselves 
is not derived from experience, is clear also from this : 
that through this mode of representation we arrive at 
propositions which are rigorously universal and neces- 
sary. Propositions of such a kind could not possibly be 
obtained from experience ; for experience can only teach 
us by a limited number of examples, and therefore can 
never securely establish a universal proposition : and 
again, experience can only inform us that anything is so, 
and can never prove that it must be so. That two sides 
of a triangle are greater than the third is a universal and 
necessary geometrical truth : it is true of all triangles ; 
it is true in such a way that the contrary cannot be con- 
ceived. Experience could not prove such a proposition. 
And experience has not proved it ; for perhaps no man 
ever made the trial as a means of removing doubts : and 
no trial could, in fact, add in the smallest degree to the 
certainty of this truth. To seek for proof of geometrical 
propositions by an appeal to observation proves nothing 
in reality, except that the person who has recourse to such 
grounds has no due apprehension of the nature of geo- 



OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 83 

metrical demonstration. We have heard of persons who 
convinced themselves by measurement that the geome- 
trical rule respecting the squares on the sides of a right- 
angled triangle was true : but these were persons whose 
minds had been engrossed by practical habits, and in 
whom the speculative developement of the idea of space 
had been stifled by other employments. The practical 
trial of the rule may illustrate, but cannot prove it. 
The rule will of course be confirmed by such trial, because 
what is true in general is true in particular : but it cannot 
be proved from any number of trials, for no accumulation 
of particular cases makes up a universal case. To all 
persons who can see the force of any proof, the geome- 
trical rule above referred to is as evident, and its evidence 
as independent of experience, as the assertion that sixteen 
and nine make twenty-five. At the same time the truth 
of the geometrical rule is quite independent of numerical 
truths, and results from the relations of space alone. 
This could not be if our apprehension of the relations of 
space were the fruit of experience : for experience has no 
element from which such truth and such proof could 
arise. 

3. Thus the existence of necessary truths, such as 
those of geometry, proves that the idea of space from 
which they flow, is not derived from experience. Such 
truths are inconceivable on the supposition of their being 
collected from observation ; for the impressions of sense 
include no evidence of necessity. But we can readily 
understand the necessary character of such truths, if we 
conceive that there are certain necessary conditions under 
which alone the mind receives the impressions of sense. 
Since these conditions reside in the constitution of the 
mind, and apply to every perception of an object to which 
the mind can attain, we easily see that their rules must 
include, not only all that has been, but all that can be, 

G 2 



84 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

matter of experience. Our sensations can each convey 
no information except about itself; each can contain no 
trace of another additional sensation ; and thus no rela- 
tion and connexion between two sensations can be given 
by the sensations themselves. But the mode in which 
the mind perceives these impressions as objects, may and 
will introduce necessary relations among them : and thus 
by conceiving the idea of space to be a condition of per- 
ception in the mind, we can conceive the existence of 
necessary truths, which apply to all perceived objects. 

4. If we consider the impressions of sense as the 
mere materials of our experience, such materials may 
be accumulated in any quantity and in any order. But 
if we suppose that this matter has a certain form given 
it, in the act of being accepted by the mind, we can 
understand how it is that these materials are subject to 
inevitable rules ; how nothing can be perceived exempt 
from the relations which belong to such a form. And 
since there arc such truths applicable to our expe- 
rience, and arising from the nature of space, we may 
thus consider space as a, form which the materials given 
by experience necessarily assume in the mind; as an 
arrangement derived from the perceiving mind, and not 
from the sensations alone. 

5. Thus this phrase, that space is a form belonging 
to our perceptive power, may be employed to express 
that we cannot perceive objects as in space, without an 
operation of the mind as well as of the senses without 
active as well as passive faculties. This phrase, how- 
ever, is not necessary to the exposition of our doctrines. 
Whether we call the conception of space a condition of 
perception, a form of perception, or an idea, or by any 
other term, it is something originally inherent in the mind 
perceiving, and not in the objects perceived. And it is 
because the apprehension of all objects is thus subjected 



OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 85 

to certain mental conditions, forms or ideas, that our 
knowledge involves certain inviolable relations and neces- 
sary truths. The principles of such truths, so far as they 
regard space, are derived from the idea of space, and we 
must endeavour to exhibit such principles in their general 
form. But before we do this, we may notice some of 
the conditions which belong not to our Ideas in general, 
but to this Idea of Space in particular. 



CHAPTER III. 

OF SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF 
SPACE. 

1. SOME of the Ideas which we shall have to examine 
involve conceptions of certain relations of objects, as the 
idea of Cause and of Likeness ; and may appear to be 
suggested by experience, enabling us to abstract this 
general relation from particular cases. But it will be 
seen that Space is not such a general conception of a 
relation. For we do not speak of Spaces as we speak of 
Causes and Likenesses, but of space. And when we 
speak of spaces, we understand by the expression, parts 
of one and the same identical everywhere extended 
Space. We conceive a universal space ; which is not made 
up of these partial spaces as its component parts, for it 
would remain if these were taken away; and these 
cannot be conceived without presupposing absolute space. 
Absolute space is essentially one ; and the complication 
which exists in it, and the conception of various spaces, 
depends merely upon boundaries. Space must, therefore, 
be, as we have said, not a general conception abstracted 
from particulars, but a universal mode of representation, 
altogether independent of experience. 

2. Space is infinite. We represent it' to ourselves ps 



86 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

an infinitely great magnitude. Such an idea as that of 
Likeness or Cause, is, no doubt, found in an infinite 
number of particular cases, and so far includes these 
cases. But these ideas do not include an infinite number 
of cases as parts of an infinite whole. When we say 
that all bodies and partial spaces exist in infinite space, 
we use an expression which is not applied in the same 
sense to any cases except those of space and time. 

3. What is here said may appear to be a denial of 
the real existence of space. It must be observed, how- 
ever, that we do not deny, but distinctly assert, the 
existence of space as a real and necessary condition of all 
objects perceived ; and that we not only allow that 
objects are seen external to us, but we found upon the 
fact of their being so seen, our view of the nature of 
space. If, however, it be said that we deny the reality 
of space as an object or thing, this is true. Nor does it 
appear easy to maintain that space exists as a thing, 
when it is considered that this thing is infinite in all its 
dimensions; and, moreover, that it is a thing, which, 
being nothing in itself, exists only that other things may 
exist in it. And those who maintain the real existence 
of space, must also maintain the real existence of time in 
the same sense. Now two infinite things, thus really 
existing, and yet existing only as other things exist in 
them, are notions so extravagant that we are driven to 
some other mode of explaining the state of the matter. 

4. Thus space is not an object of which we perceive 
the properties, but a form of our perception ; not a thing 
which affects our senses, but an idea to which we con- 
form the impressions of sense. And its peculiarities 
appear to depend upon this, that it is not only a form of 
sensation, but of intuition ; that in reference to space, 
we not only perceive but contemplate objects. We see 
objects in space, side by side, exterior to each other; 



PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 87 

space, and objects in so far as they occupy space, have 
parts exterior to other parts ; and have the whole thus 
made up by the juxtaposition of parts. This mode of 
apprehension belongs only to the ideas of space and 
time. Space and time are made up of parts, but cause 
and likeness are not apprehended as made up of parts. 
And the term intuition (in its rigorous sense) is appli- 
cable only to that mode of contemplation in which we 
thus look at objects as made up of parts, and apprehend 
the relations of those parts at the same time and by the 
same act by which we apprehend the objects themselves. 

5. As we have said, space limited by boundaries 
gives rise to various conceptions which we have often to 
consider. Thus limited, space assumes form or figure ; 
and the variety of conceptions thus brought under our 
notice is infinite. We have every possible form of line, 
straight line, and curve ; and of curves an endless 
number; circles, parabolas, hyperbolas, spirals, helices. 
We have plane surfaces of various shapes, parallelograms, 
polygons, ellipses ; and we have solid figures, cubes, 
cones, cylinders, spheres, spheroids, and so on. All 
these have their various properties, depending on the 
relations of their boundaries ; and the investigation of 
their properties forms the business of the science of 
geometry. 

6. Space has three dimensions, or directions in which 
it may be measured; it cannot have more or fewer. The 
simplest measurement is that of a straight line, which 
has length alone. A surface has both length and 
breadth : and solid space has length, breadth, and thick- 
ness or depth. The origin of such a difference of dimen- 
sions will be seen if we reflect that each portion of space 
has a boundary, and is extended both in the direction in 
which its boundary extends, and also in a direction from 
its boundary ; for otherwise it would not be a boundary, 



88 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

A point has no dimensions. A line has but one dimen- 
sion, the distance from its boundary, or its length. A 
plane, bounded by a straight line, has the dimension 
which belongs to this line, and also has another dimension 
arising from the distance of its parts from this boundary 
line ; and this may be called breadth. A solid, bounded 
by a plane, has the dimensions which this plane has ; and 
has also a third dimension, which we may call height or 
depth, as we consider the solid extended above or below 
the plane ; or thickness, if we omit all consideration of up 
and down. And no space can have any dimensions 
which are not resoluble into these three. 

We may now proceed to consider the mode in 
which the idea of space is employed in the formation 
of geometry. 



CHAPTER TV. 

OF THE DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS WHICH 
RELATE TO SPACE. 

1. THE relations of space have been apprehended 
with peculiar distinctness and clearness from the very 
first unfolding of man's speculative powers. This was a 
consequence of the circumstance which we have just 
noticed, that the simplest of these relations, and those on 
which the others depend, are seen by intuition. Hence, 
as soon as men were led to speculate concerning the 
relations of space, they assumed just principles, and 
obtained true results. It is said that the science of 
geometry had its origin in Egypt, before the dawn of the 
Greek philosophy: but the knowledge of the early 
Egyptians (exclusive of their mythology) appears to have 
been purely practical ; and, probably, their geometry 
consisted only in some maxims of land-measuring, which 



DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS RELATING TO SPACE. 89 

is what the term implies. The Greeks of the time of 
Plato, had, however, not only possessed themselves of 
many of the most remarkable elementary theorems of 
the science ; but had, in several instances, reached the 
boundary of the science in its elementary form ; as when 
they proposed to themselves the problems of doubling 
the cube and squaring the circle. 

But the deduction of these theorems by a systematic 
process, and the primary exhibition of the simplest 
principles involved in the idea of space, which such a 
deduction requires, did not take place, so far as we are 
aware, till a period somewhat later. The Elements of 
Geometry of Euclid, in which this task was performed, are 
to this day the standard work on the subject : the author 
of this work taught mathematics with great applause at 
Alexandria, in the reign of Ptolemy Lagus, about 280 
years before Christ. The principles which Euclid makes 
the basis of his system have been very little simplified 
since his time; and all the essays and controversies 
which bear upon these principles, have had a reference to 
the form in which they are stated by him. 

2. Definitions. The first principles of Euclid's geo- 
metry are, as the first principles of any system of geo- 
metry must be, definitions and axioms respecting the 
various ideal conceptions which he introduces ; as straight 
lines, parallel lines, angles, circles, and the like. But it 
is to be observed that these definitions and axioms are 
very far from being arbitrary hypotheses and assumptions. 
They have their origin in the idea of space, and are 
merely modes of exhibiting that idea in such a manner 
as to make it afford grounds of deductive reasoning. 
The axioms are necessary consequences of the concep- 
tions respecting which they are asserted ; and the defi- 
tions are no less necessary limitations of conceptions ; not 
requisite in order to arrive at this or that consequence ; 



90 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

but necessary in order that it may be possible to draw any 
consequences, and to establish any general truths. 

For example, if we rest the end of one straight 
staff upon the middle of another straight staff, and move 
the first staff into various positions, we, by so doing, 
alter the angles which the first staff makes with the 
other to the right hand and to the left. But if we 
place the staff in that special position in which these two 
angles are equal, each of them is a right angle, according 
to Euclid; and this is the definition of a right angle, 
except that Euclid employs the abstract conception of 
straight lines, instead of speaking, as we have done, of 
staves. But this selection of the case in which the two 
angles are equal is not a mere act of caprice ; as it might 
have been if he had selected a case in which these angles 
are unequal in any proportion. For the consequences 
which can be drawn concerning the cases of unequal 
angles, do not lead to general truths, without some refer- 
ence to that peculiar case in which the angles are equal : 
and thus it becomes necessary to single out and define 
that special case, marking it by a special phrase. And 
this definition not only gives complete and distinct know- 
ledge what a right angle is, to any one who can form the 
conception of an angle in general ; but also supplies a 
principle from which all the properties of right angles 
may be deduced. 

3. Axioms. With regard to other conceptions also, as 
circles, squares, and the like, it is possible to lay down 
definitions which are a sufficient basis for our reasoning, 
so far as such figures are concerned. But, besides these 
definitions, it has been found necessary to introduce 
certain axioms among the fundamental principles of geo- 
metry. These are of the simplest character ; for instance, 
that two straight lines cannot cut each other in more than 
one point, and an axiom concerning parallel lines. Like 



DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS RELATING TO SPACE. 91 

the definitions, these axioms flow from the Idea of Space, 
and present that idea under various aspects. They are 
different from the definitions ; nor can the definitions be 
made to take the place of the axioms in the reasoning by 
which elementary geometrical properties are established. 
For example, the definition of parallel straight lines is, 
that they are such as, however far continued, can never 
meet : but, in order to reason concerning such lines, we 
must further adopt some axiom respecting them: for 
example, we may very conveniently take this axiom ; that 
two straight lines which cut one another are not both of 
them parallel to a third straight line*. The definition 
and the axiom are seen to be inseparably connected by 
our intuition of the properties of space ; but the axiom 
cannot be proved from the definition, by any rigorous 
deductive demonstration. And if we were to take any 
other definition of two parallel straight lines, (as that 
they are both perpendicular to a third straight line,) we 
should still, at some point or other of our progress, fall in 
with the same difficulty of demonstratively establishing 
their properties without some further assumption. 

4. Thus the elementary properties of figures, which 
are the basis of our geometry, are necessary results of our 
Idea of Space ; and are connected with each other by the 
nature of that idea, and not merely by our hypotheses 
and constructions. Definitions and axioms must be com- 
bined, in order to express this idea so far as the purposes 
of demonstrative reasoning require. These verbal enun- 
ciations of the results of the idea cannot be made to 
depend on each other by logical consequence ; but have a 
mutual dependence of a more intimate kind, which words 
cannot fully convey. It is not possible to resolve these 
truths into certain hypotheses, of which all the rest shall 
be the necessary logical consequence. The necessity is 

* This axiom is simpler and more convenient than that of Euclid. 
It is employed by the late Professor Playfair in his Geometry. 



02 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

not hypothetical, but intuitive. The axioms require not 
to be granted, but to be seen. If any one were to assent 
to them without seeing them to be true, his assent would 
be of no avail for purposes of reasoning : for he would be 
also unable to see in what cases they might be applied. 
The clear possession of the Idea of Space is the first requi- 
site for all geometrical reasoning ; and this clearness of 
idea may be tested by examining whether the axioms 
offer themselves to the mind as evident. 

5. The necessity of ideas added to sensations, in order 
to produce knowledge, has often been overlooked or 
denied in modern times. The ground of necessary truth 
which ideas supply being thus lost, it was conceived that 
there still remained a ground of necessity in definitions ; 
that we might have necessary truths, by asserting especi- 
ally what the definition implicitly involved in general. It 
was held, also, that this was the case in geometry : that 
all the properties of a circle, for instance, were implicitly 
contained in the definition of a circle. That this alone is 
not the ground of the necessity of the truths which regard 
the circle, that we could not in this way unfold a defini- 
tion into proportions, without possessing an intuition of 
the relations to which the definition led, has already been 
shown. But the insufficiency of the above account of the 
grounds of necessary geometrical truth appeared in ano- 
ther way also. It was found impossible to lay down a 
system of definitions out of which alone the whole of 
geometrical truth could be evolved. It was found that 
axioms could not be superseded. No definition of a 
straight line could be given which rendered the axiom 
concerning straight lines superfluous. And thus it ap- 
peared that the source of geometrical truths was not 
definition alone ; and we find in this result a confirmation 
of the doctrine which we are here urging, that this source 
of truth is to be found in the form or conditions of our 
perception ; in the idea which we unavoidably combine 



DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS RELATING TO SPACE. 93 

with the impressions of sense ; in the activity, and not 
in the passivity of the mind*. 

6. This will appear further when we come to con- 
sider the mode in which we exercise our observation 
upon the relations of space. But we may, in the first 
place, make a remark which tends to show the connexion 
between our conception of a straight line, and the axiom 
which is made the foundation of our reasonings concern- 
ing space. The axiom is this ; that two straight lines, 
which have both their ends joined, cannot have the 
intervening parts separated so as to inclose a space. 
The necessity of this axiom is of exactly the same 
kind as the necessity of the definition of a right angle, 
of which we have already spoken. For as the line 
standing on another makes right angles when it makes 
the angles on the two sides of it equal ; so a line is a 
straight line when it makes the two portions of space, on 
the two sides of it, similar. And as there is only a single 
position of the line first mentioned, which can make the 
angles equal, so there is only a single form of a line which 
can make the spaces near the line similar on one side and 
on the other : and therefore there cannot be two straight 
lines, such as the axiom describes, which, between the 
same limits, give two different boundaries to space thus 
separated. And thus we see a reason for the axiom. 
Perhaps this view may be further elucidated if we take a 
leaf of paper, double it, and crease the folded edge. We 
shall thus obtain a straight line at the folded edge ; and 
this line divides the surface of the paper, as it was origi- 
nally spread out, into two similar spaces. And that these 

* I formerly stated views similar to these in some " Remarks'* 
appended to a work which I termed The Mechanical Euclid, pub- 
lished in 1837. These Remarks, so far as they bear upon the question 
here discussed, were noticed and controverted in No. 135 of the Edin- 
burgh Review. As an examination of the reviewer's objections may 
serve further to illustrate the subject, I shall annex to this chapter an 
answer to the article to which I have referred. 



94 PHILOSOPHY OP THE PURE SCIENCES. 

spaces are similar so far as the fold which separates them 
is concerned, appears from this ; that these two parts 
coincide when the paper is doubled. And thus a fold in 
a sheet of paper at the same time illustrates the defini- 
tion of a straight line according to the above view, and 
confirms the axiom that two such lines cannot enclose a 
space. 

If the separation of the two parts of space were made 
by any other than a straight line ; if, for instance, the 
paper were cut by a concave line ; then on turning one of 
the parts over, it is easy to see that the edge of one part 
being concave one way, and the edge of the other part 
concave the other way, these two lines might enclose a 
space. And each of them would divide the whole space 
into two portions which were not similar ; for one portion 
would have a concave edge, and the other a convex edge. 
Between any two points there might be innumerable lines 
drawn, some convex one way arid some convex the other 
way ; but the straight line is the line which is not convex 
either one way or the other ; it is the single medium 
standard from which the others may deviate in opposite 
directions. 

Such considerations as these show sufficiently that 
the singleness of the straight line which connects any 
two points is a result of our fundamental conceptions of 
space. But yet the above conceptions of the similar 
form of the two parts of space on the two sides of a line, 
and of the form of a line which is intermediate among 
all other forms, are of so vague a nature, that they cannot 
fitly be made the basis of our elementary geometry ; and 
they are far more conveniently replaced, as they have 
been in almost all treatises of geometry, by the axiom 
that two straight lines cannot inclose a space. 

7. But we may remark that in what precedes we have 
considered space only under one of its aspects : as a 
plane. The sheet of paper which we assumed in order 



DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS RELATING TO SPACE. 95 

to illustrate the nature of a straight line, was supposed to 
be perfectly plane or flat : for otherwise, by folding it, we 
might obtain a line not straight. Now this assumption 
of a plane appears to take for granted that very concep- 
tion of a straight line which the sheet was employed to 
illustrate ; for the definition of a plane given in the Ele- 
ments of Geometry is, that it is a surface on which lie 
all straight lines drawn from one point of the surface to 
another. Arid thus the explanation above given of the 
nature of a straight line, that it divides a plane space 
into similar portions on each side, appears to be imper- 
fect or nugatory. 

And to this we reply, that the explanation must be 
rendered complete and valid by deriving the conception 
of a plane from considerations of the same kind as those 
which we employed for a straight line. Any portion of 
solid space may be divided into two portions by surfaces 
passing through any given line or boundaries. And these 
surfaces may be convex either on one side or on the 
other, and they admit of innumerable changes from being 
convex on one side to being convex on the other in any 
degree. So long as the surface is convex either way, the 
two portions of space which it separates are not similar, 
one having a convex and the other a concave boundary. 
But there is a certain intermediate position of the sur- 
face in which the two portions of space which it divides 
have their boundaries exactly similar. In this position 
the surface is neither convex nor concave, but plane. 
And thus a plane surface is determined by this condition 
of its being that single surface which is the intermediate 
form among all convex and concave surfaces by which 
solid space can be divided, and of its separating such 
space into two portions, of which the boundaries, though 
they are the same surface in two opposite positions, are 
exactly similar. 



96 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

Thus a plane is the simplest and most symmetrical 
boundary by which a solid can be divided ; and a straight 
line is the simplest and most symmetrical boundary by 
which a plane can be separated. These conceptions are 
obtained by considering the boundaries of an interminable 
space capable of imaginary division in every direction. 
And as a limited space may be separated into two parts 
by a plane, and a plane again separated into two parts by 
a straight line, so a line is divided into two portions by a 
point, which is the common boundary of the two por- 
tions ; the end of the one and the beginning of the other 
portion having itself no magnitude, form, or parts. 

8. The geometrical properties of planes and solids are 
deducible from the first principles of the Elements, with- 
out any new axioms; the definition of a plane above 
quoted, that all straight lines joining its points lie in the 
plane, being a sufficient basis for all reasoning upon these 
subjects. And thus the views which we have presented 
of the nature of space being verbally expressed by means 
of certain definitions and axioms, become the ground- 
work of a long series of deductive reasoning, by which 
is established a very large and curious collection of 
truths, namely, the whole science of elementary plane 
and solid geometry. 

This science is one of indispensable use and constant 
reference to every student of the laws of nature ; for the 
relations of space and number are the alphabet in which 
those laws are written. But besides the interest and im- 
portance of this kind which geometry possesses, it has a 
great and peculiar value for all who wish to understand 
the foundations of human knowledge, and the methods 
by which it is acquired. For the student of geometry 
acquires, with a degree of insight and clearness which the 
unmathematical reader can but feebly imagine, a convic- 
tion that there are necessary truths, many of them of a 



DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS RELATING TO SPACE. 97 

very complex and striking character ; and that a few of 
the most simple and self-evident truths which it is pos- 
sible for the mind of man to apprehend, may, by syste- 
matic deduction, lead to the most remote and unexpected 
results. 

In pursuing such philosophical researches as that 
in which we are now engaged, it is of great advantage 
to the speculator to have cultivated to some extent the 
study of geometry ; since by this study he may become 
fully aware of such features in human knowledge as 
those which we have mentioned. By the aid of the 
lesson thus learned from the contemplation of geome- 
trical truths, we have been endeavouring to establish 
those further doctrines ; that these truths are but dif- 
ferent aspects of the same Fundamental Idea, and that the 
ground of the necessity which these truths possess reside 
in the Idea from which they flow, this Idea not being a 
derivative result of experience, but its primary rule. 
When the reader has obtained a clear and satisfactory 
view of these doctrines, so far as they are applicable to 
our knowledge concerning space, he has, we may trust, 
overcome the main difficulty which will occur in follow- 
ing the course of the speculations now presented to him. 
He is then prepared to go forwards with us ; to see over 
how wide a field the same doctrines are applicable ; and 
how rich and various a harvest of knowledge springs 
from these seemingly scanty principles. 

But before we quit the subject now under our con- 
sideration, we shall endeavour to answer some objections 
which have been made to the views here presented ; and 
shall attempt to illustrate further the active powers which 
we have ascribed to the mind. 



VOL. I. H 



98 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER V. 

OF SOME OBJECTIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 

MADE TO THE DOCTRINES STATED 

IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER*. 

THE Edinburgh Review, No. CXXXV., contains a 
critique on a work termed The Mechanical Euclid, in which 
opinions were delivered to nearly the same effect as some 
of those stated in the last chapter, and in Chapter XI. of 
the First Book. Although I believe that there are no 
arguments used by the reviewer to which the answers will 
not suggest themselves in the mind of any one who has 
read with attention what has been said in the preceding 
chapters (except, perhaps, one or two remarks which have 
reference to mechanical ideas), it may serve to illustrate 
the subject if I reply to the objections directly, taking 
them as the reviewer has stated them. 

1. I had dissented from Stewart's assertion that mathe- 
matical truth is hypothetical, or depends upon arbitrary 
definitions; since we understand by an hypothesis a 
supposition, not only which we may make, but may abstain 
from making, or may replace by a different supposition ; 

* In order to render the present chapter more intelligible, it may 
be proper to state briefly the arguments which gave occasion to the 
review. After noticing Stewart's assertions, that the certainty of 
mathematical reasoning arises from its depending upon definitions, and 
that mathematical truth is hypothetical ; I urged, that no one has yet 
been able to construct a system of mathematical truths by the aid of 
definition alone ; that a definition would not be admissible or appli- 
cable except it agreed with a distinct conception in the mind ; that the 
definitions which we employ in mathematics are not arbitrary or hypo- 
thetical, Lut necessary definitions ; that if Stewart had taken as his 
examples of axioms the peculiar geometrical axioms, his assertions 
would have been obviously erroneous ; and that the real foundation of 
the truths of mathematics is the Idea of Space, which may be ex- 
pressed (for purposes of demonstration) partly by definitions and 
partly by axioms. 



ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS. 99 

whereas the definitions and hypotheses of geometry are 
necessarily such as they are, and cannot be altered or 
excluded. The reviewer (p. 84), informs us that he under- 
stands Stewart, when -he speaks of hypotheses and defini- 
tions being the foundation of geometry, to speak of the 
hypothesis that real objects correspond to our geometrical 
definitions. "If a crystal be an exact hexahedron, the 
geometrical properties of the hexahedron may be predi- 
cated of that crystal." To this I reply, that such hypo- 
theses as this are the grounds of our applications of geo- 
metrical truths to real objects, but can in no way be said 
to be the foundation of the truths themselves ; that I do 
not think that the sense which the reviewer gives was 
Stewart's meaning ; but that if it was, this view of the 
use of mathematics does not at all affect the question 
which both he and I proposed to discuss, which was, 
the ground of mathematical certainty. I may add, that 
whether a crystal be an exact hexahedron, is a matter of 
observation and measurement, not of definition. I think 
the reader can have no difficulty in seeing how little my 
doctrine is affected by the connexion on which the re- 
viewer thus insists. I have asserted that the proposition 
which affirms the square on the diagonal of a rectangle to 
be equal to the squares on two sides does not rest upon 
arbitrary hypotheses ; the objector answers, that the pro- 
position that the square on the diagonal of this page is 
equal to the squares on the sides, depends upon the arbi- 
trary hypothesis that the page is a rectangle. Even if 
this fact were a matter of arbitrary hypothesis, what 
could it have to do with the general geometrical pro- 
position? How could a single fact, observed or hypo- 
thetical, affect a universal and necessary truth, which 
would be equally true if the fact were false? If there 
be nothing arbitrary or hypothetical in geometry till we 
come to such steps in its application, it is plain that the 

H 2 



100 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

truths themselves are not hypothetical, which is the 
question for us to decide. 

2. The reviewer then (p. 85,) considers the doctrine 
that axioms as well as definitions are the foundations of 
geometry ; and here he strangely narrows and confuses 
the discussion by making himself the advocate of Stewart, 
instead of arguing the question itself. I had asserted 
that some axioms are necessary as the foundations of 
mathematical reasoning, in addition to the definitions. 
If Stewart did not intend to discuss this question, I had 
no concern with what he had said about axioms. But I 
had every reason to believe that this was the question 
which Stewart did intend to discuss. I conceive there is 
no doubt that he intended to give an opinion upon the 
grounds of mathematical reasoning in general. For he 
begins his discussion (Elements, vol. ii., p. 38,) by contesting 
Reid's opinion on this subject, which is stated generally ; 
and he refers again to the same subject, asserting in 
general terms, that the first principles of mathematics are 
not axioms but definitions. If, then, afterwards, he made 
his proof narrower than his assertion ; if having declared 
that no axioms are necessary, he afterwards limited him- 
self to showing that seven out of twelve of Euclid's 
axioms are barren truisms, it was no concern of mine to 
contest this assertion, which left my thesis untouched. 
I had asserted that the proper geometrical axioms (that 
two straight lines cannot inclose a space, and the axiom 
about parallel lines) are indispensable in geometry. 
What account the reviewer gives of these axioms we 
shall soon see ; but if Stewart allowed them to be axioms 
necessary to geometrical reasoning, he overturned his 
own assertion as to the foundations of such reasoning ; 
and if he said nothing decisive about these axioms, 
which are the points on which the battle must turn, he 
left his assertion altogether unproved ; nor was it neces- 



ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS. 101 

sary for me to pursue the war into a barren and unim- 
portant corner, when the metropolis was surrendered. 
The reviewer's exultation that I have not contested the 
first seven axioms is an amusing example of the self- 
complacent zeal of advocacy. 

3. But let us turn to the material point : the proper 
geometrical axioms. What is the reviewer's account of 
these? Which side of the alternative does he adopt? 
Do they depend upon the definitions, and is he prepared 
to show the dependence? Or are they superfluous, and 
can he erect the structure of geometry without their aid ? 
One of these two courses, it would seem, he must take. 
For we both begin by asserting the excellence of geometry 
as an example of demonstrated truth. It is precisely 
this attribute which gives an interest to our present in- 
quiry. How, then, does the reviewer explain this excel- 
lence on his views ? How does he reckon the foundation 
courses of the edifice which we agree in considering as a 
perfect example of intellectual building? 

I presume I may take, as his answer to this question, 
his hypothetical statement of what Stewart would have 
said, (p. 87,) on the supposition that there had been, among 
the foundations of geometry, self-evident indemonstrable 
truths : although it is certainly strange that the reviewer 
should not venture to make up his mind as to the truth or 
falsehood of this supposition. If there were such truths 
they would be, he says, " legitimate filiations" of the defi- 
nitions. They would be involved in the definitions. 
And again he speaks of the foundation of the geo- 
metrical doctrine of parallels as a flaw, and as a truth 
which requires, but has not received demonstration. 
And yet again, he tells us that each of these supposed 
axioms (Euclid's twelfth, for instance), is "merely an 
indication of the point at which geometry fails to perform 
that which it undertakes to perform" (p. 91); and 



102 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

that in reality her truths are not yet demonstrated. The 
amount of this is, that the geometrical axioms are to be 
held to be legitimate filiations of the definitions, because 
though certainly true, they cannot be proved from the 
definitions ; that they are involved in the definitions, 
although they cannot be evolved out of them ; and that 
rather than admit that they have any other origin than 
the definitions, we are to proclaim that geometry has 
failed to perform what she undertakes to perform. 

To this I reply that I cannot understand what is meant 
by " legitimate filiations " of principles, if the phrase do 
not mean consequences of such principles established by 
rigorous and formal demonstration ; that the reviewer, if 
he claims any real signification for his phrase, must sub- 
stantiate the meaning of it by such a demonstration ; 
he must establish his " legitimate filiation " by a genea- 
logical table in a satisfactory form. When this cannot 
be done, to assert, notwithstanding, that the propositions 
are involved in the definitions, is a mere begging the 
question ; and to excuse this defect by saying that geo- 
metry fails to perform what she has promised, is to calum- 
niate the character of that science which we profess to 
make our standard, rather than abandon an arbitrary 
and unproved assertion respecting the real grounds of her 
excellence. I add, further, that if the doctrine of parallel 
lines, or any other geometrical doctrine of which we see 
the truth, with the most perfect insight of its necessity, 
have not hitherto received demonstration to the satisfac- 
tion of any school of reasoners, the defect must arise 
from their erroneous views of the nature of demonstra- 
tions, and the grounds of mathematical certainty. 

4, I conceive, then, that the reviewer has failed alto- 
gether to disprove the doctrine that the axioms of geo- 
metry are necessary as a part of the foundations of the 
science. I had asserted further that these axioms supply 



ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS. 103 

what the definitions leave deficient ; and that they, along 
with definitions, serve to present the idea of space under 
such aspects that we can reason logically concerning it. 
To this the reviewer opposes (p. 96) the common opinion 
that a perfect definition is a complete explanation of a 
name, and that the test of its perfection is, that we 
may substitute the definition for the name wherever it 
occurs. I reply, that my doctrine, that a definition ex- 
presses a part, but not the whole, of the essential cha- 
racters of an idea, is certainly at variance with an opinion 
sometimes maintained, that a definition merely explains 
a word, and should explain it so fully that it may always 
replace it. The error of this common opinion may, I think, 
be shown from considerations such as these ; that if we 
undertake to explain one word by several, we may be called 
upon, on the same ground, to explain each of these seve- 
ral by others, and that in this way we can reach no limit 
nor resting-place : that in point of fact, it is not found to 
lead to clearness, but to obscurity, when in the discussion 
of general principles, we thus substitute definitions for 
single terms ; that even if this be done, we cannot reason 
without conceiving what the terms mean ; and that, in 
doing this, the relations of our conceptions, and not the 
arbitrary equivalence of two forms of expression, are the 
foundations of our reasoning. 

5. The reviewer conceives that some of the so-called 
axioms are really definitions. The axiom, that " magni- 
tudes which coincide with each other, that is, which fill 
the same space, are equal," is a definition of geometrical 
equality: the axiom, that "the whole is greater than its 
part," is a definition of whole and part. But surely there 
are very serious objections to this view. It would seem 
more natural to say, if the former axiom is a definition 
of the word equal, that the latter is a definition of the 
word greater. And how can one short, phrase define two 



104 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

terms ? If I say, " the heat of summer is greater than 
the heat of winter," does this assertion define anything, 
though the proposition is perfectly intelligible and dis- 
tinct? I think, then, that this attempt to reduce these 
axioms to definitions is quite untenable. 

6. I have stated that a definition can be of no use, 
except we can conceive the possibility and truth of the 
property connected with it ; and that if we do conceive 
this, we may rightly begin our reasonings by stating the 
property as an axiom ; which Euclid does, in the case of 
straight lines and of parallels. The reviewer inquires, 
(p. 92,) whether I am prepared to extend this doctrine to 
the case of circles, for which the reasoning is usually rested 
upon the definition ; whether I would replace this defini- 
tion by an axiom, asserting the possibility of such a circle. 
To this I might reply, that it is not at all incumbent 
upon me to assent to such a change ; for I have all along- 
stated that it is indifferent whether the fundamental pro- 
perties from which we reason be exhibited as definitions 
or as axioms, provided their necessity be clearly seen. 
But I am ready to declare that I think the form of our 
geometry w T ould be not at all the worse, if, instead of the 
usual definition of a circle, " that it is a figure contained 
by one line, which is called the circumference, and which 
is such, that all straight lines drawn from a certain point 
within the circumference are equal to one another," 
we were to substitute an axiom and a definition, as 
follows : 

Axiom. If a line be drawn so as to be at every point 
equally distant from a certain point, this line will return 
into itself, or will be one line including a space. 

Definitions. The space is called a circle, the line the 
circumference, and the point the centre. 

And this being done, it would be true, as the reviewer 
remarks, that geometry cannot stir one step without 



ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS. 105 

resting on an axiom. And I do not at all hesitate to say, 
that the above axiom, expressed or understood, is no less 
necessary than the definition, and is tacitly assumed in 
every proposition into which circles enter. 

7. I have, I think, now disposed of the principal 
objections which bear upon the proper axioms of geo- 
metry. The principles which are stated as the first seven 
axioms of Euclid's Elements, need not, as I have said, be 
here discussed. They are principles which refer, not to 
Space in particular, but to Quantity in general : such, 
for instance, as these; "If equals be added to equals the 
wholes are equal ;" " If equals be taken from equals the 
remainders are equal." But I will make an observation 
or two upon them before I proceed. 

Both Locke and Stewart have spoken of these axioms 
as barren truisms : as propositions from which it is not 
possible to deduce a single inference : and the reviewer 
asserts that they are not first principles, but laws of 
thought, (p. 88.) To this last expression I am willing 
to assent ; but I would add, that not only these, but all 
the principles which express the fundamental conditions 
of our knowledge, may with equal propriety be termed 
laws of thought; for these principles depend upon our 
ideas, and regulate the active operations of the mind, by 
which coherence and connexion are given to its passive 
impressions. But the assertion that no conclusions can 
be drawn from simple axioms, or laws of human thought 
which regard quantity, is by no means true. The whole 
of arithmetic, for instance, the rules for the multiplica- 
tion and division of large numbers, for finding a common 
measure, and, in short, a vast body of theory respecting 
numbers, rests upon no other foundation than such 
axioms as have been just noticed, that if equals be added 
to equals the wholes will be equal. And even when 
Locke's assertion, that from these axioms no truths can 



106 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

be deduced, is modified by Stewart and the reviewer, and 
limited to geometrical truths, it is hardly tenable (although, 
in fact, it matters little to our argument whether it is 
or no). For the greater part of the Seventh Book of 
Euclid's Elements, (on Commensurable and Incommen- 
surable Quantities,) and the Fifth Book, (on Proportion,) 
depend upon these axioms, with the addition only of the 
definition or axiom (for it may be stated either way) 
which expresses the idea of proportionality in numbers. 
So that the attempt to disprove the necessity and use of 
axioms, as principles of reasoning, fails even when we 
take those instances which the opponents consider as the 
more manifestly favourable to their doctrine. 

8. But perhaps the question may have already sug- 
gested itself to the reader's mind, of what use can it be 
formally to state such principles as these, (for example, 
that if equals be added to equals the wholes are equal,) 
since, whether stated or no, they will be assumed in our 
reasoning? And how can such principles be said to be 
necessary, when our proof proceeds equally well without 
any reference to them ? And the answer is, that it is 
precisely because these are the common principles of 
reasoning, which we naturally employ without specially 
contemplating them, that they require to be separated 
from the other steps and formally stated, when we 
analyse the demonstrations which we have obtained. 
In every mental process many principles are combined 
and abbreviated, and thus in some measure concealed 
and obscured. In analysing these processes the combi- 
nation must be resolved, and the abbreviation expanded, 
and thus the appearance is presented of a pedantic and 
superfluous formality. But that which is superfluous for 
proof, is necessary for the analysis of proof. In order to 
exhibit the conditions of demonstration distinctly, they 
must be exhibited formally. In the same manner, in 



ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS. 107 

demonstration we do not usually express every step in 
the form of a syllogism, but we see the grounds of the 
conclusiveness of a demonstration, by resolving it into 
syllogisms. Neither axioms nor syllogisms are necessary 
for conviction ; but they are necessary to display the con- 
ditions under which conviction becomes inevitable. The 
application of a single one of the axioms just spoken of 
is so minute a step in the proof, that it appears pedantic 
to give it a marked place ; but the very essence of 
demonstration consists in this, that it is composed of an 
indissoluble succession of such minute steps. The admi- 
rable circumstance is, that by the accumulation of such 
apparently imperceptible advances, we can in the end 
make so vast and so sure a progress. The completeness 
of the analysis of our knowledge appears in the small- 
ness of the elements into which it is thus resolved. The 
minuteness of any of these elements of truth, of axioms 
for instance, does not prevent their being as essential as 
others which are more obvious. And any attempt to 
assume one kind of element only when the course of our 
analysis brings before us two or more kinds, is alto- 
gether unphilosophical. Axioms and definitions are the 
proximate constituent principles of our demonstrations ; 
and the intimate bond which connects together a defini- 
tion and an axiom on the same subject is not truly 
expressed by asserting the latter to be derived from the 
former. This bond of connexion exists in the mind of 
the reasoner, in his conception of that to which both defi- 
nition and axiom refer, and consequently in the general 
Fundamental Idea of which that conception is a modifi- 
cation. 



108 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

CHAPTER VI. 
OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 

1. ACCORDING to the views above explained, certain of 
the impressions of our senses convey to us the perception 
of objects as existing in space ; inasmuch as by the con- 
stitution of our minds we cannot receive those impres- 
sions otherwise than in a certain form, involving- such a 
manner of existence. But the question deserves to be 
asked, What are the impressions of sense by which we 
thus become acquainted with space and its relations? 
And as we have seen that this idea of space implies an 
act of the mind as well as an impression on the sense, 
what manifestations do we find of this activity in our 
observation of the external world ? 

It is evident that sight and touch are the senses by 
which the relations of space are perceived, principally or 
entirely. It does not appear that an odour, or a feeling 
of warmth or cold, would, independently of experience, 
suggest to us the conception of a space surrounding us. 
But when we see objects, we see that they are extended 
and occupy space; when we touch them, we feel that 
they are in a space in which we also are. We have 
before our eyes any object, for instance, a board covered 
with geometrical diagrams; and we distinctly perceive, 
by vision, those lines of which the relations are the sub- 
jects of our mathematical reasoning. Again, we see 
before us a solid object, a cubical box for instance ; we 
see that it is within reach ; we stretch out the hand and 
perceive by the touch that it has sides, edges, corners, 
which we had already perceived by vision. 

2. Probably most persons do not generally apprehend 
that there is any material difference in these two cases ; 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 109 

that there are any different acts of mind concerned in 
perceiving by sight a mathematical diagram upon paper, 
and a solid cube lying on a table. Yet it is not difficult 
to show that, in the latter case at least, the perception of 
the shape of the object is not immediate. A very little 
attention teaches us that there is an act of judgment as 
well as a mere impression of sense requisite, in order that 
we may see any solid object. For there is no visible 
appearance which is inseparably connected with solidity. 
If a picture of a cube be rightly drawn in perspective and 
skilfully shaded, the impression upon the sense is the same 
as if it were a real cube. The picture may be mistaken for 
a solid object. But it is clear that in this case, the solidity 
is given to the object by an act of mental judgment. 
All that is seen is outline and shade, figures and colours 
on a flat board. The solid angles and edges, the relation 
of the faces of the figure by which they form a cube, is a 
matter of inference. This, which is evident in the case 
of the pictured cube, is true in all vision whatever. We 
see a scene before us on which are various figures and 
colours, but the eye cannot see more. It sees length 
and breadth, but no third dimension. In order to know 
that there are solids, we must infer as well as see. And 
this we do readily and constantly ; so familiarly, indeed, 
that we do not perceive the operation. Yet we may detect 
this latent process in many ways; for instance, by attending 
to cases in which the habit of drawing such inferences 
misleads us. Most persons have experienced this delu- 
sion in looking at a scene in a theatre, and especially 
that kind of scene which is called a diorama, when 
the interior of a building is represented. In these 
cases, the perspective representations of the various 
members of the architecture and decoration impress us 
almost irresistibly with the conviction that we have 
before us a space of great extent and complex form, 
instead of a flat painted canvass. Here, at least, the 



110 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

space is our own creation ; but it is manifestly created 
by the same act of thought as if we were really in the 
palace or the cathedral of which the halls and aisles thus 
seem to inclose us. And the act by which we thus 
create space of three dimensions out of visible extent 
of length and breadth, is constantly and imperceptibly 
going on. We are perpetually interpreting in this 
manner the language of the visible world. From the 
appearances of things which we directly see, we are con- 
stantly inferring that which we cannot directly see, their 
distance from us, and the position of their parts. 

3. The characters which we thus interpret are various. 
They are, for instance, the visible forms, colours, and 
shades of their parts, understood according to the maxims 
of perspective ; (for of perspective every one has a prac- 
tical knowledge, as every one has of grammar;) the 
effort by which we fix both our eyes on the same object, 
and adjust each eye to distinct vision; and the like. 
The right interpretation of the information which such 
circumstances give us respecting the true forms and 
distances of things, is gradually learned ; the lesson being 
begun in our earliest infancy, and inculcated upon us 
every hour during which we use our eyes. The com- 
pleteness with which the lesson is mastered is truly 
admirable ; for we forget that our conclusion is obtained 
indirectly, and mistake a judgment on evidence for an 
intuitive perception. We see the breadth of the street, 
as clearly and readily as we see the house on the other 
side of it; and we see the house to be square, however 
obliquely it be presented to us. This, however, by no 
means throws any doubt or difficulty on the doctrine 
that in all these cases we do interpret and infer. The 
rapidity of the process, and the unconsciousness of the 
effort, are not more remarkable in this case than they are 
when we understand the meaning of the speech which 
we hear, or of the book which we read. In these latter 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. Ill 

cases we merely hear noises or see black marks ; but we 
make, out of these elements, thought and feeling, without 
being aware of the act by which we do so. And by an 
exactly similar process we see a variously-coloured 
expanse, and collect from it a space occupied by solid 
objects. In both cases the act of interpretation is become 
so habitual that we can hardly stop short at the mere 
impression of sense. 

4. But yet there are various ways in which we may 
satisfy ourselves that these two parts of the process of 
seeing objects are distinct. To separate these operations 
is precisely the task which the artist has to execute in 
making a drawing of what he sees. He has to recover 
the consciousness of his real and genuine sen*ations, and 
to discern the lines of objects as they appear. This at 
first he finds difficult ; for he is tempted to draw what 
he knows of the forms of visible objects, and not what 
he sees : but as he improves in his art, he learns to put 
on paper what he sees only, separate from what he infers, 
in order that thus the inference, and with it a conception 
like that of the reality, may be left to the spectator. And 
thus the natural process of vision is the habit of seeing 
that which cannot be seen ; and the difficulty of the art 
of drawing consists in not seeing more than is visible. 

5. But again ; even in the simplest drawing we 
exhibit something which we do not see. However slight 
is our representation of objects, it contains something 
which we create for ourselves. For we draw an outline. 
Now an outline has no existence in nature. There are 
no visible lines presented to the eye by a group of figures. 
We separate each figure from the rest, and the boundary 
by which we do this is the outline of the figure ; and the 
like may be said of each member of every figure. A painter 
of our own times has made this remark in a work upon his 
art*. " The effect which natural objects produce upon our 

* PHILLIPS on Painting. 



112 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

sense of vision is that of a number of parts, or distinct 
masses of form and colour, and not of lines. But when 
we endeavour to represent by painting the objects which 
are before us, or which invention supplies to our minds, 
the first and the simplest means we resort to is this 
picture, by which we separate the form of each object 
from those that surround it, marking its boundary, the 
extreme extent of its dimensions in every direction, as 
impressed on our vision : and this is termed drawing its 
outline." 

5. Again, there are other ways in which we see clear 
manifestations of the act of thought by which we assign 
to the parts of objects their relations in space, the 
impressions of sense being merely subservient to this 
act. If we look at a medal through a glass which 
inverts it, we see the figures upon it become concave 
depressions instead of projecting convexities; for the 
light which illuminates the nearer side of the convexity, 
will be transferred to the opposite side by the apparent 
inversion of the medal, and will thus imply a hollow 
in which the side nearest the light gathers the shade. 
Here our decision as to which part is nearest to us, has 
reference to the side from \vhich the light comes. In 
other cases it is more spontaneous. If we draw black 
outlines, such as represent the edges of a cube seen 
in perspective, certain of the lines will cross each other ; 
and we may make tins cube appear to assume two 
different positions, by determining that the lines which 
belong to one end of the cube shall be understood to be 
before or to be behind those which they cross. Here an 
act of the will, operating upon the same sensible image, 
gives us two cubes, occupying two entirely different 
positions. Again, many persons may have observed that 
when a windmill in motion at a distance from us, (so 
that the outline of the sails only is seen,) stands obliquely 
to the eye, we may, by an effort of thought, make the 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 113 

obliquity assume one or the other of two positions ; and 
as we do this, the sails, which in one instance appear to 
turn from right to left, in the other case turn from left 
to right. A person a little familiar with this mental 
effort can invert the motion as often as he pleases, so 
long as the conditions of form and light do not offer a 
manifest contradiction to either position. 

Thus we have these abundant and various manifesta- 
tions of the activity of the mind, in the process by which 
we collect from vision the relations of solid space of three 
dimensions. But we must further make some remarks on 
the process by which we perceive mere visible figure ; 
and also on the mode in which we perceive the relations 
of space by the touch ; and first of the latter subject. 

6. The opinion above illustrated, that our sight 
does not give us a direct knowledge of the relations of 
solid space, and that this knowledge is acquired only by 
an inference of the mind, was first clearly taught by the 
celebrated Bishop Berkeley*, and is a doctrine now gene- 
rally assented to by metaphysical speculators. 

But does the sense of touch give us directly a know- 
ledge of space ? This is a question which has attracted 
considerable notice in recent times ; and new light has 
been thrown upon it in a degree which is very remark- 
able, when we consider that the philosophy of perception 
has been a prominent subject of inquiry from the earliest 
times. Two philosophers, advancing to this inquiry 
from different sides, the one a metaphysician, the other a 
physiologist, have independently arrived at the conviction 
that the long current opinion, according to which we 
acquire a knowledge of space by the sense of touch, is 
erroneous. And the doctrine which they teach instead 
of the ancient error, has a very important bearing upon 
the principle which we are endeavouring to establish, 

* Theory of Vision. 
VOL. I. I 



114 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

that our knowledge of space and its properties is derived 
rather from the active operations than from the passive 
impressions of the percipient mind. 

Undoubtedly the persuasion that we acquire a know- 
ledge of form by the touch is very obviously suggested 
by our common habits. If we wish to know the form of 
any body in the dark, or to correct the impressions 
conveyed by sight, when we suspect them to be false, we 
have only, it seems to us, at least at first, to stretch forth 
the hand and touch the object ; and we learn its shape 
with no chance of error. In these cases, form appears 
to be as immediate a perception of the sense of touch, as 
colour is of the sense of sight. 

7. But is this perception really the result of the 
passive sense of touch merely ? Against such an opinion 
Dr. Brown, the metaphysician of whom I speak, urges* 
that the feeling of touch alone, when any object is applied 
to the hand, or any other part of the body, can no more 
convey the conception of form or extension, than the 
sensation of an odour or a taste can do, except we have 
already some knowledge of the relative position of the 
parts of our bodies ; that is, except we are already in 
possession of an idea of space, and have in our minds 
referred our limbs to their positions ; which is to suppose 
the conception of form already acquired. 

8. By what faculty then do we originally acquire onr 
conceptions of the relations of position ? Brown answers 
by the muscular sense; that is, the conscious exertions 
of the various muscles by which we move our limbs. 
When we feel out the form and position of bodies by 
the hand, our knowledge is acquired, not by the mere 
touch of the body, but by perceiving the course the 
fingers must take in order to follow the surface of the 
body, or to pass from one body to another. We are 

* Lecturer, vol. i. p. 450, (J824). 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 115 

conscious of the slightest of the volitions by which we 
thus feel out form and place ; we know whether we move 
the finger to the right or left, up or down, to us or from 
us, through a large or a small space ; and all these con- 
scious acts are bound together and regulated in our minds 
by an idea of an extended space in which they are per- 
formed. That this idea of space is not borrowed from the 
sight, and transferred to the muscular feelings by habit, 
is evident. For a man born blind can feel out his way 
with his staff, and has his conceptions of position deter- 
mined by the conditions of space, no less than one who 
has the use of his eyes. And the muscular consciousness 
which reveals to us the position of objects and parts of 
objects when we feel them out by means of the hand, 
shews itself in a thousand other ways, and in all our 
limbs : for our habits of standing, walking, and all other 
attitudes and motions, are regulated by our feeling 
of our position and that of surrounding objects. And 
thus we cannot touch any object without learning some- 
thing respecting its position ; not that the sense of touch 
directly conveys such knowledge ; but we have already 
learnt, from the muscular sense, constantly exercised, the 
position of the limb which the object thus touches. 

9. The justice of this distinction will, I think, be 
assented to by all persons who attend steadily to the 
process itself, and might be maintained by many forcible 
reasons. Perhaps one of the most striking evidences in 
its favour is that, as I have already intimated, it is the 
opinion to which another distinguished philosopher, Sir 
Charles Bell, has been led, reasoning entirely upon phy- 
siological principles. From his researches it resulted that 
besides the nerves which convey the impulse of the will 
from the brain to the muscle, by which every motion of 
our limbs is produced, there is another set of nerves which 
carry back to the brain a sense of the condition of the 

I 2 



116 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

muscle, and thus regulate its activity ; and give us the 
consciousness of our position and relation to surrounding 
objects. The motion of the hand and fingers, or the con- 
sciousness of this motion, must be combined with the 
sense of touch properly so called, in order to make an 
inlet to the knowledge of such relations. This conscious- 
ness of muscular exertion, which he called a sixth sense*, 
is our guide, Sir C. Bell shows, in the common practical 
government of our motions ; and he states that having 
given this explanation of perception as a physiological 
doctrine, he had with satisfaction seen it confirmed by 
Dr. Brown's speculations. 

10. Thus it appears that our consciousness of the re- 
lations of space is inseparably and fundamentally con- 
nected with our own actions in space. We perceive only 
while we act ; our sensations require to be interpreted by 
our volitions. The apprehension of extension and figure 
is far from being a process in which we are inert and 
passive. We draw lines with our fingers ; we construct 
surfaces by curving our hands ; we generate spaces by the 
motion of our arms. When the geometer bids us form 
lines, or surfaces, or solids by motion, he intends his in- 
junction to be taken as hypothetical only ; we need only 
conceive such motions. But yet this hypothesis repre- 
sents truly the origin of our knowledge ; we perceive by 
motion at first, as we conceive afterwards. Or if not 
always by actual motion, at least by potential. If we 
perceive the length of a staff by holding its two ends in 
our two hands without running the finger along it, this is 
because by habitual motion we have already acquired a 
measure of the distance of our hands in any attitude of 
which we are conscious. Even in the simplest case, our 
perceptions are derived not from the touch, but from the 

* Bridgewater Treatise, p. 195. Phil. Trans., 1826, p. ii., 
p. 167. 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 117 

sixth sense ; and this sixth sense at least, whatever may 
be the case with the other five, implies an active mind 
along with the passive sense. 

10. Upon attentive consideration, it will be clear that 
a large portion of the perceptions respecting space which 
appear at first to be obtained by sight alone, are, in fact, 
acquired by means of this sixth sense. Thus we consider 
the visible sky as a single surface surrounding us and re- 
turning into itself, and thus forming a hemisphere. But 
such a mode of conceiving an object of vision could never 
have occurred to us, if we had not been able to turn our 
heads, to follow this surface, to pursue it till we find it re- 
turning into itself. And when we have done this, we 
necessarily represent it to ourselves as a concave inclosure 
within which we are. The sense of sight alone, without 
the power of muscular motion, could not have Jed us to 
view the sky as a vault or hemisphere. Under such cir- 
cumstances, we should have perceived only what was pre- 
sented to the eye in one position; and if different 
appearances had been presented in succession, we could 
not have connected them as parts of the same picture, 
for want of any perception of their relative position. 
They would have been so many detached and incohe- 
rent visual sensations. The muscular sense connects 
their parts into a whole, making them to be only different 
portions of one universal scene. 

11. These considerations point out the fallacy of a very 
curious representation made by Dr. Reid, of the convic- 
tions to which man would be led, if he possessed vision 
without the sense of touch. To illustrate this subject, 
Reid uses the fiction of a nation whom he terms the Ido- 
menians, who have no sense except that of sight. He 
describes their notions of the relations of space as being 
entirely different from ours. The axioms of their geome- 
try are quite contradictory to our axioms, For example, 



1.18 PHILOSOPHY OP THE PURE SCIENCES. 

it is lield to be self-evident among them that two straight 
lines which intersect each other once, must intersect a 
second time ; that the three angles of any triangle are 
greater than two right angles ; and the like. These para- 
doxes are obtained by tracing the relations of lines on the 
surface of a concave sphere, which surrounds the spec- 
tator, and on which all visible appearances may be sup- 
posed to be presented to him. But from what is said 
above it appears that the notion of such a sphere, and 
such a connexion of visible objects which are seen in dif- 
ferent directions, cannot be arrived at by sight alone. 
When the spectator combines in his conception the rela- 
tions of long-drawn lines and large figures, as he sees 
them by turning his head to the right and to the left, up- 
wards and downwards, he ceases to be an Idomenian. 
And thus our conceptions of the properties of space de- 
rived through the exercise of one mode of perception are 
not at variance with those obtained in another way ; but 
all such conceptions, however produced or suggested, are 
in harmony with each other ; being, as has already been 
said, only different aspects of the same idea. 

12. If our perceptions of the position of objects 
around us do not depend on the sense of vision alone, but 
on the muscular feeling brought into play when we turn 
our head, it will obviously follow that the same is true 
when we turn the eye instead of the head. And thus 
we may learn the form of objects, not by looking at 
them with a fixed gaze, but by following the boundary of 
them with the eye. While the head is held perfectly 
still, the eye can rove along the outlines of visible objects, 
scrutinize each point in succession, and leap from one 
point to another ; each such act being accompanied by a 
muscular consciousness which makes us aware of the 
direction in which the look is travelling. And we may 
thus gather information concerning the figures and places 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 119 

which we trace out with the visual ray, as the blind 
man learns the forms of things which he traces out with 
his staff, being conscious of the motions of his hand. 

13. This view of the mode in which the eye per- 
ceives position, which is thus supported by the analogy 
of other members employed for the same purpose, is fur- 
ther confirmed by Sir Charles Bell by physiological rea- 
sons. He teaches us that* when an object is seen we 
employ two senses : there is an impression on the retina ; 
but we receive also the idea of position or relation in 
space, which it is not the office of the retina to give, by 
our consciousness of the efforts of the voluntary muscles 
of the eye : and he has traced in detail the course of the 
nerves by which these muscles convey their information. 
The constant searching motion of the eye, as he terms itf , 
is the means by which we become aware of the position 
of objects about us. 

14. It is not to our present purpose to follow the 
physiology of this subject ; but we may notice that Sir 
C. Bell has examined the special circumstances which 
belong to this operation of the eye. We learn from him 
that the particular point of the eye which thus traces the 
forms of visible objects is a part of the retina which has 
been termed the sensible spot ; being that part which is 
most sensible to the impressions of light and colour. This 
part, indeed, is not a spot of definite size and form, for it 
appears that proceeding from a certain point of the retina, 
the sensibility diminishes on every side by degrees. And 
the searching motion of the eye arises from the desire 
which we instinctively feel of receiving upon the sensible 
spot the image of the object to which the attention is 
directed. We are uneasy and impatient till the eye is 
turned so that this is effected. And as our attention is 

* P Idl. Trans., 1823. On the Motions of the Eye. 
t Bridget? aler Treatise, p. 282. 



120 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

transferred from point to point of the scene before us, the 
eye, and this point of the eye in particular, travel along 
with the thoughts ; and the muscular sense which tells 
us of these movements of the organ of vision, conveys 
to us a knowledge of the forms and places which we thus 
successively survey. 

15. How much of activity there is in the process by 
which we perceive the outlines of objects appears further 
from the language by which we describe their forms. 
We apply to them not merely adjectives of form, but 
verbs of motion. An abrupt hill starts out of the plain ; 
a beautiful figure has a gliding outline. We have 

The windy summit, wild and high, 
Roughly rushing on the sky. 

These terms express the course of the eye as it follows 
the lines by which such forms are bounded and marked. 
In like manner another modern poet* says of Soracte, 

that il From out the plain 

Heaves like a long-swept wave about to break. 
And on the curl hangs pausing. 

Thus the muscular sense, which is inseparably con- 
nected with an act originating in our own mind, not only 
gives us all that portion of our perceptions of space in 
which we use the sense of touch, but also, at least in a 
great measure, another large portion of such perceptions, 
in which we employ the sense of sight. As we have 
before seen that our knowledge of solid space and its 
properties is not conceivable in any other way than as the 
result of a mental act, governed by conditions depending 
on its own nature ; so it now appears that our perceptions 
of visible figure are not obtained without an act performed 
under the same conditions. The sensations of touch and 
sight are subordinated to an idea which is the basis of 
our speculative knowledge concerning space and its rela- 

* BYRON, Ch. Ear. IV., St. 75. 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. 121 

tions ; and this same idea is disclosed to our conscious- 
ness by its practically regulating our intercourse with the 
external world. 

By considerations such as have been adduced and 
referred to, it is proved beyond doubt, that in a great 
number of cases our knowledge of form and position is 
acquired from the muscular sense, and not from sight 
directly: for instance, in all cases in which we have 
before us large objects and extensive spaces. Whether 
in any case the eye gives us a direct perception of form, 
we shall not here further inquire. Another opportunity 
of discussing this subject will occur hereafter. 

We now quit the consideration of the properties of 
Space, and consider the Idea of Time. 



CHAPTER VI. 
OF THE IDEA OF TIME. 

1. RESPECTING the Idea of Time, we may make several 
of the same remarks which we made concerning the idea 
of space, in order to shew that it is not borrowed from 
experience ; but is a bond of connexion among the 
impressions of sense, derived from a peculiar activity of 
the mind, and forming a foundation both of our experience 
and of our speculative knowledge. 

Time is not a notion obtained by experience. Expe- 
rience, that is, the impressions of sense and our con- 
sciousness of our thoughts, gives us various percep- 
tions ; and different successive perceptions considered 
together exemplify the notion of change. But this very 
connexion of different perceptions, this successiveness, 
presupposes that the perceptions exist in time. That 
things happen either together, or one after the other, is 



122 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

intelligible only by assuming time as the condition under 
which they are presented to us. 

Thus time is a necessary condition in the presentation 
of all occurrences to our minds. We cannot conceive 
this condition to be taken away. We can conceive 
time to go on while nothing happens in it ; but we can- 
not conceive anything to happen while time does not 
go on. 

It is clear from this that time is not an impression 
derived from experience, in the same manner in which 
we derive from experience our information concerning 
the objects which exist, and the occurrences which take 
place in time. The objects of experience can easily be 
conceived to be, or not to be : to be absent as well as 
present. Time always is, and always is present, and 
even in our thoughts we cannot form the contrary sup- 
position. 

2. Thus time is something distinct from the matter 
or substance of our experience, and may be considered 
as a necessary form which that matter (the experience of 
change) must assume, in order to be an object of con- 
templation to the mind. Time is one of the necessary 
conditions under which we apprehend the information 
which our senses and consciousness give us. By con- 
sidering time as a form which belongs to our power of 
apprehending occurrences and changes, and under which 
alone all such experience can be accepted by the mind, 
we explain the necessity, which we find to exist, of con- 
ceiving all such changes as happening in time ; and we 
thus see that time is not a property perceived as existing 
in objects, or as conveyed to us by our senses ; but a 
condition impressed upon our knowledge by the consti- 
tution of the mind itself ; involving an act of thought as 
well as an impression of sense. 

3. We showed that space is an idea of the mind, or 



OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE. T23 

form of our perceiving power, independent of experience, 
by pointing out that we possess necessary and universal 
truths concerning the relations of space, which could 
never be given by means of experience ; but of which 
the necessity is readily conceivable, if we suppose them 
to have for their basis the constitution of the mind. 
There exist also respecting number, many truths abso- 
lutely necessary, entirely independent of experience and 
anterior to it ; and so far as the conception of number 
depends upon the idea of time, the same argument might 
be used to show that the idea of time is not derived from 
experience, but is a result of the native activity of the 
mind: but we shall defer all views of this kind till we 
come to the consideration of Number. 

4. Some persons have supposed that we obtain the 
notion of time from the perception of motion. But it 
is clear that the perception of motion, that is, change of 
place, presupposes the conception of time, and is not 
capable of being presented to the mind in any other way. 
If we contemplate the same body as being in different 
places at different times, and connect these observations, 
we have the conception of motion, which thus presup- 
poses the necessary conditions that existence in time 
implies. And thus we see that it is possible there should 
be necessary truths concerning all motion, and conse- 
quently concerning those motions which are the objects of 
experience : but that the source of this necessity is the 
Ideas of time and space, which, being universal conditions 
of knowledge residing in the mind, afford a foundation 
for necessary truths. 



124 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

CHAPTER VII. 
OF SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF TIME. 

1. THE Idea of Time, like the Idea of Space, offers to 
our notice some characters which do not belong to our 
fundamental ideas generally, but which are deserving of 
remark. These characters are, in some respects, closely 
similar with regard to time and to space, while, in other 
respects, the peculiarities of these two ideas are widely 
different. We shall point out some of these charac- 
ters. 

Time is not a general abstract notion collected from 
experience ; as, for example, a certain general con- 
ception of the relations of things. For we do not con- 
sider particular times as examples of Time in general, 
(as we consider particular causes to be examples of 
Cause,) but we conceive all particular times to be parts 
of a single and endless Time. This continually-flowing 
and endless time is what offers itself to us when we 
contemplate any series of occurrences. All actual and 
possible times exist as parts, in this original and general 
time. And since all particular times are considered as 
derivable from time in general, it is manifest that the 
notion of time in general cannot be derived from the 
notions of particular times. The notion of time in gene- 
ral is therefore not a general conception gathered from 
experience. 

2. Time is infinite. Since all actual and possible 
times exist in the general course of time, this general 
time must be infinite. All limitation merely divides, 
and does not terminate, the extent of absolute time. 
Time has no beginning and no end ; but the beginning 
and the end of every other existence takes place in it. 

3. Time, like space, is not only a form of perception 



SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF TIME. 125 

but of intuition. We contemplate events as taking 
place in time. We consider its parts as added to one 
another, and events as filling a larger or smaller extent 
of such parts. The time which any event takes up is 
the sum of all such parts, and the relation of the same 
to time is fully understood when we can clearly see what 
portions of time it occupies, and what it does not. 
Thus the relation of known occurrences to time is 
perceived by intuition ; and time is a form of intuition 
of the external world. 

5. Time is conceived as a quantity of one dimension ; 
it has great analogy with a line, but none at all with a 
surface or solid. Time may be considered as consisting 
of a series of instants, which are before and after one 
another ; and they have no other relation than this, of 
before and after. Just the same would be the case with 
a series of points taken along a line ; each would be 
after those on one side of it, and before those on another. 
Indeed the analogy between time and space of one 
dimension is so close, that the same terms are applied to 
both ideas, and we hardly know to which they originally 
belong. Times and lines are alike called long and short; 
we speak of the beginning and end of a line ; of a point 
of time, and of the limits of a portion of duration. 

6. But as has been said, there is nothing in time 
which corresponds to more than one dimension in space, 
and hence nothing which has any obvious analogy with 
figure. Time resembles a line indefinitely extended both 
ways ; all partial times are portions of this line ; and no 
mode of conceiving time suggests to us a line making 
any angle with the original line, or any other combina- 
tion which might give rise to figures of any kind. The 
analogy between time and space, which in many circum- 
stances is so clear, here disappears altogether. Spaces 
of two and of three dimensions, planes and solids, have 



126 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

nothing to which we can compare them in the concep- 
tions arising out of time. 

7. As figure is a conception solely appropriate to 
space, there is also a conception which peculiarly belongs 
to time, namely, the conception of recurrence of times 
similarly marked ; or, as it may be termed, rhythm* using 
this word in a general sense. The term rhythm is most 
commonly used to designate the recurrence of times 
marked by the syllables of a verse, or the notes of a 
melody : but it is easy to see that the general conception 
of such a recurrence does not depend on the mode in 
which it is impressed upon the sense. The forms of 
such recurrence are innumerable. Thus in such a line as 

Quadrupedante putrem sonitii quatit ungula campum, 

we have alternately one long or forcible syllable, and 
two shorter light ones, recurring over and over. In like 
manner in our own language, in the line 

At the close of tlie day when the hamlet is still, 

we have two light and one strong syllable repeated four 
times over. Such repetition is the essence of versification. 
The same kind of rhythm is one of the main elements 
of music, with this difference only, that in music the 
forcible syllables are made so for the purposes of rhythm 
by their length only ; for example, if either of the above 
lines were imitated by a melody in the most simple and 
obvious manner, each strong syllable would occupy 
exactly twice as much time as two of the weaker ones. 
Something very analogous to such rhythm may be traced 
in other parts of poetry and art, which we need not here 
dwell upon. But in reference to our present subject, we 
may remark that by the introduction of such rhythm, 
the flow of time, which appears otherwise so perfectly 
simple and homogeneous, admits of an infinite number of 
varied yet regular modes of progress. All the kinds of 
versification which occur in all languages, and the still 



SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF TIME. 127 

more varied forms of recurrence of notes of different 
lengths, which are heard in all the varied strains of melo- 
dies, are only examples of such modifications, or configu- 
rations as we may call them, of time. They involve re- 
lations of various portions of time, as figures involve re- 
lations of various portions of space. But yet the analogy 
between rhythm and figure is by no means very close ; 
for in rhythm we have relations of quantity alone in the 
parts of time, whereas in figure we have relations not 
only of quantity, but of a kind altogether different, 
namely, of position. On the other hand, a repetition of 
similar elements, which does not necessarily occur in 
figures, is quite essential in order to impress upon us that 
measured progress of time of which we here speak. 
And thus the ideas of time and space have each its pecu- 
liar and exclusive relations ; position and figure belong- 
ing only to space, while repetition and rhythm are appro- 
priate to time. 

8. One of the simplest forms of recurrence is alter- 
nation, as when we have alternate strong and slight syl- 
lables. For instance, 

Awake, arise, or be for ever f&ll'n. 

Or without any subordination, as when we reckon num- 
bers, and call them in succession, odd, even, odd, even. 

9. But the simplest of all forms of recurrence is that 
which has no variety; in which a series of units, each 
considered as exactly similar to the rest, succeed each 
other ; as one, one, one, and so on. In this case, however, 
we are led to consider each unit with reference to all that 
have preceded ; and thus the series one, one, one, and so 
forth, becomes one, two, three, four, five, and so on ; a 
series with which all are familiar, and which may be con- 
tinued without limit. 

We thus collect from that repetition of which time 
admits, the conception of Number. 



128 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

10. The relations of position and figure are the sub- 
ject of the science of geometry; and are, as we have 
already said, traced into a very remarkable and extensive 
body of truths, which rests for its foundations on axioms 
involved in the Idea of Space. There is, in like manner, 
a science of great complexity and extent, which has its 
foundation in the Idea of Time. But this science, as it 
is usually pursued, applies only to the conception of Num- 
ber, which is, as we have said, the simplest result of repe- 
tition. This science is Theoretical Arithmetic, or the spe- 
culative doctrine of the properties and relations of num- 
bers ; and we must say a few words concerning the prin- 
ciples which it is requisite to assume as the basis of this 
science. 



CHAPTER VIII. 
OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO NUMBER. 

1. THE foundations of our speculative knowledge of 
the relations and properties of Number, as of Space, are 
contained in the mode in which we represent to ourselves 
the magnitudes which are the subjects of our reasonings. 
To express these foundations in axioms in the case of 
number is a matter requiring some consideration, for the 
same reason as in the case of geometry ; that is, because 
these axioms are principles which we assume as true, 
without being aware that we have made any assumption ; 
and we cannot, without careful scrutiny, determine when 
we have stated in the form of axioms, all that is necessary 
for the formation of the science, and no more than is 
necessary. We will, however, attempt to detect the 
principles which really must form the basis of theoretical 
arithmetic. 

2. Why is it that three and two are equal to four and 



OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO NUMBER. 129 

one ? Because if we look at five things of any kind, we 
see that it is so. The five are four and one ; they are 
also three and two. The truth of our assertion is in- 
volved in our being able to conceive the number five at 
all. We perceive this truth by intuition, for we cannot 
see, or imagine we see, five things, without perceiving 
also that the assertion above stated is true. 

But how do we state in words this fundamental prin- 
ciple of the doctrine of numbers? Let us consider a 
very simple case. If we wish to show that seven and 
two are equal to four and five, we say that seven are four 
and three, therefore seven and two are four and three 
and two ; and because three and two are five, this is four 
and five. The axioms by which mathematical reasoners 
justify the first inference (marked by the conjunctive 
word therefore], is by saying that " When equals are added 
to equals the wholes are equal," and that thus, since 
seven is equal to three and four, if we add two to both, 
seven and two are equal to four and three and two. 

3. Such axioms as this, that when equals are added to 
equals the wholes are equal, are, in fact, expressions of 
the general condition of intuition, by which a whole is 
contemplated as made up of parts, and as identical with 
the aggregate of the parts. And a yet more general form 
in which we might more adequately express this condi- 
tion of intuition would be this ; that " Two magnitudes 
are equal when they can be divided into parts which are 
equal, each to each." Thus in the above example, seven 
and two are equal to four and five, because each of 
the two sums can be divided into the parts, four, three, 
and two. 

4. In all these cases a person who had never seen 
such axioms enunciated in a verbal form would employ 
the same reasoning as a practised mathematician, in order 
to satisfy himself that the proposition was true. The 

VOL. i. K 



130 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

steps of the reasoning, being seen to be true by intuition, 
would carry an entire conviction, whether or not the 
argument were made verbally complete. Hence the 
axioms may appear superfluous, and on this account such 
axioms have often been spoken contemptuously of as 
empty and barren assertions. In fact, however, although 
they cannot supply the deficiency of the clear intuition 
of number and space in the reasoner himself, and 
although when he possesses such a faculty, he will reason 
rightly if he have never heard of such axioms, they still 
have their place properly at the beginning of our trea- 
tises on the science of quantity ; since they express, as 
simply as words can express, those conditions of the 
intuition of magnitudes on which all reasoning concern- 
ing quantity must be based ; and are necessary when we 
want, not only to see the truth of the elementary reason- 
ings on these subjects, but to put such reasonings in a 
formal and logical shape. 

5. We have considered the axioms which we have 
suggested above as the basis of all arithmetical opera- 
tions of the nature of addition. But it is easily seen 
that the same principle may be carried into other cases ; 
as for instance, multiplication, which is merely a repeated 
addition, and admits of the same kind of evidence. 
Thus five times three are equal to three times five ; why 
is this ? If we arrange fifteen things in five rows of 
three, it is seen by looking, or by imaginary looking, 
which is intuition, that they may also be taken as three 
rows of five. And thus the principle that those wholes 
are equal which can be resolved into the same partial 
magnitudes, is immediately applicable in this as in the 
other case. 

6. We may proceed to higher numbers, and may find 
ourselves obliged to use artificial nomenclature and 
notation in order to represent and reckon them ; but the 



OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO NUMBER. 131 

reasoning* in these cases also is still the same. And the 
usual artifice by whicli our reasoning in such instances is 
assisted is, that the number whicli is the root of our scale 
of notation (which is ten in our usual system), is alter- 
nately separated into parts and treated as a single thing. 
Thus 47 and 35 are 82 ; for 47 is four tens and seven ; 
35 is three tens and five ; whence 47 and 35 are seven 
tens and twelve ; that is, 7 tens, 1 ten, and 2 ; which is 
8 tens and 2, or 82. The like reasoning is applicable in 
other cases. And since the most remote and complex 
properties of numbers are obtained by a prolongation of 
a course of reasoning exactly similar to that by which we 
thus establish the most elementary propositions, we have 
in the principles just noticed, the foundation of the whole 
of Theoretical Arithmetic. 



CHAPTER IX. 
OF THE PERCEPTION OF TIME AND NUMBER. 

1. OUR perception of the passage of time involves a 
series of acts of memory. This is easily seen and assented 
to, when large intervals of time and a complex train of 
occurrences are concerned. But since memory is requi- 
site in order to apprehend time in such cases, we cannot 
doubt that the same faculty must be concerned in the 
shortest and simplest cases of succession ; for it will 
hardly be maintained that the process by which we con- 
template the progress of time is different when small 
and when large intervals are concerned. If memory be 
absolutely requisite to connect two events which begin 
and end a day, and to perceive a tract of time between 
them, it must be equally indispensable to connect the 
beginning and end of a minute, or a second; though in 

K 2 



132 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

this case the effort may be smaller, and consequently 
more easily overlooked. In common cases, we are 
unconscious of the act of thought by which we recollect 
the preceding instant, though we perceive the effort 
when we recollect some distant event. And this is 
analogous to what happens in other instances. Thus, we 
walk without being conscious of the volitions by which 
we move our muscles ; but, in order to leap, a distinct 
and manifest exertion of the same muscles is necessary. 
Yet no one will doubt that we walk as well as leap by 
an act of the will exerted through the muscles ; and in 
like manner our consciousness of small as well as large 
intervals of time involves something of the nature of an 
act of memory. 

2. But this constant and almost imperceptible kind 
of memory, by which we connect the beginning and end 
of each instant as it passes, may very fitly be distinguished 
in common cases from manifest acts of recollection, 
although it may be difficult or impossible to separate the 
two operations in general. This perpetual and latent 
kind of memory may be termed a sense of successive- 
ness ; and must be considered as an internal sense by 
which we perceive ourselves existing in time, much in 
the same way as by our external or muscular sense 
we perceive ourselves existing in space. And both our 
internal thoughts and feelings, and the events which 
take place around us, are apprehended as objects of this 
internal sense, and thus as taking place in time. 

3. In the same manner in which our interpretation 
of the notices of the muscular sense implies the power of 
moving our limbs, and of touching at will this object or 
that ; our apprehension of the relations of time by means 
of the internal sense of successiveness implies a power of 
recalling what has past, and of retaining what is pass- 
ing. We are able to seize the occurrences which have 



PERCEPTION OF TIME AND NUMBER. 133 

just taken place, and to hold them fast in our minds so 
as mentally to measure their distance in time from occur- 
rences now present. And thus, this sense of successive- 
ness, like the muscular sense with which we have com- 
pared it, implies activity of the mind itself, and is not a 
sense passively receiving impressions. 

4. The conception of Number appears to require the 
exercise of the same sense of succession. At first sight, 
indeed, we seem to apprehend Number without any act 
of memory, or any reference to time : for example, we 
look at a horse, and see that his legs are four ; and this 
we seem to do at once, without reckoning them. But it 
is not difficult to see that this seeming instantaneousness 
of the perception of small numbers is an illusion. This 
resembles the many other cases in which we perform 
short and easy acts so rapidly and familiarly that we are 
unconscious of them ; as in the acts of seeing, and of arti- 
culating our words. And this is the more manifest, since 
we begin our acquaintance with number by counting even 
the smallest numbers. Children and very rude savages 
must use an effort to reckon even their five fingers, and 
find a difficulty in going further. And persons have 
been known who were able by habit, or by a peculiar 
natural aptitude, to count by dozens as rapidly as common 
persons can by units. We may conclude, therefore, that 
when we appear to catch a small number by a single 
glance of the eye, we do in fact count the units of it in a 
regular, though very brief succession. To count requires 
an act of memory. Of this we are sensible when we 
count very slowly, as when we reckon the strokes of a 
church clock ; for in such a case we may forget in the 
intervals of the strokes, and miscount. Now it will not 
be doubted that the nature of the process in counting is 
the same whether we count fast or slow. There is no 
definite speed of reckoning at which the faculties which 



134 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

it requires are changed ; and therefore memory, which is 
requisite in some cases, must be so in all. 

The act of counting, (one, two, three, and so on,) is 
the foundation of all our knowledge of number. The 
intuition of the relations of number involves this act of 
counting; for, as we have just seen, the conception of 
number cannot be obtained in any other way. And thus 
the whole of theoretical arithmetic depends upon an act 
of the mind, and upon the conditions which the exercise 
of that act implies. These have been already explained 
in the last chapter. 

5. But if the apprehension of number be accompanied 
by an act of the mind, the apprehension of rhythm is so 
still more clearly. All the forms of versification and the 
measures of melodies are the creations of man, who thus 
realises in words and sounds the forms of recurrence 
which rise within his own mind. When we hear in a 
quiet scene any rapidly-repeated sound, as those made by 
the hammer of the smith or the saw of the carpenter, 
every one knows how insensibly we throw these noises 
into a rhythmical form in our own apprehension. We 
do this even without any suggestion from the sounds 
themselves. For instance, if the beats of a clock or 
watch be ever so exactly alike, we still reckon them 
alternately tick-tack, tick-tack. That this is the case, 
may be proved by taking a watch or clock of such a con- 
struction that the returning swing of the pendulum is 
silent, and in which therefore all the beats are rigor- 
ously alike: we shall find ourselves still reckoning its 
sounds as tick-tack. In this instance it is manifest that 
the rhythm is entirely of our own making. In melo- 
dies, also, and in verses in which the rhythm is complex, 
obscure, and difficult, we perceive something is required 
on our part ; for we are often incapable of contributing 
our share, and thus lose the sense of the measure alto- 



PERCEPTION OF TIME AND NUMBER. 135 

gether. And when we consider such cases, and attend to 
what passes within us when we catch the measure, even 
of the simplest and best-known air, we shall no longer 
doubt that an act of our own thoughts is requisite in 
such cases, as well as impressions on the sense. And 
thus the conception of this peculiar modification of time, 
which we have called rhythm, like all the other views 
which we have taken of the subject, shows that we must, 
in order to form such conceptions, supply a certain idea 
by our own thoughts, as well as merely receive by senses, 
whether external or internal, the impressions of appear- 
ances and collections of appearances. 



CHAPTER X. 
OF MATHEMATICAL REASONING. 

1. Discursive Reasoning. We have thus seen that 
our notions of space, time, and their modifications, neces- 
sarily involve a certain activity of the mind ; and that 
the conditions of this activity form the foundations of 
those sciences which have the relations of space, time, 
and number for their object. Upon the fundamental 
principles thus established, the various sciences which 
are included in the term Pure Mathematics, (Geometry, 
Algebra, Trigonometry, Conic Sections and the rest of 
the Higher Geometry, the Differential Calculus, and the 
like,) are built up by a series of reasonings. These rea- 
sonings are subject to the rules of logic, as we have 
already remarked ; nor is it necessary here to dwell long 
on the nature and rules of such processes. But we may 
here notice that such processes are termed discursive, in 
opposition to the operations by which we acquire our 
fundamental principles, which are, as we have seen, intui- 



136 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

tive. This opposition was formerly very familiar to our 
writers, as Milton : 

. . . . Thus the soul reason receives, 
Discursive or intuitive. Paradise Lost, v. 438. 

For in such reasonings we obtain our conclusions, not by 
looking at our conceptions steadily in one view, which is 
intuition, but by passing from one view to another, like 
those who run from place to place (discursus). Thus a 
straight line may be at the same time a side of a triangle 
and a radius of a circle : and in the first proposition of 
Euclid a line is considered, first in one of these relations, 
and then in the other, and thus the sides of a certain 
triangle are proved to be equal. And by this " discourse 
of reason," as by our older writers it was termed, we set 
forth from those axioms which we perceive by intuition, 
travel securely over a vast and varied region, and become 
possessed of a copious store of mathematical truths. 

2. Technical Terms of Reasoning. The reasoning of 
mathematics, thus proceeding from a few simple principles 
to many truths, is conducted according to the rules of 
Logic. If it be necessary, mathematical proofs may be 
reduced to logical forms, and expressed in Syllogisms, 
consisting of major, minor, and conclusion. But in most 
cases the syllogism is of that kind which is called by logical 
writers an enthymeme ; a word which implies something 
existing in the thoughts only, and which designates a syl- 
logism in which one of the premises is understood, and 
not expressed. Thus we say in a mathematical proof, 
" because the point c is the centre of the circle A B, A c 
is equal to BC;" not stating the major, that all lines 
drawn from the centre of a circle to the circumference 
are equal ; or introducing it only by a transient reference 
to the definition of a circle. But the enthymeme is so 
constantly used in all habitual forms of reasoning, that it 
does not occur to us as being anything peculiar in mathe- 
matical works. 



OF MATHEMATICAL REASONING. 137 

The propositions which are proved to be generally 
true are termed theorems : but when anything is required 
to be done, as to draw a line or a circle under given con- 
ditions, this proposition is a problem. A theorem requires 
demonstration ; a problem, solution. And for both pur- 
poses the mathematician usually makes a construction. 
He directs us to draw certain lines, circles, or other 
curves, on which is to be founded his demonstration that 
his theorem is true, or that his problem is solved. Some- 
times, too, he establishes some lemma, or preparatory pro- 
position, before he proceeds to his main task ; and often 
he deduces from his demonstration some conclusion in 
addition to that which was the professed object of his 
proposition ; and this is termed a corollary. 

These technical terms are noted here, not as being 
very important, but in order that they may not sound 
strange and unintelligible if we should have occasion to 
use some of them. There is, however, one technical dis- 
tinction more peculiar, and more important. 

3. Geometrical Analysis and Synthesis. In geome- 
trical reasoning such as we have described, we introduce 
at every step some new consideration ; and it is by com- 
bining all these considerations, that we arrive at the con- 
clusion, that is, the demonstration of the proposition. 
Each step tends to the final result, by exhibiting some 
part of the figure under a new relation. To what we 
have already proved is added something more ; and hence 
this process is called Synthesis, or putting together. The 
proof flows on, receiving at every turn new contributions 
from different quarters ; like a river fed and augmented 
by many tributary streams. And each of these tribu- 
taries flows from some definition or axiom as its fountain, 
or is itself formed by the union of smaller rivulets which 
have sources of this kind. In descending along its course, 
the synthetical proof gathers all these accessions into one 
common tifink, the proposition finally proved. 



138 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

~ But we may proceed in a different manner. We 
may begin from the formed river, and ascend to its 
sources. We may take the proposition of which we 
require a. proof, and may examine what the supposition 
of its truth implies. If this be true, then something else 
may be seen to be true ; and from this, something else, 
and so on. We may often in this way discover of what 
simpler propositions our theorem or solution is com- 
pounded, and may resolve these in succession, till we come 
to some proposition which is obvious. This is geometrical 
Analysis. Having succeeded in this analytical process, 
we may invert it; and may descend again from the 
simple and known propositions, to the proof of a 
theorem, or the solution of a problem, which was our 
starting-place. 

This process resembles, as we have said, tracing a 
river to its sources. As we ascend the stream, we per- 
petually meet with bifurcations; and some sagacity is 
needed to enable us to see which, in each case, is the 
main stream: but if we proceed in our research, we 
exhaust the unexplored valleys, and finally obtain a clear 
knowledge whence the waters flow. Analytical is some- 
times confounded with symbolical reasoning, on which 
subject we shall make a remark in the next chapter. 
The object of that chapter is to notice certain other fun- 
damental principles and ideas, not included in those 
hitherto spoken of, which we find thrown in our way as 
we proceed in our mathematical speculations. It would 
detain us too long, and involve us in subtle and technical 
disquisitions, to examine fully the grounds of these prin- 
ciples ; but Mathematics hold so important a place in 
relation to the inductive sciences, that I shall briefly 
notice the leading ideas which the ulterior progress of the 
subject involves. 



139 



CHAPTER XI. 

OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE HIGHER 
MATHEMATICS. 

1. The Idea of a Limit. The general truths concern- 
ing relations of space which depend upon the axioms 
and definitions contained in Euclid's Elements, and which 
involve only properties of straight lines and circles, are 
termed Elementary Geometry : all beyond this belongs to 
the Higher Geometry. To this latter province appertain, 
for example, all propositions respecting the lengths of any 
portions of curve lines ; for these cannot be obtained by 
means of the principles of the Elements alone. Here 
then we must ask to what other principles the geometer 
has recourse, and from what source these are drawn. Is 
there any origin of geometrical truth which we have not 
yet explored ? 

The Idea of a Limit supplies a new mode of establish- 
ing mathematical truths. Thus with regard to the length 
of any portion of a curve, a problem which we have just 
mentioned ; a curve is not made up of straight lines, and 
therefore we cannot by means of any of the doctrines of 
elementary geometry measure the length of any curve. 
But we may make up a figure nearly resembling any curve 
by putting together many short straight lines, just as a 
polygonal building of very many sides may nearly resemble 
a circular room. And in order to approach nearer and 
nearer to the curve, we may make the sides more and 
more small, more and more numerous. We may then 
possibly-find some mode of measurement, some relation 
of these small lines to other lines, which is not disturbed 
by the multiplication of the sides however far it be 
carried. And thus we may do what is equivalent to 



140 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

measuring the curve itself; for by multiplying the sides 
we may approach more and more closely to the curve till 
no appreciable difference remains. The curve line is the 
Limit of the polygon ; and in this process we proceed on 
the Axiom, that "What is true up to the limit is true at 
the limit." 

This mode of conceiving mathematical magnitudes is 
of wide extent and use; for every curve may be con- 
sidered as the limit of some polygon ; every varied 
magnitude, as the limit of some aggregate of simpler 
forms ; and thus the relations of the elementary figures 
enable us to advance to the properties of the most com- 
plex cases. 

A Limit is a peculiar and fundamental conception, the 
use of which in proving the propositions of the Higher 
Geometry cannot be superseded by any combination of 
other hypotheses and definitions*. The axiom just noticed, 
that what is true up to the limit is true at the limit, is 
involved in the very conception of a limit: and this 
principle, with its consequences, leads to all the results 
which form the subject of the higher mathematics, whe- 
ther proved by the consideration of evanescent triangles, 

* This assertion cannot be fully proved and illustrated without a 
reference to mathematical reasonings which would not be generally 
intelligible. I have shown the truth of the assertion in my Thoughts 
on the Study of Mathematics, annexed to the Principles of English 
University Education. The proof is of this kind : The ultimate 
equality of an arc of a curve and the corresponding periphery of a 
polygon, when the sides of the polygon are indefinitely increased in 
number, is evident. But this truth cannot be proved from any other 
axiom. For if we take the supposed axiom, that a curve is always 
less than the including broken line, this is not true, except with a con- 
dition; and in tracing the import of this condition, we find its neces- 
sity becomes evident only when we introduce a reference to a Limit. 
And the same is the case if we attempt to supersede the notion of a 
Limit in proving any other simple and evident proposition in which 
that notion is involved. Therefore these evident truths are ^-evident, 
in virtue of the Idea of a Limit. 



THE FOUNDATION OF THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS. 141 

by the processes of the Differential Calculus, or in any 
other way. 

The ancients did not expressly introduce this con- 
ception of a Limit into their mathematical reasonings; 
although in the application of what is termed the 
Method of Exhaustions, (in which they show how to 
exhaust the difference between a polygon and a curve, or 
the like,) they were in fact proceeding upon an obscure 
apprehension of principles equivalent to those of the 
Method of Limits. Yet the necessary fundamental prin- 
ciple not having, in their time, been clearly developed, 
their reasonings were both needlessly intricate and imper- 
fectly satisfactory. Moreover they were led to put in the 
place of axioms, assumptions which were by no means 
self-evident ; as when Archimedes assumed, for the basis 
of his measure of the circumference of the circle, the 
proposition that a circular arch is necessarily less than 
two lines which inclose it, joining its extremities. The 
reasonings of the older mathematicians, which professed 
to proceed upon such assumptions, led to true results 
in reality, only because they were guided by a latent 
reference to the limiting case of such assumptions. And 
this latent employment of the conception of a Limit, 
reappeared in various forms during the early period of 
modern mathematics ; as for example, in the Method of 
Indivisibles of Cavalleri, and the Characteristic Triangle 
of Barrow; till at last Newton distinctly referred such 
reasonings to the conception of a Limit, and established 
the fundamental principles and processes which that 
conception introduces, with a distinctness and exactness 
which required little improvement to make it as unim- 
peachable as the demonstrations of geometry. And 
when such processes as Newton thus deduced from the 
conception of a Limit are represented by means of general 
algebraical symbols instead of geometrical diagrams, 



142 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

we have then before us the Method of Fluxions, or the 
Differential Calculus ; a mode of treating mathematical 
problems justly considered as the principal weapon by 
which the splendid triumphs of modern mathematics 
have been achieved. 

2. The Use of General Symbols. The employment 
of algebraical symbols, of which we have just spoken, 
has been another of the main instruments to which the 
successes of modern mathematics are owing. And here 
again the processes by which we obtain our results 
depend for their evidence upon a fundamental conception, 
the conception of arbitrary symbols as the Signs of 
quantity and its relations; and upon a corresponding 
axiom, that " The interpretation of such symbols must be 
perfectly general." In this case, as in the last, it was 
only by degrees that mathematicians were led to a just 
apprehension of the grounds of their reasoning. For 
symbols were at first used only to represent numbers 
considered with regard to their numerical properties ; and 
thus the science of algebra was formed. But it was 
found, even in cases belonging to common algebra, that 
the symbols often admitted of an interpretation which 
went beyond the limits of the problem, and which yet 
was not unmeaning, since it pointed out a question closely 
analogous to the question proposed. This was the case, 
for example, when the answer was a negative quantity ; 
for when Descartes had introduced the mode of repre- 
senting curves by means of algebraical relations among 
the symbols of the co-ordinates, or distances of each of 
their points from fixed lines, it was found that negative 
quantities must be dealt with as not less truly significa* 
tive than positive ones. And as the researches of mathe- 
maticians proceeded, other cases also were found, in which 
the symbols, although destitute of meaning according to 
the original conventions of their institution, still pointed 



THE FOUNDATION OF THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS. 143 

out truths which could be verified in other ways ; as in 
the cases in which what are called impossible quantities 
occur. Such processes may usually be confirmed upon 
other principles, and the truth in question may be esta- 
blished by means of a demonstration in which no such 
seeming fallacies defeat the reasoning. But it has also 
been shown in many such cases, that the process in which 
some of the steps appear to be without real meaning, 
does in fact involve a valid proof of the proposition. 
And what we have here to remark is, that this is not 
true accidentally or partially only, but that the results of 
systematic symbolical reasoning must always express 
general truths, by their nature, and do not, for their 
justification, require each of the steps of the process to 
represent some definite operation upon quantity. The 
absolute universality of the interpretation of symbols is the 
fundamental principle of their use. This has been shown 
very ably by Professor Peacock in his Algebra^ He has 
there illustrated, in a variety of ways, this principle : that 
" If general symbols express an identity when they are 
supposed to be of any special nature, they must also ex- 
press an identity when they are general in their nature." 
And thus this universality of symbols is a principle in 
addition to those we have already noticed ; and is a prin- 
ciple of the greatest importance in the formation of 
mathematical science, according to the wide generality 
which such science has in modern times assumed. 

3. Connexion of Symbols and Analysis. Since in our 
symbolical reasoning our symbols thus reason for us, we 
do not necessarily here, as in geometrical reasoning, go 
on adding carefully one known truth to another, till we 
reach the desired result. On the contrary, if we have a 
theorem to prove or a problem to solve which can be 
brought under the domain of our symbols, we may at 
once state the given but unproved truth, or the given 



144 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

combination of unknown quantities, in its symbolical 
form. After this first process we may then proceed to 
trace, by means of our symbols, what other truth is 
involved in the one thus stated, or what the unknown 
symbols must signify; resolving step by step the symbolical 
assertion with which we began, into others more fitted for 
our purpose. The former process is a kind of synthesis, 
the latter is termed analysis. And although symbolical 
reasoning does not necessarily imply such analysis ; yet 
the connexion is so familiar, that the term analysis is 
frequently used to designate symbolical reasoning. 



CHAPTER XII. 
THE DOCTRINE OF MOTION. 

1. Pure Mechanism. THE doctrine of Motion, of 
which we have here to speak, is that in which motion is 
considered quite independently of its cause, force; for 
all consideration of force belongs to a class of ideas en- 
tirely different from those with which we are here con- 
cerned. In this view it may be termed the pure doctrine 
of motion, since it has to do solely with space and time, 
which are the subjects of pure mathematics. Although 
the doctrine of motion in connexion with force, which is 
the subject of mechanics, is by far the most important 
form in which the consideration of motion enters into 
the formation of our sciences, the pure doctrine of mo- 
tion, which treats of space, time, and velocity, might be 
followed out so as to give rise to a very considerable and 
curious body of science. Such a science is the science 
of Mechanism, independent of Force, and considered as 
the solution of a problem which may be thus enunciated : 
" To communicate any given motion from a first mover to 



THE DOCTRINE OF MOTION. 145 

a given body." The science which should have for its 
object to solve all the various cases into which this pro- 
blem would ramify, might be termed Pure Mechanism in 
contradistinction to Mechanics Proper, or Machinery, in 
which Force is taken into consideration. The greater 
part of the machines which have been constructed for 
use in manufactures have been practical solutions of some 
of the cases of this problem. We have also important 
contributions to such a science in the works of mathe- 
maticians ; for example, the various investigations and 
demonstrations which have been published respecting 
the form of the Teeth of Wheels, and Mr. Babbage's 
memoir* on the Language of Machinery. There are 
also several works which contain collections of the 
mechanical contrivances which have been invented for 
the purpose of transmitting and modifying motion, and 
these works may be considered as treatises on the science 
of Pure Mechanism. But this science has not yet been 
reduced to the systematic simplicity which is desirable, 
nor indeed generally recognised as a separate science. It 
has been confounded, under the common name of Mecha- 
nics, with the other science, Mechanics Proper, or Ma- 
chinery, which considers the effect of force transmitted 
by mechanism from one part of a material combination to 
another. For example, the Mechanical Powers, as they 
are usually termed, (the Lever, the Wheel and Axle, the 
Inclined Plane, the Wedge, and the Screw,) have almost 
always been treated with reference to the relation be- 
tween the Power and the Weight, and not primarily as a 
mode of changing the velocity and kind of the motion. 
The science of pure motion has not generally been sepa- 
rated from the science of motion viewed with reference 
to its causes. 

* On a Method of expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery. 
Phil. Trans., 1826, p. 250. 

VOL. I. L 



146 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

Recently, indeed, the necessity of such a separation 
has been seen by those who have taken a philosophical 
view of science. Thus this necessity has been urged by 
M. Ampere, in his Essai sur la Philosophic des Sciences 
(1834) : " Long," he says, (p. 50), " before I employed 
myself upon the present work, I had remarked that it is 
usual to omit, in the beginning of all books treating of 
sciences which regard motion and force, certain conside- 
rations which, duly developed, must constitute a special 
science : of which science certain parts have been treated 
of, either in memoirs or in special works ; such, for exam- 
ple, as that of Carnot upon Motion considered geometri- 
cally, and the essay of Lanz and Betancourt upon the 
Composition of Machines." He then proceeds to describe 
this science nearly as we have done, and proposes to term 
it Kinematics (Cinematique), from Kivrjiia, motion. 

2. Formal Astronomy. I shall not attempt here fur- 
ther to develop the form which such a science must 
assume. But I may notice one very large province which 
belongs to it. When men had ascertained the apparent 
motions of the sun, moon, and stars, to a moderate de- 
gree of regularity and accuracy, they tried to conceive in 
their minds some mechanism by which these motions 
might be produced ; and thus they in fact proposed to 
themselves a very extensive problem in Kinematics. This, 
indeed^ was the view originally entertained of the nature 
of the science of astronomy. Thus Plato in the seventh 
Book of his Republic*, speaks of astronomy as the 
doctrine of the motion of solids, meaning thereby, spheres. 
And the same was a proper description of the science 
till the time of Kepler, and even later : for Kepler 
endeavoured, though in vain, to conjoin with the know- 
ledge of the motions of the heavenly bodies, those true 
mechanical conceptions which converted formal into 
physical astronomy f . 

* P. 528. t Hist. Ind. 8c., ii. 130. 



THE DOCTRINE OF MOTION. 147 

The astronomy of the ancients admitted none but 
uniform circular motions, and could therefore be com- 
pletely cultivated by the aid of their elementary geo- 
metry. But the pure science of motion might be extended 
to all motions, however varied as to the speed or the path 
of the moving body. In this form it must depend upon 
the doctrine of limits ; and the fundamental principle of 
its reasonings would be this : That velocity is measured 
by the Limit of the space described, considered with 
reference to the times in which it is described. I shall 
not further pursue this subject ; and in order to complete 
what I have to say respecting the Pure Sciences, I have 
only a few words to add respecting their bearing on 
Inductive Science in general. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

OF THE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS TO 
THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. 

1. ALL objects in the world which can be made the 
subjects of our contemplation are subordinate to the con- 
ditions of Space, Time, and Number ; and on this account 
the doctrines of pure mathematics have most numerous 
and extensive applications in every department of our 
investigations of nature. And there is a peculiarity in 
these Ideas, which has caused the mathematical sciences 
to be, in all cases, the first successful efforts of the awak- 
ening speculative powers of nations at the commence- 
ment of their intellectual progress. Conceptions derived 
from these Ideas are from the very first perfectly precise 
and clear, so as to be fit elements of scientific truths. 
This is not the case with the other conceptions which 
form the subjects of scientific inquiries. The conception 

L 2 



148 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

of statical force, for instance, was never presented in a 
distinct form till the works of Archimedes appeared 
the conception of accelerating force was confused, in the 
mind of Kepler and his contemporaries, and only became 
clear enough for purposes of sound scientific reasoning 
in the succeeding century : the just conception of che- 
mical composition of elements gradually, in modern times, 
emerged from the erroneous and vague notions of the 
ancients. If we take works published on such subjects 
before the epoch when the foundations of the true science 
were laid, we find the knowledge not only small, but 
worthless. The writers did not see any evidence in what 
we now consider as the axioms of the science ; nor any 
inconsistency where we now see self-contradiction. But 
this was never the case with speculations concerning 
space and number. From their first rise, these were 
true as far as they went. The Geometry and Arithmetic 
of the Greeks and Indians, even in their first and most 
scanty form, contained none but true propositions. Men's 
intuitions upon these subjects never allowed them to 
slide into error and confusion ; and the truths to which 
they were led by the first efforts of their faculties, so 
employed, form part of the present stock of our mathe- 
matical knowledge. 

2. But we are here not so much concerned with mathe- 
matics in their pure form, as with their application to the 
phenomena and laws of nature. And here also the very 
earliest history of civilization presents to us some of the 
most remarkable examples of man's success in his attempts 
to attain to science. Space and time, position and motion, 
govern all visible objects ; but by far the most conspicuous 
examples of the relations which arise out of such elements, 
are displayed by the ever-moving luminaries of the sky, 
which measure days, and months, and years, by their 
motions, and man's place on the earth by their position. 



INDUCTIVE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS. 149 

Hence the sciences of space and number were from the 
first cultivated with peculiar reference to Astronomy. I 
have elsewhere* quoted Plato's remark, that it is absurd 
to call the science of the relations of space geometry, the 
measure of the earth, since its most important office is to 
be found in its application to the heavens. And on other 
occasions also it appears how strongly he, who may be 
considered as the representative of the scientific and 
speculative tendencies of his time and country, had been 
impressed with the conviction, that the formation of a 
science of the celestial motions must depend entirely 
upon the progress of mathematics. In the Epilogue to 
the Dialogue on the Laws^, he declares mathematical 
knowledge to be the first and main requisite for the 
astronomer, and describes the portions of it which he 
holds necessary for astronomical speculators to culti- 
vate. These seem to be, Plane Geometry, Theoretical 
Arithmetic, the Application of Arithmetic to planes 
and to solids, and finally the doctrine of Harmonics. 
Indeed the bias of Plato appears to be rather to con- 
sider mathematics as the essence of the science of 
astronomy, than as its instrument; and he seems dis- 
posed, in this as in other things, to disparage observation, 
and to aspire after a science founded upon demon- 
stration alone. "An astronomer," he says in the same 
place, "must not be like Hesiod and persons of that 
kind, whose astronomy consists in noting the settings 
and risings of the stars ; but he must be one who 
understands the revolutions of the celestial spheres, each 
performing its proper cycle." 

A large portion of the mathematics of the Greeks, 
so long as their scientific activity continued, was directed 
towards astronomy. Besides many curious propositions 
of plane and solid Geometry, to which their astronomers 

* Hist. Ind. Sc., i. 161. t Epinomis, p. 990. 



150 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

were led, their Arithmetic, though very inconvenient in 
its fundamental assumptions, was cultivated to a great 
extent ; and the science of Trigonometry, in which pro- 
blems concerning the relations of space were resolved by 
means of tables of numerical results previously obtained, 
was created. Menelaus of Alexandria wrote six Books 
on Chords, probably containing methods of calculating 
Tables of these quantities ; such Tables were familiarly 
used by the later Greek astronomers. The same author 
also wrote three Books on Spherical Trigonometry, which 
are still extant. 

3. The Greeks, however, in the first vigour of their pur- 
suit of mathematical truth, at the time of Plato and soon 
after, had by no means confined themselves to those 
propositions which had a visible bearing on the phe- 
nomena of nature ; but had followed out many beau- 
tiful trains of research, concerning various kinds of 
figures, for the sake of their beauty alone ; as for instance 
in their doctrine of Conic Sections, of which curves they 
had discovered all the principal properties. But it is 
curious to remark, that these investigations, thus pursued 
at first as mere matters of curiosity and intellectual 
gratification, were destined, two thousand years later, to 
play a very important part in establishing that system 
of the celestial motions which succeeded the Platonic 
scheme of cycles and epicycles. If the properties of the 
conic sections had not been demonstrated by the Greeks, 
and thus rendered familiar to the mathematicians of suc- 
ceeding ages, Kepler would probably not have been able 
to discover those laws respecting the orbits and motions 
of the planets which were the occasion of the greatest 
revolution that ever happened in the history of science. 

4. The Arabians, who, as I have elsewhere said, added 
little of their own to the stores of science which they 
received from the Greeks, did however make some very 



INDUCTIVE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS. 151 

important contributions in those portions of pure mathe- 
matics which are subservient to astronomy. Their adop- 
tion of the Indian mode of computation by means of the 
Ten Digits, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, and by the method 
of Local Values, instead of the cumbrous sexagesimal 
arithmetic of the Greeks, was an improvement by which 
the convenience and facility of numerical calculations were 
immeasurably augmented. The Arabians also rendered 
several of the processes of trigonometry much more 
commodious, by using the Sine of an arc instead of the 
Chord; an improvement which Albategnius appears to 
claim for himself*; and by employing also the Tangents 
of arcs, or, as they called themf, upright shadows. 

5. The constant application of mathematical knowledge 
to the researches of Astronomy, and the mutual influence 
of each science on the progress of the other, has been 
still more conspicuous in modem times. Newton's 
Method of Prime and Ultimate Ratios, which we have 
already noticed as the first correct exposition of the 
doctrine of a Limit, is stated in a series of Lemmas, or 
preparatory theorems, prefixed to his Treatise on the System 
of the World. Both the properties of curve lines and the 
doctrines concerning force and motion, which he had to 
establish, required that the common mathematical methods 
should be methodized and extended. If Newton had 
not been a most expert and inventive mathematician, as 
well as a profound and philosophical thinker, he could 
never have made any one of those vast strides in disco- 
very of which the rapid succession in his work strikes us 
with wonder t- And if we see that the great task begun 
by him, goes on more slowly in the hands of his imme- 
diate successors, and lingers a little before its full comple- 
tion, we perceive that this arises, in a great measure, from 

* DELAMBRE, Ast., M. A., p. 12. t Ibid., p. 17. 

t Hist. Ind. Se., ii., 155. 167. 176. 



152 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

the defect of the mathematical methods then used. New- 
ton's synthetical modes of investigation, as we have else- 
where observed, were an instrument*, powerful indeed 
in his mighty hand, but too ponderous for other persons 
to employ with effect. The countrymen of Newton 
clung to it the longest, out of veneration for their 
master ; and English cultivators of physical astronomy 
were, on that very account, left behind the progress of 
mathematical science in France and Germany, by a wide 
interval, which they have only recently recovered. On 
the Continent, the advantages offered by a familiar use of 
symbols, and by attention to their symmetry and other 
relations, were accepted without reserve. In this manner 
the Differential Calculus of Leibnitz, which was in its 
origin and signification identical with the Method of 
Fluxions of Newton, soon surpassed its rival in the 
extent and generality of its application to problems. 
This Calculus was applied to the science of mechanics, to 
which it, along with the symmetrical use of co-ordinates, 
gave a new form ; for it was soon seen that the most 
difficult problems might in general be reduced to finding 
integrals, which is the reciprocal process of that by which 
differentials are found ; so that all difficulties of physical 
astronomy were reduced to difficulties of symbolical cal- 
culation, these, indeed, being often sufficiently stubborn. 
Clairaut, Euler, and D'Alembert employed the increased 
resources of mathematical science upon the Theory of 
the Moon, and other questions relative to the system of 
the world ; and thus began to pursue such inquiries in 
the course in which mathematicians are still labouring up 
to the present day. This course was not without its checks 
and perplexities. We have elsewhere quoted f Clairaut's 
expression when he had obtained the very complex 
differential equations which contain the solution of the 

* Hist. Ind. Sc.> ii., 167. t /$., ii., 103. 



INDUCTIVE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS. 153 

problem of the moon's motion : " Now integrate them 
who can !" But in no very long time they were inte- 
grated, at least approximately ; and the methods of 
approximation have since then been improved ; so that 
now, with a due expenditure of labour, they may be 
carried to any extent which is thought desirable. If the 
methods of astronomical observation should hereafter 
reach a higher degree of exactness than they now profess, 
so that irregularities in the motions of the sun, moon, and 
planets, shall be detected which at present escape us, the 
mathematical part of the theory of universal gravitation is 
in such a condition that it can soon be brought into com- 
parison with the newly-observed facts. Indeed at present 
the mathematical theory is in advance of such observa- 
tions. It can venture to suggest what may afterwards 
be detected, as well as to explain what has already been 
observed. This has happened recently; for Professor 
Airy has calculated the law and amount of an inequality 
depending upon the mutual attraction of the Earth and 
Venus ; of which inequality (so small is it,) it remains to 
be determined whether its effect can be traced in the 
series of astronomical observations. 

6. As the influence of mathematics upon the progress 
of astronomy is thus seen in the cases in which theory and 
observation confirm each other, so this influence appears 
in another way, in the very few cases in which the facts 
have not been fully reduced to an agreement with theory. 
The most conspicuous case of this kind is the state of our 
knowledge of the Tides. This is a portion of astronomy : 
for the Newtonian theory asserts these curious phenomena 
to be the result of the attraction of the sun and moon. 
Nor can there be any doubt that this is true, as a general 
statement; yet the subject is up to the present time a 
blot on the perfection of the theory of universal gravita- 
tion ; for we are very far from being able in this, as in the 



154 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

other parts of astronomy, to show that theory will exactly 
account for the time, and magnitude, and all other cir- 
cumstances of the phenomenon at every place on the 
earth's surface. And what is the portion of our mathe- 
matics which is connected with this solitary signal defect 
in astronomy ? It is the mathematics of the Motion of 
Fluids ; a portion in which extremely little progress has 
been made, and in which all the more general problems 
of the subject have hitherto remained entirely insoluble. 
The attempts of the greatest mathematicians, Newton, 
Maclaurin, Bernoulli, Clairaut, Laplace, to master such 
questions, all involve some gratuitous assumption, which 
is introduced because the problem cannot otherwise be 
mathematically dealt with : these assumptions confessedly 
render the result defective, and how defective it is hard to 
say. And it was probably precisely the absence of a theory 
which could be reasonably expected to agree with the 
observations, which made Observations of this very curious 
phenomenon, the Tides, to be so much neglected as till 
very recently they were. Of late years such observations 
have been pursued, and their results have been resolved 
into empirical laws, so that the rules of the phenomena 
have been ascertained, although the dependence of these 
rules upon the lunar and solar forces has not been shown. 
Here then we have a portion of our knowledge relating to 
facts undoubtedly dependent upon universal gravitation, 
in which Observation has outstripped Theory in her pro- 
gress, and is compelled to wait till her usual companion 
overtakes her. This is a position of which Theory has 
usually been very impatient, and we may expect that she 
will be no less so in the present instance. 

7. It would be easy to show from the history of other 
sciences, for example, Mechanics and Optics, how essential 
the cultivation of pure mathematics has been to their 
progress. The parabola was already familiar among 



INDUCTIVE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS. 155 

mathematicians when Galileo discovered that it was the 
theoretical path of a Projectile ; and the extension and 
generalization of the Laws of Motion could never have 
been effected, unless the differential and integral calculus 
had been at hand, ready to trace the results of every hypo- 
thesis which could be made. D'Alembert's mode of 
expressing the Third Law of Motion in its most general 
form*, if it did not prove the law, at least reduced the 
application of it to analytical processes which could be per- 
formed in most of those cases in which they were needed. 
In many instances the demands of mechanical science 
suggested the extension of the methods of pure analysis. 
The problem of Vibrating Strings gave rise to the Calculus 
of Partial Differences, which was still further stimulated 
by its application to the motions of fluids and other 
mechanical problems. And we have in the writings of 
Lagrange and Laplace other instances equally remarkable 
of new analytical methods, to which mechanical problems, 
and especially cosmical problems., have given occasion. 

8. The progress of Optics as a science has, in like manner, 
been throughout dependent upon the progress of pure 
mathematics. The first rise of geometry was followed by 
some advances, slight ones no doubt, in the doctrine of 
Reflection and in Perspective. The law of Refraction was 
traced to its consequences by means of trigonometry, 
which indeed was requisite to express the law in a simple 
form. The steps made in optical science by Descartes, 
Newton, Euler, and Huyghens, required the geometrical 
skill which those philosophers possessed. And if Young 
and Fresnel had not been, each in his peculiar way, per- 
sons of eminent mathematical endowments, they would 
not have been able to bring the Theory of Undulations 
and Interferences into a condition in which it could be 
tested by experiments. We may see how unexpectedly 

* Hist. Ind. & ii. 89. 



156 PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES. 

recondite parts of pure mathematics may bear upon phy- 
sical science, by calling to mind a circumstance already 
noticed in the History of Science*; that Fresnel 
obtained one of the most curious confirmations of the 
theory (the laws of Circular Polarization by reflection) 
through an interpretation of an algebraical expression, 
which, according to the original conventional meaning of 
the symbols, involved an impossible quantity. We have 
already remarked, that in virtue of the principle of the 
generality of symbolical language, such an interpretation 
may often point out some real and important analogy. 

8. From this rapid sketch it may be seen how important 
an office in promoting the progress of the physical sciences 
belongs to mathematics. Indeed in the progress of many 
sciences every step has been so intimately connected with 
some advance in mathematics, that we can hardly be 
surprised if some persons have considered mathematical 
reasoning to be the most essential part of such sciences ; 
and have overlooked the other elements which enter into 
their formation. How erroneous this view is we shall 
best see by turning our attention to the other Ideas besides 
those of space, number, and motion, which enter into 
some of the most conspicuous and admired portions of 
what is termed exact science ; and by showing that the 
clear and distinct developement of such Ideas is quite 
as necessary to the progress of exact and real knowledge 
as an acquaintance with arithmetic and geometry. 

* Vol. ii. 445. 



157 



BOOK III. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL 
SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER I. 
OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

IN the History of the Sciences, that class of which we 
here speak occupies a conspicuous and important place ; 
coming into notice immediately after those parts of 
astronomy which require for their cultivation merely the 
ideas of space, time, motion, and number. It appears 
from our History that certain truths concerning the equi- 
librium of bodies were established by Archimedes ; that, 
after a long interval of inactivity, his principles were 
extended and pursued further in modern times: and 
that to these doctrines concerning equilibrium and the 
forces which produce it, (which constitute the science 
Statics,} were added many other doctrines concerning the 
motions of bodies, considered also as produced by forces, 
and thus the science of Dynamics was produced. The 
assemblage of these sciences composes the province of 
Mechanics. Moreover, philosophers have laboured to 
make out the laws of the equilibrium of fluid as well as 
solid bodies ; and hence has arisen the science of Hydro- 
statics. And the doctrines of Mechanics have been found 
to have a most remarkable bearing upon the motions of 
the heavenly bodies; with reference to which, indeed, 
they were at first principally studied. The explanation of 



158 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

those cosmical facts by means of mechanical principles 
and their consequences, forms the science of Physical 
Astronomy. These are the principal examples of mecha- 
nical science ; although some other portions of Physics, 
as Magnetism and Electrodynamics, introduce mecha- 
nical doctrines very largely into their speculations. 

Now in all these sciences we have to consider Forces. 
In all mechanical reasonings forces enter, either as 
producing motion, or as prevented from doing so by other 
forces. Thus force, in its most general sense, is the came 
of motion, or of tendency to motion ; and in order to 
discover the principles on which the mechanical sciences 
truly rest, we must examine the nature and origin of our 
knowledge of Causes. 

In these sciences, however, we have not to deal with 
Cause in its more general acceptation, in which it applies 
to all kinds of agency, material or immaterial ; to the 
influence of thought and will, as well as of bodily pressure 
and attractive force. Our business at present is only 
with such causes as immediately operate upon matter. 
We shall nevertheless, in the first place, consider the 
nature of Cause in its most general form ; and afterwards 
narrow our speculations so as to direct them specially 
to the mechanical sciences. 



CHAPTER II. 
OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 

1. WE see in the world around us a constant succes- 
sion of causes and effects connected with each other. 
The laws of this connexion we learn in a great measure 
from experience, by observation of the occurrences which 
present themselves to our notice, succeeding one another. 



OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 159 

But in doing this, and in attending to this succession of 
appearances, of which we are aware by means of our senses, 
we supply from our own minds the Idea of Cause. This 
Idea, as we have already shown with respect to other 
Ideas, is not derived from experience, but has its origin 
in the mind itself; is introduced into our experience by 
the active, and not by the passive part of our nature. 

By Cause we mean some quality, power, or efficacy, 
by which a state of things produces a succeeding state. 
Thus the motion of bodies from rest is produced by a 
cause which we call Force : and in the particular case in 
which bodies fall to the earth, this force is termed Gra- 
vity. In these cases, the Conceptions of Force and Gra- 
vity receive their meaning from the Idea of Cause 
which they involve : for Force is conceived as the Cause 
of Motion. That this Idea of Cause is not derived from 
experience, we prove (as in former cases) by this con- 
sideration: that we can make assertions, involving this 
idea, which are rigorously necessary and universal; 
whereas knowledge derived from experience can only be 
true as far as experience goes, and can never contain in 
itself any evidence whatever of its necessity. We assert 
that " Every event must have a cause :" and this proposi- 
tion we know to be true, not only probably, and gene- 
rally, and as far as we can see : but we cannot suppose 
it to be false in any single instance. We are as certain 
of it as of the truths of arithmetic or geometry. We 
cannot doubt that it must apply to all events past and 
future, in every part of the universe, just as truly as to 
those occurrences which we have ourselves observed. 
What causes produce what effects ; what is the cause of 
any particular event ; what will be the effect of any pecu- 
liar process ; these are points on which experience may 
enlighten us. Observation and experience may be requi- 
site, to enable us to judge respecting such matters. But 



160 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

that every event has some cause, Experience cannot prove 
any more than she can disprove. She can add nothing 
to the evidence of the truth, however often she may 
exemplify it. This doctrine, then, cannot have been 
acquired by her teaching : and the Idea of Cause, which 
the doctrine involves, and on which it depends, cannot 
have come into our minds from the region of observa- 
tion. 

2. That we do, in fact, apply the Idea of Cause in a 
more extensive manner than could be justified, if it were 
derived from experience only, is easily shown. For from 
the principle that everything^must have a cause, we not 
only reason concerning the succession of events which 
occur in the progress of the world, and which form the 
course of experience ; but we infer that the world itself 
must have a cause ; that the chain of events connected 
by common causation, must have a First Cause of a 
nature different from the events themselves. This we 
are entitled to do, if our Idea of Cause be independent of, 
and superior to, experience : but if we have no Idea of 
Cause except such as we gather from experience, this 
reasoning is altogether baseless and unmeaning. 

3. Again ; by the use of our powers of observation, 
we are aware of a succession of appearances and events. 
But none of our senses or powers of external observation 
can detect in these appearances the power or quality 
which we call Cause. Cause is that which connects one 
event with another ; but no sense or perception discloses 
to us, or can disclose, any connexion among the events 
which we observe. We see that one occurrence follows 
another, but we can never see anything which shows that 
one occurrence must follow another. We have already 
noticed*, that this truth has been urged by metaphysi- 
cians in modern times, and generally assented to by those 

* Book i., chap. 13. 



OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 161 

who examine carefully the connexion of their own 
thoughts. The arguments are, indeed, obvious enough. 
One ball strikes another and causes it to move forwards. 
But by what compulsion? Where is the necessity? 
If the mind can see any circumstance in this case which 
makes the result inevitable, let this circumstance be 
pointed out. But, in fact, there is no such discoverable 
necessity; for we can conceive this event not to take 
place at all. The struck ball may stand still, for aught 
we can see. " But the laws of motion will not allow it to 
do so." Doubtless they will not. But the laws of motion 
are learnt from experience, and therefore can prove no 
necessity. Why should not the laws of motion be other 
than they are ? Are they necessarily true ? That they 
are necessarily such as do actually regulate the impact of 
bodies, is at least no obvious truth ; and therefore this 
necessity cannot be, in common minds, the ground of 
connecting the impact of one ball with the motion of 
another. And assuredly, if this fail, no other ground of 
such necessary connexion can be shown. In this case, 
then, the events are not seen to be necessarily connected. 
But if this case, where one ball moves another by impulse, 
be not an instance of events exhibiting a necessary con- 
nexion, we shall look in vain for any example of such a 
connexion. There is, then, no case in which events can 
be observed to be necessarily connected : our idea of 
causation, which implies that the event is necessarily 
connected with the cause, cannot be derived from obser- 
vation. 

4. But it may be said, we have not any such idea of 
cause, implying necessary connexion with effect, and a 
quality by which this connexion is produced. We see 
nothing but the succession of events ; and by cause we 
mean nothing but a certain succession of events ; namely, 
a constant, unvarying succession. Cause and effect are 
VOL. i. M 



162 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

only two events of which the second invariably follows 
the first. We delude ourselves when we imagine that 
our idea of causation involves anything more than this. 

To this I reply by asking, what then is the meaning 
of the maxim above quoted, and allowed by all to be 
universally and necessarily true, that every event must 
have a cause ? Let us put this maxim into the language 
of the explanation just noticed ; and it becomes this : 
" Every event must have a certain other event invariably 
preceding it." But why must it ? Where is the necessity? 
Why must like events always be preceded by like, except 
so far as other events interfere ? That there is such a 
necessity, no one can doubt. All will allow that if a stone 
ascend because it is thrown upwards in one case, a stone 
which ascends in another case has also been thrown up- 
wards, or has undergone some equivalent operation. All 
will allow that in this sense, every kind of event must 
have some other specific kind of event preceding it. But 
this turn of men's thoughts shows that they see in events 
a connexion which is not mere succession. They see in 
cause and effect, not merely what does, often or always, 
precede and follow, but what must precede and follow. 
The events are not only conjoined, they are connected. 
The cause is more than the prelude, the effect is more 
than the sequel, of the fact. The cause is conceived not 
as a mere occasion ; it is a power, an efficacy, which has 
a real operation. 

5. Thus we have drawn from the maxim, that every 
effect must have a cause, arguments to show that we 
have an idea of cause which is not borrowed from expe- 
rience, and which involves more than mere succession. 
Similar arguments might be derived from any other 
maxims of universal and necessary validity, which we 
can obtain concerning cause : as, for example, the maxims 
that causes are measured by their effects, and that reac- 



OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 163 

tion is equal and opposite to action. These maxims we 
shall soon have to examine ; but we may observe here, 
that the necessary truth which belongs to them, shows 
that they, and the ideas they involve, are not the mere 
fruits of observation ; while their meaning, containing, as 
it does, something quite different from the mere concep- 
tion of succession of events, proves that such a conception 
is far from containing the whole import and signification 
of our idea of cause. 

The progress of the opinions of philosophers on the 
points discussed in this chapter, has been one of the most 
remarkable parts of the history of Metaphysics in modern 
times: and I shall therefore briefly notice some of its 
features. 



CHAPTER III. 

MODERN OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA 
OF CAUSE. 

1. TOWARDS the end of the seventeenth century there 
existed in the minds of many of the most vigorous and 
active speculators of the European literary world, a strong 
tendency to ascribe the whole of our knowledge to the 
teaching of experience. This tendency, with its conse- 
quences, including among them the reaction which was 
produced when the tenet had been pushed to a length 
manifestly absurd, has exercised a very powerful influence 
upon the progress of metaphysical doctrines up to the 
present time. I proceed to notice some of the most 
prominent of the opinions which have thus obtained 
prevalence among philosophers, so far as the Idea of 
Cause is concerned. 

Locke was one of the metaphysicians who produced 
the greatest effect in diffusing this opinion, of the exclusive 

M 2 



164 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

dependence of our knowledge upon experience. Agree- 
ably to this general system, he taught* that our ideas of 
Cause and Effect are got from observation of the things 
about us. Yet notwithstanding this tenet of his, he 
endeavoured still to employ these ideas in reasoning on 
subjects which are far beyond all limits of experience : 
for he professed to prove, from our idea of Causation, 
the existence of the Deityf . 

Hume noticed this obvious inconsistency; but declared 
himself unable to discover any remedy for a defect so 
fatal to the most important parts of our knowledge. He 
could see, in our belief of the succession of cause and 
effect, nothing but the habit of associating in our minds 
what had often been associated in our experience. He 
therefore maintained that we could not, with logical 
propriety, extend our belief of such a succession to cases 
entirely distinct from all those of which our experience 
consisted. We see, he said, an actual conjunction of two 
events ; but we can in no way detect a necessary con- 
nexion ; and therefore we have no means of inferring 
cause from effect, or effect from cause $. The only way 
in which we recognise cause and effect in the field of our 
experience, is as an unfailing sequence : we look in vain 
for anything which can assure us of an infallible conse- 
quence. And since experience is the only source of our 
knowledge, we cannot with any justice assert that the 
world in which we live must necessarily have had a cause. 
2. This doctrine, taken in conjunction with the known 
scepticism of its author on religious points, produced a 
considerable fermentation in the speculative world. The 
solution of the difficulty thus thrown before philosophers, 
was by no means obvious. It was vain to endeavour to 
find in experience any other property of a cause than a 

* Essay on the Human Understanding, b. ii., c. 26. t B. iv., c. 10. 
J HUME'S Phil, of the Human Mind, vol. i., p. 94. 



OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 165 

constant sequence of the effect. Yet it was equally vain 
to try to persuade men that they had no idea of cause ; 
or even to shake their belief in the cogency of the fami- 
liar arguments concerning the necessity of an original 
cause of all that is and happens. Accordingly these 
hostile and apparently irreconcilable doctrines, the in- 
dispensable necessity of a cause of every event, and the 
impossibility of our knowing such a necessity, were at 
last allowed to encamp side by side. Reid, Beattie, and 
others, formed one party, who showed how widely and 
constantly the idea of a cause pervades all the processes 
of the human mind : while another sect, including Brown, 
and apparently Stewart, maintained that this idea is 
always capable of being resolved into a constant sequence ; 
and these latter reasoners tried to obviate the dangerous 
and shocking inferences which some persons might try to 
draw from their opinion, by declaring the maxim that 
" Every event must have a cause," to be an instinctive law 
of belief, or a fundamental principle of the human mind *. 

3. While this series of discussions was going on in 
Britain, a great metaphysical genius in Germany was 
unravelling the perplexity in another way. Kant's spe- 
culations originated, as he informs us, in the trains of 
thought to which Hume's writings gave rise; and the 
Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, or Examination of the Pure 
Reason, was published in 1787, with the view of showing 
the true nature of our knowledge. 

Kant's solution of the difficulties just mentioned 
differs materially from that above stated. According to 
Brown f, succession observed and cause inferred, the 
memory of past conjunctions of events and the belief of 
similar future conjunctions. are facts, independent, so 
far as we can discover, but inseparably combined by a 

* STEWART'S Active Powers, vol. i., p. 347. BROWN'S Lectures^ 
vol. i., p. 115. t Lect.^ vol. i., p. 114, 



166 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

law of our mental nature. According to Kant, causality 
is an inseparable condition of our experience : a con- 
nexion in events is requisite to our apprehending them as 
events. Future occurrences must be connected by causa- 
tion as the past have been, because we cannot think of 
past, present, and future, without such connexion. We 
cannot fix the mind upon occurrences, without including 
these occurrences in a series of causes and effects. The 
relation of causation is a condition under which we 
think of events, as the relations of space are a condition 
under which we see objects. 

4. On a subject so abstruse, it is not easy to make 
our distinctions very clear. Some of Brown's illustrations 
appear to approach very near to the doctrine of Kant. 
Thus he says*, " The form of bodies is the relation of 
their elements to each other in space, the power of 
bodies is their relation to each other in time." Yet not- 
withstanding such approximations in expression, the 
Kantian doctrine appears to be different from the views 
of Stewart and Brown, as commonly understood. Ac- 
cording to the Scotch philosophers, the cause and the 
effect are two things, connected in our minds by a law 
of our nature. But this view requires us to suppose that 
we can conceive the law to be absent, and the course of 
events to be unconnected. If we can understand what 
is the special force of this law, we must be able to imagine 
what the case would be if the law were non-existing. We 
must be able to conceive a mind which does not connect 
effects with causes. The Kantian doctrine, on the other 
hand, teaches that we cannot imagine events liberated 
from the connexion of cause and effect : this connexion is 
a condition of our conceiving any real occurrences : we 
cannot think of a real sequence of things, except as in- 
volving the operation of causes. In the Scotch system, 
* Lect., i., p. 127. 



OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 167 

the past and the future are in their nature independent, 
but bound together by a rule ; in the German system, 
they share in a common nature and mutual relation, by 
the act of thought which makes them past and future. 
In the former doctrine cause is a tie which binds ; in the 
latter it is a character which pervades and shapes events. 
The Scotch metaphysicians only assert the universality of 
the relation ; the German attempts further to explain its 
necessity. 

This being the state of the case, such illustrations as 
that of Dr. Brown quoted above, in which he represents 
cause as a relation of the same kind with form, do not 
appear exactly to fit his opinions. Can the relations of 
figure be properly said to be connected with each other 
by a law of our nature, or a tendency of our mental con- 
stitution ? Can we ascribe it to a law of our thoughts, 
that we believe the three angles of a triangle to be equal 
to two right angles? If so, we must give the same 
reason for our belief that two straight lines cannot 
inclose a space ; or that three and two are five. But will 
any one refer us to an ultimate law of our constitution 
for the belief that three and two are five ? Do we not 
see that they are so, as plainly as we see that they are 
three and two ? Can we imagine laws of our constitu- 
tion abolished, so that three and two shall make some- 
thing different from five ; so that an inclosed space shall 
lie between two straight lines ; so that the three angles 
of a plane triangle shall be greater than two right angles? 
We cannot conceive this. If the numbers are three and 
two ; if the lines are straight ; if the triangle is a recti- 
linear triangle, the consequences are inevitable. We 
cannot even imagine the contrary. We do not want a 
law to direct that things should be what they are. The 
relation, then, of cause and effect, being of the same kind 
as the necessary relations of figure and number, is not 



168 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

properly spoken of as established in our minds by a spe- 
cial law of our constitution : for we reject that loose and 
inappropriate phraseology which speaks of the relations of 
figure and number as determined by laws of belief. 

5. In the present work, we accept and adopt, as the 
basis of our inquiry concerning our knowledge, the exist- 
ence of necessary truths concerning causes, as there exist 
necessary truths concerning figure and number. We find 
such truths universally established and assented to among 
the cultivators of science, and among speculative men in 
general. All mechanicians agree that reaction is equal 
and opposite to action, both when one body presses ano- 
ther, and when one body communicates motion to another. 
All reasoners join in the assertion not only that every 
observed change of motion has had a cause, but that every 
change of motion must have a cause. Here we have cer- 
tain portions of substantial and undoubted knowledge. 
Now the essential point in the view which we must take of 
the idea of cause is this, that our view must be such as 
to form a solid basis for our knowledge. We have, in the 
Mechanical Sciences, certain universal and necessary truths 
on the subject of causes. Now any view which refers 
our belief in causation to mere experience or habit, can- 
not explain the possibility of such necessary truths, since 
experience and habit can never lead to a perception of 
necessary connexion. But a view which teaches us to 
acknowledge axioms concerning cause, as we acknow- 
ledge axioms concerning space, will lead us to look upon 
the science of mechanics as equally certain and universal 
with the science of geometry ; and will thus materially 
affect our judgment concerning the nature and claims of 
our scientific knowledge. 

Axioms concerning cause, or concerning force, which 
as we shall see, is a modification of cause, will flow from 
an idea of cause, just as axioms concerning space and 



. OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 169 

number flow from the ideas of space and time. And 
thus the propositions which constitute the science of 
mechanics prove that we possess an idea of cause, in the 
same sense in which the propositions of geometry and 
arithmetic prove our possession of the ideas of space and 
of time or number. 

6. The idea of cause, like the ideas of space and time, 
is a part of the active powers of the mind. The relation of 
cause and effect is a relation or condition under which 
events are apprehended, which relation is not given by ob- 
servation, but supplied by the mind itself. According to 
the views which explain our apprehension of cause by refer- 
ence to habit, or to a supposed law of our mental nature, 
causal connexion is a consequence of agencies which the 
mind passively obeys ; but according to the view to which 
we are led, this connexion is a result of faculties which 
the mind actively exercises. And thus the relation of 
cause and effect is a condition of our apprehending suc- 
cessive events, a part of the mind's constant and universal 
activity, a source of necessary truths ; or to sum all this 
in one phrase, a Fundamental Idea. 



CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA 

OF CAUSE. 

1. Cause is an abstract Term. We have now to ex- 
press, as well as we can, the fundamental character of that 
Idea of Cause, of which we have just proved the exist- 
ence. This may be done, at least for purposes of reason- 
ing, in this as in former instances, by means of axioms. 
I shall state the principal axioms which belong to this 
subject, referring the reader to his own thoughts for the 
axiomatic evidence which belongs to them. 



170 PHILOSOPHY OP THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

But I must first observe that in order to express 
general and abstract truths concerning cause and effect, 
these terms, cause and effect, must be understood in a gene- 
ral and abstract manner. When one event gives rise to 
another, the first event is, in common language, often 
called the cause, and the second the effect. Thus the 
meeting of two billiard balls may be said to be the 
cause of one of them turning aside out of the path in 
which it was moving. For our present purposes, how- 
ever, we must not apply the term cause to such occur- 
rences as this meeting and turning, but to a certain con- 
ception, ybree, abstracted from all such special events,"and 
considered as a quality or property by which one body 
affects the motion of the other. And in like manner in 
other cases, cause is to be conceived as some abstract 
quality, power, or efficacy, by which change is produced ; 
a quality not identical with the events, but disclosed by 
means of them. Not only is this abstract mode of con- 
ceiving force and cause useful in expressing the funda- 
mental principles of science ; but it supplies us with the 
only mode by which such principles can be stated in a 
general manner, and made to lead to substantial truth and 
real knowledge. 

Understanding cause, therefore, in this sense, we 
proceed to our Axioms. 

2. First Axiom. Nothing can take place without a 
Cause. 

Every event, of whatever kind, must have a Cause in 
the sense of the term which we have just indicated ; and 
that it must, is a universal and necessary proposition to 
which we irresistibly assent as soon as it is understood. 
We believe each appearance to come into existence, we 
conceive every change to take place, not only with some- 
thing preceding it, but something by which it is made to 
be what it is. An effect without a cause ; an event with- 



AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 171 

out a preceding condition involving the efficacy by which 
the event is produced ; are suppositions which we cannot 
for a moment admit. That the connexion of effect with 
cause is universal and necessary, is a universal and con- 
stant conviction of mankind. It persists in the minds of 
all men, undisturbed by all the assaults of sophistry and 
scepticism ; and, as we have seen in the last chapter, re- 
mains unshaken, even when its foundations seem to be 
ruined. This axiom expresses, to a certain extent, our 
Idea of cause ; and when that idea is clearly apprehended, 
the axiom requires no proof, and indeed admits of none 
which makes it more evident. That notwithstanding its 
simplicity, it is of use in our speculations, we shall here- 
after see ; but in the first place, we must consider the 
other axioms belonging to this subject. 

3. Second Axiom. Effects are proportional to their 
Causes, and Causes are measured by their Effects. 

We have already said that cause is that quality or power 
in the circumstances of each case by which the effect is 
produced; and this power, an abstract property of the 
condition of things to which it belongs, can in no way 
fall directly under the cognisance of the senses. Cause, 
of whatever kind, is not apprehended as including objects 
and events which share its nature by being co-extensive 
with certain portions of it, as space and time are. It 
cannot therefore, like them, be measured by repetition 
of its own parts, as space is measured by repetition of 
inches, and time by repetition of minutes. Causes may 
be greater or less ; as, for instance, the force of a man is 
greater than the force of a child. But how much is the 
one greater than the other? How are we to compare 
the abstract conception, force, in such cases as these ? 

To this the obvious and only answer is, that we must 
compare causes by means of their effects ; that we must 
compare force by something which force can do. The 



172 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

child can lift one fagot; the man can lift ten such 
fagots : we have here a means of comparison. And 
whether or not the rule is to be applied in this manner, 
that is, by the number of the things operated on, (a ques- 
tion which we shall have to consider hereafter,) it is clear 
that this form of rule, namely, a reference to some effect 
or other as our measure, is the right, because the only 
possible form. The cause determines the effect. The 
cause being the same, the effect must be same. The 
connexion of the two is governed by a fixed and invio- 
lable rule. It admits of no ambiguity. Every degree of 
intensity in the cause has some peculiar modification of 
the effect corresponding to it. Hence the effect is an 
unfailing index of the amount of the cause ; and if it be 
a measurable effect, gives a measure of the cause. We 
can have no other measure ; but we need no other, for 
this is exact, sufficient, and complete. 

It may be said, that various effects are produced by 
the same cause. The sun's heat melts wax and expands 
quicksilver. The force of gravity causes bodies to move 
downwards if they are free, and to press down upon their 
supports if they are supported. Which of the effects is 
to be taken as the measure of heat or of gravity in these 
cases ? To this we reply, that if we had merely different 
states of the same cause to compare, any of the effects 
might be taken. The sun's heat on different days might 
be measured by the expansion of quicksilver, or by the 
quantity of wax melted. The force of gravity, if it were 
different at different places, might be measured by the 
spaces through which a given weight would bend an elastic 
support, or by the spaces through which a body would 
fall in a given time. All these measures are consistent 
with the general character of our idea of cause. 

4. Limitation of the Second Axiom. But there may 
be circumstances in the nature of the case which may 



AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 173 

further determine the kind of effect which we must take 
for the measure of the cause. For example, if causes are 
conceived to be of such a nature as to be capable of 
addition, the effects taken as their measure must conform 
to this condition. This is the case with mechanical 
causes. The weights of two bodies are the causes of the 
pressure which they exert downwards ; and these weights 
are capable of addition. The weight of the two is the 
sum of the weight of each. We are therefore not at 
liberty to say that weights shall be measured by the 
spaces through which they bend a certain elastic support, 
except we have first ascertained that the whole weight 
bends it through a space equal to the sum of the inflec- 
tions produced by the separate weights. Without this 
precaution, we might obtain inconsistent results. Two 
weights, each of the magnitude 3 as measured by their 
effects, might, if we took the inflections for the effects, 
be together equal to 5 or to 7 by the same kind of mea- 
surement. For the inflection produced by two weights 
of 3 might, for aught we can see beforehand, be more 
or less than twice as great as the inflection produced by 
one weight of 3. That forces are capable of addition, is 
a condition which limits, and, as we shall see, rigorously 
fixes, the kind of effects which are to be taken as their 
measures. 

Causes which are thus capable of addition are to 
be measured by the repeated addition of equal quantities. 
Two such causes are equal to each other when they pro- 
duce exactly the same effect. So far our axiom is applied 
directly. But these two causes can be added together; 
and being thus added, they are double of one of them ; 
and the cause composed by addition of three such, is 
three times as great as the first ; and so on for any mea- 
sure whatever. By this means, and by this means only, 
we have a complete and consistent measure of those 



174 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

causes which are so conceived as to be subject to this 
condition of being added and multiplied. 

Causes are, in the present chapter, to be understood 
in the widest sense of the term ; and the axiom now 
under our consideration applies to them, whenever they 
are of such a nature as to admit of any measure at all. 
But the cases which we have more particularly in view 
are mechanical causes, the causes of the motion and of the 
equilibrium of bodies. In these cases, forces are con- 
ceived as capable of addition ; and what has been said of 
the measure of causes in such cases, applies peculiarly to 
mechanical forces. Two weights, placed together, may 
be considered as a single weight, equal to the sum of the 
two. Two pressures, pushing a body in the same direc- 
tion at the same point, are identical in all respects with 
some single pressure, their sum, pushing in like manner; 
and this is true whether or not they put the body in 
motion. In the cases of mechanical forces, therefore, we 
take some certain effect, velocity generated or weight 
supported, which may fix the unit of force ; and we then 
measure all other forces by the successive repetition of 
this unit, as we measure all spaces by the successive repe- 
tition of our unit of lineal measure. 

But these steps in the formation of the science of 
Mechanics will be further explained, when we come to 
follow our axioms concerning cause into their application 
in that science. At present we have, perhaps, sufficiently 
explained the axiom that causes are measured by their 
effects, and we now proceed to a third axiom, also of 
great importance. 

5. Third Axiom. Reaction is equal and opposite to 
Action. 

In the case of mechanical forces, the action of a 
cause often takes place by an operation of one body 
upon another ; and in this case, the action is always and 



AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 175 

inevitably accompanied by an opposite action. If I press 
a stone with my hand, the stone presses my hand in 
return. If one ball strike another and put it in motion, 
the second ball diminishes the motion of the first. In 
these cases the operation is mutual ; the Action is accom- 
panied by a Reaction. And in all such cases the Reaction 
is a force of exactly of the same nature as the Action, 
exerted in an opposite direction. A pressure exerted 
upon a body at rest is resisted and balanced by another 
pressure : when the pressure of one body puts another 
in motion, the body, though it yields to the force, never- 
theless exerts upon the pressing body a force like that 
which it suffers. 

Now the axiom asserts further, that this Reaction is 
equal, as well as opposite, to the Action. For the Reaction 
is an effect of the Action, and is determined by it. And 
since the two, Action and Reaction, are forces of the same 
nature, each may be considered as cause and as effect ; 
and they must, therefore, determine each other by a 
common rule. But this consideration leads necessarily 
to their equality: for since the rule is mutual, if we could 
for an instant suppose the Reaction to be less than the 
Action, we must, by the same rule, suppose the Action to 
be less than the Reaction. And thus Action and Reac- 
tion, in every such case, are rigorously equal to each other. 
It is easily seen that this axiom is not a proposition 
which is, or can be, proved by experience ; but that its 
truth is anterior to special observation, and depends on 
our conception of Action and Reaction. Like our other 
axioms, this has its source in an Idea ; namely, the Idea 
of Cause, under that particular condition in which cause 
and effect are mutual. The necessary and universal 
truth which we cannot help ascribing to the axiom, 
shows that it is not derived from the stores of experi- 
ence, which can never contain truths of this character. 



170 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

Accordingly, it was asserted with equal confidence and 
generality by those who did not refer to experience for 
their principles, and by those who did. Leonicus 
Tomseus, a commentator of Aristotle, whose work was 
published in 1552, and therefore at a period when no 
right opinions concerning mechanical reaction were 
current, at least in his school, says, in his remarks on the 
Author's Questions concerning the communication of 
motion, that " Reaction is equal and contrary to Action." 
The same principle was taken for granted by all parties, 
in all the controversies concerning the proper measure of 
force, of which we shall have to speak : and would be 
rigorously true, as a law of motion, whichever of the 
rival interpretations of the measure of the term "Action" 
we were to take. 

6. Extent of the Third Axiom. It may naturally be 
asked whether this third axiom respecting causation 
extends to any other cases than those of mechanical 
action, since the notion of cause in general has certainly 
a much wider extent. For instance, when a hot body 
heats a cold one, is there necessarily an equal reaction of 
the second body upon the first ? Does the snowball cool 
the boy's hand exactly as much as the hand heats the 
snow? To this we reply, that, in every case in which 
one body acts upon another by its physical qualities, there 
must be some reaction. No body can affect another 
without being itself also affected. But in any physical 
change the action exerted is an abstract term which may 
be variously understood. The hot hand may melt a cold 
body, or may warm it : which kind of effect is to be taken 
as action? This remains to be determined by other 
considerations. 

In all cases of physical change produced by one body 
in another, it is generally possible to assume such a 
meaning of action, that the reaction shall be of the same 



AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE. 177 

nature as the action ; and when this is done, the third 
axiom of causation, that reaction is equal to action, is 
universally true. Thus if a hot body heat a cold one, the 
change may be conceived as the transfer of a certain sub- 
stance, heat or caloric, from the first body to the second. 
On this supposition, the first body loses just as much 
heat as the other gains ; action and reaction are equal. 
But if the reaction be of a different kind to the action 
we can no longer apply the axiom. If a hot body melt 
a cold one, the latter cools the former: here, then, is 
reaction; but so long as the action and reaction are 
stated in this form, we cannot assert any equality between 
them. 

In treating of the secondary mechanical sciences, we 
shall see further in what way we may conceive the phy- 
sical action of one body upon another, so that the same 
axioms which are the basis of the science of Mechanics shall 
apply to changes not at first sight manifestly mechanical. 

The three axioms of causation which we have now 
stated are the fundamental maxims of all reasoning con- 
cerning causes as to their quantities; and it will be 
shown in the sequel that these axioms form the basis of 
the science of Mechanics, determining its form, extent, 
and certainty. We must, however, in the first place, 
consider how we acquire those conceptions upon which 
the axioms now established are to be employed. 



CHAPTER V. 

OF THE ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE 
AND MATTER. 

1. Force. When the faculties of observation and 
thought are developed in man, the idea of causation is 
applied to those changes which we see and feel in the 

VOL. I. N 



178 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

state of rest and motion of bodies around us. And 
when our abstract conceptions are thus formed and named, 
we become possessed of the term Force, to denote that 
property which is the cause of motion produced, changed, 
or prevented. This conception is, it would seem, mainly 
and primarily suggested by our consciousness of the 
exertions by which we put bodies in motion. The Latin 
and Greek words for force, vis, Fb, were probably, like all 
abstract terms, derived at first from some sensible object. 
The original meaning of the Greek word was a muscle or 
tendon. Its first application as an abstract term is accord- 
ingly to muscular force. 

Aevrepos avr Alas TTO\V {j.eiova \aav deipas 
TJK fmdwfja-as, eVcpfure de FIN' airikfQpov. 

Then Ajax a far heavier stone upheaved, 
He whirled it, and impressing Force intense 
Upon the mass, dismist it. 

The property by which bodies affect each other's 
motions, was naturally likened to that energy which we 
exert upon them with similar effect : and thus the labour- 
ing horse, the rushing torrent, the descending weight, the 
elastic bow, were said to exert force. Homer* speaks 
of the force of the river, Fls 7rora/*oto ; and Hesiodf of 
the force of the north wind, Fls- ave^ov fiopeao. 

Thus man's general notion of force was probably first 
suggested by his muscular exertions, that is, by an act 
depending upon that muscular sense, to which, as we 
have already seen, the perception of space is mainly due, 
And this being the case, it will be easily understood that 
the Direction of the force thus exerted is perceived by 
the muscular sense, at the same time that the force itself 
is perceived ; and that the direction of any other force is 
understood by comparison with force which man must 
exert to produce the same effect, in the same manner as 
force itself is so understood. 

* II xxi. t Op. ft D. 



ORIGIN OF CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE AND MATTER. 179 

This abstract notion of Force long remained in a very 
vague and obscure condition, as may be seen by referring 
to the History for the failures of attempts at a science of 
force and motion, made by the ancients and their com- 
mentators in the middle ages. By degrees, in modern 
times, we see the scientific faculty revive. The concep- 
tion of force becomes so far distinct and precise that it 
can be reasoned upon in a consistent manner, with demon- 
strated consequences ; and a genuine science of Mecha- 
nics comes into existence. The foundations of this 
science are to be found in the Axioms concerning causa- 
tion which we have already stated ; these axioms being 
interpreted and fixed in their application by a constant 
reference to observed facts, as we shall show. But we 
must, in the first place, consider further those primary 
processes of observation by which we acquire the first 
materials of thought on such subjects. 

2. Matter. The conception of Force, as we have said, 
arises with our consciousness of our own muscular exer- 
tions. But we cannot imagine such exertions without 
also imagining some bodily substance against which they 
are exercised. If we press, we press something : if we 
thrust or throw, there must be something to resist the 
thrust or to receive the impulse. Without body, mus- 
cular force cannot be exerted, and force in general is not 
conceivable. 

Thus Force cannot exist without Body on which it 
acts. The two conceptions, Force and Matter, are coex- 
istent and correlative. Force implies resistance; and 
the force is effective only when the resistance is called 
into play. If we grasp a stone, we have no hold of it 
till the closing of the hand is resisted by the solid texture 
of the stone. If we push open a gate, we must sur- 
mount the opposition which it exerts while turning 
on its hinges. However slight the resistance be, there 

N 2 



180 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

must be some resistance, or there would be no force. 
If we imagine a state of things in which objects do not 
resist our touch, they must also cease to be influenced by 
our strength. Such a state of things we sometimes 
imagine in our dreams ; and such are the poetical pictures 
of the regions inhabited by disembodied spirits. In 
these, the figures which appear are conspicuous to the 
eye, but impalpable like shadow or smoke ; and as they 
do not resist the corporeal impressions, so neither do 
they obey them. The spectator tries in vain to strike 
or to grasp them. 

Et ni cana vates tenues sine corpore vitas 
Admoneat volitare cava sub imagine formae, 
Irruafc ac frustra ferro diverberet umbras. 

The Sibyl warns him that there round him fly 
Bodiless things, but substance to the eye; 
Else had he pierced those shapes with life-like face, 
And smitten, fierce, the unresisting space. 

Neque ilium 

Prensantem nequicquam umbras et multa volentem 
Dicere, preterea vidit. 

He grasps her form, and clutches but the shade. 

Such may be the circumstances of the unreal world of 
dreams, or of poetical fancies approaching to dreams : 
for in these worlds our imaginary perceptions are bound 
by no rigid conditions of force and reaction. In such 
cases, the mind casts off the empire of the idea of cause, 
as it casts off even the still more familiar sway of the 
ideas of space and time. But the character of the 
material world in which we live when awake is, that we 
have at every instant and at every place, force operating 
on matter and matter resisting force. 

3. Solidity. From our consciousness of muscular 
exertion, we derive, as we have seen, the conception of 
force, and with that also the conception of matter. We 
have already shown, in a former chapter, that the same 



ORIGIN OF CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE AND MATTER. 181 

part of our frame, the muscular system, is the organ by 
which we perceive extension and the relations of space. 
Thus the same organ gives us the perception of body as 
resisting force, and as occupying space ; and by combin- 
ing these conditions we have the conception of solid 
extended bodies. In reality, this resistance is inevitably 
presented to our notice in the very facts from which we 
collect the notion of extension. For the action of the 
hand and arm by which we follow the forms of objects, 
implies that we apply our fingers to their surface ; and 
we are stopped there by the resistance which the body 
offers. This resistance is precisely that which is requisite 
in order to make us conscious of our muscular effort*. 
Neither touch, nor any other mere passive sensation, 
could produce the perception of extent, as we have 
already urged : nor could the muscular sense lead to such 
a perception, except the extension of the muscles were 
felt to be resisted. And thus the perception of resistance 
enters the mind along with the perception of extended 
bodies. All the objects with which we have to do are 
not only extended but solid. 

This sense of the term solidity, (the general property 
of all matter,) is different to that in which we oppose 
solidity to fluidity. We may avoid ambiguity by op- 
posing rigid to fluid bodies. By solid bodies, as w r e now 
speak of them, we mean only such as resist the pressure 
which we exert, so long as their parts continue in their 
places. By fluid bodies, we mean those whose parts are, 
by a slight pressure, removed out of their places. A drop 
of water ceases to prevent the contact of our two hands, 
not by ceasing to have solidity in this sense, but by being 
thrust out of the way. If it could remain in its place, 
it could not cease to exercise its resistance to our pres- 
sure, except by ceasing to be matter altogether. 

* BROWN'S Lectures, i., 466. 



182 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

The perception of solidity, like the perception of 
extension, implies an act of the mind, as well as an 
impression of the senses : as the perception of extension 
implies the idea of space, so the perception of solidity 
implies the idea of action and reaction. That an idea 
is involved in our knowledge on this subject appears, as in 
other instances, from this consideration, that the convic- 
tions of persons, even of those who allow of no ground of 
knowledge but experience, do in fact go far beyond the 
possible limits of experience. Thus Locke says*, that "the 
bodies which we daily handle hinder by an insurmountable 
force the approach of the parts of our hands that press 
them." Now it is manifest that our observation can 
never go to this length. By our senses we can only 
perceive that bodies resist the greatest actual forces that 
we exert upon them. But our conception of force carries 
us further: and since, so long as the body is there to 
receive the action of the force, it must suffer the whole 
of that action, and must react as much as it suffers : it 
is therefore true, that so long as the body remains there, 
the force which is exerted upon it can never surmount 
the resistance which the body exercises. And thus this 
doctrine, that bodies resist the intrusion of other bodies 
by an insurmountable force, is in fact a consequence of 
the axiom that the reaction is always equal to the action. 

4. Inertia. But this principle of the equality of action 
and reaction appears also in another way. Not only 
when we exert force upon bodies at rest, but when, by 
our exertions, we put them in motion, they react. If we 
set a large stone in motion, the stone resists ; for the ope- 
ration requires an effort. By increasing the effort, we 
can increase the effect, that is, the motion produced ; but 
the resistance still remains. And the greater the stone 
moved, the greater is the effort requisite to move it. 
* Essay, b. ii., c. 4. 



ORIGIN OF CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE AND MATTER. 183 

There is, in every case, a resistance to motion, which shows 
itself, not in preventing the motion, but in a reciprocal 
force, exerted backwards upon the agent by which the 
motion is produced. And this resistance resides in 
each portion of matter, for it is increased as we 
add one portion of matter to another. We can push a 
light boat rapidly through the water ; but we may go on 
increasing its freight, till we are barely able to stir it. 
This property of matter, then, by which it resists the re- 
ception of motion, or rather by which it reacts and re- 
quires an adequate force in order that any motion may 
result, is called its inertness, or inertia. That matter has 
such a property, is a conviction flowing from that idea of 
a reaction equal and opposite to the action, which the 
conception of all force involves. By what laws this 
inertia depends on the magnitude, form, and material of 
the body, must be the subject of our consideration here- 
after. But that matter has this inertia, in virtue of 
which, as the matter is greater, the velocity which the 
same effort can communicate to it is less, is a principle 
inseparable from the notion of matter itself. 

Hermann says that Kepler first introduced this " most 
significant word" inertia. Whether it is to be found in 
earlier writers I know not ; Kepler certainly does use it 
familiarly in those attempts to assign physical reasons for 
the motions of the planets which were among the main 
occasions of the discovery of the true laws of mechanics. 
He assumes the slowness of the motions of the planets 
to increase, (other causes remaining the same,) as the 
inertia increases ; and though, even in this assumption, 
there is an error involved, (if we adopt that interpreta- 
tion of the term inertia to which subsequent researches 
led,) the introduction of such a word was one step in 
determining and expressing those laws of motion which 
depend on the fundamental principle of the equality of 
action and reaction. 



184 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

5. We have thus seen, I trust in a satisfactory 
manner, the origin of our conceptions of Force, Matter, 
Solidity, and Inertness. It has appeared that the organ 
by which we obtain such conceptions is that very mus- 
cular frame, which is the main instrument of our percep- 
tions of space ; but that, besides bodily sensations, these 
ideal conceptions, like all the others which we have 
hitherto considered, involve also an habitual activity of 
the mind, giving to our sensations a meaning which they 
could not otherwise possess. And among the ideas thus 
brought into play, is an idea of action with an equal and 
opposite reaction, which forms a foundation for universal 
truths to be hereafter established respecting the concep- 
tions thus obtained. 

We must now endeavour to trace in what manner 
these fundamental principles and conceptions are un- 
folded by means of observation and reasoning, till they 
become an extensive yet indisputable science. 



CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES 
OF STATICS. 

1. Object of the Chapter. In the present and the suc- 
ceeding chapters we have to show how the general axioms 
of Causation enable us to construct the science of Me- 
chanics. We have to consider these axioms as moulding 
themselves, in the first place, into certain fundamental 
mechanical principles, which are of evident and necessary 
truth in virtue of their dependence upon the general 
axioms of Causation ; and thus as forming a foundation 
for the whole structure of the science ; a system of truths 
no less necessary than the fundamental principles, because 
derived from these by rigorous demonstration. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 185 

This account of the construction of the science of 
Mechanics, however generally treated, cannot be other- 
wise than technical in its details, and will probably be 
imperfectly understood by any one not acquainted with 
Mechanics as a mathematical science. 

I cannot omit this portion of my survey without 
rendering my work incomplete ; but I may remark that 
the main purpose of it is to prove, in a more particular 
manner, what I have already declared in general, that 
there are in Mechanics no less than in Geometry, funda- 
mental principles of axiomatic evidence and necessity; 
that these principles derive their axiomatic character 
from the Idea which they involve, namely the Idea of 
Cause ; and that through the combination of principles 
of this kind, the whole science of Mechanics, including its 
most complex and remote results, exists as a body of solid 
and universal truths. 

2. Statics and Dynamics. We must first turn our 
attention to a technical distinction of Mechanics into two 
portions, according as the forces about which we reason 
produce rest, or motion ; the former portion is termed 
Statics, the latter Dynamics. If a stone fall, or a weight 
put a machine in motion, the problem belongs to Dy- 
namics; but if the stone rest upon the ground, or a 
weight be merely supported by a machine, without being 
raised higher, the question is one of Statics. 

3. Equilibrium. In Statics, forces balance each other, 
or keep each other in equilibrium. And forces which 
directly balance each other, or keep each other in equili- 
brium, are necessarily and manifestly equal. If we see 
two boys pull at two ends of a rope so that neither of 
them in the smallest degree prevails over the other, we 
have a case in which two forces are in equilibrium. The 
two forces are evidently equal, and are a statical exem- 
plification of action and reaction, such as are spoken of 



186 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

in the third axiom concerning causes. Now the same 
exemplification occurs in every case of equilibrium. No 
point or body can be kept at rest except in virtue of 
opposing forces acting upon it ; and these forces must 
always be equal in their opposite effect. When a stone 
lies on the floor, the weight of the stone downwards is 
opposed and balanced by an equal pressure of the floor 
upwards. If the stone rests on a slope, its tendency to 
slide is counteracted by some equal and opposite force, 
arising, it may be, from the resistance which the sloping 
ground opposes to any motion along its surface. Every 
case of rest is a case of equilibrium : every case of equi- 
librium is a case of equal and opposite forces. 

The most complex frame-work on which weights are 
supported, as the roof of a building, or the cordage of a 
machine, are still examples of equilibrium. In such 
cases we may have many forces all combining to balance 
each other ; and the equilibrium will depend on various 
conditions of direction and magnitude among the forces. 
And in order to understand what are these conditions, we 
must ask, in the first place, what we understand by the 
magnitude of such forces; what is the measure of 
statical forces. 

4. Measure of Statical Forces. At first we might 
expect, perhaps, that since statical forces come under the 
general notion of Cause, the mode of measuring them 
would be derived from the second axiom of Causation, 
that causes are measured by their effects. But we find 
that the application of this axiom is controlled by the 
limitation which we noticed, after stating that axiom ; 
namely, the condition that the causes shall be capable of 
addition. Further, as we have seen, a statical force pro- 
duces no other effect than this, that it balances some other 
statical force ; and hence the measure of statical forces is 
necessarily dependent upon their balancing, that is, upon 
the equality of action and reaction. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 187 

That statical forces are capable of addition is involved 
in our conception of such forces. When two men pull 
at a rope in the same direction, the forces which they 
exert are added together. When two heavy bodies are 
put into a basket suspended by a string, their weights are 
added, and the sum is supported by the string. 

Combining these considerations, it will appear that 
the measure of statical forces is necessarily given at once 
by the fundamental principle of the equality of action 
and reaction. Since two opposite forces which balance 
each other are equal, each force is measured by that 
which it balances ; and since forces are capable of addi- 
tion, a force of any magnitude is measured by adding to- 
gether a proper number of such equal forces. Thus a heavy 
body which, appended to some certain elastic branch of a 
tree, would bend it down through one inch, may be taken 
as a unit of weight. Then if we remove this first body, 
and find a second heavy body which will also bend the 
branch through the same space, this is also a unit of 
weight ; and in like manner we might go on to a third 
and a fourth equal body ; and adding together the two^ 
or the three, or the four heavy bodies, we have a force 
twice, or three times, or four times the unit of weight. 
And with such a collection of heavy bodies, or weights, we 
can readily measure all other forces ; for the same prin- 
ciple of the equality of action and reaction leads at once 
to this maxim, that any statical force is measured by the 
weight which it would support. 

As has been said, it might at first have been supposed 
that we should have to apply, in this case, the axiom that 
causes are measured by their effects in another manner ; 
that thus, if that body were a unit of weight which bent 
the bough of a tree through one inch, that body would be 
two units which bent it through two inches, and so on. 
But, as we have already stated, the measures of weight 



188 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES, 

must be subject to this condition, that they are susceptible 
of being added : and therefore we cannot take the deflex- 
ion of the bough for our measure, till we have ascertained, 
that which experience alone can teach us, that under the 
burden of two equal weights, the deflexion will be twice as 
great as it is with one weight, which is not true, or at 
least is neither obviously nor necessarily true. In this, 
as in all other cases, although causes must be measured 
by their effects, we learn from experience only how the 
effects are to be interpreted, so as to give a true and 
consistent measure. 

With regard, however, to the measure of statical 
force, and of weight, no difficulty really occurred to phi- 
losophers from the time when they first began to specu- 
late on such subjects ; for it was easily seen that if we 
take any uniform material, as wood, or stone, or iron, por- 
tions of this which are geometrically equal, must also be 
equal in statical effect ; for this was implied in the very 
hypothesis of a uniform material. And a body ten times 
as large as another of the same substance, will be of ten 
times the weight. But before men could establish by 
reasoning the conditions under which weights would be in 
equilibrium, some other principles were needed in addi- 
tion to the mere measure of forces. The principles in- 
troduced for this purpose still resulted from the concep- 
tion of equal action and reaction ; but it required no 
small clearness of thought to select them rightly, and to 
employ them successfully. This, however, was done, to a 
certain extent, by the Greeks ; and the treatise of Archi- 
medes On the Centre of Gravity, is founded on principles 
which may still be considered as the genuine basis of sta- 
tical reasoning. I shall make a few remarks on the most 
important principle among those which Archimedes thus 
employs. 

5. 2he Centre of Gravity. The most important of 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 189 

the principles which enter into the demonstration of 
Archimedes is this: that "Every body has a centre of 
gravity ;" meaning by the centre of gravity, a point at 
which the whole matter of the body may be supposed to 
be collected, to all intents and purposes of statical 
reasoning. This principle has been put in various forms 
by succeeding writers : for instance, it has been thought 
sufficient to assume a case much simpler than the general 
one; and to assert that two equal bodies have their 
centre of gravity in the point midway between them. It 
is to be observed, that this assertion not only implies 
that the two bodies will balance upon a support placed 
at that midway point, but also, that they will exercise, 
upon such a support, a pressure equal to their sum ; 
for this point being the centre of gravity, the whole 
matter of the two bodies may be conceived to be col- 
lected there, and therefore the whole weight will press 
there. And thus the principle in question amounts to 
this, that when two equal heavy bodies are supported on the 
middle point between them, the pressure upon the support is 
equal to the sum of the weights of the bodies. 

A clear understanding of the nature and grounds of 
this principle is of great consequence : for in it we have 
the foundation of a large portion of the science of 
Mechanics. And if this principle can be shown to be 
necessarily true, in virtue of our Fundamental Ideas, we 
can hardly doubt that there exist many other truths of 
the same kind, and that no sound view of the evidence 
and extent of human knowledge can be obtained, so long 
as we mistake the nature of these, its first principles. 

The above principle, that the pressure on the support 
is equal to the sum of the bodies supported, is often 
stated as an axiom in the outset of books on Mechanics. 
And this appears to be the true place and character of 
this principle, in accordance with the reasonings which 



190 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

we have already urged. The axiom depends upon our 
conception of action and reaction. That the two weights 
are supported, implies that the supporting force must be 
equal to the force or weight supported. 

In order further to show the foundation of this 
principle, we may ask the question : i it be not an 
axiom, deriving its truth from the fundamental concep- 
tion of equal action and reaction, which equilibrium 
always implies, what is the origin of its certainty ? The 
principle is never for an instant denied or questioned: it is 
taken for granted, even before it is stated. No one will 
doubt that it is not only true, but true with the same 
rigour and universality as the axioms of Geometry. Will 
it be said, that it is borrowed from experience ? Expe- 
rience could never prove a principle to be universally and 
rigorously true. Moreover, when from experience we 
prove a proposition to possess great exactness and 
generality, we approach by degrees to this proof: the 
conviction becomes stronger, the truth more secure, as 
we accumulate trials. But nothing of this kind is the 
case in the instance before us. There is no gradation 
from less to greater certainty; no hesitation which 
precedes confidence. From the first, we know that the 
axiom is exactly and certainly true. In order to be 
convinced of it, we do not require many trials, but 
merely a clear understanding of the assertion itself. 

But, in fact, not only are trials not necessary to the 
proof, but they do not strengthen it. Probably no 
one ever made a trial for the purpose of showing that 
the pressure upon the support is equal to the sum of the 
two weights. Certainly no person with clear mechanical 
conceptions ever wanted such a trial to convince him of 
the truth ; or thought the truth clearer after the trial 
had been made. If to such a person, an experiment 
were shown which seemed to contradict the principle, his 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 191 

conclusion would be, not that the principle was doubtful, 
but that the apparatus was out of order. Nothing can 
be less like collecting truth from experience. 

We maintain, then, that this equality of mechanical 
action and reaction, is one of the principles which do 
not flow from, but regulate our experience. To this 
principle, the facts which we observe must conform; 
and we cannot help interpreting them in such a manner 
that they shall be exemplifications of the principle. A 
mechanical pressure not accompanied by an equal and 
opposite pressure, can no more be given by experience, 
than two unequal right angles. With the supposition of 
such inequalities, space ceases to be space, force ceases to 
be force, matter ceases to be matter. And this equality 
of action and reaction, considered in the case in which 
two bodies are connected so as to act on a single support, 
leads to the axiom which we have stated above, and 
which is one of the main foundations of the science of 
Mechanics. 

6. Oblique Forces. By the aid of this axiom and a 
few others, the Greeks made some progress in the 
science of Statics. But after a short advance, they 
arrived at another difficulty, that of Oblique Forces, 
which they never overcame ; and which no mathematician 
mastered till modern times. The unpublished manuscripts 
of Leonardo da Vinci, written in the fifteenth century, 
and the works of Stevinus and Galileo, in the sixteenth, 
are the places in which we find the first solid grounds of 
reasoning on the subject of forces acting obliquely to 
each other. And mathematicians, having thus become 
possessed of all the mechanical principles which are 
requisite in problems respecting equilibrium, soon framed 
a complete science of Statics. Succeeding writers pre- 
sented this science in forms variously modified; for it 
was found, in Mechanics as in Geometry, that various 



192 PHILOSOPHY OP THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

propositions might be taken as the starting points ; and 
that the collection of truths which it was the mecha- 
nician's business to include in his course, might be 
traversed by various routes, each path offering a series 
of satisfactory demonstrations. The fundamental con- 
ceptions of force and resistance, like those of space and 
number, could be contemplated under different aspects, 
each of which might be made the basis of axioms, 
or of principles employed as axioms. Hence the 
grounds of the truth of Statics may be stated in various 
ways ; and it would be a task of some length to examine 
all these completely, and to trace them to their Funda- 
mental Ideas. This I shall not undertake here to do ; 
but the philosophical importance of the subject makes it 
proper to offer a few remarks on some of the main 
principles involved in the different modes of presenting 
Statics as a rigorously demonstrated science. 

7. A force may be supposed to act at any Point of its 
Direction. It has been stated in the history of Mechanics*, 
that Leonardo da Vinci and Galileo obtained the true 
measure of the effect of oblique forces, by reasonings 
which were, in substance, the same. The principle of 
these reasonings is that expressed at the head of this 
paragraph ; and when we have a little accustomed our- 
selves to contemplate our conceptions of force, and its 
action on matter, in an abstract manner, we shall have 
no difficulty in assenting to the principle in this general 
form. But it may, perhaps, be more obvious at first in a 
special case. 

If we suppose a wheel, moveable about its axis, and 
carrying with it in its motion a weight, (as, for example, 
one of the wheels by means of which the large bells of a 
church are rung,) this weight may be supported by means 
of a rope (not passing along the circumference of the wheel, 

* Hist. Ind. 8c., ii. pp. 17 and 122. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OP STATICS. 1 93 

as is usual in the case of bells,) but fastened to one of 
the spokes of the wheel. Now the principle which is 
enunciated above asserts, that if the rope pass in a 
straight line across several of the spokes of the wheel, it 
makes no difference in the mechanical effect of the force 
applied, for the purpose of putting the bell in motion, to 
which of these spokes the rope is fastened. In each case, 
fastening the rope to the wheel merely serves to enable 
the force to produce motion about the centre; and so long 
as the force acts in the same line, the effect is the same, 
at whatever point of the rope the line of action finishes. 

This axiom very readily aids us in estimating the 
effect of oblique forces. For when a force acts on one of 
the arms of a lever at any oblique angle, we suppose 
another arm projecting from the centre of motion, like 
another spoke of the same wheel, so situated that it is 
perpendicular to the force. This arm we may, with 
Leonardo, call the virtual lever ; for, by the axiom, we 
may suppose the force to act where the line of its direction 
meets this arm ; and thus we reduce the case to that in 
which the force acts perpendicularly on the arm. 

The ground of this axiom is, that matter, in Statics, 
is necessarily conceived as transmitting force. That force 
can be transmitted from one place to another, by means 
of matter; that we can push with a rod, pull with a 
rope, are suppositions implied in our conceptions of 
force and matter. Matter is, as we have said, that which 
receives the impression of force, and the modes just 
mentioned, are the simplest ways in which that impression 
operates. And since, in any of these cases, the force 
might be resisted by a reaction equal to the force itself, 
the reaction in each case would be equal, and, therefore, 
the action in each case is necessarily equal ; and thus the 
forces must be transmitted, from one point to another, 
without increase or diminution. 

VOL. i. o 



194 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

This property of matter, of transmitting the action of 
force, is of various kinds. We have the coherence of a 
rope which enables us to pull, and the rigidity of a staff, 
which enables us to push with it in the direction of its 
length ; and again, the same staff has a rigidity of another 
kind, in virtue of which we can use it as a lever ; that is, a 
rigidity to resist flexure, and to transmit the force which 
turns a body round a fulcrum. There is, further, the 
rigidity by which a solid body resists twisting. Of these 
kinds of rigidity, the first is that to which our axiom 
refers; but in order to complete the list of the ele- 
mentary principles of Statics, we ought also to lay down 
axioms respecting the other kinds of rigidity*. These, 
however, I shall not here state, as they do not involve 
any new principle. Like the one just considered, they 
form part of our fundamental conception of matter ; they 
are not the results of any experience, but are the hypo- 
theses to which we are irresistibly led, when we would 
liberate our reasonings concerning force and matter from 
a dependence on the special results of experience. We 
cannot even conceive (that is, if we have any clear 
mechanical conceptions at all) the force exerted by the 
point of a staff and resisting the force which we steadily 
impress on the head of it, to be different from the 
impressed force. 

8. Forces may have equivalent Forces substituted for 
them. The Parallelogram of Forces. It has already been 
observed, that in order to prove the doctrines of Statics, 
we may take various principles as our starting points, 
and may still find a course of demonstration by which 
the leading propositions belonging to the subject may 
be established. Thus, instead of beginning our reason- 
ings, as in the last section we supposed them to 

* Such axioms are given in a little work (The Mechanical Euclid 
which I published on the Elements of Mechanics. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 195 

commence, with the case in which forces act upon 
different points of the same body in the same line of 
force, and counteract each other in virtue of the inter- 
vening matter by which the effect of force is transferred 
from one point to another, we may suppose different 
forces to act at the same point, and may thus commence 
our reasonings with a case in which we have to con- 
template force, without having to take into our account 
the resistance or rigidity of matter. Two statical forces, 
thus acting at a mathematical point, are equivalent, in 
all respects, to some single force acting at the same point ; 
and would be kept in equilibrium by a force equal and 
opposite to that single force. And the rule by which 
the single force is derived from the two, is commonly 
termed the parallelogram of forces; the proposition being 
this, That if the two forces be represented in magnitude 
and direction by the two sides of a parallelogram, the 
resulting force will be represented in the same manner 
by the diagonal of the parallelogram. This proposition 
has very frequently been made, by modern writers, the 
commencement of the science of Mechanics: a position 
for which, by its simplicity, it is well suited ; although, 
in order to deduce from it the other elementary proposi- 
tions of the science, as, for instance, those respecting the 
lever, we require the axiom stated in the last section. 
9. The Parallelogram of Forces is a necessary Truth. 

In the series of discussions in which we are here 

engaged, our main business is to ascertain the nature and 
grounds of the certainty of scientific truths. We have, 
therefore, to ask whether this proposition, the parallelo- 
gram of forces, be a necessary truth ; and if so, on what 
grounds its necessity ultimately rests. We shall find 
that this, like the other fundamental doctrines of Statics, 
justly claims a demonstrative certainty. Daniel Ber- 
noulli, in 1726, gave the first proof of this important 

o 2 



196 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

proposition on pure statical principles ; and thus, as lie 
says*, " proved that statical theorems are not less 
necessarily true than geometrical are." If we examine 
this proof of Bernoulli, in order to discover what are the 
principles on which it rests, we shall find that the 
reasoning employs in its progress such axioms as this ; 
That if from forces which are in equilibrium at a point 
be taken away other forces which are in equilibrium at 
the same point, the remainder will be in equilibrium ; 
and generally ; That if forces can be resolved into other 
equivalent forces, these may be separated, grouped, and 
recombined, in any new manner, and the result will still 
be identical with what it was at first. Thus in Ber- 
noulli's proof, the two forces to be compounded are repre- 
sented by P and Q; P is resolved into two other forces, x 
and u ; and Q, into two others, Y and v, under certain 
conditions. It is then assumed that these forces may be 
grouped into the pairs x, Y, and u, v : and when it has 
been shown that x and Y are in equilibrium, they may, by 
what has been said, be removed, and the forces P, Q, are 
equivalent to u, v ; which, .being in the same direction by 
the course of the construction, have a result equal to 
their sum. 

It is clear that the principles here assumed are 
genuine axioms, depending upon our conception of the 
nature of equivalence of forces, and upon their being 
capable of addition and composition. If the forces P, Q, 
be equivalent to forces x, u, Y, v, they are equivalent to 
these forces added and compounded in any order ; just as 
a geometrical figure is, by our conception of space, 
equivalent to its parts added together in any order. The 
apprehension of forces as having magnitude, as made 
up of parts, as capable of composition, leads to such 
axioms in Statics, in the same manner as the like 

* Comm. Petrop. vol. i. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 197 

apprehension of space leads to the axioms of Geometry. 
And thus the truths of Statics, resting upon such foun- 
dations, are independent of experience in the same 
manner in which geometrical truths are so. 

The proof of the parallelogram of forces thus given 
by Daniel Bernoulli, as it was the first, is also one of 
the most simple proofs of that proposition which have 
been devised up to the present day. Many other 
demonstrations, however, have been given of the same 
proposition. Jacobi, a German mathematician, has col- 
lected and examined eighteen of these*. They all depend 
either upon such principles as have just been stated; 
That forces may in every way be replaced by those which 
are equivalent to them ; or else upon those previously 
stated, the doctrine of the lever, and the transfer of a 
force from one point to another of its direction. In 
either case, they are necessary results of our statical 
conceptions, independent of any observed laws of motion, 
and indeed, of the conception of actual motion altogether. 

There is another class of alleged proofs of the paral- 
lelogram of forces, which involve the consideration of the 
motion produced by the forces. But such reasonings 
are, in fact, altogether irrelevant to the subject of Statics. 
In that science, forces are not measured by the motion 
which they produce, but by the forces which they will 
balance, as we have already seen. The combination of 
two forces employed in producing motion in the same 
body, either simultaneously or successively, belongs to 
that part of Mechanics which has motion for its subject, 
and is to be considered in treating of the laws of motion. 
The composition of motion, (as when a man moves in a 

* These are by the following mathematicians; D. Bernoulli 
(1726); Lambert (1771) ; Scarella (1756) ; Venini (1764); Araldi 
(1806); Wachter (1815); Kaestner; Marini; Eytelwein; Salimbeni; 
Duchayla; two different proofs by Foncenex (1760); three by 
D'Alembert ; and those of Laplace and M. Poisson. 



198 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

ship while the ship moves through the water,) has con- 
stantly been confounded with the composition of force. 
But though this has been done by very eminent mathe- 
maticians, it is quite necessary for us to keep the two 
subjects distinct, in order to see the real nature of the 
evidence of truth in either case. The conditions of 
equilibrium of two forces on a lever, or of three forces at 
a point, can be established without any reference what- 
ever to any motions which the forces might, under other 
circumstances, produce. And because this can be done, 
to do so is the only scientific procedure. To prove 
such propositions by any other course, would be to 
support truth by extraneous and inconclusive reasons ; 
which would be foreign to our purpose, since we seek 
not only knowledge, but the grounds of our knowledge. 

1 0. The Centre of Gravity seeks the lowest place. The 
principles which we have already mentioned afford a 
sufficient basis for the science of Statics in its most 
extensive and varied applications ; and the conditions of 
equilibrium of the most complex combinations of ma- 
chinery may be deduced from these principles with a 
rigour not inferior to that of geometry. But in some of the 
more complex cases, the results of long trains of reasoning 
may be foreseen, in virtue of certain maxims which 
appear to us self-evident, although it may not be easy to 
trace the exact dependence of these maxims upon our fun- 
damental conceptions of force and matter. Of this nature 
is the maxim now stated ; That in any combination of 
matter any how supported, the Centre of Gravity will 
descend into the lowest position which the connexion of 
the parts allows it to assume by descending. It is easily 
seen that this maxim carries to a much greater extent 
the principle which the Greek mathematicians assumed, 
that every body has a Centre of Gravity, that is, a point 
in which, if the whole matter of the body be collected, 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 199 

the effect will remain unchanged. For the Greeks 
asserted this of a single rigid mass only ; whereas, in the 
maxim now under our notice, it is asserted of any masses, 
connected by strings, rods, joints, or in any manner. 
We have already seen that more modern writers on 
mechanics, desirous of assuming as fundamental no wider 
principles than are absolutely necessary, have not adopted 
the Greek axiom in all its generality, but have only 
asserted that two equal weights have a centre of gravity 
midway between them. Yet the principle that every 
body, however irregular, has a centre of gravity, and will 
be supported if that centre is supported, and not otherwise, 
is so far evident, that it might be employed as a funda- 
mental truth, if we could not resolve it into any simpler 
truths : and, historically speaking, it was assumed as 
evident by the Greeks. In like manner the still wider 
principle, that a collection of bodies, as, for instance, a 
flexible chain hanging upon one or more supports, has a 
centre of gravity ; and that this point will descend to the 
lowest possible situation, as a single body would do, has 
been adopted at various periods in the history of mechan- 
ics; and especially at conjunctures when mathematical 
philosophers have had new and difficult problems to con- 
tend with. For in almost every instance it has only 
been by repeated struggles that philosophers have reduced 
the solution of such problems to a clear dependence upon 
the most simple axioms. 

11. Stevinus's Proof for Oblique Forces. We have 
an example of this mode of dealing with problems, in 
Stevinus's mode of reasoning concerning the Inclined 
Plane ; which, as we have stated in the History of 
Mechanics, was the first correct published solution of 
that problem. Stevinus supposes a loop of chain, or a 
loop of string loaded with a series of equal balls at 
equal distances, to hang over the Inclined Plane; and 
his reasoning proceeds upon this assumption, That 



200 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

such a loop so hanging will find a certain position in 
which it will rest : for otherwise, says he *, its motion 
must go on for ever, which is absurd. It may be asked 
how this absurdity of a perpetual motion appears ; and it 
will perhaps be added, that although the impossibility of 
a machine with such a condition may be proved as a 
remote result of mechanical principles, this impossibility 
can hardly be itself recognised as a self-evident truth. 
But to this we may reply, that the impossibility is really 
evident in the case contemplated by Stevinus; for we 
cannot conceive a loop of chain to go on through all 
eternity, sliding round and round upon its support, by the 
effect of its own weight. And the ground of our convic- 
tion that this cannot be, seems to be this consideration ; 
that when the chain moves by the effect of its weight, we 
consider its motion as the result of an effort to reach some 
certain position, in which it can rest ; just as a single ball 
in a bowl moves till it comes to rest at the lowest point 
of the bowl. Such an effect of weight in the chain, we 
may represent to ourselves by conceiving all the matter 
of the chain to be collected in one single point, and this 
single heavy point to hang from the support in some way 
or other, so as fitly to represent the mode of support of 
the chain. In whatever manner this heavy point (the 
centre of gravity of the chain) be supported and con- 
trolled in its movements, there will still be some position 
of rest which it will seek and find. And thus there will 
be some corresponding position of rest for the chain ; and 
the interminable shifting from one position to another, 
with no disposition to rest in any position, cannot exist. 

Thus the demonstration of the property of the 
Inclined Plane by Stevinus, depends upon a principle 
which, though far from being the simplest of those to 
which the case can be reduced, is still both true and 
evident: and the evidence of this principle, depending 
* STEVIN. Sfatique^ livre i., prop. 19. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 201 

upon the assumption of a centre of gravity, is of the same 
nature as the evidence of the Greek statical demonstra- 
tions, the earliest real advances in the science. 

12. Principle of Virtual Velocities. We have 
referred above to an assertion often made, that we 
may, from the simple principles of Mechanics, demon- 
strate the impossibility of a perpetual motion. In reality, 
however, the simplest proof of that impossibility, in 
a machine acted upon by weight only, arises from the 
very maxim above stated, that the centre of gravity seeks 
and finds the lowest place ; or from some similar pro- 
position. For if, as is done by many writers, we profess 
to prove the impossibility of a perpetual motion by means 
of that proposition which includes the conditions of equi- 
librium, and is called the Principle of Virtual Velocities*, 
we are under the necessity of first proving in a general 
manner that principle. And if this be done by a mere 
enumeration of cases, (as by taking those five cases which 
are called the mechanical powers,) there may remain some 
doubts whether the enumeration of possible mechanical 
combinations be complete. Accordingly, some writers 
have attempted independent and general proofs of the 
Principle of Virtual Velocities; and these proofs rest 
upon assumptions of the same nature as that now under 
notice. This is, for example, the case with Lagrange's 
proof, which depends upon what he calls the Principle 
of Pulleys. For this principle is, That a weight any how 
supported, as by a string passing round any number of 
pulleys any how placed, will be at rest then only, when 
it cannot get lower by any small motion of the pulleys. 
And thus the maxim that a weight will descend if it can, 
is assumed as the basis of this proof. 

There is, as we have said, no need to assume such 
principles as these for the foundation of our mechanical 
science. But it is, on various accounts, useful to direct 
* Sec Hist. Ind. ScL, \\. 41. 



202 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

our attention to those cases in which truths, apprehended 
at first in a complex and derivative form, have afterwards 
been reduced to their simpler elements ; in which, also, 
sagacious and inventive men have fixed upon those 
truths as self-evident, which now appear to us only cer- 
tain in virtue of demonstration. In these cases we can 
hardly doubt that such men were led to assert the doc- 
trines which they discovered, not by any capricious con- 
jecture or arbitrary selection, but by having a keener 
and deeper insight than other persons into the relations 
which were the object of their contemplation ; and in the 
science now spoken of, they were led to their assumptions 
by possessing clearly and distinctly the conceptions of 
mechanical cause and effect, action and reaction, force, 
and the nature of its operation. 

13. Fluids press Equally in all Directions. The doc- 
trines which concern the equilibrium of fluids depend on 
principles no less certain and simple than those which 
refer to the equilibrium of solid bodies ; and the Greeks, 
who, as we have seen, obtained a clear view of some of 
the principles of Statics, also made a beginning in the 
kindred subject of Hydrostatics. We still possess a trea- 
tise of Archimedes On Floating Bodies, which contains 
correct solutions of several problems belonging to this 
subject, and of some which are by no means easy. In 
this treatise, the fundamental assumption is of this kind : 
" Let it be assumed that the nature of a fluid is such, 
that the parts which are less pressed yield to those which 
are more pressed." In this assumption or axiom it is 
implied that a pressure exerted upon a fluid in one direc- 
tion produces a pressure in another direction ; thus, the 
weight of the fluid which arises from a downward force 
produces a lateral pressure against the sides of the con- 
taining vessel. Not only does the pressure thus diverge 
from its original direction into all other directions, but it 
is in all directions exactly equal, an equal extent of the 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 203 

fluid being taken. This principle, which was involved in 
the reasoning of Archimedes, is still to the present day 
the basis of all hydrostatical treatises, and is expressed, 
as above, by saying that fluids press equally in all direc- 
tions. 

Concerning this, as concerning previously-noticed 
principles, we have to ask whether it can rightly be said 
to be derived from experience. And to this the answer 
must still be, as in the former cases, that the proposition 
is not one borrowed from experience in any usual or exact 
sense of the phrase. I will endeavour to illustrate this. 
There are many elementary propositions in physics, our 
knowledge of which indisputably depends upon expe- 
rience ; and in these cases there is no difficulty in seeing 
the evidence of this dependence. In such cases, the ex- 
periments which prove the law are prominently stated in 
treatises upon the subject : they are given with exact 
measures, and with an account of the means by which 
errors were avoided : the experiments of more recent 
times have either rendered more certain the law ori- 
ginally asserted, or have pointed out some correction of 
it as requisite : and the names, both of the discoverers of 
the law and of its subsequent reformers, are well known. 
For instance, the proposition that " The elastic force of air 
varies as the density," was first proved by Boyle, by means 
of operations of which the detail is given in his Defence 
of his Pneumatical Experiments* ; and by Marriotte in his 
Traite de VEquilibre des Liquides, from whom it has gene- 
rally been termed Marriotte's law. After being confirmed 
by many other experimenters, this law was suspected to 
be slightly inaccurate, and a commission of the French 
Academy of Sciences was appointed, consisting of several 
distinguished philosophers!, to ascertain the truth or false- 

* SHAW'S Boyle^ vol. ii., p. 671. 

t The members were Prony, Arago, Ampere, Girard, and Dulong. 



204 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

hood of this suspicion. The result of their investigations 
appeared to be, that the law is exact, as nearly as the 
inevitable inaccuracies of machinery and measures will 
allow us to judge. Here we have an example of a law 
which is of the simplest kind and form ; and which yet is 
not allowed to rest upon its simplicity or apparent proba- 
bility, but is rigorously tested by experience. In this 
case, the assertion, that the law depends upon experience, 
contains a reference to plain and notorious passages in the 
history of science. 

Now with regard to the principle that fluids press 
equally in all directions, the case is altogether different. 
It is, indeed, often asserted in works on hydrostatics, that 
the principle is collected from experience, and sometimes 
a few experiments are described as exhibiting its effect ; 
but these are such as to illustrate and explain, rather 
than to prove, the truth of the principle: they are never 
related to have been made with that exactness of pre- 
caution and measurement, or that frequency of repetition, 
which are necessary to establish a purely experimental 
truth. Nor did such experiments occur as important 
steps in the history of science. It does not appear that 
Archimedes thought experiment necessary to confirm the 
truth of the law as he employed it : on the contrary, he 
states it in exactly the same shape as the axioms which 
he employs in statics, and even in geometry ; namely, as 
an assumption. Nor does any intelligent student of the 
subject find any difficulty in assenting to this fundamental 
principle of hydrostatics as soon as it is propounded to 
him. Experiment was not requisite for its discovery; 
experiment is not necessary for its proof at present ; and 

The experiments were extended to a pressure of twenty-seven atmo- 
spheres ; and in no instance did the difference between the observed 
and calculated elasticity amount to one-hundredth of the whole ; nor 
did the difference appear to increase with the increase of pressure. 
FECHNER. Rcpcrtorium, i. 110. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 205 

we may add, that experiment, though it may make the 
proposition more readily intelligible, can add nothing to 
our conviction of its truth when it is once understood. 

14. Foundation of the above Axiom. But it will 
naturally be asked, What then is the ground of our 
conviction of this doctrine of the equal pressure of a 
fluid in all directions? And to this I reply, that the 
reasons of this conviction are involved in our idea of a 
fluid, which is considered as matter, and therefore as 
capable of receiving, resisting, and transmitting force 
according to the general conception of matter ; and which 
is also considered as matter which has its parts perfectly 
moveable among one another. For it follows from these 
suppositions, that if the fluid be confined, a pressure 
which thrusts in one side of the containing vessel, may 
cause any other side to bulge outwards, if there be a part 
of the surface which has not strength to resist this pressure 
from within. And that this pressure when thus trans- 
ferred into a direction different from the original one, is 
not altered in intensity, depends upon this consideration ; 
that any difference in the two pressures would be consi- 
dered as a defect of perfect fluidity, since the fluidity 
would be still more complete, if this entire and undimi- 
nished transmission of pressure in all directions were 
supposed. If, for instance, the lateral pressure were less 
than the vertical, this could be conceived no other way 
than as indicating some rigidity or adhesion of the parts 
of the fluid. When the fluidity is perfect, the two pres- 
sures which act in the two different parts of the fluid 
exactly balance each other : they are the action and the 
reaction, and must hence be equal by the same necessity 
as two directly opposite forces in statics. 

But it may be urged, that even if we grant that this 
conception of a perfect fluid, as a body which has its parts 
perfectly moveable among each other, leads us necessarily 



206 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

to the principle of the equality of hydrostatic pressure in 
all directions, still this conception itself is obtained from 
experience, or suggested by observation. And to this we 
may reply, that the conception of a fluid, as contemplated 
in mechanical theory, cannot be said to be derived from 
experience, except in the same manner as the conception 
of a solid and rigid body may be said to be acquired by 
experience. For if we imagine a vessel full of small, 
smooth spherical balls, such a collection of balls would 
approach to the nature of a fluid, in having its parts 
moveable among each other ; and would approach to per- 
fect fluidity, as the balls became smoother and smaller. 
And such a collection of balls would also possess the sta- 
tical properties of a fluid ; for it would transmit pressure 
out of a vertical into a lateral (or any other) direction, in 
the same manner as a fluid would do. And thus a col- 
lection of solid bodies has the same property which a 
fluid has ; and the science of Hydrostatics borrows from 
experience no principles beyond those which are involved 
in the science of Statics respecting solids. And since in 
this latter portion of science, as we have already seen, 
none of the principles depend for their evidence upon any 
special experience, the doctrines of Hydrostatics also are 
not proved by experience, but have a necessary truth 
borrowed from the relations of our ideas. 

It is hardly to be expected that the above reasoning 
will, at first sight, produce conviction in the mind of the 
reader, except he have, to a certain extent, acquainted 
himself with the elementary doctrines of the science of 
Hydrostatics as usually delivered ; and have followed, 
with clear and steady apprehension, some of the trains of 
reasoning by which the pressures of fluids are deter- 
mined ; as, for instance, the explanation of what is called 
the Hydrostatic Paradox. The necessity of such a dis- 
cipline in order that the reader may enter fully into this 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS. 207 

part of our speculations, naturally renders them less 
popular ; but this disadvantage is inevitable in our plan. 
We cannot expect to throw light upon philosophy by 
means of the advances which have been made in the 
mathematical and physical sciences, except we really 
understand the doctrines which have been firmly esta- 
blished in those sciences. This preparation for philoso- 
phizing may be somewhat laborious ; but such labour is 
necessary if we would pursue speculative truth with all 
the advantages which the present condition of human 
knowledge places within our reach. 

We may add, that the consequences to which we are 
directed by the preceding opinions, are of very great im- 
portance in their bearing upon our general views respect- 
ing human knowledge. I trust to be able to show, that 
some important distinctions are illustrated, some perplex- 
ing paradoxes solved, and some large anticipations of the 
future extension of our knowledge suggested, by means of 
the conclusions to which the preceding discussions have 
conducted us. But before I proceed to these general 
topics, I must consider the foundations of some of the 
remaining portions of Mechanics. 



CHAPTER VII. 

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES 
OF DYNAMICS. 

1. IN the History of Mechanics, I have traced the 
steps by which the three Laws of Motion and the other 
principles of mechanics were discovered, established, and 
extended to the widest generality of form and applica- 
tion. We have, in these laws, examples of principles 
which were, historically speaking, obtained by reference 
to experience. Bearing in mind the object and the re- 
sult of the preceding discussions, we cannot but turn 



203 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

with much interest to examine these portions of science ; 
to inquire whether there be any real difference in the 
grounds and nature between the knowledge thus obtained, 
and those truths which we have already contemplated ; 
and which, as we have seen, contain their own evidence, 
and do not require proof from experiment. 

2. The First Law of Motion. The first law of motion 
is, that When a body moves not acted upon by any 
force, it will go on perpetually in a straight line, and 
with a uniform velocity. Now what is the real ground 
of our assent to this proposition? That it is not at first 
sight a self-evident truth, appears to be clear ; since from 
the time of Aristotle to that of Galileo the opposite 
assertion was held to be true; and it was believed that 
all bodies in motion had, by their own nature, a constant 
tendency to move more and more slowly, so as to stop at 
last. This belief, indeed, is probably even now enter- 
tained by most persons, till their attention is fixed upon 
the arguments by which the first law of motion is esta- 
blished. It is, however, not difficult to lead any person 
of a speculative habit of thought to see that the retarda- 
tion which constantly takes place in the motion of all 
bodies when left to themselves, is, in reality, the effect of 
extraneous forces which destroy the velocity. A top 
ceases to spin because the friction against the ground and 
the resistance of the air gradually diminish its motion, 
and not because its motion has any internal principle of 
decay or fatigue. This may be shown, and was, in fact, 
shown by Hooke before the Royal Society, at the time 
when the laws of motion were still under discussion, by 
means of experiments in which the weight of the top is 
increased, and the resistance to motion offered by its sup- 
port, is diminished ; for by such contrivances its motion is 
made to continue much longer than it would otherwise 
do. And by experiments of this nature, although we can 
never remove the whole of the external impediments to 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 209 

continued motion, and although, consequently, there will 
always be some retardation ; and an end of the motion of 
a body left to itself, however long it may be delayed, must 
at last come ; yet we can establish a conviction that if all 
resistance could be removed, there would be no diminution 
of velocity, and thus the motion would go on for ever. 

If we call to mind the axioms which we formerly stated, 
as containing the most important conditions involved in 
the idea of Cause, it will be seen that our conviction 
in this case depends upon the first axiom of Causation, 
that nothing can happen without a cause. Every change 
in the velocity of the moving body must have a cause ; 
and if the change can, in any manner, be referred to the 
presence of other bodies, these are said to exert force upon 
the moving body: and the conception of force is thus 
evolved from the general idea of cause. Force is any 
cause which has motion, or change of motion, for its effect ; 
and thus, all the change of velocity of a body which can 
be referred to extraneous bodies, as the air which sur- 
rounds it, or the support on which it rests, is considered 
as the effect of forces ; and this consideration looked 
upon as explaining the difference between the motion 
which really takes place in the experiment, and that 
which, as the law asserts, would take place if the body 
were not acted on by any forces. 

Thus the truth of the first law of motion depends 
upon the axiom that no change can take place without a 
cause ; and follows from the definition of force, if we sup- 
pose that there can be none but an external cause of change. 
But in order to establish the law, it was necessary further 
to be assured that there is no internal cause of change of 
velocity belonging to all matter whatever, and operating 
in such a manner that the mere progress of time is suffi- 
cient to produce a diminution of velocity in all moving 
bodies. It appears from the history of mechanical science, 

VOL. i. p 



210 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

that this latter step required a reference to observation 
and experiment ; and that the first law of motion is so 
far, historically at least, dependent upon our experience. 

But notwithstanding this historical evidence of the 
need which we have of a reference to observed facts, in 
order to place this first law of motion out of doubt, it has 
been maintained by very eminent mathematicians and 
philosophers, that the law is, in truth, evident of itself, 
and does not really rest upon experimental proof. Such, 
for example, is the opinion of D'Alembert*, who offers 
what is called an a priori proof of this law ; that is, a 
demonstration derived from our ideas alone. When a 
body is put in motion, either, he says, the cause which 
puts it in motion at first, suffices to make it move one 
foot, or the continued action of the cause during this foot 
is requisite for the motion. In the first case, the same 
reason which made the body proceed to the end of the first 
foot will hold for its going on through a second, a third, 
a fourth foot, and so on for any number. In the second 
case, the same reason which made the force continue to act 
during the first foot, will hold for its acting, and therefore 
for the body moving during each succeeding foot. And 
thus the body, once beginning to move, must go on 
moving for ever. 

It is obvious that we might reply to this argument, 
that the reasons for the body proceeding during each 
succeeding foot may not necessarily be all the same ; for 
among these reasons may be the time which has elapsed ; 
and thus the velocity may undergo a change as the time 
proceeds : and we require observation to inform us that 
it does not do so. 

Professor Playfair has presented nearly the same argu- 
ment, although in a different and more mathematical 
formf. If the velocity change, says he, it must change 

* Dynamique. t Outlines, c. 5 p. 26. 



ESTABLISHMENT OP THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 211 

according to some expression of calculation depending 
upon the time, or, in mathematical language, must be a 
function of the time. If the velocity diminish as the 
time increases, this may be expressed by stating the 
velocity in each case as a certain number, from which 
another quantity, or term, increasing as the time increases, 
is subtracted. But, Playfair adds, there is no condition 
involved in the nature of the case, by which the coefficients, 
or numbers which are to be employed, along with the 
number representing the time, in calculating this second 
term, can be determined to be of one magnitude rather 
than of any other. Therefore he infers there can be no 
such coefficients, and that the velocity is in each case equal 
to some constant number, independent of the time ; and 
is therefore the same for all times. 

In reply to this we may observe, that the circum- 
stance of our not seeing in the nature of the case any- 
thing which determines for us the coefficients above 
spoken off, cannot prove that they have not some certain 
value in nature. We do not see in the nature of the 
case anything which should determine a body to fall six- 
teen feet in a second of time, rather than one foot or one 
hundred feet : yet in fact the space thus run through by 
falling bodies is determined to a certain magnitude. It 
would be easy to assign a mathematical expression for 
the velocity of a body, implying that one-hundredth of 
the velocity, or any other fraction, is lost in each second*: 
and where is the absurdity of supposing such an expres- 
sion really to represent the velocity? 

Most modern writers on mechanics have embraced 
the opposite opinion, and have ascribed our knowledge of 

* This would be the case, if, t being the number of seconds 
elapsed, and C some constant quantity, the velocity were expressed by 
this mathematical formula, 

C f 

i . p 2 



212 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

this first law of motion to experience. Thus M. Poisson, 
one of the most eminent of the mathematicians who have 
written on this subject, says*, "We cannot affirm a 
priori that the velocity communicated to a body will not 
become slower and slower of itself, and end by being 
entirely extinguished. It is only by experience and 
induction that this question can be decided." 

Yet it cannot be denied that there is much force in 
those arguments by which it is attempted to shew that 
the First Law of Motion, such as we find it, is more con- 
sonant to our conceptions than any other would be. The 
Law, as it exists, is the most simple that we can conceive. 
Instead of having to determine by experiments what is 
the law of the natural change of velocity, we find the Law 
to be that it does not change at all. To a certain 
extent, the Law depends upon the evident axiom, that no 
change can take place without a cause. But the ques- 
tion further occurs, whether the mere lapse of time may 
not be a cause of change of velocity. In order to ensure 
this, we have recourse to experiment ; and the result is 
that time alone does not produce any such change. In 
addition to the conditions of change which we collect 
from our own ideas, we ask of experience what other 
conditions and circumstances she has to offer ; and the 
answer is, that she can point out none. When we have 
removed the alterations which external causes, in our 
very conception of them, occasion, there are no longer 
any alterations. Instead of having to guide ourselves by 
experience, we learn that on this subject she has nothing 
to tell us. Instead of having to take into account a num- 
ber of circumstances, we find that we have only to 
reject all circumstances. The velocity of a body remains 
unaltered by time alone, of whatever kind the body 
itself be. 

But the doctrine that time alone is not a cause of 

* POISSON. Dynamique. Ed. 2, Art. 113. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 213 

change of velocity in any body is further recommended 
to us by this consideration ; that time is conceived by 
us not as a cause, but only as a condition of other causes 
producing 1 their effects. Causes operate in time ; but it 
is only when the cause exists that the lapse of time can 
give rise to alterations. When therefore all external 
causes of change of velocity are supposed to be removed, 
the velocity must continue identical with itself, whatever 
the time which elapses. An eternity of negation can 
produce no positive result. 

Thus, though the discovery of the First Law of 
Motion was made, historically speaking, by means of 
experiment, we have now attained a point of view in 
which we see that it might have been certainly known 
to be true independently of experience. This law in its 
ultimate form, when completely simplified and steadily 
contemplated, assumes the character of a self-evident 
truth. We shall find the same process to take place in 
other instances. And this feature in the progress of 
science will hereafter be found to suggest very important 
views with regard both to the nature and prospects of our 
knowledge. 

2. Gravity is a Uniform Force. We shall find 
observations of the same kind offering themselves in a 
manner more or less obvious, with regard to the other 
principles of Dynamics. The determination of the laws 
according to which bodies fall downwards by the common 
action of gravity, has already been noticed in the History 
of Mechanics*, as one of the earliest positive advances 
in the doctrine of motion. These laws were first rightly 
stated by Galileo, and established by reasoning and by 
experiment, not without dissent and controversy. The 
amount of these doctrines is this : That gravity is a 
uniform accelerating force ; such a uniform force having 
this for its character, that it makes the velocity increase in 

* Hist. Tnd. Sci.y ii. 26. 



214 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

exact proportion to the time of motion. The relation which 
the spaces described by the body bear to the times in 
which they are described, is obtained by mathematical 
deduction from this definition of the force. 

The clear Definition of a uniform accelerating force, 
and the Proposition that gravity is such a force, were 
co-ordinate and contemporary steps in this discovery. 
In defining accelerating force, reference, tacit or ex- 
press, was necessarily made to the second of the general 
axioms respecting causation, That causes are measured 
by their effects. Force, in the cases now under our 
notice, is conceived to be, as we have already stated, 
(p. 209,) any cause which, acting from without, changes 
the motion of a body. It must, therefore, in this accep- 
tation, be measured by the magnitude of the changes 
which are produced. But in what manner the changes 
of motion are to be employed as the measures of force, is 
learnt from observation of the facts which we see taking- 
place in the world. Experience interprets the axiom of 
causation, from which otherwise we could not deduce 
any real knowledge. We may assume, in virtue of our 
general conceptions of force, that under the same circum- 
stances, a greater change of motion implies a greater force 
producing it ; but what are we to expect when the cir- 
cumstances change? The weight of a body makes it 
fall from rest at first, and causes it to move more quickly 
as it descends lower. We may express this by saying, 
that gravity, the universal force which makes all terres- 
trial bodies fall when not supported, by its continuous 
action first gives velocity to the body when it has none, 
and afterwards adds velocity to that which the body 
already has. But how is the velocity added proportioned 
to the velocity which already exists? Force acting on a 
body at rest, and on a body in motion, appears under 
very different conditions ; how are the effects related ? 
Let the force be conceived to be in both cases the 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 215 

same, since force is conceived to depend upon the extra- 
neous bodies, and not upon the condition of the moving 
mass itself. But the force being the same, the effects 
may still be different. It is at first sight conceivable 
that the body," acted upon by the same gravity, may 
receive a less addition of velocity when it is already 
moving in the direction in which this gravity impels it ; 
for if we ourselves push a body forwards, we can produce 
little additional effect upon it when it is already moving 
rapidly away from us. May it not be true, in like man- 
ner, that although gravity be always the same force, its 
effect depends upon the velocity which the body under 
its influence already possesses? 

Observation and reasoning combined, as we have 
said, enabled Galileo to answer these questions. He 
asserted and proved that we may consistently and properly 
measure a force by the velocity which is by it generated 
in a body, in some certain time, as one second; and 
further, that if we adopt this measure, gravity will be a 
force of the same value under all circumstances of the 
body which it affects ; since it appeared that, in fact, a 
falling body does receive equal increments of velocity 
in equal times from first to last. 

If it be asked whether we could have known, anterior 
to, or independent of, experiment, that gravity is a 
uniform force in the sense thus imposed upon the term ; 
it appears clear that we must reply 5 that we could not 
have attained to such knowledge, since other laws of the 
motion of bodies downwards are easily conceivable, and 
nothing but observation could inform us that one of 
these laws does not prevail in fact. Indeed, we may add, 
that the assertion that the force of gravity is uniform, is 
so far from being self-evident, that it is not even true ; 
for gravity varies according to the distance from the 
centre of the earth ; and although this variation is so 



216 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

small as to be, in the case of falling bodies, imperceptible, 
it negatives the rigorous uniformity of the force as com- 
pletely, though not to the same extent, as if the weight 
of a body diminished in a marked degree, when it was 
carried from the lower to the upper room of a house. It 
cannot, then, be a truth independent of experience, that 
gravity is uniform. 

Yet, in fact, the assertion that gravity is uniform was 
assented to, not only before it was proved, but even 
before it was clearly understood. It was readily granted 
by all, that bodies which fall freely are uniformly accele- 
rated ; but while some held the opinion just stated, that 
uniformly accelerated motion is that in which the velocity 
increases in proportion to the time, others maintained, 
that that is uniformly accelerated motion, in which the 
velocity increases in proportion to the space ; so that, for 
example, a body in falling vertically through twenty feet 
should acquire twice as great a velocity as one which 
falls through ten feet. 

These two opinions are both put forward by the 
interlocutors of Galileo's dialogue on this subject*. 
And the latter supposition is rejected, the author showing, 
not that it is inconsistent with experience, but that it is 
impossible in itself: inasmuch as it would inevitably lead 
to the conclusion, that the fall though a large and a 
small vertical space would occupy exactly the same time. 
Indeed, Galileo assumes his definition of uniformly 
accelerated motion as one which is sufficiently recom- 
mended by its own simplicity. " If we attend carefully," 
he says, " we shall find that no mode of increase of velocity 
is more simple than that which adds equal increments in 
equal times. Which we may easily understand if we 
consider the close affinity of time and motion : for as the 
uniformity of motion is defined by the equality of spaces 
* Dlalogo, iii. p. 95, t Ibid. p. 91. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 217 

described in equal times, so we may conceive the uni- 
formity of acceleration to exist when equal velocities are 
added in equal times." 

Galileo's mode of supporting his opinion, that bodies 
falling by the action of gravity are thus uniformly acce- 
lerated, consists, in the first place, in adducing the 
maxim that nature always employs the most simple 
means *. But he is far from considering this a decisive 
argument. " I," says one of his speakers, " as it would 
be very unreasonable in me to gainsay this or any other 
definition which any author may please to make, since 
they are all arbitrary, may still, without offence, doubt 
whether such a definition, conceived and admitted in the 
abstract, fits, agrees, and is verified in that kind of 
accelerated motion which bodies have when they descend 
naturally." 

The experimental proof that bodies, when they fall 
downwards, are uniformly accelerated, is (by Galileo) 
derived from the inclined plane ; and therefore assumes 
the proposition, that if such uniform acceleration prevail 
in vertical motion, it will also hold when a body is com- 
pelled to describe an oblique rectilinear path. This pro- 
position may be shown to be true, if (assuming by anti- 
cipation the Third Law of Motion, of which we shall 
shortly have to speak,) we introduce the conception of 
a uniform statical force as the cause of uniform acce- 
leration. For the force on the inclined plane bears 
a constant proportion to the vertical force, and this 
proportion is known from statical considerations. But 
in the work of which we are speaking, Galileo does 
not introduce this abstract conception of force as the 
foundation of his doctrines. Instead of this, he pro- 
poses, as a postulate sufficiently evident to be made 
the basis of his reasonings, That bodies which descend 

* Dialogo, iii. p. 91. 



218 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

clown inclined planes of different inclinations, but of 
the same vertical height, all acquire the same velocity*. 
But when this postulate has been propounded by one 
of the persons of the dialogue, another interlocutor says, 
" You discourse very probably ; but besides this like- 
lihood, I wish to augment the probability so far, that 
it shall be almost as complete as a necessary demon- 
stration." He then proceeds to describe a very inge- 
nious and simple experiment, which shows that when a 
body is made to swing upwards at the end of a string, 
it attains to the same height, whatever is the path it 
follows, so long as it starts from the lowest point with 
the same velocity. And thus Galileo's postulate is ex- 
perimentally confirmed, so far as the force of gravity can 
be taken as an example of the forces which the postulate 
contemplates : and conversely, gravity is proved to be a 
uniform force, so far as it can be considered clear that 
the postulate is true of uniform forces. 

When we have introduced the conception and defi- 
nition of accelerating force, Galileo's postulate, that 
bodies descending down inclined planes of the same 
vertical height, acquire the same velocity, may, by a 
few steps of reasoning, be demonstrated to be true of 
uniform forces : and thus the proof that gravity, either in 
vertical or oblique motion, is a uniform force, is confirmed 
by the experiment above mentioned ; as it also is, on 
like grounds, by many other experiments, made upon 
inclined planes and pendulums. 

Thus the propriety of Galileo's conception of a uni- 
form force, and the doctrine that gravity is a uniform 
force, were confirmed by the same reasonings and experi- 
ments. We may make here two remarks ; First, that the 
conception, when established and rightly stated, appears 
so simple as hardly to require experimental proof; a 
remark which we have already made with regard to the 

) iii. p. 36. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 219 

First Law of Motion : and Second, that the discovery of 
the real law of nature was made by assuming propositions 
which, without further proof, we should consider as very 
precarious, and as far less obvious, as well as less evident, 
than the law of nature in its simple form. 

3. The Second Law of Motion. When a body, instead 
of falling downwards from rest, is thrown in any direc- 
tion, it describes a curve line, till its motion is stopped. 
In this, and in all other cases in which a body describes 
a curved path in free space, its motion is determined by 
the Second Law of Motion. The law, in its general 
form, is as follows: When a body is thus cast forth 
and acted upon by a force in a direction transverse to its 
motion, the result is, That there is combined with the 
motion with which the body is throivn, another motion, 
exactly the same as that which the same force would have 
communicated to a body at rest. 

It will readily be understood that the basis of this 
law is the axiom already stated, that effects are measured 
by their causes. In virtue of this axiom, the effect of 
gravity acting upon a body in a direction transverse to its 
motion, must measure the accelerative or deflective force 
of gravity under those circumstances. If this effect vary 
with the varying velocity and direction of the body thus 
acted upon, the deflective force of gravity also will vary 
with those circumstances. The more simple supposition 
is, that the deflective force of gravity is the same, whatever 
be the velocity and direction of the body which is sub- 
jected to its influence : and this is the supposition which 
we find to be verified by facts. For example, a ball let 
fall from the top of a ship's upright mast, when she is 
sailing steadily forward, will fall at the foot of the mast, 
just as if it were let fall while the ship were at rest ; thus 
showing that the motion which gravity gives to the ball 
is compounded with the horizontal motion which the ball 



220 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

shares with the ship from the first. This general and 
simple conception of motions as compounded with one 
another, represents, it is proved, the manner in which the 
motion produced by gravity modifies any other motion 
which the body may previously have had. 

The discussions which terminated in the general 
reception of this Second Law of Motion among mechani- 
cal writers, were much mixed up with the arguments for 
and against the Copernican system, which system repre- 
sented the earth as revolving upon its axis. For the 
obvious argument against this system was, that if the 
earth were thus in motion from west to east, a stone 
dropt from the top of a tower would be left behind, the 
tower moving away from it : and the answer was, that by 
this law of motion, the stone would have the earth's 
motion impressed upon it, as well as that motion which 
would arise from its gravity to the earth ; and that the 
motion of the stone relative to the tower would thus be 
the same as if both earth and tower were at rest. Gali- 
leo further urged, as a presumption in favour of the 
opinion that the two motions, the circular motion arising 
from the rotation of the earth, and the downward motion 
arising from the gravity of the stone, would be com- 
pounded in the way we have described, (neither of them 
disturbing or diminishing the other,) that the first 
motion was in its own nature not liable to any change or 
diminution*, as we learn from the First Law of Motion. 
Nor was the subject lightly dismissed. The experiment 
of the stone let fall from the top of the mast was made 
in various forms by Gassendi; and in his Epistle, De 
Motu impwsso a Motore translate, the rule now in question 
is supported by reference to these experiments. In this 
manner, the general truth, the Second Law of Motion, 
was established completely and beyond dispute. 

* Dialogo, ii. p. 114. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 221. 

But when this law had been proved to be true in a 
general sense, with such accuracy as rude experiments, 
like those of Galileo and Gassendi, would admit, it still 
remained to be ascertained (supposing our knowledge of 
the law to be the result of experience alone,) whether it 
were true with that precise and rigorous exactness which 
more refined modes of experimenting could test. We 
so willingly believe in the simplicity of laws of nature, 
that the rigorous accuracy of such a law, known to be at 
least approximately true, was taken for granted, till some 
ground for suspecting the contrary should appear. Yet 
calculations have not been wanting which might confirm 
the law as true to the last degree of accuracy. Laplace 
relates (Syst. du Monde, livre iv., chap. 16,) that at one 
time he had conceived it possible that the effect of gravity 
upon the moon might be slightly modified by the moon's 
direction and velocity ; and that in this way an explana- 
tion might be found for the moon's acceleration (a devia- 
tion of her observed from her calculated place, which long 
perplexed mathematicians). But it was after some time 
discovered that this feature in the moon's motion arose 
from another cause ; and the second law of motion was 
confirmed as true in the most rigorous sense. 

Thus we see that although there were arguments 
which might be urged in favour of this law, founded 
upon the necessary relations of ideas, men became con- 
vinced of its truth only when it was verified and con- 
firmed by actual experiment. But yet in this case 
again, as in the former ones, when the law had been 
established beyond doubt or question, men were very 
ready to believe that it was not a mere result of observa- 
tion, that the truth which it contained was not derived 
from experience, that it might have been assumed as 
true in virtue of reasonings anterior to experience, and 
that experiments served only to make the law more plain 



222 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

and intelligible, as visible diagrams in geometry serve to 
illustrate geometrical truths ; our knowledge not being 
(they deemed) in mechanics, any more than in geometry, 
borrowed from the senses. It was thought by many to be 
self-evident, that the effect of a force in any direction 
cannot be increased or diminished by any motion trans- 
verse to the direction of the force which the body may 
have at the same time : or, to express it otherwise, that 
if the motion of the body be compounded of a horizontal 
and vertical motion, the vertical motion alone will be 
affected by the vertical force. This principle, indeed, not 
only has appeared evident to many persons, but even at the 
present day is assumed as an axiom by many of the most 
eminent mathematicians. It is, for example, so employed 
in the Mecanique Celeste of Laplace, which may be looked 
upon as the standard of mathematical mechanics in our 
time ; and in the Mecanique Analytique of Lagrange, the 
most consummate example which has appeared of sub- 
tilty of thought on such subjects, as well as of power of 
mathematical generalization*. And thus we have here 

* I may observe that the rule that we may compound motions, as 
the Law supposes, is involved in the step of resolving them ; which is 
done in the passage to which I refer (Mec. Analyt. ptie. i., sect, i., art. 
3, p. 225). " Si on concoit que la mouvement d'un corps et les forces 
qui le sollicitent soient decomposes suivant trois lignes droites perpen- 
diculaires entre elles, on pourra considerer separement les mouvemens 
et les forces relatives a chacun a de ces trois directions. Car a cause de 
la perpendicularite des directions il est visible que chacun de ces mouve- 
mens partiels peut etre regarde comme independant des deux autres, 
et qu'il ne peut recevoir d'alteration que de la part de la force qui agit 
dans la direction de ce mouvement ; Ton peut conclure que ces trois 
mouvements doivent suivre, chacun en particulier, les lois des mouve- 
mens rectilignes acceleres ou retardes par les forces donnees." Laplace 
makes the same assumption in effect, (Mec. Cel. p. i , liv. i., art. 7>) 
by resolving the forces which act upon a point in three rectangular 
directions, and reasoning separately concerning each direction. But in 
his mode of treating the subject is involved a principle which belongs 
to the Third Law of Motion, namely, the doctrine that the velocity is 
as the force, of which we shall have to speak elsewhere. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 223 

another example of that circumstance which we have 
already noticed in speaking of the First Law of Motion, 
(p. 213,) and of the Law that Gravity is a uniform Force, 
(p. 218) ; namely, that the law, though historically esta- 
blished by experiments, appears, when once discovered 
and reduced to its most simple and general form, to be 
self-evident. I am the more desirous of drawing atten- 
tion to this feature in various portions of the history of 
science, inasmuch as it will be found to lead to some very 
extensive and important views, hereafter to be con- 
sidered. 

4. The Third Law of Motion. We have, in the 
definition of Accelerating Force, a measure of Forces, so 
far as they are concerned in producing motion. We had 
before, in speaking of the principles of statics, defined 
the measure of Forces or Pressures, so far as they are 
employed in producing equilibrium. But these two 
aspects of Force are closely connected ; and we require a 
law which shall lay down the rule of their connexion. 
By the same kind of muscular exertion by which we can 
support a heavy stone, we can also put it in motion. The 
question then occurs, how is the rate and manner of its 
motion determined ? The answer to this question is con- 
tained in the Third Law of Motion, and it is to this effect : 
that the Momentum which any pressure produces in the 
mass in a given time is proportional to the pressure. By 
momentum is meant the product of the numbers which 
express the velocity and the mass of the body : and hence, 
if the mass of the body be the same in the instances 
which we compare, the rule is, That the velocity is as the 
force which produces it ; and this is one of the simplest 
ways of expressing the Third Law of Motion. 

In agreement with our general plan, we have to ask, 
What is the ground of this rule ? What is the simplest 
and most satisfactory form to which we can reduce the 



224 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

proof of it? Or, to take an instance ; if a double pres- 
sure be exerted against a given mass, so disposed as to 
be capable of motion, why must it produce twice the 
velocity in the same time ? 

To answer this question, suppose the double pressure 
to be resolved into two single pressures : one of these 
will produce a certain velocity ; and the question is, why 
an equal pressure, acting upon the same mass, will pro- 
duce an equal velocity^ addition to the former? Or, 
stating the matter otherwise, the question is, why each 
of the two forces will produce its separate effect, unal- 
tered by the simultaneous action of the other force ? 

This statement of the case makes it seem to approach 
very near to such cases as are included in the Second Law 
of Motion, and therefore it might appear that this Third 
Law has no grounds distinct from the Second. But it must 
be recollected that the workforce has a different meaning 
in this case and in that ; in this place it signifies pressure ; 
in the statement of the Second Law its import was acce- 
lerative or deflective force, measured by the velocity or 
deflexion generated. And thus the Third Law of Motion? 
so far as our reasonings yet go, appears to rest on a 
foundation different from the Second. 

Accordingly, that part of the Third Law of Motion 
which we are now considering, that the velocity generated 
is as the force, was obtained, in fact, by a separate train 
of research. The first exemplification of this law which 
was studied by mathematicians, was the motion of bodies 
upon inclined planes : for the force which urges a body 
clown an inclined plane is known by statics, and hence 
the velocity of its descent was to be determined. Galileo 
originally* in his attempts to solve this problem of the 
descent of a body down an inclined plane, did not proceed 

* Dial, della Sc. Nuov. Hi., p. 96. See Hist. Ind. Sci. y ii., 
p. 47. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 225 

from the principle which we have stated, (the determina- 
tion of the force which acts down the inclined plane from 
statical considerations,) obvious as it may seem ; but 
assumed, as we have already seen, a proposition appa- 
rently far more precarious ; namely, that a body sliding 
down a smooth inclined plane acquires always the same 
velocity, so long as the vertical height fallen through is 
the same. And this conjecture, (for at first it was nothing 
more than a conjecture,) he confirmed by an ingenious 
experiment ; in which bodies acquired or lost the same 
velocity by descending or ascending through the same 
height, although their paths were different in other 
respects. 

This was the form in which the doctrine of the motion 
of bodies down inclined planes was at first presented in 
Galileo's Dialogues on the Science of Motion. But his 
disciple Viviani was dissatisfied with the assumption thus 
introduced ; and in succeeding editions of the Dialogues, 
the apparent chasm in the reasoning was much narrowed, 
by making the proof depend upon a principle nearly 
identical with the third law of motion as we have just 
stated it. In the proof thus added, " We are agreed," 
says the interlocutor*, "that in a moving body the 
impetus, energy, momentum, or propension to motion, is 
as great as is the force or least resistance which suffices 
to sustain it ;" and the impetus or momentum, in the 
course of the proof, being taken to be as the velocity 
produced in a given time, it is manifest that the principle 
so stated amounts to this ; that the velocity produced 
is as the statical force. And thus this law of motion 
appears, in the school of Galileo, to have been suggested 
and established at first by experiment, but afterwards 
confirmed and demonstrated by a priori considerations. 

We see, in the above reasoning, a number of abstract 

* Dialogo, p. 104. 
VOL. I. Q 



226 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

terms introduced which are not, at first at least, very 
distinctly defined, as impetus, momentum, &c. Of 
these, momentum has been selected, to express that 
quantity which, in a moving- body, measures the statical 
force impressed upon the body. This quantity is, as we 
have just seen, proportional to the velocity in a given 
body. It is also, in different bodies, proportional to the 
mass of the body. This- part of the third law of motion 
follows from our conception of matter in general as con- 
sisting of parts capable of addition. A double pressure 
must be required to produce the same velocity in a double 
mass ; for if the mass be halved, each half will require 
an equal pressure ; and the addition, both of the pres- 
sures and of the masses, will take place without disturb- 
ing the effects. 

The measure of the quantity of matter of a body con- 
sidered as affecting the velocity which pressure produces 
in the body, is termed its inertia, as we have already 
stated, (p. 182.) Inertia is the property by which a 
large mass of matter requires a greater force than a 
small mass, to give it an equal velocity. It belongs to 
each portion of matter; and portions of inertia are 
added whenever portions of matter are added. Hence 
inertia is as the quantity of matter ; which is only ano- 
ther way of expressing this third law of motion, so far 
as quantity of matter is concerned. 

But how do we know the quantity of matter of a 
body ? We may reply, that we take the weight as the 
measure of the quantity of matter : but we may then be 
again asked, how it appears that the weight is propor- 
tional to the inertia ; which it must be, in order that the 
quantity of matter may be proportional to both one and 
the other. We answer, that this appears to be true 
experimentally, because all bodies fall with equal veloci- 
ties by gravity, when the known causes of difference are 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 227 

removed. The observations of falling bodies, indeed, are 
not susceptible of much exactness : but experiments lead- 
ing to the same result, and capable of great precision, 
were made upon pendulums by Newton ; as he relates in 
The Principia, book iii., prop. 6. They all agreed, he 
says, with perfect accuracy : and thus the weight and the 
inertia are proportional in all cases, and therefore each 
proportional to the quantity of matter as measured by 
the other. 

The conception of inertia, as we have already seen in 
Chapter V., involves the notion of action and reaction ; 
and thus the laws which involve inertia depend upon the 
idea of mutual causation. The rule, that the velocity is 
as the force, depends upon the principle of causation, 
that the effect is proportional to the cause ; the effect 
being here so estimated as to be consistent both with the 
other laws of motion and with experiment. 

But here, as in other cases, the question occurs again ; 
Is experiment really requisite for the proof of this law? 
If we look to authorities, we shall be not a little embar- 
rassed to decide. D'Alembert is against the necessity of 
experimental proof. "Why," says he*, "should we have 
recourse to this principle employed, at the present day, 
by everybody, that the force is proportional to the velo- 
city ? . . . a principle resting solely upon this vague and 
obscure axiom, that the effect is proportional to the cause. 
We shall not examine here," he adds, " if this principle 
is necessarily true ; we shall only avow that the proofs 
which have hitherto been adduced do not appear to us 
unexceptionable: nor shall we, with some geometers, 
adopt it as a purely contingent truth ; which would be 
to ruin the certainty of mechanics, and to reduce it to be 
nothing more than an experimental science. We shall 
content ourselves with observing," he proceeds, " that 

* Dynamique, Pref. p. x. 

Q 2 



228 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

certain or doubtful, clear or obscure, it is useless in mecha- 
nics, and consequently ought to be banished from the 
science." Though D'Alembert rejects the third law of 
motion in this form, he accepts one of equivalent import, 
which appears to him to possess axiomatic certainty; and 
this procedure is in consistence with the course which he 
takes, of claiming for the science of mechanics more than 
mere experimental truth. On the contrary, Laplace con- 
siders this third law as established by experiment. " Is 
the force," he says*, "proportional to the velocity? 
This," he replies, " we cannot know a priori, seeing that 
we are in ignorance of the nature of moving force : we 
must therefore, for this purpose, recur to experience ; for 
all which is not a necessary consequence of the few data 
we have respecting the nature of things, is, for us, only 
'a result of observation." And again he saysf, "Here, 
then, we have two laws of motion, the law of inertia [the 
first law of motion], and the law of the force proportional 
to the velocity, which are given by observation. They 
are the most natural and the most simple laws which we 
can imagine, and without doubt they flow from the very 
nature of matter ; but this nature being unknown, they 
are, for us, only observed facts : the only ones, however, 
which mechanics borrows from experience." 

It will appear, I think, from the views given in this 
and several other parts of the present work, that we can- 
not with justice say that we have very " few data respect- 
ing the nature of things," in speculating concerning the 
laws of the universe ; since all the consequences which 
flow from the relations of our fundamental ideas, neces- 
sarily regulate our knowledge of things, so far as we have 
any such knowledge. Nor can we say that the nature of 
matter is unknown to us, in any sense in which we can 
conceive knowledge as possible. The nature of matter is 

* Mec. Cel. p. 15. t P. 18. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 229 

no more unknown than the nature of space or of number. 
In our conception of matter, as of space and of number, 
are involved certain relations, which are the necessary 
groundwork of our knowledge ; and anything which is 
independent of these relations, is not unknown, but 
inconceivable. 

It must be already clear to the reader, from the 
phraseology employed by these two eminent mathema- 
ticians, that the question respecting the formation of the 
third law of motion can only be solved by a careful con- 
sideration of what we mean by observation and experi- 
ence, nature and matter. But it will probably be gene- 
rally allowed, that, taking into account the explanations 
already offered of the necessary conditions of experience 
and of the conception of inertia, this law of motion, that 
the inertia is as the quantity of matter, is almost or alto- 
gether self-evident. 

5. Action and Reaction are Equal in Moving Bodies. 
When we have to consider bodies as acting upon one 
another, and influencing each other's motions, the third 
law of motion is still applied ; but along with this, we 
also employ the general principle that action and reaction 
are equal and opposite. Action and reaction are here to 
be understood as momentum produced and destroyed, 
according to the measure of action established by the 
third law of motion : and the cases in which this prin- 
ciple is thus employed form so large a portion of those in 
which the third law of motion is used, that some writers 
(Newton at the head of them) have stated the equality of 
action and reaction as the third law of motion. 

The third law of motion being once established, the 
equality of action and reaction, in the sense of momentum 
gained and lost, necessarily follows. Thus, if a weight 
hanging by a string over the edge of a smooth level table 
draw another weight along the table, the hanging weight 



230 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

moves more slowly than it would do if not so connected, 
and thus loses velocity by the connexion ; while the other 
.weight gains by the connexion all the velocity which it 
has, for if left to itself it would rest. And the pressures 
which restrain the descent of the first body and accelerate 
that of the second, are equal at all instants of time, for 
each of these pressures is the tension of the string : and 
hence, by the third law of motion, the momentum gained 
by the one body, and the momentum lost by the other in 
virtue of the action of this string, are equal. And similar 
reasoning may be employed in any other case where bodies 
are connected. 

The case where one body does not push or draw, but 
strikes another, appeared at first to mechanical reasoners 
to be of a different nature from the others ; but a little 
consideration was sufficient to show that a blow is, in 
fact, only a short and violent pressure ; and that, there- 
fore, the general rule of the equality of momentum lost 
and gained applies to this as well as to the other cases. 

Thus, in order to determine the case of the direct 
action of bodies upon one another, we require no new law 
of motion. The equality of action and reaction, which 
enters necessarily into every conception of mechanical 
operation, combined with the measure of action as given 
by the third law of motion, enables us to trace the con- 
sequences of every case, whether of pressure or of 
impact. 

6. DAlemberfs Principle. But what will be the 
result when bodies do not act directly upon each other, 
but are indirectly connected in any way by levers, strings, 
pulleys, or in any other manner, so that one part of the 
system has a mechanical advantage over another ? The 
result must still be determined by the principle that 
action and reaction balance each other. The action and 
reaction, being pressures in one sense, must balance each 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 231 

other by the laws of statics, for these laws determine 
the equilibrium of pressure. Now action and reaction, 
according to their measures in the Third Law of Motion, 
are momentum gained and lost, when the action is direct; 
and except the indirect action introduce some modifica- 
tion of the law, they must have the same measure still. 
But, in fact, we cannot well conceive any modification of 
the law to take place in this case ; for direct action is only 
one (the ultimate) case of indirect action. Thus if two heavy 
bodies act at different points of a lever, the action of each 
on the other is -indirect ; but if the two points come toge- 
ther, the action becomes direct. Hence the rule must be 
that which we have already stated ; for if the rule were 
false for indirect action, it would also be false for direct 
action, for which case we have shown it to be true. And 
thus we obtain the general principle, that in any system 
of bodies which act on each other, action and reaction, 
estimated by momentum gained and lost, balance each 
other according to the laws of equilibrium. This prin- 
ciple, which is so general as to supply a key to the solu- 
tion of all possible mechanical problems, is commonly 
called D'Akmberts Principle. The experimental proofs 
which convinced men of the truth of the third law of 
motion were, many or most of them, proofs of the law in 
this extended sense. And thus the proof of D'Alembert's 
Principle, both from the idea of mechanical action and 
from experience, is included in the proof of the law 
already stated. 

7. Connexion of Dynamical and Statical Principles 
The principle of equilibrium of D'Alembert just stated, 
is the law which he would substitute for the third law of 
motion ; and he would thus remove the necessity for an 
independent proof of that law. In like mariner, the 
second law of motion is by some writers derived from the 
principle of the composition of statical forces; and they 



232 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

would thus supersede the necessity of a reference to 
experiment in that case. Laplace takes this course, and 
thus, as we have seen, rests only the first and third law 
of motion upon experience. Newton, on the other hand, 
recognises the same connexion of propositions, but for a 
different purpose ; for he derives the composition of 
statical forces from the second law of motion. 

The close connexion of these three principles, the 
composition of (statical) forces, the composition of (acce- 
lerating) forces with velocities, and the measure of 
(moving) forces by velocities, cannot be denied ; yet it 
appears to be by no means easy to supersede the neces- 
sity of independent proofs of the two last of these prin- 
ciples. Both may be proved or illustrated by expe- 
riment: and the experiments which prove the one are 
different from those which establish the other. For 
example, it appears by easy calculations, that when we 
apply our principles to the oscillations of a pendulum, 
the second law is proved by the fact, that the oscillations 
take place at the same rate in an east and west, and in a 
north and south direction : under the same circumstances, 
the third law is proved by our finding that the time of a 
small oscillation is proportional to the square root of the 
length of a pendulum ; and similar differences might be 
pointed out in other experiments, as to their bearing 
upon the one law or the other. 

8. Mechanical Principles become gradually more 
simple and more evident.- I will again point out in 
general two circumstances which I have already noticed 
in particular cases of the laws of motion. Truths are 
often at first assumed in a form which is far from being 
the most obvious or simple ; and truths once discovered 
are gradually simplified, so as to assume the appearance 
of self-evident truths. 

The former circumstance is exemplified in several of 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 233 

the instances which \ve have had to consider. The 
assumption that a perpetual motion is impossible pre- 
ceded the knowledge of the first law of motion. The 
assumed equality of the velocities acquired down two 
inclined planes of the same height, was afterwards reduced 
to the third law of motion by Galileo himself. In the 
History*, we have noted Huyghens's assumption of the 
equality of the actual descent and potential ascent of the 
centre of gravity : this was afterwards reduced by Her- 
man and the Bernoulli s, to the statical equivalence of the 
solicitations of gravity and the vicarious solicitations of 
the effective forces which act on each point ; and finally 
to the principle of D'Alembert, which asserts that the 
motions gained and lost balance each other. 

This assertion of principles which now appear neither 
obvious nor self-evident, is not to be considered as a 
groundless assertion on the part of the discoverers by 
whom it was made. On the contrary, it is evidence of 
the deep sagacity and clear thought which were requisite 
in order to make such discoveries. For these results are 
really rigorous consequences of the laws of motion in 
their simplest form : and the evidence of them was pro- 
bably present, though undeveloped, in the minds of the 
discoverers. We are told of geometrical students, who, 
by a peculiar aptitude of mind, perceived the evidence of 
some of the more advanced "propositions of geometry 
without going through the introductory steps. We must 
suppose a similar aptitude for mechanical reasonings, 
which led Stevinus, Galileo, Newton, and Huyghens, to 
make those assumptions which finally resolved themselves 
into the laws of motion. 

We may observe further, that the simplicity and evi- 
dence which the laws of mechanics have at length 
assumed, are much favoured by the usage of words among 

* Vol. ii. p. 82. 



234 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

the best writers on such subjects. Terms which origi- 
nally, and before the laws of motion were fully known, 
were used in a very vague and fluctuating sense, were 
afterwards limited and rendered precise, so that assertions 
which at first appear identical propositions become dis- 
tinct and important principles. Thus force, motion, 
momentum, are terms which were employed, though in a 
loose manner, from the very outset of mechanical specu- 
lation. And so long as these words retained the vagueness 
of common language, it would have been a useless and 
barren truism to say that " the momentum is proportional 
to the force," or that " a body loses as much motion as 
it communicates to another." But when " momentum " 
and " quantity of motion " are defined to mean the pro- 
duct of mass and velocity, these two propositions imme- 
diately become distinct statements of the third law of 
motion and its consequences. In like manner, the asser- 
tion that " gravity is a uniform force " was assented to, 
before it was settled what a uniform force was ; but this 
assertion only became significant and. useful when that 
point had been properly determined. The statement 
that " when different motions are communicated to the 
same body their effects are compounded," becomes the 
second law of motion, when we define what composition 
of motions is. And the same process may be observed 
in other cases. 

And thus we see how well the form which science 
ultimately assumes is adapted to simplify it. The defi- 
nitions which are adopted, and the terms which become 
current in precise senses, produce a complete harmony 
between the matter and the form of our knowledge ; so 
that truths which were at first unexpected and recondite, 
became familiar phrases, and after a few generations 
sound, even to common ears, like identical propositions. 

9. Controversy of the Measure of Force. In the His- 



ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS. 235 

tory of Mechanics*, we have given an account of the 
controversy which, for some time, occupied the mathema- 
ticians of Europe, whether the forces of bodies in motion 
should be reckoned proportional to the velocity, or to the 
square of the velocity. We need not here recall the 
events of this dispute ; but we may remark, that its his- 
tory, as a metaphysical controversy, is remarkable in this 
respect, that it has been finally and completely settled ; 
for it is now agreed among mathematicians that both 
sides were right, and that the results of mechanical 
action may be expressed with equal correctness by means of 
momentum and of vis viva* It is, in one sense, as D'Alem- 
bert has saidf, a dispute about words; but we are not 
to infer that, on that account, it was frivolous or useless ; 
for such disputes are one principal means of reducing the 
principles of our knowledge to their utmost simplicity 
and clearness. The terms which are employed in the 
science of mechanics are now liberated for ever, in the 
minds of mathematicians, from that ambiguity which was 
the battle-ground in the war of the vis viva. 

But we may observe that the real reason of this con- 
troversy was exactly that tendency which we have been 
noticing : the disposition of man to assume in his specu- 
lations certain general propositions as true, and to fix the 
sense of terms so that they shall fall in with this truth. 
It was agreed, on all hands, that in the mutual action of 

* Vol. ii. p. 87. 

f D'Alembert has also remarked (Dynamique^ Pref. xxi.,) that 
this controversy "shows how little justice and precision there is in the 
pretended axiom that causes are proportional to their effects." But 
this reflection is by no means well founded. For since both measures 
are true, it appears that causes may \)QJiAStly measured by their effects, 
even when very different kinds of effects are taken. That the axiom 
does not point out one precise measure till illustrated by experience or 
by other considerations, we grant : but the same thing occurs in the 
application of other axioms also. 



236 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

bodies the same quantity of force is always preserved ; 
and the question was, by which of the two measures this 
rule could best be verified. We see, therefore, that the 
dispute was not concerning a definition merely, but con- 
cerning a definition combined with a general proposition. 
Such a question may be readily conceived to have been 
by no means unimportant ; and we may remark, in pass- 
ing, that such controversies, although they are commonly 
afterwards stigmatised as quarrels about words and defi- 
nitions, are, in reality, events of considerable conse- 
quence in the history of science ; since they dissipate all 
ambiguity and vagueness in the use of terms, and bring 
into view the conditions under which the fundamental 
principles of our knowledge can be most clearly and 
simply presented. 

It is worth our while to pause for a moment on the 
prospect that we have thus obtained of the advance of 
knowledge, as exemplified in the history of mechanics. 
The general transformation of our views from vague to 
definite, from complex to simple, from unexpected dis- 
coveries to self-evident truths, from seeming contradic- 
tions to identical propositions, is very remarkable, but it 
is by no means peculiar to our subject. The same cir- 
cumstances, more or less prominently, more or less deve- 
loped, appear in the history of other sciences, according 
to the point of advance which each has reached. They 
bear upon very important doctrines respecting the pro- 
spects, the limits, and the very nature of our knowledge. 
And though these doctrines require to be considered with 
reference to the whole body of science, yet the peculiar 
manner in which they are illustrated by the survey of the 
history of mechanics, on which we have just been engaged, 
appears to make this a convenient place for introducing 
them to the reader. 



237 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSI- 
TIONS OBTAINED FROM EXPERIENCE. 

1. IT was formerly stated* that experience cannot 
establish any universal or necessary truths. The number 
of trials of any proposition is necessarily limited, and 
observation alone cannot give us any ground of extend- 
ing the inference to untried cases. Observed facts have 
no visible bond of necessary connexion, and no exercise 
of our senses can enable us to discover such connexion. 
We can never acquire from a mere observation of facts, 
the right to assert that a proposition is true in all cases, 
and that it could not be otherwise than we find it to be. 

Yet, as we have just seen in the history of the laws of 
motion, we may go on collecting our knowledge from 
observation, and enlarging and simplifying it, till it ap- 
proaches or attains to complete universality and seeming 
necessity. Whether the laws of motion, as we now know 
them, can be rigorously traced to an absolute necessity in 
the nature of things, we have not ventured absolutely to 
pronounce. But we have seen that some of the most 
acute and profound mathematicians have believed that 
for these laws of motion, or some of them, there was 
such a demonstrable necessity compelling them to be 
such as they are, and no other. Most of those who have 
carefully studied the principles of mechanics will allow 
that some at least of the primary laws of motion approach 
very near to this character of necessary truth ; and will 
confess that it would be difficult to imagine any other 
consistent scheme of fundamental principles. And almost 
all mathematicians will allow to these laws an absolute 
universality ; so that we may apply them without scruple 

* B. i., c. 12. Of Experience. 



238 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

or misgiving, in cases the most remote from those to 
which our experience has extended. What astronomer 
would fear to refer to the known laws of motion in rea- 
soning concerning the double stars; although these objects 
are at an immeasurably remote distance from that solar 
system which has been the only field of our observation 
of mechanical facts ? What philosopher, in speculating 
respecting a magnetic fluid, or a luminiferous ether, would 
hesitate to apply to it the mechanical principles which 
are applicable to fluids of known mechanical properties ? 
When we assert that the quantity of motion in the world 
cannot be increased or diminished by the mutual actions of 
bodies, does not every mathematician feel convinced that 
it would be an un philosophical restriction to limit this 
proposition to such modes of action as we have tried ? 

Yet no one can doubt that, in historical fact, these 
laws were collected from experience. That such is the 
case, is no matter of conjecture. We know the time, the 
persons, the circumstances, belonging to each step of each 
discovery. I have, in the History, given an account of 
these discoveries; and in the previous chapters of the 
present work, I have further examined the nature and 
the import of the principles which were thus brought to 
light. 

Here, then, is an apparent contradiction. Experi- 
ence, it would seem, has done that which we had proved 
that she cannot do. She has led men to propositions, 
universal at least, and to principles which appear to some 
persons necessary. What is the explanation of this con- 
tradiction, the solution of this paradox? Is it true that 
Experience can reveal to us universal and necessary truths? 
Does she possess some secret virtue, some unsuspected 
power, by which she can detect connexions and conse- 
quences which we have declared to be out of her sphere ? 
Can she see more than mere appearances, and observe 



PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS. 239 

more than mere facts? Can she penetrate, in some way, 
to the nature of things ? descend below the surface of 
phenomena to their causes and origins, so as to be able to 
say what can and what can not be ; what occurrences are 
partial, and what universal ? If this be so, we have in- 
deed mistaken her character and powers ; and the whole 
course of our reasoning becomes precarious and obscure. 
But, then, when we return upon our path we cannot find 
the point at which we deviated, we cannot detect the 
false step in our deduction. It still seems that by expe- 
rience, strictly so called, we cannot discover necessary 
and universal truths. Our senses can give us no evidence 
of a necessary connexion in phenomena. Our observa- 
tion must be limited, and cannot testify concerning any- 
thing which is beyond its limits. A general view of our 
faculties appears to prove it to be impossible that men 
should do what the history of the science of mechanics 
shows that they have done. 

2. But in order to try to solve this Paradox, let us 
again refer to the History of Mechanics. In the cases 
belonging to that science, in which propositions of the 
most unquestionable universality, and most approaching 
to the character of necessary truths, (as, for instance, the 
laws of motion,) have been arrived at, what is the source 
of the axiomatic character which the propositions thus 
assume ? The answer to this question will, we may hope, 
throw some light on the perplexity in which we appear to 
be involved. 

Now the answer to this inquiry is, that the laws of 
motion borrow their axiomatic character from their 
being merely interpretations of the Axioms of Causation. 
Those axioms, being exhibitions of the Idea of Cause 
under various aspects, are of the most rigorous univer- 
sality and necessity. And so far as the laws of motion 
are exemplifications of those axioms, these laws must be 



240 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

no less universal and necessary. How these axioms are 
to be understood ; in what sense cause and effect, action 
and reaction, are to be taken, experience and observation 
did, in fact, teach inquirers on this subject ; and without 
this teaching, the laws of motion could never have been 
distinctly known. If two forces act together, each must 
produce its effect, by the axiom of causation ; and, 
therefore, the effects of the separate forces must be 
compounded. But a long course of discussion and experi- 
ment must instruct men of what kind this composition of 
forces is. Again ; action and reaction must be equal ; 
but much thought and some trial were needed to show 
what action and reaction are. Those metaphysicians who 
enunciated Laws of motion without reference to expe- 
rience, propounded only such laws as were vague and 
inapplicable. But yet these persons manifested the 
indestructible conviction, belonging to man's speculative 
nature, that there exist Laws of motion, that is, universal 
formulae, connecting the causes and effects when motion 
takes place. Those mechanicians, again, who observed 
facts involving equilibrium and motion, and stated some 
narrow rules, without attempting to ascend to any 
universal and simple principle, obtained laws no less 
barren and useless than the metaphysicians ; for they 
could not tell in what new cases, or whether in any, their 
laws would be verified; they needed a more general 
rule, to show them the limits of the rule they had dis- 
covered. They went wrong in each attempt to solve a 
new problem, because their interpretation of the terms of 
the axioms, though true, perhaps, in certain cases, was 
not right in general. 

Thus Pappus erred in attempting to interpret as 
a case of the lever, the problem of supporting a weight 
upon an inclined plane; thus Aristotle erred in inter- 
preting the doctrine that the weight of bodies is the 



PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS. 241 

cause of their fall ; thus Kepler erred in interpreting the 
rule that the velocity of bodies depends upon the force ; 
thus Bernoulli* erred in interpreting the equality of 
action and reaction upon a lever in motion. In each of 
these instances, true doctrines, already established, (whe- 
ther by experiment or otherwise,) were erroneously applied. 
And the error was corrected by further reflection, which 
pointed out that another mode of interpretation was requi- 
site, in order that the axiom which was appealed to in 
each case might retain its force in the most general sense. 
And in the reasonings which avoided or corrected such 
errors, and which led to substantial general truths, the 
object of the speculator always was to give to the acknow- 
ledged maxims which the Idea of Cause suggested, such 
a signification as should be consistent with their universal 
validity. The rule was not accepted as particular at the 
outset, and afterwards generalized more and more widely; 
but from the very first, the universality of the rule was 
assumed, and the question was, how it should be under- 
stood so as to be universally true. At every stage of 
speculation, the law was regarded as a general law. This 
was not an aspect which it gradually acquired, by the 
accumulating contributions of experience, but a feature 
of its original and native character. What should 
happen universally, experience might be needed to show: 
but that what happened should happen universally, was 
implied in the nature of knowledge. The universality of 
the laws of motion was not gathered from experience, 
ijowever much the laws themselves might be so. 

3. Thus we obtain the solution of our Paradox, so 
far as the case before us is concerned. The laws of 
motion borrow their form from the Idea of Causation, 
though their matter may be given by experience: and 
hence they possess a universality which experience cannot 

* Hist, Ind. Sc., ii. p. 83. 
VOL. I. R 



242 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

give. They are certainly and universally valid ; and the 
only question for observation to decide is, how they are 
to be understood. They are like general mathematical 
formulae, which are known to be true even while we are 
ignorant what are the unknown quantities which they 
involve. It must be allowed, on the other hand, that so 
long as these formulae are not interpreted by a real study 
of nature, they are not only useless but prejudicial, filling 
men's minds with vague general terms, empty maxims, 
and unintelligible abstractions, which they mistake for 
knowledge. Of such perversion of the speculative pro- 
pensities of man's nature, the world has seen too much 
in all ages. Yet we must not, on that account, despise 
these forms of truth, since without them, no general 
knowledge is possible. Without general terms, and 
maxims, and abstractions, we can have no science, no 
speculation ; hardly, indeed, consistent thought or the 
exercise of reason. The course of real knowledge is, to 
obtain from thought and experience the right interpreta- 
tion of our general terms, the real import of our maxims, 
the true generalizations which our abstractions involve. 

4. If it be asked, how experience is able to teach us 
to interpret aright the general terms which the Axioms 
of Causation involve; whence she derives the light 
which she is to throw on these general notions ; the 
answer is obvious ; namely, that the relations of causa- 
tion are the conditions of experience ; that the general 
notions are exemplified in the particular cases of which 
she takes cognizance. The events which take place 
about us, and which are the objects of our observation, 
we cannot conceive otherwise than as subject to the 
laws of cause and effect. Every event must have a 
cause ; every effect must be determined by its cause ; 
these maxims are true of the phenomena which form the 
materials of our experience. It is precisely to them, 



PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS. 243 

that these truths apply. It is in the world which we 
have before our eyes, that these propositions are univer- 
sally verified ; and it is therefore by the observation of 
what we see, that we must learn how these propositions 
are to be understood. Every fact, every experiment, is 
an example of these statements ; and it is therefore by 
attention to and familiarity with facts and experiments, 
that we learn the signification of the expressions in which 
the statements are made ; just as in any other case we 
learn the import of language by observing the manner in 
which it is applied in known cases. Experience is the 
interpreter of nature ; it being understood that she is to 
make her interpretation in that comprehensive phraseo- 
logy which is the genuine language of science. 

5. We may return for an instant to the objection, 
that experience cannot give us general truths, since, after 
any number of trials confirming a rule, we may, for 
aught we can foresee, have one which violates the rule. 
When we have seen a thousand stones fall to the ground, 
we may see one which does not fall under the same appa- 
rent circumstances. How then, it is asked, can experience 
teach us that all stones, rigorously speaking, will fall if 
unsupported ? And to this we reply, that it is not true 
that we can conceive one stone to be suspended in the 
air, while a thousand others fall, without believing some 
peculiar cause to support it ; and that, therefore, such a 
supposition forms no exception to the law, that gravity is 
a force by which all bodies are urged downwards. Un- 
doubtedly we can conceive a body, when dropt or thrown, 
to move in a line quite different from other bodies : thus 
a certain missile * used by the natives of Australia, and 
lately brought to this country, when thrown from the 
hand in a proper manner, describes a curve, and returns 
to the place from whence it was thrown. But did any 

* Called the Bo*me-rang. 

R 2 



244 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

one, therefore, even for an instant suppose that the laws 
of motion are different for this and for other bodies ? On 
the contrary, was not every person of a speculative turn 
immediately led to inquire how it was that the known 
causes which modify motion, the resistance of the air and 
the other causes, produced in this instance so peculiar an 
effect? And if the motion had been still more unac- 
countable, it would not have occasioned any uncertainty 
whether it were consistent with the agency of gravity 
and the laws of motion. If a body suddenly alter its 
direction, or move in any other unexpected manner, \ve 
never doubt that there is a cause of the change. We 
may continue quite ignorant of the nature of this cause, 
but this ignorance never occasions a moment's doubt that 
the cause exists and is exactly suited to the effect. And 
thus experience can prove or discover to us general 
rules, but she can never prove that general rules do not 
exist. Anomalies, exceptions, unexplained phenomena, 
may remind us that we have much still to learn, but they 
can never make us suppose that truths are not universal. 
We may observe facts that show us we have not fully 
understood the meaning of our general laws, but we can 
never find facts which show our laws to have no meaning. 
Our experience is bound in by the limits of cause and 
effect, and can give us no information concerning any 
region where that relation does not prevail. The whole 
series of external occurrences and objects, through all 
time and space, exists only, and is conceived only, as 
subject to this relation ; and therefore we endeavour 
in vain to imagine to ourselves when and where and 
how exceptions to this relation may occur. The assump- 
tion of the connexion of cause and effect is essential to 
our experience, as the recognition of the maxims which 
express this connexion is essential to our knowledge. 
6. I have thus endeavoured to explain in some 



PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS. 245 

measure how, at least in the field of our mechanical know- 
ledge, experience can discover universal truths, though 
she cannot give them their universality ; and how such 
truths, though borrowing their form from our ideas, cannot 
be understood except by the actual study of external 
nature. And thus with regard to the laws of motion, 
and other fundamental principles of Mechanics, the 
analysis of our ideas and the history of the progress of 
the science well illustrate each other. 

If the paradox of the discovery of universal truths by 
experience be thus solved in one instance, a much wider 
question offers itself to us ; How far the difficulty, and 
how far the solution, are applicable to other subjects. It 
is easy to see that this question involves most grave and 
extensive doctrines with regard to the whole compass of 
human knowledge : and the views to which we have been 
led in the present Book of this work are, we trust, fitted 
to throw much light upon the general aspect of the sub- 
ject. But after discussions so abstract, and perhaps 
obscure, as those in which we have been engaged for 
some chapters, I willingly postpone to a future occasion 
an investigation which may perhaps appear to most 
readers more recondite and difficult still. And we have, 
in fact, many other special fields of knowledge to survey, 
before we are led by the order of our subject, to those 
general questions and doctrines, those antitheses brought 
into view and again resolved, which a view of the whole 
territory of human knowledge suggests, and by which 
the nature and conditions of knowledge are exhibited. 

Before we quit the subject of mechanical science we 
shall make a few remarks on another doctrine t which 
forms part of the established truths of the science, 
namely, the doctrine of universal gravitation, 



246 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LAW OF 
UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 

THE doctrine of universal gravitation is a feature of 
so much importance in the history of science that we 
shall not pass it by without a few remarks on the nature 
and evidence of the doctrine. 

1. To a certain extent the doctrine of the attraction 
of bodies according to the law of the inverse square of 
the distance, exhibits in its progress among men the same 
general features which we have noticed in the history 
of the laws of motion. This doctrine was maintained 
a priori on the ground of its simplicity, and asserted 
positively, even before it was clearly understood : not- 
withstanding this anticipation, its establishment on the 
ground of facts was a task of vast labour and sagacity : 
when it had been so established in a general way, there 
occurred at later periods, an occasional suspicion that it 
might be approximately true only : these suspicions led 
to further researches, which showed the rule to be rigor- 
ously exact : and at present there are mathematicians 
who maintain, not only that it is true, but that it is a 
necessary property of matter. A very few words on each 
of these points will suffice. 

2. I have shown in the History of Science*, that the 
attraction of the sun according to the inverse square of 
the distance, had been divined by Bullialdus, Hooke, Hal- 
ley, and others, before it was proved by Newton. Pro- 
bably the reason which suggested this conjecture was that 
gravity might be considered as a sort of emanation ; and 
that thus, like light or any other effect diffused from a 

* Vol. ii., 148. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 247 

centre, it must follow the law just stated, the efficacy of 
the force being weakened in receding from the centre, 
exactly in proportion to the space througli which it is 
diffused. It cannot be denied that such a view appears 
to be strongly recommended by analogy. 

When it had been proved by Newton that the planets 
were really retained in their elliptical orbits by a central 
force, his calculations also showed that the above-stated 
law of the force must be at least very approximately 
correct, since otherwise the aphelia of the orbits could 
not be so nearly at rest as they were. Yet when it 
seemed as if the motion of the moon's apogee could not 
be accounted for without some new supposition, the a 
priori argument in favour of the inverse square did not 
prevent Clairaut from trying the hypothesis of a small 
term added to that which expressed the ancient law : but 
when, in order to test the accuracy of this hypothesis, the 
calculation of the motion of the moon's apogee was 
pushed to a greater degree of exactness than had been 
obtained before, it was found that the new term vanished 
of itself; and that the inverse square now accounted for 
tke whole of the motion. And thus, as in the case of 
the second law of motion, the most scrupulous examina- 
tion terminated in showing the simplest rule to be rigor- 
ously true. 

3. Similar events occurred in the history of another part 
of the law of gravitation: namely, that the attraction is pro- 
portional to the quantity of matter attracted. This part of 
the law may also be thus stated, That the weight of bodies 
arising from gravity is proportional to their inertia ; and 
thus, that the accelerating force on all bodies under the 
same circumstances is the same. Newton made experi- 
ments which proved this with regard to terrestrial bodies ; 
for he found that, at the end of equal strings, balls of . all 
substances, gold, silver, lead, glass, wood, &c., oscillated 



248 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

in equal times*. But a few years ago, doubts arose 
among the German astronomers whether this law was 
rigorously true with regard to the planetary bodies. 
Some calculations appeared to prove, that the attraction 
of Jupiter as shown by the perturbations which he pro- 
duces in the small planets Juno, Vesta, and Pallas, was 
different from the attraction which he exerts on his 
own satellites. Nor did there appear to these philoso- 
phers anything inconceivable in the supposition that the 
attraction of a planet might be thus elective. But when 
Mr. Airy obtained a more exact determination of the 
mass of Jupiter, as indicated by his effect on his satel- 
lites, it was found that this suspicion was unfounded ; 
and that there was, in this case, no exception to the 
universality of the rule, that this cosmical attraction is in 
the proportion of the attracted mass. 

4. Again : when it had thus been shown that a mutual 
attraction of parts, according to the law above mentioned, 
prevailed throughout the extent of the solar system, it 
might still be doubted whether the same law extended 
to other regions of the universe. It might have been 
perhaps imagined that each fixed star had its peculiar 
law of force. But the examination of the motions of 
double stars about each other, by the two Herschels and 
others, appears to show that they describe ellipses as the 
planets do : and thus extends the law of the inverse 
squares to parts of the universe immeasurably distant 
from the whole solar system. 

5. Since every doubt which lias been raised with 
regard to the universality and accuracy of the law of 
gravitation, has thus ended in confirming the rule, it is 
not surprising that men's minds should have returned 
with additional force to those views which had at first 
represented the law as a necessary truth, capable of being 

* Princ, 1. in,, Prop. 6, 



ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 249 

established by reason alone. When it had been proved 
by Newton that gravity is really a universal attribute of 
matter as far as we can learn, his pupils were not content 
without maintaining it be an essential quality. This is 
the doctrine held by Cotes in the preface to the second 
edition of the Principia (1712) : " Gravity," he says, " is 
a primary quality of bodies, as extension, mobility, and 
impenetrability are." But Newton himself by no means 
went so far. In his second Letter to Bentley (1693), he 
says : " You sometimes speak of gravity as essential and 
inherent to matter ; pray do not ascribe that notion to 
me. The cause of gravity," he adds, "I do not pretend 
to know, and would take more time to consider of it." 

Cotes maintains his opinion by urging, that we learn 
by experience that all bodies possess gravity, and that we 
do not learn in any other way that they are extended, 
moveable, or solid. But we have already seen, that the 
ideas of space, time, and reaction, on which depend 
extension, mobility, and solidity, are not results, but con- 
ditions, of experience. We cannot conceive a body 
except as extended ; we cannot conceive it to exert 
mechanical action except with some kind of solidity. 
But so far as our conceptions of body have hitherto been 
developed, we find no difficulty in conceiving two bodies 
which do not attract each other. 

6. Newton lays down, in the second edition of the 
Principia, this " Rule of Philosophizing" (Book iii.) ; that 
" The qualities of bodies which cannot be made more or 
less intense, and which belong to all bodies on which we 
are able to make experiments, are to be held to be quali- 
ties of all bodies in general." And this Rule is cited in 
the sixth proposition of the Third Book of the Principia, 
(Cor. 2,) in order to prove that gravity, proportional to 
the quantity of matter, may be asserted to be a quality of 
all bodies universally, But we may remark that a Rule 



250 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

of Philosophizing, itself of precarious authority, cannot 
authorize us in ascribing universality to an empirical 
result. Geometrical and statical properties are seen to 
be necessary, and therefore universal : but Newton appears 
disposed to assert a like universality of gravity, quite 
unconnected with any necessity. It would be a very 
inadequate statement, indeed a false representation, of 
statical truth, if we were to say, that because every body 
which has hitherto been tried has been found to have a 
centre of gravity, we venture to assert that all bodies 
whatever have a centre of gravity. And if we are ever 
able to assert the absolute universality of the law of gra- 
vitation, we shall have to rest this truth upon the clearer 
development of our ideas of matter and force ; not upon a 
Rule of Philosophizing, which, till otherwise proved, must 
be a mere rule of prudence, and which the opponent may 
refuse to admit. 

7. Other persons, instead of asserting gravity to be 
in its own nature essential to matter, have made hypo- 
theses concerning some mechanism or other, by which 
this mutual attraction of bodies is produced*. Thus the 
Cartesians ascribed to a vortex the tendency of bodies to 
a centre ; Newton himself seems to have been disposed 
to refer this tendency to the elasticity of an ether ; Le 
Sage propounded a curious hypothesis, in which this 
attraction is accounted for by the impulse of infinite 
streams of particles flowing constantly through the uni- 
verse in all directions. In these speculations, the force 
of gravity is resolved into the pressure or impulse of 
solids or fluids. On the other hand, hypotheses have 
been propounded, in which the solidity, and other phy- 
sical qualities of bodies, have been explained by repre- 
senting the bodies as a collection of points, from which 

* See VINCE, Observations on the Hypotheses respecting Gravitation^ 
and the Critique of that vyork, Edinb. Rev, vol, xiii. 



ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 251 

points repulsive, as well as attractive, forces emanate. 
This view of the constitution of bodies was maintained 
and developed by Boscovich, and is hence termed " Bos- 
covich's Theory :" and the discussion of it will more pro- 
perly come under our review at a future period, when we 
speak of the question whether bodies are made up of 
atoms. But we may observe, that Newton himself 
appears to have inclined, as his followers certainly did, to 
this mode of contemplating the physical properties of 
bodies. In his Preface to the Principia, after speaking 
of the central forces which are exhibited in cosmical phe- 
nomena, he says : " Would that we could derive the 
other phenomena of Nature from mechanical principles 
by the same mode of reasoning. For many things move 
me, so that I suspect all these phenomena may depend 
upon certain forces, by which the particles of bodies, 
through causes not yet known, are either impelled to 
each other and cohere according to regular figures, or are 
repelled and recede from each other : which forces being 
unknown, philosophers have hitherto made their attempts 
upon nature in vain." 

8. But both these hypotheses ; that by which cohe- 
sion and solidity are reduced to attractive and repulsive 
forces, and that by which attraction is reduced to the 
impulse and pressure of media; are hitherto merely 
modes of representing mechanical laws of nature ; and 
cannot, either of them, be asserted as possessing any evi- 
dent truth or peremptory authority to the exclusion of 
the other. This consideration may enable us to estimate 
the real weight of the difficulty felt in assenting to the 
mutual attraction of bodies not in contact with each 
other ; for it is often urged that this attraction of bodies 
at a distance is an absurd supposition. 

The doctrine is often thus stigmatised, both by popu- 
lar and by learned writers. It was long received as a 



252 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

maxim in philosophy (as Monboddo informs us*), that a 
body cannot act where it is not, any more than when it is 
not. But to this we reply, that time is a necessary con- 
dition of our conception of causation, in a different man- 
ner from space. The action of force can only be con- 
ceived as taking place in a succession of moments, in 
each of which cause and effect immediately succeed each 
other: and thus the interval of time between a cause and 
its remote effect is filled up by a continuous succession of 
events connected by the same chain of causation. But 
in space, there is no such visible necessity of continuity; 
the action and reaction may take place at a distance from 
each other; all that is necessary being that they be equal 
and opposite. 

Undoubtedly the existence of attraction is rendered 
more acceptable to common apprehension by supposing 
some intermediate machinery, a cord, or rod, or fluid, 
by which the forces may be conveyed from one point to 
another. But such images are rather fitted to satisfy 
those prejudices which arise from the earlier applica- 
tion of our ideas of force, than the real nature of those 
ideas. If we suppose two bodies to pull each other by 
means of a rod or a cord, we only suppose, in addition to 
those equal and opposite forces acting upon the two 
bodies, which forces are alone essential to mutual attrac- 
tion, a certain power of resisting transverse pressure at 
every point of the intermediate line : which additional 
supposition is entirely useless, and quite unconnected 
with the essential conditions of the case. When the 
Newtonians were accused of introducing into philosophy 
an unknown cause which they termed attraction, they 
justly replied that they knew as much respecting attrac- 
tion as their opponents did about impulse. In each case 
we have a knowledge of the conception in question so 

* Ancient Metaphysics, vol. ii. p. 175, 



ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 253 

far as we clearly apprehend it under the conditions of 
those axioms of mechanical causation which form the 
basis of our science on such subjects. 

Having thus examined the degree of certainty and 
generality to which our knowledge of the law of universal 
gravitation has been carried, by the progress of mechanical 
discovery and speculation up to the present time, we 
might proceed to the other branches of science, and 
examine in like manner their grounds and conditions. 
But before we do this, it will be worth our while to 
attend for a moment to the effect which the progress of 
mechanical ideas among mathematicians and mechanical 
philosophers has produced upon the minds of other per- 
sons, who share only in an indirect and derivative manner 
in the influence of science. 



CHAPTER X. 

OF THE GENERAL DIFFUSION OF CLEAR 
MECHANICAL IDEAS. 

1. WE have seen how the progress of knowledge 
upon the subject of motion and force has produced, in 
the course of the world's history, a great change in the 
minds of acute and speculative men ; so that such per- 
sons can now reason with perfect steadiness and precision 
upon subjects on which, at first, their thoughts were vague 
and confused ; and can apprehend, as truths of complete 
certainty and evidence, laws which it required great labour 
and time to discover. This complete developement and 
clear manifestation of mechanical ideas has taken place 
only among mathematicians and philosophers. But yet a 
progress of thought upon such subjects ; an advance from 
the obscure to the clear, and from, error to truth ; may be 



254 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

traced in the world at large, and among those who have 
not directly cultivated the exact sciences. This diffused 
and collateral influence of science manifests itself, 
although in a wavering and fluctuating manner, by vari- 
ous indications, at various periods of literary history. 
The opinions and reasonings which are put forth upon 
mechanical subjects, and above all, the adoption into com- 
mon language, of terms and phrases belonging to the 
prevalent mechanical systems, exhibit to us the most pro- 
found discoveries and speculations of philosophers in 
their effect upon more common and familiar trains of 
thought. This effect is by no means unimportant, and 
we shall point out some examples of such indications as 
we have mentioned. 

2. The discoveries of the ancients in speculative 
mechanics were, as we have seen, very scanty ; and hardly 
extended their influence to the unmathematical world. 
Yet the familiar use of the term " centre of gravity" 
preserved and suggested the most important part of what 
the Greeks had to teach. The other phrases which they 
employed, as momentum, energy, virtue, force, and the 
like, never had any exact meaning, even among mathe- 
maticians ; and therefore never, in the ancient world, be- 
came the means of suggesting just habits of thought. I 
have pointed out, in the History of Science, several cir- 
cumstances which appear to denote the general confusion 
of ideas which prevailed upon mechanical subjects during 
the times of the Roman empire. I have there taken as 
one of the examples of this confusion, the fable narrated 
by Pliny and others concerning the echine'js, a small 
fish, which was said to stop a ship merely by sticking 
to it*. This story was adduced as betraying the absence 
of any steady apprehension of the equality of action and 
reaction ; since the fish, except it had some immoveable 
* Hist. Ind. Scl, i. 245. 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 255 

obstacle to hold by, must be pulled forward by the ship, 
as much as it pulled the ship backward. If the writers 
who speak of this wonder had shown any perception of 
the necessity of a reaction, either produced by the rapid 
motion of the fish's fins in the water, or in any other way, 
they would not be chargeable with this confusion of 
thought ; but from their expressions it is, I think, evident 
that they saw no such necessity*. Their idea of mecha- 
nical action was not sufficiently distinct to enable them 
to see the absurdity of supposing an intense pressure with 
no obstacle for it to exert itself against. 

3. We may trace, in more modern times also, indica- 
tions of a general ignorance of mechanical truths. Thus 
the phrase of shooting at an object " point-blank," im- 
plies the belief that a cannon-ball describes a path of 
which the first portion is a straight line. This error was 
corrected by the true mechanical principles which Galileo 
and his followers brought to light ; but these principles 
made their way to popular notice, principally in conse- 
quence of their application to the motions of the solar 
system, and to the controversies which took place respect- 
ing those motions. Thus by far the most powerful argu- 
ment against the reception of the Copernican system of 
the universe, was that of those who asked, Why a stone 
dropt from a tower was not left behind by the motion of 
the earth ? The answer to this question, now universally 

* See Prof. POWELL On the Nature and Evidence of the Laws of 
Motion. Reports of the Ashmolean Society. Oxford. 1837. Professor 
Powell has made an objection to my use of this instance of confusion 
of thought; the remark in the text seems to me to justify what I said 
in the History. As an evidence that the fish was not supposed to pro- 
duce its effect by its muscular power acting on the water, we may take 
what Pliny says, Nat. Hist.) xxxii. 1, <{ Domat niundi rabiem, nullo 
suo labore; non retinendo, aut alio modo quam adhserendo :" and also 
what he states in another place (ix. 41,) that when it is preserved in 
pickle, it may be used in recovering gold which has fallen into a deep 
well. All this implies adhesion alone, with no conception of reaction. 



256 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

familiar, involves a reference to the true doctrine of the 
composition of motions. Again; Kepler's persevering 
and strenuous attempts* to frame a physical theory of 
the universe were frustrated by his ignorance of the first 
law of motion, which informs us that a body will retain 
its velocity without any maintaining force. He proceeded 
upon the supposition that the sun's force was requisite to 
keep up the motion of the planets, as well as to deflect and 
modify it ; and he was thus led to a system which repre- 
sented the sun as carrying round the planets in their 
orbits by means of a vortex, produced by his revolution. 
The same neglect of the laws of motion presided in the 
formation of Descartes' system of vortices. Although 
Descartes had enunciated in words the laws of motion, 
he and his followers showed that they had not the practi- 
cal habit of referring to these mechanical principles ; and 
dared not trust the planets to move in free space without 
some surrounding machinery to support themf. 

4. When at last mathematicians, following Newton, 
had ventured to consider the motion of each planet as a 
mechanical problem not different in its nature from the 
motion of a stone cast from the hand ; and when the 
solution of this problem and its immense consequences 
had become matters of general notoriety and interest ; 
the new views introduced, as is usual, new terms, which 
soon became extensively current. We meet with such 
phrases as " flying off in the tangent," and " deflexion 
from the tangent ;" with antitheses between "centripetal" 
and " centrifugal force," or between " projectile" and 
" central force." " Centres of force," " disturbing forces," 

* Hist. Ind. Sci., i. 408; ii. 129. 

t I have, in the History, applied to Descartes the character which 
Bacon gives to Aristotle, " Audax simul et pavidus :'' though he was 
bold enough to enunciate the laws of motion without knowing them 
aright, he had not the courage to leave the planets to describe their 
orbits by the agency of those laws, without the machinery of contact. 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 257 

"perturbations," and "perturbations of higher orders," 
are not unfrequently spoken of: and the expression " to 
gravitate," and the term " universal gravitation," acquired 
a permanent place in the language. 

Yet for a long time, and even up to the present day, 
we find many indications that false and confused appre- 
hensions on such subjects are by no means extirpated. 
Arguments are urged against the mechanical system of 
the universe, implying in the opponents an absence of all 
clear mechanical notions. Many of this class of writers 
retrograde to Kepler's point of view. This is, for example, 
the case with Lord Monboddo, who, arguing on the as- 
sumption that force is requisite to maintain, as well as to 
deflect motion, produced a series of attacks upon the 
Newtonian philosophy; which he inserted in his Ancient 
Metaphysics, published in 1779 and the succeeding years. 
This writer (like Kepler), measures force by the velocity 
which the body has *, not by that which it gains. Such a 
use of language would prevent our obtaining any laws of 
motion at all. Accordingly, the author, in the very next 
page to that which I have just quoted, abandons this mea- 
sure of force, and, in curvilinear motion, measures force 
by " the fall from the extremity of the arc." Again ; in 
his objections to the received theory, he denies that cur- 
vilinear motion is compounded, although his own mode of 
considering such motion assumes this composition in the 
only way in which it was ever intended by mathema- 
ticians. Many more instances might be adduced to show 
that a want of cultivation of the mechanical ideas ren- 
dered this philosopher incapable of judging of a mecha- 
nical system. 

The following extract from the Ancient Metaphy- 
sics 9 may be sufficient to show the value of the author's 
criticism on the subjects of which we are now speaking. 

* Am. Met., vol. ii., b. v., c. 6., p. 413. 
VOL. I. S 



258 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

His object is to prove that there do not exist a centripetal 
and a centrifugal force in the case of elliptical motion. 
" Let any man move in a circular or elliptical line described 
to him ; and he will find no tendency in himself either 
to the centre or from it, much less both. If indeed he 
attempt to make the motion with great velocity, or if he 
do it carelessly and inattentively, he may go out of the 
line, either towards the centre or from it : but this is to 
be ascribed, not to the nature of the motion, but to our 
infirmity ; or perhaps to the animal form, which is more 
fitted for progressive motion in a right line than for any 
kind of curvilinear motion. But this is not the case with 
a sphere or spheroid, which is equally adapted to motion 
in all directions*." We need hardly remind the reader 
that the manner in which a man running round a small 
circle, finds it necessary to lean inwards, in order that 
there may be a centripetal inclination to counteract the 
centrifugal force, is a standard example of our mechanical 
doctrines ; and this fact (quite familiar in practice as well 
as theory,) is in direct contradiction of Lord Monboddo's 
assertion. 

5. A similar absence of distinct mechanical thought 
appears in some of the most celebrated metaphysicians 
of Germany. I have elsewhere noted f the opinion ex- 
pressed by Hegel, that the glory which belongs to Kepler 
has been unjustly transferred to Newton ; and I have 
Suggested, as the explanation of this mode of thinking, 
that Hegel himself, in the knowledge of mechanical 
truth, had not advanced beyond Kepler's point of view. 
Persons who possess conceptions of space and number, 
but who have not learnt to deal with ideas of force and 
causation, may see more value in the discoveries of Kepler 
than in those of Newton. Another exemplification of this 

* Anc. Met., vol. i., b. ii., c. 19, p. 264. 
t Hist. Ind. Sc., ii., 181. 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 259 

state of mind may be found in Mr. Schelling's specula- 
tions ; for instance, in his Lectures on the Method of Aca- 
demical Study. In the twelfth Lecture, on the Study of 
Physics and Chemistry, he says, (p. 266,) " What the 
mathematical natural philosophy has done for the know- 
ledge of the laws of the universe since the time that they 
were discovered by his (Kepler's) godlike genius, is, as 
is well known, this : it has attempted a construction of 
those laws which, according to its foundations, is altoge- 
ther empirical. We may assume it as a general rule, that 
in any proposed construction, that which is not a pure 
general form cannot have any scientific import or truth. 
The foundation from which the centrifugal motion of the 
bodies of the world is derived, is no necessary form, it is 
an empirical fact. The Newtonian attractive force, even 
if it be a necessary assumption for a merely reflective 
view of the subject, is still of no significance for the 
Reason, which recognises only absolute relations. The 
grounds of the Keplerian laws can be derived, without 
any empirical appendage, purely from the doctrine of 
Ideas, and of the two Unities, which are in themselves 
one Unity, and in virtue of which each being, while it is 
absolute in itself, is at the same time in the absolute, and 
reciprocally." 

It will be observed, that in this passage our mecha- 
nical laws are objected to because they are not necessary 
results of our ideas ; which, however, as we have seen, 
according to the opinion of some eminent mechanical 
philosophers, they are. But to assume this evident 
necessity as a condition of every advance in science, is 
to mistake the last, perhaps unattainable step, for the 
first, which lies before our feet. And, without inquiring 
further about " the Doctrine of the two Unities," or the 
manner in which from that doctrine we may deduce the 
Keplerian laws, we may be well convinced that such a 

s 2 



2GO PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

doctrine cannot supply any sufficient reason to induce us 
to quit the inductive path by which all scientific truth 
up to the present time has been acquired. 

C. But without going- to schools of philosophy oppo- 
sed to the Inductive School, we may find many loose and 
vague habits of thinking on mechanical subjects among 
the common classes of readers and reasoners. And there 
are some familiar modes of employing the phraseology of 
mechanical science, which are, in a certain degree, charge- 
able with inaccuracy, and may produce or perpetuate 
confusion. Among such cases we may mention the way 
in which the centripetal and centrifugal forces, and also 
the projectile and central forces of the planets, are often 
compared or opposed. Such antitheses sometimes pro- 
ceed upon the false notion that the two members of these 
pairs of forces are of the same kind : whereas on the 
contrary the projectile force is a hypothetical impulsive 
force which may, at some former period, have caused the 
motion to begin ; while the central force is an actual 
force, which must act continuously and during the whole 
time of the motion, in order that the motion may go on 
in the curve. In the same manner the centrifugal force 
is not a distinct force in a strict sense, but only a certain 
result of the first law of motion, measured by the portion 
of centripetal force which counteracts it. Comparisons 
of quantities so heterogenous imply confusion of thought, 
and often suggest baseless speculations and imagined 
reforms of the received opinions. 

7. I might point out other terms and maxims, in 
addition to those already mentioned, which, though for- 
merly employed in a loose and vague manner, are now 
accurately understood and employed by all just thinkers; 
and thus secure and diffuse a right understanding of 
mechanical truths. Such are momentum, inertia, quantity 
of matter, quantity of motion ; that force is proportional 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 201 

to its effects ; that action and reaction are equal; that what 
is gained in force by machinery is lost in time ; that the 
quantity of motion in the world cannot be either increased 
or diminished. When the expression of the truth thus 
becomes easy and simple, clear and convincing, the mean- 
ings given to words and phrases by discoverers glide into 
the habitual texture of men's reasonings, and the effect of 
the establishment of true mechanical principles is felt far 
from the school of the mechanician. If these terms and 
maxims are understood with tolerable clearness, they 
carry the influence of truth to those who have no direct 
access to its sources. Many an extravagant project in 
practical machinery, and many a wild hypothesis in spe- 
culative physics, has been repressed by the general cur- 
rency of such maxims as we have just quoted. 

8. Indeed so familiar and evident are the elementary 
truths of mechanics when expressed in this simple form, 
that they are received as truisms ; and men are disposed 
to look back with surprise and scorn at the speculations 
which were carried on in neglect of them. The most 
superficial reasoner of modern times thinks himself enti- 
tled to speak with contempt and ridicule of Kepler's 
hypothesis concerning the physical causes of the celestial 
motions: and gives himself credit for intellectual supe- 
riority, because he sees, as self-evident, what such a man 
could not discover at all. It is well for such a person to 
recollect, that the real cause of his superior insight is not 
the pre-eminence of his faculties, but the successful 
labours of those who have preceded him. The language 
which he has learnt to use unconsciously, has been adapted 
to, and moulded on, ascertained truths. When he talks 
familiarly of accelerating forces, and deflexions from the 
tangent, he is assuming that which Kepler did not know, 
and which it cost Galileo and his disciples so much labour 
and thought to establish. Language is often e$llfd an 



262 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

instrument of thought ; but it is also the nutriment of 
thought ; or rather, it is the atmosphere in which thought 
lives : a medium essential to the activity of our specu- 
lative power, although invisible and imperceptible in its 
operation ; and an element modifying, by its qualities and 
changes, the growth and complexion of the faculties 
which it feeds. In this way the influence of preceding- 
discoveries upon subsequent ones, of the past upon the 
present, is most penetrating and universal, though most 
subtle and difficult to trace. The most familiar words 
and phrases are connected by imperceptible ties with the 
reasonings and discoveries of former men and distant 
times. Their knowledge is an inseparable part of ours ; 
the present generation inherits and uses the scientific 
wealth of all the past. And this is the fortune, not only 
of the great and rich in the intellectual world : of those 
who have the key to the ancient storehouses, and who 
have accumulated treasures of their own ; but the 
humblest inquirer, while he puts his reasonings into 
words, benefits by the labours of the greatest discoverers. 
When he counts his little wealth, he finds that he has in 
his hands coins which bear the image and superscription of 
ancient and modern intellectual dynasties ; and that in 
virtue of this possession, acquisitions are in his power, 
solid knowledge within his reach, which none could ever 
have attained to, if it were not that the gold of truth, 
once dug out of the mine, circulates more and more 
widely among mankind. 

9. Having so fully examined, in the preceding in- 
stances, the nature of the progress of thought which 
science implies, both among the peculiar cultivators of 
science, and in that wider world of general culture which 
receives only an indirect influence from scientific disco- 
veries, we shall not find it necessary to go into the same 
extent of detail with regard to the other provinces of 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 263 

human knowledge. In the case of the Mechanical Sci- 
ences, we have endeavoured to show, not only that Ideas 
are requisite in order to form into a science the Facts 
which nature offers to us, but that we can advance, almost 
or quite, to a complete identification of the Facts with 
the Ideas. In the sciences to which we now proceed, we 
shall not seek to fill up the chasm by which Facts and 
Ideas are separated; but we shall endeavour to detect 
the Ideas which our knowledge involves, to show how 
essential these are ; and in some respects to trace the 
mode in which they have been gradually developed among 
men. 

10. The motions of the heavenly bodies, their laws, 
their causes, are among the subjects of the first division 
of the Mechanical Sciences ; and of these sciences we 
formerly sketched the history, and have now endeavoured 
to exhibit the philosophy. If we were to take any other 
class of motions, their laws and causes might give rise to 
sciences which would be mechanical sciences in exactly 
the same sense in which Physical Astronomy is so. The 
phenomena of magnets, of electrical bodies, of galvanical 
apparatus, seem to form obvious materials for such sci- 
ences ; and if they were so treated, the philosophy of 
such branches of knowledge would naturally come under 
our consideration at this point of our progress. 

But on looking more attentively at the sciences of 
Electricity, Magnetism, and Galvanism, we discover cogent 
reasons for transferring them to another part of our 
arrangement ; we find it advisable to associate them with 
Chemistry, and to discuss their principles when we can 
connect them with the principles of chemical science. For 
though the first steps and narrower generalizations of 
these sciences depend upon mechanical ideas, the highest 
laws and widest generalizations which we can reach 
respecting them, involve chemical relations. The pro- 



264 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

gress of these portions of knowledge is in some respects 
opposite to the progress of Physical Astronomy. In 
this, we begin with phenomena which appear to indicate 
peculiar and various qualities in the bodies which we 
consider, (namely, the heavenly bodies,) and we find in 
the end that all these qualities resolve themselves into 
one common mechanical property, which exists alike in 
all bodies and parts of bodies. On the contrary, in 
studying magnetical and electrical laws, we appear at first 
to have a single extensive phenomenon, attraction and 
repulsion : but in our attempts to generalize this pheno- 
menon, we find that it is governed by conditions depend- 
ing upon something quite separate from the bodies them- 
selves, upon the presence and distribution of peculiar and 
transitory agencies ; and, so far as we can discover, the 
general laws of these agencies are of a chemical nature, 
and are brought into action by peculiar properties of 
special substances. In cosmical phenomena, everything, in 
proportion as it is referred to mechanical principles, tends 
to simplicity, to permanent uniform forces, to one 
common, positive, property. In magnetical and electrical 
appearances, on the contrary, the application of mecha- 
nical principles leads only to a new complexity, which 
requires a new explanation ; and this explanation involves 
changeable and various forces, gradations and opposi- 
tions of qualities. The doctrine of the universal gravita- 
tion of matter is a simple and ultimate truth, in which 
the mind can acquiesce and repose. We rank gravity 
among the mechanical attributes of matter, and we see 
no necessity to derive it from any ulterior properties. 
Gravity belongs to matter, independent of any conditions. 
But the conditions of magnetic or electrical activity 
require investigation as much as the laws of their 
action. Of these conditions no mere mechanical expla- 
pation can be given ; we are compelled to take 



DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS. 265 

with us chemical properties and relations also : arid thus 
magnetism, electricity, galvanism, are mechanico-chemical 
sciences. 

12. Before considering these, therefore, I shall treat 
of what I shall call Secondary Mechanical Sciences ; by 
which expression I mean the sciences depending upon 
certain qualities which our senses discover to us in bodies ; 
Optics, which has visible phenomena for its subject ; 
Acoustics, the science of hearing; the doctrine of Heat, 
a quality which our touch recognises ; to this last science 
I shall take the liberty of sometimes giving the name 
Thermotics, analogous to the names of the other two. 
If our knowledge of the phenomena of Smell and Taste 
had been successfully cultivated and systematized, the 
present part of our work would be the place for the phi- 
losophical discussion of those sensations as the subjects 
of science. 

The branches of knowledge thus grouped in one class 
involve common Fundamental Ideas, from which their 
principles are derived in a mode analogous, at least in a 
certain degree, to the mode in which the principles of 
the mechanical sciences are derived from the fundamental 
ideas of causation and reaction. We proceed now to 
consider these Fundamental Ideas, their nature, develop- 
ment, and consequences. 



266 



BOOK IV. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SECONDARY 
MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER I. 

OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM AS COMMONLY 
EMPLOYED. 

1. Of Primary and Secondary Qualities. In the same 
way in which the mechanical sciences depend upon the 
Idea of Cause, and have their principles regulated by 
the development of that Idea, it will be found that the 
sciences which have for their subject Sound, Light, and 
Heat, depend for their principles upon the Fundamental 
Idea of Media by means of which we perceive those 
qualities. Like the idea of cause, this idea of a medium 
is unavoidably employed, more or less distinctly, in the 
common, unscientific operations of the understanding ; 
and is recognised as an express principle in the earliest 
speculative essays of man. But here also, as in the case 
of the mechanical sciences, the developement of the idea, 
and the establishment of the scientific truths which 
depend upon it, was the business of a succeeding period, 
and was only executed by means of long and laborious 
researches, conducted with a constant reference to experi- 
ment and observation. 

Among the most prominent manifestations of the 
influence of the idea of a medium of which we have now 
to speak, is the distinction of the qualities into primary, 



OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 267 

and secondary qualities. This distinction has been con- 
stantly spoken of in modern times : yet it has often been 
a subject of discussion among metaphysicians whether 
there be really such a distinction, and what the true 
difference is. Locke states it thus*: original or primary 
qualities of body are " such as are utterly inseparable 
from the body in what estate soever it may be, such as 
sense constantly finds in every particle of matter which 
has bulk enough to be perceived, and the mind finds 
inseparable from every particle of matter, though less 
than to make itself singly perceived by our senses:" and 
he enumerates them as solidity, extension, figure, motion 
or rest, and number. Secondary qualities, on the other 
hand, are such " which in truth are nothing in the objects 
themselves, but powers to produce various sensations in 
us by their primary qualities, i. e. 9 by the bulk, figure, 
texture, and motion of their insensible parts, as colours, 
sounds, tastes, &c." 

Dr. Reidf, reconsidering this subject, puts the differ- 
ence in another way. There is, he says, a real foundation 
for the distinction of primary and secondary qualities, and 
it is this : " That our senses give us a direct and distinct 
notion of the primary qualities, and inform us what they 
are in themselves ; but of the secondary qualities, our 
senses give us only a relative and obscure notion. They 
inform us only that they are qualities that affect us in a 
certain manner, that is, produce in us a certain sensation ; 
but as to what they are in themselves, our senses leave us 
in the dark." 

Dr. Brown ^ states the distinction somewhat other- 
wise. We give the name of matter, he observes, to that 
which has extension and resistance : these, therefore, are 
primary qualities of matter, because they compose our 

* Essay, b. ii., ch. 8., s. 9, 10. t Essays, b. ii., c. 1 7- 

f Lectures, ii., ]2. 



268 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

definition of it. All other qualities are secondary, since 
they are ascribed to bodies only because we find them 
associated with the primary qualities which form our 
notion of those bodies. 

It is not necessary to criticise very strictly these vari- 
ous distinctions. If it were, it would be easy to cavil at 
them. Thus Locke, it may be observed, does not point 
out any reason for believing that his secondary qualities 
are produced by the primary. How are we to learn that 
the colour of a rose arises from the bulk, figure, texture, 
and motion of its particles ? Certainly our senses do not 
teach us this ; and in what other way, on Locke's prin- 
ciples, can we learn it? Reid's statement is not more 
free from the same objection. How does it appear that 
our notion of warmth is relative to our own sensations 
more than our notion of solidity? And if we take 
Brown's account, we may still ask whether our selection 
of certain qualities to form our idea and definition of 
matter be arbitrary and without reason ? If it be, how 
can it make a real distinction ; if it be not, what is the 
reason ? 

I do not press these objections, because I believe that 
any of the above accounts of the distinction of primary 
and secondary qualities is right in the main, however im- 
perfect it may be. The difference between such qualities 
as extension and solidity on the one hand, and colour or 
fragrance on the other, is assented to by all, with a con- 
viction so firm and indestructible^ that there must be 
some fundamental principle at the bottom of the belief 
however difficult it may be to clothe the principle in 
words. That successive efforts to express the real nature 
of the difference were made by men so clear-sighted and 
acute as those whom I have quoted, even if none of them 
are satisfactory, shows how strong and how deeply-seated 
is the perception of truth which impels us to suclj 
Attempts, 



OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 269 

The most obvious mode of stating the difference of 
primary and secondary qualities, as it naturally offers itself 
to speculative minds, appears to be that employed by 
Locke, slightly modified. Certain of the qualities of 
bodies, as their bulk, figure, and motion, are perceived 
immediately in the bodies themselves. Certain other 
qualities as sound, colour, heat, are perceived by means 
of some medium. Our conviction that this is the case 
is spontaneous and irresistible; and this difference of 
qualities immediately and mediately perceived is the dis- 
tinction of primary and secondary qualities. We proceed 
further to examine this conviction. 

2. The Idea of Externality. In reasoning concerning 
the secondary qualities of bodies, we are led to assume 
the bodies to be external to us, and to be perceived by 
means of some medium intermediate between us and 
them. These assumptions are fundamental conditions of 
perception, inseparable from it even in thought. 

That objects are external to us, that they are without 
us, that they have outness, is as clear as it is that these 
words have any meaning at all. This conviction is, in- 
deed, involved in the exercise of that faculty by which 
we perceive all things as existing in space ; for by this 
faculty we place ourselves and other objects in one com- 
mon space, and thus they are exterior to us. It may be 
remarked that this apprehension of objects as external to 
us, although it assumes the idea of space, is far from 
being implied in the idea of space. The objects which 
we contemplate are considered as existing in space, and 
by that means become invested with certain mutual rela- 
tions of position ; but when we consider them as existing 
without us, we make the additional step of supposing 
ourselves and the objects to exist in one common space. 
The question respecting the Ideal Theory of Berkeley has 
been mixed up with the recognition of this condition of 



270 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

the externality of objects. That philosopher maintained, 
as is well known, that the perceptible qualities of bodies 
have no existence except in a perceiving mind. This 
system has often been understood as if he had imagined 
the world to be a kind of optical illusion, like the images 
which we see when we shut our eyes, appearing to be 
without us, though they are only in our organs ; and thus 
this Ideal System has been opposed to a belief in an 
external world. In truth, however, no such opposition 
exists. The Ideal System is an attempt to explain the 
mental process of perception, and to get over the diffi- 
culty of mind being affected by matter. But the author 
of that system did not deny that objects were perceived 
under the conditions of space and mechanical causation ; 
that they were external and material so far as those 
words describe perceptible qualities. Berkeley's system, 
however visionary or erroneous, did not prevent his enter- 
taining views as just, concerning optics or acoustics, as if 
he had held any other doctrine of the nature of perception. 

But when Berkeley's theory was understood as a 
denial of the existence of objects without us, how was it 
answered ? If we examine the answers which are given 
by Reid and other philosophers to this hypothesis, it will 
be found that they amount to this : that objects are with- 
out us, since we perceive that they are so ; that we per- 
ceive them to be external, by the same act by which we 
perceive them to be objects. And thus, in this stage of 
philosophical inquiry, the externality of objects is recog- 
nised as one of the inevitable conditions of our percep- 
tion of them; and hence the idea of externality is 
adopted as one of the necessary foundations of all reason- 
ing concerning all objects whatever. 

3. Sensation ly a Medium. Objects, as we have just 
seen, are necessarily apprehended as without us ; and in 
general, as removed from us by a great or small distance. 



OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 271 

Yet they affect our bodily senses ; and this leads us irre- 
sistibly to the conviction that they are perceived by means 
of something intermediate. Vision, or hearing, or smell, 
or the warmth of a fire, must be communicated to us by 
some medium of sensation. This unavoidable belief 
appears in all attempts, the earliest and the latest alike, 
to speculate upon such subjects. Thus, for instance, 
Aristotle says*, "Seeing takes place in virtue of some 
action which the sentient organ suffers : now it cannot 
suffer action from the colour of the object directly : the 
only remaining possible case then is, that it is acted upon 
by an intervening Medium ; there must then be an inter- 
vening Medium." " And the same may be said," he adds, 
" concerning sounding and odorous bodies ; for these do 
not produce sensation by touching the sentient organ, 
but the intervening Medium is acted on by the sound or 
the smell, and the proper organ, by the Medium.... In 
sound the Medium is air ; in smell we have no name for 
it." In the sense of taste, the necessity of a Medium 
is not at first so obviously seen, because the object tasted 
is brought into contact with the organ ; but a little atten- 
tion convinces us that the taste of a solid body can only 
be perceived when it is conveyed in some liquid vehicle. 
Till the fruit is crushed, and till its juices are pressed out, 
we do not distinguish its flavour. In the case of heat, it 
is still more clear that we are compelled to suppose some 
invisible fluid, or other means of communication, between 
the distant body which warms us and ourselves. 

It may appear to some persons that the assumption 
of an intermedium between the object perceived and the 
sentient organ results from the principles which form the 
basis of our mechanical reasonings, that every change 
must have a cause, and that bodies can act upon each 
other only by contact. It cannot be denied that this 

II. 7. 



272 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

principle does offer itself very naturally as the ground of 
our belief in media of sensation ; and it appears to be 
referred to for this purpose by Aristotle in the passage 
quoted above. But yet we cannot but ask, Does the 
principle, that matter produces its effect by contact only, 
manifestly apply here? When we so apply it, we include 
sensation among the effects which material contact pro- 
duces ; a case so different from any merely mechanical 
effect, that the principle, so employed, appears to acquire 
a new signification. May we not, then, rather say that 
we have here a new axiom, That sensation implies a 
material cause immediately acting on the organ ; than a 
new application of our former proposition, That all 
mechanical change implies contact ? 

The solution of this doubt is not of any material con- 
sequence to our reasonings ; for whatever be the ground 
of the assumption, it is certain that we do assume the 
existence of media by which the sensations of sight, 
hearing, and the like, are produced ; and it will be seen 
shortly that principles inseparably connected with this 
assumption are the basis of the sciences now before us. 

This assumption makes its appearance in the physical 
doctrines of all the schools of philosophy. It is exhibited 
perhaps most prominently in the tenets of the Epicureans, 
who were materialists, and extended to all kinds of causa- 
tion the axiom of the existence of a corporeal mechanism 
by which alone the effect is produced. Thus, according to 
them, vision is produced by certain images or material 
films which flow from the object, strike upon the eyes, 
and so become sensible. This opinion is urged with 
great detail and earnestness by Lucretius, the poetical 
expositor of the Epicurean creed among the Romans. 
His fundamental conviction of the necessity of a material 
medium is obviously the basis of his reasoning, though he 
attempts to show the existence of such a medium by facts. 



OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 273 

Thus he argues*, that by shouting loud we make the 
throat sore ; which shows, he says, that the voice must be 
material, so that it can hurt the passage in coming out. 

Hand igitur dubium est quin voces verbaque constent 
Corporeis e principiis ut kedere possint. 

4. The Process of Perception of Secondary Qualities. 
The likenesses or representatives of objects by which 
they affect our senses were called by some writers species, 
or sensible species, a term which continued in use till 
the revival of science. It may be observed that the 
conception of these species as films cast off from the 
object, and retaining its shape, was different, as we have 
seen, from the view which Aristotle took, though it has 
sometimes been called the Peripatetic doctrine f. We may 
add that the expression was latterly applied to express 
the supposition of an emanation of any kind, and implied 
little more than that supposition of a medium of which 
we are now speaking. Thus Bacon, after reviewing the 
phenomena of sound, sayst, " Videntur motus soni fieri 
per species spirituales : ita enim loquendum donee certius 
quippiam inveniatur." 

Though the fundamental principles of several sciences 
depend upon the assumption of a medium of perception, 
these principles do not at all depend upon any special 
view of the process of our perceptions. The mechanism 
of that process is a curious subject of consideration ; but it 
belongs to physiology, more properly than either to meta- 
physics, or to those branches of physics of which we are 
now speaking. The general nature of the process is the 
same for all the senses. The object affects the appropriate 
intermedium; the medium, through the proper organ, 
the eye, the ear, the nose, affects the nerves of the par- 

" Lib. iv. 529. t BROWN, vol. ii., p. 98. 

: Hist. Son. et Aud., vol. ix., p. 87. 
VOL. I. T 



274 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

ticular sense ; and, by these, in some way, the sensation 
is conveyed to the mind. But to treat the impression 
upon the nerves as the act of sensation which we have to 
consider, would be to mistake our object, which is not the 
constitution of the human body, but of the human mind. 
It would be to mistake one link for the power which 
holds the end of the chain. No anatomical analysis of 
the corporeal conditions of vision, or hearing, or feeling 
warm, is necessary to the sciences of Optics, or Acoustics, 
or Thermotics. 

Not only is this physiological research an extraneous 
part of our subject, but a partial pursuit of such a research 
may mislead the inquirer. We perceive objects by means 
of certain media, and by means of certain impressions on 
the nerves : but we cannot with propriety say that we 
perceive either the media or the impressions on the 
nerves. What person in the act of seeing is conscious 
of the little coloured spaces on the retina? or of the 
motions of the bones of the auditory apparatus whilst he 
is hearing? Surely, no one. This may appear obvious 
enough, and yet a writer of no common acuteness, Dr. 
Brown, has put forth several very strange opinions, all 
resting upon the doctrine that the coloured spaces on the 
retina are the objects which we perceive ; and there are 
some supposed difficulties and paradoxes on the same 
subject which have become quite celebrated (as upright 
vision with inverted images), arising from the same con- 
fusion of thought. 

As the consideration of the difficulties which have 
arisen respecting the philosophy of perception may serve 
still further to illustrate the principles on which we 
necessarily reason respecting the secondary qualities of 
bodies, I shall here devote a few pages to that subject. 



275 



CHAPTER II. 

ON PECULIARITIES IN THE PERCEPTIONS OP 
THE DIFFERENT SENSES. 

1. WE cannot doubt that we perceive all secondary 
qualities by means of immediate impressions made, 
through the proper medium of sensation, upon our 
organs. Hence all the senses are sometimes vaguely 
spoken of as modifications of the sense of feeling. It 
will, however, be seen, on reflection, that this mode of 
speaking identifies in words things which in our concep- 
tions have nothing in common. No impression on the 
organs of touch can be conceived as having any resem- 
blance to colour or smell. No effort, no ingenuity, can 
enable us to describe the impressions of one sense in 
terms borrowed from another. 

The senses have, however, each its peculiar powers, 
and these powers may be in some respects compared, so 
as to show their leading resemblances and differences, 
and the characteristic privileges and laws of each. This 
is what we shall do as briefly as possible. 

(I.) Prerogatives of Sight The sight distinguishes 
colours, as the hearing distinguishes tones; the sight 
estimates degrees of brightness, the ear, degrees of loud- 
ness ; but with several resemblances, there are most 
remarkable differences between these two senses. 

2. Position. The sight has this peculiar prerogative, 
that it apprehends the place of its objects directly and 
primarily. We see where an object is at the same 
instant that we see what it is. If we see two objects, we 
see their relative position. We cannot help perceiving 
that one is above or below, to the right or to the left of 
the other, if we perceive them at all. 

T 2 



276 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

There is nothing corresponding to this in sound. 
When we hear a noise, we do not necessarily assign a 
place to it. It may easily happen that we cannot tell 
from which side a thnnder-clap comes. And though we 
often can judge in what direction a voice is heard, this is a 
matter of secondary impression, and of inference from con- 
comitant circumstances, not a primary fact of sensation. 
The judgments which we form concerning the position of 
sounding bodies are obtained by the conscious or uncon- 
scious comparison of the impressions made on the two ears, 
and on the bones of the head in general ; they are not 
inseparable conditions of hearing. We may hear sounds, 
and be uncertain whether they are " above, around, or 
imderneath ;" but the moment any thing visible appears, 
however unexpected, we can say " see where it comes !" 

Since we can see the relative position of things, we 
can see figure, which is but the relative position of the 
different parts of the boundary of the object. And thus 
the whole visible world exhibits to us a scene of various 
shapes, coloured and shaded according to their form and 
position, but each having relations of position to all the 
rest; and altogether, entirely filling up the whole range 
which the eye can command. 

3. Distance. The distance of objects from us is no 
matter of immediate perception, but is a judgment and 
inference formed from our sensations, in the same way as 
our judgment of position by the ear. That this is so, 
was most distinctly shown by Berkeley, in his New Theory 
of Vision. The elements on which we form our judgment 
are, the effort by which we fix both eyes on the same 
object, the effort by which we adjust each eye to distinct 
vision, and the known forms, colours, and parts of objects, 
as compared with their appearance. The right interpre- 
tation of the information which these circumstances give 
us respecting the true distances and forms of things, is 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 277 

gradually learned by experience, the lesson being begun 
in our earliest infancy, and inculcated upon us every hour 
during which we use our eyes. The completeness with 
which the lesson is learned is truly admirable ; for we for- 
get that our conclusion is obtained indirectly, and mistake 
a judgment on evidence for an intuitive perception. This, 
however, is not more surprising than the rapidity and 
unconsciousness of effort with which we understand the 
meaning of the speech that we hear, or the book that we 
read. In both cases, the habit of interpretation is become 
as familiar as the act of perception. And this is the case 
with regard to vision. We see the breadth of the street 
as clearly and readily as we see the. house on the other 
side of it. We see the house to be square, however 
obliquely it be presented to us. Indeed the difficulty is, 
to recover the consciousness of our real and original 
sensations ; to discover what is the apparent relation of 
the lines which appear before us. As we have already 
said, in the common process of vision we suppose our- 
selves to see that which cannot be seen ; and when we 
would make a picture of an object, the difficulty is to 
represent what is visible and no more. 

But perfect as is our habit of interpreting what we 
perceive, we could not interpret if we did not perceive. 
If the eye did not apprehend visible position, it could not 
infer actual position, which is collected as a consequence : 
if we did not see apparent figure, we could not form any 
opinion concerning real form. The perception of place, 
which is the prerogative of the eye, is the basis of all its 
other superiority. 

The precision with which the eye can judge of apparent 
position is remarkable. If we had before us two stars dis- 
tant from each other by one-twentieth of the moon's dia- 
meter, we could easily decide the apparent direction of the 
one from the other, as above or below, to the right or left. 



278 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

Yet eight millions of stars might be placed in the visible 
hemisphere of the sky at such distances from each other ; 
and thus the eye would recognise the relative position in 
a portion of its range not greater than one eight-mil- 
lionth of the whole. Such is the accuracy of the sense 
of vision in this respect; and, indeed, we might with 
truth have stated it much higher. Our judgment of the 
position of distant objects in a landscape depends upon 
features far more minute than the magnitude we have 
here stated. 

As our object is to point out principally the differ- 
ences of the senses, we do not dwell upon the delicacy 
with which we distinguish tints and shades, but proceed 
to another sense. 

(II.) Prerogatives of Hearing. The sense of hear- 
ing has two remarkable prerogatives ; it can perceive a 
definite and peculiar relation between certain tones, and 
it can clearly perceive two tones together ; in both these 
circumstances it is distinguished from vision, and from 
the other senses. 

4. Musical Intervals. We perceive that two tones 
have, or have not, certain definite relations to each other, 
which we call Concords : one sound is a Fifth, an Octave, 
&c., above the other. And when this is the case, our per- 
ception of the relation is extremely precise. It is easy 
to perceive when a fifth is out of tune by one-twentieth 
of a tone ; that is, by one-seventieth of itself. To this 
there is nothing analogous in vision. Colours have cer- 
tain vague relations to one another; they look well 
together, by contrast or by resemblance ; but this is an 
indefinite, and in most cases a casual and variable feeling 
The relation of complementary colours to one another, as 
of red to green, is somewhat more definite ; but still has 
nothing of the exactness and peculiarity which belongs 
to a musical concord. In the case of the two sounds, 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 279 

there is an exact point at which the relation obtains; 
when by altering one note we pass this point, the concord 
does not gradually fade away, but instantly becomes a 
discord; and if we go further still, we obtain another 
concord of quite a different character. 

We learn from the theory of sound that concords 
occur when the times of vibration of the notes have exact 
simple ratios; an octave has these times as 1 to 2; a 
fifth, as 2 to 3. According to the undulatory theory of 
light, such ratios occur in colours, yet the eye is not 
affected by them in any peculiar way. The times of the 
undulations of certain red and violet rays are as 2 to 3, 
but we do not perceive any peculiar harmony or con- 
nexion between those colours. 

5. Chords. Again, the ear has this prerogative, that it 
can apprehend two notes together, yet distinct. If two 
notes, distant by a fifth from each other, are sounded on 
two wind instruments, both they and their musical rela- 
tion are clearly perceived. There is not a mixture, but 
a concord, an interval. In colours, the case is otherwise. 
If blue and yellow fall on the same spot, they form green; 
the colour is simple to the eye; it can no more be 
decomposed by the vision than if it were the simple green 
of the prismatic spectrum : it is impossible for us, by 
sight, to tell whether it is so or not. 

These are very remarkable differences of the two 
senses : two colours can be compounded into an appa- 
rently simple one ; two sounds cannot : colours pass into 
each other by gradations and intermediate tints; sounds 
pass from one concord to another by no gradations : the 
most intolerable discord is that whkh is near a concord. 
We shall hereafter see how these differences affect the 
scales of sound and of colour. 

6. Rhythm. We might remark, that as we see objects 
in space, we hear sounds in time ; and that we thus intro- 



280 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

duce an arrangement among sounds which has several 
analogies with the arrangement of objects in space. 
But the conception of time does not seem to be pecu- 
liarly connected with the sense of hearing ; a faculty of 
apprehending tone and time, or in musical phraseology 
tune and rhythm, are certainly very distinct. I shall not, 
therefore, here dwell upon such analogies. 

The other Senses have not any peculiar prerogatives, 
at least none which bear on the formation of science. I 
may, however, notice, in the feeling of heat, this circum- 
stance ; that it presents us with two opposites, heat and 
cold, which graduate into each other. This is not quite 
peculiar, for vision also exhibits to us white and black, 
which are clearly opposites, and which pass into each 
other by the shades of gray. 

7. First Paradox of Vision. Upright Vision. All 
our senses appear to have this in common; That 
they act by means of organs, in which a bundle of nerves 
receives the impression of the appropriate medium of the 
sense. In the construction of these organs there are 
great differences and peculiarities, corresponding, in part 
at least, to the differences in the information given. 
Moreover, in some cases, as we have noted in the case of 
audible position and visible distance, that which seems to 
be a perception is really a judgment founded on percep- 
tions of which we are not directly aware. It will be 
seen, therefore, that with respect to the peculiar powers 
of each sense, it may be asked ; whether they can be 
explained by the construction of the peculiar organ ; 
whether they are acquired judgments and not direct per- 
ceptions ; or whether they are inexplicable in either of 
these ways, and cannot, at present at least, be resolved 
into anything but conditions of the intellectual act of 
perception. 

Two of these questions with regard to vision, have 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 281 

been much discussed by psychological writers : the cause 
of our seeing objects upright by inverted images on the 
retina ; and of our seeing single with two such images. 

Physiologists have very completely explained the 
exquisitely beautiful mechanism of the eye, considered 
as analogous to an optical instrument ; and it is in- 
disputable that by means of certain transparent lenses 
and humours, an inverted image of the objects which are 
looked at is formed upon the retina, or fine net-work of 
nerve, with which the back of the eye is lined. We 
cannot doubt that the impression thus produced on these 
nerves is essential to the act of vision ; and so far as we 
consider the nerves themselves to feel or perceive by 
contact, we may say that they perceive this image, or the 
affections of light which it indicates. But we cannot 
with any propriety say that we perceive, or that our mind 
perceives, this image ; for we are not conscious of it, and 
none but anatomists are aware of its existence : we 
perceive by means of it. 

A difficulty has been raised, and dwelt upon in a 
most unaccountable manner, arising from the neglect of 
this obvious distinction. It has been asked, how is it 
that we see an object, a man for instance, upright, when 
the immediate object of our sensation, the image of the 
man on our retina, is inverted ? To this we must answer, 
that we see him upright because the image is inverted; 
that the inverted image is the necessary means of seeing 
an upright object. This is granted, and where then is 
the difficulty? Perhaps it may be put thus : How is it 
that we do not judge the man to be inverted, since the 
sensible image is so? To this we may reply, that we 
have no notion of upright or inverted, except that which 
is founded on experience, and that all our experience, 
without exception, must have taught us that such a 
sensible image belongs to a man who is in an upright 



282 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

position. Indeed, the contrary judgment is not con- 
ceivable ; a man is upright whose head is upwards and 
his feet downwards. But what are the sensible images 
of upwards and downwards f Whatever be our standard 
of up and down, the sensible representation of up will be 
an image moving on the retina towards the lower side, 
and the sensible representation of down will be a motion 
towards the upper side. The head of the man's image is 
towards the image of the sky, its feet are towards the 
image of the ground ; how then should it appear other- 
wise than upright? But, perhaps, we expect that the 
whole world should appear inverted; but if the whole 
be inverted, how is the relation of the parts altered? 
or we expect that we should think our own persons 
inverted: yet this cannot be, for we look at them 
as we do at other objects : Or, perhaps we expect 
that things should appear to fall upwards ; yet what do 
we know of upwards, except that it is the direction 
in which bodies do not fall? In short, the whole 
of this difficulty, though it has in no small degree em- 
barrassed metaphysicians, appears to result from a very 
palpable confusion of ideas; from an attempt at com- 
parison of what we see, with that which the retina feels, 
as if they were separately presentable. It is a sufficient 
explanation to say, that we do not see the image on the 
retina, but see by means of it. The perplexity does not 
require much more skill to disentangle, than it does to 
see that a word written in black ink, may signify white. 

8. Second Paradox of Vision. Single Vision. 
(1.) Small or Distant Objects. The other difficulty, why 
with two images on the retina we see only one object, is 
of a much more real and important kind. This effect is 
manifestly limited by certain circumstances of a very 
precise nature ; for if we direct our eyes at an object 
which is very near the eye, we see all other objects 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 283 

double. The fact is not, therefore, that we are incapable 
of receiving two impressions from the two images, but 
that, under certain conditions, the two impressions form 
one. A little attention shows us that these conditions 
are, that with both eyes we should look at the same 
object ; and again, we find that to look at an object with 
either eye, is to direct the eye so that the image falls on 
or near a particular point about the middle of the retina. 
Thus these middle points in the two retinas correspond, 
and we see an image single when the two images fall on 
the corresponding points. 

Again, as each eye judges of position, and as the two 
eyes judge similarly, an object will be seen in the same 
place by one eye and by the other, when the two images 
which it produces are similarly situated with regard to 
the corresponding points of the retina. 

This is the Law of Single Vision, at least so far as 
regards small objects ; namely, objects so small that in con- 
templating them we consider their position only, and not 
their solid dimensions. The law is a distinct and original 
principle of our constitution ; and it is a mistake to call in, 
as some have done, the influence of habit and of acquired 
judgments, in order to determine the result in such cases. 

To ascribe the apparent singleness of objects to the 
impressions of vision corrected by the experience of 
touch*, would be to assert that a person who had not 
been in the habit of handling what lie saw, would see all 
objects double ; and also, to assert that a person begin- 
ning with the double world which vision thus offers to 
him, would, by the continued habit of handling objects, 
gradually and at last learn to see them single. But all 
the facts of the case show such suppositions to be 
utterly fantastical. No one can, in this case, go back 
from the habitual judgment of the singleness of objects, 

* ee BROWN, vol. ii. p. 81. 



284 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

to the original and direct perception of their doubleness, 
as the draughtsman goes back from judgments to per- 
ception, in representing solid distances and forms by 
means of perspective pictures. No one can point out 
any case in which the habit is imperfectly formed ; even 
children of the most tender age look at an object with 
both eyes, and see it as one. 

In cases when the eyes are distorted (in squinting), 
one eye only is used, or if both are employed, there is 
double vision ; and thus any derangement of the corre- 
spondence of motion in the two eyes will produce double- 
sightedness. 

Brown is one of those* who assert that two images 
suggest a single object because we have always found 
two images to belong to a single object. He urges as 
an illustration, that the two words " he conquered," 
by custom excite exactly the same notion as the one 
Latin word " vicit ;" and thus that two visual images, 
by the effect of habit, produce the same belief of a 
single object as one tactual impression. But in order 
to make this pretended illustration of any value, it ought 
to be true that when a person has thoroughly learnt 
the Latin language, he can no longer distinguish any 
separate meaning in " he" and in " conquered." We can 
by no effort perceive the double sensation, when we 
look at the object with the two eyes. Those who squint, 
learn by habit to see objects single : but the habit which 
they acquire is that of attending to the impressions of 
one eye only at once, not of combining the two impres- 
sions. It is obvious, that if each eye spreads before us 
the same visible scene, with the same objects and the 
same relations of place, then, if one object in each scene 
coincide, the whole of the two visible impressions will be 
coincident. And here the remarkable circumstance is, 
* Lectures^ vol. ii. p. 81. 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 285 

that not only each eye judges for itself of the relations of 
position which come within its field of view ; but that 
there is a superior and more comprehensive faculty 
which combines and compares the two fields of view ; 
which asserts or denies their coincidence ; which con- 
templates, as in a relative position to one another, these 
two visible worlds, in which all other relative position is 
given. This power of confronting two sets of visible 
images and figured spaces before a purely intellectual 
tribunal, is one of the most remarkable circumstances in 
the sense of vision. 

9. (2.) Near Objects. We have hitherto spoken of the 
singleness of objects whose images occupy corresponding 
positions on the retina of the two eyes. But here occurs 
a difficulty. If an object of moderate size, a small thick 
book for example, be held at a little distance from the 
eyes, it produces an image on the retina of each eye ; and 
these two images are perspective representations of the 
book from different points of view, (the positions of the 
two eyes,) and are therefore of different forms. Hence 
the two images cannot occupy corresponding points of 
the retina throughout their whole extent. If the central 
parts of the two images occupy corresponding points, the 
boundaries of the two will not correspond. How is it 
then consistent with the law above stated, that in this 
case the object appears single ? 

It may be observed, that the two images in such a 
case will differ most widely when the object is not a 
mere surface, but a solid. If a book, for example, be 
held with one of its edges towards the face, the right eye 
will see one side more directly than the left eye, and 
the left eye will see another side more directly, and the 
outline of the two images upon the two retinas will ex- 
hibit this difference. And it may be further observed, 
that this difference in the images received by the two 



286 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

eyes, is a plain and demonstrative evidence of the solidity 
of the object seen; since nothing but a solid object 
could (without some special contrivance) produce these 
different forms of the images in the two eyes. 

Hence the absence of exact coincidence in the two 
images on the retina is the necessary condition of the 
solidity of the object seen, and must be one of the indi- 
cations by means of which our vision apprehends an 
object as solid. And that this is so, Mr. Wheatstone 
has proved experimentally, by means of some most 
ingenious and striking contrivances. He has devised* 
an instrument by which two images (drawn in outline) 
differing exactly as much as the two images of a solid 
body seen near the face would differ, are conveyed, 
one to one eye, and the other to the other. And it is 
found that when this is effected, the object which the 
images represent is not only seen single, but is appre- 
hended as solid with a clearness and reality of conviction 
quite distinct from any impression which a mere per- 
spective representation can give. 

At the same time it is found that the object is then 
only apprehended as single when the two images are 
such as are capable of being excited by one single object 
placed in solid space, and seen by the two eyes. If the 
images differ more or otherwise than this condition 
allows, the result is, that both are seen, their lines cross- 
ing and interfering with one another. 

It may be observed, too, that if an object be of such 
large size as not to be taken in by a single glance of the 
eyes, it is no longer apprehended as single by a direct act 
of perception ; but its parts are looked at separately and 
successively, and the impressions thus obtained are put 
together by a succeeding act of the mind. Hence the 
objects which are directly seen as solid, will be of mode- 

* Phil. Trans., 1839. 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 287 

rate size ; in which case it is not difficult to show that 
the outlines of the two images will differ from each other 
only slightly. 

Hence we are led to the following, as the Law of 
Single Vision for near objects : When the two images 
in the two eyes are situated (part for part) nearly, but not 
exactly, upon corresponding points, the object is appre- 
hended as single, if the two images are such as are or would 
be given by a single solid object seen by the two eyes 
separately : and in this case the object is necessarily 
apprehended as solid. 

This law of vision does not contradict that stated 
above for distant objects : for when an object is removed 
to a considerable distance, the images in the two eyes 
coincide exactly, and the object is seen as single, though 
without any direct apprehension of its solidity. The first 
law is a special case of the second. Under the condition 
of exactly corresponding points, we have the perception 
of singleness, but no evidence of solidity. Under the 
condition of nearly corresponding points, we may have 
the perception of singleness, and with it, of solidity. 

We have before noted it as an important feature in 
our visual perception, that while we have two distinct 
impressions upon the sense, which we can contemplate 
separately and alternately, (the impressions on the two 
eyes,) we have a higher perceptive faculty which can 
recognise these two impressions, exactly similar to each 
other, as only two images of one and the same assemblage 
of objects. But we now see that the faculty by which 
we perceive visible objects can do much more than this : 
it can not only unite two impressions, and recognise 
them as belonging to one object in virtue of their coin- 
cidence, but it can also unite and identify them, even 
when they do not exactly coincide. It can correct and 
adjust their small difference, so that they are both appre- 



288 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

hended as representations of the same figure. It can 
infer from them a real form, not agreeing with either of 
them ; and a solid space, which they are quite incapable 
of exemplifying. The visual faculty decides whether or 
not the two ocular images can be pictures of the same 
solid object, and if they can, it undoubtingly and neces- 
sarily accepts them as being so. This faculty operates as 
if it had the power of calling before it all possible solid 
figures, and of ascertaining by trial whether any of those 
will, at the same time, fit both the outlines which are 
given by the sense. It assumes the reality of solid space, 
and, if it be possible, reconciles the appearances with that 
reality. And thus an activity of the mind of a very 
remarkable and peculiar kind is exercised in the most 
common act of seeing. 

10. It may be said that this doctrine, of such a visual 
faculty as has been described, is very vague and obscure, 
since we are not told what are its limits. It adjusts and 
corrects figures which nearly coincide, so as to identify 
them. But how nearly, it may be asked, must the figures 
approach each other, in order that this adjustment may 
be possible ? What discrepance renders impossible the 
reconcilement of which we .speak? Is it not impossible 
to give a definite answer to these questions, and therefore 
impossible to lay down definitely such laws of vision as 
we have stated ? To this I reply, that the indefiniteness 
thus objected to us, is no new difficulty, but one with 
which philosophers are familiar, and to which they are 
already reconciled. It is, in fact, no other than the 
indefiniteness of the limits of distinct vision. How near 
to the face must an object be brought, so that we shall 
cease to see it distinctly? The distance, it will be 
answered, is indefinite : it is different for different per- 
sons ; and for the same person, it varies with the degree 
of effort, attention, and habit. But this indefiniteness is 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 289 

only the indefiniteness, in another form, of the deviation 
of the two ocular images from one another : and in reply 
to the question concerning them we must still say, as 
before, that in doubtful cases, the power of apprehending 
an object as single, when this can be done, will vary with 
effort, attention, and habit. The assumption that the 
apparent object exists as a real figure, in real space, is to 
be verified, if possible ; but, in extreme cases, from the 
unfitness of the point of view, or from any other cause of 
visual confusion or deception, the existence of a real 
object corresponding to the appearance may be doubtful ; 
as in any other kind of perception it may be doubtful 
whether our senses, under disadvantageous circumstances, 
give us true information. The vagueness of the limits, 
then, within which this visual faculty can be successfully 
exercised, is no valid argument against the existence of 
the faculty, or the truth of the law which we have stated 
concerning its action. 

11. Visible Figure. There is one tenet on the 
subject of vision which appears to me so extravagant 
and unphilosophical, that I should not have thought it 
necessary to notice it, if it bad not been recently pro- 
mulgated by a writer of great acuteness in a book which 
has obtained, for a metaphysical work, considerable cir- 
culation. I speak of Brown's opinion* that we have no 
immediate perception of visible figure. I confess myself 
unable to comprehend fully the doctrine which he would 
substitute in the place of the one commonly received. He 
states it thusf: "When the simple affection of sight is 
blended with the ideas of suggestion [those arising from 
touch, &c.] in what are termed the acquired perceptions 
of vision, as, for example, in the perception of a sphere, 
it is colour only which is blended with the large con- 
vexity, and not a small coloured plane." The doctrine 

* Lectures, vol. ii., p. 82. t Ib. 9 vol. ii., p. 90. 

VOL, I. U 



290 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

which Brown asserts in this and similar passages, appears 
to be, that we do not by vision perceive both colour and 
figure ; but that the colour which we see is blended with 
the figure which we learn the existence of by other 
means, as by touch. But if this were possible when we 
can call in other perceptions, how is it possible when we 
cannot or do not touch the object? Why does the 
moon appear round, gibbous, or horned ? What sense 
besides vision suggests to us the idea of her figure ? And 
even in objects which we can reach, what is that circum- 
stance in the sense of vision which suggests to us that 
the colour belongs to the sphere, except that we see the 
colour where we see the sphere ? If we do not see figure, 
we do not see position ; for figure is the relative position 
of the parts of a boundary. If we do not see position, 
why do we ascribe the yellow colour to the sphere on our 
left, rather than to the cube on our right ? We associate 
the colour with the object, says Dr. Brown ; but if his 
opinion were true, we could not associate two colours 
with two objects, for we could not apprehend the colours 
as occupying two different places. 

The whole of Brown's reasoning on this subject is so 
irreconcileable with the first facts of vision, that it is 
difficult to conceive how it could proceed from a person 
who has reasoned with great acuteness concerning touch. 
In order to prove his assertion, he undertakes to examine 
the only reasons which, he says*, he can imagine for 
believing the immediate perception of visible figure : (1) 
That it is absolutely impossible, in our present sensations 
of sight, to separate colour from extension ; and (2) That 
there are, in fact, figures on the retina corresponding to 
the apparent figures of objects. 

On the subject of the first reason, he says, that the 
figure which we perceive as associated with colour, is the 
real, and not the apparent figure. " Is there," he asks, 
* Lectures, vol. ii. 5 p. 83. 



\ PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 201 

"the slightest consciousness of a perception of visible 
figure, corresponding to the affected portion of the 
retina ?" To which, though he seems to think an affirma- 
tive answer impossible, we cannot hesitate to reply, that 
there is undoubtedly such a consciousness ; that though 
obscured by being made the ground of habitual inference 
as to the real figure, this consciousness is constantly 
referred to by the draughtsmen, and easily recalled by 
any one. We may separate colour, he says again*, 
from the figures on the retina, as we may separate it from 
length, breadth, and thickness, which we do not see. But 
this is altogether false : we cannot separate colour from 
length, breadth, and thickness in any other way> than 
by transferring it to the visible figure which we do 
see. He cannot, he allows, separate the colour from 
the visible form of the trunk of a large oak ; but just as 
little, he thinks, can he separate it from the convex mass 
of the trunk, which (it is allowed on all hands) he does not 
immediately see. But in this he is mistaken : for if he 
were to make a picture of the oak, he would separate the 
colour from the convex shape, which he does not imitate, 
but he could not separate it from the visible figure, which 
he does imitate ; and he would then perceive that the 
fact that he has not an immediate perception of the con- 
vex form, is necessarily connected with the fact that he 
has an immediate perception of the apparent figure ; so 
far is the rejection of immediate perception in the former 
case from being a reason for rejecting it in the latter. 

Again, with regard to the second argument. It does 
not, he says, follow, that because a certain figured portion 
of the retina is affected by light, we should see such a 
figure ; for if a certain figured portion of the olfactory 
organ were affected by odours, we should not acquire by 
smell any perception of such figuref . This is merely to 

* Lectures, vol. ii., p. 84. t /&., p. 87. 



202 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

say, that because we do not perceive position and figure 
by one sense, we cannot do so by another. But this 
again is altogether erroneous. It is an office of our 
sight to inform us of position, and consequently of figure ; 
for this purpose, the organ is so constructed that the 
position of the object determines the position of the 
point of the retina affected. There is nothing of this 
kind in the organ of smell ; objects in different positions 
and of different forms do not affect different parts of the 
olfactory nerve, or portions of different shape. Different 
objects, remote from each other, if perceived by smell, 
affect the same part of the olfactory organs. This is all 
quite intelligible ; for it is not the office of smell to 
inform us of position. Of what use or meaning would 
be the curious and complex structure of the eye, if it 
gave us only such vague and wandering notions of the 
colours and forms of the flowers in a garden, as we 
receive from their odours when we walk among them 
blindfold? It is, as we have said, the prerogative of 
vision to apprehend position : the places of objects on 
the retina give this information. We do not suppose 
that the affection of a certain shape of nervous expanse 
will necessarily and in all cases give us the impression of 
figure ; but we know that in vision it does ; and it is 
clear that if we did not acquire our acquaintance with 
visible figure in this way, we could not acquire it in 
any way*. 

The whole of this strange mistake of Brown's appears 
to arise from the fault '^already noticed ; that of consi- 
dering the image on the retina as the object instead of 

* When Brown says further (p. 87,) that we can indeed show the 
image in the dissected eye ; but that "it is not in the dissected eye 
that vision takes place ;" it is difficult to see what his drift is. Does 
he doubt that there is an image formed in the living as completely as 
in the dissected eye ? 



PECULIARITIES OF THE PERCEPTIONS. 293 

the means of vision. This indeed is what he says : " the 
true object of vision is not the distant body itself, but 
the light that has reached the expansive termination of 
the optic nerve*." Even if this were so, we do not see 
why we should not perceive the position of the impression 
on this expanded nerve. But as we have already said* 
the impression on the nerve is the means of vision, and 
enables us to assign a place, or at least a direction, to the 
object from which the light proceeds, and thus makes 
vision possible. Brown, indeed, pursues his own peculiar 
view till he involves the subject in utter confusion. Thus 
he saysf, "According to the common theory [that 
figure can be perceived by the eye,] a visible sphere is at 
once to my perception convex and plane ; and if the 
sphere be a large one, it is perceived at once to be a 
sphere of many feet in diameter, and a plane circular 
surface of the diameter of a quarter of an inch." It is 
easy to deduce these and greater absurdities, if we pro- 
ceed on his strange and baseless supposition that the 
object and the image on the retina are loth perceived. 
But who is conscious of the image on the retina in any 
other way than as he sees the object by means of it ? 

Brown seems to have imagined that he was ana- 
lysing the perception of figure in the same manner in 
which Berkeley had analysed the perception of distance. 
He ought to have recollected that such an undertaking, 
to be successful, required him to show what elements he 
analysed it into. Berkeley analysed the perception of 
real figure into the interpretation of visible figure accord- 
ing to certain rules which he distinctly stated.- Brown 
analyses the perception of visible figure into no elements. 
Berkeley says, that we do not directly perceive distance, 
but that we perceive something else, from which we infer 
distance, namely, visible figure and colour, and our own. 

* Lectures, vol. ii, p. 57. t lb. t vol. ii., p 89. 



294 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

efforts in seeing ; Brown says, that we do not see figure, 
but infer it ; what then do we see which we infer it from? 
To this he offers no answer. He asserts the seeming 
perception of visible figure to be a result of " associa- 
tion ;" of " suggestion." But what meaning can we 
attach to this? Suggestion requires something which 
suggests ; and not a hint is given what it is which sug- 
gests position. Association implies two things asso- 
ciated ; what is the sensation which we associate with 
form? What is that visual perception which is not 
figure, and which we mistake for figure ? What percep- 
tion is it that suggests a square to the eye ? What im- 
pressions are those which have been associated with a 
visible triangle, so that the revival of the impressions 
revives the notion of the triangle ? Brown has nowhere 
pointed out such perceptions and impressions ; nor indeed 
was it possible for him to do so ; for the only visual per- 
ceptions which he allows to remain, those of colour, most 
assuredly do not suggest visible figures by their differ- 
ences ; red is not associated with square rather than with 
round, or with round rather than square. On the con- 
trary, the eye, constructed in a very complex and wonderful 
manner in order that it may give to us directly the per- 
ception of position as well as of colour, has it for one of its 
prerogatives to give us this information ; and the percep- 
tion of the relative position of each part of the visible 
boundary of an object constitutes the perception of its 
apparent figure ; which faculty we cannot deny to the eye 
without rejecting the plain and constant evidence of our 
senses, making the mechanism of the eye unmeaning, 
confounding the object with the means of vision, and 
rendering the mental process of vision utterly unintelli- 
gible. 

Having sufficiently discussed the processes of percep- 
tion, I now return to the consideration of the Ideas which 
these processes assume. 



295 



CHAPTER III. 

SUCCESSIVE ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC 

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A 

MEDIUM. 

1. IN what precedes, we have shown by various consi- 
derations that we necessarily and universally assume the 
perception of secondary qualities to take place by means 
of a medium interjacent between the object and the 
person perceiving. Perception is affected by various 
peculiarities, according to the nature of the quality per- 
ceived : but in all cases a medium is equally essential to 
the process. 

This principle, which, as we have seen, is accepted as 
evident by the common understanding of mankind, is 
confirmed by all additional reflection and discipline of 
the mind, and is the foundation of all the theories which 
have been proposed concerning the processes by which the 
perception takes place, and concerning the modifications 
of the qualities thus perceived. The medium, and the 
mode in which the impression is conveyed through the 
medium, seem to be different for different qualities ; but 
the existence of the medium leads to certain necessary 
conditions or alternatives, which have successively made 
their appearance in science, in the course of the attempts 
of men to theorize concerning the principal secondary 
qualities, sound, light, and heat. We must now point 
out some of the ways, at first imperfect and erroneous, 
in which the consequences of the fundamental assumption 
were traced. 

2. Sound. In all cases the medium of sensation, 
whatever it is, is supposed to produce the effect of con- 
veying secondary qualities to our perception by means of 
its primary qualities. It was conceived to operate by the 



296 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

size, form, and motion of its parts. This is a fundamental 
principle of the class of sciences of which we have at 
present to speak. 

It was assumed from the first, as we have seen in the 
passage lately quoted from Aristotle *, that in the convey- 
ance of sound, the medium of communication was the air. 
But although the first theorists were right so far, that 
circumstance did not prevent their going entirely wrong 
when they had further to determine the nature of the 
process. It was conceived by Aristotle that the air acted 
after the manner of a rigid body; like a staff, which, 
receiving an impulse at one end, transmits it to the 
other. Now this is altogether an erroneous view of the 
manner in which the air conveys the impulse by which 
sound is perceived. An approach was made to the true 
view of this process, by assimilating it to the diffusion of 
the little circular waves which are produced on the sur- 
face of still water when a stone is dropt into it. These 
little waves begin from the point thus disturbed, and run 
outwards, expanding on every side, in concentric circles, 
till they are lost. The propagation of sound through the 
air from the point where it is produced, was compared 
by Vitruvius to this diffusion of circular waves in water ; 
and thus the notion of a propagation of impulse by the 
waves of a fluid was introduced, in the place of the former 
notion of the impulse of an unyielding body. 

But though, taking an enlarged view of the nature of 
the progress of a wave, this is a just representation of the 
motion of air in conveying sound, we cannot suppose that 
the process was, at the period of which we speak, rightly 
understood. For the waves of water were contemplated 
only as affecting the surface of the water ; and as the air 
has no surface, the communication must take place by 
means of an internal motion, which can bear only a 
remote and obscure resemblance to the waves which we 

* Supr., p. 271. 



SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 297 

see. And even with regard to the waves of water, the 
mechanism by which they are produced and transferred 
was not at all understood ; so that the comparison 
employed by Vitruvius must be considered rather as a 
loose analogy than as an exact scientific explanation. 

No correct account of such motions was given, till 
the formation of the science of mechanics in modern 
times had enabled philosophers to understand more dis- 
tinctly the mode in which motion is propagated through 
a fluid, and to discern the forces which the process calls 
into play, so as to continue the motion once begun. 
Newton introduced into this subject the exact and rigor- 
ous conception of an undulation, which is the true key to 
the explanation of impulses conveyed through a fluid. 

Even at the present day, the right apprehension of 
the nature of an undulation transmitted through a fluid 
is found to be very difficult for all persons except those 
whose minds have been duly disciplined by mathematical 
studies. When we see a wave run along the surface of 
water, we are apt to imagine at first that a portion of the 
fluid is transferred bodily from one place to another. 
But with a little consideration we may easily satisfy our- 
selves that this is not so: for if we look at a field of 
standing corn, when a breeze blows over it, we see waves 
like those of water run along its surface. Yet it is clear 
that in this case the separate stalks of corn only bend 
backwards and forwards, and no portion of the grain is 
really conveyed from one part of the field to the other. 
This is obvious even to popular apprehension. The poet 
speaks of 

The rye, 

That stoops its head when whirlwinds rave 
And springs again in eddying wave 
As each wild gust sweeps by. 

Each particle of the mass in succession has a small 



298 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

motion backwards and forwards; and by this means a 
large ridge made by many such particles runs along the 
mass to any distance. This is the general notion of an 
undulation. 

Thus, when an undulation is propagated in a fluid, 
it is not matter, but form, which is transmitted from one 
place to another. The particles along the line of each 
wave assume a certain arrangement, and this arrangement 
passes from one part to another, the particles changing 
their places only within narrow limits, so as to lend 
themselves successively to the arrangements by which 
the successive waves, and the intervals between the 
waves, are formed. 

When such an undulation is propagated through air, 
the wave is composed, not, as in water, of particles which 
are higher than the rest, but of particles which are closer 
to each other than the rest. The wave is not a ridge of 
elevation, but a line of condensation ; and as in water 
w r e have alternately elevated and depressed lines, we have 
in air lines alternately condensed and rarefied. And the 
motion of the particles is not, as in water, up and down ? 
in a direction transverse to that of the wave which runs 
forwards ; in the motion of an undulation through air the 
motion of each particle is alternately forwards and back- 
wards, while the motion of the undulation is constantly 
forwards. 

This precise and detailed account of the undulatory 
motion of air by which sound is transmitted was first 
given by Newton. He further attempted to determine 
the motions of the separate particles, and to point out 
the force by which each particle affects the next, so as 
to continue the progress of the undulation once begun. 
The motions of each particle must be oscillatory; he 
assumed the oscillations to be governed by the simplest 
law of oscillation which had come under the notice of 



SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 299 

mathematicians, (that of small vibrations of a pendulum;) 
and he proved that in this manner the forces which are 
called into play by the contraction and expansion of the 
parts of the elastic fluid are such as the continuance of 
the motion requires. 

Newton's proof of the exact law of oscillatory motion 
of the aerial particles was not considered satisfactory by 
succeeding mathematicians; for it was found that the 
same result, the development of forces adequate to con- 
tinue the motion, would follow if any other law of the 
motion were assumed. Cramer proved this by a sort of 
parody of Newton's proof, in which, by the alteration of 
a few phrases in this formula of demonstration, it was 
made to establish an entirely different conclusion. 

But the general conception of an undulation as pre- 
sented by Newton was, as from its manifest mechanical 
truth it could not fail to be, accepted by all mathemati- 
cians : and in proportion as the methods of calculating 
the motions of fluids were further improved, the neces- 
sary consequences of this conception, in the communica- 
tion of sound through air, were traced by unexceptionable 
reasoning. This was especially done by Euler and 
Lagrange, whose memoirs on such motions of fluids are 
some of the most admirable examples which exist, of 
refined mathematical methods applied to the solution of 
difficult mechanical problems. 

But the great step in the formation of the theory of 
sound was undoubtedly that which we have noticed, the 
introduction of the conception of an undulation such as 
we have attempted to describe it : a state, condition, or 
arrangement of the particles of a fluid, which is trans- 
ferred from one part of space to another by means of 
small motions of the particles altogether distinct from 
the movement of the undulation itself. This is a con- 
ception which is not obvious to common apprehension* 



300 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

It appears paradoxical at first sight to speak of a large 
wave (as the tide wave) running up a river at the rate of 
twenty miles an hour, while the stream of the river is 
all the while flowing downwards. Yet this is a very 
common fact. And the conception of such a motion 
must be fully mastered by all who would reason rightly 
concerning the transmission of impressions through a 
medium. 

We have described the motion of sound as produced 
by small motions of the particles forwards and backwards, 
while the waves, or condensed and rarefied lines, move 
constantly forwards. It may be asked what right we 
have to suppose the motion to be of this kind, since 
when sound is heard no such motions of the particles of 
air can be observed, even by refined methods of observa- 
tion. Thus Bacon declares himself against the hypothesis 
of such a vibration, since, as he remarks, it cannot be 
perceived in any visible impression upon the flame of a 
candle. And to this we reply, that the supposition of 
this vibration is made in virtue of a principle which is 
involved in the original assumption of a medium ; namely, 
That a medium, in conveying secondary qualities, operates by 
means of its primary qualities, the bulk, figure, motion, 
and other mechanical properties of its parts. This is an 
axiom belonging to the Idea of a Medium. In virtue 
of this axiom it is demonstrable that the motion of the 
air, when any how disturbed, must be such as is supposed 
in our acoustical reasonings. For the elasticity of the 
parts of the air, called into play by its expansion and 
contraction, lead, by a mechanical necessity, to such a 
motion as we have described. We may add that, by 
proper contrivances, this motion may be made percep- 
tible in its visible effects. Thus the theory of sound, 
as an impression conveyed through air, is established 
upon evident general principles, although the mathe- 



SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 301 

rnatical calculations which are requisite to investigate 
its consequences are, some of them, of a very recondite 
kind. 

3. Light. The early attempts to explain vision repre- 
sented it as performed by means of material rays pro- 
ceeding from the eye, by the help of which the eye felt 
out the form and other visible qualities of an object, as a 
blind man might do with his staff. But this opinion 
could not keep its ground long : for it did not even 
explain the fact that light is necessary to vision. Light 
as a peculiar medium was then assumed as the machinery 
of vision ; but the mode in which the impression was 
conveyed through the medium was left undetermined, 
and no advance was made towards sound theory, on that 
subject, by the ancients. 

In modern times, when the prevalent philosophy 
began to assume a mechanical turn (as in the theories of 
Descartes), light was conceived to be a material substance 
which is emitted from luminous bodies, and which is also 
conveyed from all bodies to the eye, so as to render them 
visible. The various changes of direction by which the 
rays of light are affected, (reflection, refraction, &c.) 
Descartes explained, by considering the particles of light 
as small globules, which change their direction when 
they impinge upon other bodies, according to the laws of 
mechanics. Newton, with a much more profound know- 
ledge of mechanics than Descartes possessed, adopted, in 
the most mature of his speculations, nearly the same 
view of the nature of light ; and endeavoured to show 
that reflection, refraction, and other properties of light, 
might be explained as the effects which certain forces, 
emanating from the particles of bodies, produce upon the 
luminiferous globules. 

But though some of the properties of light could thus 
be accounted for by the assumption of particles emitted 
from luminous bodies, and reflected or refracted by forces, 



302 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

other properties came into view which would not admit 
of the same explanation. The phenomena of diffraction 
.(the fringes which accompany shadows) could never be 
truly represented by such an hypothesis, in spite of many 
attempts which were made. And the colours of thin 
plates, which show the rays of light to be affected by an 
alternation of two different conditions at small intervals 
along their length, led Newton himself to incline, often 
and strongly, to some hypothesis of undulation. The 
double refraction of Iceland spar, a phenomenon in itself 
very complex, could, it was found by Huyghens, be 
expressed with great simplicity by a certain hypothesis of 
undulations. 

Two hypotheses of the nature of the luminiferous 
medium were thus brought under consideration ; the one 
representing light as matter emitted from the luminous 
object, the other, as undulations propagated through a fluid. 
These two hypotheses remained in presence of each other 
during the whole of the last century, neither of them 
gaining any material advantage over the other, though the 
greater part of mathematicians, following Newton, em- 
braced the emission theory. But at the beginning of the 
present century, an additional class of phenomena, those 
of the interference of two rays of light, were brought 
under consideration by Dr. Young ; and these phenomena 
were strongly in favour of the undulatory theory, while 
they were irreconcilable with the hypothesis of emission. 
If it had not been for the original bias of Newton and his 
school to the other side, there can be little doubt that 
from this period light as well as sound would have been 
supposed to be propagated by undulations ; although in 
this case it was necessary to assume as the vehicle of 
such undulations a special medium or ether. Several 
points of the phenomena of vision no doubt remained 
unexplained by the undulatory theory, as absorption, and 
the natural colours of bodies; but such facts, though 



SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 303 

they did not confirm, did not evidently contradict the 
theory of a luminiferous ether ; and the facts which such 
a theory, did explain, it explained with singular happiness 
and accuracy. 

But before this undulatory theory could be generally 
accepted, it was presented in an entirely new point of 
view by being combined with the facts of polarization. 
The general idea of polarization must be illustrated here- 
after ; but we may here remark that Young and Fresnel, 
who had adopted the undulatory theory, after being 
embarrassed for some time by the new facts which were 
thus presented to their notice, at last saw that these 
facts might be explained by conceiving the vibrations to 
be transverse to the ray, the motions of the particles 
being not backwards and forwards in the line in which 
the impulse travels, but to the right and left of that line. 
This conception of transverse vibrations, though quite 
unforeseen, had nothing in it which was at all difficult to 
reconcile with the general notion of an undulation. We 
have described an undulation, or wave, as a certain 
condition or arrangement of the particles of the fluid 
successively transferred from one part of space to 
another : and it is easily conceivable that this arrange- 
ment or wave may be produced by a lateral transfer of 
the particles from their quiescent positions. This con- 
ception of transverse vibrations being accepted, it was 
found that the explanation of the phenomena of polariza- 
tion and of those of interference led to the same theory 
with a correspondence truly wonderful ; and this coinci- 
dence in the views collected from two quite distinct 
classes of phenomena was justly considered as an almost 
demonstrative evidence of the truth of this undulatory 
theory. 

It remained to be considered whether the doctrine of 
transverse vibrations in a fluid could be reconciled with 



304 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

the principles of mechanics. And it was found that by 
making certain suppositions, in which no inherent impro- 
bability existed, the hypothesis of transverse vibrations 
would explain the laws, both of interference and of 
polarization of light, in air and in crystals of all kinds, 
with a surprising fertility and fidelity. 

Thus the undulatory theory of light, like the undu- 
latory theory of sound, is recommended by its conformity 
to the fundamental principle of the Secondary Mechanical 
Sciences, that the medium must be supposed to transmit 
its peculiar impulses according to the laws of mechanics. 
Although no one had previously dreamt of qualities being 
conveyed through a medium by such a process, yet when it 
is once suggested as the only mode of explaining some of 
the phenomena, there is nothing to prevent our accepting 
it entirely, as a satisfactory theory for all the known laws 
of light. 

4. Heat. With regard to heat as with regard to 
light, a fluid medium was necessarily assumed as the 
vehicle of the property. During the last century, this 
medium was supposed to be an emitted fluid. And 
many of the ascertained Laws of Heat, those which 
prevail with regard to its radiation more especially, were 
well explained by this hypothesis*. Other effects of heat, 
however, as for instance latent lieat\> and the change of 
consistence of bodies {, were not satisfactorily brought into 
connexion with the hypothesis ; while conduction , which 
at first did not appear to result from the fundamental 
assumption, was to a certain extent explained as internal 
radiation. 

But it was by no means clear that an undulatory 
theory of heat might not be made to explain these 
phenomena equally well. Several philosophers inclined 

* See the Account of the Theory of Exchanges, Hist. Ind. Set., ii. 474. 
t /., ii. 499. t Ib., 498. Ib. 9 469. 



SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM. 305 

to such a theory ; and finally, Ampere showed that the 
doctrine that the heat of a body consists in the undula- 
tions of its particles propagated by means of the undula- 
tions of a medium, might be so adjusted as to explain all 
which the theory of emission could explain, and moreover 
to account for facts and laws which were out of the reach 
of that theory. About the same time it was discovered 
by Prof. Forbes and M. Nobili that radiant heat is, under 
certain circumstances, polarized. Now polarization had 
been most satisfactorily explained by means of transverse 
undulations in the case of light ; while all attempts to 
modify the emission theory so as to include polarization 
in it, had been found ineffectual. Hence this discovery 
was justly considered as lending great countenance to the 
opinion that heat consists in the vibrations of its proper 
medium. 

But what is this medium ? Is it the same by which 
the impressions of light are conveyed ? This is a difficult 
question ; or rather it is one which we cannot at pre- 
sent hope to answer with certainty. No doubt the 
connexion between light and heat is so intimate and 
constant, that we can hardly refrain from considering 
them as affections of the same medium. But instead of 
attempting to erect our systems on such loose and 
general views of connexion, it is rather the business of 
the philosophers of the present day to determine the laws 
of the operation of heat, and its real relation to light, in 
order that we may afterwards be able to connect the 
theories of the two qualities. Perhaps in a more 
advanced state of our knowledge we may be able to state 
it as an axiom, that two secondary qualities, which are 
intimately connected in their causes and effects, must be 
affections of the same medium. But at present it does 
not appear safe to proceed upon such a principle, although 
many writers, in their speculations both concerning light 
VOL. i. x 



306 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

and beat, and concerning other properties, have not 
hesitated to do so. 

Some other consequences follow from the Idea of a 
Medium which must be the subject of another chapter. 



CHAPTER IV. 
OF THE MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 

1. Scales of Qualities in general. The ultimate 
object of our investigation in each of the Secondary 
Mechanical Sciences, is the nature of the processes by 
which the special impressions of sound, light, and heat, are 
conveyed, and the modifications of which these processes 
are susceptible. And of this investigation, as we have 
seen, the necessary basis is the principle, that these 
impressions are transmitted by means of a medium. 
But before we arrive at this ultimate object, we may find 
it necessary to occupy ourselves with several intermediate 
objects : before we discover the cause, it may be necessary 
to determine the laws of the phenomena. Even if we 
cannot immediately ascertain the mechanism of light or 
heat, it may still be interesting- and important to arrange 
and measure the effects which we observe. 

The idea of a medium affects our proceeding in this 
research also. We cannot measure secondary qualities 
in the same manner in which we measure primary quali- 
ties, by a mere addition of parts. There is this leading 
and remarkable difference, that while both classes of 
qualities are susceptible of changes of magnitude, primary 
qualities increase by addition of extension, secondary, by 
augmentation of intensity. A space is doubled when 
another equal space is placed by its side; one weight 
joined to another makes up the sum of the two. But 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 007 

when one degree of warmth is combined with another, or 
one shade of red colour with another, we cannot in like 
manner talk of the sum. The component parts do not 
evidently retain their separate existence; we cannot 
separate a strong green colour into two weaker ones, as 
we can separate a large force into two smaller. The 
increase is absorbed into the previous amount, and is no 
longer in evidence as a part of the whole. And this is 
the difference which has given birth to the two words 
extended, and intense. That is extended which has "partes 
extra partes," parts outside of parts : that is intense which 
becomes stronger by some indirect and unapparent increase 
of agency, like the stretching of the internal springs of a 
machine, as the term intense implies. Extended magni- 
tudes can at will be resolved into the parts of which they 
were originally composed, or any other which the nature 
of their extension admits ; their proportion is apparent ; 
they are directly and at once subject to the relations of 
number. Intensive magnitudes cannot be resolved into 
.smaller magnitudes ; we can see that they differ, but we 
cannot tell in what proportion ; we have no direct 
measure of their quantity. How many times hotter than 
blood is boiling water? The answer cannot be given 
by the aid of our feelings of heat alone. 

This difference, as we have said, is connected with 
the fundamental principle that we do not perceive 
secondary qualities directly, but through a medium. We 
have no natural apprehension of light, or sound, or heat, 
as they exist in the bodies from which they proceed, but 
only as they affect our organs. We can only measure 
them, therefore, by some scale supplied by their effects. 
And thus while extended magnitudes, as space, time, are 
measurable directly and of themselves; intensive magni- 
tudes, as brightness, loudness, heat, are measurable only 
by artificial means and conventional scales. Space, time, 

X 2 



308 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

measure themselves : the repetition of a smaller space, or 
time, while it composes a larger one, measures it. But 
for light and heat we must have photometers and ther- 
mometers, which measure something which is assumed to 
be an indication of the quality in question. In one case, 
the mode of applying the measure, and the meaning of 
the number resulting, are seen by intuition ; in the 
other, they are consequences of assumption and reason- 
ing. In the one case, they are units, of which the exten- 
sion is made up ; in the other, they are degrees by which 
the intensity ascends. 

2. When we discover any property in a sensible qua- 
lity, which at once refers us to number or space, we readily 
take this property as a measure ; and thus we make a 
transition from quality to quantity. Thus Ptolemy in the 
third chapter of the First Book of his Harmonics begins 
thus : " As to the differences which exist in sounds both 
in quality and in quantity, if we consider that difference 
which refers to the acuteness and graveness, we cannot 
at once tell to which of the above two classes it belongs, 
till we have considered the causes of such symptoms." 
But at the end of the chapter, having satisfied himself 
that grave sounds result from the magnitude of the string 
or pipe, other things being equal, he infers, " Thus the 
difference of acute and grave appears to be a difference of 
quantity'' 

In the same manner, in order to form Secondary 
Mechanical Sciences respecting any of the other pro- 
perties of bodies, we must reduce these properties to a 
dependence upon quantity, and thus make them subject 
to measurement. We cannot obtain any sciential truths 
respecting the comparison of sensible qualities, till we 
have discovered measures and scales of the qualities 
which we have to consider ; and accordingly, some of the 
most important steps in such sciences have been the 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 809 

establishment of such measures and scales, and the inven- 
tion of the requisite instruments. 

The formation of the mathematical sciences which 
rest upon the measures of the intensity of sensible 
qualities took place mainly in the course of the last 
century. Perhaps we may consider Lambert, a mathe- 
matician who resided in Switzerland, and published about 
1750, as the person who first clearly felt the importance 
of establishing such sciences. His Photometry, Pyro- 
metry, Hygrometry, are examples of the systematic 
reduction of sensible qualities (light, heat, moisture) to 
modes of numerical measurement. 

We now proceed to speak of such modes of measure- 
ment with regard to the most obvious properties of 
bodies. 

3. (I.) The Musical Scale. The establishment of 
the Harmonic Canon, that is, of a Scale and Measure of 
the musical place of notes, in the relation of high and low, 
was the first step in the science of Harmonics. The 
perception of the differences and relations of musical 
sounds is the office of the sense of hearing; but these 
relations are fixed, and rendered accurately recognisable 
by artificial means. "Indeed, in all the senses," as 
Ptolemy truly says in the opening of his Harmonics, "the 
sense discovers what is approximately true, and receives 
accuracy from another quarter : the reason receives the 
approximately-true from another quarter, and discovers 
the accurate truth." We can have no measures of 
sensible qualities which do not ultimately refer to the 
sense ; whether they do this immediately, as when we 
refer colours to an assumed standard ; or mediately, as 
when we measure heat by expansion, having previously 
found by an appeal to sense that the expansion 
increases with the heat. Such relations of sensible 
qualities cannot be described in words, and can only be 



310 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

apprehended by their appropriate faculty. The faculty 
by which the relations of sounds are apprehended is a 
musical car in the largest acceptation of the term. In this 
signification the faculty is nearly universal among men ; 
for all persons have musical ears sufficiently delicate to 
understand and to imitate the modulations corresponding 
to various emotions in speaking ; which modulations 
depend upon the succession of acuter and graver tones. 
These are the relations now spoken of, and these are 
plainly perceived by persons who have very imperfect 
musical ears, according to the common use of the phrase. 
But the relations of tones which occur in speaking are 
somewhat indefinite ; and in forming that musical scale 
which is the basis of our science upon the subject, we 
take the most definite and marked of such relations of 
notes ; such as occur, not in speaking but in singing. 
Those musical relations of two sounds which we call the 
octave, the fifth, the fourth, the third, are recognised after 
a short familiarity with them. These chords or intervals 
are perceived to have each a peculiar character, which 
separates them from the relations of two sounds taken at 
random, and makes it easy to know them when sung or 
played on an instrument ; and for most persons, not diffi- 
cult to sing the sounds in succession exactly, or nearly 
correct. These musical relations, or concords, then, are 
the groundwork of our musical standard. But how are 
we to name these indescribable sensible characters ? 
how to refer, with unerring accuracy, to a type which 
exists only in our own perceptions ? We must have for 
this purpose a Scale and a Standard. 

The Musical Scale is a series of eight notes, ascend- 
ing by certain steps from the first or key-note to the 
octave above it, each of the notes being fixed by such 
distinguishable musical relations as we have spoken of 
above. We may call these notes c, D, E, F, a, A, B, c ; 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 311 

and we may then say that G is determined by its being a 
fifth above c ; D by its being a fourth below G ; E by its 
being a third above C ; and similarly of the rest. It will 
be recollected that the terms & fifth, a fourth, a third, have 
hitherto been introduced as expressing certain simple and 
indescribable musical relations among sounds, which 
might have been indicated by any other names. Thus 
we might call the fifth the dominant, and the fourth the 
subdominant, as is done in one part of musical science. 
But the names we have used, which are the common 
ones, are in fact derived from the number of notes which 
these intervals include in the scale obtained in the above 
manner. The notes c, D, E, F, G, being five, the interval 
from c to G is a fifth, and so of the rest. The fixation of 
this scale gave the means of describing exactly any note 
which occurs in the scale, and the method is easily appli- 
cable to notes above and below this range ; for in a 
series of sounds higher or lower by an octave than this 
standard series, the ear discovers a recurrence of the 
same relations so exact, that a person may sometimes 
imagine he is producing the same notes as another when 
he is singing the same air an octave higher. Hence the 
next eight notes may be conveniently denoted by a repeti- 
tion of the same letters, as the first ; thus, c, r>, E, F, G, A, B, 
c, d, e,f, y, a, b ; and it is easy to devise a continuation 
of such cycles. And other admissible notes are desig- 
nated by a further modification of the standard ones, as 
by making each note flat or sharp ; which modification it 
is not necessary here to consider, since our object is only 
to show how a standard is attainable, and how it serves 
the ends of science. 

We may observe, however, that the above is not an 
exact account of the first, or early Greek scale ; for this 
scale was founded on a primary division of the interval of 
two octaves (the extreme range which it admitted) into 



312 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

five tetrachords, each tetrachord including the interval of 
a fourth. All the notes of this series had different 
names borrowed from this division* r thus mese was the 
middle or key-note ; the note below it was lichanos meson, 
the next below was parypate meson, the next lower 
Ju/pate meson. The fifth above mese was nete diazeuy- 
menon, the octave was nete hyperlolceon. 

4. But supposing a complete system of such denomi- 
nations established, how could it be with certainty and 
rigour applied ? The human ear is fallible, the organs of 
voice imperfectly obedient ; if this were not so, there 
would be no such thing as a cjood ear or a good voice. 
What means can be devised of finding at will a perfect 
concord, a fifth or a fourth ? Or supposing such concords 
fixed by an acknowledged authority, how can they be 
referred to, and the authority adduced ? How can we 
enact a Standard of sounds ? 

A Standard was discovered in the Monochord. A 
musical string properly stretched, may be made to pro- 
duce different notes, in proportion as we intercept a 
longer or shorter portion, and make this portion vibrate. 
The relation of the length of the strings which thus 
sound the two notes a and c is fixed and constant, and 
the same is true of all other notes. Hence the musical 
interval of any notes of which we know the places in the 
musical scale, may be reproduced by measuring the 
lengths of string which are known to give them. If c be 
of the length 180, D is 169, E is 144, F is 135, G is 320; 
and thus the musical relations are reduced to numerical 
relations, and the monochord is a complete and perfect 
tonometer. 

We have here taken the length of the string as the mea- 
sure of the tone : but we may observe that there is in us a 
necessary tendency to assume that the ground of this mea- 

* BURNEY'S History of Music , vol. i. p. 28. 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 313 

sure is to be sought in some ulterior cause ; and when we 
consider the matter further, we find this cause in the fre- 
quency of these vibrations of the string. The truth that 
the same note must result from the same frequency of 
vibration is readily assented to on a slight suggestion of 
experience. Thus Mersenne*, when he undertakes to 
determine the frequency of vibrations of a given sound, 
says " Supponendum est quoscunque nervos et quaslibet 
chordas unisonum facientes eundem efficere numerum 
recursuum eodem vel equali tempore, quod perpetua 
constat experientia." And he proceeds to apply it to 
cases where experience could not verify this assertion, or 
at least had not verified it, as to that of pipes. 

The pursuit of these numerical relations of tones 
forms the science of Harmonics ; of which here we do 
not pretend to give an account, but only to show, how 
the invention of a Scale and Nomenclature, a Standard 
and Measure of the tone of sounds, is its necessary basis. 
We will therefore now r proceed to speak of another 
subject; colour. 

5. (II.) Scales of Colour. The Prismatic Scale of 
Colour. A Scale of Colour must depend originally upon 
differences discernible by the eye, as a scale of notes 
depends on differences perceived by the ear. In one 
respect the difficulty is greater in the case of the visible 
qualities, for ,there are no relations of colour which the 
eye peculiarly singles out and distinguishes, as the ear 
selects and distinguishes an octave or a fifth. Hence we 
are compelled to take an arbitrary scale ; and we have 
to find one which is fixed, and which includes a proper 
collection of colours. The prismatic spectrum, or coloured 
image produced when '-a small beam of light passes 
obliquely through any transparent surface (as the surface 
of a prism of glass,) offers an obvious Standard as far 

* Harmoma, lib. ii. Prop, 19, 




314 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 



as it is applicable. Accordingly colours have, for various 
purposes, been designated. by their place in the spectrum 
ever since the time of Newton ; and we have thus a 
means of referring to such colours as are included in the 
series red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, indigo, and the 
intermediate tints. 

But this scale is not capable of numerical precision. 
If the spectrum could be exactly defined as to its 
extremities, and if these colours occupied always the 
same proportional part of it, we might describe any 
colour in the above series by the measure of its position. 
But the fact is otherwise. The spectrum is too indefinite 
in its boundaries to afford any distinct point from which 
we may commence our measures ; and moreover the 
spectra produced by different transparent bodies differ 
from each other. Newton had supposed that the spec- 
trum and its parts were the same, so long as the refrac- 
tion was the same ; but his successors discovered that, 
with the same amount of refraction in different kinds of 
glass, there are different magnitudes of the spectrum ; 
and what is still worse with' reference to our present 
purpose, that the spectra from different glasses have 
the colours distributed in different proportions. In order, 
therefore, to make the spectrum the scale of colour, we 
must assume some fixed substance ; for instance, we may 
take water, and thus the colours of the rainbow will 
be our standard. But we should still have an extreme 
difficulty in applying such a rule. The distinctions of 
colour which the terms of common language express, are 
not used with perfect unanimity or with rigorous precision. 
What one person calls bluish green another calls greenish 
blue. Nobody can say what is the precise boundary 
between red and orange. Thus the prismatic scale of 
colour was incapable of mathematical exactness, and this 
inconvenience was felt up to our own times. 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 315 

But this difficulty was removed by a curious dis- 
covery of Fraunhofer ; who found that there are, in the 
solar spectrum, certain line black Lines which occupy a 
definite place in the series of colours, and can be ob- 
served with perfect precision. We have now no uncer- 
tainty as to what coloured light we are speaking of, when 
we describe it as that part of the spectrum in which 
Fraunhofer's Line c or D occurs. And thus, by this dis- 
covery, the prismatic spectrum of sunlight became, for 
certain purposes, an exact Chromatometer . 

6. Newton's Scale of Colours. Still, such a standard 
is arbitrary and seemingly anomalous. The lines A, B, c, D, 
&c., of Fraunhofer's spectrum are distributed without 
any apparent order or law ; and we do not, in this way, 
obtain numerical measures, which is what, in all cases, we 
desire to have. Another discovery of Newton, however, 
gives us a spectrum containing the same colours as the 
prismatic spectrum, but produced in another way, so that 
the colours have a numerical relation. I speak of the 
colours of thin plates. The little rainbows which we some- 
times see in the cracks of broken glass are governed by 
fixed and simple laws. The kind of colour produced at 
any point depends on the thickness of the thin plate of 
air included in the fissure. If the thickness be twelve- 
millionths of an inch, the colour is orange, if ten-mil- 
lionths of an inch, we have green, and so on ; and thus 
these numbers which succeed each other in a regular 
order from red to indigo, give a numerical measure of 
each colour ; which measure, when we pursue the subject, 
we find is one of the bases of all optical theory. The 
series of colours obtained from plates of air of gradually 
increasing thickness is called Newton's Scale of Colours; 
but we may observe that this is not precisely what we are 
here speaking of, a scale of simple colours ; it is a series 
produced by certain combinations, resulting from the 



316 PHILOSOPHY OP SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

repetition of the first spectrum, and is mainly useful as a 
standard for similar phenomena, and not for colour in 
general. The real scale of colour is to be found, as we 
have said, in the numbers which express the thickness of 
the producing film ; in the length of a fit in Newton's 
phraseology, or the length of an undulation in the modern 
theory. 

7. Scales of Impure Colours. The standards just spoken 
of include (mainly at least) only pure and simple colours ; 
and however complete they may be for certain objects of 
the science of op tics, they are insufficient for other purposes. 
They do not enable us to put in their place mixed and im- 
pure colours. And there is, in the case of colour, a diffi- 
culty already noticed, which does not occur in the case of 
sound ; two notes, when sounded together, are not neces- 
sarily heard as one ; they are recognised as still two, and 
as forming a concord or a discord. But two colours form 
a single colour ; and the eye cannot, in any way, distin- 
guish between a green compounded of blue and yellow, 
and the simple, undecomposable green of the spectrum. 
By composition of three or more colours, innumerable 
new colours may be generated which form no part of the 
prismatic series ; and by such compositions is woven the 
infinitely varied web of colour which forms the clothing 
of nature. How are we to classify and arrange all the 
possible colours of objects, so that each shall have a place 
and name? How shall we find a chromatometer for 
impure as well as for pure colour ? 

Though no optical investigations have depended on a 
scale of impure colours, such a scale has been wanted and 
invented for other purposes ; for instance, in order to 
identify and describe objects of natural history. Not to 
speak of earlier essays, we may notice Werner's Nomen- 
clature of Colours, devised for the purpose of describing 
minerals. This scale of colour was far superior to any 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 317 

which had previously been promulgated. It was, indeed, 
arbitrary in the selection of its degrees, and in a great 
measure in their arrangement; and the colours were 
described by the usual terms, though generally with some 
added distinction ; as blackish green, bluish green, apple 
green, emerald green. But the great merit of the scale 
was its giving a fixed conventional meaning to these terms, 
so that they lost much of their usual vagueness. Thus 
apple-green did not mean the colour of any green apple 
casually taken ; but a certain definite colour which the 
student was to bear in mind, whether or not he had ever 
seen an apple of that exact hue. The words were not a 
description, but a record of the colour : the memory was 
to retain a sensation, not a name. 

The imperfection of the system (arising from its arbi- 
trary form) was its incompleteness: however well it 
served for the reference of the colours which it did con- 
tain, it was applicable to no others ; and thus, though 
Werner's enumeration extended to more than a hundred 
colours, there occur in nature a still greater number 
which cannot be exactly described by means of it. 

In such cases the unclassed colour is, by the Werne- 
rians, defined by stating it as intermediate between two 
others : thus we have an object described as between eme- 
rald green and grass green. The eye is capable of per- 
ceiving a gradation from one colour to another ; such as 
may be produced by a gradual mixture in various ways. 
And if we image to ourselves such a mixture, we can 
compare with it a given colour. But in employing this 
method we have nothing to tell us in what part of the 
scale we must seek for an approximation to our unclassed 
colour. We have no rule for discovering where we are 
to look for the boundaries of the definition of a colour 
which the Wernerian series does not supply. For it is 
not always between contiguous members of the series 
that the undescribed colour is found. If we place erne- 



318 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

raid green between apple green and grass green, we may 
yet have a colour intermediate between emerald green 
and leek green ; and, in fact, the Wernerian series of 
colours is destitute of a principle of self-arrangement and 
gradation; and is thus necessarily and incurably imperfect. 

9. We should have a complete Scale of Colours, if we 
could form a series including all colours, and arranged so 
that each colour was intermediate in its tint between the 
adjacent terms of the series; for then, whether we took 
many or few of the steps of the series for our standard 
terms, the rest could be supplied by the law of continuity ; 
and any given colour would either correspond to one of 
the steps of our scale or fall between two intermediate 
ones. The invention of a Chromatometer for Impure 
Colours, therefore, requires that we should be able to form 
all possible colours by such intermediation in a systematic 
manner ; that is, by the mixture or combination of cer- 
tain elementary colours according to a simple rule : and 
we are led to ask whether such a process has been shown 
to be possible. 

The colours of the prismatic spectrum obviously do 
form a continuous series ; green is intermediate between 
its neighbours yellow and blue, orange between red and 
yellow ; and if we suppose the two ends of the spectrum 
bent round to meet each other, so that the arrangement 
of the colours may be circular, the violet and indigo will 
find their appropriate place between the blue and red. 
And all the interjacent tints of the spectrum, as well as 
the ones thus named, will result from such an arrange- 
ment. Thus all the pure colours are produced by com- 
binations two and two of three primary colours, red ? 
yellow, and blue; and the question suggests itself 
whether these three are not really the only primary 
colours, and whether all the impure colours do not arise 
from mixtures of the three in various proportions. There 
are various modes in which this suggestion may be 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. o!9 

applied to the construction of a scale of colours ; but the 
simplest and the one which appears really to verify the con- 
jecture that all possible colours may be so exhibited, is the 
following. A certain combination of red, yellow, and blue, 
will produce black, or pure grey, and when diluted, will 
give all the shades of grey which intervene between black 
and white. By adding various shades of grey, then,, to pure 
colours, we may obtain all the possible ternary combina- 
tions of red, yellow, and blue ; and in this way it is found 
that we exhaust the range of colours. Thus the circle of 
pure colours of which we have spoken may be accompa- 
nied by several other circles, in which these colours are 
tinged with a less or greater shade of grey ; and in this 
manner it is found that we have a perfect chromatometer; 
every possible colour being exhibited either exactly or by 
means of approximate and contiguous limits. The ar- 
rangement of colours has been brought into this final and 
complete form by M. Merimee, whose chromatic scale is 
published by M. Mirbel in his Elements of Botany. We may 
observe that such a standard affords us a numerical expo- 
nent for every colour by means of the proportions of the 
three primary colours which compose it ; or, expressing 
the same result otherwise, by means of the pure colour 
which is involved, and the proportion of grey by which 
it is rendered impure. In such a scale the fundamental 
elements would be the precise tints of red, yellow, and 
blue which are found or assumed to be primary; the 
numerical exponents of each colour would depend upon 
the arbitrary number of degrees which we interpose be- 
tween each two primary colours ; and between each pure 
colour and absolute blackness. No such numerical 
scale has, however, as yet, obtained general acceptation. 

10. (III.) Scales of Light. Photometer. Another instru- 
ment much needed in optical researches is a Photometer, a 
measure of the intensity of light. In this case, also, 
the organ of sense, the eye, is the ultimate judge ; no r 



320 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

has any effect of light, as light, yet been discovered which 
we can substitute for such a judgment. All instruments, 
such as that of Leslie, which employ the heating effect of 
light, or at least all that have hitherto been proposed, are in- 
admissible as photometers. But though the eye can judge 
of two surfaces illuminated by light of the same colour, 
and can determine when they are equally bright, or which 
is the brighter, the eye can by no means decide at sight 
the proportion of illumination. How much in such 
judgments we are affected by contrast, is easily seen when 
we consider how different is the apparent brightness of 
the moon at mid-day and at midnight, though the light 
which we receive from her is, in fact, the same at both 
periods. In order to apply a scale in this case, we must 
take advantage of the known numerical relations of light. 
We are certain that if all other illumination be excluded, 
two equal luminaries, under the same circumstances, will 
produce an illumination twice as great as one does ; and 
we can easily prove, from mathematical considerations, 
that if light be not enfeebled by the medium through 
which it passes, the illumination on a given surface 
will diminish as the square of the distance of the lumi- 
nary increases. If, therefore, we can by taking a frac- 
tion thus known of the illuminating effect of one lumi- 
nary, make it equal to the total effect of another, of which 
equality the eye is a competent judge, we compare the 
effects of the two luminaries. In order to make this 
comparison we may, with Rumford, look at the shadows 
of the same object made by the two lights, or with 
Ritchie, we may view the brightness produced on two 
contiguous surfaces, framing an apparatus so that the 
equality may be brought about by proper adjustment ; and 
thus a measure will become practicable. Or we may em- 
ploy other methods as was done by Wollaston*, who 
reduced the light of the sun by observing it as reflected 
* Phil. Trans., 1829, p. 19. 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. o21 

from a bright globule, and thus found the light of the 
sun to be 10,000,000,000 times that of Sirius, the 
brightest fixed star. All these methods are inaccurate, 
even as methods of comparison ; and do not offer any 
fixed or convenient numerical standard ; but none better 
have yet been devised. 

10. Cyanometer. As we thus measure the brightness 
of a colourless light, we may measure the intensity of any 
particular colour in the same way ; that is, by applying 
a standard exhibiting the gradations of the colour in 
question till we find a shade which is seen to agree with 
the proposed object. Such an instrument we have in the 
Cyanometer, which was invented by Saussure for the 
purpose of measuring the intensity of the blue colour of 
the sky. We may introduce into such an instrument a 
numerical scale, but the numbers in such a scale will be 
altogether arbitrary. 

11. (IV.) Scales of Heat. When we proceed to the 
sensation of heat, and seek a measure of that quality, we 
find, at first sight, new difficulties. Our sensations of this 
kind are more fluctuating than those of vision ; for we 
know that the same object may feel warm to one hand 
and cold to another at the same instant, if the hands 
have been previously cooled and warmed respectively. 
Nor can we obtain here, as in the case of light, self-evi- 
dent numerical relations of the heat communicated in 
given circumstances ; for we know that the effect so pro- 
duced will depend on the warmth of the body to be 
heated, as well as on that of the source of heat; the 
summer sun, which warms our bodies, will not augment 
the heat of a red-hot iron. The cause of the diffe- 
rence of these cases is, that bodies do not receive the 
whole of their heat, as they receive the whole of their 
light, from the immediate influence of obvious external 
agents. There is no readily-discovered absolute cold, 

VOL. I. Y 



322 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

corresponding to the absolute darkness which we can easily 
produce or imagine. Hence we should be greatly at a 
loss to devise a Thermometer, if we did not find an indirect 
effect of heat sufficiently constant and measurable to 
answer this purpose. We discover, however, such an 
effect in the expansion of bodies by the effect of heat. 

12. Many obvious phenomena show that air, under 
given circumstances, expands by the effect of heat ; the 
same is seen to be true of liquids, as of water, and spirit 
of wine ; and the property is found to belong also to the 
metallic fluid, quicksilver. A more careful examination 
showed that the increase of bulk in some of these bodies 
by increase of heat was a fact of a nature sufficiently con- 
stant and regular to afford a means of measuring that 
previously intangible quality ; and the Thermometer was 
invented. There were, however, many difficulties to 
overcome, and many points to settle before this instru- 
ment was fit for the purposes of science. 

An explanation of the way in which this was done 
necessarily includes an important chapter of the history 
of Thermotics. We must now, therefore, briefly notice 
historically the progress of the Thermometer. The lead- 
ing steps of this progress, after the first invention of the 
instrument, were The establishment of fixed points in 
the thermometric scale The comparison of the scales of 
different substances And the reconcilement of these 
differences by some method of interpreting them as indi- 
cations of the absolute quantity of heat. 

13. It would occupy too much space to give in detail 
the history of the successive attempts by which these steps 
were effected. A thermometer is described by Bacon 
under the title Vitrum Calendare ; this was an air ther- 
mometer. Newton used a thermometer of linseed oil, 
and he perceived that the first step requisite to give 
value to such an instrument was to fix its scale ; accord- 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 823 

ingly he proposed his Scala Graduum Caloris*. But 
when thermometers of different liquids were compared, 
it appeared, from their discrepancies, that this fixation of 
the scale of heat was more difficult than had been sup- 
posed. It was, however, effected. Newton had taken 
freezing water, or rather thawing snow, as the zero of his 
scale, which is really a fixed point ; Halley and Amontons 
discovered (in 1693 and 1702) that the heat of boiling 
water is another fixed point ; and Daniel Gabriel Fahren- 
heit, of Dantzig, by carefully applying these two standard 
points, produced, about 1714, thermometers, which were 
constantly consistent with each other. This result was 
much admired at the time, and was, in fact, the solution 
of the problem just stated, the fixation of the scale of heat. 

14. But the scale thus obtained is a conventional not 
a natural scale. It depends upon the fluid employed for 
the thermometer. The progress of expansion from the 
heat of freezing to that of boiling water is different for 
mercury, oil, water, spirit of wine, air. A degree of heat 
which is half-way between these two standard points 
according to a mercurial thermometer, will be below the 
half-way point in a spirit thermometer, and above it in 
an air thermometer. Each liquid has its own march in 
the course of its expansion. Deluc and others compared 
the marches of various liquids, and thus made what we 
may call a concordance of thermometers of various kinds. 

15. Here the question farther occurs: Is there not 
some natural measure of the degrees of heat ? It appears 
certain that there must be such a measure, and that by 
means of it all the scales of different liquids must be 
reconciled. Yet this does not seem to have occurred at 
once to men's minds. Deluc, in speaking of the re- 
searches which we have just mentioned, saysf , " When I 
undertook these experiments, it never once came into my 

* Phil. Trans., 1701. t Modif. de HAtmosph., 1782, p. 303. 

Y 2 



324 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

thoughts that they could conduct me with any probability 
to a table of real degrees of heat But hope grows with 
success, and desire with hope." Accordingly he pursued 
this inquiry for a long course of years. 

What are the principles by which we are to be 
guided to the true measure of heat ? Here, as in all the 
sciences of this class, we have the general principle, that 
the secondary quality, heat, must be supposed to be per- 
ceived in some way by a material medium or fluid. If 
we take that which is, perhaps, the simplest form of this 
hypothesis, that the heat depends upon the quantity of this 
fluid, or caloric, which is present, we shall find that we are 
led to propositions which may serve as a foundation for a 
natural measure of heat. The Method of Mixtures is 
one example of such a result. If we mix together two 
pints of water, one hot and one cold, is it not manifest 
that the temperature of the mixture must be midway 
between the two ? Each of the two portions brings with it 
its own heat, The whole heat, or caloric, of the mixture 
is the sum of the two ; and the heat of each half must be 
the half of this sum, and therefore its temperature must 
be intermediate between the temperatures of the equal 
portions which were mixed. Deluc made experiments 
founded upon this principle, and was led by them to con- 
clude that " the dilatations of mercury follow an accele- 
rated march for successive equal augmentations of heat." 

But there are various circumstances which prevent 
this method of mixtures from being so satisfactory as at 
first sight it seems to promise to be. The different capa- 
cities for heat of different substances, and even of the 
same substance at different temperatures, introduce much 
difficulty into the experiments, and this path of inquiry 
has not yet led to a satisfactory result. 

16. Another mode of inquiring into the natural measure 
of heat is to seek it by researches on the law of cooling of 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 325 

hot bodies. If we assume that the process of cooling of 
hot bodies consists in a certain material heat flying off, 
we may, by means of certain probable hypotheses, deter- 
mine mathematically the law according to which the tem- 
perature decreases as time goes on ; and we may assume 
that to be the true measure of temperature which gives 
to the experimental law of cooling the most simple and 
probable form. 

It appears evident from the most obvious conceptions 
which we can form of the manner in which a body parts 
with its superabundant heat, that the hotter a body is, the 
faster it cools ; though it is not clear without experi- 
ment, by what law the rate of cooling will depend upon 
the heat of the body. Newton took for granted the most 
simple and seemingly natural law of this dependence : he 
supposed the rate of cooling to be proportional to the 
temperature, and from this supposition he could deduce 
the temperature of a hot iron, calculating from the original 
temperature and the time during which it had been cool- 
ing. By calculation founded on such a basis, he graduated 
his thermometer. 

17. But a little further consideration showed that the 
rate of cooling of hot bodies depended upon the tempera- 
ture of the surrounding bodies, as well as upon its own 
temperature. Prevost's Theory of Exchanges* was pro- 
pounded with a view of explaining this dependence, and 
was generally accepted. According to this theory, all 
bodies radiate heat to one another, and are thus con- 
stantly giving and receiving heat ; and a body which i s 
hotter than surrounding bodies, cools itself, and warms 
the surrounding bodies, by an exchange of heat for heat, 
in which they are the gainers. Hence if be the tem- 
perature of the bodies, or of the space, by which the hot 
body is surrounded, and + t the temperature of the hot 

* Recherche* sur la Chaleur, 1791. Hist, Ind. #'., ii. 474. 



326 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

body, the rate of cooling will depend upon the excess of 
the radiation for a temperature + t, above the radiation 
for a temperature 0. 

Accordingly, in the admirable researches of MM. 
Dulong and Petit upon the cooling of bodies, it was 
assumed that the rate of cooling of the hot body was 
represented by the excess of F(0-M) above F(#); where 
F represented some mathematical function, that is, some 
expression obtained by arithmetical operations from the 
temperatures 6 + 1 and ; although what these operations 
are to be, was left undecided, and was in fact determined 
by the experiments. And the result of their investiga- 
tions was, that the function is of this kind : when the 
temperature increases by equal intervals, the function 
increases in a continued geometric proportion*. This 
was, in fact, the same law which had been assumed by 
Newton and others, with this difference, that they had 
neglected the term which depends upon the temperature 
of the surrounding space. 

18. This law falls in so well with the best conceptions 
we can form of the mechanism of cooling upon the suppo- 
sition of a radiant fluid caloric, that it gives great proba- 
bility to the scale of temperature on which the simplicity 
of the result depends. Now the temperatures in the 
formulae just referred to were expressed by means of. the 
air thermometer. Hence MM. Dulong and Petit justly 
state that while all different substances employed as ther- 
mometers give different laws of thermotical phenomena, 
their own success in obtaining simple and general laws 
by means of the air thermometer, is a strong recommen- 
dation of that as the natural scale of heat. They add f, 

H t 9 

* The formula for the rate of cooling is ma ma , where the 

quantity m depends upon the nature of the body, the state of it 
surface, and other circumstances. Ann. Ckim. vii. 150. 
t Annales de Ckimie, \ii. 153. 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 327 

'* The well-known uniformity of the principal physical 
properties of all gases, and especially the perfect identity 
of their laws of dilatation by heat, [a very important 
discovery of Dalton and Gay Lussac*,] make it very 
probable that in this class of bodies the disturbing causes 
have not the same influence as in solids and liquids ; and 
consequently that the changes of bulk produced by the 
action of heat are here in a more immediate dependence 
on the force which produces them." 

19. Still we cannot consider this point as settled 
till we obtain a more complete theoretical insight into 
the nature of heat itself. If it be true that heat con- 
sists in the vibrations of a fluid, then, although, as 
Ampere has shown f, the laws of radiation will, on 
mathematical grounds, be the same as they are on the 
hypothesis of emission, we cannot consider the natural 
scale of heat as determined, till we have discovered 
some means of measuring the caloriferous vibrations 
as we measure luminiferous vibrations. We shall only 
know what the quantity of heat is when we know what 
heat itself is ; when we have obtained a theory which 
satisfactorily explains the manner in which the sub- 
stance or medium of heat produces its effects. When 
we see how radiation and conduction, dilatation and 
liquefaction are all produced by mechanical changes of 
the same fluid, we shall then see what the nature of that 
change is which dilatation really measures, and what 
relation it bears to any more proper standard of heat. 

We may add, that while our thermotical theory is 
still so imperfect as it is, all attempts to divine the true 
nature of the relation between light and heat are pre- 
mature, and must be in the highest degree insecure and 
visionary. Speculations in which, from the general 
assumption of a caloriferous and luminiferous medium, 

* ffist. Ind. $., ii., 496. f //>., ii., 528. 



328 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

and from a few facts arbitrarily selected and loosely 
analysed, a general theory of light and heat is asserted, 
are entirely foreign to the course of inductive science, 
and cannot lead to any stable and substantial truth. 

20. Other Instruments for measuring Heat. It does not 
belong to our present purpose to speak of instruments of 
which the object is to measure, not sensible qualities, but 
some effect or modification of the cause by which such 
qualities are produced : such, for instance, are the Calo- 
rimeter, employed by Lavoisier and Laplace, in order to 
compare the specific heat of different substances ; and 
the Actinometer, invented by Sir John Herschel, in order 
to determine the effect of the sun's rays by means of the 
heat which they communicate in a given time ; which 
effect is, as may readily be supposed, very different under 
different circumstances of atmosphere and position. The 
laws of such effects may be valuable contributions to our 
knowledge of heat, but the interpretation of them must 
depend on a previous knowledge of the relations which 
temperature bears to heat, according to the views just 
explained. 

21. (V.) Scales of other Qualities. Before quitting 
the subject of the measures of sensible qualities, we may 
observe that there are several other such qualities for 
which it would be necessary to have scales and means of 
measuring, in order to make any approach to science on 
such subjects. This is true, for instance, of tastes and 
smells. Indeed some attempts have been made towards 
a classification of the tastes of sapid substances, but these 
have not yet assumed any satisfactory or systematic 
character; and I am not aware that any instruments 
have been suggested for measuring either the flavour or 
the odour of bodies which possess such qualities. 

22. Quality of Sounds. The same is true of that kind 
of difference in sounds which is peculiarly termed their 



MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES. 329 

quality; that character by which, for instance, the sound 
of a flute differs from that of a hautbois, when the note 
is the same ; or a woman's voice from a boy's. 

23. Articulate Sounds. There is also in sounds another 
difference, of which the nature is still obscure, but in 
reducing which to rule, and consequently to measure, 
some progress has nevertheless been made. I speak of 
the differences of sound considered as articulate. Classi- 
fications of the sounds of the usual alphabets have been 
frequently proposed ; for instance, that which arranges 
the consonants into the following groups : 

Sharp. Flat. Sharp Aspirate. Flat Aspirate. Nasal. 

p b ph (/) bh (v) m 

k g (hard) kh gh ng 

t d th (sharp) th (flat) n 

s z sh zh 

It is easily perceived that the relations of the sounds in 
each of these horizontal lines are analogous ; and accord- 
ingly the rules of derivation and modification of words 
in several languages proceed upon such analogies. In 
the same manner the vowels may be arranged in an order 
depending on their sound. But to make such arrange- 
ments fixed and indisputable, we ought to know the 
mechanism by which such modifications are caused. 
Instruments have been invented by which some of these 
sounds can be imitated ; and if such instruments could 
be made to produce the above series of articulate sounds, 
by connected and regular processes, we should find, in the 
process, a measure of the sound produced. This has been 
in a great degree effected for the Vowels by Professor 
Willis's artificial mode of imitating them. For he finds 
that if a musical reed be made to sound through a cylin- 
drical pipe, we obtain by gradually lengthening the cylin- 
drical pipe, the series of vowels i, E, A, o, u, with 
intermediate sounds*. In this instrument, then, the 
* Camb. Trans., vol. iii., p. 239. 



330 PHILOSOPHY OF SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES. 

length of the pipe would determine the vowel, and 
might be used numerically to express it. Such an 
instrument so employed would be a measure of vowel 
quality. 

Our business at present, however, is not with instru- 
ments which might be devised for measuring sensible 
qualities, but with those which have been so used, and 
have thus been the basis of the sciences in which such 
qualities are treated of; and this we have now done suf- 
ficiently for our present purpose. 

24. There is another Idea which, though hitherto very 
vaguely entertained, has had considerable influence in the 
formation, both of the sciences spoken of in the present 
Book, and on others which will hereafter come under our 
notice: namely, the Idea of Polarity. This Idea will be 
the subject of the ensuing Book. And although this 
Idea forms a part of the basis of various other extensive 
portions of science, as Optics and Chemistry, it occupies 
so peculiarly conspicuous a place in speculations belong- 
ing to what I have termed the Mechanico-Chemical 
Sciences, (Magnetism and Electricity,) that I shall desig- 
nate the discussion of the Idea of Polarity as the Philo- 
sophy of those Sciences. 



331 



BOOK V. 



OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO- 
CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER I. 

ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION 
OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 

1 . IN some of the mechanical sciences, as Magnetism 
and Optics, the phenomena are found to depend upon posi- 
tion (the position of the magnet, or of the ray of light,) 
in a peculiar alternate manner. This dependence, as it 
was first apprehended, was represented by means of 
certain conceptions of space and force, as for instance by 
considering the two poles of a magnet. But in all such 
modes of representing these alternations by the concep- 
tions borrowed from other ideas, a closer examination 
detected something superfluous and something defective ; 
and in proportion as the view which philosophers took of 
this relation was gradually purified from these incongru- 
ous elements, and was rendered more general and abstract 
by the discovery of analogous properties in new cases, it 
was perceived that the relation could not be adequately 
apprehended without considering it as involving a 
peculiar and independent Idea, which we may designate 
by the term Polarity. 

We shall trace some of the forms in which this Idea 
has manifested itself in the history of science. In doing 
so we shall not begin, as in other Books of this work 



332 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

we have done, by speaking of the notion as it is employed 
in common use: for the relation of polarity is of so 
abstract and technical a nature, that it is not employed, 
at least in any distinct and obvious manner, on any 
ordinary or practical occasions. The idea belongs pecu- 
liarly to the region of speculation : in persons of com- 
mon habits of thought it is probably almost or quite 
undeveloped ; and even most of those whose minds have 
been long occupied by science, find a difficulty in appre- 
hending it in its full generality and abstraction, and stript 
of all irrelevant hypothesis. 

2. Magnetism. The name and the notion of Poles 
were first adopted in the case of a magnet. If we have 
two magnets, their extremities attract and repel each 
other alternatively. If the first end of the one attract 
the first end of the other, it repels the second end, and 
conversely. In order to express this rule conveniently, 
the two ends of each magnet are called the north pole and 
the south pole respectively, the denominations being bor- 
rowed from the poles of the earth and heavens. " These 
poles," as Gilbert says*, "regulate the motions of the 
celestial spheres and of the earth. In like manner the 
magnet has its poles, a northern and a southern one ; 
certain and determined points constituted by nature in 
the stone, the primary terms of its motions and effects, 
the limits and governors of many actions and virtues." 

The nature of the opposition of properties of which 
we speak may be stated thus. 

The North pole of one magnet attracts the South 
pole of another magnet. 

The North pole of one magnet repels the North pole 
of another magnet. 

The South pole of one magnet repels the South pole 
of another magnet. 

* De Magn., lib. i. c. 3. 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 333 

The South pole of one magnet attracts the North 
pole of another magnet. 

It will be observed that the contrariety of position 
which is indicated by putting the South pole for the North 
pole in either magnet, is accompanied by the opposition 
of mechanical effect which is expressed by changing 
attraction into repulsion and repulsion into attraction: 
and thus we have the general feature of polarity: A 
contrast of properties corresponding to a contrast of 
positions. 

3. Electricity. When the phenomena of electricity 
came to be studied, it appeared that they involved rela- 
tions in some respects analogous to those of magnetism. 

Two kinds of electricity were distinguished, the 
positive and the negative; arid it appeared that two 
bodies electrized positively or two electrized negatively, 
repelled each other, like two north or two south magnetic 
poles ; while a positively and a negatively electrized body 
attracted each other, like the north and south poles of 
two magnets. In conductors of an oblong form, the 
electricity could easily be made to distribute itself so 
that one end should be positively and one end negatively 
electrized ; and then such conductors acted on each other 
exactly as magnets would do. 

But in conductors, however electrized, there is no 
peculiar point which can permanently be considered as 
the pole. The distribution of electricity in the conduc- 
tor depends upon external circumstances : and thus, 
although the phenomena offer the general character of 
polarity alternative results corresponding to alternative 
positions, they cannot be referred to poles. Some other 
mode of representing the forces must be adopted than 
that which makes them emanate from permanent points 
as in a magnet. 

The phenomena of attraction and repulsion in elec- 



334 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

trized bodies were conveniently represented by means of 
the hypothesis of two electric fluids^ a positive and a 
negative one, which were supposed to be distributed in 
the bodies. Of these fluids, it was supposed that each 
repelled its own parts and attracted those of the opposite 
fluid : and it was found that this hypothesis explained all 
the obvious laws of electric action. Here then we have 
the phenomena of polarization explained by a new kind 
of machinery : two opposite fluids distributed in bodies, 
and supplying them, so to speak, with their polar forces. 
This hypothesis not only explains electrical attraction, 
but also the electrical spark : when two bodies, of which 
the neighbouring surfaces are charged with the two 
opposite fluids, approach near to each other, the mutual 
attraction of the fluids becomes more and more intense, 
till at last the excess of fluid on the one body breaks 
through the air and rushes to the other body, in a form 
accompanied by light and noise. When this transfer has 
taken place, the attraction ceases, the positive and the 
negative fluid having neutralized each other. Their 
effort was to unite ; and this union being effected, there 
is no longer any force in action. Bodies in their natural 
unexcited condition may be considered as occupied by a 
combination of the two fluids : and hence we see how 
the production of either kind of electricity is necessarily 
accompanied with the production of an equivalent amount 
of the opposite kind. 

4. Voltaic Electricity. Such is the case in Franklinic 
electricity, that which is excited by the common elec- 
trical machine. In studying Voltaic electricity, we are 
led to the conviction that the fluid which is in a condition 
of momentary equilibrium in electrized conductors, exists 
in the state of current in the voltaic circuit. And here 
we find polar relations of a new kind existing among 
the forces. Two voltaic currents attract each other when 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 335 

they are moving in the same, and repel each other when 
they are moving in opposite, directions. 

But we find, in addition to these, other polar relations 
of a more abstruse kind, and which the supposition of 
two fluids does not so readily explain. For instance, if 
such fluids existed, distinct from each other, it might 
be expected that it would be possible to exhibit one 
of them separate from the other. Yet in all the phe- 
nomena of electromotive currents, we attempt in vain 
to obtain one kind of electricity separately. " I have 
not," says Mr. Faraday*, "been able to find a single 
fact which could be adduced to prove the theory of 
two electricities rather than one, in electric currents ; 
or, admitting the hypothesis of two electricities, have 
I been able to perceive the slightest grounds that one 
electricity can be more powerful than the other, or 
that it can be present without the other, or that it 
can be varied or in the slightest degree affected without 
a corresponding variation in the other." "Thus," he 
adds, " the polar character of the powers is rigorous and 
complete." Thus, we too may remark, all the super- 
fluous and precarious parts gradually drop off from the 
hypothesis which we devise in order to represent polar 
phenomena ; and the abstract notion of polarity of equal 
and opposite powers called into existence by a com- 
mon condition remains unincumbered with extraneous 
machinery. 

5. Light. Another very important example of the 
application of the idea of polarity is that supplied by the 
discovery of the polarization of light. A ray of light 
may, by various processes, be modified, so that it has dif- 
ferent properties according to its different sides, although 
this difference is not perceptible by any common effects. 
If, for instance, a ray thus modified, pass perpendicularly 

* Researches, 516. 



336 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

through a circular glass, and fall upon the eye, we may 
turn the glass round and round its frame, and we shall 
make no difference in the brightness of the spot which 
we see. But if, instead of a glass, we look through a 
longitudinal slice of tourmaline, the spot is alternately 
dark and bright as we turn the crystal through successive 
quadrants. Here we have a contrast of properties (dark 
and bright) corresponding to a contrast of positions, (the 
position of a line east and west being contrasted with 
the position north and south,) which, as we have said, is 
the general character of polarity. It was with a view of 
expressing this character that the term polarization was 
originally introduced. Malus was forced by his disco- 
veries into the use of this expression. " We find," he 
says, in 1811, " that light acquires properties which are 
relative only to the sides of the ray, which are the same 
for the north and south sides of the ray, (using the 
points of the compass for description's sake only,) and 
which are different when we go from the north and south 
to the east or to the west sides of the ray. I shall give 
the name of poles to these sides of the ray, and shall call 
polarization the modification which gives to light these 
properties relative to these poles. I have put off hitherto 
the admission of this term into the description of the 
physical phenomena with which we have to do: I did 
not date to introduce it into the Memoirs in which I 
published my last observations : but the variety of forms 
in which this new phenomenon appears, and the difficulty 
of describing them, compel me to admit this new expres- 
sion ; which signifies simply the modification which light 
has undergone in acquiring new properties which are not 
relative to the direction of the ray, but only to its sides 
considered at right angles to each other, and in a plane 
perpendicular to its direction." 

The theory which represents light as an emission of 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 337 

particles was in vogue at the time when Malus published 
his discoveries; and some of his followers in optical 
research conceived that the phenomena which he thus 
described rendered it necessary to ascribe poles and an 
axis to each particle of light. On this hypothesis, light 
would be polarized when the axes of all the particles 
were in the same direction : and, making such a suppo- 
sition, it may easily be conceived capable of transmission 
through a crystal whose axis is parallel to that of the 
luminous particles, and intransmissible when the axis of 
the crystal is in a position transverse to that of the par- 
ticles. 

The hypothesis of particles possessing poles is a rude 
and arbitrary assumption, in this as in other cases ; but it 
serves to convey the general notion of polarity, which is 
the essential feature of the phenomena. The term 
" polarization of light" has sometimes been complained of 
in modern times as hypothetical and obscure. But the 
real cause of obscurity was, that the Idea of Polarity was, 
till lately, very imperfectly developed in men's minds. 
As we have seen, the general notion of polarity, oppo- 
site properties in opposite directions, exactly describes 
the character of the optical phenomena to which the 
term is applied. 

It is to be recollected that in optics we never speak 
of the poles, but of the plane of polarization of a ray. The 
word sides, which Newton and Malus have used, neither 
of them appears to have been satisfied with ; Newton, in 
employing it, had recourse to the strange Gallicism of 
speaking of the coast of usual and of unusual refraction 
of a crystal. 

The modern theory of optics represents the plane of 

polarization of light as depending, not on the position in 

which the axes of the luminiferous particles lie, but on 

the direction of those transverse vibrations in which light 

VOL. i. z 



338 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

consists. This theory is, as we have stated in the His- 
tory, recommended by an extraordinary series of suc- 
cesses in accounting for the phenomena. And this 
hypothesis of transverse vibrations shows us another 
mechanical mode, (besides the hypothesis of particles 
with axes,) by which we may represent the polarity of a 
ray. But we may remark that the general notion of 
polarity, as applied to light in such cases, would subsist, 
even if the undulatory theory were rejected. The idea 
is, as we have before said, independent of all hypothetical 
machinery. 

I need not here refer to the various ways in which 
light may be polarized, as, for instance, by being reflected 
from the surface of water or of glass at certain angles, by 
being transmitted through crystals, and in other ways. 
In all cases the modification produced, the polarization, 
is identically the same property. Nor need I mention 
the various kinds of phenomena which appear as contrasts 
in the result ; for these are not merely light and dark, or 
white and black, but red and green, and generally, a 
colour and its complementary colour, exhibited in many 
complex and varied configurations. These multiplied 
modes in which polarized light presents itself add nothing 
to the original conception of polarization: and I shall 
therefore pass on to another subject. 

6. Crystallization. Bodies which are perfectly crys- 
tallized exhibit the most complete regularity and sym- 
metry of form ; and this regularity not only appears in 
their outward shape, but pervades their whole texture, 
and manifests itself in their cleavage, their transparency, 
and in the uniform and determinate optical properties 
which exist in every part, even the smallest fragment of 
the mass. If we conceive crystals as composed of par- 
ticles, we must suppose these particles to be arranged in 
the most regular manner; for example, if we suppose 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 339 

each particle to have an axis, we must suppose all these 
axes to be parallel ; for the direction of the axis of the 
particles is indicated by the physical and optical pro- 
perties of the crystal, and therefore this direction must 
be the same for every portion of the crystal. This 
parallelism of the axes of the particles may be con- 
ceived to result from the circumstance of each particle 
having poles, the opposite poles attracting each other. 
In virtue of forces acting as this hypothesis assumes, a 
collection of small magnetic particles would arrange 
themselves in parallel positions ; and such a collection of 
magnetic particles offers a sort of image of a crystal. 
Thus we are led to conceive the particles of crystals as 
polarized, and as determined in their crystalline positions 
by polar forces. This mode of apprehending the consti- 
tution of crystals has been adopted by some of our most 
eminent philosophers. Thus Berzelius says*, " It is 
demonstrated, that the regular forms of bodies presuppose 
an effort of their atoms to touch each other by preference 
in certain points ; that is, they are founded upon a Pola- 
rity ;" he adds, " a polarity which can be no other than 
an electric or magnetic polarity." In this latter clause 
we have the identity of different kinds of polarity 
asserted; a principle which we shall speak of in the 
next chapter. But we may remark, that even without 
dwelling upon this connexion, any notion which we can 
form of the structure of crystals necessarily involves the 
idea of polarity. Whether this polarity necessarily 
requires us to believe crystals to be composed of atoms 
which exert an effort to touch each other in certain points 
by preference, is another question. And, in agreement 
with what has been said respecting other kinds of polarity, 
we shall probably find, on a more profound examination 
of the subject, that while the idea of polarity is essential, 

* Essay on the Theory of Chemical Properties, 1820, p. 1 13. 

Z 2 



340 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

the machinery by which it is thus expressed is precarious 
and superfluous. 

7. Chemical Affinity. We shall have, in the next 
Book, to speak of Chemical Affinity at some length ; but 
since the ultimate views to which philosophers have been 
led, induce them to consider the forces of affinity as 
polar forces, we must enumerate these among the exam- 
ples of polarity. In chemical processes, opposites tend 
to unite, and to neutralize each other by their union. 
Thus an acid or an alkali combine with vehemence, and 
form a compound, a neutral salt, which is neither acid 
nor alkaline. 

This conception of contrariety and mutual neutraliza- 
tion, involves the idea of polarity. In the conception, as 
entertained by the earlier chemists, the idea enters very 
obscurely : but in the attempts which have more recently 
been made to connect this relation (of acid and base,) with 
other relations, the chemical elements have been conceived 
as composed of particles which possess poles ; like poles 
repelling, and unlike attracting each other, as they do in 
magnetic and electric phenomena. This is, however, a rude 
and arbitrary way of expressing polarity, and, as may be 
easily shown, involves many difficulties which do not 
belong to the idea itself. Mr. Faraday, who has been 
led by his researches to a conviction of the polar nature 
of the forces of chemical affinity, has expressed their 
character in a more general manner, and without any of 
the machinery of particles indued with poles. Accord- 
ing to his view, chemical synthesis and analysis must 
always be conceived as taking place in virtue of equal 
and opposite forces, by which the particles are united or 
separated. These forces, by the very circumstance of 
their being polar, may be transferred from point to point. 
For if we conceive a string of particles, and if the positive 
force of the first particle be liberated and brought into 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 341 

action, its negative force also must be set free : this 
negative force neutralizes the positive force of the next 
particle, and therefore the negative force of this particle 
(before employed in neutralizing its positive force,) is set 
free : this is in the same way transferred to the next 
particle, and so on. And thus we have a positive force 
active at one extremity of a line of particles, correspond- 
ing to a negative force at the other extremity, all the 
intermediate particles reciprocally neutralizing each other's 
action. This conception of the transfer of chemical action 
was indeed at an earlier period introduced by Grotthus*, 
and confirmed by Davy. But in Mr. Faraday's hands 
we see it divested of all that is superfluous, and spoken 
of, not as a line of particles, but as " an axis of power, 
having [at every point,] contrary forces, exactly equal, 
in opposite directions." 

8. General Remarks. Thus, as we see, the notion of 
polarity is applicable to many large classes of phenomena. 
Yet the idea in a distinct and general form is only of 
late growth among philosophers. It has gradually been 
abstracted and refined from many extraneous hypotheses 
which were at first supposed to be essential to it. We 
have noticed some of these hypotheses ; as the poles of 
a body ; the poles of the particles of a fluid ; two oppo- 
site fluids ; a single fluid in excess and defect ; transverse 
vibrations. To these others might be added. Thus Dr. 
Proutf assumes that the polarity of molecules results 
from their rotation on their axes, the opposite motions 
of contiguous molecules being the cause of opposite 
(positive and negative) polarities. 

But none of these hypotheses can be proved by the 
fact of polarity alone ; and they have been in succession 
rejected when they had been assumed on that ground. 

* DUMAS, Lemons sur la Philosophic Chimique, p. 401 . 
t Bridgwater Treatise, p. 559. 



342 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

Thus Davy, in 1826, speaking of chemical forces says*, 
" In assuming the idea of two ethereal, subtile, elastic 
fluids, attractive of the particles of each other, and 
repulsive as to their own particles, capable of combining 
in different proportions with bodies, and according to 
their proportions giving them their specific qualities and 
rendering them equivalent masses, it would be natural 
to refer the action of the poles to the repulsions of the 
substances combined with the excess of one fluid, and 
the attractions of those united to the excess of the other 
fluid ; and a history of the phenomena, not unsatisfactory 
to the reason, might in this way be made out. But as it 
is possible likewise to take an entirely different view of 
the subject, on the idea of the dependence of the results 
upon the primary attractive powers of the parts of the 
combination on a single subtile fluid, I shall not enter 
into any discussion on this obscure part of the theory." 
Which of these theories will best represent the case, will 
depend upon the consideration of other facts, in combi- 
nation with the polar phenomena, as we see in the history 
of optical theory. In like manner Mr. Faraday proved 
by experiment f the error of all theories which ascribe 
electro-chemical decomposition to the attraction of the 
poles of the voltaic battery. 

In order that they may distinctly image to them- 
selves the idea of polarity, men clothe it in some of 
the forms of machinery above spoken of; yet every 
new attempt shows them the unnecessary difficulties in 
which they thus involve themselves. But on the other 
hand it is difficult to apprehend this idea divested of 
all machinery; and to entertain it in such a form that 
it shall apply at the same time to magnetism and elec- 
tricity, galvanism and chemistry, crystalline structure and 
light. The Idea of Polarity becomes most pure and genu- 

* Phil. Tr. 9 1826, p. 415. t Researches, p. 495, &c. 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF POLARITY. 343 

ine, when we entirely reject the conception of Poles, as 
Faraday has taught us to do in considering electro-chemical 
decomposition ; but it is only by degrees and by effort that 
we can reach this point of abstraction and generality. 

9. There is one other remark which we may here make. 
It was a maxim commonly received in the ancient schools 
of philosophy, that " like attracts like:" but as we have 
seen, the universal maxim of polar phenomena is, that 
like repels like, and attracts unlike. The north pole 
attracts the south pole, the positive fluid attracts the 
negative fluid ; opposite elements rush together ; opposite 
motions reduce each other to rest. The permanent and 
stable course of things is that which results from the 
balance and neutralization of contrary tendencies. 
Nature is constantly labouring after repose by the effect 
of such tendencies ; and so far as polar forces enter into 
her economy, she seeks harmony by means of discord, 
and unity by opposition. 

Although the Idea of Polarity is still somewhat vague 
and obscure, even in the minds of the cultivators of 
physical science, it has still given birth to some general 
principles which have been accepted as evident, and 
have had great influence on the progress of science. 
These we shall now consider. 



CHAPTER II. 
OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 

1. IT has appeared in the preceding chapter that in 
cases in which the phenomena suggest to us the idea of 
polarity, we are also led to assume some material ma- 
chinery as the mode in which the polar forces are exerted. 
We assume, for instance, globular particles which possess 



344 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

poles, or the vibrations of a fluid, or two fluids attracting 
each other; in every case, in short, some hypothesis by 
which the existence and operation of the polarity is 
embodied in geometrical and mechanical properties of a 
medium; nor is it possible for us to avoid proceeding 
upon the conviction that some such hypothesis must be 
true ; although the nature of the connexion between 
the mechanism and the phenomena must still be inde- 
finite and arbitrary. 

But since each class of polar phenomena is thus 
referred to an ulterior cause, of which we know no more 
than that it has a polar character, it follows that different 
polarities may result from the same cause manifesting 
its polar character under different aspects. Taking, for 
example, the hypothesis of globular particles, if electricity 
result from an action dependent upon the poles of each 
globule, magnetism may depend upon an action in the 
equator of each globule; or taking the supposition of 
transverse vibrations, if polarized light result directly 
from such vibrations, crystallization may have reference 
to the axes of the elasticity of the medium by which the 
vibrations are rendered transverse, so far as the polar 
character only of the phenomena is to be accounted for. I 
say this may be so, in so far only as the polar character of 
the phenomena is concerned ; for whether the relation of 
electricity to magnetism, or of crystalline forces to light, 
can really be explained by such hypotheses, remains to 
be determined by the facts themselves. But since the 
first necessary feature of the hypothesis is, that it shall 
give polarity, and since an hypothesis which does this may, 
by its mathematical relations, give polarities of different 
kinds and in different directions, any two co-existent 
kinds of polarity may result from the same cause, mani- 
festing itself in various manners. 

The conclusion to which we are led by these general 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 345 

considerations is, that two co-existing classes of polar 
phenomena may be effects of the same cause. But those 
who have studied such phenomena more deeply and 
attentively have, in most or in all cases, arrived at the 
conviction that the various kinds of polarity in such cases 
must be connected and fundamentally identical. As this 
conviction has exercised a great influence, both upon the 
discoveries of new facts and upon the theoretical specu- 
lations of modern philosophers, and has been put forward 
by some writers as a universal principle of science, I will 
consider some of the cases in which it has been thus 
applied. 

2. Connexion of * Magnetic and Electric Polarity. 
The polar phenomena of electricity and magnetism are 
clearly analogous in their laws : and obvious facts showed 
at an early period that there was some connexion between 
the two agencies. Attempts were made to establish an 
evident and definite relation between the two kinds of 
force, which attempts proceeded upon the principle now 
under consideration ; namely, that in such cases, the two 
kinds of polarity must be connected. Professor (Ersted, 
of Copenhagen, was one of those who made many trials 
founded upon this conviction : yet all these were long 
unsuccessful. At length, in 1820, he discovered that a 
galvanic current, passing at right angles near to a mag- 
netic needle, exercises upon it a powerful deflecting 
force. The connexion once detected between magnetism 
and galvanism was soon recognised as constant and 
universal. It was represented in different hypothetical 
modes by different persons; some considering the gal- 
vanic current as the primitive axis, and the magnet as 
constituted of galvanic currents passing round it at right 
angles to the magnetic axis; while others conceived the 
magnetic axis as the primitive one, and the electric 
current as implying a magnetic current round the wire. 



346 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

So far as many of the general relations of these two kinds 
of force were concerned, either mode of representation 
served to express them ; and thus the assumption that 
the two polarities, the magnetic and the electric, were 
fundamentally identical, was verified, so far as the phe- 
nomena of magnetic attraction, and the like, were con- 
cerned. 

I need not here mention how this was further con- 
firmed by the experiments in which, by means of the 
forces thus brought into view, a galvanic wire was made 
to revolve round a magnet, and a magnet round a gal- 
vanic wire ; in which artificial magnets were constructed 
of coils of galvanic wire ; and finally, in which the gal- 
vanic spark was obtained from the magnet. The identity 
which sagacious speculators had divined even before it 
was discovered, and which they had seen to be universal as 
soon as it was brought to light, was completely manifested 
in every imaginable form. 

The relation of the electric and magnetic polarities 
was found to be, that they were transverse to each other, 
and this relation exhibited under various conditions of 
form and position of the apparatus, gave rise to very 
curious and unexpected perplexities. The degree of com- 
plication which this relation may occasion, may be judged 
of from the number of constructions and modes of con- 
ception offered by (Ersted, Wollaston, Faraday, and others, 
for the purpose of framing a technical memory of the 
results. The magnetic polarity gives us the north and 
south poles of the needle ; the electric polarity makes the 
current positive and negative ; and these pairs of opposites 
are connected by relations of situation, as above and below, 
right and left ; and give rise to the resulting motion of 
the needle one way or the other. 

3. Ampere, by framing his hypotheses of the action of 
voltaic currents and the constitution of magnets, reduced 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 347 

all these technical rules to rigorous deductions from one 
general principle. And thus the vague and obscure per- 
suasion that there must be some connexion between elec- 
tricity and magnetism, so long an idle and barren conjec- 
ture, was unfolded into a complete theory, according to 
which magnetic and electromotive actions are only two 
different manifestations of the same forces ; and all the 
above-mentioned complex relations of polarities are re- 
duced to one single polarity, that of the electro-dynamic 
current. 

4. As the idea of polarity was thus firmly established 
and clearly developed, it became an instrument of reason- 
ing. Thus it led Ampere to maintain that the original 
or elementary forces in electro-dynamic action could not 
be as M. Biot thought they were, a statical couple, but 
must be directly opposite to each other. The same idea 
enabled Mr. Faraday to carry on with confidence such 
reasonings as the following # : " No other known power 
has like direction with that exerted between an electric 
current and a magnetic pole ; it is tangential, while all 
other forces acting at a distance are direct. Hence if a 
magnetic pole on one side of a revolving plate follow its 
course by reason of its obedience to the tangential force 
exerted upon it by the very current of electricity which 
it has itself caused ; a similar pole on the other side of 
the plate should immediately set it free from this force ; 
for the currents which have to be formed by the two 
poles are in contrary directions." And in Article 1114 
of his Researches, the same eminent philosopher infers 
that if electricity and magnetism are considered as the 
results of a peculiar agent or condition, exerted in deter- 
minate directions perpendicular to each other, one must 
be by some means convertible into the other ; and this 
he was afterwards able to prove to be the case in fact. 

* Researches, 244. 



348 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

Thus the principle that .the co-existent polarities of 
magnetism and electricity are connected and fundamen- 
tally identical, is not only true, but is far from being 
either vague or barren. It has been a fertile source both 
of theories which have, at present, a very great probabi- 
lity, and of the discovery of new and striking facts. We 
proceed to consider other similar cases. 

5. Connexion of Electrical and Chemical Polarities. 
The doctrine that the chemical forces by which the ele- 
ments of bodies are held together or separated, are iden- 
tical with the polar forces of electricity, is a great dis- 
covery of modern times ; so great and so recent, indeed, 
that probably men of science in general have hardly yet 
obtained a clear view and firm hold of this truth. This 
doctrine is now, however, entirely established in the minds 
of the most profound and philosophical chemists of our 
time. The complete developement and confirmation of 
this as of other great truths, was preceded by more vague 
and confused opinions gradually tending to this point; 
and the progress of thought and of research was impelled 
and guided, in this as in similar cases, by the persuasion 
that these co-existent polarities could not fail to be closely 
connected with each other. While the ultimate and 
exact theory to which previous incomplete and transitory 
theories tended is still so new and so unfamiliar, it must 
needs be a matter of difficulty and responsibility for a 
common reader to describe the steps by which truth has 
advanced from point to point. I shall, therefore, in doing 
this, guide myself mainly by the historical sketches of 
the progress of this great theory, which, fortunately for us, 
have been given us by the two philosophers who have 
played by far the most important parts in the discovery, 
Davy and Faraday. 

It will be observed that we are concerned here with 
the progress of theory, and not of experiment, except so 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 349 

far as it is confirmatory of theory. In Davy's Memoir* 
of 1826, on the Relations of Electrical and Chemical 
Changes, he gives the historical details to which I have 
alluded. Already in 1802 he had conjectured that all 
chemical decompositions might be polar. In 1806 he 
attempted to confirm this conjecture, and succeeded, to 
his own satisfaction, in establishing! that the combina- 
tions and decompositions by electricity were referable 
to the law of electrical attractions and repulsions ; and 
advanced the hypothesis (as he calls it,) that chemical and 
electrical attractions were produced by the same cause, 
acting in one case on particles, in the other on masses. 
This hypothesis was most strikingly confirmed by the 
author's being able to use electrical agency as a more 
powerful means of chemical decomposition than any 
which had yet been applied. " Believing," he adds, " that 
our philosophical systems are exceedingly imperfect, I 
never attached much importance to this hypothesis ; but 
having formed it after a copious induction of facts, and 
having gained by the application of it a number of prac- 
tical results, and considering myself as much the author 
of it as I was of the decomposition of the alkalies, and 
having developed it in an elementary work as far as the 
present state of chemistry seemed to allow, I have never," 
he says, " criticized or examined the manner in which 
different authors have adopted or explained it, contented, 
if in the hands of others, it assisted the arrangements of 
chemistry or mineralogy, or became an instrument of dis- 
covery." When the doctrine had found an extensive 
acceptance among chemists, attempts were made tB show 
that it had been asserted by earlier writers : and though 
Davy justly denies all value to these pretended anticipa- 
tions, they serve to show, however dimly, the working of 
that conviction of the connexion of co-existent proper- 
* Phil. Trans., 1826, p. 383. t P. 389. 



350 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

ties which all along presided in men's minds during this 
course of investigation. " Bitter and Winterl have been 
quoted," Davy says* 1 , "among other persons, as having 
imagined or anticipated the relation between electrical 
powers and chemical affinities before the discovery of the 
pile of Volta. But whoever will read with attention 
Hitter's ' Evidence that Galvanic action exists in orga- 
nized nature,' and Winter's Prolusiones ad Chemiam 
scBculi decimi noni, will find nothing to justify this opi- 
nion." He then refers to the Queries of Newton at the 
end of his Optics. "These," he says, "contain more 
grand and speculative views that might be brought to 
bear upon this question than any found in the works of 
modern electricians ; but it is very unjust to the experi- 
mentalists who by the laborious application of new in- 
struments, have discovered novel facts and analogies, to 
refer them to any such suppositions as that all attractions, 
chemical, electrical, magnetical, and gravitative, may de- 
pend upon the same cause." It is perfectly true, that 
such vague opinions, though arising from that tendency to 
generalize which is the essence of science, are of no value 
except so far as they are both rendered intelligible, and 
confirmed by experimental research. 

The phenomena of chemical decomposition by means 
of the voltaic pile, however, led other persons to views 
very similar to those of Davy. Thus Grotthus in 1805f 
published an hypothesis of the same kind. "The pile of 
Volta," he says, " is an electrical magnet, of which each 
element, that is, each pair of plates, has a positive and a 
negative pole. The consideration of this polarity sug- 
gested to me the idea that a similar polarity may come 
into play between the elementary particles of water 
when acted upon by the same electrical agent ; and I 
avow that this thought was for me a flash of light." 

* Phil. Trans., 1826, p. 384. f *** Chim.; Ixriii., 54. 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 351 

6. The thought, however, though thus brought into 
being, was very far from being as yet freed from vague- 
ness, superfluities, and errors. I have elsewhere noticed* 
Faraday's remark on Davy's celebrated Memoir of 1806 ; 
that " the mode of action by which the effects take place 
is stated very generally, so generally, indeed, that probably 
a dozen precise schemes of electro-chemical action might 
be drawn up, differing essentially from each other, yet all 
agreeing with the statement there given." When Davy 
and others proceeded to give a little more definiteness 
and precision to the statement of their views, they soon 
introduced into the theory features which it was after- 
wards found necessary to abandon. Thusf both Davy, 
Grotthus, Riffault, and Chompre, ascribed electrical de- 
composition to the action of the poles, and some of them 
even pretended to assign the proportion in which the 
force of the pole diminishes as the distance from it in- 
creases. Faraday, as I have already stated, showed that 
the polarity must be considered as residing not only in 
what had till then been called the poles, but at every 
point of the circuit. He ascribed^: electro-chemical de- 
composition to internal forces, residing in the particles of 
the matter under decomposition, not to external forces, 
exerted by the poles. Hence he shortly afterwards pro- 
posed to reject the word poles altogether, and to employ 
instead, the term electrode, meaning the doors or passages 
(of whatever surface formed,) by which the decomposed 
elements pass out. What have been called the positive 
and negative poles he further termed the anode and 
cathode ; and he introduced some other changes in no- 
menclature connected with these. He then, as I have 

* Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 161. 

t See FARADAY'S Historical Sketch, Researches, 481 492. 

f Art. 524. 

Iri 1834. Eleventh Series of Researches. Art. 662. 



352 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

related in the History*, invented the Volta-electrometer, 
which enabled him to measure the quantity of voltaic 
action, and this he found to be identical \vith the quantity 
of chemical affinity ; and he was thus led to the clearest 
view of the truth towards which he and his predecessors 
had so long been travelling, that electrical and chemical 
forces are identical f. 

7. It will, perhaps, be said that this beautiful train of 
discovery was entirely due to experiment, and not to any 
a priori conviction that co-existent polarities must be 
connected. I trust I have sufficiently stated that such 
an a priori principle could not be proved, nor even under- 
stood, without a most laborious and enlightened use of 
experiment ; but yet I think that the doctrine when once 
fully unfolded, exhibited clearly, and established as true, 
takes possession of the mind with a more entire convic- 
tion of its certainty and universality, in virtue of the 
principle we are now considering. When the theory has 
assumed so simple a form, it appears to derive immense 
probability (to say the least) from its simplicity. Like 
the laws of motion, when stated in its most general form, 
it appears to carry with it its own evidence. And thus 
this great theory borrows something of its character from 
the Ideas which it involves, as well as from the experi- 
ments by which it was established. 

8. We may find in many of Mr. Faraday's subsequent 
reasonings, clear evidence that this idea of the connexion 
of polarities, as now developed, is not limited in its appli- 
cation to facts already known experimentally, but, like 
other ideas, determines the philosopher's researches into 
the unknown, and gives us the form of knowledge even 
before we possess the matter. Thus, he says, in his Thir- 
teenth Series t, "I have long sought, and still seek, for an 
effect or condition which shall be to statical electricity 

* Hist. Ind. Sci., iii., 168. t Art. 915, 916, 917. } Art, 1658. 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 353 

what magnetic force is to current electricity ; for as the 
lines of discharge are associated with a certain transverse 
effect, so it appeared to me impossible but that the lines 
of tension or of inductive action, which of necessity pre- 
cede the discharge, should also have their correspondent 
transverse condition or effect." Other similar passages 
might be found. 

I will now consider another case to which we may 
apply the principle of connected polarities. 

9. Connexion of Chemical and Crystalline Polarities. 
-The close connexion between the chemical affinity 
and the crystalline attraction of elements cannot be over- 
looked. Bodies never crystallize but when their ele- 
ments combine chemically ; and solid bodies which com- 
bine, when they do it most completely and exactly, also 
crystallize. The forces which hold together the elements 
of a crystal of alum are the same forces which make it a 
crystal. There is no distinguishing between the two sets 
of forces. 

Both chemical and crystalline forces are polar, as we 
stated in the last chapter ; but the polarity in the two 
cases is of a different kind. The polarity of chemical 
forces is then put in the most distinct form, when it is 
identified with electrical polarity; the polarity of the 
particles of crystals has reference to their geometrical 
form. And it is clear that these two kinds of polarity 
must be connected. Accordingly, Berzelius expressly 
asserts* the necessary identity of these two polarities. 
" The regular forms of bodies suppose a polarity which 
can be no other than an electric or magnetic polarity." 
This being so seemingly inevitable, we might expect to 
find the electric forces manifesting some relation to the 
definite directions of crystalline forms. Mr. Faraday tried, 
but in vain, to detect some such relation. He attempted 

"" Essay on Chemical Prop., 1 13. 
VOL, I. 2 A 



354 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

to ascertain* whether a cube of rock crystal transmitted 
the electrical force of tension with different intensity 
along and across the axis of the crystal. In the first spe- 
cimen there seemed to be some difference ; but in other 
experiments, made both with rock crystal and with calc 
spar, this difference disappeared. Although therefore we 
may venture to assert that there must be some very close 
connexion between electrical and crystalline forces, we 
are, as yet, quite ignorant what the nature of the con- 
nexion is, and in what kind of phenomena it will manifest 
itself. 

10. Connexion of Crystalline and Optical Polarities. 
Crystals present to us optical phenomena which have a 
manifestly polar character. The double refraction, both 
of uniaxal and of biaxal crystals, is always accompanied 
with opposite polarization of the two rays ; and in this 
and in other ways light is polarized in directions depen- 
dent upon the axes of the crystalline form, that is, on 
the directions of the polarities of the crystalline particles. 
The identity of these two kinds of polarity (crystalline 
and optical) is too obviou to need insisting on ; and it is 
not necessary for us here to decide by what hypothesis 
this identity may most properly be represented. We 
may hereafter perhaps find ourselves justified in consider- 
ing the crystalline forces as determining the elasticity of 
the luminiferous ether to be different in different direc- 
tions within the crystal, and thus as determining the 
refraction and polarization of the light which the crystal 
transmits. But at present we merely note this case as 
an additional example of the manifest connexion and 
fundamental identity of two co-existent polarities. 

11. Connexion of Polarities in general. Thus we find 
that the connexion of different kinds of polarities, mag- 
netic, electric, chemical, crystalline, and optical, is certain 

* Researches. Art. 1689. 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 355 

as a truth of experimental science. We have attempted 
to show further that in the minds of several of the most 
eminent discoverers and philosophers, such a conviction 
is something more than a mere empirical result : it is a 
principle which has regulated their researches while it 
was still but obscurely seen and imperfectly unfolded, and 
has given to their theories a character of generality and 
self-evidence which experience alone cannot bestow. 

It will, perhaps, be said that these doctrines, that 
scientific researches may usefully be directed by prin- 
ciples in themselves vague and obscure ; that theories 
may have an evidence superior to and anterior to experi- 
ence ; are doctrines in the highest degree dangerous, and 
utterly at variance with the soundest maxims of modern 
times respecting the cultivation of science. 

To the justice and wisdom of this caution I entirely 
agree : and although I have shown that this principle of 
the connexion of polarities, rightly interpreted and esta- 
blished in each case by experiment, involves profound 
and comprehensive truths ; I think it no less important 
to remark that, at least in the present stage of our know- 
ledge, we can make no use of this principle without 
taking care, at every step, to determine by clear and deci- 
sive experiments, its proper meaning and application. 
All endeavours to proceed otherwise have led, and must 
lead, to ignorance and confusion. Attempts to deduce 
from our bare idea of polarity, and our fundamental con- 
victions respecting the connexion of polarities, theories 
concerning the forces which really exist in nature, can 
hardly have any other result than to bewilder men's 
minds, and to misdirect their efforts. 

So far, indeed, as this persuasion of a connexion 
among apparently different kinds of agencies impels men, 
engaged in the pursuit of knowledge, to collect observa- 
tions, to multiply, repeat, and vary experiments, and to 

2 A 2 



356 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMTCAL SCIENCES. 

contemplate the result of these in all aspects and rela- 
tions, it may be an occasion of the most important dis- 
coveries. Accordingly we find that the great laws of 
phenomena which govern the motions of the planets 
about the sun, were first discovered by Kepler, in con- 
sequence of his scrutinizing the recorded observations 
with an intense conviction of the existence of geome- 
trical and arithmetical harmonies in the solar system. 
Perhaps we may consider the discovery of the connexion 
of magnetism and electricity by Professor (Ersted in 1820, 
as an example somewhat of the same kind ; for he also 
was a believer in certain comprehensive but undefined 
relations among the properties of bodies; and in conse- 
quence of such views entertained great admiration for 
the Prologue to the Chemistry of the Nineteenth Century, of 
Winterl, already mentioned. M. (Ersted, in 1803, pub- 
lished a summary of this work ; and in so doing, praised 
the views of Winterl as far more profound and compre- 
hensive than those of Lavoisier. Soon afterwards a 
Review of this publication appeared in France*, in which 
it was spoken of as a work only fit for the dark ages, and 
as the indication of a sect which had for some time 
"ravaged Germany," and inundated that country with 
extravagant and unintelligible mysticism. It was, there- 
fore, a kind of triumph to M. (Ersted to be, after some 
years' labour, the author of one of the most remarkable 
and fertile physical discoveries of his time. 

12. It was not indeed without some reason that cer- 
tain of the German philosophers were accused of dealing in 
doctrines vast and profound in their aspect, but, in reality, 
indefinite, ambiguous, and inapplicable. And the most 
prominent of such doctrines had reference to the prin- 
ciple now under our consideration ; they represented the 
properties of bodies as consisting in certain polarities, 

* Ann. Ckim., torn. 50 (1804), p. 191. 



Or THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 357 

and professed to deduce, from the very nature of things, 
with little or no reference to experiment, the existence 
and connexion of these polarities. Thus Schelling, in 
his Ideas towards a Philosophy of Nature, published in 
1803, says*, "Magnetism is the universal act of investing 
Multiplicity with Unity ; but the universal form of the 
reduction of Multiplicity to Unity is the Line, pure Lon- 
gitudinal Extension : hence Magnetism is determination 
of pure Longitudinal Extension; and as this manifests 
itself by absolute Cohesion, Magnetism is the determina- 
tion of absolute Cohesion." And as Magnetism was, by 
such reasoning, conceived to be proved as a universal 
property of matter, Schelling asserted ;t to be a confir- 
mation of his views when it was discovered that other 
bodies besides iron are magnetic. In like manner he used 
such expressions as the folio wingf. "The threefold 
character of the Universal, the Particular, and the Indif- 
ference of the two, as expressed in their Identity, is 
Magnetism, as expressed in their Difference, is Electricity, 
and as expressed in the Totality, is Chemical Process. 
Thus these forms are only one form ; and the Chemical 
Process is a mere transfer of the three Points of Magnet- 
ism into the Triangle of Chemistry." 

It was very natural that the chemists should refuse 
to acknowledge, in this fanciful and vague language, 
(delivered, however, it is to be recollected, in 1803,) an 
anticipation of Davy's doctrine of the identity of electrical 
and chemical forces, or of (Ersted's electro-magnetic 
agency. Yet it was perhaps no less natural that the 
author of such assertions should look upon every great 
step in the electro-chemical theory as an illustration 
of his own doctrines. Accordingly we find Schelling 
welcoming, with a due sense of their importance, the dis- 
coveries of Faraday. When he heard of the experiment 

* P. 223 ? + P. 48G, 



358 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

in which electricity was produced from common mag- 
netism, he fastened with enthusiasm upon the discovery, 
even before he knew any of its details, and proclaimed 
it at a public meeting of a scientific body* as one of the 
most important advances of modern science. We have 
(he thus reasoned) three effects of polar forces ; electro- 
chemical Decomposition, electrical Action, Magnetism. 
Volta and Davy had confirmed experimentally the identity 
of the two former agencies : (Ersted showed that a closed 
voltaic circuit acquired magnetic properties : but in 
order to exhibit the identity of electric and magnetic 
action it was requisite that electric forces should be 
extricated from, magnetic. This great step Faraday, he 
remarked, had made, in producing the electric spark by 
means of magnets. 

13. Although conjectures and assertions of the kind 
thus put forth by Schelling involve a persuasion of the 
pervading influence and connexion of polarities, which 
persuasion has already been confirmed in many instances, 
they involve this principle in a manner so vague and 
ambiguous that it can rarely, in such a form, be of 
any use or value. Such views of polarity can never 
teach us in what cases we are and in what we are not' 
to expect to find polar relations ; and indeed tend rather 
to diffuse error and confusion, than to promote know- 
ledge. Accordingly we cannot be surprised to find such 
doctrines put forward by their authors as an evidence of 
the small value and necessity of experimental science. 
This is done by the celebrated metaphysician Hegel, in 
his Encyclopedia^. "Since," says he, "the plane of 
incidence and of reflection in simple reflection is the 
same plane, when a second reflector is introduced which 
further distributes the illumination reflected from the 

* UEBER FARADAY'S Neueste Entdeckung. Milnchen. 1832. 
f Sec. 278, 



OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES. 359 

first, the position of the first plane with respect to the 
second plane, containing the direction of the first reflection 
and of the second, has its influence upon the position, 
illumination or darkening of the object as it appears 
by the second reflection. This influence must be the 
strongest when the two planes are what we must call 
negatively related to each other: that is, when they are 
at right angles." " But," he adds, " when men infer (as 
Malus has done) from the modification which is produced 
by this situation, in the illumination of the reflection, 
that the molecules of light in themselves, that is, on their 
different sides, possess different physical energies ; and 
when on this foundation, along with the phenomena of 
entoptical colours therewith connected, a wide labyrinth 
of the most complex theory is erected ; we have then 
one of the most remarkable examples of the inferences of 
physics from experiment." If Hegel's reasoning prove 
anything, it must prove that polarization always accom- 
panies reflection under such circumstances as he describes: 
yet all physical philosophers know that in the case of 
metals, in which the reflection is most complete, light is 
not completely polarized at any angle ; and that in other 
substances the polarization depends upon various circum- 
stances which show how idle and inapplicable is the 
account he thus gives of the property. His self-com- 
placent remark about the inferences of physics from 
experiment, is intended to recommend by comparison his 
own method of considering the nature of things in them- 
selves ; a mode of obtaining physical truth which had 
been more than exhausted by Aristotle, and out of which 
no new attempts have extracted anything of value since 
his time. 

14. Thus the general conclusion to which we are led 
on this subject is, that the persuasion of the existence and 
connexion or identity of various polarities in nature, 



360 PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHAN1CO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES. 

although very naturally admitted, and in many cases 
interpreted and confirmed by observed facts, is of itself, 
so far as we at present possess it, a very insecure guide 
to scientific doctrines. When it is allowed to dictate 
our theories, instead of animating and extending our 
experimental researches, it leads only to error, confusion, 
obscurity, and mysticism. 

This Fifth Book, on the subject of Polarities, is a 
short one compared with most of the others. This 
arises in a great measure from the circumstance that the 
Idea of Polarity has only recently been apprehended and 
applied, with any great degree of clearness, among phy- 
sical philosophers ; and is even yet probably entertained 
in an obscure and ambiguous manner by most experimental 
inquirers. I have been desirous of not attempting to 
bring forward any doctrines upon the subject, except 
such as have been fully illustrated and exemplified by the 
acknowledged progress of the physical sciences. If I 
had been willing to discuss the various speculations 
which have been published respecting the universal pre- 
valence of polarities in the universe, and their results in 
every province of nature, I might easily have presented 
this subject in a more extended form ; but this would 
not have been consistent with my plan of tracing the 
influence of scientific ideas only so far as they have really 
aided in disclosing and developing scientific truths. And 
as the influence of this idea is clearly distinguishable 
both from those which precede and those which follow in 
the character of the sciences to which it gives rise, and 
appears likely to be hereafter of great extent and conse- 
quence, it seemed better to treat of it in a separate 
Book, although of a brevity disproportioned to the rest. 



361 



BOOK VI. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 



CHAPTER I. 

ATTEMPTS TO CONCEIVE ELEMENTARY 
COMPOSITION. 

1. WE have now to bring into view, if possible, the 
ideas and general principles which are involved in Che- 
mistry, the science of the composition of bodies. For in 
this as in other parts of human knowledge, we shall find 
that there are certain ideas, deeply seated in the mind, 
though shaped and unfolded by external observation, which 
are necessary conditions of the existence of such a science. 
These ideas it is which impel man to such a knowledge 
of the composition of bodies, which give meaning to facts 
exhibiting this composition, and universality to special 
truths discovered by experience. These are the Ideas of 
Element and of Substance. 

Unlike the idea of polarization, of which we treated 
in the last Book, these ideas have been current in men's 
minds from very early times, and formed the subject of 
some of the first speculations of philosophers. It hap- 
pened however, as might have been expected, that in the 
first attempts they were not clearly distinguished from 
other notions, and were apprehended and applied in an 
obscure and confused manner. We cannot better ex- 
hibit the peculiar character and meaning of these ideas 
than by tracing the form which they have assumed and 



362 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

the efficacy which they have exerted in these successive 
essays. This, therefore, I shall endeavour to do, begin- 
ning with the Idea of Element. 

2. That bodies are composed or made up of certain 
parts, elements, or principles, is a conception which has 
existed in men's minds from the beginning of the first 
attempts at speculative knowledge. The doctrine of the 
four elements, earth, air, fire and water, of which all 
things in the universe were supposed to be constituted, is 
one of the earliest forms in which this conception was 
systematized; and this doctrine is stated by various 
authors to have existed as early as the times of the 
ancient Egyptians*. The words usually employed by 
Greek writers to express these elements are upx*}> & prin- 
ciple or beginning, and o-ro^etov, which probably meant 
a letter (of a word) before it meant an element of a 
compound. For the resolution of a word into its letters 
is undoubtedly a remarkable instance of a successful 
analysis performed at an early stage of man's history; 
and might very naturally supply a metaphor to denote 
the analysis of substances into their intimate parts, when 
men began to contemplate such an analysis as a subject 
of speculation. The Latin word elementum itself, though 
by its form it appears to be a derivative abstract term, 
comes from some root now obsolete; probably f from a 
word signifying to grow or spring up. 

The mode in which elements form the compound 
bodies and determine their properties was at first, as 
might be expected, vaguely and variously conceived. It 
will, I trust, hereafter be made clear to the reader that 
the relation of the elements to the compound involves a 

* GILBERT'S Phys., 1. i. c. 3. 

t Vossius in wee. " Conjecto esse ab antiqua voce eleo pro oleo, 
id est cresco : a qua significatione proles, suboles^ adolescens : ut ab 
juratum, juramentum; ab adjutum, adjumentum: sic ab eletum, 
elementum : quia inde omnia crescnnt ac nascuntur." 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 363 

peculiar and appropriate Fundamental Idea, not suscept- 
ible of being correctly represented by any comparison or 
combination of other ideas, and guiding us to clear and 
definite results only when it is illustrated and nourished 
by an abundant supply of experimental facts. But at first 
the peculiar and special notion which is required in a just 
conception of the constitution of bodies was neither dis- 
cerned nor suspected ; and up to a very late period in the 
history of chemistry, men went on attempting to appre- 
hend the constitution of bodies more clearly by substitu- 
ting for this obscure and recondite idea of elementary 
composition, some other idea more obvious, more lumi- 
nous, and more familiar, such as the ideas of resemblance, 
position, and mechanical force. We shall briefly speak of 
some of these attempts, and of the errors which were 
thus introduced into speculations on the relations of 
elements and compounds. 

3. Compounds assumed to resemble their Elements. 
The first notion was that compounds derive their qualities 
from their elements by resemblance: they are hot in 
virtue of a hot element, heavy in virtue of a heavy 
element, and so on. In this way the doctrine of tlivfour 
elements was framed; for every body is either hot or 
cold, moist or dry ; and by combining these qualities in 
all possible ways, men devised four elementary sub- 
stances, as has been stated in the History*. 

This assumption of the derivation of the qualities of 
bodies from similar qualities in the elements was, as we 
shall see, altogether baseless and unphilosophical, yet it 
prevailed long and universally. It was the foundation of 
medicine for a long period, both in Europe and Asia ; 
disorders being divided into hot, cold, and the like ; and 
remedies being arranged according to similar distinctions. 
Many readers will recollect, perhaps, the story f of the 

* Hist. Ind. Sri., i. 47. t See Hadji JBaba. 



364 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

indignation which the Persian physicians felt towards the 
European, when he undertook to cure the ill effects of 
cucumber upon the patient, by means of mercurial medi- 
cine : for cucumber, which is cold, could not be coun- 
teracted, they maintained, by mercury, which in their 
classification is cold also. Similar views of the operation 
of medicines might easily be traced in our own country. 
A moment's reflection may convince us that when drugs 
of any kind are subjected to the chemistry of the 
human stomach and thus made to operate on the human 
frame, it is utterly impossible to form the most remote 
conjecture what the result will be from any such vague 
notions of their qualities as the common use of our 
senses can give. And in like manner the common 
operations of chemistry give rise in almost every instance 
to products which bear no resemblance to the materials 
employed. The results of the furnace, the alembic, the 
mixture frequently bear no visible resemblance to the 
ingredients operated upon. Iron becomes steel by the 
addition of a little charcoal ; but what visible trace of 
the charcoal is presented by the metal thus modified ? 
The most beautiful colours are given to glass and 
earthenware by minute portions of the ores of black or 
dingy metals, as iron and manganese. The worker in 
metal, the painter, the dyer, the vintner, the brewer, 
all the artisans in short who deal with practical 
chemistry, are able to teach the speculative chemist 
that nothing can be so false as to expect that the 
qualities of the elements shall be still discoverable, in 
an unaltered form, in the compound. This first rude 
notion of an element, that it determines the properties 
of bodies by resemblance, must be utterly rejected and 
abandoned before we can make any advance towards a 
true apprehension of the constitution of bodies. 

4. This step accordingly was made, when the hypo- 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 065 

thesis of the four elements was given up, and the doctrine 
of the three principles, salt, sulphur and mercury, was sub- 
stituted in its place. For in making this change, as I 
have remarked in the History*, the real advance was the 
acknowledgment of the changes produced by the chemist's 
operations as results to be accounted for by the union 
and separation of substantial elements, however great 
the changes, and however unlike the product might be 
to the materials. And this step once made, chemists 
went on constantly advancing towards a truer view of 
the nature of an element, and consequently, towards a 
more satisfactory theory of chemical operations. 

5. Yet we may, I think, note one instance, even in the 
works of eminent modem chemists, in which this maxim, 
that we have no right to expect any resemblance between 
the elements and the compound, is lost sight of. I speak 
of certain classifications of mineral substances. Berzelius, 
in his System of Mineral Arrangement, places sulphur next 
to the sulphurets. But surely this is an error, involving 
the ancient assumption of the resemblance of elements 
and compounds ; as if we were to expect the sulphurets 
to bear a resemblance to sulphur. All classifications are 
intended to bring together things resembling each other : 
the sulphurets of metals have certain general resem- 
blances which make them a tolerably distinct, well 
determined, class of bodies. But sulphur has no resem- 
blances with these, no analogies with them, either in 
physical or even in chemical properties. It is a simple 
body ; and both its resemblances and its analogies direct 
us to place it along with other simple bodies, (selenium, 
and phosphorus,) which, united with metals, produce com- 
pounds not very different from the sulphurets. Sulphur 
cannot be, nor approach to being, a sulphuret ; we must 
not confound what it is with what it makes. Sulphur has 

* Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 100. 



366 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

its proper influence in determining the properties of the 
compound into which it enters ; but it does not do this 
according to resemblance of qualities, or according to any 
principle which properly leads to propinquity in classifi- 
cation. 

6. Compounds assumed to be determined by the Figure of 
Elements. I pass over the fanciful modes of representing 
chemical changes which were employed by the Alche- 
mists ; for these strange inventions did little in leading 
men towards a juster view of the relations of elements to 
compounds. I proceed for an instant to the attempt to 
substitute another obvious conception for the still obscure 
notion of elementary composition. It was imagined that 
all the properties of bodies and their mutual operations 
might be accounted for by supposing them constituted of 
particles of various forms, round or angular, pointed or 
hooked, straight or spiral. This is a very ancient hypo- 
thesis, and a favourite one with many casual speculators 
in all ages. Thus Lucretius undertakes to explain why 
wine passes rapidly through a sieve and oil slowly, by 
telling us that the latter substance has its particles either 
larger than those of the other, or more hooked and inter- 
woven together. And he accounts for the difference of 
sweet and bitter by supposing the particles in the former 
case to be round and smooth, in the latter sharp and 
jagged*. Similar assumptions prevailed in modern times 
on the revival of the mechanical philosophy, and consti- 
tute a large part of the physical schemes of Descartes 
and Gassendi. They were also adopted to a considerable 
extent by the chemists. Acids were without hesitation 
assumed to consist of sharp pointed particles; which, "I 
hope," Lemery saysf, " no one will dispute, seeing every 
one's experience does demonstrate it : he needs but taste 
an acid to be satisfied of it, for it pricks the tongue like 

* De Rerum Natura, ii. 390 sqq. t Chemistry, p. 25. 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 367 

anything keen and finely cut." Such an assumption is 
not only altogether gratuitous and useless, but appears to 
be founded in some degree upon a confusion in the meta- 
phorical and literal use of such words as keen and sharp. 
The assumption once made, it was easy to accommodate 
it, in a manner equally arbitrary, to other facts. "A 
demonstrative and convincing proof that an acid does 
consist of pointed parts is, that not only all acid salts do 
crystallize into edges, but all dissolutions of different 
things, caused by acid liquors, do assume this figure in 
their crystallization. These crystals consist of points 
differing both in length and bigness one from another, 
and this diversity must be attributed to the keener or 
blunter edges of the different sorts of acids : and so like- 
wise this difference of the points in subtilty is the cause 
that one acid can penetrate and dissolve with one sort of 
miivt, that another can't rarify at all : Thus vinegar dis- 
solves lead, which aquafortis can't : aqua fortis dissolves 
quicksilver, which vinegar will not touch ; aqua regalis 
dissolves gold, whenas aquafortis cannot meddle with it; 
on the contrary, aqua fortis dissolves silver, but can do 
nothing with gold, and so of the rest." 

The leading fact of the vehement combination and 
complete union of acid and alkali readily suggested a fit 
form for the particles of the latter class of substances. 
" This effect," Lemery adds, " may make us reasonably 
conjecture that an alkali is a terrestrious and solid matter 
whose forms are figured after such a manner that the 
acid points entering in do strike and divide whatever 
opposes their motion." And in a like spirit are the 
speculations in Dr. MEAD'S Mechanical Account of Poisons 
(1745). Thus he explains the poisonous effect of corrosive 
sublimate of mercury by saying* that the particles of the 
salt are a kind of lamellae or blades to which the 

* P. 199. 



368 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

mercury gives an additional weight. If resublimed with 
three-fourths the quantity of mercury, it loses its corro- 
siveness, (becoming calomel,) which arises from this, that 
in sublimation " the crystalline blades are divided every 
time more and more by the force of the fire ;" and " the 
broken pieces of the crystals uniting into little masses of 
differing figures from their former make, those cutting 
points are now so much smaller that they cannot make 
wounds deep enough to be equally mischievous and 
deadly : and therefore do only vellicate and twitch the 
sensible membranes of the stomach." 

7. Among all this very fanciful and gratuitous assump- 
tion we may notice one true principle clearly introduced, 
namely, that the suppositions which we make respecting 
the forms of the elementary particles of bodies and their 
mode of combination must be such as to explain the facts 
of crystallization, as well as of mere chemical change. 
This principle we shall hereafter have occasion to insist 
upon further. 

I now proceed to consider a more refined form of 
assumption respecting the constitution of bodies, yet still 
one in which a vain attempt is made to substitute for the 
peculiar idea of chemical composition a more familiar 
mechanical conception. 

8. Compounds assumed to be determined by the Mecha- 
nical Attraction of the Elements. When, in consequence 
of the investigations and discoveries of Newton and his 
predecessors, the conception of mechanical force had 
become clear and familiar, so far as the action of external 
forces upon a body was concerned, it was very natural 
that the mathematicians who had pursued this train of 
speculation should attempt to apply the same conception 
to that mutual action of the internal parts of a body by 
which they are held together. Newton himself had 
pointed the way to this attempt. In the Preface to the 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 369 

Principia, after speaking of what he has done in calcu- 
lating the effects of forces upon the planets, satellites, 
&c., he adds, " Would it were permitted us to deduce the 
other phenomena of nature from mechanical principles 
by the same kind of reasoning. For many things move 
me to suspect that all these phenomena depend upon 
certain forces, by which the particles of bodies, through 
causes not yet known, are either urged towards each 
other, and cohere according to regular figures, or are 
repelled and recede from each other ; which forces being 
unknown, philosophers have hitherto made their attempts 
upon nature in vain." The same thought is at a later 
period followed out further in one of the Queries at the 
end of the Opticks*. " Have not the small particles of 
bodies certain Powers, Virtues, or Forces by which they 
act at a distance, not only upon the rays of light for 
reflecting, refracting and inflecting them, but also upon 
one another for producing a great part of the phenomena 
of nature?" And a little further on he proceeds to 
apply this expressly to chemical changes. " When Salt 
of Tartar runs per deliquium [or as we now express it, 
deliquesces] is not this done By an attraction between the 
particles of the Salt of Tartar and the particles of the 
water which float in the air in the form of vapours ? 
And why does not common salt, or saltpetre, or vitriol, 
run per deliquium, but for want of such an attraction ? or 
why does not Salt of Tartar draw more water out of the 
air than in a certain proportion to its quantity, but for 
want of an attractive force after it is saturated with 
water ?" He goes on to put a great number of similar 
cases, all tending to the same point, that chemical com- 
binations cannot be conceived in any other way than as 
an attraction of particles. 

9. Succeeding speculators in his school attempted to 

* Query 31. 
VOL. I. 2 B 



370 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

follow out this view. Dr. Frend, of Christ Church, in 
1710, published his Prcelectiones Gliymica, in quibusomnes 
fere Operationes Vliymicce ad vera Principia ex ipsius 
Natures Legibus rediguntur. Oxonii habita. This book is 
dedicated to Newton, and in the dedication, the promise 
of advantage to chemistry from the influence of the 
Newtonian discoveries is spoken of somewhat largely, 
much more largely, indeed, than has yet been justified by 
the sequel. After declaring in strong terms that the 
only prospect of improving science consists in following 
the footsteps of Newton, the author adds, " That force 
of attraction, of which you first so successfully traced 
the influence in the heavenly bodies, operates in the most 
minute corpuscles, as you long ago hinted in your Prin- 
cipia, and have lately plainly shown in your Opticks ; 
and this force we are only just beginning to perceive and 
to study. Under these circumstances I have been desir- 
ous of trying what is the result of this view in chemistry." 
The work opens formally enough, with a statement of 
general mechanical principles, of which the most peculiar 
are these : That there exists an attractive force by which 
particles when at very small distances from each other, 
are drawn together ; that this force is different, accord- 
ing to the different figure and density of the particles ; 
that the force may be greater on one side of a par- 
ticle than on the other ; that the force by which par- 
ticles cohere together arises from attraction, and is vari- 
ously modified according to the quantity of contacts." 
But these principles are not applied in any definite 
manner to the explanation of specific phenomena. He 
attempts, indeed, the question of special solvents*. Why 
does aqua fortis dissolve silver and not gold, while aqua 
regia dissolves gold and not silver? which, he says, is 
the most difficult question in chemistry, and which is 

* P. 54. 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 371 

certainly a fundamental one in the formation of chemical 
theory. He solves it by certain assumptions respecting 
the forces of attraction of the particles, and also the 
diameter of the particles of the acids and the pores of 
the metals, all which suppositions are gratuitous. 

10. We may observe further, that by speaking, as I have 
stated that he does, of the figure of particles, he mixes to- 
gether the assumption of the last section with the one 
which we are considering in this. This combination is very 
unphilosophical, or, to say the least, very insufficient, since 
it makes a new hypothesis necessary. If a body be com- 
posed of cubical particles, held together by their mutual 
attraction, by what force are the parts of each cube held 
together? In order to understand their structure, we 
are obliged again to assume a cohesive force of the 
second order, binding together the particles of each 
particle. And therefore Newton himself says*, .very 
justly, " The parts of all homogeneal hard bodies which 
fully touch each other, stick together very strongly : and 
for explaining how this is, some have invented hooked 
atoms, which is begging the question" For (he means 
to imply,) how do the parts of the hook stick together ? 

The same remark is applicable to all hypotheses in 
which particles of a complex structure are assumed as the 
constituents of bodies : for while we suppose bodies and 
their known properties to result from the mutual actions 
of these particles, we are compelled tJ suppose the parts 
of each particle to be held together by forces still more 
difficult to conceive, since they are disclosed only by the 
properties of these particles, which as yet are unknown. 
Yet Newton himself has not abstained from such hypo- 
theses : thus he saysf, " A particle of a salt may be com- 
pared to a chaos, being dense, hard, dry, and earthy in the 
centre, and moist and watery in the circumference." 

* Opticks, p. 364. t Ib., p. 362. 

2 B 2 



372 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

Since Newton's time the use of the term attrac- 
tion, as expressing the cause of the union of the 
chemical elements of bodies, has been familiarly con- 
tinued; and has, no doubt, been accompanied in the 
minds of many persons with an obscure notion that 
chemical attraction is, in some way, a kind of mechanical 
attraction of the particles of bodies. Yet this view has 
never, so far as I am aware, been worked out into a 
system of chemical theory; nor even applied with any 
distinctness as an explanation of any particular chemical 
phenomena. Any such attempt, indeed, could only tend 
to bring more clearly into view the entire inadequacy of 
such a mode of explanation. For the leading pheno- 
mena of chemistry are all of such a nature that no 
mechanical combination can serve to express them, with- 
out an immense accumulation of additional hypotheses. 
If we take as our problem the changes of colour, 
transparency, texture, taste, odour, produced by small 
changes in the ingredients, how can we expect to 
give a mechanical account of these, till we can give 
a mechanical account of colour, transparency, texture, 
taste, odour, themselves ? And if our mechanical hypo- 
thesis of the elementary constitution of bodies does not 
explain such phenomena as those changes, what can it 
explain, or what can be the value of it? I do not here 
insist upon a remark which will afterwards come before 
us, that even crystalline form, a phenomenon of a far 
more obviously mechanical nature than those just alluded 
to, has never yet been in any degree explained by such 
assumptions as this, that bodies consist of elementary 
particles exerting forces of the same nature as the central 
forces which we contemplate in Mechanics. 

When therefore Newton asks, " When some stones, 
as spar of lead, dissolved in proper menstruums, become 
salts, do not these things show that salts are dry earth 



CONCEPTION OF ELEMENTARY COMPOSITION. 373 

and watery acid united by attraction f " we may answer, 
that this mode of expression appears to be intended to 
identify chemical combination with mechanical attrac- 
tion ; that there would be no objection to any such 
identification if we could, in that way, explain, or even 
classify well, a collection of chemical facts ; but that 
this has never yet been done by the help of such expres- 
sions. Till some advance of this kind can be pointed 
out, we must necessarily consider the power which pro- 
duces chemical combination as a peculiar principle, a 
special relation of the elements, not rightly expressed in 
mechanical terms. And we now proceed to consider this 
relation under the name by which it is most familiarly 
known. 

CHAPTER II. 

ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 

1. THE earlier chemists did not commonly involve 
themselves in the confusion into which the mechanical 
philosophers ran, of comparing chemical to mechanical 
forces. Their attention was engaged, and their ideas 
were moulded, by their own pursuits. They saw that the 
connexion of elements and compounds with which they 
had to deal, was a peculiar relation which must be studied 
directly; and which must be understood, if understood 
at all, in itself, and not by comparison with a dif- 
ferent class of relations. At different periods of the 
progress of chemistry, the conception of this relation, 
still vague and obscure, was expressed in various man- 
ners; and at last this conception was clothed in tole- 
rably consistent phraseology, and the principles which it 
involved were, by the united force of thought and expe- 
riment, brought into view. 



374 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

2. The power by which the elements of bodies com- 
bine chemically, being, as we have seen, a peculiar agency, 
different from mere mechanical connexion or attraction, 
it is desirable to have it designated by a distinct and 
peculiar name ; and the term affinity has been employed 
for that purpose by most modern chemists. The word 
" affinity" in common language means, sometimes resem- 
blance, and sometimes relationship and ties of family. 
It is from the latter sense that the metaphor is bor- 
rowed when we speak of chemical affinity. By the 
employment of this term we do not indicate resemblance, 
but disposition to unite. Using the word in a common 
unscientific manner, we might say that chlorine, bromine, 
and iodine have a great natural affinity with each other, 
for there are considerable resemblances and analogies 

o 

among them ; but these bodies have very little chemical 
affinity for each other. The use of the word in the 
former sense, of resemblance, can be traced in earlier 
chemists; but it does not appear to have acquired its 
peculiar chemical meaning till after Boerhaave's time. 
Boerhaave, however, is the writer in whom we first find 
a due apprehension of the peculiarity and importance 
of the Idea which it now expresses. When we make 
a chemical solution*, he says, not only are the particles 
of the dissolved body separated from each other, but 
they are closely united to the particles of the solvent. 
When aqua regia dissolves gold, do you not see, he says 
to his hearers, that there must be between each particle 
of the solvent and of the metal, a mutual virtue by which 
each loves, unites with, and holds the other (amat, unity 
retinet) ? The opinion previously prevalent had been that 
the solvent merely separates the parts of the body dis- 
solved : and most philosophers had conceived this separa- 
tion as performed by mechanical operations of the par- 
* Elementa Chemice. Lugd. Bat. 1732, p. 677. 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 375 

tides, resembling, for instance, the operation of wedges 
breaking up a block of timber. But Boerhaave forcibly 
and earnestly points out the insufficiency of the concep- 
tion. This, he says, does not account for what we see. 
We have not only a separation, but a new combination. 
There is a force by which the particles of the solvent 
associate to themselves the parts dissolved, not a force by 
which they repel and dissever them. We are here to 
imagine not mechanical action, not violent impulse, not 
antipathy, but love, at least if love be the desire of unit- 
ing. (Non igitur hie etiam actiones mechanicae, non 
propulsiones violentae, non inimicitiae cogitandae, sed 
amicitiae, si amor dicendus copulas cupido.) The novelty 
of this view is evidenced by the mode in which he apolo- 
gizes for introducing it. " Fateor, paradoxa haec assertio." 
To Boerhaave, therefore, (especially considering his great 
influence as a teacher of chemistry,) we may assign the 
merit of first diffusing a proper view of chemical affinity 
as a peculiar force, the origin of almost all chemical 
changes and operations. 

3. To Boerhaave is usually assigned also the credit of 
introducing the word " affinity" among chemists ; but I do 
not find that the word is often used by him in this sense ; 
perhaps not at all*. But however this may be, the term is 

* See DUMAS, Legons de Philos. Chim., p. 364. REES' Cyclopaedia, 
Art. Chemistry. In the passage of Boerhaave to which I refer above, 
affinitas is rather opposed to, than identified with, chemical combina- 
tion. When, he says, the parts of the body to be dissolved are 
dissevered by the solvent, why do they remain united to the particles 
of the solvent, and why do not rather both the particles of the solvent 
and of the dissolved body collect into homogeneous bodies by their 
affinity ? denuo se affinitate suse nature colligant in corpora homo- 
genea ? And the answer is, because they possess another force which 
counteracts this affinity of homogeneous particles, and makes com- 
pounds of different elements. Affinity, in chemistry, now means the 
tendency of different kinds of matter to unite: but it appears, as I 
have said, to have acquired this sense since Boerhaave's time. 



376 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

on many accounts well worthy to be preserved, as I shall 
endeavour to show. Other terms were used in the same 
sense during the early part of the eighteenth century. 
Thus when Geoffroy, in 1718, laid before the Academy 
of Paris his Tables of Affinities, which perhaps did more 
than any other event to fix the idea of affinity, he termed 
them " Tables of the Relations of Bodies ;" " Tables des 
Rapports :" speaking however, also, of their " disposition 
to unite," and using other phrases of the same import. 

The term attraction, having been recommended by 
Newton as a fit word to designate the force which pro- 
duces chemical combination, continued in great favour in 
England, where the Newtonian philosophy was looked 
upon as applicable to every branch of science. In France, 
on the contrary, where Descartes stilt reigned triumphant, 
" attraction," the watch-word of the enemy, was a sound 
never uttered but with dislike and suspicion. In 1718 
(in the notice of Geoffrey's Tables,) the Secretary of the 
Academy, after pointing out some of the peculiar circum- 
stances of chemical combinations says, " Sympathies and 
attractions would suit well here, if there were such 
things." " Les sympathies, les attractions conviendroient 
bien ici, si elles etaient quelque chose." And at a later 
period, in 1731, having to write the eloge of Geoffroy 
after his death, he says, "He gave, in 1718, a singular 
system, and a Table of Affinities, or Relations of the 
different substances in chemistry. These affinities gave 
uneasiness to some persons, who feared that they were 
attractions in disguise, and all the more dangerous in con- 
sequence of the seductive forms which clever people have 
contrived to give them. It was found in the sequel that 
this scruple might be got over." 

This is the earliest published instance, so far as I am 
aware, in which the word "affinity" is distinctly used for the 
cause of chemical composition ; and taking into account 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 377 

the circumstances, the word appears to have been adopted 
in France in order to avoid the word attraction, which 
had the taint of Newtonianism. Accordingly we find 
the word ajffinite employed in the works of French che- 
mists from this time. Thus, in the Transactions of the 
French Academy for 1746, in a paper of Macquer's upon 
Arsenic, he says*, " On peut facilement rendre raison de 
ces phenomenes par le moyen des affinites que les dif- 
ferens substances qui entrent dans ces combinaisons, ont 
les uns avec les autres :" and he proceeds to explain the 
facts by reference to Geoffrey's Table. And in Macquer's 
Elements of Chemistry, which appeared a few years later, 
the " affinity of composition " is treated of as a leading 
part of the subject, much in the same way as has been 
practised in such books up to the present time. From 
this period the word appears to have become familiar to 
all European chemists in the sense of which we are now 
speaking. Thus, in the year 1758, the Academy of 
Sciences at Rouen offered a prize for the best dissertation 
on Affinity. The prize was shared between M. Limbourg 
of Theux, near Liege, and M. Le Sage of Geneva f. 
About the same time other persons (Manherrj:, Nicolai$, 
and others) wrote on the same subject, employing the 
same name. 

Nevertheless, in 1775, the Swedish chemist Bergman, 
pursuing still further this subject of chemical affinities, 
and the expression of them by means of tables, returned 
again to the old Newtonian term; and designated the 
disposition of a body to combine with one rather than 

* A. P. 1746, p. 201. 

t THOMSON'S Chemistry, iii. 10. Limbourg's Dissertation was 
published at Liege, in 1761 ; and Le Sage's at Geneva. 
J Dissertatio de Affinitate Corporum. Vindob. 1762. 
Progr. I. II. de Affinitate Corporum Chimica. Jen. 1775, 

1776. 



378 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

another of two others as elective attraction. And as his 
work on Elective Attractions had great circulation and 
great influence, this phrase has obtained a footing by the 
side of affinity, and both one arid the other are now in 
common use among chemists. 

4. I have said above that the term Affinity is worthy 
of being retained as a technical term. If we use the 
word attraction in this case, we identify or compare 
chemical with mechanical attraction ; from which iden- 
tification and comparison, as I have already remarked, 
no one has yet been able to extract the means of ex- 
pressing any single scientific truth. If such an identifi- 
cation or comparison be not intended, the use of the 
same word in two different senses can only lead to con- 
fusion : and the proper course, recommended by all the 
best analogies of scientific history, is to adopt a peculiar 
term for that peculiar relation on which chemical com- 
position depends. The word affinity, even if it were not 
rigorously proper according to its common meaning, 
still, being simple, familiar, and well established in this 
very usage, is much to be preferred before any other. 

But further, there are some analogies drawn from 
the common meaning of this word, which appear to 
recommend it as suitable for the office which it has 
to discharge. For common mechanical attractions and 
repulsions, the forces by which one body considered as a 
whole acts upon another external to it, are, as we have 
said, to be distinguished from those more intimate ties 
by which the parts of each body are held together. Now 
this difference is implied, if we compare the former rela- 
tions, the attractions and repulsions, to alliances and wars 
between states, and the latter, the internal union of parti- 
cles, to those bonds of affinity which connect the citizens 
of the same state with one another, and especially to the 
ties of family. We have seen that Boerhaave compares 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 379 

the union of two elements of a compound to their mar- 
riage; "we must allow," says an eminent chemist of 
our own time*, " that there is some truth in this poetical 
comparison." It contains this truth, that the two 
become one to most intents and purposes, and that the 
unit thus formed (the family) is not a mere juxtaposition 
of the component parts. And thus the idea of Affinity as 
the peculiar principle of chemical composition, is esta- 
blished among chemists, and designated by a familiar and 
appropriate name. 

5. Analysis is possible. We must, however, endea- 
vour to obtain a further insight into this idea, thus fixed 
and named. We must endeavour to extricate, if not 
from the idea itself, from the processes by which it has 
obtained acceptation and currency among chemists, some 
principles which may define its application, some addi- 
tional specialties in the relations which it implies. This 
we shall proceed to do. 

The idea of affinity, as already explained, implies a 
disposition to combine. But this combination is to be 
understood as admitting also of a possibility of separa- 
tion. Synthesis implies analysis as conceivable : or to 
recur to the image which we have already used, divorce 
is possible when the marriage has taken place. 

That there is this possibility, is a conviction implied in 
all the researches of chemists, ever since the true notion of 
composition began to predominate in their investigations. 
One of the first persons who clearly expressed this con- 
viction was Mayow, an English physician, who published 
his Medico-Physical Tracts in 1674. The first of them, 
De Sale-Nitro et Spiritu Nitro-Aerio, contains a clear 
enunciation of this principle. After showing how, in the 
combinations of opposite elements, as acid and alkali, 
their properties entirely disappear, and a new substance 
* DUMAS, Lemons de Phil. Chim., p. 363. 



380 . PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

is formed not at all resembling either of the ingredients, 
he adds*, "Although these salts thus mixed appear to be 
destroyed, it is still possible for them to be separated 
from each other, with their powers still entire." He 
proceeds to exemplify this, and illustrates it by the same 
image which I have already alluded to : " Salia acida a 
salibus volatilibus discedunt, ut cum sale fixo tartari, 
tanquam sponso magis idoneo, conjugium strictius ineunt." 
This idea of a synthesis which left a complete analysis still 
possible, was opposed to a notion previously current, that 
when two heterogeneous bodies united together and 
formed a third body, the two constituents were entirely 
destroyed, and the result formed out of their ruinsf- 
And this conception of synthesis and analysis, as processes 
which are possible successively and alternately, and each 
of which supposes the possibility of the other, has been 
the fundamental and regulative principle of the operations 
and speculations of analytical chemistry from the time of 
Mayow to the present day. 

6. Affinity is elective. When the idea of chemical 
affinity, or disposition to unite, was brought into view by 
the experiments and reasonings of chemists, they found 
it necessary to consider this disposition as elective; 
each element chose one rather than another of the ele- 
ments which were presented to it, and quitted its union 
with one to unite with another which it preferred. This 
has already appeared in the passage just quoted from 
Mayow. He adds in the same strain, " I have no doubt 
that fixed salts choose one acid rather than another, in 
order that they may coalesce with it in a more intimate 
union." " Nullus dubito salia fixa acidum unum prse 
aliis eligere, ut cum eodem arctiore unione coalescant." 
The same thought is expressed and exemplified by other 
chemists : they notice innumerable cases in which, when 

* Cap. xiv., p. 233. t THOMSON'S Chemistry, iii. 8. 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 381 

an ingredient is combined with a liquid, if a new sub- 
stance be immersed which has a greater affinity for the 
liquid, the liquid combines with the new substance by 
election, and the former ingredient is precipitated. Thus 
Stahl says*, "In spirit of nitre dissolve silver; put in 
copper and the silver is thrown down ; put in iron and 
the copper goes down ; put in zinc, the iron precipitates ; 
put in volatile alkali, the zinc is separated ; put in fixed 
alkali, the volatile quits its hold." As may be seen in 
this example, we have in such cases, not only a prefer- 
ence, but a long gradation of preferences. The spirit of 
nitre will combine with silver, but it prefers copper; 
prefers iron more; zinc still more; volatile alkali yet 
more ; fixed alkali the most. 

The same thing was proved to obtain with regard to 
each element ; and when this was ascertained, it became 
the object of chemists to express these degrees of prefer- 
ence, by lists in which substances were arranged accord- 
ing to their disposition to unite with another substance. 
In this manner was formed Geoffrey's Table of Affinities 
(1718), which we have already mentioned. This Table 
was further improved by other writers, as Gellert (1751) 
and Limbo urg (1761). Finally Bergman improved these 
Tables still further, taking into account not only the 
order of affinities of each element for others, but the sum 
of the tendencies to unite of each two elements, which 
sum, he held, determined the resulting combination when 
several elements were in contact with each other. 

7. As we have stated in the History f, when the doc- 
trine of elective affinities had assumed this very definite 
and systematic form, it was assailed by Berthollet, who 
maintained, in his Essai de Statique Chimique, (1803,) 
that chemical affinities are not elective : that, when 
various elements are brought together, their combinations 

* Zymotechma, 1697, p. 117. t Hist. Ind. Sci., iii. 115, 



382 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

do not depend upon the kind of elements alone, but upon 
the quantity of each which is present, that which is 
most abundant always entering most largely into the 
resulting compounds. It may seem strange that it should 
be possible, at so late a period of the science, to throw 
doubt upon a doctrine which had presided over and 
directed its progress so long. Proust answered Ber- 
thollet, and again maintained that chemical affinity is 
elective. I have, in the History, given the judgment of 
Berzelius upon this controversy. " Berthollet," he says, 
" defended himself with an acuteness which makes the 
reader hesitate in his judgment ; but the great mass of 
facts finally decided the point in favour of Proust." I 
may here add the opinion pronounced upon this subject 
by Dr. Turner*. "Bergman erred in supposing the 
result of chemical action to be in every case owing to 
elective affinity [for this power is modified in its effects by 
various circumstances]: but Berthollet ran into the oppo- 
site extreme in declaring that the effects formerly ascribed 
to that power are never produced by it. That chemical 
attraction is exerted between different bodies with dif- 
ferent degrees of energy, is, I apprehend, indisputable." 
And he then proceeds to give many instances of differ- 
ences in affinity which cannot be accounted for by the 
operation of any modifying causes. Still more recently, 
M. Dumas has taken a review of this controversy ; and, 
speaking with enthusiasm of the work of Berthollet, as 
one which had been of inestimable service to himself in 
his early study of chemistry, he appears at first disposed 
to award to him the victory in this dispute. But his 
final verdict leaves undamaged the general principle now 
under our consideration, that chemical affinity is elective. 
" For my own part," he saysf, " I willingly admit the no- 

* Chemistry, p. 199. 6th edition, 
t Legons de Philosophic Chimigue, p. 386. 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 883 

tions of Berthollet when we have to do with acids or with 
bases, of which the energy is nearly equal: but when 
bodies endued with very energetic affinities are in pre- 
sence of other bodies of which the affinities are very 
feeble, I propose to adopt the following rule : In a solu- 
tion, everything remaining dissolved, the strong affinities 
satisfy themselves, leaving the weak affinities to arrange 
matters with one another. The strong acids take the 
strong bases, and the weak acids can only unite with the 
weak bases. The known facts are perfectly in accordance 
with this practical rule." It is obvious that this recog- 
nition of a distinction between strong and weak affinities 
which operates to such an extent as to determine entirely 
the result, is a complete acknowledgement of the elective 
nature of affinity as far as any person acquainted with 
chemical operations could contend for it. For it must 
be allowed by all, that solubility, and other collateral cir- 
cumstances, influence the course of chemical combina- 
tions, since they determine whether or not there shall 
take place that contact of elements without which affinity 
cannot possibly operate. 

8. Affinity is Definite as to Quantity. In proportion 
as chemists obtained a clearer view of the products of the 
laboratory as results of the composition of elements, 
they saw more and more clearly that these results were 
definite ; that one element not only preferred to combine 
with another of a certain kind, but also would combine 
with it to a certain extent and no further, thus giving to 
the result not an accidental and variable, but a fixed and 
constant character. Thus salts being considered as the 
result of the combination of two opposite principles, acid 
and alkali, and being termed neutral when these prin- 
ciples exactly balanced each other, Rouelle (who was 
Royal Professor at Paris in 1742,) admits of neutral 
salts with excess of acid, neutral salts with excess of 



384 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

base, and perfect neutral salts. Beaume maintained* 
against him that there were no salts except those per- 
fectly neutral, the other classes being the results of mix- 
ture and imperfect combination. But this question was 
not adequately treated till chemists made every experi- 
ment with the balance in their hands. When this was 
done, they soon discovered that, in each neutral salt, the 
proportional weights of the ingredients which composed it 
were always the same. This was ascertained by Wenzel, 
whose Doctrine of the Affinities of Bodies appeared in 
1777. He not only ascertained that the proportions of 
elements in neutral chemical compounds are definite, but 
also that they are reciprocal ; that is, that if A, a certain 
weight of a certain acid, neutralize m, a certain weight of 
a certain base, and B, a certain weight of a certain other 
acid, neutralize n, a certain weight of a certain other base; 
the compound of A and n will also be neutral ; as also that 
of B and m. The same views were again presented by 
Richter in 1 792, in his Principles of the Measure of Che- 
mical Elements. And along with these facts, that of the 
combination of elements in multiple proportions being 
also taken into account, the foundations of the Atomic 
Theory were laid ; and that theory was propounded in 
1803 by Mr. Dalton. That theory, however, rests upon 
the idea of substance, as well as upon that idea of chemi- 
cal affinity which we are here considering ; and the dis- 
cussion of its evidence and truth must be for the present 
deferred. 

9. The two principles just explained, that affinity is 
definite as to the kind, and as to the quantity of the ele- 
ments which it unites, have here been stated as results of 
experimental investigation. That they could never have 
been clearly understood, and therefore never firmly esta- 
blished, without laborious and exact experiments, is 

* DUMAS, PML Chim., p. 198. 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 385 

certain ; but yet we may venture to say that being once 
known, they possess an evidence beyond that of mere 
experiment. For how, in fact, can we conceive combi- 
nations, otherwise than as definite in kind and quantity? 
If we were to suppose each element ready to combine 
with any other indifferently, and indifferently in any 
quantity, we should have a w r orld in which all would be 
confusion and indefiniteness. There would be no fixed 
kinds of bodies ; salts, and stones, and ores, would ap- 
proach to and graduate into each other by insensible de- 
grees. Instead of this, we know that the world consists 
of bodies distinguishable from each other by definite dif- 
ferences, capable of being classified and named, and of 
having general propositions asserted concerning them. 
And as we cannot conceive a world in which this should 
not be the case, it would appear that we cannot conceive 
a state of things in which the laws of the combination 
of elements should not be of that definite and measured 
kind which we have above asserted. 

This will, perhaps, appear more clearly by stating our 
fundamental convictions respecting chemical composition 
in another form, which I shall, therefore, proceed to do. 

10. Chemical Composition determines Physical Proper- 
ties. However obscure and incomplete may be our con- 
ception of the internal powers by which the ultimate 
particles of bodies are held together, it involves, at least, 
this conviction : that these powers are what determine 
bodies to be bodies, and therefore contain the reason of all 
the properties which, as bodies, they possess. The forces 
by which the particles of a body are held together, also 
cause it to be hard or soft, heavy or light, opake or trans- 
parent, black or red ; for if these forces are not the 
cause of these peculiarities, what can be the cause ? By 
the very supposition which we make respecting these 
forces, they include all the relations by which the parts 
VOL. i. 2 c 



386 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

are combined into a whole, and therefore they, and they 
only, must determine all the attributes of the whole. 
The foundation of all our speculations respecting the 
intimate constitution of bodies must be this, that their 
composition determines their properties. 

Accordingly we find our chemists reasoning from this 
principle with great confidence, even in doubtful cases. 
Thus Davy, in his researches concerning the diamond, 
says: "That some chemical difference must exist between 
the hardest and most beautiful of the gems and charcoal, 
between a non-conductor and a conductor of electricity, 
it is scarcely possible to doubt : and it seems reasonable to 
expect that a very refined or perfect chemistry will confirm 
the analogies of nature ; and show that bodies cannot be 
the same in their composition or chemical nature, and 
yet totally different in their chemical properties." It is 
obvious that the principle here assumed is so far from 
being a mere result of experience, that it is here appealed 
to to prove that all previous results of experience on this 
subject must be incomplete and inaccurate; and that 
there must be some chemical difference between charcoal 
and diamond, though none had hitherto been detected. 

11. In what manner, according to what rule, the 
chemical composition shall determine the kind of the sub- 
stance, we cannot reasonably expect to determine by mere 
conjecture or assumption, without a studious examination 
of natural bodies and artificial compounds. Yet even in 
the most recent times, and among men of science, we find 
that an assumption of the most arbitrary character has 
in one case been mixed up with this indisputable principle, 
that the elementary composition determines the kind of 
the substance. In the classification of minerals, one 
school of mineralogists have rightly taken it as their fun- 
damental principle that the chemical composition shall 
decide the position of the mineral in the system. But 



IDEA OF CHEMICAL AFFINITY. 387 

they have appended to this principle, arbitrarily and 
unjustifiably, the maxim that the element which is largest 
in quantity shall fix the class of the substance. To make 
such an assumption is to renounce, at once, all hope of 
framing a system which shall be governed by the resem- 
blances of the things classified ; for how can we possibly 
know beforehand that fifty-five per cent, of iron shall 
give a substance its predominant properties, and that 
forty-five per cent, shall not ? Accordingly, the systems 
of mineralogical arrangement which have been attempted 
in this way, (those of Haiiy, Phillips, and others,) have 
been found inconsistent with themselves, ambiguous, and 
incapable of leading to any general truths. 

12. Thus the physical properties of bodies depend 
upon their chemical composition, but in a manner which 
a general examination of bodies with reference to their 
properties and their composition can alone determine. 
We may, however, venture to assert further, that the 
more definite the properties are, the more distinct may 
we expect to find this dependence. Now the most 
definite of the properties of bodies are those constant 
properties which involve relations of space : that is, their 
figure. We speak not, however, of that external figure, 
derived from external circumstances, which, so far from 
being constant and definite, is altogether casual and arbi- 
trary; but of that figure which arises from their internal 
texture, and which shows itself not only in the regular 
forms which they spontaneously assume, but in the 
disposition of the parts to separate in definite directions 
and no others. In short, the most definite of the pro- 
perties of perfect chemical compounds is their crystalline 
structure ; and therefore it is evident that the crystalline 
structure of each body, and the forms which it affects, 
must be in a most intimate dependence upon its chemical 
composition. 

2 c 2 



388 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

Here again we are led to the brink of another theory; 
that of crystalline structure, which has excited great 
interest among philosophers ever since the time of 
Haiiy. But this theory involves, besides that idea of 
chemical composition with which we are here concerned, 
other conceptions which enter into the relations of 
figure. These conceptions, governed principally by the 
idea of Symmetry, must be unfolded and examined before 
we can venture to discuss any theory of crystallization : 
and we shall proceed to do this as soon as we have 
first duly considered the Idea of Substance and its con- 
sequences. 



CHAPTER III. 
OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 

1. Axiom of the Indestructibility of Substance. We 
now come to an Idea of which the history is very different 
from those of which we have lately been speaking. 
Instead of being gradually and recently brought into a 
clear light, as has been the case with the Ideas of Polarity 
and Affinity, the Idea of Substance has been entertained 
in a distinct form from the first periods of European 
speculation. That this is so, is proved by our finding a 
principle depending upon this idea current as an axiom 
among the early philosophers of Greece : namely, that 
nothing can be produced out of nothing. Such an axiom, 
more fully stated, amounts to this : that the substance of 
which a body consists is incapable of being diminished 
(and consequently incapable of being augmented) in 
quantity, whatever apparent changes it may undergo. 
Its form, its distribution, its qualities may vary, but the 
substance itself is identically the same under all these 
variations. 



IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 389 

The axiom just spoken of was the great principle of 
the physical philosophy of the Epicurean school, as it 
must be of every merely material philosophy. The 
reader of Lucretius will recollect the emphasis with 
which it is repeatedly asserted in his poem : 

E nilo nil gigni, in niluin nil posse reverti ; 
Nought comes of nought, nor ought returns to nought. 

Those who engaged in these early attempts at physical 
speculation were naturally much pleased with the clear- 
ness which was given to their notions of change, compo- 
sition, and decomposition, by keeping steadily hold of the 
Idea of Substance, as marked by this fundamental axiom. 
Nor has its authority ever ceased to be acknowledged. 
A philosopher was asked *, What is the weight of smoke ? 
He answered, Subtract the weight of the ashes from the 
weight of the wood which is burnt, and you have the 
weight of the smoke. This reply would be assented to 
by all ; and it assumes as incontestable that even under 
the action of fire, the material, the substance, does not 
perish, but only changes its form. 

This principle of the indestructibility of substance 
might easily be traced in many reasonings and researches, 
ancient and modern. For instance, when the chemist 
works with the retort, he places the body on which he 
operates in one part of an inclosed cavity, which, by its 
bendings and communications, separates at the same 
time that it confines, the products which result from 
the action of fire : and he assumes that this process 
is an analysis of the body into its ingredients, not a 
creation of anything which did not exist before, or a 
destruction of anything which previously existed. And 
he assumes further, that the total quantity of the sub- 
stance thus analysed is the sum of the quantities of its 
ingredients. This principle is the very basis of chemical 
speculation as we shall hereafter explain more fully. 
* KANT, Kritik, <kr R. F., p. 16?. 



390 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

2. The Idea of Substance. The axiom above spoken 
of depends upon the Idea of Substance, which is involved 
in all our views of external objects. We unavoidably 
assume that the qualities and properties which we observe 
are properties of things; that the adjective implies a 
substantive ; that there is, besides the external characters 
of things, something of which they are the characters. 
An apple which is red, and round, and hard, is not merely 
redness, and roundness, and hardness : these circum- 
stances may all alter while the apple remains the same 
apple. Behind the appearances which we see, we con- 
ceive something of which we think ; or to use the 
metaphor which obtained currency among the ancient 
philosophers, the attributes and qualities which we observe 
are supported by and inherent in something : and this 
something is hence called a substratum or substance, that 
which stands beneath the apparent qualities and supports 
them. 

That we have such an Idea, using the term in the 
sense in which I have employed it throughout these 
disquisitions, is evident from what has been already said. 
The Axiom of the indestructibility of substance proves 
the existence of the Idea of Substance, just as the Axioms 
of Geometry and Arithmetic prove the existence of the 
Ideas of Space and Number. In the case of substance, 
as of space or number, the ideas cannot be said to be 
borrowed from experience, for the axioms have an 
authority of a far more comprehensive and demonstrative 
character than any which experience can bestow. The 
axiom that nothing can be produced from nothing and 
nothing destroyed, is so far from being a result of expe- 
rience, that it is apparently contradicted by the most 
obvious observation. It has, at first, the air of a paradox, 
and by those who refer to it, it is familiarly employed to 
show how fallacious common observation is. The asser- 



IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 391 

tion is usually made in this form ; that nothing is created 
and nothing annihilated, notwithstanding that the common 
course of our experience appears to show the contrary. 
The principle is not an empirical, but a necessary and 
universal truth : is collected, not from the evidence of 
our senses, but from the operation of our ideas. And 
thus the universal and undisputed authority of the axiom 
proves the existence of the Idea of Substance. 

3. Lockers Denial of the Idea of Substance. I shall 
not attempt to review the various opinions which have 
been promulgated respecting this idea : but it may be 
worth our while to notice briefly the part it played in 
the great controversy concerning the origin of our ideas 
which LOCKE'S Essay occasioned. Locke's object was to 
disprove the existence of all ideas not derived from 
Sensation or Reflection : and since the idea of substance 
as distinct from external qualities, is manifestly not derived 
directly from sensation, nor by any very obvious or dis- 
tinct process from reflection, Locke was disposed to 
exclude the idea as much as possible. Accordingly, in 
his argumentation against Innate Ideas *, he says plainly, 
" the idea of substance, which we neither have nor can. 
have by sensation or reflection." And" the inference 
which he draws is, " that we have no such clear idea at 
all." What then, it may be asked, do we mean by the 
word substance? This also he answers, though some- 
what strangely, "We signify nothing by the word 
substance, but only an uncertain supposition of we know 
not what, i. e. 9 of something whereof we have no par- 
ticular distinct positive idea, which we take to be the 
substratum, or support, of those ideas we know." That 
while he indulged in this tautological assertion of our 
ignorance and uncertainty, he should still have been 
compelled to acknowledge that the word substance had 

* Essay, b, i., ch. 4, ? s. 18. 



302 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

some meaning, and should have been driven to explain it 
by the identical metaphors of substratum and support, is 
a curious proof how impossible it is entirely to reject this 
idea. 

But as we have already seen, the supposition of the 
existence of substance is so far from being uncertain, that 
it carries with it irresistible conviction, and substance is 
necessarily conceived as something which cannot be pro- 
duced or destroyed. It may be easily supposed, therefore, 
that when the controversy between Locke and his assail- 
ants came to this point, he would be in some difficulty. 
And, indeed, though with his accustomed skill in contro- 
versy, he managed to retain a triumphant tone, he was 
driven from his main points. Thus he repels the charge 
that he took the being of substance to be doubtful*. 
He says, " Having everywhere affirmed and built upon it 
that man is a substance, I cannot be supposed to question 
or doubt of the being of substance, till I can question or 
doubt of my own being." He attempts to make a stand 
by saying that being of things does not depend upon our 
ideas ; but if he had been asked how, without having an 
idea of substance, he knew substance to be, it is difficult 
to conceive what answer he could have made. Again, he 
had said that our idea of substance arises from our 
accustoming ourselves to suppose a substratum of qua- 
lities. Upon this his adversary, Bishop Stillingfleet, very 
properly asks, Is this custom grounded upon true reason 
or no ? To which Locke replies, that it is grounded upon 
this : That we cannot conceive how simple ideas of sensible 
qualities should subsist alone ; and therefore we suppose 
them to exist in, and to be supported by some common 
subject, which support we denote by the name substance. 
Thus he allows, not only that we necessarily assume the 
reality of substance, but that we cannot conceive qualities 
* Essay, b. ii., ch. 2, and First Letter to the Bishop of Worcester. 



IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 393 

without substance ; which are concessions so ample as 
almost to include all that any advocate for the Idea of 
Substance need desire. 

Perhaps Locke, and the adherents of Locke, in deny- 
ing that we have an idea of substance in general, were 
latently influenced by finding that they could not, by any 
effort of mind, call up any image winch could be con- 
sidered as an image of substance in general. That in 
this sense we have no idea of substance, is plain enough ; 
but in the same sense we have no idea of space in 
general, or of time, or number, or cause, or resemblance. 
Yet we certainly have such a power of representing to 
our minds space, time, number, cause, resemblance, as to 
arrive at numerous truths by means of such representa- 
tions. These general representations I have all along- 
called Ideas, nor can I discover any more appropriate 
word ; and in this sense, we have also, as has now been 
shown, an Idea of Substance. 

4. Is all Material Substance heavy? The principle 
that the quantity of the substance of any body remains 
unchanged by our operations upon it, is, as we have said, 
of universal validity. But then the question occurs, how 
are we to ascertain the quantity of substance, and thus 
to apply the principle in particular cases. In the case 
above mentioned, where smoke was to be weighed, it 
was manifestly assumed that the quantity of the substance 
might be known by its weight ; and that the total 
quantity being unchanged, the total weight also would 
remain the same. Now on what grounds do we make 
this assumption ? Is all material substance heavy ? and 
if we can assert this to be so, on what grounds does the 
truth of the assertion rest ? These are not idle questions 
of barren curiosity ; for in the history of that science 
(Chemistry) to which the idea of substance is principally 
applicable, nothing less than the fate of a comprehensive 



394 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

and long established theory (the Phlogiston theory) 
depended upon the decision of this question. When it 
.was urged that the reduction of a metal from a calcined 
to a metallic form could not consist in the addition of 
phlogiston, because the metal was lighter than the calx 
had been ; it was replied by some, that this was not con- 
clusive, for that phlogiston was a principle of levity, 
diminishing the weight of the body to which it was 
added. This reply was, however, rejected by all the 
sounder philosophers, and the force of the argument 
finally acknowledged. But why was this suggestion of a 
substance having no weight, or having absolute levity, 
repudiated by the most reflective reasoners? It is as- 
sumed, it appears, that all matter must be heavy; what is 
the ground of this assumption ? 

The ground of such an assumption appears to be the 
following. Our idea of substance includes in it this : 
that substance is a quantity capable of addition ; and 
thus capable of making up, by composition, a sum equal 
to all its parts. But substance, and the quantity of sub- 
stance, can be known to us only by its attributes and qua- 
lities. And the qualities which are capable constantly 
and indefinitely of increase and diminution by increase 
and diminution of the parts, must be conceived insepa- 
rable from the substance. For the qualities, if removable 
from the substance at all, must be removable by some 
operation performed upon the substance; and by the 
idea of substance, all such operations are only equivalent 
to separation, junction, and union of parts. Hence those 
characters which thus universally increase and diminish 
by addition and subtraction of the things themselves, 
belong to the substance of the things. They are measures 
of quantity, and not merely separable qualities. 

The weight of bodies is such a character. However 
we compound or divide bodies, we compound and divide 



IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 895 

their weight in the same manner. We may dismember a 
body into the minutest parts ; but the sum of the weights 
of the parts is always equal to the whole weight of the 
body. The weight of a body can be in no way increased 
or diminished except by adding something to it or taking- 
something from it. If we bake a brick, we do not con- 
ceive that the change of colour or of hardness, implies 
that anything has been created or destroyed. It may 
easily be that the parts have only assumed a new 
arrangement ; but if the brick have lost weight, we sup- 
pose that something (moisture for instance,) has been 
removed elsewhere. 

Thus weight is apprehended as essential to matter. 
In considering the dismemberment or analysis of bodies, 
we assume that there must be some criterion of the quan- 
tity of substance ; and this criterion can possess no other 
properties than their weight possesses. If we assume 
an element which has no weight, or the weight of 
which is negative, as some of the defenders of phlo- 
giston attempted to do, we put an end to all speculation 
on such subjects. For if weight is not the criterion of 
the quantity of one element, phlogiston for instance, why 
is weight the criterion of the quantity of any other ele- 
ment ? We may, by the same right, assume any other 
real or imaginary element to have levity instead of gra- 
vity ; or to have a peculiar intensity of gravity which 
makes its weight no index of its quantity. In short, if 
we do this, we deprive of all possibility of application our 
notions of element, analysis, and composition ; and vio- 
late the postulates on which the questions are propounded 
which we thus attempt to decide. 

We must, then, take a constant and quantitative pro- 
perty of matter, such as weight is, to be an index of the 
quantity of matter or of substance to which it belongs. 
I do not here speak of the question which has sometimes 



396 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

been proposed, whether the iveight or the inertia of 
bodies be the more proper measure of the quantity of 
matter. For the measure of inertia is regulated by the 
same assumption as that of substance : that the quantity 
of the whole must be equal to the quantity of all the 
parts : and inertia is measured by weight, for the same 
reason that substance is so. 

Having thus established the certainty, and ascertained 
the interpretation of the fundamental principle which the 
Idea of Substance involves, we are prepared to consider 
its application in the science upon which it has a peculiar 
bearing. 



CHAPTER IV. 

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE IN 
CHEMISTRY. 

1. A Body is Equal to the Sum of its Elements. 
From the earliest periods of chemistry the balance has 
been familiarly used to determine the proportions of the 
ingredients and of the compound ; and soon after the 
middle of the last century, this practice was so studiously 
followed, that Wenzel and Richter were thereby led to 
the doctrine of definite proportions. But yet the full 
value and significance of the balance, as an indispensable 
instrument in chemical researches, was not understood till 
the gaseous, as well as solid and fluid ingredients were 
taken into the account. When this was done, it was 
found that the principle, that the whole is equal to the 
sum of its parts, of which, as we have seen, the necessary 
truth, in such cases, flows from the idea of substance, 
could be applied in the most rigorous manner. And con- 
versely, it was found that by the use of the balance, the 
chemist could decide, in doubtful cases, which was a 
whole, and which were parts. 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 397 

For it may be observed that chemistry considers all 
the changes which belong to her province as compositions 
and decompositions of elements : but still the question 
may occur, whether an observed change be the one or 
the other. How can we distinguish whether the process 
which we contemplate be composition or decomposition? 
Whether the new body be formed by addition of a new, 
or subtraction of an old element ? Again ; in the case of 
decomposition, we may inquire, what are the ultimate 
limits of our analysis ? If we decompound bodies into 
others more and more simple, how far can we carry this 
succession of processes ? How far can we proceed in the 
road of analysis ? And in our actual course, what evidence 
have we that our progress, as far as it has gone, has carried 
us from the more complex to the more simple? To this we 
reply, that the criterion which enables us to distinguish, 
decidedly and finally, whether our process have been a 
mere analysis of the proposed body into its ingredients, or 
a synthesis of some of them with some new element, is 
the principle stated above, that the weight of the whole is 
equal to the weight of all the parts. And no process of 
chemical analysis or synthesis can be considered complete 
till it has been^ verified by this fact ; by finding that the 
weight of the compound is the weight of its supposed in- 
gredients ; or, that if there be an element which we think 
we have detached from the whole, its loss is betrayed by a 
corresponding diminution of weight. 

I have already noticed what an important part this 
principle has played in the great chemical controversy 
which ended in the establishment of the oxygen theory, 
The calcination of a metal was decided to be the union 
of oxygen with the metal, and not the separation of 
phlogiston from it, because it was found that in the pro- 
cess of calcination, the weight of the metal increased, 
and increased exactly as much as the weight of ambient 



398 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

air diminished. When oxygen and hydrogen were ex- 
ploded together, and a small quantity of water was pro- 
duced, it was held that this was really a synthesis of 
water, because, when very great care was taken with the 
process, the weight of the water which resulted was equal 
to the weight of the gases which disappeared. 

2. Lavoisier. It was when gases came to be con- 
sidered as entering largely into the composition of liquid 
and solid bodies, that extreme accuracy in weighing was 
seen to be so necessary to the true understanding of 
chemical processes. It was in this manner discovered by 
Lavoisier and his contemporaries that oxygen constitutes 
a large ingredient of calcined metals, of acids, and of 
water. A countryman of Lavoisier* has not only given 
most just praise to that great philosopher for having con- 
stantly tested all his processes by a careful and skilful use 
of the balance, but has also claimed for him the merit of 
having introduced the maxim, that in chemical operations 
nothing is created and nothing lost. But I think it is 
impossible to deny that this maxim is assumed in all the 
attempts at analysis made by his contemporaries, as well 
as by him. This maxim is indeed included in any clear 
notion of analysis: it could not be the result of the 
researches of any one chemist, but was the governing 
principle of the reasonings of all. Lavoisier, however, 
employed this principle with peculiar assiduity and skill. 
In applying it, he does not confine himself to mere addi- 
tions and subtractions of the quantities of ingredients ; 
but often obtains his results by more complex processes. 
In one of his investigations he says, " I may consider the 
ingredients which are brought together, and the result 
which is obtained as an algebraical equation ; and if I 
successively suppose each of the quantities of this equation 
to be unknown, I can obtain its value from the rest : and 

* M. DUMAS, Leqonsch la Philosophic Chimiqw. 1837. p. 157. 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 399 

thus I can rectify the experiment by the calculation, and 
the calculation by the experiment. I have often taken 
advantage of this method, in order to correct the first 
results of my experiments, and to direct me in repeating 
them with proper precautions." 

The maxim that the whole is equal to the sum of all 
its parts, is thus capable of most important and varied 
employment in chemistry. But it may be applied in 
another form to the exclusion of a class of speculations 
which are often put forwards. 

3. Maxim respecting Imponderable Elements. Several 
of the phenomena which belong to bodies, as heat, light, 
electricity, magnetism, have been explained hypothetical ly 
by assuming the existence of certain fluids; but these fluids 
have never been shown to have weight. Hence such 
hypothetical fluids have been termed imponderable elements. 
It is however plain, that so long as these fluids appear 
to be without weight, they are not elements of bodies in 
the same sense as those elements of which we have 
hitherto been speaking. Indeed we may with good 
reason doubt whether those phenomena depend upon 
transferable fluids at all. We have seen strong reason 
to believe that light is not matter, but only motion ; and 
the same thing appears to be probable with regard to 
heat. Nor is it at all inconceivable that a similar hypo- 
thesis respecting electricity and magnetism should here- 
after be found tenable. Now if heat, light, and those 
other agents, be not matter, they are not elements in 
such a sense as to be included in the principle referred 
to above, that the body is equal to the sum of its ele- 
ments. Consequently the maxim just stated, that in 
chemical operations nothing is created, nothing annihi- 
lated, does not apply to light and heat. They are not 
things. And whether heat can be produced where there 
was no heat before, and light struck out from darkness, 



400 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

the ideas of which we are at present treating do not 
enable us to say. In reasoning respecting chemical 
synthesis and analysis therefore, we shall only make con- 
fusion by attempting to include in our conception the 
light and heat which are produced and destroyed. Such 
phenomena may be very proper subjects of study, as 
indeed they undoubtedly are ; but they cannot be studied 
to advantage by considering them as sharing the nature 
of composition and decomposition. 

Again : in all attempts to explain the processes of 
nature, the proper course is, first to measure the facts 
with precision, and then to endeavour to understand 
their cause. Now the facts of chemical composition and 
decomposition, the weights of the ingredients and of the 
compounds, are facts measurable with the utmost preci- 
sion and certainty. But it is far otherwise with the light 
and heat which accompany chemical processes. When 
combustion, deflagration, explosion, takes place, how can 
we measure the light or the heat? Even in cases of 
more tranquil action, though we can apply the thermo- 
meter, what does the thermometer tell us respecting the 
quantity of the heat ? Since then we have no measure 
which is of any value as regards such circumstances in 
chemical changes, if we attempt to account for these 
phenomena on chemical principles, we introduce, into 
investigations in themselves perfectly precise and mathe- 
matically rigorous, another class of reasonings, vague 
and insecure, of which the only possible effect is to vitiate 
the whole reasoning, and to make our conclusions ine- 
vitably erroneous. 

We are led then to this maxim : that imponderable 
fluids are not to be admitted as chemical elements of bodies*. 

* Since we are thus warned by a sound view of the nature of 
science, from considering chemical affinity as having any hold upon 
imponderable elements, we are manifestly still more decisively pro- 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 401 

4. It appears, I think, that our best and most philo- 
sophical chemists have proceeded upon this principle in 
their investigations. In reasoning concerning the consti- 
tution of bodies and the interpretation of chemical changes, 
the attempts to include in these interpretations the heat 
or cold produced, by the addition or subtraction of a 
certain hypothetical caloric, have become more and more 
rare among men of science. Such statements, and the 
explanations often put forwards of the light and heat 
which appear under various circumstances in the form of 
fire, must be considered as unessential parts of any sound 
theory. Accordingly we find Mr. Faraday gradually 
relinquishing such views. In January, 1834, he speaks 
generally of an hypothesis of this kind*. "I cannot 
refrain from recalling here the beautiful idea put forth, 
I believe by Berzelius, in his developement of his views 
of the electro-chemical theory of affinity, that the heat 
and light evolved during cases of powerful combination 
are the consequence of the electric discharge which is at 
that moment taking place." But in April of the same 
yearf, he observes, that in the combination of oxygen 
and hydrogen to produce water, electric powers to a most 
enormous amount are for the time active, but that the 
flame which is produced gives but feeble traces of such 
powers. " Such phenomena," therefore, he adds, " may 
not, cannot be, taken as evidences of the nature of the 
action ; but are merely incidental results, incomparably 
small in relation to the forces concerned, and supplying 
no information of the way in which the particles are 

hibited from supposing mechanical impulse or pressure to have any 
effect upon such elements. To make this supposition, is to connect 
the most subtle and incorporeal objects which we know in nature by 
the most material ties. This remark seems to be applicable to M. 
Poisson's hypothesis that the electric fluid is retained at the surface .of 
bodies by the pressure of the atmosphere. 

* Researches, 870, t Ib. 960. 

VOL. I. 2 D 



402 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

active on each other, or in which their forces are finally 
arranged." 

In pursuance of this maxim, we must consider as 
unessential parts of the oxygen theory that portion of it, 
much insisted upon by its author at the time, in which 
when sulphur, for instance, combined with oxygen to 
produce sulphuric acid, the combustion was accounted 
for by means of the caloric which was supposed to bo 
liberated from its combination with oxygen. 

5. Controversy of the Composition of Water. There 
is another controversy of our times to which we may 
witli great propriety apply the maxim now before us. 
After the glory of having first given a true view of the 
composition of water had long rested tranquilly upon 
the names of Cavendish and Lavoisier, a claim was 
made in favour of James Watt as the real author of this 
discovery by his son, (Mr. J. Watt,) and his eulogist, 
(M. Arago*.) It is not to our purpose here to discuss 
the various questions which have arisen on this subject 
respecting priority of publication, and respecting the 
translation of opinions published at one time into the 
language of another period. But if we look at Watt's 
own statement of his views, given soon after those of 
Cavendish had been published, we shall perceive that 
it is marked by a violation of this maxim: we shall 
find that he does admit imponderable fluids as chemical 
elements; and thus shows a great vagueness and 
confusion in his idea of chemical composition. With 
such imperfection in his views, it is not surprising that 
Watt, not only did not anticipate, but did not fully 
appreciate the discovery of Cavendish and Lavoisier. 
Watt's statement of his views is as followsf: "Are we 
not authorized to conclude that water is composed of 

* Eloge cle James Watt, Annuaire du Bur. clcs Long.^ 1839. 
t Phil Trans., 1784, p. 332. 



APPLICATION OP THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 403 

dephlogisticated air and phlogiston deprived of part of 
their latent or elementary heat ; that dephlogisticated or 
pure air is composed of water deprived of its phlogiston 
and united to elementary heat and light ; and that the 
latter are contained in it in a latent state, so as not to 
be sensible to the thermometer or to the eye ; and if 
light be only a modification of heat, or a circumstance 
attending it, or a component part of the inflammable air, 
then pure or dephlogisticated air is composed of water 
deprived of its phlogiston and united to elementary heat ?" 

When we compare this doubtful and hypothetical 
statement, involving so much that is extraneous and hete- 
rogeneous, with the conclusion of Cavendish, in which 
there is nothing hypothetical or superfluous, we may con- 
fidently assent to the decision which has been pronounced 
by one* of our own time in favour of Cavendish. And 
we may with pleasure recognise, in this enlightened um- 
pire, a due appreciation of the value of the maxim on 
which we are now insisting. "Cavendish," says Mr. 
Vernon Harcourt, "pared off from the hypotheses their 
theories of combustion, and affinities of imponderable for 
ponderable matter, as complicating chemical with physical 
considerations." 

6. Relation of Heat to Chemistry. But while we 
thus condemn the attempts to explain the thermotical 
phenomena of chemical processes by means of che- 
mical considerations, it may be asked if we are alto- 
gether to renounce the hope of understanding such 
phenomena? It is plain, it may be said, that heat gene- 
rated in chemical changes is always a very important 
circumstance, and can sometimes be measured, and per- 
haps reduced to laws ; are we prohibited from speculat- 
ing concerning the causes of such circumstances and 

* The Rev. "W. Vernon Harcourt, Address to the British Asso- 
ciation, 1839. 

2 D 2 



404 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

such laws ? And to this we reply, that we may properly 
attempt to connect chemical with thermotical processes, 
so far as we have obtained a clear and probable view of 
the nature of the thermotical processes. When our 
theory of thermotics is tolerably complete and certain, 
we may with propriety undertake to connect it with our 
theory of chemistry. But at present we are not far 
enough advanced in our knowledge of heat to make this 
attempt with any hope of success. We can hardly 
expect to understand the part which heat plays in the 
union of two bodies, when we cannot as yet compre- 
hend in what manner it produces the liquefaction or 
vaporization of one body. We cannot look to account 
for Gay Lussac and Dalton's Law, that all gases expand 
equally by heat, till we learn how heat causes a gas to 
expand. We cannot hope to see the grounds of Dulong 
and Petit's Law, that the specific heat of all atoms is 
the same, till we know much more, not only about atoms, 
but about specific heat. We have as yet no thermotical 
theory which even professes to account for all the pro- 
minent facts of the subject* : and the theories which 
have been proposed are of the most diverse kind. 
Laplace assumes particles of bodies surrounded by 
atmospheres of caloric f; Cauchy makes heat consist in 
longitudinal vibrations of the ether of which transverse 
vibrations produce light: in Ampere's theory f, heat 
consists in the vibrations of the particles of bodies. 
And so long as we have nothing more certain in our 
conceptions of heat than the alternative of these and 
other precarious hypotheses, how can we expect to arrive 
at any real knowledge, by connecting the results of such 
hypotheses with the speculations of chemistry, of which 
science the theory is at least equally obscure ? 

* Hist. Ind. /8W., ii., 530. f /., ii., 531. 

J /&., ii., 529. 



APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE. 405 

The largest attempts at chemical theory have been 
made in the form of the Atomic Theory, to which I have 
just had occasion to allude. I must, therefore, before 
quitting the subject, say a few words respecting this 
theory. 



CHAPTER V. 
THE ATOMIC THEORY. 

1. The Atomic Theory considered on Chemical 
Grounds. We have already seen that the combinations 
which result from chemical affinity are definite, a certain 
quantity of one ingredient uniting, not with an uncertain, 
but with a certain quantity of another ingredient. But 
it was found, in addition to this principle, that one ingre- 
dient would often unite with another in different propor- 
tions, and that, in such cases, these proportions are mul- 
tiples one of another. In the three salts formed by 
potassa with oxalic acid, the quantities of acid which 
combine with the same quantity of alkali are exactly in 
the proportion of the numbers 1, 2, 4. And the same 
rule of the existence of multiple proportions is found to 
obtain in other cases. 

It is obvious that such results will be accounted for, 
if we suppose the base and the acid to consist each of 
definite equal particles, and that the formation of the 
salts above mentioned consists in the combination of one 
particle of the base with one particle of acid, with two 
particles of acid, and with four particles of acid, respec- 
tively. But further ; as we have already stated, chemical 
affinity is not only definite, but reciprocal. The propor- 
tions of potassa and soda which form neutral salts are 
590 and 391 in one case, and therefore in all. These 



406 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

numbers represent the proportions of weight in which the 
two bases, potassa and soda, enter into analogous combi- 
nations; 590 of potassa is equivalent to 391 of soda. 
These facts with regard to combination are still expressed 
by the above supposition of equal particles, assuming 
that the weights of a particle of potassa and of soda are 
in the proportion of 590 to 391. 

But we pursue our analysis further. We find that 
potassa is a compound of a metallic base, potassium, 
and of oxygen, in the proportion of 490 to 100; we sup- 
pose, then, that the particle of potassa consists of a par- 
ticle of potassium and a particle of oxygen, and these 
latter particles, since we see no present need to suppose 
them divided, potassium and oxygen being simple bodies, 
we may call atoms 9 and assume to be indivisible. And 
by supposing all simple bodies to consist of such atoms, 
and compounds to be formed by the union of two, or 
three, or more of such atoms, we explain the occurrence 
of definite and multiple proportions, and we construct the 
Atomic Theory. 

2. Hypothesis of Atoms. So far as the assumption 
of such atoms as we have spoken of serves to express 
those laws of chemical composition which we have 
referred to, it is a clear and useful generalization. 
But if the Atomic Theory be put forwards (and its 
author, Dr. Dalton, appears to have put it forwards 
with such an intention,) as asserting that chemical 
elements are really composed of atoms, that is, of such 
particles not further divisible, we cannot avoid remark- 
ing, that for such a conclusion, chemical research has 
not afforded, nor can afford, any satisfactory evidence 
whatever. The smallest observable quantities of ingre- 
dients, as well as the largest, combine according to the 
laws of proportions and equivalence which have been 
cited above. How are we to deduce from such facts any 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 407 

inference with regard to the existence of certain smallest 
possible particles? The Theory, when dogmatically 
taught as a physical truth, asserts that all observable 
quantities of elements are composed of proportional 
numbers of particles which can no further be subdivided ; 
but all which observation teaches us is, that if there be 
such particles, they are smaller than the smallest observ- 
able quantities. In chemical experiment, at least, there 
is not the slightest positive evidence for the existence of 
such atoms. The assumption of indivisible particles, 
smaller than the smallest observable, which combine, par- 
ticle with particle, will explain the phenomena ; but the 
assumption of particles bearing this proportion, but not 
possessing the property of indivisibility, will explain the 
phenomena at least equally well. The decision of the 
question, therefore, whether the Atomic Hypothesis be 
the proper way of conceiving the chemical combinations 
of substances, must depend, not upon chemical facts, but 
upon our conception of substance. In this sense the 
question is an ancient and curious controversy, and we 
shall hereafter have to make some remarks upon it. 

3. Chemical Difficulties of the Hypothesis. But 
before doing this, we may observe that there is no 
small difficulty in reconciling this hypothesis with the 
facts of chemistry. According to the theory, all salts, 
compounded of an acid and a base, are analogous in their 
atomic constitution ; and the number of atoms in one 
such compound being known or assumed, the number of 
atoms in other salts may be determined. But when we 
proceed in this course of reasoning to other bodies, as 
metals, we find ourselves involved in difficulties. The 
protoxide of iron is a base which, according to all ana- 
logy, must consist of one atom of iron and one of oxygen ; 
but the peroxide of iron is also a base, and it appears by 
the analysis of this substance that it must consist of two- 



408 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

thirds of an atom of iron and one atom of oxygen. 
Here, then, our indivisible atoms must be divisible, even 
upon chemical grounds. And if we attempt to evade 
this difficulty by making the peroxide of iron consist of 
two atoms of iron and three of oxygen, we have to make 
a corresponding alteration in the theoretical constitution of 
all bodies analogous to the protoxide ; and thus we over- 
turn the very foundation of the theory. Chemical facts, 
therefore, not only do not prove the Atomic Theory as 
a physical truth, but they are not, according to any modi- 
fication yet devised of the theory, reconcilable with its 
scheme. 

Nearly the same conclusions result from the attempts 
to employ the Atomic Hypothesis in expressing another 
important chemical law; the law of the combinations 
of gases according to definite proportions of their volumes, 
experimentally established by Guy Lussac*. In order 
to account for this law, it has been very plausibly sug- 
gested that all gases, under the same pressure, contain 
an equal number of atoms in the same space ; and that 
when they combine, they unite atom to atom. Thus one 
volume of chlorine unites with one volume of hydrogen, 
and form hydrochloric acid f . But then this hydro- 
chloric acid occupies the space of the two volumes; and 
therefore the proper number of particles cannot be sup- 
plied, and the uniform distribution of atoms in all gases 
maintained, without dividing into two each of the com- 
pound particles, constituted of an atom of chlorine and 
an atom of hydrogen. And thus in this case, also, the 
Atomic Theory becomes untenable if it be understood to 
imply the indivisibility of the atoms. 

In all these attempts to obtain a distinct physical 
conception of chemical union by the aid of the Atomic 
Hypothesis, the atoms are conceived to be associated by 

* Hist. Ind. Sc., iii., 153. t DUMAS, Phil Chim, 263. 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 409 

certain forces of the nature of mechanical attractions. 
But we have already seen* that no such mode of con- 
ception can at all explain or express the facts of che- 
mical combination ; and therefore it is not wonderful that 
when the Atomic Theory attempts to give an account of 
chemical relations by contemplating them under such 
an aspect, the facts on which it grounds itself should be 
found not to authorise its positive doctrines; and that 
when these doctrines are tried upon the general range 
of chemical observation, they should prove incapable of 
even expressing, without self-contradiction, the laws of 
phenomena. 

4. Grounds of the Atomic Doctrine. Yet the doctrine 
of atoms, or of substance as composed of indivisible 
particles, has in all ages had great hold upon the minds 
of physical speculators ; nor would this doctrine ever 
have suggested itself so readily, or have been maintained 
so tenaciously, as the true mode of conceiving chemical 
combinations, if it had not been already familiar to the 
minds of those wiio endeavour to obtain a general view 
of the constitution of nature. The grounds of the assump- 
tion of the atomic structure of substance are to be found 
rather in the idea of substance itself, than in the experi- 
mental laws of chemical affinity. And the question of 
the existence of atoms, thus depending upon an idea 
which has been the subject of contemplation from the 
very infancy of philosophy, has been discussed in all ages 
with interest and ingenuity. On this very account it is 
unlikely that the question, so far as it bears upon che- 
mistry, should admit of any clear and final solution. Still 
it will be instructive to look back at some of the opinions 
which have been delivered respecting this doctrine. 

5. Ancient Prevalence of the Atomic Doctrine. The 
doctrine that matter consists of minute, simple, indivisible, 

* See Chapter I. of this Book. 



410 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

indestructible particles as its ultimate elements, has been 
current in all ages and countries, whenever the tendency 
of man to wide and subtle speculations has been active. 
I need not attempt to trace the history of this opinion in 
the schools of Greece and Italy. It was the leading 
feature in the physical tenets of the Epicureans, and was 
adopted by their Roman disciples, as the poem of Lucre- 
tius copiously shows us. The same tenet had been held 
at still earlier periods, in forms more or less definite, by 
other philosophers. It is ascribed to Democritus, and is 
said to have been by him derived from Leucippus. But 
this doctrine is found also, we are told*, among the 
speculations of another intellectual and acute race, the 
Hindoos. According to some of their philosophical 
writers, the ultimate elements of matter are atoms,, of 
which it is proved by certain reasonings, that they are 
each one-sixth of one of the motes that float in the 
sunbeam. 

This early prevalence of controversies of the widest 
and deepest kind, which even in our day remain unde- 
cided, has in it nothing which need surprise us ; or, at 
least, it has in it nothing which is not in conformity with 
the general course of the history of philosophy. As soon 
as any ideas are clearly possessed by the human mind, its 
activity and acuteness in reasoning upon them are such, 
that the fundamental antitheses and ultimate difficul- 
ties which belong to them are soon brought into view. 
The Greek and Indian philosophers had mastered com- 
pletely the Idea of Space, and possessed the Idea of 
Substance in tolerable distinctness. They were, therefore, 
quite ready, with their lively and subtle minds, to discuss 
the question of the finite and infinite divisibility of matter, 
so far as it involved only the ideas of space and of sub- 

* By Mr. Colebrook. Asiatic Res, ]824. 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 411 

stance, and this accordingly they did with great ingenuity 
and perseverance. 

But the ideas of Space and of Substance are far from 
being sufficient to enable men to form a complete general 
view of the constitution of matter. We must add to 
these ideas, that of mechanical Force with its antagonist 
Resistance, and that of the Affinity of one kind of matter 
for another. Now the former of these ideas the ancients 
possessed in a very obscure and confused manner; and 
of the latter they had no apprehension whatever. They 
made vague assumptions respecting the impact and pres- 
sure of atoms on each other ; but of their mutual attrac- 
tion and repulsion they never had any conception, except 
of the most dim and wavering kind ; and of an affinity 
different from mere local union they did not even dream. 
Their speculations concerning atoms, therefore, can have 
no value for us, except as a part of the history of science. 
If their doctrines appear to us to approach near to the 
conclusions of our modern philosophy, it must be because 
our modern philosophy has not fully profited by the addi- 
tional light which the experiments and meditations of 
later times have thrown upon the constitution of matter. 

6. Bacon. Still, when modern philosophers look upon 
the Atomic Theory of the ancients in a general point of 
view merely, without considering the special conditions 
which such a theory must fulfil, in order to represent the 
discoveries of modern times, they are disposed to regard 
it with admiration. Accordingly we find Francis Bacon 
strongly expressing such a feeling. The Atomic Theory is 
selected and dwelt upon by him as the chain which connects 
the best parts of the physical philosophy of the ancient 
and the modern world. Among his works is a remarkable 
dissertation On the Philosophy of Democritiis, Parmenides, 
and Tele-sins; the last? mentioned of whom was one of 
the revivers of physical science in modern times. In 



412 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

this work he speaks of the atomic doctrine of Democritus 
as a favourable example of the exertions of the undis- 
ciplined intellect. "Haec ipsa placita, quamvis paulo 
emendatiora, talia sunt qualia esse possunt ille quae ab 
intellectu sibi permisso, nee continenter et gradatim sub- 
levato, profecta videntur." " Accordingly," he adds, " the 
doctrine of Atoms, from its going a step beyond the 
period in which it was advanced, was ridiculed by the 
vulgar, and severely handled in the disputations of the 
learned, notwithstanding the profound acquaintance with 
physical science by which its author was allowed to be 
distinguished, and from which he acquired the character 
of a magician." 

" However," he continues, " neither the hostility of 
Aristotle, with all his skill and vigour in disputation, 
(though, like the Ottoman sultans, he laboured to destroy 
all his brother philosophers that he might rest undis- 
puted master of the throne of science,) nor the majestic 
and lofty authority of Plato, could effect the subversion 
of the doctrine of Democritus. And while the opinions 
of Plato and Aristotle were rehearsed with loud decla- 
mation and professorial pomp in the schools, this of 
Democritus was always held in high honour by those of 
a deeper wisdom, who followed in silence a severer path 
of contemplation. In the days~of Roman speculation it 
kept its ground and its favour ; Cicero everywhere speaks 
of its author with the greatest praise ; and Juvenal, who, 
like poets in general, probably expressed the prevailing 
judgment of his time, proclaims his merit as a noble 
exception to the general stupidity of his countrymen. 

. . . . Cujus prudentia monstrat 
Magnos posse viros et magna exempla daturos 
Yervecum in patria crassoque sub aere nasci. 

" The destruction of this philosophy was not effected 
by Aristotle and Plato, but by Genseric and Attila, and 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 413 

their barbarians. For then, when human knowledge had 
suffered shipwreck, those fragments of the Aristotelian 
and Platonic philosophy floated on the surface like things 
of some lighter and emptier sort, and so were preserved ; 
while more solid matters went to the bottom, and were 
almost lost in oblivion." 

7. Modern Prevalence of the Atomic Doctrine. It is 
our business here to consider the doctrine of Atoms only 
in its bearing upon existing physical sciences, and I must 
therefore abstain from tracing the various manifestations 
of it in the schemes of hypothetical cosmologists ; its 
place among the vortices of Descartes, its exhibition in 
the monads of Leibnitz. I will, however, quote a passage 
from Newton to show the hold it had upon his mind. 

At the close of his Opticks he says, " All these things 
being considered, it seems probable to me that God, in 
the beginning, formed matter in solid, massy, hard, 
impenetrable, moveable particles, of such sizes and 
figures, and with such other properties, and in such pro- 
portions to space, as most conduced to the end for which 
He formed them; and that these primitive particles, 
being solids, are incomparably harder than any porous 
bodies compounded of them, even so very hard as never 
to wear or break in pieces ; no ordinary power being able 
to divide what God had made one in the first creation. 
While the particles continue entire, they may compose 
bodies of one and the same nature and texture in all 
ages : but should they wear away or break in pieces, the 
nature of things depending on them would be changed. 
Water and earth composed of old worn particles and 
fragments of particles would not be of the same nature 
and texture now with water and earth composed of entire 
particles in the beginning. And therefore that nature 
may be lasting, the changes of corporeal things are to be 
placed only in the various separations and new associa- 



414 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

tions and motions of these permanent particles; com- 
pounded bodies being apt to break, not in the midst of 
solid particles, but where those particles are laid together 
and only touch in a few points." 

We shall hereafter see how extensively the atomic 
doctrine has prevailed among still more recent philoso- 
phers. Not only have the chemists assumed it as the 
fittest form for exhibiting the principles of multiple pro- 
portions ; but the physical mathematicians, as Laplace and 
Poisson, have made it the basis of their theories of heat, 
electricity, capillary action; and the crystallographers 
have been supposed to have established both the exist- 
ence and the arrangement of such ultimate molecules. 

In the way in which it has been employed by such 
writers, the hypothesis of ultimate particles has been of 
great use, and is undoubtedly permissible. But when we 
would assert this theory, not as a convenient hypothesis 
for the expression or calculation of the laws of nature, 
but as a philosophical truth respecting the constitution 
of the universe, we find ourselves checked by difficulties 
of reasoning which we cannot overcome, as w r ell as by 
conflicting phenomena which we cannot reconcile. I 
will attempt to state briefly the opposing arguments on 
this question. 

8. Arguments for and against Atoms. The leading 
arguments on the two sides of the question, in their most 
general form, may be stated as follows : 

For the Atomic Doctrine. The appearances which 
nature presents are compounded of many parts, but if we 
go on resolving the larger parts into smaller, and so on 
successively, we must at last come to something simple. 
For that which is compound can be so no otherwise than 
by composition of what is simple ; and if we suppose all 
composition to be removed, which hypothetically we may 
do, there can remain nothing but a number of simple 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 415 

substances, capable of composition, but themselves not 
compounded. That is, matter being dissolved, resolves 
itself into atoms. 

Against the Atomic Doctrine. Space is divisible 
without limit, as may be proved by geometry ; and matter 
occupies space, therefore matter is divisible without limit, 
and no portion of matter is indivisible, or an atom. 

And to the argument on the other side just stated, it 
is replied that we cannot even hypothetically divest a body 
of composition, if by composition we mean the relation of 
point to point in space. However small be a particle, it 
is compounded of parts having relation in space. 

The Atomists urge again, that if matter be infinitely 
divisible, a finite body consists of an infinite number of 
parts, which is a contradiction. To this it is replied, that 
the finite body consists of an infinite number of parts in 
the same sense in which the parts are infinitely small, 
which is no contradiction. 

But the opponents of the Atomists not only rebut, 
but retort this argument drawn from the notion of 
infinity. Your atoms, they say, are indivisible by any 
finite force ; therefore they are infinitely hard ; and thus 
your finite particles possess infinite properties. To this 
the Atomists are wont to reply, that they do not mean 
the hardness of their particles to be infinite, but only so 
great as to resist all usual natural forces. But here it is 
plain that their position becomes untenable ; for, in the 
first place, their assumption of this precise degree of 
hardness in the particles is altogether gratuitous ; and in 
the next place, if it were granted, such particles are not 
atoms, since in the next moment the forces of nature 
may be augmented so as to divide the particle, though 
hitherto undivided. 

Such are the arguments for and against the Atomic 
Theory in its original form. But when these atoms are 



416 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

conceived, as they have been by Newton, and commonly 
by his followers, to be solid, hard particles exerting 
attractive and repulsive forces, a new set of arguments 
come into play. Of these, the principal one may be thus 
stated : According to the Atomic Theory thus modified, 
the properties of bodies depend upon the attractions and 
repulsions of the particles. Therefore, among other pro- 
perties of bodies, their hardness depends upon such forces. 
But if the hardness of the bodies depends upon the forces, 
the repulsion, for instance, of the particles, upon what 
does the hardness of the particles depend ? what progress 
do we make in explaining the properties of bodies, when 
we assume the same properties in our explanation? and 
to what purpose do we assume that the particles are hard ? 

9. Transition to Boscovictis Theory. To this diffi- 
culty it does not appear easy to offer any reply. But 
if the hardness and solidity of the particles be given 
up as an incongruous and untenable appendage to 
the Newtonian view of the Atomic Theory, we are led 
to the theory of Boscovich, according to which matter 
consists not of solid particles, but of mere mathematical 
centres of force. According to this theory, each body is 
composed of a number of geometrical points from which 
emanate forces, following certain mathematical laws in 
virtue of which they become, at certain small distances 
attractive, at certain other distances repulsive, and at 
greater distances attractive again. From these forces of 
the points arise the cohesion of the parts of the same 
body, the resistance which it exerts against the pressure 
of another body, and finally the attraction of gravitation 
which it exerts upon bodies at a distance. 

This theory is at least a homogeneous and consistent 
mechanical theory, and it is probable that it may be used 
as an instrument for investigating and expressing true 
laws of nature ; although, as we have already said, the 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 417 

attempt to identify the forces by which the particles of 
bodies are bound together with mechanical attraction 
appears to be a confusion of two separate ideas. 

10. Use of the Molecular Hypothesis. In this form, 
representing matter as a collection of molecules or 
centres of force, the Atomic Theory has been abundantly 
employed in modern times as an hypothesis on which 
calculations respecting the elementary forces of bodies 
might be conducted. When thus employed it is to be 
considered as expressing the principle that the properties 
of bodies depend upon forces emanating from immovable 
points of their mass. This view of the way in which the 
properties of bodies are to be treated by the mechanical 
philosopher was introduced by Newton, and was a natural 
sequel to the success which he had obtained by reasoning 
concerning central forces on a large scale. I have 
already quoted his Preface to the Principia, in which he 
says, " Many things induce me to believe that the rest 
of the phenomena of nature, as well as those of astro- 
nomy, may depend upon certain forces by which the 
particles of bodies, in virtue of causes not yet known, are 
urged towards each other and cohere in regular figures, 
or are mutually repelled and recede ; and philosophers, 
knowing nothing of these forces, have hitherto failed in 
their examination of nature." Since the time of Newton, 
this line of speculation has been followed with great 
assiduity, and by some mathematicians with great success. 
In particular Laplace has shown that it may, in many 
instances, be made a much closer representation of 
nature, if we suppose the forces exerted by the particles 
to deciease so rapidly with the increasing distance from 
them, that the force is finite only at distances impercep- 
tible to our senses, and vanishes at all remoter points. 
He has taught the method of expressing and calculating 
such forces, and he and other mathematicians of his 
VOL. i. 2 fi 



418 PHILOSOPHY OP CHEMISTRY. 

school have applied this method to many of the most 
important questions of physics ; as capillary action, the 
elasticity of solids, the conduction and radiation of heat. 
The explanation of many apparently" unconnected and 
curious observed facts by these mathematical theories gives 
us a strong assurance that its essential principles are true. 
But it must be obsei-ved that the actual constitution 
of bodies as composed of distinct and separate particles is 
by no means proved by these coincidences. The assump- 
tion, in the reasoning, of certain centres of force acting 
at a distance, is to be considered as nothing more than a 
method of reducing to calculation that view of the 
constitution of bodies, which supposes that they exert 
force at every point. It is a mathematical artifice of the 
same kind as the hypothetical division of a body into 
infinitesimal parts, in order to find its centre of gravity ; 
and no more implies a physical reality than that hypo- 
, thesis does* 

11. Poisson's Inference. When, therefore, M. Pois- 
son, in his views of Capillary Action, treats this hypothe- 
tical distribution of centres of force as if it were a 
physical fact, and blames Laplace for not taking account 
of their different distribution at the surface of the fluid 
and below it*, he appears to push the claims of the 
molecular hypothesis too far. The only ground for the 
assumption of separate centres, is that we can thus ex- 
plain the action of the whole mass. The intervals between 
the centres nowhere enter into this explanation : and 
therefore we can have no reason for assuming these inter- 
vals different in one part of the fluid and in the other. 
M Poisson asserts that the density of the fluid diminishes 
when we approach very near the surface ; but he allows 
that this diminution is not detected by experiment, and 
that the formula} on his supposition, so far as the results 

* POISSON, Theorle de I' Action Capillaire. 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 419 

go, are identical with those of Laplace. It is clear, then, 
that his doctrine consists merely in the assertion of the 
necessary truth of a part of the hypothesis which cannot 
be put to the test of experiment. It is true, that so long 
as we have before us the hypothesis of separate centres, 
the particles very near the surface are not in a condition 
symmetrical with that of the others : but it is also true 
that this hypothesis is only a step of calculation. There 
results, at one period of the process of deduction, a 
stratum of smaller density at the surface of the fluid ; but 
at a succeeding point of the reasoning the thickness of 
this stratum vanishes ; it has no physical existence. 

Thus the molecular hypothesis, as used in such cases, 
does not differ from the doctrine of forces acting at every 
point of the mass ; and this principle, which is common 
to both the opposite views, is the true part of each. 

12. WollastorCs Argument. An attempt has been 
made in another case, but depending on nearly the same 
arguments, to bring the doctrine of ultimate atoms to the 
test of observation. In the case of the air, we know that 
there is a diminution of density in approaching the upper 
surface of the atmosphere, if it have a surface : but it is 
held by some that except we allow the doctrine of ulte- 
nate molecules, it will not be bounded by any surface, 
but will extend to an infinite distance. This is the 
reasoning of Wollaston*. " If air consists of any ultimate 
particles no longer divisible, then must the expansion of 
the medium composed of them cease at that distance 
where the force of gravity downwards is equal to the 
resistance arising from the repulsive force of the medium." 
But if there be no such ultimate particles, every stratum 
will require a stratum beyond it to prevent by its weight 
a further expansion, and thus the atmosphere must 
extend to an infinite distance. And Wollaston con- 

* Phil. Trans., 1822, p. 89. 

2 E 2 



420 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

ceived that he could learn from observation whether the 
atmosphere was thus diffused through all space ; for if so, 
it must, he argued, be accumulated about the larger 
bodies of the system, as Jupiter and the Sun, by the law 
of universal gravitation ; and the existence of an atmo- 
sphere about these bodies, might, he remarked, be detected 
by its effects in producing refraction. His result is, that 
" all the phenomena accord entirely with the supposition 
that the earth's atmosphere is of finite extent, limited by 
the weight of ultimate atoms of definite magnitude, no 
longer divisible by repulsion of their parts." 

A very little reflection will show us that such a line 
of reasoning cannot lead to any result. For we know 
nothing of the law which connects the density with the 
compressing force, in air so extremely rare as we must 
suppose it to be near the boundary of the atmosphere. 
Now there are possible laws of dependence of the den- 
sity upon the compressing force such that the atmosphere 
would terminate in virtue of the law without any assump- 
tion of atoms. This may be proved by mathematical rea- 
soning. If we suppose the density of air to be as the 
square root of the compressing force, it will follow that at 
the very limits of the atmosphere, the strata of equal 
thickness may observe in their densities such a law of 
proportion as is expressed by the numbers 7, 5, 3, 1 *. 

If it be asked how, on this hypothesis, the density of 
the highest stratum can be as 1, since there is nothing to 

* For the compressing force on each being as the whole weight 
beyond it, will be for the four highest strata, 16, 9. 4 and 1, of which 
the square roots are as 4, 3, 2, 1, or, as 8, 6, 4, 2 ; and though these 
numbers are not exactly as the densities 7, 5, 3, 1, those who are 
a little acquainted with mathematical reasoning, will see that the dif- 
ference arises from taking so small a number of strata. If we were to 
make the strata indefinitely thin, as to avoid error we ought to do, the 
coincidence would be exact ; and thus, according to this law, the series 
of strata terminates as we ascend, without any consideration of atoms. 



THE ATOMIC THEORY. 421 

compress it, we answer that the upper part of the highest 
stratum compresses the lower, and that the density dimi- 
nishes continually to the surface, so that the need of 
compression and the compressing weight vanish together. 

The fallacy of concluding that because the height of 
the atmosphere is finite, the weight of the highest stratum 
must be finite, is just the same as the fallacy of those who 
conclude that when we project a body vertically upwards, 
because it occupies only a finite time in ascending to the 
highest point, the velocity at the last instant of the 
ascent must be finite. For it might be said, if the last 
velocity of ascent be not finite, how can the body describe 
the last particle of space in a finite time ? and the answer 
is, that there is no last finite particle of space, and there 
fore no last finite velocity. 

13. Permanence of Properties of Bodies. We nave 
already seen that, in explaining the properties of mattei 
as we find them in nature, the assumption of solid, hard, 
indestructible particles is of no use or value. But we 
may remark, before quitting the subject, that Newton 
appears to have had another reason for assuming such 
particles, and one well worthy of notice. He wished to 
express, by means of this hypothesis, the doctrine that 
the laws of nature do not alter with the course of time. 
This we have already seen in the quotation from Newton. 
" The ultimate particles of matter are indestructible, 
unalterable, impenetrable; for if they could break or 
wear, the structure of material bodies now would be dif- 
ferent from that which it was when the particles were 
new." No philosopher will deny the truth which is thus 
conveyed by the assertion of atoms ; but it is obviously 
equally easy for a person who rejects the atomic view, to 
state this truth by saying that the forces which matter 
exerts do not vary with time ; but however modified by 
the new modifications of its form, are always unimpaired 



422 PHILOSOPHY OF CHEMISTRY. 

in quantity, and capable of being restored to their former 
mode of action. 

We now proceed to speculations in which the funda- 
mental conceptions may, perhaps, be expressed, at least 
in some cases, by means of the arrangement of atoms ; 
but in which the philosophy of the subject appears to 
require a reference to a new Fundamental Idea. 



423 



BOOK VII. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY, 
INCLUDING CRYSTALLOGRAPHY. 



CHAPTER I. 
EXPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY. 

1. WE have seen in the History of the Sciences, that 
a principle which I have there termed^ the principle of 
developed and metamorphosed Symmetry, has been exten- 
sively applied in botany and physiology, and has given 
rise to a province of science termed Morphology. In 
order to understand clearly this principle, it is necessary 
to obtain a clear idea of the Symmetry of which we thus 
speak. But this Idea of Symmetry is applicable in the 
inorganic, as well as in the organic kingdoms of nature ; 
it is presented to our eyes in the forms of minerals, as 
well as of flowers and animals ; we must, therefore, take 
it under our consideration here, in order that we may 
complete our view of mineralogy, which, as I have 
repeatedly said, is an essential part of chemical science. 
I shall accordingly endeavour to unfold the Idea of Sym- 
metry with which we here have to do. 

It will of course be understood that by the term Sym- 
metry I here intend, not that more indefinite attribute of 
form which belongs to the domain of the fine arts, as 
when we speak of the symmetry of an edifice or of a 

* Hist. Ind. Sci, iii,, 433. 



424 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

sculptured figure, but a certain definite relation or pro- 
perty, no less rigorous and precise than other relations of 
number and position, which is thus one of the sure guides 
of the scientific faculty, and one of the bases of our exact 
science. 

2. In order to explain what Symmetry is in this sense, 
let the reader recollect that the bodies of animals consist 
of two equal and similar sets of members, the right and 
the left side ; that some flowers consist of three or of five 
equal sets of organs, similarly and regularly disposed, as 
the iris has three straight petals, and three reflexed ones, 
alternately disposed, the rose li&sjive equal and similar 
sepals of the calyx, and alternate with these as many 
petals of the corolla. This orderly and exactly similar 
distribution of two, or three, or five, or any other number 
of parts, is Symmetry ; and according to its various modi- 
fications, the forms thus determined are said to be sym- 
metrical with various numbers of members. The classifi- 
cation of these different kinds of symmetry has been 
most attended to in Crystallography, in which science it 
is the highest and most general principle by which the 
classes of forms are governed. Without entering far 
into the technicalities of the subject, we may point out 
some of the features of such classes. 

The first of the figures(l) in the 
margin may represent the summit 
of a crystal as it appears to an eye 
looking directly down upon it ; 
the centre of the figure repre- 
sents the summit of a pyramid, and the spaces of various 
forms which diverge from this point represent sloping sides 
of the pyramid. Now it will be observed that the figure 
consists of three portions exactly similar to one another, 
and that each part or member is repeated in each of these 
portions. The faces, or pairs of faces, are repeated in 





EXPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY. 



425 




threes, with exactly similar forms and angles. This figure is 
said to be three-membered, or to have triangular symmetry. 
The same kind of symmetry may exist in a flower, as pre- 
sented in the accompanying figure, and does, in fact, occur 
in a large class of flowers, as for example, all the lily tribe. 
The next pair of figures (2) have four equal and similar 
portions, and have their members 
or pairs of members four times re- 
peated. Such figures are termed 
four-membered, and are said to 
have square or tetragonal symme- 
try. The pentagonal symmetry, 
formed by five similar members, 
is represented in the next figures 
(B). It occurs abundantly in the 
vegetable world, but never among 
crystals; for the pentagonal fi- 
gures which crystals sometimes 
assume, are never exactly regular. 
But there is still another kind of 
symmetry (4) in which the oppo- 
site ends are exactly similar to 
each other and also the opposite 
sides ; this is oblong, or two-and- 
two-membered symmetry. And 
finally, we have the case of sim- 
ple symmetry (5) in which the 
two sides of the object are ex- 
actly alike (in opposite positions) 
without any further repetition. 

3. These different kinds of symmetry occur in various 
ways in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdom; thus 
vertebrate animals have a right and a left side exactly 
alike and thus possess simple symmetry. The same kind 
of symmetry (simple symmetry) occurs very largely in the 
forms of vegetables, as in most leaves, in papilionaceous, 







426 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

personate, and labiate flowers. Among minerals, crystals 
which possess this symmetry are called oblique-prismatic, 
and are of very frequent occurrence. The oblong, or 
two-and-two membered symmetry belongs to right-prismatic 
crystals ; and may be seen in cruciferous flowers, for 
though these are cross-shaped, the cross has two longer 
and two shorter arms, or pairs of arms. The square or 
tetragonal symmetry occurs in crystals abundantly ; to 
the vegetable world it appears to be less congenial; 
for though there are flowers with four exactly similar 
and regularly-disposed petals, as the herb Paris (Paris 
quadrifolia), these flowers appear, from various circum- 
stances, to be deviations from the usual type of vege- 
table forms. The trigonal, or tJiree-membered symmetry is 
found abundantly both in plants and in crystals, while the 
pentagonal symmetry, on the other hand, though by far 
the most common among flowers, nowhere occurs in 
minerals, and does not appear to be a possible form of 
crystals. This pentagonal form further occurs in the ani- 
mal kingdom, which the oblong, triangular, and square 
forms do not. Many of Cuvier's radiate animals appear 
in this pentagonal form, as echini and pentacrin ites, which 
latter have hence their name. 

4. The regular, or as they may be called, the normal 
types of the vegetable world appear to be the forms which 
possess triangular and pentagonal symmetry ; from these 
the others may be conceived to be derived, by transforma- 
tions resulting from the expansion of one or more parts. 
Thus it is manifest that if in a three-membered or five- 
membered flower, one of the petals be expanded more 
than the other, it is immediately reduced from pentagonal 
or trigonal, to simple symmetry. And the oblong or two- 
and-two-membered symmetry of the flowers of crucife- 
rous plants, (in which the stamens are four large and two 
small ones, arranged in regular opposition,) is held by 



EXPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY. 427 

botanists to result from a normal form with ten stamens ; 
Meinecke explaining this by adhesion, and Sprengel by 
the metamorphosis of the stamens into petals*. 

It is easy to see that these various kinds of symmetry 
include relations both of form and of number, but more 
especially of the latter kind ; and as this symmetry is 
often an important character in various classes of natural 
objects, such classes have often curious numerical pro- 
perties. One of the most remarkable and extensive of 
these is the distinction which prevails between mono- 
cotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants ; the number three 
being the ground of the symmetry of the former, and the 
number Jive, of the latter. Thus liliaceous and bulbous 
plants, and the like, have flowers of three or six petals, 
and the other organs follow the same numbers: while 
the vast majority of plants are pentandrous, and with their 
five stamens have also their other parts in fives. This 
great numerical distinction corresponding to a leading 
difference of physiological structure cannot but be con- 
sidered as a highly curious fact in phytology. Such 
properties of numbers, thus connected in an incompre- 
hensible manner with fundamental and extensive laws 
of nature, give to numbers an appearance of myste- 
rious importance and efficacy. We learn from history 
how strongly the study of such properties, as they are 
exhibited by the phenomena of the heavens, took posses- 
sion of the mind of Kepler ; perhaps it was this, which, 
at an earlier period, contributed in no small degree to 
the numerical mysticism of the Pythagoreans in antiquity, 
and of the Arabians and others in the middle ages. In 
crystallography, numbers are the primary characters in 
which the properties of substances are expressed ; they 
appear, first, in that classification of forms which depends 
on the degree of symmetry, that is, upon the number of 
* SPRENGEL, Gesch. d. Bot., ii., 304. 



428 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

correspondencies; and next, in the laws of derivation, 
which, for the most part, appear to be common in their 
occurrence in proportion to the numerical simplicity of 
their expression. But the manifestation of a governing 
numerical relation in the organic world strikes us as more 
unexpected ; and the selection of the number five as the 
index of the symmetry of dicotyledonous plants and radi- 
ated animals, (a number which is nowhere symmetrically 
produced in inorganic bodies,) makes this a new and 
remarkable illustration of the constancy of numerical rela- 
tions. We may observe, however, that the moment one 
of these radiate animals has one of its five members 
expanded, or in any way peculiarly modified, (as happens 
among the echini) it is reduced to the common type of 
animals simply symmetrical, with a right and left side. 

5. It is not necessary to attempt to enumerate all the 
kinds of Symmetry, since our object is only to explain 
what Symmetry is, and for this purpose enough has 
probably been said already. It will be seen, as soon as 
the notion of Symmetry in general is well apprehended, 
that it is or includes a peculiar Fundamental Idea, not 
capable of being resolved into any of the ideas hitherto 
examined. It may be said, perhaps, that the Idea of 
Symmetry is a modification or derivative of our ideas of 
space and number; that a symmetrical shape is one 
which consists of parts exactly similar, repeated a certain 
number of times, and placed so as to correspond with 
each other. But on further reflection it will be seen 
that this repetition and correspondence of parts in sym- 
metrical figures are something peculiar ; for it is not any 
repetition or any correspondence of parts to which we 
should give the name of symmetry, in the manner in 
which we are now using the term. Symmetrical arrange- 
ments may no doubt be concerned with space and" posi- 
tion, time and number ; but there appears to be implied 



EXPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY. 429 

in them a Fundamental Idea of regularity, of complete- 
ness, of complex simplicity, which is not a mere modifica- 
tion of other ideas. 

6. It is, however, not necessary, in this and in similar 
cases to determine whether the idea which we have 
before us be a peculiar and independent Fundamental 
Idea or a modification of other ideas, provided we clearly 
perceive the evidence of those Axioms by means of which 
the Idea is applied in scientific reasonings. Now in the 
application of the Idea of Symmetry to crystallography, 
phytology and zoology, we must have this idea embodied 
in some principle which asserts more than a mere geome- 
trical or numerical accordance of members. We must 
have it involved in some vital or productive action, in 
order that it may connect and explain the facts of the 
organic world. Nor is it difficult to enunciate such a 
principle. We may state it in this manner. All the 
symmetrical members of a natural product are, under like 
circumstances, alike affected. The parts which we have 
termed symmetrical, resemble each other, not only in 
their form and position, but also in the manner in which 
they are produced and modified by natural causes. And 
this principle we assume to be necessarily true, however 
unknown and inconceivable may be the causes which 
determine the phenomena. Thus it has not yet been 
found possible to discover or represent to ourselves, in 
any intelligible manner, the forces by which the various 
faces of a crystal are consequent upon its primary form ; 
but the whole of crystallography rests upon this principle, 
that if one of the primary planes or axes be modified in 
any manner, all the symmetrical planes and axes must be 
modified in the same manner. And though accidental 
mechanical or other causes may interfere with the actual 
exhibition of such faces, we do not the less assume their 
crystallographical reality, as inevitably implied in the 



430 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

law of symmetry of the crystal*. And we apply similar 
considerations to organized beings. We assume that in 
a regular flower, each of the similar members has the 
same organization and similar powers of developement ; 
and hence if among these similar parts some are much 
less developed than others, we consider them as abortive ; 
and if we wish to remove doubts as to what are symme- 
trical members in such a case, we make the inquiry by 
tracing the anatomy of these members, or by following 
them in their earlier states of developement, or in cases 
where their capabilities are magnified by monstrosity or 
otherwise. The power of developement may be modified 
by external causes, and thus we may pass from one kind 
of symmetry to another ; as we have already remarked. 
Thus a regular flower with pentagonal symmetry, growing 
on a lateral branch, has one petal nearest to the axis of 
the plant : if this petal be more or less expanded than the 
others, the pentagonal symmetry is interfered with, and 
the flower may change to a symmetry of another kind. 
But it is easy to see that all such conceptions of expan- 
sion, abortion, and any other kind of metamorphosis go, 
upon the supposition of identical faculties and tendencies 
in each similar member, in so far as such tendencies have 
any relation to the symmetry. And thus the principle we 
have stated above is the basis of that which, in the History, 
we termed the Principle of Developed and Metamor- 
phosed Symmetry. 

We shall not at present pursue the other applications 
of this Idea of Symmetry, but we shall consider some of 
the results of its introduction into Crystallography. 

* Some crystalline forms, instead of being holohedral (provided 
with their whole number of faces), are hemihedral (provided with only 
half their number of faces). But in these hemihedral forms, the half 
of the faces are still symmetrically suppressed. 



431 



CHAPTER II. 

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY 
TO CRYSTALS. 

1. MINERALS and other bodies of definite chemical 
composition often exhibit that marked regularity of form 
and structure which we designate by terming them 
Crystals; and in such crystals, when we duly study them, 
we perceive the various kinds of symmetry of which we 
have spoken in the previous chapter. And the different 
kinds of symmetry which we have there described are 
now usually distinguished from each other, by writers on 
crystallography. Indeed it is mainly to such writers that 
we are indebted for a sound and consistent classification 
of the kinds and degrees of symmetry of which forms are 
capable. But this classification was by no means invented 
as soon as mineralogists applied themselves to the study 
of crystals. These first attempts to arrange crystalline 
forms were very imperfect; those, for example, of Lin- 
nreus, Werner, Rome de Lisle, and Haiiy. The essays of 
these writers implied a classification at once defective 
and superfluous. They reduced all crystals to one or 
other of certain fundamental forms ; and this procedure 
might have been a perfectly good method of dividing 
crystalline forms into classes, if the fundamental forms 
had been selected so as to exemplify the different kinds 
of symmetry. But this was not the case. Haiiy's fun- 
damental or " primitive " forms, were, for instance, the 
following : the parallelepiped, the octahedron, the tetra- 
hedron, the regular hexagonal prism, the rhombic dodeca- 
hedron, and the double hexagonal pyramid. Of these, 
the octahedron, the tetrahedron, the rhombic dodeca- 
hedron, all belong to the same kind of symmetry (the 



432 



PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 



tessular systems) ; also the hexagonal prism and the 
hexagonal pyramid both belong to the rhombic system ; 
while the parallelepiped is so employed as to include all 
kinds of symmetry. 

It is, however, to be recollected that Haiiy, in his 
selection of primitive forms, not only had an eye to the 
external form of the crystal and to its degree and 
kind of regularity, but also made his classification with 
an especial reference to the cleavage of the mineral, 
which he considered as a primary element in crystalline 
analysis. There can be no doubt that the cleavage of a 
crystal is one of its most important characters: it is a 
relation of form belonging to the interior, which is to be 
attended to no less than the form of the exterior. But 
still the cleavage is to be regarded only as determining 
the degree of geometrical symmetry of the body, and not 
as defining a special geometrical figure to which the body 
must be referred. To have looked upon it in the latter 
light was a mistake of the earlier crystallographic specu- 
lators, on which we shall shortly have to remark. 

2. I have said that the reference of crystals to primi- 
tive forms might have been well employed as a mode of 
expressing a just classification of them. This follows as 
a consequence from the application of the principle stated 
in the last chapter, that all symmetrical members are alike 
affected. Thus we may take an upright triangular prism 
as the representative of the rhombic system, and if we then 
suppose one of the upper edges to be cut off, or truncated, 
we must, by the principle of symmetry, suppose the other 
two upper edges to be truncated in precisely the same 
manner. By this truncation we may obtain the upper part 
of a rhombohedron ; and by truncations of the same kind, 
symmetrically affecting all the analogous parts of the 
figure, we may obtain any other form possessing three- 
membered symmetry. And the same is true of any of 



IDEA OF SYMMETRY IN CRYSTALS. 433 

the other kinds of symmetry, provided we make a proper 
selection of a fundamental form. And this was really 
the method employed by Demeste, Werner, and Rome 
de Lisle. They assumed a primitive form, and then con- 
ceived other forms, such as they found in nature, to be 
derived from the primitive form by truncation of the 
edges, acumination of the corners, and the like processes. 
This mode of conception was a perfectly just and legiti- 
mate expression of the general idea of symmetry. 

3. The true view of the degrees of symmetry was, as I 
have already said, impeded by the attempts which Haiiy 
and others made to arrive at primitive forms by the light 
which cleavage was supposed to throw upon the structure 
of minerals. At last, however, in Germany, as I have 
narrated in the History of Mineralogy*, Weiss and Mohs 
introduced a classification of forms implying a more phi- 
losophical principle, dividing the forms into Systems ; 
which, employing the terms of the latter writer, we shall 
call the tessular, the pyramidal or square pyramidal, the 
prismatic or oblong, and the rJiombohedral systems. 

Of these forms, the three latter may be at once 
referred to those kinds of symmetry of which we have 
spoken in the last chapter. The rhombohedral system 
has triangular symmetry, or is three-membered : the 
pyramidal has square symmetry, or is four-membered : 
the prismatic has oblong symmetry, and is two-and-two- 
membered. But the kinds of symmetry which were 
spoken of in the former chapter, do not exhaust the idea 
when applied to minerals. For the symmetry which was 
there explained was such only as can be exhibited on a 
surface, whereas the forms of crystals are solid. Not 
only have the right and left parts of the upper surface of 
a crystal relations to each other ; but the upper surface 

* Hist. Ind. 8d., iii. 209. 
VOL. I. 2 F 



434 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

and the lateral faces of the crystal have also their rela- 
tions; they may be different, or they may be alike. 
If we take a cube, and hold it so that four of its faces 
are vertical, not only are all these four sides exactly simi- 
lar, so as to give square symmetry ; but also we may turn 
the cube, so that any one of these four sides shall become 
the top, and still the four sides which are thus made 
vertical, though not the same which were vertical before, 
are still perfectly symmetrical. Thus this cubical figure 
possesses more than square symmetry. It possesses 
square symmetry in a vertical as well as in a horizontal 
sense. It possesses a symmetry which has the same 
relation to a cube which four-membered symmetry has to 
a square. And this kind of symmetry is termed the 
cubical or tessular symmetry. All the other kinds of 
symmetry have reference to an axis, about which the cor- 
responding parts are disposed ; but in tessular symmetry 
the horizontal and vertical axes are also symmetrical, or 
interchangeable ; and thus the figure may be said to have 
no axis at all. 

4. It has already been repeatedly stated that, by the 
very idea of symmetry, all the incidents of form must 
affect alike all the corresponding parts. Now in crystals 
we have, among these incidents, not only external figure, 
but cleavage, which may be considered as internal figure. 
Cleavage, then, must conform to the degree of symmetry 
of the figure. Accordingly'cleavage, no less than form, is 
to be attended to in determining to what system a mineral 
belongs. If a crystal were to occur as a square prism or 
pyramid, it would not on that account necessarily belong 
to the square pyramidal system. If it were found that 
it was cleavable parallel to one side of the prism, but not 
in the transverse direction, it has only oblong symmetry ; 
and the equality of the sides which makes it square is 
only accidental. 



IDEA OF SYMMETRY IN CRYSTALS. 435 

Thus no cleavage is admissible in any system of 
crystallization which does not agree with the degree of 
symmetry of the system. On the other hand, any cleavage 
which is consistent with the symmetry of the system, is 
(hypothetically at least) allowable. Thus in the oblong 
prismatic system we may have a cleavage "parallel to one 
side only of the prism ; or parallel to both, but of different 
distinctness ; or parallel to the two diagonals of the prism 
but of the same distinctness ; or we may have both these 
cleavages together. In the rhombohedral system, the 
cleavage may be parallel to the sides of the rhombo- 
hedron, as in Calc Spar: or, in the same system, 
the cleavage, instead of being thus oblique to the axis, 
may be along the axis in those directions which make 
equal angles with each other : this cleavage easily gives 
either a triangular or a hexagonal prism. Again, in the 
tessular system, the cleavage may be parallel to the sur- 
face of the cube, which is thus readily separable into 
other cubes, as in Galena ; or the cleavage may be such 
as to cut off the solid angle of the cube, and since there 
are eight of these, such cleavage gives us an octahedron, 
which, however, may be reduced to a tetrahedron, by 
rejecting all parallel faces, as being mere repetitions of 
the same cleavage; this is the case with Fluor Spar: 
or the cube of the tessular system may be cleavable in 
planes which truncate all the edges of the cube ; and as 
these are twelve, we thus obtain the dodecahedron with 
rhombic faces: this occurs in Zinc Blende. And thus 
we see the origin of Hau'y's various primitive forms, the 
tetrahedron, octahedron, and rhombic dodecahedron, all 
belonging to the tessular system : they are, in fact, dif- 
ferent cleavage forms of that system. 

5. I do not dwell upon other incidents of crystals 
which have reference to form, nor upon the lustre, smooth- 
ness, and striation of the surfaces. To all such incidents 

2 F 2 



430 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

the general principle applies, that similar parts are simi- 
larly affected ; and hence if any parts are found to be 
constantly and definitely different from other parts of the 
same sort, they are not similar parts ; and the symmetry 
is to be interpreted with reference to this difference. 

We have now to consider the inferences which have 
been drawn from these incidents of crystallization, with 
regard to the intimate structure of bodies. 



CHAPTER III. 

SPECULATIONS FOUNDED UPON THE 
SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 

1. WHEN a crystal, as, for instance, a crystal of galena, 
(sulphuret of lead,) is readily divisible into smaller cubes, 
and these into smaller ones, and so on without limit, it is 
very natural to represent to ourselves the original cube as 
really consisting of small cubical elements; and to imagine 
that it is a philosophical account of the physical structure 
of such a substance to say that it is made up of cubical 
molecules. And when the galena crystal has externally 
the form of a cube, there is no difficulty in such a concep- 
tion; for the surface of the crystal is also conceived as 
made up of the surfaces of its cubical molecules. We 
conceive the crystal so constituted, as we conceive a wall 
built of bricks. 

But if, as often happens, the galena crystal be an 
octahedron, a further consideration is requisite in order 
to understand its structure, pursuing still the same hypo- 
thesis. The mineral is still, as in the other case, readily 
cleavable into small cubes, having their corners turned 
to the faces of the octahedron. Therefore these faces 
can no longer be conceived as made up of the faces of 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 437 

cubical elements of which the whole is constituted. If 
we suppose a pile of such small cubes to be closely built 
together, but with decreasing width above, so as to form 
a pyramid, the face of such a pyramid will no longer be 
plane ; it will consist of a great number of the corners 
or edges of the small elementary cubes. It would ap- 
pear at first sight, therefore, that such a face cannot 
represent the smooth polished surface of a crystal. 

But when we come to look more closely, this diffi- 
culty disappears. For how large are these elementary 
cubes ? We cannot tell, even supposing they really have 
any size. But we know that they must be, at any rate, 
very small ; so small as to be inappreciable by our senses, 
for our senses find no limit to the divisibility of minerals 
by cleavage. Hence the surface of the pyramid above 
described would not consist of visible corners or edges, 
but would be roughened by specks of imperceptible size ; 
or rather, by supposing these specks to become still 
smaller, the roughness becomes smoothness. And thus 
we may have a crystal with a smooth surface, made up of 
small cubes in such a manner that their surfaces are all 
oblique to the surface of the crystal. 

Haiiy, struck by some instances in which the suppo- 
sition of such a structure of crystals appeared to account 
happily for several of their relations and properties, 
adopted and propounded it as a general theory. The 
small elements, of which he supposed crystals to be thus 
built up, he termed integrant molecules. The form of 
these molecules might or might not be the same as the 
primitive form with which his construction was supposed 
to begin ; but there was, at any rate, a close connexion 
between these forms, since both of them were founded 
on the cleavage of the mineral. The tenet that crystals 
are constituted in the manner which I have been de- 
scribing, I shall call the Theory of Integrant Molecules, 



438 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

and I have now to make some remarks on the grounds of 
this theory. 

2. In the case of which I have spoken, the mineral 
used as the example, galena, readily splits into cubes, and 
cubes are easily placed together so as to fit each other, 
and fill the space which they occupy. The same is the 
case in the mineral which suggested to Haiiy his theory, 
namely, calc spar. The crystals of this substance are 
readily divisible into rhombohedrons, a form like a brick 
with oblique angles ; and such bricks can be built to- 
gether so as to produce crystals of all the immense varie- 
ties of form which calc spar presents. This kind of 
masonry is equally possible in many other minerals ; but 
as we go through the mineral kingdom in our survey, we 
soon find cases which offer difficulties. Some minerals 
cleave only in two directions, some in one only ; in such 
cases we cannot by cleavage obtain an integrant mole- 
cule of definite form; one of its dimensions, at least, 
must remain indeterminate and arbitrary. Again, in 
some instances, we have more than three different planes 
of cleavage, as in fluor spar, where we have four. The 
solid, bounded by four planes, is a tetrahedron ; or if we 
take four pairs of parallel faces, an octahedron. But if 
we attempt to take either of these forms for our inte- 
grant molecule, we are met by this difficulty : that a col- 
lection of such forms will not fill space. Perhaps this 
difficulty will be more readily conceived by the general 
reader if it be contemplated with reference to plane 
figures. It will readily be seen that a number of equal 
squares may be put together so as to fill the space which 
they occupy ; but if we take a number of equal regular 
octagons, we may easily convince ourselves that no pos- 
sible arrangement can make them cover a flat space with- 
out leaving blank spots between. In like manner octa- 
hedrons or tetrahedrons cannot be arranged in solid space 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 439 

so as to fill it. They necessarily leave vacancies. Hence 
the structure of fluor spar, and similar crystals, was a 
serious obstacle in the way of the theory of integrant 
molecules. That theory had been adopted in the first 
instance because portions of the crystal, obtained by 
cleavage, could be built up into a solid mass ; but this 
ground of the theory failed altogether in such instances 
as I have described, and hence the theory, even upon the 
representations of its adherents, had no longer any claim 
to assent. 

The doctrine of Integral Molecules, however, was by 
no means given up at once, even in such instances. In 
this and in other subjects, we may observe that a theory, 
once constructed and carried into detail, has such a hold 
upon the minds of those who have been in the habit of 
applying it, that they will attempt to uphold it by intro- 
ducing suppositions inconsistent with the original founda- 
tions of the theory. Thus those who assert the atomic 
theory, reconcile it with facts by taking the halves of atoms; 
and thus the theory of integrant molecules was maintained 
for fluor spar, by representing the elementary octahedrons 
of which crystals are built up, as touching each other only 
by the edges. The contact of surface with surface amongst 
integrant molecules had been the first basis of the theory ; 
but this supposition being here inapplicable, was replaced 
by one which made the theory no longer a representation 
of the facts (the cleavages) but a mere geometrical con- 
struction. Although, however, the inapplicability of the 
theory to such cases was thus, in some degree, disguised 
to the disciples of Haiiy, it was plain that, in the face of 
such difficulties, the Theory of Integrant Molecules could 
not hold its place as a philosophical truth. But it still 
answered the purpose (a very valuable one, and one to 
which crystallography is much indebted,) of an instru- 
ment for calculating the geometrical relations of the parts 



440 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

of crystals to each other: for the integrant molecules 
were supposed to be placed layer above layer, each layer 
as we ascend, decreasing by a certain number of mole- 
cules and rows of molecules ; and the calculation of these 
laws of decrement was, in fact, the best mode then known 
of determining the positions of the faces. The Theory 
of Decrements served to express and to determine, in 
a great number of the most obvious cases, the laws of 
phenomena in crystalline forms, though the Theory of 
Integrant Molecules could not be maintained as a just 
view of the structure of crystals. 

3. The Theory of Integrant Molecules, however, in- 
volved this just and important principle : that a true view 
of the intimate structure of crystals must include and 
explain the facts of crystallization, that is, crystalline 
form and cleavage; and that it must take these into 
account, according to their degree of symmetry. So far 
all theories concerning the elements of crystals must 
agree. And it was soon seen that this was, in reality, all 
that had been established by the investigations of Haiiy 
and his school. I have already, in the History, quoted 
Weiss's reflections on making this step. " When in 
1809," he says*, " I published my Dissertation, I shared 
the common opinion as to the necessity of the assump- 
tion, and the reality of the existence of a primitive form, 
at least in a sense not very different from the usual sense 
of the expression." He then proceeds to relate that he 
sought a ground for such an opinion, independent of the 
doctrine of atoms, which he, in common with a great 
number of philosophers of that time in his own country, 
was disposed to reject, inclining to believe that the pro- 
perties of bodies were determined by forces which acted 
in them, and not by molecules of which they were com- 
posed. He adds, that in pursuing this train of thought, 

* Acad. Berlin. 1816. p. 307. 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 441 

he found, " that out of his primitive forms there was gra- 
dually unfolded to his hands that which really governs 
them, and is not affected by their casual fluctuations ; 
namely, the fundamental relations of their Dimensions," 
or as*we now may call them, Axes of Symmetry. With 
reference to these axes, he found, as he goes on to say, 
that "a multiplicity of internal oppositions, necessarily 
and mutually interdependent, are developed in the crys- 
talline mass, each relation having its own polarity; so 
that the crystalline character is co-extensive with these 
polarities." The character of these polarities, whether 
manifested in crystalline faces, cleavage, or any other 
incidents of crystallization, is necessarily displayed in the 
degree and kind of symmetry which the crystal possesses: 
and thus this symmetry, in all our speculations concern- 
ing the structure of crystals, necessarily takes the place 
of that enumeration of primitive forms which were re- 
jected as inconsistent with observed facts, and destitute 
of sound scientific principle. 

I may just notice here what I have stated in the His- 
tory of Mineralogy*, that the distinction of systems of 
crystallization, as introduced by Weiss and Mohs, was 
strikingly confirmed by Sir David Brewster's discoveries 
respecting the optical properties of minerals. The splen- 
did phenomena which were produced by passing polarized 
light through crystals, were found to vary according as 
the crystals were of the rhombohedral, square pyramidal, 
oblong prismatic, or tessular system. The optical exactly 
corresponded with the geometrical symmetry. In the 
two former systems were crystals uniaxal in respect of 
their optical properties ; the oblong prismatic was biaxal; 
while in the tessular, the want of a predominant axis pre- 
vented the phenomena here spoken of from occurring at 
all. The optical experiments must have led to a classifi- 

* Hist. Tnd. Sci., iii. 217- 



442 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

cation of crystals into the above systems or something 
nearly equivalent, even had they not been already so 
arranged by attention to their forms. 

4. While in Germany Weiss and Mohs with their 
disciples, were gradually rejecting what was superfluous 
in the previous crystallographical hypotheses, philosophers 
in England were also trying to represent to themselves 
the constitution of crystals in a manner which should be 
free from the obviously arbitrary and untenable fictions 
of the Haiiyian school. These attempts, how r ever, were 
not crowned with much success. One mode of repre- 
senting the structure of crystals which suggested itself, 
was to reject the polyhedral forms which Haiiy gave to 
his integrant molecules, and to conceive the elements of 
crystals as spheres, the properties of the crystal being 
determined not by the surfaces, but by the position of 
the elements. Tnis was done by Wollaston, in the Phi- 
losophical Transactions for 1813. He applied this view to 
the tessular system, in which, indeed, the application is 
not difficult ; and he showed that octahedral and tetrahe- 
dral figures may be deduced from symmetrical arrange- 
ments of equal spherules. But though in doing this, he 
manifested a perception of the conditions of the problem, 
he appeared to lose his hold on the real question when he 
tried to pass on to other systems of crystallization. For 
he accounted for the rhombohedral system by supposing 
the spheres changed into spheroids. Such a procedure 
involved him in a gratuitous and useless hypothesis : for 
to what purpose do we introduce the arrangement of 
atoms (instead of their figure,) as a mode of explaining 
the symmetry of the crystallization, when at the next 
step we ascribe to the atom, by an arbitrary fiction, a 
symmetry of figure of the same kind as that which we 
have to explain ? It is just as easy, and as allowable, to 
assume an elementary rhombohedron, as to assume ele- 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 443 

mentary spheroids, of which the rhombohedrons are 
constructed. 

5. Many hypotheses of the same kind might be 
adduced, devised both by mineralogists and chemists. 
But almost all such speculations have been pursued with 
a most surprising neglect of the principle which obviously 
is the only sound basis on which they can proceed. 
The principle is this : that all hypotheses concerning the 
arrangement of the elementary atoms of bodies in space 
must be constructed with reference to the general facts of 
crystallization. The truth and importance of this prin. 
ciple can admit of no doubt. For if we make any 
hypothesis concerning the mode ef connexion of the 
elementary particles of bodies, this must be done with 
the view of representing to ourselves the forces which 
connect them, and the results of these forces as mani- 
fested in the properties of the bodies. Now the forces 
which connect the particles of bodies so as to make 
them crystalline, are manifestly chemical forces. It is 
only definite chemical compounds which crystallize ; and 
in crystals the force of cohesion by which the particles 
are held together cannot in any way be distinguished or 
separated from the chemical force by which their elements 
are combined. The elements are understood to be com- 
bined, precisely because tne result is a definite, apparently 
homogeneous substance. The properties of the com- 
pound bodies depend upon the elements and their mode 
of combination ; for, in fact, these include everything on 
which they can depend. There are no other circum- 
stances than these which can affect the properties of a 
body. Therefore all those properties which have refer- 
ence to space, namely, the crystalline properties, cannot 
depend upon anything else than the arrangement of the 
elementary molecules in space. These properties are 
the facts which any hypothesis of the arrangement of 



444 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

molecules must explain, or at least render conceivable ; 
and all such hypotheses, all constructions of bodies by 
supposed arrangements of molecules, can have no other 
philosophical object than to account for facts of this 
kind. If they do not do this, they are mere arbitrary 
geometrical fictions, which cannot be in any degree con- 
firmed or authorized by an examination of nature, and 
are therefore not deserving of any regard. 

6. Those philosophers who have endeavoured to repre- 
sent the mode in which bodies are constructed by the 
combination of their chemical atoms, have often under- 
taken to show, not only that the atoms are combined, but 
also in what positions and configurations they are com- 
bined. And it is truly remarkable, as I have already 
said, that they have done this, almost in every instance, 
without any consideration of the crystalline character of 
the resulting combinations ; from which alone we receive 
any light as to the relation of their elements in space. 
Thus Dr. Dalton, in his Elements of Chemistry, in which 
he gave to the world the Atomic Theory as a representa- 
tion of the doctrine of definite and multiple proportions, 
also published a large collection of diagrams, exhibiting 
what he conceived to be the configuration of the atoms 
in a great number of the most common combinations of 
chemical elements. Now these hypothetical diagrams 
do not in any way correspond, as to the nature of their 
symmetry, with the compounds, as we find them display- 
ing their symmetry when they occur crystallized. Car- 
bonate of lime has in reality a triangular symmetry, since 
it belongs to the rhombohedral system; Dr. Dalton's 
carbonate of lime would be an oblique rhombic prism or 
pyramid. Sulphate of baryta is really two-and-two 
membered ; Dr. Dalton's diagram makes it two-and-one 
membered. Alum is really octahedral or tessular ; but 
according to the diagram it could not be so, since the 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 445 

two ends of the atom are not symmetrical. And the 
same want of correspondence between the facts and the 
hypothesis runs through the whole system. It need not 
surprise us that the theoretical arrangement of atoms 
does not explain the facts of crystallization ; for to pro- 
duce such an explanation would be a second step in 
science quite as great as the first, the discovery of the 
atomic theory in its chemical sense. But we may allow 
ourselves to be surprised that an utter discrepance be- 
tween all the facts of crystallization and the figures 
assumed in the theory, did not suggest any doubt as to 
the soundness of the mode of philosophizing by which 
this part of the theory was constructed. 

7. Some little accordance between the hypothetical 
arrangements of chemical atoms and the facts of crystal- 
lization, does appear to have been arrived at by some of 
the theorists to whom we here refer, although by no 
means enough to show a due conviction of the importance 
of the principle stated above. Thus Wollaston, in the 
Essay above noticed, after showing that a symmetrical 
arrangement of equal spherules would give rise to octa- 
hedral and other tessular figures, remarks, very properly, 
that the metals, which are simple bodies, crystallize in 
such forms. M. Ampere* also, in 1814, published a 
brief account of an hypothesis of a somewhat similar 
nature, and stated himself to have developed this specu- 
lation in a Memoir which has not yet, so far as I am 
aware, been published. In this notice he conceives bodies 
to be compounded of molecules, which, arranged in a poly- 
hedral form, constitute particles. These representative 
forms of the particles depend on chemical laws. Thus 
the particles of oxygen, of hydrogen, and of azote, are 
composed each of four molecules. Hence it is collected 
that the particles of nitrous gas are composed of two 

* Ann.de Chimie, torn. xc. p. 43. 



446 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

molecules of oxygen and two of azote ; and similar con- 
clusions are drawn respecting other substances. These 
conclusions, though expressed by means of the polyhe- 
drons thus introduced, are supported by chemical, rather 
than by crystallographical comparisons. The author does, 
indeed, appeal to the crystallization of sal ammoniac as 
an argument*; but as all the forms which he introduces 
appear to belong to the tessular system of crystallization, 
there is, in his reasonings, nothing distinctive; and 
therefore nothing, crystallographically speaking, of any 
weight on the side of this theory. 

8. Any hypothesis which should introduce any prin- 
ciple of chemical order among the actual forms of mine- 
rals, would well deserve attention. At first sight, nothing 
can appear more anomalous than the forms which occur. 
We have, indeed, one broad fact, which has an encou- 
raging aspect, the tessular forms in which the pure metals 
crystallize. The highest degree of chemical and of geo- 
metrical simplicity coincide : irregularity disappears pre- 
cisely where it is excluded by the consideration above 
stated, that the symmetry of chemical composition must 
determine the symmetry of crystalline form. 

But if we go on to any other class of crystalline 
forms, we soon find ourselves lost in our attempts to 
follow any thread of order. We have indeed many large 
groups connected by obvious analogies ; as the rhombo- 
hedral carbonates of lime, magnesia, iron, manganese ; 
the prismatic carbonates and sulphates of lime, baryta, 
strontia, lead. But even in these, we cannot form any 
plausible hypothesis of the arrangement of the elements ; 
and in other cases to which we naturally turn, we can 
find nothing but confusion. For instance, if we examine 
the oxides of metals : those of iron are rhombohedral 
and tessular ; those of copper, tessular ; those of tin, of 

* Ann. de Chirme, torn. xc. p. 83. 



SPECULATIONS ON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS. 447 

titanium, of manganese, square pyramidal; those of 
antimony, prismatic ; and we have other forms for other 
substances. 

It may be added, that if we take account of the 
optical properties which, as we have already stated, have 
constant relations to the crystalline forms, the confusion 
is still further increased ; for the optical dimensions vary 
in amount, though not in symmetry, where chemistry can 
trace no difference of composition. 

9. We will not quit the subject, however, without 
noticing the much more promising aspect which it 
has assumed by the detection of such groups as are 
referred to in the last article ; or in other words, by 
Mitscherlich's discovery of Isomorphism. According to 
that discovery, there are various elements which may 
take the place of each other in crystalline bodies, either 
without any alteration of the crystalline form, or at most 
with only a slight alteration of its dimensions. Such a 
group of elements we have in the earths lime and mag- 
nesia, the protoxides of iron and manganese : for the car- 
bonates of all these bases occur crystallized in forms of 
the rhombohedral system, the characteristic angle being 
nearly the same in all. Now lime and magnesia, by the 
discoveries of modern chemistry, are really oxides of 
metals ; and therefore all these carbonates have a similar 
chemical constitution, while they have also a similar 
crystalline form. Whether or no we can devise any 
arrangement of molecules by which this connexion of 
the chemical and the geometrical property can be repre- 
sented, we cannot help considering the connexion as an 
extremely important fact in the constitution of bodies ; 
and such facts are more likely than any other to give us 
some intelligible view of the relations of the ultimate 
parts of bodies. The same may be said of all the other 



448 PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY. 

isomorphous or plesiomorphous groups*. For instance, 
we have a number of minerals which belong to the same 
system of crystallization, but in which the chemical com- 
position appears at first sight to be very various : namely, 
spinelle, pleonaste, gahnite, franklinite, chromic iron 
oxide, magnetic iron oxide : but Abich has shown that 
all these may be reduced to a common chemical formula ; 
they are bioxides of one set of bases, combined with 
trioxides of another set. Perhaps some mathematician 
may be able to devise some geometrical arrangement of 
such a group of elements which may possess the properties 
of the tessular system. Hypothetical arrangements of 
atoms, thus expressing both the chemical and the crys- 
talline symmetry which we know to belong to the sub- 
stance, would be valuable steps in analytical science ; and 
when they had been duly verified, the hypotheses might 
easily be divested of their atomic character. 

Thus, as we have already said, mineralogy, understood 
in its wider sense, as the counterpart of chemistry, has 
for one of its main objects to discover those relations of 
the elements of bodies which have reference to space. 
In this research, the foundation of all sound speculation 
is the kind and degree of symmetry of form which we 
find in definite chemical compounds: and the problem 
at present before the inquirer is, to devise such arrange- 
ments of molecules as shall answer the conditions alike 
of chemistry and of crystallography. 

We now proceed to the Classificatory Sciences, of 
which mineralogy is one, though hitherto by far the least 
successful. 

* See Hist. Ind. 8ci. 9 Hi. 222. 



449 



BOOK VIII. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY 
SCIENCES. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE IDEA OF LIKENESS AS GOVERNING THE 
USE OF COMMON NAMES. 

1. Object of the Chapter. Not only the Classificatory 
Sciences, but the application of names to things in the 
rudest and most unscientific manner, depends upon our 
apprehending them as like each other. We must there- 
fore endeavour to trace the influence and operation of 
the Idea of Likeness in the common use of language, 
before we speak of the conditions under which it acquires 
its utmost exactness and efficacy. 

It will be my object to show in this, as in previous 
cases, that the impressions of sense are apprehended by 
acts of the mind ; and that these mental acts necessarily 
imply certain relations which may be made the subjects 
of speculative reasoning. We shall have, if we can, to 
seize and bring into clear view the principles which the 
relation of like and unlike involves, and the mode in 
which these principles have been developed. 

2. Unity of the Individual. But before we can attend 
to several things as like or unlike, we must be able to 
apprehend each of these by itself as one thing. It may at 
first sight perhaps appear that this apprehension results 
immediately from the impressions on our senses, without 

VOL. i. 2 G 



450 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

any act of our thoughts. A very little attention, how- 
ever, enables us to see that thus to single out special 
objects requires a mental operation as well as a sensation. 
How, for example, without an exertion of mental activity, 
can we see one tree, in a forest where there are many ? We 
have, spread before us, a collection of colours and forms, 
green and brown, dark and light, irregular and straight : 
this is all that sensation gives or can give. But we asso- 
ciate one brown trunk with one portion of the green mass, 
excluding the rest, although the neighbouring leaves are 
both nearer in contiguity and more similar in appearance 
than is the stem. We thus have before us one tree ; but 
this unity is given by the mind itself. We see the green 
and the brown, but we must make the tree before we can 
see it. 

That this composition of our sensations so as to form 
one thing implies an act of our own, will perhaps be more 
readily allowed, if we once more turn our attention to 
the manner in which we sometimes attempt to imitate 
and record the objects of sight, by drawing. When we do 
this, as we have already observed, we mark this unity of each 
object, by drawing a line to separate the parts which we 
include from those which we exclude ; an Outline. This 
line corresponds to nothing which we see ; the beginner 
in drawing has great difficulty in discerning it ; he has in 
fact to make it. It is, as has been said by a painter of 
our own time*, a fiction : but it is a fiction employed to 
mark a real act of the mind ; to designate the singleness 
of the object in our conception. As we have said else- 
where, we see lines, but especially outlines, by mentally 
drawing them ourselves. 

The same act of conception which the outline thus 
represents and commemorates in visible objects, the same 
combination of sensible impressions into a unit, is exer- 

* PHILLIPS on Painting) Design. 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 451 

cised also with regard to the objects of all our senses : and 
the singleness thus given to each object, is a necessary 
preliminary to its being named or represented in any 
other way. 

But it may be said, Is it then by an arbitrary act of 
our own that we put together the branches of the same 
tree, or the limbs of the same animal ? Have we equally 
the power and the right to make the branch of the fir a 
part of the neighbouring oak? Can we include in the 
outline of a man any object with which he happens to be 
in contact? 

Such suppositions are manifestly absurd. And the 
answer is, that though we give unity to objects by an 
act of thought, it is not by an arbitrary act ; but by a 
process subject to certain conditions : to conditions which 
exclude such incongruous combinations as have just been 
spoken of. 

What are these conditions which regulate our appre- 
hension of an object as one ? which determine what por- 
tion of our impressions does, and what portion does not 
belong to the same thing ? 

2. Condition of Unity. I reply, that the primary and 
fundamental condition is, that we must be able to make 
intelligible assertions respecting the object, and to enter- 
tain that belief of which assertions are the exposition. A 
tree grows, sheds its leaves in autumn, and buds again in 
the spring, waves in the wind, or falls before the storm. 
And to the tree belong all those parts which must be 
included in order that such declarations, and the thoughts 
which they convey, shall have a coherent and permanent 
meaning. Those are its branches which wave and fall with 
its trunk ; those are its leaves which grow on its branches. 
The permanent connexions which we observe, perma- 
nent, among unconnected changes which affect the sur- 
rounding appearances, are what we bind together as 

2 G 2 



452 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

belonging to one object. This permanence is the condi- 
tion of our conceiving the object as one. The connected 
changes may always be described by means of assertions ; 
and the connexion is seen in the identity of the subject of 
successive predications; in the possibility of applying 
many verbs to one substantive. We may therefore express 
the condition of the unity of an object to be this : that 
assertions concerning the object shall be possible : or rather 
we should say, that the acts of belief which such assertions 
enunciate shall be possible. 

It may seem to be superfluous to put in a form so 
abstract and remote, the grounds of a process apparently 
so simple as our conceiving an object to be one. But 
the same condition to which we have thus been led, as 
the essential principle of the unity of objects, namely, 
that propositions shall be possible, will repeatedly occur 
in the present chapter ; and it may serve to illustrate our 
views, to show that this condition pervades even the 
simplest cases. 

4. Kinds. The mental synthesis of which we have 
thus spoken, gives us our knowledge of individual things ; 
it enables me to apprehend that particular tree or man 
which I now see, or, by the help of memory, the tree or 
the man I saw yesterday. But the knowledge with 
which we have mainly here to do is not a knowledge of 
individuals but of kinds ; of such classes as are indicated 
by common names. We have to make assertions con- 
cerning a tree or a man in general, without regarding 
what is peculiar to this man or that tree. 

Now it is clear that certain individual objects are all 
called man, or all called tree, in virtue of some resemblance 
which they have. If we had not the power of perceiving 
in the appearances around us, likeness and unlikeness, 
we could not consider objects as distributed into kinds at 
all. The impressions of sense would throng upon us, but 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 453 

being uncompared with each other, they would flow away 
like the waves of the sea, and each vanish from our con- 
templation when the sensation faded. That we do appre- 
hend surrounding objects as belonging to permanent kinds, 
as being men and horses, oaks and roses, arises from our 
having the idea of likeness, and from our applying it 
habitually, and so far as such a classification requires. 

Not only can we employ the idea of likeness in this 
manner, but we apply it incessantly and universally to 
the whole mass and train of our sensations. For we have 
no external sensations to which we cannot apply some 
language or other, and all language necessarily implies 
recognition of resemblances. We cannot call an object 
green or round without comparing in our thoughts its 
colour or its shape, with a shape and a colour seen in 
other objects. All our sensations, therefore, without any 
exception of kind or time, are subject to this constant 
process of classification ; and the idea of likeness is per- 
petually operating to distribute them into kinds, at least 
so far as the use of language requires. 

We come then again to the question, Upon what 
principle, under what conditions, is the idea of likeness 
thus operative ? What are the limits of the classes thus 
formed ? Where does that similarity end, which induces 
and entitles us to call a thing a tree ? What universal 
rule is there for the application of common names, so 
that we may not apply them wrongly ? 

5. Not made ty Definitions. Perhaps some one might 
expect in answer to these inquiries a definition or a series 
of definitions ; might imagine that some description of a 
tree might be given which might show when the term 
was applicable and when it was not ; and that we might 
construct a body of rules to which such descriptions must 
conform. But on consideration it will be clear that the 
real solution of our difficulty cannot be obtained in such 



454 PHILOSOPHY OP THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

a manner. For first; such descriptions must be given in 
words, and therefore suppose that we have already satisfied 
ourselves how words are to be used. If we define a 
tree to be a living thing without the power of voluntary 
motion, we shall be called upon to define a living thing ; 
and it is manifest that this renewal of the demand for 
definition might be repeated indefinitely ; and, therefore, 
we cannot in this way come to a final principle. And in 
the next place, most of those who use language, even with 
great precision and consistency, would find it difficult or 
impossible to give good definitions even of a few of the 
general names which they use ; and therefore their prac- 
tice cannot be regulated by any tacit reference to such de- 
finitions. That definitions of terms are of great use and 
importance in their right place, we shall soon see ; but 
their place is not to regulate the use of common language. 

What then, once more, is this regulative principle ? 
What rules do men follow in the use of words, so as 
commonly to avoid confusion and ambiguity? How do 
they come to understand each other so well as they 
ordinarily do, respecting the limits of classes never de- 
fined, and which they cannot define? What is the 
common convention, or condition to which they conform? 

6. Condition of the Use of Terms. To this we reply, 
that the condition which regulates the use of language, 
is that it shall be capable of being used ; that is, that 
general assertions shall be possible. The term tree is 
applicable as far as it is useful in expressing our know- 
ledge concerning trees : thus we know that trees are 
fixed in the ground, have a solid stem, branches, leaves, 
and many other properties. With regard to all the objects 
which surround us, we have an immense store of know- 
ledge of such properties, and we employ the names of the 
objects in such a manner as enables us to express these 
properties. 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 455 

But the connexion of such properties is variable and in- 
definite. Some properties are constantly combined, others 
occasionally only. The leaves of different oaks resemble 
each other, the branches resemble far less, and may differ 
very widely. The term oak does not enable us to say that 
all oaks have straight branches or all crooked. Terms can 
only express properties as far as they are constant. Not 
only, therefore, the accumulation of a vast mass of know- 
ledge of the properties and attributes of objects, but also 
an observation of the habitual connexion of such properties 
is needed, to direct us to the consistent application of 
terms : to enable us to apply them so as to express 
truths. But here again we are largely provided with the 
requisite knowledge and observation by the common 
course of our existence. The unintermitting stream of 
experience supplies us with an incalculable amount of 
such observed connexions. All men have. observed that 
the associations of the same form of leaves are more con- 
stant than of the same form of branches ; that though 
persons walk in different attitudes none go on all fours ; 
and thus the term oak is so applied as to include those 
cases in which the leaves are alike in form though the 
branches be unlike ; and though we should refuse to 
apply the term man to a class of creatures which habi- 
tually and without compulsion used four legs, we make no 
scruple of affixing it to persons of very different figures. 
The whole of human experience being composed of such 
observed connexions, we have thus materials even for 
the immense multiplicity of names which human language 
contains ; all which names are, as we have said, regulated 
in their application by the condition of expressing such 
experience. 

Thus amid the countless combinations of properties 
and divisions of classes which the structure of language 
implies, scarcely any are arbitrary or capricious. A word 



456 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

which expressed a mere wanton collection of unconnected 
attributes could hardly be called a word ; for of such a 
collection of properties no truth could be asserted, and 
the word would disappear, for want of some occasion on 
which it could be used. Though much of the fabric of 
language appears, not unnaturally, fantastical and purely 
conventional, it is in fact otherwise. The associations 
and distinctions of phraseology are not more fanciful than 
is requisite to make them correspond to the apparent 
caprices of nature or of thought ; and though much in 
language may be called conventional, the conventions 
exist for the sake of expressing some truth or opinion, 
and not for their own sake. The principle, that the con- 
dition of the use of terms is the possibility of general, intelli- 
gible, consistent assertions, is true in the most complete 
and extensive sense. 

7. Terms may have different Uses. The terms with 
which we are here most concerned are names of classes 
of natural objects ; and when we say that the principle 
and the limit of such names are their use in expressing 
propositions concerning the classes, it is clear that much 
will depend on the kind of propositions which we mainly 
have to express: and that the same name may have 
different limits, according to the purpose we have in view. 
For example, is the whale properly included in the 
general term fish f When men are concerned in catching 
marine animals, the main features of the process are the 
same however the animals may differ ; hence whales are 
classed with fishes, and we speak of the whale-fishery. 
But if we look at the analogies of organization, we find 
that, according to these, the whale is clearly not a fish, but 
a beast, (confining this term, for the sake of distinctness, 
to suckling beasts or mammals). In Natural History, there- 
fore, the whale is not included among fish. The indefi- 
nite and miscellaneous propositions which language is 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 457 

employed to enunciate in the course of common practical 
life, are replaced by a more coherent and systematic 
collection of properties, when we come to aim at scientific 
knowledge. But we shall hereafter consider the principle 
of the classifications of Natural History; our present 
subject is the application of the Idea of Likeness in 
common practice and common language. 

8. Gradation of Kinds. Common names, then, in- 
clude many individuals associated in virtue of resem- 
blances, and of permanently connected properties ; and 
such names are applicable as far as they serve to express 
such properties. These collections of individuals are 
termed kinds, sorts, classes. 

But this association of particulars is capable of degrees. 
As individuals by their resemblances form kinds, so kinds 
of things, though different, may resemble each other so as 
to be again associated in a higher class ; and there may 
be several successive steps of such classification. Man, 
horse, tree, stone, are each a name of a kind ; but animal 
includes the two first and excludes the others; living 
thing is a term which includes animal and tree but not 
stone ; body includes all the four. And such a subordi- 
nation of kinds may be traced very widely in the arrange- 
ments of language. 

The condition of the use of the wider is the same as 
that of the narrower names of classes ; they are good as 
far as they serve to express true propositions. In com- 
mon language, though such an order of generality may in 
a variety of instances be easily discerned, it is not sys- 
tematically and extensively referred to ; but this subordi- 
nation and graduated comprehensiveness is the essence of 
the methods and nomenclatures of Natural History, as we 
shall soon have to show. 

But such subordination is not without its use, even in 
common cases, and when it is expressed in the terms of 



458 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

common language. Thus organized body is a term which 
includes plants and animals ; animal includes beasts, birds, 
fishes ; beast includes horses and dogs ; dogs, again, are 
greyhounds, spaniels, terriers. 

9. Characters of Kinds. Now when we have such a 
series of names and classes, we find that we take for 
granted irresistibly that each class has some character 
which distinguishes it from other classes included in the 
superior division. We ask what kind of beast a dog is ; 
what kind of animal a beast is ; and we assume that such 
questions admit of answer; that each kind has some 
mark or marks by which it may be described. And such 
descriptions may be given : an animal is an organized 
body having sensation and volition ; man is a reasonable 
animal. Whether or no we assent to the exactness of 
these definitions, we allow the propriety of their form. 
If we maintain these to be wrong, we must believe some 
others to be right, however difficult it may be to hit upon 
them. We entertain a conviction that there must be, 
among things so classed and named, a possibility of defin- 
ing each. 

Now what is the foundation of this postulate ? What 
is the ground of this assumption, that there must exist a 
definition which we have never seen, and which perhaps 
no one has seen in a satisfactory form ? The knowledge 
of this definition is by no means necessary to our using 
the word with propriety ; for any one can make true asser- 
tions about dogs, but who can define a dog ? And yet if 
the definition be not necessary to enable us to use the 
word, why is it necessary at all ? We allow that we pos- 
sess an indestructible conviction that there must be such 
a character of each kind as will supply a definition ; but 
we ask, on what this conviction rests. 

I reply, that our persuasion that there must needs be 
characteristic marks by which things can be defined in 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 459 

words, is founded on the assumption of the necessary pos- 
sibility of reasoning. 

The reference of any object or conception to its class 
without definition, may give us a persuasion that it shares 
the properties of its class, but does not enable us to rea- 
son upon those properties. When we consider man as 
an animal, we ascribe to him in thought the appetites, 
desires, affections, which we habitually include in our 
notion of animal : but except we have expressed these in 
some definition or acknowledged description of the term 
animal, we can make no use of the persuasion in ratioci- 
nation. But if we have described animals as "beings 
impelled to action by appetites and passions," we can not 
only think, but say, "man is an animal, and therefore he 
is impelled to act by appetites and passions." And if we 
add a further definition, that " man is a reasonable ani- 
mal," and if it appear that "reason implies conformity 
to a rule of action," we can then further infer that man's 
nature is to conform the results of animal appetite and 
passion to a rule of action. 

The possibility of pursuing any such Jtrain of reason- 
ing as this, depends on the definitions, of animal and of 
man, which we have introduced ; and the possibility of 
reasoning concerning the objects around us being inevit- 
ably assumed by us from the constitution of our nature, 
we assume consequently the possibility of such definitions 
as may thus form part of our deduction, and the existence 
of such defining characters. 

10. Difficult!/ of Definitions. But though men are, on 
such grounds, led to make constant and importunate 
demands for definitions of the terms which they employ 
in their speculations, they are, in fact, far from being 
able to carry into complete effect the postulate on which 
they proceed, that they must be able to find definitions 
which by logical consequence shall lead to the truths 



460 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

they seek. The postulate overlooks the process by which 
our classes of things are formed and our names applied. 
This process consisting, as we have already said, in 
observing permanent connexions of properties, and in 
fixing them by the attribution of names, is of the nature 
of the process of induction, of which we shall afterwards 
have to speak. And the postulate is so far true, that 
this process of induction being once performed, its result 
may usually be expressed by means of a few definitions, 
and may thus lead by a deduction to a train of real truths. 

But in the subjects where we principally find such a 
subordination of classes as we have spoken of, this pro- 
cess of deduction is rarely of much prominence : for 
example, in the branches of natural history. Yet it is 
in these subjects that the existence and importance of 
these characteristic marks, which we have spoken of, 
principally comes into view. In treating of these marks, 
however, we enter upon methods which are technical and 
scientific, not popular and common. And before we 
make this transition, we have a remark to make on the 
manner in which writers, without reference to physics or 
natural history, have spoken of kinds, their subordination, 
and their marks. 

11. " The Five Words:' These things, the nature 
and relations of classes, were, in fact, the subjects of 
minute and technical treatment by the logicians of the 
school of Aristotle. Porphyry wrote an Introduction to 
the Categories of that philosoper, which is entitled On the 
Five Words. The " Five Words " are genus, species, 
difference, property, accident. Genus and species are 
superior and inferior classes, and are stated* to be capable 
of repeated subordination. The "most general genus" 
is the widest class, the " most special species " the nar- 
rowest. Between these are intermediate classes, which 
* PORPHYR. Isagog. c. 23. 



THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 461 

are genera with regard to those below, and species with 
regard to those above them. Thus Being is the most 
general genus ; under this is Body ; under Body is Living 
Body; under this again Animal ; under Animal is Rational 
Animal, or Man ; under Man are Socrates and Plato, and 
other individual men. 

The Difference is that which is added to the genus 
to make the species ; thus Rational is the Difference by 
which the genus Animal is made the species Man ; the 
Difference in this Technical sense is the " Specific," or 
species-making Difference*. It forms the Definition for 
the purposes of logic, and corresponds to the " Character" 
(specific or generic) of the Natural Historians. Indeed 
several of them, as, for instance, Linnaeus, in his Philoso- 
plda Botanica^ always call these Characters the Difference, 
by a traditional application of the Peripatetic terms of art. 

Of the other two words, the Property is that which 
though not employed in defining the class, belongs to 
every part of itf : it is, " What happens to all the class, 
to it alone, and at all times ; as to be capable of laughing 
is a property of a man." 

The Accident is that which may be present and absent 
without the destruction of the subject, as to sleep is an 
Accident (a thing which happens) to man. 

I need not dwell further on this system of techni- 
calities. The most remarkable points in it are those 
which I have already noticed ; the doctrine of the succes- 
sive subordination of genera, and the fixing attention 
upon the specific difference. These doctrines, though 
invented in order to make reasoning more systematic, 
and at a period anterior to the existence of any classifi- 
catory science, have, by a curious contrast with the inten- 
tions of their founders, been of scarcely any use in sciences 
of reasoning, but have been amply applied and developed 
* etdoTrotoy. f Isagog. c. 4. 



462 PHILOSOPHY OP THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES 

in the Natural History which arose in later times. We 
must now treat of the principles on which this science 
proceeds, and explain what peculiar arid technical pro- 
cesses it employs in addition to those of common thought 
and common language. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY, AS REGU- 
LATED BY THE IDEA OF LIKENESS. 

1. Idea of Likeness in Natural History. The various 
branches of Natural History, in so far as they are classi- 
ficatory sciences merely, and do not depend upon physio- 
logical views, rest upon the same Idea of Likeness which 
is the ground of the application of the names, more or 
less general, of common language. But the nature of 
science requires that for her purposes this idea should be 
applied in a more exact and rigorous manner than in its 
common and popular employment ; just as occurs with 
regard to the other Ideas on which science is founded ; 
for instance, as the idea of space gives rise, in popular use, 
to the relations implied in the prepositions and adjectives 
which refer to position and form, and in its scientific 
developement gives rise to the more precise relations of 
geometry. 

The way in which the Idea of Likeness has been 
applied, so as to lead to the construction of a science, is 
best seen in Botany : for, in the Classification of Animals, 
we are inevitably guided by a consideration of the function 
of parts ; that is, by an idea of purpose, and not of like- 
ness merely : and in Mineralogy the attempts at classifi- 
cation on the principles of Natural History have been 
hitherto very imperfectly successful. But in Botany we 
have an example of a branch of knowledge in which sys- 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 463 

teiAatic classification has been effected with great beauty 
and advantage; and in which the peculiarities and prin- 
ciples on which such classification must depend have been 
carefully studied. Many of the principal botanists, as 
Linnaeus, Adanson, Decandolle, have not only practically 
applied, but have theoretically enunciated, what they held 
to be the sound maxims of classificatory science: and 
have thus enabled us to place before the reader with con- 
fidence the philosophy of this kind of science. 

2. Condition of its Use. We may begin by remarking 
that the Idea of Likeness, in its systematic employment, 
is governed by the same principle which we have already 
spoken of as regulating the distribution of things into 
kinds, and the assignment of names in unsystematic 
thought and speech ; namely, the condition that general 
propositions shall be possible. But as in this case the pro- 
positions are to f be of a scientific form and exactness, the 
likeness must be treated with a corresponding precision ; 
and its consequences traced by steady and distinct pro- 
cesses. Naturalists must, for their purposes, employ the 
resemblances of objects in a technical manner. This tech- 
nical process may be considered as consisting of three 
steps; The fixation of the resemblances; The use of 
them in making a classification ; The means of applying 
the classification. These three steps may be spoken of as 
the Terminology, the Plan of the System, and the Scheme 
of the Characters. 

3. (I.) Terminology*. Terminology signifies the col- 
lection of terms, or technical words, which belong to the 
science. But in fixing the meaning of the terms, at 

* Decandolle and others use the term Glossology instead of Termi- 
nology, to avoid the blemish of a word compounded of two parts taken 
from different languages. The convenience of treating the termina- 
tion ology (and a few other parts of compounds) as not restricted to 
Greek combinations, is so great, that I shall venture, in these cases, to 
disregard this philological scruple. 



464 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

least of the descriptive terms, we necessarily fix, at the 
same time, the perceptions and notions which the terms 
are to convey ; and thus the terminology of a classifica- 
tory science exhibits the elements of its substance as 
well as of its language. A large but indispensable part 
of the study of botany (and of mineralogy and zoology 
also,) consists in the acquisition of the peculiar voca- 
bulary of the science. 

The meaning of technical terms can be fixed in the 
first instance only by convention, and can be made intel- 
ligible only by presenting to the senses that which the 
terms are to signify. The knowledge of a colour by its 
name can only be taught through the eye. No descrip- 
tion can convey to a hearer what we mean by apple green 
or French grey. It might, perhaps, be supposed that, in 
the first example, the term apple, referring to so familiar 
an object, sufficiently suggests the colour intended. But 
it may easily be seen that this is not true ; for apples are 
of many different hues of green, and it is only by a con- 
ventional selection that we can appropriate the term to 
one special shade. When this appropriation is once mad e, 
the term refers to the sensation, and not to the parts of 
the term ; for these enter into the compound merely as 
a help to the memory, whether the suggestion be a 
natural connexion as in "apple green," or a casual one as in 
"French grey." In order to derive due advantage from 
technical terms of this kind, they must be associated 
immediately with the perception to which they belong ; 
and not connected with it through the vague usages of 
common language. The memory must retain the sensa- 
tion; and the technical word must be understood as 
directly as the most familiar word, and more distinctly. 
When we find such terms as tin-white or pinchbeck- 
brown, the metallic colour so denoted ought to start up 
in our memory without delay or search. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 465 

This, which it is most important to recollect with 
respect to the simpler properties of bodies, as colour and 
form, is no less true with respect to more compound 
notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a peculiar 
meaning by convention ; and the student, in order to use 
the word, must be completely familiar with the conven- 
tion, so that he has no need to frame conjectures from 
the word itself. Such conjectures would always be inse- 
cure, and often erroneous. Thus the term papilionaceous 
applied to a flower is employed to indicate, not only a re- 
semblance to a butterfly, but a resemblance arising from 
five petals of a certain peculiar shape and arrangement ; 
and even if the resemblance were much stronger than it 
is in such cases, yet if it were produced in a different way, 
as, for example, by one petal, or two only, instead of a 
" standard," two " wings," and a " keel" consisting of two 
parts more or less united into one, we should no longer 
be justified in speaking of it as a " papilionaceous" flower. 

The formation of an exact and extensive descriptive 
language for botany has been executed with a degree of 
skill and felicity, which, before it was attained, could 
hardly have been dreamt of as attainable. Every part of 
a plant has been named ; and the form of every part, even 
the most minute, has had a large assemblage of descrip- 
tive terms appropriated to it, by means of which the 
botanist can convey and receive knowledge of form and 
structure, as exactly as if each minute part were pre- 
sented to him vastly magnified. This acquisition w^as 
part of the Linnaean reform, of which we have spoken in 
the History. " Tournefort," says Decandolle*, " appears to 
have been the first who really perceived the utility of fixing 
the sense of terms in such a way as always to employ the 
same word in the same sense, and always to express the 
same idea by the same word ; but it was Linnaeus who 

* Theor. Elem., p. 327. 
VOL. I. 2 H 



466 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

really created and fixed this botanical language, and 
this is his fairest claim to glory, for by this fixation of 
language he has shed clearness and precision over all 
parts of the science." 

It is not necessary here to give any detailed account 
of the terms of botany. The fundamental ones have been 
gradually introduced, as the parts of plants were more 
carefully and minutely examined. Thus the flower was 
successively distinguished into the calyx, the corolla, the 
stamens, and the pistils : the sections of the corolla were 
termed petals by Columna; those of the calyx were 
called sepals by Necker*. Sometimes terms of greater 
generality were devised ; as perianth to include the calyx 
and corolla, whether one or both of these were present f; 
pericarp for the part inclosing the grain, of whatever kind 
it be, fruit, nut, pod, &c. And it may easily be imagined 
that descriptive terms may, by definition and combination, 
become very numerous and distinct. Thus leaves may be 
called pinnatifid\, pinnatipartite, pinnatisect, pinnatilobate, 
palmatifid, palmatipartite, &c., and each of these words 
designates different combinations of the modes and extent 
of the divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. 
In some cases arbitrary numerical relations are introduced 
into the definition : thus a leaf is called bilobatej when it 
is divided into two parts by a notch ; but if the notch go 
to the middle of its length, it is bifid ; if it go near the 
base of the leaf, it is bipartite ; if to the base, it is bisect. 
Thus, too, a pod of a cruciferous plant is a silica\\ if it be 
four times as long as it is broad, but if it be shorter than 
this it is a silicula. Such terms being established, the 
form of the very complex leaf or frond of a fern is exactly 
conveyed by the following phrase : " fronds rigid pinnate, 

* DEC. 329. 

t For this Erliart and Decandolle use Perigone. 

% DEC. 318. Ib. 493. || Ib. 422. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 467 

pinnae recurved subunilateral pinnatifid, the segments 
linear undivided or bifid spinuloso-serrate*." 

Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with 
the like precision : Colour by means of a classified scale 
of colours, as we have seen in speaking of the measures 
of secondary qualities ; to which, however, we must add, 
that the naturalist employs arbitrary names, (such as we 
have already quoted,) and not mere numerical exponents, 
to indicate a certain number of selected colours. This 
was done with most precision by Werner, and his scale 
of colours is still the most usual standard of naturalists. 
Werner also introduced a more exact terminology with 
regard to other characters which are important in mine- 
ralogy, as lustre, hardness. But Mohs improved upon this 
step by giving a numerical scale of hardness, in which 
talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc spar 3, and so on, as we have 
already explained in the History of Mineralogy. Some 
properties, as specific gravity, by their definition give at 
once a numerical measure ; and others, as crystalline 
form, require a very considerable array of mathematical 
calculation and reasoning, to 'point out their relations 
and gradations. In all cases the features of likeness in 
the objects must be rightly apprehended, in order to their 
being expressed by a distinct terminology. Thus no 
terms could describe crystals for any purpose of natural 
history, till it was discovered that in a class of minerals 
the proportion of the faces might vary, while the angle 
remained the same. Nor could crystals be described so 
as to distinguish species, till it was found that the de- 
rived and primitive forms are connected by very simple 
relations of space and number. The discovery of the 
mode in which characters must be apprehended so that 
they may be considered w& fixed for a class, is an important 

* HOOKER, Brit. Flo., p. 450. Hymenophyllum Wilsoni, Scot- 
tish filmy-fern, abundant in the Highlands of Scotland and about 
Killarney. 2 H 2 



468 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

step in the progress of each branch of Natural History ; 
and hence we have had, in the History of Mineralogy 
and Botany, to distinguish as important and eminent 
persons those who made such discoveries, Rome de 
Lisle and Hauy, Cesalpinus and Gesner. 

By the continued progress of that knowledge of 
minerals, plants, and other natural objects, in which such 
persons made the most distinct and marked steps, but 
which has been constantly advancing in a more gradual 
and imperceptible manner, the most important and essen- 
tial features of similarity and dissimilarity in such objects 
have been selected, arranged, and fitted with names ; and 
we have thus in such departments, systems of terminology 
which fix our attention upon the resemblances which it 
is proper to consider, and enable us to convey them in 
words. We have now to speak of the mode in which 
such resemblances have been employed in the construc- 
tion of a systematic classification. 

4. (II.) The Plan of the System. The collection of 
sound views and maxims by which the resemblances of 
natural objects are applied so as to form a scientific classi- 
fication, is a department of the philosophy of natural history 
which has been termed by some writers (as Decandolle,) 
Taxonomy, as containing the Laws of the Taxis, (arrange- 
ment). By some Germans this has been denominated 
Systematik ; if we could now form a new substantive after 
the analogy of the words Logic, Rhetoric, and the like, 
we might call it Systematic^. But though our English 
writers commonly use the expression Systematical Botany 
for the Botany of Classification, they appear to prefer 
the term Diatcuvis for the method of constructing the 
classification. The rules of such a branch of science are 
curious and instructive. 

In framing a classification of objects we must attend 
to their resemblances and differences. But here the 
question occurs, to ivhat resemblances and differences? for 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 469 

a different selection of the points of resemblance would 
give different results : a plant frequently agrees in leaves 
with one group of plants, in flowers with another. Which 
set of characters are we to take as our guide ? 

The view already given of the regulative principle of 
all classification, namely, that it must enable us to assert 
true and general propositions, will obviously occur as 
applicable here. The object of a scientific classification 
is to enable us to enunciate scientific truths : we must 
therefore classify according to those resemblances of 
objects (plants or any others,) which bring to light such 
truths. 

But this reply to the inquiry, On what characters of 
resemblance we are to found our system, is still too gene- 
ral and vague to be satisfactory. It carries us, however, as 
far as this ; that since the truths we are to attend to are 
scientific truths, governed by precise and homogeneous 
relations, we must not found our scientific classification on 
casual, indefinite, and unconnected considerations. We 
must not, for instance, be satisfied with dividing plants, 
as Dioscorides does, into aromatic, esculent, medicinal, 
and vinous ; or even with the long prevalent distribution 
into trees, shrubs, and herbs ; since in these subdivisions 
there is no consistent principle. 

5. Latent Reference to Natural Affinity. But there 
may be several kinds of truths, all exact and coherent, 
which may be discovered concerning plants or any other 
natural objects ; and if this should be the case, our rule 
leaves us still at a loss in what manner our classification 
is to be constructed. And, historically speaking, a much 
more serious inconvenience has been this ; that the task 
of classification of plants was necessarily performed when 
the general laws of their form and nature were very little 
known ; or rather, when the existence of such laws was 
only just beginning to be discerned. Even up to the 
present day, the general propositions which botanists are 



470 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

able to assert concerning the structure and properties of 
plants, are extremely imperfect and obscure. 

We are thus led to this conclusion : that the idea of 
likeness could not be applied so as to give rise to a scien- 
tific classification of plants, till considerable progress was 
made in studying the general relations of vegetable form 
and life ; and that the selection of the resemblances which 
should be taken into account, must depend upon the 
nature of the relations which were then brought into view. 

But this amounts to saying that, in the consideration of 
the classification of vegetables, other Ideas must be called 
into action as well as the Idea of Likeness. The new 
general views to which the more intimate study of plants 
leads, must depend, like all general truths, upon some 
regulating Idea which gives unity to scattered facts : no 
progress could be made in botanical knowledge without 
the operation of such principles : and such additional 
Ideas must be employed, besides those of mere likeness 
and unlikeness, in order to point out that classification 
which has a real scientific value. 

Accordingly in the classificatory sciences Ideas other 
than Likeness do make their appearance. Such Ideas 
in botany have influenced the progress of the science, 
even before they have been clearly brought into view. 
We have especially the Idea of Affinity, which is the 
basis of all Natural Systems of Classification, and 'which 
we shall consider in a succeeding chapter. The assump- 
tion that there is a Natural System, an assumption made 
by all philosophical botanists, implies a belief in the 
existence of Natural Affinity, and is carried into effect by 
means of principles which are involved in that Idea. 
But as the formation of all systems of classification must 
involve, in a great degree, the Idea of Resemblance and 
Difference, I shall first consider the effect of that Idea, 
before I treat specially of Natural Affinity. 

6. Natural Classes. Many attempts were made to 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 471 

classify vegetables before the rules which govern a natural 
system, were clearly apprehended. Botanists agreed in 
esteeming some characters as of more value than others, 
before they had agreed upon any general rules or prin- 
ciples for estimating the relative importance of the cha- 
racters. They were convinced of the necessity of adding 
other considerations to that of resemblance, without see- 
ing clearly what these ought to be. They aimed at a 
Natural Classification, without knowing distinctly in what 
manner it was to be Natural. 

The attempts to form Natural Classes, therefore, in the 
first part of their history, belong to the Idea of Likeness, 
though obscurely modified, even from an earty period, by 
the Ideas of Affinity, and even of Function and of Deve- 
lopement. Hence Natural Classes may, to a certain 
extent be treated of in this place. 

Natural Classes are opposed to Artificial Classes, which 
are understood to be regulated by an assumed character. 
Yet no classes can be so absolutely Artificial in this 
sense, as to be framed upon characters arbitrarily as- 
sumed ; for instance, no one would speak of a class of 
shrubs defined by the circumstance of each having a 
hundred leaves : for of such a class no assertion could be 
made, and therefore the class could never come under our 
notice. In what sense then are Artificial Classes to be 
understood, as opposed to Natural ? 

7. Artificial Classes. To this question the following 
is the answer. When Natural Classes of a certain small 
extent have been formed, a system may be devised which 
shall be regulated by a few selected characters, and which 
shall not dissever these small Natural Classes, but con- 
form to them as far as they go. If these selected 
characters be made absolute and imperative, and if we 
abandon all attempt to obtain Natural Classes of any 
higher order and wider extent, we form an Artificial 
System. 



472 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

Thus in the Linneean System of Botanical Classifica- 
tion, it is assumed that certain natural groups, namely, 
species and genera, are established ; it is conceived, more- 
over, that the division of classes according to the number 
of stamens and of pistils does not violate the natural 
connexions of species and genera. This arrangement, 
according to the number of stamens and pistils, (further 
modified in certain cases by other considerations,) is then 
made the ground of all the higher divisions of plants, and 
thus we have an Artificial System. 

It has been objected to this view, that the Linnsean 
Artificial System does not in all cases respect the boun- 
daries of genera, but would, if rigorously applied, distribute 
the species of the same genus into different artificial 
classes ; it would divide, for instance, the genera Vale- 
riana, Geranium*, &c. To this we must reply, that so 
far as the Linnsean System does this, it is an imperfect 
Artificial System. Its great merit is in its making such a 
disjunction in comparatively so few cases; and in the ar- 
tificial characters being, for the most part, obvious and 
easily applied. 

8. Are Genera Natural f It has been objected also 
that Genera are not Natural groups. Linnaeus asserts in 
the most positive manner that they aref. On which 
Adanson observes!, "I know not how any Botanist can 
maintain such a thesis : that which is certain is, that up 
to the present time no one has been able to prove it, nor 
to give an exact definition of a natural genus, but only of 
an artificial." He then brings several arguments to con- 
firm this view. 

But we are to observe, in answer to this, that Adan- 
son improperly confounds the recognition of the existence 
of a natural group with the invention of a technical 
mark or definition of it. Genera are groups of species 

* DECAND. Th. EL, p. 45. 
t P/iil. J3ot. Art. 165. $ Famille de Ph., Pref. cv. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 473 

associated in virtue of natural affinity, of general resem- 
blance, of real propinquity: of such groups, certain 
selected characters, one or few, may usually be discovered, 
by which the species may be referred to their groups. 
These Artificial characters do not constitute, but indicate 
the genus : they are the Diagnosis, not the basis of the 
Diataxis: and they are always subject to be rejected, and 
to have others substituted for them, when they violate 
the natural connexion of species which a minute and 
enlarged study discovers. * 

It is, therefore, no proof that Genera are not Natural, 
to say that their artificial characters are different in dif- 
ferent systems. Such characters are only different at- 
tempts to confine the variety of nature within the limits 
of definition. Nor is it sufficient to say that these groups 
themselves are different in different writers ; that some 
botanists make genera what others make only species ; as 
Pedicularis, Rhinanthus, Euphrasies Antirrhinmi*. This 
discrepancy shows only that the natural arrangement is 
not yet completely known, even in the smaller groups ; 
a conclusion to which we need not refuse our assent. 
But in opposition to these negatives, the manner in which 
Genera have been established proves that they are regu- 
lated by the principle of being natural and that alone. 
For they are not formed according to any a priori rule. 
The Botanist does not take any selected or arbitrary part 
or parts of the plants, and marshal his genera according 
to the differences of this part. On the contrary, the 
divisions of genera are sometimes made by means of the 
flower ; sometimes by means of the fruit ; the anthers, 
the stamens, the seeds, the pericarp, and the most varied 
features of these parts, are used in the most miscellaneous 
and unsystematic manner. Linnaeus has indeed laid 
down a maxim that the characteristic differences of 

* ADANSON, p. cvi. 



474 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

genera must reside in the fructification 5 *: but Adanson 
has justly remarked f, that an arbitrary restriction like 
this makes the groups artificial : and that in some families 
other characters are more essential than those of the 
fructification ; as the leaves in the families of Aparinea 
and LeguminoscB, and the disposition of the flowers in 
Labiatce. And Naturalists are so far from thinking it 
sufficient to distribute species into genera by arbitrary 
marks, that we find them in many cases lamenting the 
absence of good natural marks: as in the families of 
Umbelliferee, where Linnaeus declared that any one who 
could find good characters of genera would deserve great 
admiration, and where it is only of late that good 
characters have been discovered and the arrangement 
settled by means principally of the ribs of the fruit J. 

It is thus clear that genera are not established on any 
assumed or preconceived basis. What, then, is the prin- 
ciple which regulates botanists when they try to fix 
genera ? What is the arrangement which they thus wish 
for, without being able to hit upon it? What is the 
tendency which thus drives them from the corolla to the 
anthers, from the flower to the fruit, from the fructifica- 
tion to the leaves ? It is plain that they seek something, 
not of their own devising and creating ; not anything 
merely conventional and systematic; but something which 
they conceive to exist in the relations of the plants 
themselves ; something which is without the mind, not 
within ; in nature, not in art ; in short, a natural order. 

Thus the regulative principle of a genus, or of any 
other natural group is, that it is, or is supposed to be, 
natural. And by reference to this principle as our guide, 

* Phil. Bot. Art. 162. t ADANSON, Pref., p. cxx. 

J LINDLEY, Nat. Syst.y p. 5. 

In like manner we find Cuvier saying of Rondelet that he has 
" un sentiment tres vrai des genres." Hist. Ichth., p. 39. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 475 

we shall be able to understand the meaning of that inde- 
finiteness and indecision which we frequently find in the 
descriptions of such groups, and which must appear so 
strange and inconsistent to any one who does not suppose 
these descriptions to assume any deeper ground of con- 
nexion than an arbitrary choice of the botanist. Thus 
in the family of the Rose-tree, we are told that the 
ovules are very rarely erect*, the stigmata usually simple. 
Of what use, it might be asked, can such loose accounts 
be? To which the answer is, that they are not inserted 
in order to distinguish the species, but in order to 
describe the family, and the total relations of the ovules 
and of the stigmata of the family are better known by 
this general statement. A similar observation may be 
made with regard to the Anomalies of each group, which 
occur so commonly, that Mr. Lindley, in his Introduction 
to the Natural System of Botany, makes the "Anomalies" 
an article in each family. Thus, part of the character of 
the Rosaceae is that they have alternate stipulate leaves, 
and that the albumen is obliterated : but yet in Lowea, one 
of the genera of this family, the stipulae are absent ; and 
the albumen is present in another, Neillia. This implies, 
as we have already seen, that the artificial character (or 
diagnosis as Mr. Lindley calls it) is imperfect. It is, 
though very nearly, yet not exactly, commensurate with 
the natural group : and hence in certain cases this cha- 
racter is made to yield to the general weight of natural 
affinities. 

9. Difference of Natural History and Mathematics. 
These views, of classes determined by characters which 
cannot be expressed in words, of propositions which 
state, not what happens in all cases, but only usually, 
of particulars which are included in a class though they 
transgress the definition of it, may very probably surprise 

* LINDLEY, Nat. Syst., p. 81. 



470 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

the reader. They are so contrary to many of the received 
opinions respecting the use of definitions and the nature 
of scientific propositions, that they will probably appear 
to many persons highly illogical and unphilosophical. 
But a disposition to such a judgment arises in a great 
measure from this ; that the mathematical and mathe- 
matico-physical sciences have, in a great degree, deter- 
mined men's views of the general nature and form of 
scientific truth ; while Natural History has not yet had 
time or opportunity to exert its due influence upon the 
current habits of philosophizing. The apparent indefi- 
niteness and inconsistency of the classifications and 
definitions of Natural History belongs, in a far higher 
degree, to all other except mathematical speculations: 
and the modes in which approximations to exact distinc- 
tions and general truths have been made in Natural His- 
tory, may be worthy our attention, even for the light they 
throw upon the best modes of pursuing truth of all kinds. 
10. Natural Groups given by Type not by Definition. 
The further developement of this suggestion must be 
considered hereafter. But we may here observe, that 
though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no 
longer be of any use as a regulative principle, classes are 
not, therefore, left quite loose, without any certain stand- 
ard or guide. The class is steadily fixed, though not 
precisely limited; it is given, though not circumscribed ; 
it is determined, not by a boundary line without, but by a 
central point within ; not by what it strictly excludes, 
but by what it eminently includes; by an example, not 
by a precept ; in short, instead of Definition we have a 
Type for our director. 

A Type is an example of any class, for instance, a 
species of a genus, which is considered as eminently pos- 
sessing the characters of the class. All the species 
which have a greater affinity with this type-species than 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 477 

with any others, form the genus, and are ranged about 
it, deviating from it in various directions and different 
degrees. Thus a genus may consist of several species 
which approach very near the type, and of which the 
claim to a place with it is obvious ; while there may be 
other species which straggle further from this central 
knot, and which yet are clearly more connected with it 
than with any other. And even if there should be some 
species of which the place is dubious, and which appear 
to be equally bound to two generic types, it is easily seen 
that this would not destroy the reality of the generic 
groups, any more than the scattered trees of the inter- 
vening plain prevent our speaking intelligibly of the dis- 
tinct forests of two separate hills. 

The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of 
every family, is, then, one which possesses all the cha- 
racters and properties of the genus in a marked and pro- 
minent manner. The type of the Rose family has alter- 
nate stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules 
not erect, has the stigmata simple, and besides these 
features, which distinguish it from the exceptions or 
varieties of its class, it has the features which make it 
prominent in its class. It is one of those which possess 
clearly several leading attributes ; and thus, though we 
cannot say of any one genus that it must be the type of 
the family, or of any one species that it must be the type 
of the genus, we are still not wholly to seek : the type 
must be connected by many affinities with most of the 
others of its group ; it must be near the centre of the 
crowd, and not one of the stragglers. 

11. It has already been repeatedly stated, as the 
great rule of all classification, that the classification must 
serve to assert general pi'opositions. It may be asked 
what propositions we are able to enunciate by means of 
such classifications as we are now treating of. And the 



478 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

answer is, that the collected knowledge of the characters, 
habits, properties, organization, and functions of these 
groups and families, as it is found in the best botanical 
works, and as it exists in the minds of the best botanists, 
exhibits to us the propositions which constitute the 
science, and to the expression of which the classification 
is to serve. All that is not strictly definition, that is, all 
that is not artificial character, in the descriptions of such 
classes, is a statement of truths, more or less general, 
more or less precise, but making up, together, the posi- 
tive knowledge which constitutes the science. As we 
have said, the consideration of the properties of plants in 
order to form a system of classification, has been termed 
Taxonomy, or the Systematick of Botany ; all the parts 
of the descriptions, which, taking the system for granted, 
convey additional information, are termed the Physio- 
graphy of the science; and the same terms may be 
applied in the other branches of Natural History. 

12. Artificial and Natural Systems. If I have suc- 
ceeded in making it apparent that an artificial system of 
characters necessarily implies natural classes which are 
not severed by the artificial marks, we shall now be 
able to compare the nature and objects of the Artificial 
and Natural Systems ; points on which much has been 
written in recent times. 

The Artificial System is one which is, or professes to 
be, entirely founded upon marks selected according to the 
condition which has been stated, of not violating certain 
narrow natural groups ; namely, in the Linnsean system, 
the natural genera of plants. The marks which form the 
basis of the system are applied rigorously and universally 
without any further regard to any other characters or in- 
dications of affinity. Thus in the Linnsean system, which 
depends mainly on the number of male organs or stamens, 
and on the number of female organs or styles, the largest 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 479 

divisions, or the Classes, are arranged according to the 
number of the stamens, and are monandria, diandria, tri- 
andria, tetrandria, pentandria, hexandria, and so on : the 
names being formed of the Greek numerical words, and 
of the word which implies male. And the Orders of each 
of these Classes are distinguished by the number of styles, 
and are called m&tpgyma, digynia^ trigynia> and so on, 
the termination of these words meaning female. And so 
far as this numerical division and subdivision go on, the 
system is a rigorous system, and strictly artificial. 

But the condition that the artificial system shall leave 
certain natural affinities untouched, makes it impossible 
to go through the vegetable kingdom by a method of 
mere numeration of stamens and styles. The distinction 
of flowers with twenty and with thirty stamens is not a 
fixed distinction: flowers of one and the same kind, as roses, 
have, some fewer than the former, some more than the 
latter number. The Artificial System, therefore, must be 
modified. And there are various relations of connexion 
and proportion among the stamina which are more per- 
manent and important than their mere number. Thus 
flowers with two longer and two shorter stamens are not 
placed in the class tetrandria, but are made a separate 
class iidynamia ; those with four longer and two shorter 
are in like manner tetradynamia, not hexandria ; those in 
which the filaments are bound into two bundles are dia- 
delphia. All these and other classes are deviations from 
the plan of the earlier classes, and are so far defects of 
the artificial system ; but they are requisite in order that 
it may leave a basis of natural groups, without which it 
would not be a system of vegetables. And as the divi- 
sion is still founded on some properties of the stamens, 
it combines not ill with that part of the system which 
depends on the number. The classes framed in virtue of 
these various considerations make up an artificial system 
which is tolerably coherent. 



480 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

But since the Artificial System thus regards natural 
groups, in what does it differ from a Natural System ? 
It differs in this : That though it allows certain subor- 
dinate natural groups, it merely allows these, and does 
not endeavour to ascend to any wider natural groups. 
It takes all the higher divisions of its scheme from its 
artificial characters, its stamens and pistils, without look- 
ing to any natural affinities. It accepts natural genera, 
but it does not seek natural families, or orders, or classes. 
It assumes natural groups, but does not investigate any ; 
it forms wider and higher groups, but professes to frame 
them arbitrarily. 

But then, on the other hand, the question occurs, 
this being the case, what can be the use of the Artificial 
System? If its characters, in the higher stages of clas- 
sification, be arbitrary, how can it lead us to the natural 
relations of plants ? And the answer is, that it does so 
in virtue of the original condition, that there shall be 
certain natural relations which the artificial system shall 
not transgress ; and that its use arises from the facility 
with which we can follow the artificial arrangement as 
far as it goes. We can count the stamens and pistils, 
and thus we know the Class and Order of our plant ; and 
we have then to discover its Genus and Species by means 
less symmetrical but more natural. The Artificial Sys- 
tem, though arbitrary in a certain degree, brings us to a 
Class in which the whole of each genus is contained, and 
there we can find the proper Genus by a suitable method 
of seeking. No Artificial System can conduct us into 
the extreme of detail, but it can place us in a situation 
where the detail is within our reach. We cannot find 
the house of a foreign friend by its latitude and longi- 
tude ; but we may be enabled, by a knowledge of the 
latitude and longitude, to find the city in which he 
dwells, or at least the island ; and we then can reach his 





METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 481 

abode by following the road or exploring the locality. 
The Artificial System is such a method of travelling by 
latitude and longitude ; the Natural System is that which 
is guided by a knowledge of the country. 

The Natural System, then, is that which endeavours 
to arrange by the natural affinities of objects ; and more 
especially, which attempts to ascend from the lower 
natural groups to the higher ; as for example from genera 
to natural families, orders, and classes. But as we have 
already hinted, these expressions of natural affinities, 
natural groups, and the like, when considered in refer- 
ence to the idea of resemblance alone, without studying 
analogy or function, are very vague and obscure. We 
must notice some of the attempts which were made 
under the operation of this imperfect view of the subject. 

13. Modes of framing Natural Systems. Decan- 
dolle* distinguishes the attempts at Natural Classifica- 
tions into three sorts : those of blind trial, (tatonnement,) 
those of general comparison, and those of subordination of 
characters. The two former do not depend distinctly 
upon any principle, except resemblance ; the third refers 
us to other views, and must be considered in a future 
chapter. 

Method of Blind Trial. The notion of the existence 
of natural classes dependent on the general resemblance 
of plants, of an affinity showing itself in different parts 
and various ways,- though necessarily somewhat vague 
and obscure, was acted upon at an early period, as we 
have seen in the formation of genera; and was enunciated 
in general terms soon after. Thus Magnoliusf says that 
he discerns in plants an affinity, by means of which they 
may be arranged in families. " Yet it is impossible to 

* Th. EL, art. 41. 

t DEC. Th. EL, art. 42. PETRI MAGNOLI, Prodromus Hist. Gen. 
Plant., 1189. 

VOL. I. 21 



482 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

obtain from the fructification alone the Characters of these 
families ; and I have therefore chosen those parts of 
plants in which the principal characteristic marks are 
found, as the root, the stem, the flower, the seed. In 
some plants there is even a certain resemblance; an 
affinity which does not consist in the parts considered 
separately, but in their totality ; an affinity which may be 
felt but not expressed ; as we see in the families of agri- 
monies and cinquefoils, which every botanist will judge 
to be related, though they differ by their roots, their 
leaves, their flowers, and their seeds." 

This obscure feeling of a resemblance on the whole, 
an affinity of an indefinite kind, appears fifty years later 
in Linnseus's attempts. " In the Natural Classification," 
he says*, " no a priori rule can be admitted, no part of 
the fructification can be taken exclusively into considera- 
tion ; but only the simple symmetry of all its parts." 
Hence though he proposed natural families, and even 
stated the formation of such families to be the first and 
last object of all methods, he never gave the characters 
of those groups, or connected them by any method. He 
even declared it to be impossible to lay down such a 
system of characters. This persuasion was the result of 
his having refused to admit into his mind any idea more 
profound than that notion of resemblance of which he 
had made so much and such successful use ; he would not 
attempt to unravel the ideas of symmetry and of function 
on which the clear establishment of natural relations 
must depend. He even despised the study of the inner 
organization of plants ; and reckoned f the Anatomici, who 
studied the anatomy and physiology of plants and the 
laws of vegetation, among the Botanophili, the mere 
amateurs of his science. 

The same notion of general resemblance and affinity, 

* DEC., Th. EL, art. 42. t Phil. Sot., s. 44. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 483 

accompanied with the same vagueness, is to be found in 
the writer who least participated in the general admiration 
of Linnaeus, Buffon. Though it was in a great measure 
his love of higher views which made him dislike what 
he considered the pedantry of the Swedish school, he 
does not seem to have obtained a clearer sight of the 
principle of the natural method than his rival, except 
that he did not restrict his Characters to the fructification. 
Things must be arranged by their resemblances and dif- 
ferences, (he says in 1750*,) "but the resemblances and 
differences must be taken not from one part but from the 
whole; and we must attend to the form, the size, the 
habit, the number and position of the parts, even the 
substance of the part ; and we must make use of these 
elements in greater or smaller number, as we have need." 
14. Method of General Comparison. A countryman 
of Buffon, who shared with him his depreciating esti- 
mate of the Linnsean system, and his wish to found a 
natural system upon a broader basis, was Adanson ; and 
he invented an ingenious method of apparently avoid- 
ing the vagueness of the practice of following the general 
feeling of resemblance. This method consisted in making 
many artificial systems, in each of which plants were 
arranged by some one part ; and then collecting those 
plants which came near each other in the greatest number 
of those artificial systems, as plants naturally the most 
related. Adanson gives an account f of the manner in 
which this system arose in his mind. He had gone to 
Senegal, animated by an intense zeal for natural history; 
and there, amid the luxuriant vegetation of the torrid 
zone, he found that the methods of Linnaeus and Tourne- 
fort failed him altogether as means of arranging his 
new botanical treasures. He was driven to seek a new 

* ADANSON, p. clvi. BUFFON, Hist. Nat., t. i., p. 21. 
t Pref., p. clvii. 

2 I 2 



484 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

system. " For this purpose," he says, " I examined 
plants in all their parts, without omitting any, from the 
roots to the embryo, the folding of the leaves in the bud, 
their mode of sheathing*, the situation and folding of 
the embryo and of its radicle in the seed, relatively to 
the fruit; in short, a number of particulars which few 
botanists notice. I made in the first place a complete 
description of each plant, putting each of its parts in 
separate articles, in all its details ; when new species 
occurred I put down the points in which they differed, 
omitting those in which they agreed. By means of the 
aggregate of these comparative descriptions, I perceived 
that plants arranged themselves into classes or families 
which could not be artificial or arbitrary, not being 
founded upon one or two parts, which might change at 
certain limits, but on all the parts ; so that the dispropor- 
tion of one of these parts was corrected and balanced 
by the introduction of another." Thus the principle of 
resemblance was to suffice for the general arrangement, 
not by means of a new principle, as symmetry or organi- 
zation, which should regulate its application, but by a 
numeration of the peculiarities in which the resemblance 
consisted. 

The labour which Adanson underwent in the execu- 
tion of this thought was immense. By taking each 
organ, and considering its situation, figure, number, &c., 
he framed sixty-five artificial systems ; and collected his 
natural families by a numerical combination of these. 
For example, his sixty-fifth artificial system f is that which 
depends upon the situation of the ovary with regard to 
the flower ; according to this system he frames ten artifi- 
cial classes, including ninety-three sections : and of these 
sections the resulting natural arrangement retains thirty- 
five, above one-third : the same estimate is applied in 
other cases. 
* "Lour maniere cle sVngnincr." t ADANSON, Prcf., p. cccxii. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 485 

But this attempt to make number supply the defects 
which the vague notion of resemblance introduces, how- 
ever ingenious, must end in failure. For, as Decan- 
dolle observes *, it supposes that we know, not only all the 
organs of plants, but all the points of view in which it is 
possible to consider them ; and even if this assumption 
were true, which it is, and long must be, very far from 
being, the principle is altogether vicious ; for it supposes 
that all these points of view, and all the resulting artificial 
systems are of equal importance: a supposition mani- 
festly erroneous. We are thus led back to the conside- 
ration of the relative importance of organs and their 
qualities, as a basis for the classification of plants, which 
no artificial method can supersede ; and thus we find the 
necessity of attending to something besides mere external 
and detached resemblance. The method of general com- 
parison cannot, any more than the method of blind trial, 
lead us, with any certainty or clearness, to the natural 
method. Adanson's families are held by the best botanists 
to be, for the greater part natural ; but his hypotheses are 
unfounded ; and his success is probably more due to the 
dim feeling of affinity, by which he was unconsciously 
guided, than to the help he derived from his numerical 
processes. 

15. In a succeeding chapter I shall treat of that 
Natural Affinity on which a Natural System must really 
be founded. But before proceeding to this higher subject, 
we must say a few words on some of the other parts of 
the philosophy of Natural History, the Gradation of 
Groups, the Nomenclature, the Diagnosis, and the appli- 
cation of the methods to other subjects. 

Gradation of Groups. It has been already noticed 
(last chapter,) that even that vague application of the 
idea of resemblance which gives rise to the terms of 

* DEC., 2%.JW.,p.67. 



486 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

common language, introduces a subordination of classes, 
as man, animal, body, substance. Such a subordination 
appears in a more precise form when we employ this 
idea in a scientific manner as we do in Natural History. 
We have then a series of divisions, each inclusive of the 
lower ones, which are expressed by various metaphors in 
different writers. Thus some have gone as far as eight 
terms of the series*, and have taken, for the most part, 
military names for them ; as Hosts, Legions, Phalanges, 
Centuries, Cohorts, Sections, Genera, Species. But the 
most received series is Classes, Orders, Genera, and 
Species ; in which, however, we often have other terms 
interpolated, as Sub-genera, or Sections of genera. The 
expressions Family and Tribe, are commonly appropriated 
to natural groups; and we speak of the Vegetable, Ani- 
mal, Mineral Kingdom ; but the other metaphors of Pro- 
vinces, Districts, &c., which this suggests, have not 
been commonly used. 

It will of course be understood that each ascending 
step of classification is deduced by the same process from 
the one below. A genus is a collection of species which 
resemble each other more than they resemble other spe- 
cies ; an order is a collection of genera having, in like 
manner, the first degree of resemblance, and so on. 
What the degrees of resemblance are, much depend upon 
the nature of the objects compared, and cannot possibly 
be prescribed before-hand. Hence the same term, Class 
and Order for instance, may imply in different provinces 
of nature very different degrees of resemblance. The 
Classes of Animals are Insects, Birds, Fish, Beasts, &c, 
The Orders of Beasts are Ruminants, Tardigrades, Plan- 
tigrades, &c. The two Classes of Plants (according to 
the Natural Orderf,) are Vascular and Cellular, the 
latter having neither sexes, flowers, nor spiral vessels. 
* ADAKSON, p. cvi. t J INDLEY, 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 487 

The Vascular Plants are divided into Orders, as Umlelli- 
fercs, RanunculacecB, &c., but between this Class and 
its Orders are interposed two other steps : two Sub- 
classes, Dicotyledonous and Monocotyledonous, and two 
Tribes of each : Angiospermi<e, Gymnospermice of the 
first; and Petaloidece, Glumacice of the second. Such 
interpolations are modifications of the general formula of 
subordination for the purpose of accommodating it to 
the most prominent natural affinities. 

16. Species. As we have already seen in tracing the 
principles of the natural method, when by the intimate 
study of plants we seek to give fixity and definiteness to 
the notion of resemblance and affinity on which all these 
divisions depend, we are led to the study of organization 
and analogy. But we make a reference to physio- 
logical conditions even from the first, with regard to the 
lowest step of our arrangement, the species; for we 
consider it a proof of the impropriety of separating two 
species, if it be shown that they can by any course of 
propagation, culture, and treatment, the one pass into 
the other. It is in this way, for example, that it has 
been supposed to be established that the common prim- 
rose, oxlip, polyanthus, and cowslip, are all the same 
species. Plants which thus, in virtue of external cir- 
cumstances, as soil, exposure, climate, exhibit differences 
which may disappear by changing the circumstances, 
are called varieties of the species. And thus we cannot 
say that a species is a collection of individuals which 
possess the first degree of resemblance ; for it is clear 
that a primrose resembles another primrose more than it 
does a cowslip ; but this resemblance only constitutes a 
variety. And we find that we must necessarily include in 
our conception of species, the notion of propagation from 
the same stock. And thus a species has been well de- 
fined*. " The collection of the individuals descended from 
* Cuv., Regne Animal, p. 19. 



488 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

one another, or from common parents, and of those which 
resemble these as much as these resemble each other." 
And thus the sexual doctrine of plants, or rather the 
consideration of them as things which propagate their 
kind, (whether by seed, shoot, or in any other way,) is 
at the basis of our classifications. 

17. The first degree of resemblance among organized 
beings is thus that which depends on this relation of 
generation, and we might expect that the groups which 
are connected by this relation would derive their names 
from the notion of generation. It is curious that both in 
Greek and Latin languages and in our own, the words 
which have this origin (yevos, genus, kind) do not, in the 
phraseology of science at least, denote the nearest degree 
of relationship, but have other terms subordinate to them, 
which appear etymologically to indicate a mere resem- 
blance of appearance, (elSos, species, sort,) and which are 
appropriated to the groups resulting from propagation. 
Probably the reason of this is, that the former terms had 
been applied so widely and loosely before the scientific 
fixation of terms, that to confine them to what we call 
species would have been to restrict them in a manner too 
unusual to be convenient. 

18. Varieties. Races. The Species, as we have said, is 
the collection of individuals which resemble each other as 
much as do the offspring of a common stock. But within 
the limits of this boundary, there are often observable 
differences permanent enough to attract our notice, though 
capable of being obliterated by mixture in the course of 
generation. Such different groups are called Varieties. 
Thus the primrose and cowslip, as has been stated above, 
are found to be varieties of the same plant ; the poodle 
and the greyhound are well marked varieties of the 
species dog. Such differences are hereditary, and as we 
have seen, it may be long doubtful whether such here- 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 489 

ditary differences are varieties only, or different species. 
In such cases the term Race has been applied. 

19. (III.) Nomenclature. The Nomenclature of any 
branch of Natural History is the collection of names of all 
its species; which, when they become extremely numer- 
ous, requires some artifice to make it possible to recollect 
or apply them. The known species of plants, for example, 
were 10,000 at the time of Linnoeus, and are now probably 
60,000. It would be useless to endeavour to frame and 
employ separate names for each of these species. 

The division of the objects into a subordinated system 
of classification enables us to introduce a Nomenclature 
which does not require this enormous number of names. 
The artifice employed to avoid this inconvenience is to 
name a species by means of two (or it might be more) 
steps of the successive division. Thus in Botany each of 
the genera has its name, and the species are marked by 
the addition of some epithet to the name of the genus, 
In this manner about 1,700 generic names, with a mo- 
derate number of specific names, were found by Linnaeus 
sufficient to designate with precision all the species of 
vegetables known at his time. And this Binary Method 
of Nomenclature has been found so convenient that it 
has been universally adopted in every other department 
of the Natural History of organized beings. 

Many other modes of Nomenclature have been tried, 
but no other has at all taken root. Linna?us himself 
appears at first to have intended marking each species by 
the generic name accompanied by a characteristic descrip- 
tive phrase; and to have proposed the employment of a 
trivial specific name, as he termed it, only as a method of 
occasional convenience. The use of these trivial names, 
has, however, become universal, as we have said, and is 
by many persons considered the greatest improvement 
introduced at the Linneean reform. 



400 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

Both Linnaeus and other writers (as A dan son) have 
given many maxims with a view of regulating the selec- 
tion of generic and specific names. The maxims of 
Linnaeus were intended as much as possible to exclude 
barbarism and confusion, and have, upon the whole, been 
generally adopted ; though many of them were objected 
to by his contemporaries (Adanson and others*), as 
capricious or unnecessary innovations. Many of the 
names, introduced by Linnaeus, certainly appear fanciful 
enough : thus he gives the name of Bauhinia to a plant 
with leaves in pairs, because the Bauhins were a pair of 
brothers ; Banisteria is the name of a climbing plant, in 
honour of Banister, who travelled among mountains. 
But such names, once established by adequate authority, 
lose all their inconvenience and easily become permanent ; 
and hence the reasonableness of the Linnaean. rulef, that 
as such a perpetuation of the names of persons by the 
names of plants is the only honour botanists have to 
bestow, it ought to be used with care and caution. 

The generic name must, as Linnaeus says, be fixed \ 
before we attempt to form a specific name ; " the latter 
without the former is like the clapper without the bell." 
The name of the genus being established, the species may 
be marked by adding to it " a single word taken at will 
from any quarter ;" that is, not involving a description or 
any essential property of the plant, but a casual or 
arbitrary appellation. Thus the various species of Hiera- 
cium|| are Hieradum Alpinwn, H. Halleri, H. Pilosetta, 
H. dubium, H. murorum, &c., where we see how different 
may be the kind of origin of the words. 

Attempts have been made at various times to form 
the names of species from those of genera in some more 

* Pp. cxxix, clxxii. t Phil. Bot., Sec. 239. 

J Ib., Sec. 222. /$., Sec. 260. 

II HOOKER, Fl. Scot., 228. 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 491 

symmetrical manner. Thus some have numbered the 
species of genus 1, 2, 3, &c., but this method is liable to 
the inconveniences, first, that it offers nothing for the 
memory to take hold of; and second, that if a new 
species intermediate between 1 and 2, 2 and 3, &c., be 
discovered, it cannot be put in its place. It has also 
been proposed to mark the species by altering the termi- 
nation of the genus. Thus Adanson*, denoting a genus 
by the name Fonna (Lyclmidea\ conceived he might 
mark five of its species by altering the last vowel, Fonna, 
Fonna-c, Fonna-i, Fonna-o, Fonna-u; then others by 
Fonna-ba, Fonna-ka, and so on. This course would be 
liable to the same evils which have been noticed as 
belonging to the numerical method. 

The names of plants (and the same is true of animals) 
have in common practice been binary only, consisting of 
a generic and a specific name. The Class and Order 
have not been admitted to form part of the appellation of 
the species. Indeed it is easy to see that a name which 
must be identical in so many instances as that of an 
order would be, would be felt as superfluous and burden- 
some. Accordingly, Linnaeus makes it a preceptf, that 
the name of the Class and the Order must not be ex- 
pressed but understood : and hence, he says, Royen, who 
took Lilium for the name of a class, rightly rejected it as 
a generic name and substituted Lirium, with the Greek 
termination. 

Yet we must not too peremptorily assume such 
maxims as these to be universal for all classificatory 
sciences. It is very possible that it may be found 
advisable to use three terms, that of order, genus and 
species, in designating minerals, as is done in Mohs's 
nomenclature ; for example, Rhombohedral Cole Haloide, 
Paratomous Hal Baryte. It is possible also that it may 

* Pref., clxxvi. f Phil. Bot., Sec. 215. 



492 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

be found useful in the same science to mark some of the 
steps of classification by the termination. 

Thus it has been proposed to confine the termination 
ite to the Order Silicides of Naumann, as Apophyllzfc, 
Stilbe'fc, Leuczte, &c., and to use names of different form 
in other orders, as Talc Spar for Brennerite, Pyramidal 
Titanium Oxide for Octahedrite. Some such method 
appears to be the most likely to give us a tolerable 
mineralogical nomenclature. 

20. (IV.) Diagnosis. German Naturalists speak of a 
part of the general method which they call the Character- 
istic of Natural History, and which is distinguished from 
the Systematik of the science. The Systematick arranges 
the objects by means of all their resemblances, the Cha- 
racteristick enables us to detect their place in the arrange- 
ment by means of a few of their characters. What these 
characters are to be, must be discovered by observation 
of the groups and divisions of the system when they are 
formed. To construct a collection of such as shall be 
clear and fixed, is a useful, and generally a difficult task ; 
for there is usually no apparent connexion between the 
marks which are used in discriminating the groups, and 
the nature of the groups themselves. They are assumed 
only because the Naturalist, extensively and exactly 
acquainted with the groups and the properties of the 
objects which compose them, sees, by a survey of the field, 
that these marks divide it properly. 

The Characteristick has been termed by some English 
Botanists the Diagnosis of plants ; a word which we may 
conveniently adopt. The Diagnosis of any genus or 
species is different according to the system we follow. 
Thus in the Linnoean system the Diagnosis of the Rose is 
in the first place given by its Class and Order: it is Icosan- 
drous, and Polygynous ; and then the generic distinction 
is that the calyx is five-cleft, the tube urceolate, including 



METHODS OF NATURAL HISTORY. 493 

many hairy aclienia, the receptacle villous*. In the 
Natural System the Rose-Tribe are distinguished as 
beingf " Polypetalous dicotyledons, with lateral styles, 
superior simple ovaria, regular perigynous stamens, ex- 
albuminous definite seeds, and alternate stipulate leaves." 
And the true Roses are further distinguished by having 
" Nuts, numerous, hairy, terminated by the persistent 
lateral style and inclosed within the fleshy tube of the 
calyx," &c. 

It will be observed that in a rigorous artificial system 
the Systematick coincides with the C/iaractenstick ; the 
Diataxis with the Diagnosis ; the reason why a plant is 
put in a division is identical with the mode by which it is 
known to be in the division. The Rose is in the class 
icosandria, because it has many stamens inserted in the 
calyx ; and when we see such a set of stamens we imme- 
diately know the class. But this is not the case with 
the Diagnosis of natural families. Thus the genera Za- 
mium and Galeopsis (Dead Nettle and Hemp Nettle), are 
each formed into a separate group in virtue of their 
general resemblances and differences, and not because the 
former has one tooth on each side of the lower lip, and 
the latter a notch in its upper lip, though they are dis- 
tinguished by these marks. 

Thus, so far as our Systems are natural, (which, as we 
have shown, all systems to a certain extent must be), the 
Characteristick is distinct both from a Natural and an 
Artificial System ; and is, in fact, an Artificial key to a 
Natural System. As being Artificial, it takes as few 
characters as possible ; as being Natural, its characters 
are not selected by any general or prescribed rule, but 
follow the natural affinities. The Botanists who have 
made any steps in the formation of a natural method of 
plants since Linna3us, have all attempted to give a Diag- 
nosis corresponding to the Diataxis of their method. 

* LINDLEY, Nat. Syst., p. J49. t /&., p. 81. 3. 



494 



CHAPTER III. 

APPLICATION OF THE NATURAL HISTORY 
METHOD TO MINERALOGY. 

1. THE philosophy of the Sciences of Classification has 
had great light thrown upon it by discussions concerning 
the methods which are used in Botany : for that science 
is one of the most complete examples which can be con- 
ceived of the consistent and successful application of the 
principles and ideas of Classification ; and this application 
has been made in general without giving rise to any very 
startling paradoxes, or disclosing any insurmountable 
difficulties. But the discussions concerning methods of 
Mineralogical Classification have been instructive for 
quite a different reason : they have brought into view the 
boundaries and the difficulties of the process of Classifi- 
cation ; and have presented examples in which every 
possible mode of classifying appeared to involve inex- 
tricable contradictions. I will notice some of the points 
of this kind which demand our attention, referring to the 
works published recently by several mineralogists. 

In the History of Mineralogy we noticed the attempt 
ipaade by Mohs and other Germans to apply to minerals 
a method of arrangement similar to that which has been 
so successfully employed for plants. The survey which 
we have now taken of the grounds of that method will 
point out some of the reasons of the very imperfect 
success of this attempt. We have already said that the 
Terminology of Mineralogy was materially reformed by 
Werner, and including in this branch of the subject (as 
we must do) the Crystallography of later writers, it may 
be considered as to a great extent complete. Of the 
attempts at a Natural arrangement, that of Mohs appears 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 495 

to proceed by the method of blind trial, the undefinable 
perception of relationship by which the earliest attempts 
at a Natural Arrangement of plants were made. Breit- 
haupt, however, has made (though I do not know that he 
has published) an essay in a mode which corresponds very 
nearly to Adan son's process of multiplied comparisons. 
Having ascertained the specific gravity and hardness of 
all the species of minerals, he arranged them in a table, 
representing by two lines at right angles to each other 
these two numerical quantities. Thus all minerals were 
distributed according to two co-ordinates representing 
specific gravity and hardness. He conceived that the 
groups which were thus brought together were natural 
groups. On both these methods, and on all similar ones, 
we might observe, that in minerals as in plants, the mere 
general notion of likeness cannot lead us to a real arrange- 
ment : it requires to have precision and aim given it by 
some other relation ; the relation of chemical composi- 
tion in minerals, as the relation of organic function in 
vegetables. The physical and crystallographical properties 
of minerals must be studied with reference to their con- 
stitution ; and they must be arranged into groups which 
have some common chemical character, before we can 
consider any advance as made towards a natural arrange- 
ment. 

In reality, it happens in Mineralogy as it happened in 
Botany, that those speculators are regulated by an obscure 
perception of this ulterior relation, who do not profess to 
be regulated by it. Several of the Orders of Mohs have 
really great unity of chemical character, and thus have 
good evidence of their being really Natural Orders. 

2. Supposing the Diataxis of minerals thus obtained, 
Mohs attempted the Diagnosis ; and his Characteristick of 
the Mineral Kingdom, published at Dresden, in 1820, was 
the first public indication of his having constructed a 



496 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIPICATORY SCIENCES. 

* 

system. From the nature of a Characteristic!*:, it is neces- 
sarily brief, and without any ostensible principle ; but its 
importance was duly appreciated by the author's country- 
men. Since that time, many attempts have been made 
at improved arrangements of minerals, but none, I think, 
(except perhaps that of Breithaupt,) professing to pro- 
ceed rigorously on the principles of Natural History ; to 
arrange by means of external characters, neglecting alto- 
gether, or rather postponing, the consideration of chemical 
properties. By relaxing from this rigour, however, and 
by combining physical and chemical considerations, 
arrangements have been obtained (for example, that of 
Naumann,) which appear more likely than the one of Mohs 
to be approximations to an ultimate really natural system. 
Naumann's Classes are Hydrolytes, Hcdoides, Silicides, 
Metal Oxides, Metals, Sidphurides, Anthracides, with sub- 
divisions of Orders, as Anhydrous wimetallic Silicides. 
It may be remarked that the designations of these are 
mostly chemical. As we have observed already, che- 
mistry, and mineralogy in its largest sense, are each the 
necessary supplement of the other. If chemistry furnish 
the nomenclature, mineralogy must supply the physio- 
graphy : if the arrangement be founded on external 
characters, and the names independent of chemistry, the 
chemical composition of each species is an important 
scientific truth respecting it. 

3. The inquiry may actually occur, whether any sub- 
ordination of groups in the mineral kingdom has really 
been made out. The ancient chemical arrangements, 
for instance, that of Haiiy, though professing to distribute 
minerals according to Classes, Orders, Genera, and Species, 
were not only arbitrary, but inapplicable ; for the first 
postulate of any method, that the species should have 
constant characters of unity and difference, was not 
satisfied. It was not ascertained that carbonate of lime 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 497 

was really distinguishable in all cases from carbonate of 
magnesia, or of iron ; yet these species were placed in re- 
mote parts of the system : and the above carbonates made 
just so many species, although, if distinct from one another 
at all, they were further distinguishable into additional spe- 
cies. Even now, we may, perhaps, say that the limits of 
mineralogical species, and their laws of fixity, are not yet 
clearly seen. For the discovery of the isomorphous rela- 
tions and optical properties of minerals have rather shown 
us in what direction the object lies, than led us to the goal. 
It is clear that, in the mineral kingdom, the Definition of 
Species, borrowed from the laws of the continuation of 
the kind, which holds throughout the organic world, fails 
us altogether, and must be replaced by some other con- 
dition : nor is it difficult to see that the definite atomic 
relations of the chemical constituents, and the definite 
crystalline angle, must supply the principles of the specific 
identity for minerals. Yet the exact limits for the defi- 
uiteness in both these cases (when we admit the effect of 
mechanical mixtures, &c.) have not yet been completely 
disentangled. It is clear that any arbitrary assumption 
(as the allowance of a certain per centage of mixture, or 
a certain small deviation in the angle,) is altogether con- 
trary to the philosophy of the natural system, and can 
lead to no stable views. It is only by laborious, exten- 
sive, and minute research, that we can hope to attain to 
any solid basis of arrangement. 

4. Still, though there are many doubts respecting 
mineralogical species, a large number of such species are 
so far fixed that they may be supposed capable of being 
united under the higher divisions of a system with approxi- 
mate truth. Of these higher divisions, those which have 
been termed Orders appear to tend to something like a 
fixed chemical character. Thus the Haloids of Naumann, 
and mostly those of Mohs,are combinations of an oxide with 
VOL. i. 2 K 



498 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

an acid, and thus resemble Salts, whence their name. The 
Silicides contain most of Mohs's Spat/is: and the Orders 
Pyrites, Glance, and Blende, are common to Naumann 
and Mohs ; being established by the latter on a difference 
of external character, which difference is, indeed, very 
manifest ; and being included by the former in one che- 
mical Class, Sulp/mrides. The distinctions of Hydrous 
and Anhydrous, Metallic and Unmetallic, are, of course, 
chemical distinctions, but occur as the differences of 
Orders in Naumann's mixed system. 

We may observe that some French writers, following 
Haiiy's last edition, use, instead of metallic and unmetallic, 
autopside metallic and heteropside metallic; meaning by this 
phraseology to acknowledge the discovery that earths, &c., 
are metallic, though they do not appear to be so, while 
metals both are and appear metallic. But this seems to 
be a refinement not only useless but absurd. For what is 
gained by adding the word metallic, which is common to 
all, and therefore makes no distinction ? If certain metals 
are distinguished by their appearing to be metals, this 
appearance is a reason for giving them the peculiar name, 
metals. Nothing is gained by first bringing earths and 
metals together, and then immediately separating them 
again by new and inconvenient names. No proposition 
can be expressed better by calling earths heteropside metal- 
lie substances, and therefore such nomenclature is to be 
rejected. 

Granting, then, that the Orders of the best recent mine- 
ralogical systems approximate to natural groups, we are led 
to ask whether the same can be said of the Genera of the 
Natural History systems, such as those of Mohs and Breit- 
haupt. And here I must confess that I see no principle 
in these genera, and have failed to apprehend the concep- 
tions by the application of which they have been con- 
structed : I shall therefore not pass any further judgment 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 499 

upon them. The subordination of Mineralogical Species 
to Orders is a manifest gain to science : in the interposi- 
tion of Genera I see nothing but a source of confusion. 

5. In Mineralogy, as in other branches of natural 
history, a reformed arrangement ought to give rise to a 
reformed Nomenclature ; and for this, there is more occa- 
sion at present in Mineralogy than there was in Botany 
at the worst period, at least as far as the extent of the 
subject allows. The characters of minerals are much 
more dimly and unfrequently developed than* those of 
plants ; hence arbitrary chemical arrangements, which 
could not lead to any natural groups, and therefore not to 
any good names, prevailed till recently ; and this state of 
things produced an anarchy in which every man did what 
seemed right in his own eyes, proposed species without 
any ascertained distinction, and without a thought of 
subordination, and gave them arbitrary names ; and thus 
with only about two or three hundred known species, we 
have thousands upon thousands of names, of anomalous 
form and uncertain application. 

Mohs has attempted to reform the Nomenclature of 
the subject in a mode consistent with his attempt to 
reform the System. In doing this, he has fatally trans- 
gressed a rule always insisted upon by the legislators of 
Botany, of altering usual names as little as possible ; and 
his names are both so novel and so cumbrous, that they 
appear to have little chance of permanent currency. They 
are, perhaps, more unwieldy than they need to be, by 
referring, as we have said, to three of the steps of his 
classification, the Species, Genus, and Order. We may, 
however, assert confidently, from the whole analogy of 
natural history, that no good names can be found which 
do not refer to at least two terms of the arrangement. 
This rule has been practically adopted to a great extent 
by Naumann, who gives to most of his Haloids the name 

2 K 2 



500 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATOEY SCIENCES. 

Spar, as Calc spar, Iron spar, &c.; to all his Oxides the 
terminal word Erz (Ore)', and to the species of the orders 
Kies (Pyrites), Glance, and Blende, these names. It has 
also been theoretically assented to by Beudant, who pro- 
poses that we should say silicate stilbite, silicate chabasie ; 
carbonate calcaire, carbonate witherite ; sulphate couperose, 
&c. One great difficulty in this case would arise from 
the great number of silicides ; it is not likely that any 
names would obtain a footing which tacked the term 
silicide to another word for each of these species. The 
artifice which I have proposed, in order to obviate this 
difficulty, is that we should make the names of the sili- 
cides, and those alone, end in lie or lite, which a large 
proportion of them do already. 

By this and a few similar contrivances, we might, 
I conceive, without any inconvenient change, introduce 
into mineralogy a systematic nomenclature. 

6. I shall now proceed to make a few remarks on a 
work on mineralogy more recent than those which I have 
above noticed, and written with express reference to such 
difficulties as I have been discussing. I allude to the 
treatise of M. Necker, Le Regne Mineral ramene aux 
Methodes d'HistoireNaturelle*, which also contains various 
dissertations on the philosophy of classification in general, 
and its application to mineralogy in particular. 

M. Necker remarks very justly, that mineralogy, as it 
has hitherto been treated, differs from all other branches 
of Natural History in this : that while it is invested 
with all the forms of the sciences of classification, 
Classes, Divisions, Genera, and the like, the properties of 
those bodies to which the mineral ogical student's atten- 
tion is directed have no bearing whatever on the classi- 
fication. A person, he remarks f, might be perfectly 
well acquainted with all the characters of minerals which 

* Paris, 1835. * Regne Mineral, p. 3. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 501 

Werner or Haiiy examined so carefully, and might yet be 
quite unable to assign to any mineral its place in the 
divisions of their methods. There is* a complete sepa- 
ration between the study of mineralogical characters and 
the recognition of the name and systematic place of a 
mineral. Those who know mineralogy well, may know 
minerals ill, or hardly at all ; the systematist may be in 
such knowledge vastly inferior to the mineral-dealer or 
the miner. In this respect there is a complete contrast 
between this science and other classificatory sciences. 

Again, in the best-known systems of mineralogy, (as 
those of Werner and Haiiy,) the bodies which are 
grouped together as belonging to the same division, have 
not, as they have in other classificatory sciences, any 
resemblance. The different members of the larger classes 
are united by the common possession of some abstract 
property, as, that they all contain iron. This is a pro- 
perty to which no common circumstance in the bodies 
themselves corresponds. What is there common to the 
minerals named oxidulous iron, sulphuret of iron, car- 
bonate of iron, sulphate of iron, except that they all 
contain iron ? And when we have classed these bodies 
together, what general assertion can we make concerning 
them, except that which is the ground of our classifica- 
tion, that they contain iron? They have nothing in 
common with iron or with each other in any other way. ^ 

Again, as these classes have no general properties, all 
the properties are particular to the species ; and the 
descriptions of these necessarily become both tediously 
long, and inconveniently insulated. 

7. These inconveniences arise from making chemical 
composition the basis of mineralogical classification with- 
out giving chemical analysis the first place among mineral 
properties. Shall we, then, correct this omission, so far 
* Regne Mineral, p. 8. 



502 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

as it has affected mineralogical systems ? Shall we teach 
the student the chemical analysis of minerals, and then 
direct him to classify them according to the results of his 
analysis*? 

But why should we do this ? To what purpose, or on 
what ground, do we arrange the results of chemical ana- 
lysis according to the forms and subordination of natural 
history ? Is not chemistry a science distinct from natural 
history ? Are not the sciences opposed ? Is not natural 
history confined to organic bodies ? Can mere chemical 
elements and their combinations be, with any propriety 
or consistency, arranged into species, genera, and fami- 
lies ? What is the principle on which genera and species 
depend? Do not species imply individuals? What is 
an individual in the case of a chemical substance ? 

8. We thus find some of the widest and deepest 
questions of the philosophy of classification brought under 
our consideration when we would provide a method for 
the classification of minerals. The answers to these ques- 
tions are given by M. Necker ; and I shall state some of 
his opinions ; taking the liberty of adding such remarks 
as are suggested by referring the subject to those prin- 
ciples which have already been established in this work. 

M. Necker asserts f that the distinctions of different 
sciences depend, not on the objects they consider, but on 
the different and independent points of view on which 
they proceed. Each science has its logic, that is, its 
mode of applying the general rules of human reason to 
its own special case. It has been said by some^, that in 
minerals, natural history and chemistry contemplate com- 
mon objects, and thus form a single science. But do 
chemistry and natural history consider minerals in the 
same point of view? 

* Regne Mineral, p. 18. t /., p. 23. 

t /ft., P- 27. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 503 

The answer is, that they do not. Physics and che- 
mistry consider the properties of bodies in an abstract 
manner ; as, their composition, their elements, their mu-* 
tual actions, with the laws of these ; their forces, as 
attraction, affinity; all which objects are abstract ideas. 
In these cases we have nothing to do with bodies them* 
selves, but as the vehicles of the powers and properties 
which we contemplate. 

- Natural history, on the other hand, has to do with 
natural bodies : their properties are not considered ab^ 
stractedly, but only as characters. If the properties are 
abstracted, it is but for a moment. Natural history has to 
describe and class bodies as they are. All which cannot 
be perceived by the senses, belongs not to its domain, as 
molecules, atoms, elements. 

Natural history* may have recourse to physics or 
chemistry in order to recognise those properties of bodies 
which serve as characters ; but natural history is not, on 
that account, physics or chemistry. Classification is the 
essential business of the natural historianf, to which 
task chemistry and physics are only instrumental, and 
the further account of properties only complementary. 

It has been said, in support of the doctrine that 
chemistry and mineralogy are identical, that chemistry 
does not neglect external characters. " The chemist in 
describing sulphur, mentions its colour, taste, odour, hard"- 
ness, transparence, crystalline form, specific gravity ; how- 
does he then differ from the mineralogist ?" But to this 
it is replied, that these notices of the external characters 
of this or any substance are introduced in chemistry 
merely as convenient marks of recognition ; whereas they 
are essential in mineralogy. If we had taken the account 
given of several substances instead of one, we should 
have seen that the chemist and the naturalist consider 

* Reyne Mineral, p. 37. t /&., p. 41. 



304 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

them in ways altogether different. The chemist will 
make it his business to discover the mutual action of the 
substances ; he will combine them, form new products, 
determine the proportions of the elements. The minera- 
logist will divide the substances into groups according 
to their properties, and then subdivide these groups, till he 
refers each substance to its species. Exterior and phy- 
sical characters are merely accessory and subordinate for 
the chemist; chemistry is merely instrumental for the 
mineralogist. 

This view agrees with that to which we have been led 
by our previous reasonings; and may, according to our prin- 
ciples, be expressed briefly by saying, that the Idea which 
chemistry has to apply is the idea of Elementary Composi- 
tion, while natural history applies the Idea of graduated 
Resemblances, and thus performs the task of classification. 

9. The question occurs*, whether Natural History 
can be applied to Inorganic Substances ? And the answer 
to this question is, that it can be applied, if there are 
such things as inorganic individuals, since the resem- 
blances and differences with which natural history has to 
do are the resemblances and differences of individuals. 

What is an Individual ? It certainly is not that 
which is so simple that it cannot be divided. Individual 
animals are composed of many parts. But if we exa- 
mine, we shall find that our idea of an individual is, that 
it is a whole composed of parts, which are not similar to 
the whole, and have not an independent existence, while 
the whole has an independent existence and a definite 
form f. 

What then is the Mineralogical Individual ? At first, 
while minerals were studied for their use, the most pre- 
cious of the substances which they contained was looked 
upon as the characteristic of the mineral. The smallest 

* Regne Mineral t p. 46. t ./&., p. 52. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 505 

trace of silver made a mineral an ore of silver. Thus 
forms and properties were disregarded, and substance was 
considered as identical with mineral. And hence* Dau- 
benton refused to recognise species in the mineral king- 
dom, because he recognised no individuals. He proposed 
to call sorts what we call species. In this way of con- 
sidering minerals, there are no individuals. 

10. But still this is not satisfactory: for if we take a well 
formed and distinct crystal, this clearly is an individual! . 

It may be objected, that the crystal is divisible (ac- 
cording to the theory of crystallography) into smaller 
solids ; that these small solids are really the simple ob- 
jects ; and that actual crystals are formed by combinations 
of these molecules according to certain laws. 

But, as we have already said, an individual is sflch, 
not because it cannot be divided, but because it cannot 
be divided into parts similar to the whole. As to the 
division of the form into its component laws, this is an 
abstract proceeding, foreign to natural history i:. There- 
fore there is so far nothing to prevent a crystal from being 
an individual. 

11. We cannot (M. Necker goes on to remark) con- 
sider the Integrant Molecules as individuals. These are 
useful abstractions, but abstractions only, which w must 
not deal with as real objects. Haiiy himself warns us 
that his doctrine of increments is a purely abstract con- 
ception, and that nature, in fact, follows a different 
process. Accordingly, Weiss and Mohs express laws 
identical with those of Haiiy, without even speaking of 
molecules; and Wollaston and Davy have deemed it 
probable that the molecules are not polyhedrons, but 
spheres or spheroids. Such mere creations of the mind 
can never be treated as individuals. If the maxim of 

* Rtyne Mineral, p. 54. t Ib., p. 56. 4 Ib. y p. 58. 

A, p. 61. 



506 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

natural history, that the species is a collection of indi- 
viduals, be applied so as to make those individuals mere 
abstractions ; or if, instead of individuals, we take such 
an abstraction as substance or matter, the course of natu- 
ral history is altogether violated. And yet this error has 
hitherto generally prevailed ; and mineralogists have clas- 
sified, not things, but abstract ideas*. 

.12. But it may be saiclf, will not the small solids obtained 
by Cleavage better answer the idea of individuals? To 
this it is replied, that these small solids have no indepen- 
dent existence. They are only the result of a mode of 
division. They are never found separate and indepen- 
dent. The secondary forms which they compose are 
determined by various circumstances (the nature of the 
solution, &c.), and the cleavage which produces these 
small^ solids is only one result among many from the crys- 
talline forces $. 

Thus neither integrant molecules, nor solids obtained 
by cleavage, can be such mineral ogical individuals as the 
spirit of natural history requires. Hence it appears that 
we must take the real crystals for individuals $. 

13. We must, however, reject crystals (generally 
large ones) which are obviously formed of several smaller 
ones of a similar form (as occurs so often in quartz and 
calc spar). We must also distinguish cases in which a 
large regular form is composed of smaller but different 
regular forms (as octahedrons of fluor spar made up of 
cubes). Here the small component forms are the indi- 
viduals. Also we must notice the cases || in which we 
have a natural crystal, similar to the primary form. Here 
the face will show whether the body is a result obtained 
by cleavage or a natural individual. 

14. It will be objected^!, that the crystalline form ought 

* Regne Mineral, p. 67- t Ib., p. 69. J Ib., p. 71. 

Ib., p. 73. || Ib. t p. 75. 1T Ib., p. 79. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 507 

not to be made the dominant character in mineralogy, 
since it rarely occurs perfect. To this it is replied, that 
even if the application of the principle be difficult, still it 
has been shown to be the only true principle, and there- 
fore we have no alternative. But further*, it is not true 
that amorphous substances are more numerous than crys- 
tals. In LEONHARD'S Manual of Oryctoynosy, there are 
377 mineral substances. Of these, 281 have a crystalline 
structure, and 96 only have not been found in a regular 
form. 

Again, the 281 crystalline forms have each its varie- 
ties, some of which are crystalline, and some are not so. 
Now the crystalline varieties amount to 1453, and the 
uncrystalline to 180 only. Thus mineralogy, according 
to the view of it here presented, has a sufficiently wide, 
fieldf. 

15. It will be objected \> that according to this mode 
of proceeding, we must reject from our system all non- 
crystalline minerals. But we reply, that if the mass be 
composed of crystals, the size of the crystals makes no 
difference. Now lamellar and other compact masses are 
very generally groups of crystals in various positions. 
Individuals mutilated and mixed together are not the less 
individuals ; and therefore such masses may be treated as 
objects of natural history. 

If we cannot refer all rocks to crystalline species,^ 
those which elude our method may appear as an appen- 
dix, corresponding to those which botanists call genera 
incertce sedis. 

But these genera and species will often be afterwards 
removed into the crystalline part of the system, by being 
identified with crystalline species. Thus pyrope, &c., 
have been referred to garnet, and basalt, wacke, &c., to 

* Regne Mineral, p. 82. t /&., p. 85. J Ib. t p. 86. 
/6.,. 91., 



508 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

compound rocks. Thus veins of dolerite, visibly com- 
posed of two or three elements, pass to an apparently 
simple state by becoming fine-grained*. 

16. Finally f, we have to ask, are artificial crystals to 
enter into our classification? M. Necker answers, No; 
because they are the result of art, like mules, mestizos, 
hybrids, and the like. 

17. Upon these opinions, we may observe, that they 
appear to be, in the main, consistent with the soundest 
philosophy. That each natural crystal is an individual, 
is a doctrine which is the only basis of mineralogy as a 
Natural Historical science; yet the imperfections and 
confused unions of crystals make this principle difficult 
to apply. Perhaps it may be expressed in a more precise 
manner by referring to the crystalline forces, and to the 
axes by which their operation is determined, rather than 
to the external form. That portion of a mineral sub- 
stance is a mineralogical individual which is determined 
by crystalline forces acting to the same axes. In this 
way we avoid the difficulty arising from the absence of 
faces, and enable ourselves to use either cleavage, or optical 
properties, or any others, as indications of the identity of 
the individual. The individual extends so far as the polar 
forces extend by which crystalline form is determined, 
whether or not those forces produce their full effect, a 
perfectly circumscribed polyhedron. 

18. There is only one material point on which our 
principles lead us to differ from M. Necker ; the pro- 
priety of including artificial crystals in our mineralogical 
classification. To exclude them, as he does, is a conclu- 
sion so entirely at variance with the whole course of his 
own reasonings, that it is difficult to conceive that he would 
persist in his conclusion, if his attention were drawn to 
the question more steadily. For, as he justly sayst, each 

* Regne Mineral, p. 93. t /., p. 95. J Ib. t p. 23. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 509 

science has its appropriate domain, determined by its 
peculiar point of view. Now artificial and natural crys- 
tals are considered in the same point of view, (namely, 
with reference to crystalline, physical, and optical pro- 
perties, as subservient to classification,) and ought, there- 
fore, to belong to the same science. Again, he says*, 
that chemistry would reject as useless all notice of the 
physical properties and external characters of substances, if 
a special science were to take charge of the description and 
classification of these products. But such a special science 
must be mineralogy ; for we cannot well make one science 
of classification of natural, and another of artificial sub- 
stances : or if we do, the two sciences will be identical 
in method and principles, and will extend over each 
other's boundaries, so that it will be neither useful nor 
possible to distinguish them. Again, M. Necker's own 
reasonings on the selection of the individual in minera- 
logy are supported by well chosen exarnplesf ; but these 
examples are taken from artificial salts ; as, for instance, 
common salt crystallizing in different mixtures. Again, 
the analogy of mules and mestizos, as products of art, 
with chemical compounds, is not just. Chemical com- 
pounds correspond rather to natural species, propagated 
by man under the most natural circumstances, in order 
that he may study the laws of their production^. 

19. But the decisive argument against the separation 
of natural and artificial crystals in our schemes of classi- 
fication is, that we cannot make such a separation. Sub- 
stances which were long known only as the products of 
the laboratory, are often discovered, after a time, in 
natural deposits. Are the crystals which are found in a 
forgotten retort or solution to be considered as belonging 

* Regne Mineral, p. 36. t Ib., p. 71. 

J We may remark that M. Necker, in his own arrangement of 
minerals, inserts among his species iron and lead, which do not occur 
native. 



510 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

to a different science from those which occur in a deserted 
mine ? And are the crystals which are produced where 
man has turned a stream of water or air out of its course, 
to be separated from natural crystals, when the composi- 
tion, growth, and properties, are exactly the same in 
both ? And again : How many natural crystals can we 
already produce by synthesis ! How many more may we 
hope to imitate hereafter ! M. Necker himself states*, 
that Mitscherlich found, in the scoriae of the mines of 
Sweden and Germany, artificial minerals having the same 
composition and the same crystalline form with natural 
minerals : as silicates of iron, lime, and magnesia agree- 
ing with peridot ; bisilicate of iron, lime, and magnesia 
agreeing with pyroxene ; red oxide of copper ; oxide of 
zinc ; protoxide of iron (fer bxydule); sulphurets of iron, 
zinc, lead ; arseniuret of nickel ; black mica. These 
were accidental results of fusion. But M. Berthier, by 
bringing together the elements in proper quantities, has 
succeeded in composing similar minerals, and has thus 
obtained artificial silicates, with the same forms and the 
same characters as natural silicates. Other chemists 
(M. Haldat, M. Becquerel) have, in like manner, obtained, 
by artificial processes, other crystals, known previously 
as occurring naturally. How are these crystals, thus 
identical with natural minerals, to be removed out of the 
domain of mineralogy, and transferred to a science which 
shall classify artificial crystals only? If this be done, the 
mineralogist will not be able to classify any specimen till 
he has human testimony whether it was found naturally 
occurring or produced by chemical art. Or is the other 
alternative to be taken, and are these crystals to be given 
up to mineralogy because they occur naturally also? 
But what can be more unphilosophical than to refer to 
separate sciences the results of chemical processes closely 

* Regrie Mineral, p. 151. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 



511 



allied, and all but identical? The chemist constructs 
bisilicates, and these are classified by the mineralogist : 
but if he constructs a trisilicate, it belongs to anotlier 
science. All these intolerable incongruities are avoided 
by acknowledging that artificial, as well as natural, 
crystals belong to the domain of mineralogy. It is, in 
fact, the name only of mineralogy which appears to dis- 
cover any inconsistency in this mode of proceeding. 
Mineralogy is the representative of a science which has 
a wider office than mineralogists first contemplated ; but 
which must exist, in order that the body of science may 
be complete. There must, as we have already said, be a 
Science, the object of which is to classify bodies by their 
physical characters, in order that we may have some 
means of asserting chemical truths concerning bodies; 
some language in which we may express the propositions 
which chemical analysis discovers. And this Science will 
have its object prescribed, not by any accidental or arbitrary 
difference of the story belonging to each specimen ; not 
by knowing whether the specimen was found in the 
mine or in the laboratory; produced by attempting to 
imitate nature, or to do violence to her : but will have 
its course determined by its own character. The range 
and boundaries of this Science will be regulated by the 
ideas with which it deals. Like all * other sciences, it 
must extend to everything to which its principles apply. 
The limits of the province which it includes are fixed 
by the consideration that it must be a connected whole. 
No previous definition, no historical accident, no casual 
phrase, can at all stand in the way of philosophical coii!- 
sistency; can make this Science exclude what that 
includes, or oblige it to admit what that rejects. And thus, 
whatever we call our Science; whether we term it 
External Chemistry, Mineralogy, the Natural History of 
Inorganic Bodies ; since it can be nothing but the 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

Science of the Classification of Inorganic Bodies of definite 
forms and properties, it must classify all such bodies, 
whether or not they be minerals, and whether or not they 
be natural. 

20. In the application of the principles of classifica- 
tion to minerals, the question occurs, What are to be 
considered as mineral Species? By Species we are to 
understand, according to the usage of other parts of 
natural history, the lowest step of our subordinate divi- 
sions ; the most limited of the groups which have defi- 
nite distinctions. What definite distinctions of groups 
of objects of any kind really occur in nature, is to be 
learnt from an examination of nature : and the result of 
our inquiries will be some general principle which con- 
nects the members of each group, and distinguishes the 
members of groups which, though contiguous, are dif- 
ferent In the classification of organized bodies, the rule 
which thus presides over the formation of Species is the 
principle of reproduction. Those animals and those 
plants are of the same Species which are produced from 
a common stock, or which resemble each other as much 
as the progeny of a common stock. Accordingly in 
practice, if any questions arise whether two varieties of 
form be of the same or different species, it is settled by 
reference to the fact of reproduction; and when it is 
ascertained that the two forms come within the habitual 
and regalar limits of a common circle of reproduction, 
they are held to be of the same species. Now in crystals, 
this principle of reproduction disappears altogether, and 
the basis of the formation of species must be sought 
elsewhere. We must have some other principle to 
replace the reproduction which belongs only to organic 
life. This principle will be, we may expect, one which 
secures the permanence and regularity of mineral forms, 
as tke reproductive power does of animal and vegetable. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 513 

Such a principle is the Power of Crystallization. The 
forces of which solidity, cohesion, and crystallization are 
the result, are those which give to minerals their perma- 
nent existence and their physical properties; and ever 
since the discovery of the distinctions of crystalline forms 
and crystalline systems, it is certain that this force dis- 
tinguishes groups of crystals in the most precise and 
definite manner. The rhombohedral carbonates of lime 
and of iron, for instance, are distinguished exactly by the 
angles of their rhombohedrons. And if, in the case of 
any proposed crystal, we should doubt to which kind the 
specimen belongs, the measurement of the angles of 
cleavage would at once decide the question. The prin- 
ciple of crystallization therefore appears, from analogy, 
to be exactly fitted to take the place of the principle of 
animal generation. The forces which make the indivi- 
dual permanent and its properties definite, here stand in 
the place of the forces which preserve the race, while 
individuals are generated and die. 

21. According to this view, the different modifica- 
tions of the same crystalline form would be Varieties only 
of the same species. All the various solids, for example, 
which are produced by the different laws of derivation of 
rhombohedral carbonate of lime, would fall within the 
same Species. And this appears to be required by the 
general analogy of natural history. For these differences 
of form, produced by the laws of crystalline deriva- 
tion, are not definite. The faces which are added to 
one form in order to produce another, may be of any 
size, small or large, and thus the crystal which represents 
one modification passes by insensible degrees to another. 
The forms of calc spar, which we call dog-tooth spar, 
cannon spar, nail-head spar, and the like, appear at first, 
no doubt, distinct enough ; but so do the races of dogs. 
And we find, in the mineral as in the animal, that the 
VOL. i. 2 L 



514 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

distinction is obliterated by taking such intermediate 
steps as really occur. And if a fragment of any of these 
crystals is given us, we can determine that it is rhombo- 
hedral carbonate of lime ; but it is not possible, in 
genera], to determine to which of the kinds of crystal it 
has belonged. 

22. Notwithstanding these considerations, M. Necker 
has taken for his basis of mineral species* the Secondary 
Modifications, and not the Primary Forms. Thus cubical 
galena, octahedral galena, and triform galena, are, with him, 
three species of crystals. 

On this I have to observe, as I have already done, 
that on this principle we have no definite distinction of 
species ; for these forms may and do pass into each 
other: among cubo-octahedrons of galena occur cubes 
and octahedrons, as one face or another vanishes, and 
the transition is insensible. We shall, on this principle, 
find almost always three or four species in the same tuft 
of crystals ; for almost every individual in such assem- 
blages may exhibit a different combination of secondary 
faces. Again, in cases where the secondary laws are 
numerous, it would be impracticable to enumerate all 
their combinations, and impossible therefore to give a 
list of species. Accordingly M. Neckerf gives seventy- 
one Species of spath calcaire, and then says, " Nous 
n'avons pas enumere la dixieme partie des especes con- 
nues de ce genre, qui se m on tent a plus de huit cents." 
Again, in many substances, of which few crystals are 
found, every new specimen would be a new species ; if 
indeed it were perfect enough to be referred to a species 
at all. But from a specimen without perfect external 
form, however perfect in crystalline character, although 
everything else might be known, angles, optical pro- 

* Regne Mineral, p. 396, t Ib. ii. 634. 



APPLICATION TO MINERALOGY. 515 

perties, physical properties, and chemical constitution, 
the species could not be determined. Thus Necker says* 
of the micas, " Quant aux especes propre a chaque genre, 
la lac une sera presque complete ; car jusqu' ici les cris- 
taux entiers de Mica et cle Talc n'ont pas ete fort com- 
muns." 

These inconveniencies arise from neglecting the lead- 
ing rule of natural history, that the predominant prin- 
ciple of the existence of an object must determine the 
Species; whether this principle be reproduction operating 
for development, or crystallization operating for perma- 
nence of form. We may add to the above statement of 
inconveniencies this ; that if M. Necker's view of mine- 
ralogical species be adopted, the distinction of species is 
vague and indefinite, while that of genera is perfectly pre- 
cise and rigorous ; an aspect of the system entirely at 
variance with other parts of natural history ; for in all 
these the species is a more definite group than the genus. 

This result follows, as has already been said, from 
M. Necker's wish to have individuals marked by ex- 
ternal form. If, instead of this, we are contented to 
take for an individual that portion of a mass, of whatever 
form, which is connected by the continuous influence of 
the same crystalline forces, by whatever incidents these 
forces may be manifested, (as cleavage, physical and opti- 
cal properties,) our mode of proceeding avoids all the 
above inconveniencies, applies alike to the most perfect 
and most imperfect specimens, and gives a result agree- 
able to the general analogy of natural history, and the 
rules of its methods f. 

* Regne, Mineral, ii. 414. 

t I will not again enter into tlie subject of Nomenclature; but I 
may remark that M. Necker has adopted (i. 415) the Nomenclature of 
Beudant, latinising the names, and thus converting each into a single 
word. He has also introduced, besides the names of Genera, names of 

2 L 2 



516 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

I now quit the subject of mere Resemblance, and pro- 
ceed to treat of that natural affinity which Natural 
Systems of Classification for organic bodies must involve. 



CHAPTER TV. 
OF THE IDEA OF NATURAL AFFINITY. 

1. IN the Second Chapter of this Book it was 
shown that although the Classificatory Sciences proceed 
ostensibly upon the Idea of Resemblance as their main 
foundation, they necessarily take for granted in the 
course of their progress a further Idea of Natural Affinity. 
This appeared* by a general consideration of the nature 
of Science, by the recognition of natural species and 
genera, even in Artificial Systems of Classification!, and 
by the attempts of botanists to form a Natural System. 
It further appeared that among the processes by which 
endeavours have been made to frame a Natural System, 
some, as the method of blind trial and the method or 
general comparison, have been altogether unsuccessful; 
being founded only upon a collection of resemblances, 
casual in the one case and arbitrary in the other. In 
neither of these processes is there employed any general 
principle by which we may be definitely directed as to 
what resemblances we should employ, or by which the 
result at which we arrive may be verified and confirmed. 
Our object in the present chapter is to show that the 
Idea of Natural Affinity supplies us with a principle 
which may answer such purposes. 

Families taken from the typical Genus. Thus the Family of Carlo- 
nidiens contains the following genera : Calcispathum, Magnesispathum, 
Dolomispathum, Ferrispathum^ &c., Malachite, Azuria. Gaylusacia. 
* Art. 5. f Art. 7- 



IDEA OF NATURAL AFFINITY. 517 

I shall first consider the Idea of Affinity as exempli- 
fied in organized beings. In doing this, we may appear 
to take for granted Ideas which have not yet come under 
our discussion, as the Ideas of Organization, and Vital 
Function ; but it will be found that the principle to which 
we are led is independent of these additional Ideas. 

2. We have already seen that the attempts to dis- 
cover the divisions which result from this Natural Affinity 
have led to the consideration of the Subordination of 
Characters. It is easy to see that some organs are more 
essential than others to the existence of an organized 
being ; the organs of nutrition, for example, more essen- 
tial than those of locomotion. But at the same time it 
is clear that any arbitrary assumption of a certain scale 
of relative values of different kinds of characters will lead 
only to an Artificial System. This will happen, if, for 
example, we begin by declaring the nutritive to be supe- 
rior in importance to the reproductive functions. It is 
clear that this relation of importance of organs and 
functions must be collected by the study of the organized 
beings ; and cannot be determined a priori, without de- 
priving us of all right to expect a general accordance 
between our system and the arrangement of nature. We 
see, therefore, that our notion of Natural Affinity involves 
in it this consequence ; that it is not to be made out by 
an arbitrary subordination of characters. 

3. The functions and actions of living things which 
we separate from each other in our consideration, cannot 
be severed in nature. Each function is essential ; Life 
implies a collection of movements, and ceases when any 
of these movements is stopped. A change in the organi- 
zation subservient to one set of functions may lead neces- 
sarily to a change in the organization belonging to others. 
We can often see this necessary connexion ; and from a 
comparison of the forms of organized beings, from the 



518 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

way in which their structure changes in passing from one 
class to another, we are led to the conviction that there 
is some general principle which connects and graduates 
all such changes. When the circulatory system changes, 
the nervous system changes also: when the mode of 
locomotion changes, the respiration is also modified. 

4. These corresponding changes may be considered as 
ways in which the living thing is fitted to its mode of 
life ; as marks of adaptation to a purpose ; oi\ as it has 
been otherwise expressed, as results of the conditions of 
existence. But at the present moment, we put forward 
these correspondencies in a different light. We adduce 
them as illustrations of what we mean by Affinity, and 
what we consider as the tendency of a Natural Classifi- 
cation. It has sometimes been asserted that if we were 
to classify any of the departments of organized nature by 
means of one function, and then by means of another, the 
two classifications, if each strictly consistent with itself, 
would be consistent with each other. Such an assertion 
is perhaps more than we are entitled to make with con- 
fideftce ; but it shows very well what is meant by Affinity. 
The disposition to believe such a general identity of all 
partial natural classifications, shows how readily we fix 
upon the notion of Affinity, as general result of the 
causes which determine the forms of living things. 
When these causes or principles, of whatever nature they 
are conceived to be, vary so as to modify one part of the 
organization of the being, they also modify another : and 
thus the groups which exhibit this variation of the funda- 
mental principles of form, are the same, whether the 
manifestation of the change be sought in one part or in 
another of the organized structure. The groups thus 
formed are related by Affinity ; and in proportion as we 
find the evidence of more functions and more organs to 
the propriety of our groups, we are more and more satis- 



IDEA OF NATU11AL AFFINITY. 519 

fied that they are Natural Classes. It appears, then, 
that our Idea of Affinity involves the conviction of the 
coincidence of natural arrangements formed on different 
functions ; and this, rather than the principle of the sub- 
ordination of some characters to others, is the true 
ground of the natural method of Classification. 

5. For example, Cuvier, after speaking of the Subor- 
dination of Characters as the guide which he intends to 
follow in his arrangement of animals, interprets this 
principle in such a manner* as to make it agree nearly 
with the one just stated. "In pursuance of what has 
been said on methods in general, w r e now require to 
know what characters in animals are the most influential, 
and therefore those which must be made the grounds of 
the primary divisions." "These," he says, "it is clear 
must be those which are taken from the animal func- 
tions ; sensation and motion :" But how does he con- 
firm this ? Not by showing that the animal functions 
are independent of, or predominant over, the vegetative, 
but by observing that they follow the same gradations. 
" Observation," he continues, " confirms this view, by 
showing that the degrees of developement and compli- 
cation of the animal functions agree with those of the 
vegetative. The heart and the organs of the circulation 
are a sort of centre for the vegetative functions, as the 
brain and the trunk of the nervous system are for the 
animal functions. Now we see these two systems de- 
scend in the scale, and disappear the one with the other. 
In the lowest animals, when there are no longer any 
distinct nerves, there are also no longer distinct fibres, 
and the organs of digestion are simply hollowed out in 
the homogeneous mass of the body. The muscular system 
disappears even before the nervous, in insects ; but in 
general the distribution of the medullary masses corre- 

* Reg-ne Animal, p. 55. 



520 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

spends to that of the muscular instruments ; a spinal cord, 
on which knots or ganglions represent so many brains, 
corresponds to a body divided into numerous rings and 
supported on pairs of members placed at different points 
of the length, and so on. 

" This correspondence of the general forms which result 
from the arrangement of the motive organs, from the dis- 
tribution of the nervous masses, and from the energy of 
the circulatory system, must therefore form the ground 
of the first great sections by which we divide the animal 
kingdom." 

6. Decandolle takes the same view. There must be, 
he says, an equilibrium of the different functions^. And 
he exemplifies this by the case of the distinction of mono- 
cotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants, which being at 
first established by means of the organs of reproduction, 
was afterwards found to coincide with the distinction of 
endogenous and exogenous, which depends on the process 
of nutrition. " Thus," he adds, " the natural classes founded 
on one of the great functions of the vegetable are necessarily 
the same as those which are founded upon the other func- 
tion ; and I find here a very useful criterion to ascertain 
whether a class is natural : namely, in order to announce 
that it is so, it must be arrived at by the two roads 
which vegetable organization presents. Thus I affirm," 
he says, " that the division of monocotyledons from 
dicotyledons, and the distinction of Grammes from 
Cyperacese, are real, because in these cases, I arrive at 
the same result by the reproductive and the nutritive 
organs ; while the distinction of monopetalous and poly- 
petalous, of Rhodoracese and Ericinese appears to me 
artificial, because I can arrive at it only by the reproduc- 
tive organs." 

Thus the correspondence of the indications of different 
* TL El., p. 79. 



IDEA OF NATURAL AFFINITY. 521 

functions is the criterion of Natural Classes ; and this 
correspondence may be considered as one of the best and 
most characteristic marks of the fundamental Idea of 
Affinity. And the Maxim by which all Systems professing 
to be natural must be tested is this : that the arrange- 
ment obtained from one set of characters coincides with the 
arrangement obtained from another set. 

This Idea of Affinity, as a natural connexion among 
various species, of which connexion all particular resem- 
blances are indications, has principally influenced the 
attempts at classifying the animal kingdom. The reason 
why the classification in this branch of Natural History 
has been more easy and certain than that of the vegetable 
world is, as Decandolle says*, that besides the func- 
tions of nutrition and reproduction, which animals have 
in common with plants, they have also in addition the 
function of sensation ; and thus have a new means of 
verification and concordance. But we may add, as a 
further reason, that the functions of animals are necessa- 
rily much more obvious and intelligible to us than those 
of vegetables, from their clear resemblance to the opera- 
tions which take place in our own bodies, to which our 
attention has necessarily been strongly directed. 

7. The question here offers itself, whether this Idea 
of Natural Affinity is applicable to inorganic as well as 
to organic bodies ; whether there be Natural Affinities 
among Minerals. And to this we are now enabled to 
reply by considering whether or not the principle just 
stated is applicable in such cases. And the conclusion 
to which our principle leads us is, that there are such 
Natural Affinities among Minerals, since there are dif- 
ferent sets of characters which may be taken, (and have 
by different writers been taken,) as the basis of classifica- 
tion. The hardness, specific gravity, colour, lustre, 

* Th. EL, p. 80. 



522 PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES. 

crystallization, and other external characters, as they are 
termed, form one body of properties according to which 
minerals may be classified; as has in fact been done by 
Molis, Breithaupt, and others. The chemical constitution 
of the substances, on the other hand, may be made the 
principle of their arrangement, as was done by Haiiy, 
and more recently, and on a different scheme, by Ber- 
zelius. Which of these is the true and natural classifica- 
tion ? To this we answer, that each of these arrange- 
ments is true and natural, then, and then only, when it 
coincides with the other. An arrangement by external 
characters which gives us classes possessing a common 
chemical character; a chemical order which brings 
together like and separates unlike minerals ; such classi- 
fications have the evidence of truth in their agreement 
with one another. Every classification of minerals which 
does not aim at and tend to such a result, is so far merely 
arbitrary ; and cannot be subservient to the expression 
of general chemical and mineralogical truths, which is the 
proper purpose of such a classification. 

8. In the History of Mineralogy I have related the 
advances which have been made among mineralogists and 
chemists in modern times towards a System possessing 
this character of truth. I have there described the mixed 
systems of Werner and Haiiy ; the attempt made by 
Mohs to form a pure Natural History system ; the first 
and second attempt of Berzelius to form a -pure chemical 
system ; and the failure of both these attempts. But the 
distinct separation of the two elements of which science 
requires the coincidence threw a very useful light upon 
the subject ; and the succeeding mixed systems, such as 
that of Naumann, approached much nearer to the true 
conditions of the problem than any of the preceding ones 
had done. Thus, as I have stated, several of Naumann's 
groups have both a common chemical character and great 



IDEA OF NATURAL AFFINITY. 523 

external resemblances. Such are \A* Anhydrous Unmetallic 
Haloids his Anhydrous Metallic Haloids Hydrous Metal- 
lic Haloids Oxides of metals Pyrites Glances Blendes. 
The existence of such groups shows that we may hope 
ultimately to obtain a classification of minerals which 
shall be both chemically significant and agreeable to the 
methods of Natural History : although, when we consider 
how very imperfect as yet our knowledge of the chemical 
composition of minerals is, we can hardly flatter ourselves 
that we shall arrive at such a result very soon. 

We have thus seen that in Mineralogy, as well as in 
the sciences which treat of organized bodies, we may 
apply the Idea of Natural Affinity ; of which the funda- 
mental maxim is, that arrangements obtained from different 
sets of characters must coincide. 

Since the notion of Affinity is thus applicable to 
inorganic as well as to organic bodies, it is plain that it 
is not a mere modification of the Idea of Organization or 
Function, although it may in some of its aspects appear to 
approach near to these other Ideas. But these Ideas, or 
others which are the foundation of them, necessarily enter 
in a very prominent and fundamental manner into all the 
other parts of Natural History. To the consideration of 
these, therefore, we shall now proceed. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 






LONDON : 

HAHRISOX AND Co., PKF.VTKRS, 
ST. MARTIN'S LANK. 









PUBLISHED BY 

JOHN W. PARKER, LONDON, 

AND 

DEIGHTONS, CAMBRIDGE. 



MANUAL OF CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES ; 

Or, an Account of the Constitution, Ministers, Worship, Discipline, 

and Customs of the Early Church : with a complete Analysis 

of the "Works of the Antenicene Fathers. 

By the Rev. J. E. RIDDLE, M.A., Author of an English-Latin and 

Latin-English Dictionary, Luther and his Times, $c. 

In a large Octavo Volume, 18s. 

SCRIPTURAL CHARACTER of the ENGLISH 
CHURCH 

Considered in a Series of Sermons, with Notes and Illustrations. 

By the Rev. DERWENT COLERIDGE, M.A. 

Octavo, 12*. 6d. 

HISTORY of the CHURCH of IRELAND, 

From the Reformation to the Revolution ; with a Preliminary Survey, 

from the Papal Usurpation in the Twelfth Century, to its 

legal abolition in the Sixteenth. 

By RICHARD MANT, D.D., Lord Bishop of Down and Connor. 
In a large Octavo Volume, 17*. 

HISTORY of the CHURCH of ENGLAND; 

Embracing Copious Histories of the Translation of the Bible, the 

Thirty-Nine Articles, and the Book of Common Prayer. 

By THOMAS VOWLER SHORT, D.D. 

New and improved Edition. 16*. 

THE ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH; 

Its History, Revenues, and General Character. 

By the Rev. HENRY SOAMES, M.A., Author of The History 
of the Reformation. A New Edition. 10*. 6d. 

ELIZABETHAN RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 

By the Author of the above. Oct., 16*. 



THE NEW CRATYLUS; 

Or, Contributions towards a more Accurate Knowledge of the Greek 

Language. 
By J. W. DONALDSON, M.A., Fell. Trin. Coll., Cam. Oct. 17*. 

SYNCHRONOLOGY : 

A Treatise on the History, Chronology, and Mythology of the Egyp- 

tians, Greeks, and Phoenicians, and the Harmony between 

their Chronology and that of the Holy Scriptures. 

By the Rev. CHARLES CROSTHWAITE. 15s. 
A LIFE OF ARISTOTLE, 

Including a Critical Discussion of some Questions of Literary History 
connected with his Works. 

By J. W. BLAKESLEY, M.A., Fell. Trin. Coll., Cam. 8s. 6d. 

STEMMATA ATHENIENSIA; 

Tables of BIOGRAPHY, CHRONOLOGY, and HISTORY, 

to facilitate the Study of the Greek Classics. 5s. 

THE GREEK TEXT OF THE ACTS 

Of the Apostles, with Notes, Original and Selected. 

By HASTINGS ROBINSON, D.D., F.A.S., Rector of Great Warley, 
late Fellow of St. John's, Cambridge. Octavo, 8s. 



rtt&n THE GUIDE of the HEBREW STUDENT ; 

Containing Easy Passages in pure Biblical Hebrew, with Keys, 
and Glossary, adapted for English Learners. 

By HERMANN BERNARD, Hebrew Teacher in the University of 
Cambridge. Crown Octavo, 10s. 6d. 



LEO'S HEBREW GRAMMAR 

For the USE of SCHOOLS and STUDENTS in the 
UNIVERSITIES. 12s. 6d, 



ELEMENTS OF SYRIAC GRAMMAR, 

By the Rev. G. PHILLIPS, M. A., Fellow and Tutor of Queen's 
College, Cambridge. Octavo, 10s. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF LIVING; 

By HERBERT MAYO, F.R.S., Senior Surgeon of the Middlesex 
Hospital. 8s. 6d. ; and, by the same Author, 65. 6(7., 

MANAGEMENT of the ORGANS of DIGESTION 

In Health and Disease. 

MUSICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, AND 
CRITICISM ; 

Being a General Survey of Music from the Earliest to the Present Time. 
By GEORGE HOGARTH. In Two Volumes. 10*. 6d, 

STUDENT'S MANUAL OF ANCIENT HISTORY; 

Containing the Political History, Geographical Position, and Social 

State of the Principal Nations of Antiquity. 
By W. C. TAYLOR, LL.D., M.R.A.S. ; Trin. Coll., Dublin. 

Also, by the same Author, 

STUDENT'S MANUAL OF MODERN HISTORY; 

The Rise and Progress of the principal European Nations, their 

Political History, and the Changes in their Social 

Condition. 

Each Volume, 10s. 6d. 

The contents of these comprehensive volumes have been carefully drawn from the 
works of ancient writers, and are illustrated by the discoveiies of modern scholars and 
travellers. They are intended to supply the student with a compendious narrative of the 
principal events which have occurred in the history of the world, and to lead him to a con- 
sideration of the causes which have produced the principal events recorded. The geographi- 
cal position, natural productions, and progress of civilization in all the great monarchies and 
republics have been diligently investigated, and their effects on the fortunes of the state 
pointed out. Thus the philosophy of history is made to illustrate the narrative without 
interrupting it. 

THE STUDENT'S MANUAL OF NATURAL 
PHILOSOPHY ; 

By CHARLES TOMLINSON. 

Comprising Descriptions, Popular and Practical, of the most important 
Philosophical Instruments, their History, Nature, and Uses. 

105. 6d. 
Dedicated, by permission, to the Lord Bishop of Salisbury. 

In this work certain prominent subjects have been selected with which it behoves every 
one to be acquainted ; such, for example, as relate to what may be called our HOUSEHOLD 
INSTRUMENTS, namely, the Thermometer, the Barometer, and Vernier ; the Hydrometer ; the 
Hygrometer, the Tuning-Fork, Musical Glasses and Music generally; the Compass; the 
Prism, the Telescope, and the Sun-Dial. These subjects, and those in immediate connexion 
with them, are treated of extensively ; as also their application to Science, Art, and Industry. 



A MANUAL OF CHEMISTRY. 

By WILLIAM THOS. BRANDE, F.R.S., of Her Majesty's Mint. 

The Fourth Edition, greatly Enlarged, and with numerous 

Wood-cuts, 30^. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 
CHEMICAL PHILOSOPHY; 

By J. FREDERICK DANIELL, F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry in 
King's College, London. Octavo, 16s. 

A DICTIONARY OF THE MATERIA MEDICA 
AND PHARMACY; 

Including the Elements of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and a Translation 

of the London Pharmacopoeia. 

By WILLIAM THOS. BRANDE, Author of the Manual of 
Chemistry. Octavo, 15s. 

RECREATIONS IN ASTRONOMY. 

By Rev. LEWIS TOMLINSON, M.A. 

With many Wood-cuts, 4s. 6d. 

A popular view of the science of astronomy, including the suhstance of several chapters 
on the subject that appeared in the Saturday Magazine. It explains the laws that regulate 
the planetary system, describes the different planets, and treats also of the other heavenly 
bodies, of the telescope, the dial, &c. The language is plain, and the explanations are 
made clear by familiar comparisons, and illustrated by numerous diagrams and pictures, 
engraved in wood. A Glossary of terms and an Index are appended; and, altogether, this 
is the best "Popular Astronomy" we have met with. Spectator. 

RECREATIONS IN GEOLOGY; 

With an Introductory Discourse on the Nature and Advantages of 
the Science, and a copious GLOSSARY. 

By MISS ZORNLIN. 
With many Wood-cuts, 4s. 6d. 

While there is a total absence of pretension in the general form and style of the volume, 
it is evident that a great deal of reading and research have been requisite for its production, 
and that the authoress must have turned over a number of dry and ponderous tomes, the 
very sight of which would scare numbers of the fair sex. * * * Thus, though the 
book is short, it is not superficial, and, moreover, the authoress, anxious to throw light on 
her subject from every side, has not merely confined herself to geological sources, but has 
brought in much collateral information, chemical, historical, and etymological. With 
etymology she has been particularly careful, never introducing an unusual technical expres- 
sion, without giving its Greek or Latin origin. * * * While the work is excellently 
put together as a whole, a very copious Index renders easy a reference to any part. A 
Glossary is also added, which explains all the technical words, and thus the book contains all 
that those would desire to know whose occupations or inclinations hinder them from pursuing 
geology to any great extent, and are at the same time desirous of knowing what their geolo- 
gical contemporaries are about. It will also be an agreeable pocket volume for the tourist, 
who may be anxious to know something concerning the various soils over which he passes. 
Times. 