Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




eu0034416Q 



11 



4- 






OUTLINE 



or THE 



LAWS OF THOUGHT 



OUTLINE 



LAWS OF THOUGHT 




LONDON 

WILLIAM PICKERING 

OXFORD 

WILLIAH GRAHAlt 



774- 



Nee maDus nada nee intellectus sibi permissus mul- 
tum valet ; instrumentis etauziliisres pe'rficitur; quibus 
opus est non minus ad intellectum quam ad manum. 
Atque ut instromenta manus motum aut cient aut re- 
gont; ita et instrumenta mentis intelleetul aut sugge- 
runt aut cavent. — Baconi Nov. Org. 



PREFACE. 

It is no reproach on former writers to declare 
that there is still much to be said by way of 
preface to a new Essay on Logic. In the 
thickets and upland passes of any science, there 
are always improvements or inventions to b^ 
made * ; nor is it for the bold discoverer of the 
country to make them : but some humbler per- 
son, peering through weaker eyes, and gifted 
with a more fixed, if less excursive vision, tm« 
hedllioris ingenii defectus intentiore diligentid 
pensans, adds his mite of improvement to the 
stock of accurate knowledge, and, in his turn, 
leaves the work for others. 

The results we look for from a well con- 
ducted logical training, are among the matters 



* Nulla est tarn facilis atque humiUs ars, in qua non 
infinita occultantur, que possunt multa ingenia diutissim^ 
ezercere. — L. Vives. 



VI PREFACE. 

that require more light.* People continue to 
imagine, that a code of *^ Laws of Thought" is 
intended for an instrument to be openly carried 
and unblushingly used on all occasions, as a 
protection from the specious currency of false 
arguments ; and that a thorough-paced logician 
is one who not only talks orthodox syllogisms 
combined duly in analytic and synthetic method 
himself, but also makes a point of bringing to 
the same pedantic accuracy the slipshod judg- 
ments and crippled arguments which every day 
talkers are content to use. If their view were 
correct, we could not wonder at their treating 
such a public nuisance with some show of aver- 
sion, just as a publican hates an exciseman's 
measuring rod more than a common stick, be- 
cause it is poked into his barrels with un- 
pleasant results. But so far are we from con- 
templating such an obtrusive use of Logic, that 
we firmly hold, of this as of other arts, that the 



* That Logic is useful and necessary, see Luther, 
Table Talk, p. 499 ; Harris, Pref. to Hermes, p. 14 ; 
Coleridge, Table Talk. Bacon condemns the Logic of 
his day, but does so in the very act of writing an ap" 
plied Logic himself. Nov. Org. i. 11. 



• • 



PREFACE. Vll 

art is perfect when it is best concealed: or 
rather, that we ought " so to carry it, that none 
but artificers perceive it."* And farther, we 
freely confess, that no mere memorial acquire- 
ment of a body of rules would answer the pur- 
pose supposed, be the learner never so pedanticf 
You cannot pour wisdom from one mind into 
another as readily by one motion, as water 
from glass to glass ;:|: the mind requires disci- 
pline and practice to receive the boon. Pro- 
perly to conduct this discipline and practice is 
the aim of logical study : and when this is ac- 
complished, the office of the science is almost 
taken away. Let us amplify the remark. 

There are two principles employed in all 
thinkmg, the one, which originates our thoughts, 
we term the suggestive principle; the other. 



* Bbn Jonson. Pardon ! grave reader, for an instant. 
It 18 recorded of an Oxford undergraduate, no " con- 
cealer of his art," that his mother suspected a secret and 
corroding love-matter, because her boy was so often 
heard to murmur the beloved name of Barbara CeUtrent ! 

t This idiom should be written as here, and not " ever 
so.*' '* Never so pedantic" = " such as none like him 
can ever be found" ^ " most pedantic.*' 

t Plato, Symp. 175, D. 



VIU PREFACE. 

which tries them as they arise, the critical. 
Thoughts are continually present without the 
assent of * the will. One would think indeed, 
were it not for the ohvious similarity these spon- 
taneous visitors bear to the matter of former 
study, that they were in no sense our own, that 
an independent being, one over whom we had 
absolutely no control, was whispering within 
us. In the poetical temperament the rising 
thoughts are less like anything we remember, 
than in the workmg of common minds ; and 
hence poets have set up and maintained, per- 
haps in full sincerity, a claim to the privilege of 
having an unseen spiritual prompter, the source 
of their inspiration^ content to forego, like 
baser men, their independence, for the sake of 
claiming high company.^ In the madman (a 
near relation of the poet, say some) the sugges- 
tions are wholly unlike the reminiscence ; ^d 
men at once conclude he is '^ possessed." 

* Plato again and again mentions this claim of poets. 
See Ion, 533, D. Apol. Soc. 22, B. C. Legg. 719, C. 
Meno. 99, B. C. Phsdrus, 245, A. Stallbaum (Preface 
to Ion) does not think that Plato would deny to the 
poet a modifying power over the dictating principle. 
Bat the truth is, Plato is still allowing them all they 



PREFACE. IX 

Of these two principles, we maintain that the 
suggestive may be educated, but only through 
long vigilance and training of the critical.''^ By 
no single act of the will can a man change his 
grovelling thoughts for high, hid incorrect rea- 
sonings for accurate : but by a continued vigil- 
ance in repressing and cutting off the thoughts 
we disrelish, and approving those we affect, the 
suggestions of our imagination will grow more 
in accordance with our judgment. Now Logic 
is intended to educate the suggestive principle, 
so that it generate none but just and exact 
thoughts, by means of a constant supply of ex- 
ercise for the critical. Not single acts of logical 
criticism has she in view, but the formation of a 
logical habit through them ; which when she has 
accomplished, her work is done. Wherefore, 
though we impose strict rules and coin uncouth 
names for thoughts and arguments, and enjoin 
a daily practice of minute and laborious exer- 

claim, in order that the absence of spontaneous action 
(axjTovfayia) in all they do, may be seen and despised. 
Compare Ovid. (Fasti, vi. 5) Morgenstem (de Rep. p. 
296) Cicero (de Div. i. 37). Dictation and inspiration 
are distinguished, Coleridge's Table Talk, ii. SO. 
* SeweU's Christian Morals, p. S05. 

b 



X PREFACE. 

cises ; it is that at length such rules, names, and 
exercises may grow unnecessary, and that we 
may .cast them away; intellectual swimming- 
corks for a mind that now can float at ease; 
dumh-bells for an understanding that luxuriates 
in its strength. 

Under this aspect, the dulness of a treatise 
will be tolerated, the abstruseness combated 
with, the length forgiven,* because it is no 
longer regarded as a perpetual pocket com- 
panion, which the reasoner is never but with 
life to relinquish, but as a pre-exercitation, {Trpo- 
vaihvTUrf) the very difficulties of which are a 
source of strength, and which, when strength 
has come, we discard for ever. 

So far in favour of Treatises in general. For 
the present attempt it may be pleaded, that 
every Logic, whether written as Art or Science, 



* The present volume exceeds Coleridge's standard 
for a logical treatise. See Table Talk, i. 206. Kecker- 
mann would shiver with horror at the thought of circum- 
scribing to a " dozen pages/' a science '* ubi omnium ab 
initio mundi in humanis animis recte formatarum cogittk' 
tionum,judiciorum, meditationian, velut quidam indices ae 
tabula consignata sunt.** 

f A translation into English by Mr. Richardson, of 



PREFACE. XI 

is meant ultimately for an Organon, and that no 
one that I know, at present sold in Englandf^ 
has any pretension to the completeness de- 
manded for such a use. It might perhaps be 
farther maintained that the authors themselves 
cannot have put them to the test, or a very 
short trial would have proved their deficiencies. 
A whimsical confusion of the esoteric sense of 
the word Form and its vulgar use ; the omission 
of all or many of the Immediate Inferences^ 
without which thought can scarcely proceed a 
step ; the neglect of all the class of Identical 
Judgments, when the predicate and subject are 
coextensive exactly, — a class of most frequent 
occurrence in practice, especially in Theology ; 
all these defects are pretty nearly universal in 
our books of Logic. It is painful to speak 



Kant's Logic, is out of print. Born has translated the 
whole of Kant into Latin. Of the Critic of Pure Reason 
there is a Latin digest hy Rhiseldek, also translations 
into English (Pickering, 1838)* Italian, and French. 
Wolff's Pkihsophia Raiionalis should he purchased, if 
possible. " First Notions of Logic" by Professor Ds 
MoBGAN, is a cheap and lucid initiation to the science : 
any one wholly ignorant of Logic should read it, or some 
•imilar one, before proceeding with the present volume. 



Xll PREFACE. 

slightingly of such works, when one feels all 
deference and respect for the intellects that pro- 
duced them, who, needing no external aids for 
their own strength, somewhat forgot the neces- 
sities of the weaker. Still it is truth, and admits 
of a ready examination hy the diligent reader. 
Now the hope of supplying in part these defects 
has prompted the present Outline. Foreign 
sources have contributed much to it, and what- 
ever is now first brought forward has but the 
merit of novelty, none of ingenuity, since it lay 
on the surface, and did but need that some one 
should cast an eye that way. My obligations 
to others* should have been fully acknowledged 
in the body of the Work, but untoward circum- 
stances compelled me to carry it through the 



* Among them are the following. The Account of 
Representations (pp. S— 6) is from Leibnitz (Acta 
Enid. A. D. 1684, p. 537) : the limits of the science 
are drawn mostly from Kant's Logic : Part i. (with the 
exception of § 10, 11), is derived from the same place, 
enriched by some additions from Wolff and Wyttenbach. 
The doctrine of Quantity and Quality in Part ii. is 
Kant's ; not so that of Relation, and bis Modality is 
dispensed with. These are but a few of the borrow- 
ings ; in other cases, reference is made at the place, 



PREFACE. XUl 

press, when my books were at a distance, so that 
it was impossible to add references, which un- 
luckily had not been made before. And, with 
every outward facility, it is hard to assign familiar 
thoughts to their right owners : their origin is 
forgotten ; they seem native, not tenants. This 
Work, for example, has more debts to Kant and 
Wolff, than the most careful scrutiny could dis- 
entangle. To such obligations must be added 
the more numerous and subtle ones, where an 
opinion advanced has not been copied, but con- 
tradicted ; where one's own statement is wholly 
suggested by the antagonist opinion of others. 

The conception of Logic which has been 
carried through this essay, excluded of course 
such foreign matter as the Categories,-|- the 



and in others, the borrowed parts are universally used, 
so can be assigned to no particular inventor. 

t On the Categories, see Tkendelenbero, Excerpta ex 
Organo, p. 54; Harris, Phil, Arr, and Sanderson's 
Logic. Buhle's Aristotle, i. p. 453. Aristotle's 
arrangement is censured by J. Clericus, Logic, p. 2,3, 
(who gives a new one, p. 27), Dequincey (Tait's Maga- 
zine, vol. iii. p. 354), and Kant (Critik, Pickering's 
ed. p. 81). It is incomplete as a division, cumbrous as 
an engine, and metaphysical rather than logical. 



phenomena of languf^,* the correction of 
mental weaknesses and prejudices ; nor seed the 
reader regret this. New and uncouth names 
occur frequently in the succeeding pages; but 
this is unavoidahle where new things are to be 
designatedjf and however terrible a hard word 
may be at first sight, it both clings faster and is 
less fruitful of confiision, than an old word 
adapted to a new sense. It has been said by a 
scholar and poet, 1:hat every writer " should so 
apparel fair and good matter, that the studious 
of elegance be not defrauded ; redeem arts from 
their rough and brakey seats, where they lay 
hid and overgrown with thorns, to a fair open 
and flowery light ; where they may take the eye 
and be taken by the hand." J But without great 



CUUCEB. 

If men shall tellea proprrl)- a thing, 
77m u'DTii muil ccsin bt (o the werking." 
One cnuie of eirora in the uie of words is ihal the nun 
it HsaDciated uQL with the /annul but tlie arcidenlul pa 
at' [he notion. See Hooker, E. P. V. liiTiii. S. 
'* CioiBO, Acad. I. Tii. 
t Ben JoKMiii (Moxon'B ed. p. 712). 



PREFACE. XV 

diffuseness Logic admits of few graces of style, 
ornari res ipsa negat contenta doceri. The 
style, to have been softened, must have been 
diluted ; and the wish to avoid the evil of a great 
book, as it has already put away many valuable 
materials, so has often compressed what remain. 
Go now, small Book, and if in thy limited 
circuit it should be thy fate to meet both praise 
and blame, may the praise come of the good, 
and the censure of the ignorant, since both these 
are praise. Wheresoever thou shalt carry aid 
to a thinking man, may it tend to the advance- 
ment of the glory of God, and the furtherance 
of the cause of his Church ; that so the small- 
ness of thy fruit may be far outweighed by the 
greatness of its value. 



OUTLINE OF THE LAWS OF 
THOUGHT. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Like every other process, the exercise of the 
understanding is conducted according to certain 
rules, known or unknown. We term the exer- 
cise of the understanding, Thought : the laws 
of Thought are the laws hy which the under- 
standing must act. A complete code of \he 
laws which regulate Thought, is termed the 
science of Logic ; and the present Introduction 
is devoted to the task of setting bounds to that 
science : a labour by no means superfluous in a 
Work of this kind, since in their conception of 
the exact limits of Logic, no two independent 
writers that I can at present call to mind, agree. 
The intellect gains a knowledge of things 
by means of certain representations which they 
generate within it, when subjected to observa- 
tion. Such representations are of various kinds, 

B 



2 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

differing in extent, in clearness, in value : some 
are of individuals only, and these are termed 
Intuitions : some are gained from Intuitions by 
an internal process hereafter to be explained, — 
these we call Conceptions: again, some are 
conscious representations, some not so. A 
systematic division of representations in general 
is a necessary preliminary to our outline of 
Logic. 

They are divided, then, first into Clear and 
Obscure : " If one is conscious to one's self of the 
representation, it is clear ; if not, it is obscure." 
Consciousness being an imperative condition of 
every act of thought, and Logic being con- 
versant only with acts of thought, obscure re- 
presentations, as wanting this condition, do not 
properly belong to the science, nor indeed (as 
this enters into every other) to any science 
whatever. To this class belong all sounds or 
sights which occur to a man in that state of 
reverie called absence of mind; also many, if 
not all, images in dreams, the conditions of 
reverie and dreaming being closely analogous^ 
Besides these, all representations which, forming 
parts of a larger one, are not consciously real- 
ized, owing to the mind*s preoccupation with 
the larger, as a house or tree forming part of a 



INTRODUCTION. 3 

landscape. We know that representation does 
take place without consciousness, because when 
the attention is awakened to the representation, 
we remember that prior to the awakening there 
was a certain affection pf the organ of sense, 
which we are now enabled to identify as a re- 
presentation. " A soldier in the heat of battle 
may receive a severe wound without immediately 
feeling pain, his mind being completely preoc- 
cupied; and a man absorbed in thought will 
stare an acquaintance in the face without recog- 
nizing him In short, an impression is no 

more than the print which a seal can make on 
the finger of a wax-doll, until by the mind it is 
made into sensation.'' The fact established by 
these examples is that from some change in our 
state the same representation may become from 
an unnoted, a noted, from a fruitless, a fruitful, 
representation, without any change in the object 
represented, and the cause of the internal change 
is the awakening of consciousness. Conscious- 
ness is the state of knowing that a representation 
is presented to the intellect ; or, as it has been 
clearly enunciated by Mr. Richardson, the 
translator of Kant's Logic, it is *^ a representa- 
tion that another representation is within us.** 
All conscious representations are termed cog- 



4 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

nitions. Clear representations, or cognitions, 
are subdivided into confused and distinct: where 
all the marks of the representation are not 
distinguished, it is conAised ; and distinct where 
we can distinguish and enumerate the marks. 
For example, the colour blue is a clear notion, 
but we cannot tell by what marks we identify 
the colour, and our cognition of it is confused : 
house is a distinct notion when we can declare 
to ourselves its various marks, namely, that it is 
an enclosed and covered building, fit for habita- 
tion. And it is to be remarked that this enu- 
meration of notes or marks is in truth nothing 
else than a reference of the clear cognition to 
as many separate forms or genera as there are 
notes or marks to enumerate. 

We subdivide the class of distinct cognitions 
twice, according to two principles of division : 
and first, into adequate and inadequate cogni- 
tions. Adequate cognitions are those in which 
besides enumerating the notes, we can explain 
them ; that is, can enumerate the marks of the 
marks of the distinct cognition, and again, the 
marks of those marks. As this kind of analysis 
is almost interminable, we call a cognition ade- 
quate, not when there can be no further enu- 
meration of subordinate marks, but when the 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

marks of marks are enumerated sufficiently for 
OUT present purpose^ in whatever subject we 
are employed. Our cognition of happiness, for 
instance, (according to Aristotle) is adequate-, 
when we not only know that it is " an energy of 
the soul according to the best virtue in a perfect 
life ;" but can explain what is an energy of the 
soul, what the best virtue, and what a perfect 
life. So we have an adequate notion of what 
Hobbes means by Right, when we not only 
know that it is '^ unresistible might in a state of 
nature," but can explain '^ unresistible might" 
and " state of nature." The same two cogni- 
tions are inadequate, when we have the respec- 
tive definitions, but cannot explain them. Next, 
distinct cognitions are divided into symbolical 
and intuitive ; an important division, and more 
so in this Treatise than in former ones, because 
it enters into the doctrine of what are called 
identical judgments, here more largely treated 
than elsewhere. In a cognition we are able to 
substitute for an actual and present conscious- 
ness of all its marks, a symbol capable of re- 
calling, and serving as an equivalent to, all the 
marks of the distinct cognition: and such a 
substitute we term a symbolical cognition. The 
intuitive cognition is one where a consciousness 



6 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

of all the marks is not only possible, as in the 
symbolical, but actual, and simultaneous with 
the cognizing act. Simple mathematical notions 
may be of this kind, and definitions in general. 

TABLE OF COGNITIONS. 

/ Confased. 

\ r Adequate 

liepresen-Y i W Inadequate 

tations )^i ^„,^ I Distinct/ 

(Obscure. i^Syxnbolical 

( Intuitive. 

Nate^ In using this table as an exercise, write down 
the description of each division from memory, with ex- 
amples of it. 

Such are the materials out of which we con- 
struct our thoughts. But Logic does not create 
the materials of thinking, nor concern herself 
with their nature ; it is the process of thinking 
of which she expounds the laws. Thus, to recur 
to instances already cited, it is not the logician, 
> but the moralist, who first renders our confused 
notion of Happiness a distinct one, by declaring 
that it is an energy of the soul according to the 
best virtue, in a perfect life; and who after- 
wards attempts to elevate our distinct notion 
into an adequate^ by means of an explanation 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

of each of its notes or marks, as enumerated in 
the definition. In doing all this he is a moralist ; 
bat in watching his own procedure whilst doing 
it, in regulating every deduction and companson 
according to the necessary laws of thought, in 
viewing each step of the process not merely by 
the light of a previous knowledge, not merely by 
what he knows of the truth of his conclusicms, 
but by rules independent of all reference to the 
object, to determine whether they are conclu- 
sions — real consequences evolved from what 
went before— or merely judgments jumbled into 
contact with prior ones — in doing this, or in so 
far as he does it, he is a logician. We study 
Logic separately, but it is not a thing apart: 
wherever there is a science there is Ix^c ; the 
science of Morals is but the union of Logic 
with a certain subject-matter, viz. the happiness 
of man. Nay, common conversation is but a 
similar union ; one cannot say his punch is too 
sweet, or his horse a good one, without uncon- 
sciously putting in force a logical rule* 

Let us, therefore, examine more accurately 
what is the office of Logic We define Logic 
to be a science of the necessary laws of thinking, 
or in more obscure phrase, a science of theybrm 
of thought. On the interpretation of this single 



8 LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

syllable, form^ depends our conceptio& of the 
functions of the science ; it will be worth while, 
therefore, to explain it at some length. But 
before dismissmg the division of cognitions, and 
in connexion with the office of Logic, it may be 
here observed, that if any one word can describe 
this office, it is the word '^ comparison :" thought 
is comparison of cognitions. In two out of 
the three acts of thought, this is plain enough : 
judging is a mere expression of the relation of 
two cognitions when viewed with respect to each 
other, and syllogizing, as being conducted by 
judgments, involves acts of comparison. If less 
evident, it is no less true in the third function of 
thought, that of conception namely. By con- 
ception is meant the faculty of evolving from 
given cognitions, other wider cognitions, by 
means of the marks of those given. Thus by 
observing the marks possessed by every par- 
ticular house, we get the wider cognition, house 
in general. And here is plainly a comparison. 
Now viewing cognitions in this light, we get a 
new division of them, purely logical, which the 
divisions already given are not, — namely, into 
comparanda and comparata, into Intuitions 
and Conceptions. Intuitions are singular repre- 
sentations, or representaHons of individuals: 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

Conceptions are universal representations, re« 
presentations of classes, gained by comparing 
intuitions and cognizing the marks they have in 
common. Logic having to do with thought, 
and thought being comparison, intuitions are 
only considered in Logic by virtue of their 
comparability, of their serving as a ground for 
conceptions. Some notions, however, are both 
intuition and conception : they are presented in 
speech by the name of the conception with the 
particle of singularity before it, as a horsey a 
man* 

And now what is the " form of thought ?" 
It is the fashion with certain modem logicians 
to insist on this phrase, and yet I have met with 
no treatise on the science, in which the doctrine 
of forms is clearly explicated : whilst the case 
of a direct and demonstrable misapprehension 
of the philosophic use of the word form^ is not 
singular. A learned writer in the Edinburgh 
Review (No. 115, p. 194,) who is right un- 
sparing in his remarks on the Oxford logic, 
trips at this stumbling-block himself, and in 
using the words " formal laws," — a tautologous 
expression, ior form is law, and law^formy as 
will presently appear — gives good reason of 
suspicion that he has been content with a phrase, 

c 



10 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

without ascertaining its meaning.* Even Kant 
himself, in his Ix^c, is not clear on this point : 
as when he defines (p. 43, Richardson's trans- 
lation,) form as " the way in which we know 
the ohject ;" a definition borrowed from that of 
Wolff (p. 145), who tells us that ^rma is mo" 
dus cognoscendi. Such a definition may be 
explained to mean pretty nearly any thing ; and 



* The writer in question can well afford to undergo 
a little further censure. " Other sciences/' says he, 
" propose for their object (among the other faculties) 
the operation of reasoning, but this considered in its real 
nature : logic, on the contrary, has the same for its 
object, but only in its formal capacity ; in fact it has in 
propriety of speecht nothing to do with the process or opera- 
tion, but is conversant only with its laws,** Now formal 
ia no way opposed to real, but to material ; and it is 
absurd to say in the same breath, that Logic has no con- 
cern with the process of reasoning, and again, that it is 
concerned to lay down the laws of that process. In 
propriety of speech Logic has nothing to do with a par. 
licular act of tho.ught, but with the laws of the process 
in general. Again, '* the intellectual operations were 
not, in their own nature, proposed to the logician — that 
belonged to the psychologist — but only in so far as they 
were dirigible, or the subject of laws.'' On the con- 
trary, it is precisely in their own nature (for form, as 
Bacon says, ipsissima res est) that Logic is concerned 
with these operations, whilst psychology takes cogni- 
zance of their manifeetationfl undier Tarious subjectiye 



INTRODUCTION* 11 

in this instance, Kant makes it to include, not 
what WolflF did, but precisely that which, in 
other terms, Wolff assigned to mattery its oppo- 
site I It must, however, be observed, that the 
^^ Logic" which bears Kant's name, was not 
published with his sanction, nor from his own 
MS. 

Let us first endeavour to frame a consistent 
explanation of the wordybrm, and then to show 



conditions. The word dirigible is nnfortanate ; for 
liOgic is not primarUy employed in teaching io think, but 
in showing how all must think. Again, " A first notion 
is the conception of a thing as it exists of itself, and in- 
dependently of any operation of thought ;' ha John, Man, 
Animal," &c. Here two out of the three examples 
given are conceptions, and, as such, presuppose an opera* 
tion of thought, namely, conception. If space would 
allow, one might object to such expressions as " generic 
categories," one might tell the writer that in rejecting 
Modality, he begs the whole question, by saying, " Ne- 
cessity, Possibility, &c. are circumstances which do not 
affect the logical copula, or the logical inference.*' This 
unsupported assertion, if it be simply an assertion, or 
unwarranted argument, if it be used as an argument, is 
just what the Kantian would unhesitatingly contradict. 
See Trendelenburg, Ezcerpta ez Organo, p. 46. And 
Kant's Critick, ed. Pickering, p. 75. " The Modality 

of Judgments only regards the Talue of the copula." 

The Edinburgh Reviewer's errors spring all from one 
and the same source, ignorance of the doctrine of forms. 



12 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

on what foundation, amidst a chaos of materials 
stored up in the writings of philosophers and 
those who ape them, the explanation rests. 
The word is used in three distinct but cognate 
senses: itis,.!, a kw or an idea; the latter 
bemg the former transferred to a thinking sub- 
ject, for " that which contemplated objectively 
(that is, as existing externally to the mind,) 
we call a law ; the same contemplated subject' 
ively (that is, as existing in a subject or mind,) 
is an Idea. Hence, Plato often names Ideas, 
Laws ; and Lord Bacon, the British Plato, de- 
scribes the laws of the material universe as 
ideas in nature. Quod in natura naturata 
J^ex, in naturd naturante Idea dicitur,*** 
Flame, heated metal, boiling water, the rays 
of the sun, all rank under one common form 
(that is, law,) of heat namely: by which is 
meani that they, all and each, contain whatever 
is essential to heat. Lead, gold, vermilion, 
stones, and (in a greater or less degree) all 
sensible substances whatever, possess gravita- 
tion; gravitation then is their form — the law 
under which they all come, the condition with 
which they all comply. By virtue of this form 



S. T. Coleridge. 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

they are — not bodies indeed — ^but gravitating' • 
bodies: in other words, if that form or law 
were removed, their existence as to that nature 
or property would terminate. Now how does 
every one of the given instances come under 
the forms, Heat and Gravitation? By some- 
thing contained within itself — ^by its embodying 
the law or definition : that which comes under 
the form of weighty must possess weight, must 
have within it all that the definition of weight 
demands. And hence we may trace the second 
meaning of the word Form ; it is that part of 
any object through which it ranks under a 
given law* Every fresh representation (for we 
are considering the question with reference to 
the thinking subject,) to which the mind is di- 
rected, is referred to different laws, called forms, 
by virtue of various qualities within itself, each 
of which is termed metonymically, and with 
respect to the law under which it is the means 
of ranking the representation, its form. For 
example, let a man examine a stone, and the 
intellect will forthwith, and with the greatest 
rapidity, proceed to class the representation of 
that stone afforded by the senses, under the 
various forms of colour, figure, size, weight, 
temperature^ &c: and with reference to the 



14 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

• form, say, of weight, the weight of ttie object 
would be its form (sensu secundo), with refer- 
ence to the form (sensu prime) of colour, the 
colour of the object would be its form. So that 
that which in the object, when viewed with re- 
lation to one law or form, is its form (sensu 
secundo), is not its form when the object is 
viewed in relation to another. Now the matter 
of any representation is that part of it which 
with reference to any given law, is non-formal. 
Thus in our stone, the weight, size, tempera- 
ture are part of the matter, as far as the law of 
colour is concerned, for they all are non-formal, 
and the colour of the stone alone is formal. 
The matter is that which when added to the 
form (sensu secimdo) gives it extraneity — out- 
ness — and makes it exist as a fact ; for without 
somewhat more than the mere form, there can 
be no instance of a law, an instance being the 
presence of the law in an object capable of con- 
taining it, and thus presupposing two things, 
the law and the capable object, whereof we 
term one the form (sensu secundo) and the 
other the matter. For example, triangle may 
be conceived by means of its own^rm or defi- 
nition alone, but it must have a material part, 
it must become a triangle of lines, or stone, or 



INTRODUCTIOir. 15 

wood, as the sole condition of its external ex- 
istence. Where no separation, according to 
some law or other, of a representation into its 
formal and material part takes place, there must 
be total ignorance of^the object represented: 
the , representation must remain obscure, in 
which case it can never amount to a cognition. 
The absolutely material part of a cognition will 
be that which remains unknown after it has 
been brought under as many forms as the ope- 
rating intellect can reduce it to ; that which is 
non-formal throughout, and never becomes the 
condition of the cognition's ranking under a law. 
Forms have a triple mode of existence: they 
exist in the Divine Mind as ideas, and are the 
archetypes of creation ; they exist as embodied 
in instances, in which mode they are laws; 
they exist lastly in the human mind, as ideas : 
thus they precede creation, they are in it, they 
succeed it. 

There is yet a third sense of the word^rm / 
as it denotes the law, so By an easy transition 
it denotes the genus or class of instances, 
brought together and cemented by the law. 
Thus to speak of the ^rm of " animal,'* may 
mean first the law or definition of animal in 
generali independent of all implication to in- 



16 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

stances; second, the part of any given animal 
by which it comes under the law, and is what it 
is ; third and last, the class of animals in gene- 
ral, formed by the law- 
It will be needless to tell the student of Rato 
that this doctrine is not new, though he may 
look in vain in his favourite author for a con- 
sistent exposition of it as applied to the subject 
of Logic. He will call to mind that the word 
(idog is commonly and appropriately rendered 
by the Latin ^r»ia, which latter has been na- 
turalized by philosophers in the word under 
discussion; and that Plato assigns to h^oi; all 
the three given senses, as Bacon to forma two 
at least of them. For the use of those who are 
unaware of this, a few illustrative quotations 
from different authors may be admitted in proof 
of what has been advanced. The number of 
those from Plato may easily be doubled or 
tripled by any one, who will take pains to ex- 
amine his works by the help of the indices of 
Ast and Mitchell. 

^' Remember then, that I directed you not to 
teach me some one or two holy acts out of 
many, but that very form by which all holy 

acts are holy Teach me then, the nature 

of that ybrm itself, that looking to it and using 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

it for our example, I may declare any of the 
actions of yourself or any other, which partakes 
of this nature, to be holy, and any not so par- 
taking, not to be holy." Plat. Euthyp. 6, D. E. 
'^ And of the justy the unjust^ the good, the 
evil, of all the forms in short, the same holds' 
true, that each is one and simple, but because 
every where appearing by incorporation with 
actions, or matter, or other things, that each 
appears many.'' Id. Resp. 476, A. ^' One 
should understand the truth according to what 
we call form, which proceeds from many acts 
of sense to that which by thought we include 
in one." Id. Phaedr. 249, B. " For we have 
been accustomed to lay down one form for 
many particular cases, on which we impose the 
same name." Id. Resp. 596, A. '^ And ac- 
cording to the same yorm of justice, a just man 
wiU nowise differ from a just city, but will be 
like it." Id. Resp. 435, B. See also Symp. 
205, D.; Resp. 581, E.; Polit. 258, E. Still 
more explicitly, yet in the strictest accordance 
with the citations from Plato, Lord Bacon says, 
*^ The form of any nature is such that where it 
has place the given nature is also, as an in- 
fallible consequence. Therefore it is ever pre- 
sent where the given nature is so, it avows that 

D 



18 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

nature 8 presence, and is in it all. The same 
form is such that upon its removal the given 
nature infallibly vanishes. Therefore it is in- 
variably absent where that nature is so, it in 
those cases disavows that nature's presence, 
and is in it alone." (Nov. Org. II. 4.) " The 
examination of forms proceeds thus. Concern- 
ing the given nature we must first bring together 
before the intellect all the known instances, 
agreeing in that nature, though manifesting it 
in vehicles [i. e. in matter] the most dissi- 
milar." (Nov. Org. II. 11). Again, « When 
we speak of forms, we understand nothing else 
than those laws and manifestations of the pure 
act, which order and constitute any simple na- 
ture, as heat, light, weight, in any sort of 
matter and subject that can contain them. 
Therefore, the form of heat or form of light, 
and the law of heat or light is the same thing, 
nor do we ever abstract our thoughts from 
actualities and active manifestations." (Nov. 
Org. II. 17.) Again, " For since the form of 
a thing is the very thing itself (ipsissima res)y 
and the thing no otherwise differs from the 
form, than as the apparent differs from the ex- 
istent, the outward from the inward, or that 
which is considered in relation to man from 



INTRODUCTION. 19 

that whicli is considered in relation to the uni- 
verse [or universal mind], it follows clearly 
that no nature can be taken for the true form, 
unless it ever decreases when the nature itself 
decreases, and in like manner is always in- 
creased, when the nature is increased." — Nov. 
Or^. II. 13. Though Kant is not so copious 
on the doctrine of forms, it is clear that he had 
drank from the same sources as we, since he 
uses as interchangeable the phrases, '* form of 
thinking," " form of thought," " necessary laws 
of thinking," " necessary rules of thinking," 
'^ laws of the understanding ;" thus plainly 
evincing that, after Plato and Bacon, he re- 
garded form in the sense of law. This has 
not been overlooked by his interpreters. " Every 
power," writes Dequincey, " exerts its agency 
under some laws — that is, in the language of 
Kant, by certain foirms" Many casual re- 
marks might be cited from writers, old and 
modem, in proof that they understood this doc- 
trine with more or less distinctness. For in- 
stance, Clauberg says, that things which are 
universal differ from universality itself, as mat- 
ter from form; and Le Clerc defines ybrm to 
be that which constitutes a thing what it is (per 
quamy ut aiunt, res est id quod est). From 



20 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

this long chain of citations it will he seen that 
the sense assigned to form in the present work 
is at least amply warranted hy usage : for the 
more important qualities of utility and self-con- 
sistency, the reader must patiently question the 
whole hook, and examine how far its teaching 
is fruitful and availahle in practice. It remains 
to apply the doctrine oi forms to Logic. 

When it is asserted that Logic concerns 
itself only with thoughts as to their form, it is 
meant that the science neglects the distinctive 
parts of this thought and that, regarding only 
the part which they have in common, and hy 
which they come under the form or definition 
of thought. As in forms in general, the form 
of thought never occurs as a fact, hut is only 
manifest when alloyed with something else, 
which we call its matter : that is, there is never 
a thought, hut it is a thought about something. 
Mathematical truths are thoughts ahout quan- 
tity : to Logic, their heing thoughts is the for- 
mal, their heing ahout quantity the material 
part. The proposition that all radii of a circle 
are equal, if examined as to our mode of con- 
ceiving it, will be found referable to two forms, 
thought and quantity : it is a thought — it is a 
thought-about-quantities. Logic is concerned 



INTRODUCTION. 21 

with it only in the former character, Mathe- 
matics only in the latter. And therefore its 
respecting quantities is the material or extra- 
fofmal part to Logic. But its being a thought 
is not in turn the material part to Mathematics, 
for we must remember that every science (and 
therefore Mathematics) contains Logic, — is 
Logic applied, and that which is the form to 
Logic, is also part of the form to every other 
science; since into every system of thinking 
Logic enters. 

But the province of Logic is still farther re- 
stricted. Not only are we bound to neglect the 
distinctions of cognitions as to the object, as we 
have already seen, but it is also incumbent 
upon us to examine the distinctions of various 
thinkers ; for if there be any process which one 
thinking subject admits as legitimate, yet which 
another from conviction rejects, such process 
cannot belong to the form of thought, nor does 
the form accompany it, otherwise it would be 
legitimate thought not merely to one subject, 
but to all who were cognizant of it. Such a 
process, if there be one, cannot belong to uni- 
versal thought ; it is but part of the individual 
constitution. To determine thought, we must 
know what the understanding is, and we gain 



22 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

• 

for ourselves the form of the Understanding by 
the same procedure as other forms, that of com- 
paring many examples and neglecting their dis- . 
tinctive part. Our cognitions (to adopt a meta- 
phor of Bacon's) are as images glassed in vari- 
ous mirrors of unequal faces, which take a cer- 
tain distortion from the surface that reflects 
them : the comparison of many mirrors, not de- 
fective in the same parts, and all more or less 
true, suffices to certify us what the image would 
be, thrown back from the surface of a faultless 
plane. Or we may compare the understanding 
to a lamp. The representation is the object to 
be illumined, the understanding itself is the 
light, and the prejudices or peculiarities of the 
man stand for the coloured glass of the lantern. 
Surely he who would describe and explain the 
nature of the light, would feel it incumbent on 
him to do so apart from the obstacles that inter- 
cept and adulterate its rays. One mind would 
jump to a conclusion of the guilt of an accused 
person, from circumstantial evidence which a 
more impartial eye would at once pronounce de- 
fective : surely in this case the consequence or 
mode of concluding cannot belong to that form 
which universally accompanies thought, and is 
its very self, otherwise the second thinker would 



INTRODUCTION. 23 

not on examination have been able to reject it : 
for every logical procedure carries cogency with- 
in it, the moment the terms conveying it afe 
clearly understood. That a science regulating 
the processes and symptoms of thought which 
are not universal, but limited to certain minds, 
teaching how they should be treated so as to 
move in subordination to the higher modes, 
would be most useful, none will deny : only ac- 
cording to our view it is not Logic. Let it be 
called by an old name, Metalogic, or what its 
constructors will. 

By some logicians, second Intentions are said 
to be the subject-matter of Logic. The second 
intention of any representation is the mode in 
which it is regarded by Logic, and as we have 
shewn that Logic only regards its formal part, 
second intention is but another way of expressing 
formal part. The first intention is the repre- 
sentation as it naturally occurs to the mind, 
prior to any attempt to refer it to the form of 
thought. Thus "the straight lines A and B 
are equal," "Caesar was ambitious,*' "Man is 
bom to sorrow," as to their first intention, con- 
templated in the concrete and without separation 
of parts or classification, are cognitions that 
differ widely from each other ; as to their second 



24 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

intention, or mode in which the intellect knows 
them to he thoughts, they are all one, they are 
all judgments^ because in them all, two repre-* 
sentations are conjoined in one consciousness^ 
Second intentions are nothing else than cogni- 
tions viewed as to the form of thought, and di^ 
Tested of their matter. As the acts of the mind 
in thinking are three, so are the classes of 
second intentions : the first consists of Concep* 
tions, with their various divisions and determi* 
nations of Genus, Species, Predicable, &c. ; the 
second, of Judgments, divided into affirmative 
and negative, universal and particular, substitu- 
tive and attributive; and the third, of Syllo* 
gisms, divided into mediate and immediate. 

In seeking the formal part of a given thought, 
we are assisted by three view-points, from each 
of which it must be examined, and an examina* 
tion conducted by which, is exhaustive. Or 
rather, the formal part is divisible by analysis 
into three ingredients, and no more. These are 
Quantity, Quality, and Relation, the last being 
found only in compound cognitions, i. e. in 
Judgments and Syllogisms. By the first, our 
cognition is either whole or partial; by the 
second, either affirmative or negative; by the 
third, either attributive or substitutive. To the 



INTRQDUOIMON. 2a 

three points of form a fourth has been added, 
under the name of Modality, whereby we deter-« 
mine the degree or measure of our holding the 
cognition true. Aristotle and Kant make three 
degrees, the problematical, where the cognition 
is held possible, the assertorial, where actual, 
and the apodictical, where necessary. This Mo- 
dality I remit to Metaphysics, and shall assign 
my reasons in the proper place. A judgment is 
the most perfect act of thought, for it contains 
all the three pdints of form ; and the more ex- 
tended acts, namely, immediate and mediate in- 
ference, only contain these points in so far as 
they contain judgments, not in virtue of their 
own nature : besides, these acts^ taJke place for 
the sake of obtaining a judgment, and we call 
the end higher and more perfect than its hand- 
maids, the means. I may notice that Kant calls 
the three points of form (the four, in his system^ 
by the name of Categories ; this title, already 
introduced by Aristotle to denote something 
wholly different,^ is singularly infelicitous, 
neither prior usage nor etymology affording the 
slightest sanction for its new sense. Arbitrary 



* Bohie's Aristotle, vol. i. p. 432. 

£ 



26 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

change in the meanmg of received terms* is 
one of the grand fountains of philosophical con- 
fusion and controversy : yet, unlessoned hy time, 
modem writers seem to surpass ancient in their 
addiction to it. 

Logic, then, is of cognitions as to the form, 
not as to the matter; of second intentions or 
notions, not of first. It remains to be shown 
how it treats these ; whether it looks to the ac** 
quirement of a full knowledge of them and no 
^Burther ; — and this will constitute it a science ;->*^ 
or whether it meditates the application of that 
knowledge to an ulterior end, adding something 
extraneous, if necessary, to facilitate that appli- 
cation, — in which case it will deserve the name of 
an art. Let us first attempt to obtain a more 
definite idea of science and art. 

A Science, then, is a code of principles and 
deductions on some object-matter: an Art is a 
code of precepts with practical skill, for the com- 
pletion of some work. Art and science are, each 
of them, relative terms ; that is to say, an art 
must be an art of doing something, a sdence 



* Such as has taken place in the words a priori, ab- 
strcxt and concrete, chject and subject, &c. Consult Tren- 
delenburg (Ezcerpta ex Organo) on these words. 



INTRODUCTION. 27 

must be a science of something : in the one case, 
the correlative being the result (epyoy) or thing 
to be effected, and the correlative in the other, 
being the object-matter, or thing to be known. 
And the art will admit to its limits every thing 
that aids in the performance of the work, for 
that performance is the sole principle of selec- 
tion : the science, on the other hand, having the 
object-matter for its touchstone, admits nothing 
save what relates directly to it. Now it may 
happen in some one case that an art and a science 
coincide precisely ; still they are not in idea the 
same, and it would perhaps be a difficult matter 
to find the instance of their coincidence. Logic 
cannot be regarded as such an instance ; for a 
very slight acquaintance with the works of those 
who have treated it, will satisfy us that where it 
has been constructed as an art, with a view to 
the genesis and analysis of thoughts, much has 
been necessarily admitted, which could not con- 
sistently be retained when it was to be con- 
structed as a science, however useful for 'its em- 
ployment to that particular effect. This fact 
must, however, be ascertained from those who 
we are sure have first realized to themselves a 
conception of the discipline, whether art or 
science, which they profess to teach; there 



28 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

being many writers who, neglecting tliis, have 
united the definition of the science with the 
details of the art, or committed mistakes equally 
glaring, from possessing a merely historical 
knowledge of what they should have known 
philosophically. Aristotle may be cited as a 
constructor of the art, Kant of the science, of 
Logic. Wolff, in his invaluable Philosophia 
HationaliSf though he calls it a science, and 
treats it as an art, proves by his very definition 
that what we think inseparable from an art, he 
considers to belong to science : so that, on his 
own explanation of the technical terms, he is 
quite consistent, and adopts the Aristotelian, 
rather than anticipates the Kantian view. But 
the question which every future propounder of 
Logic should ask himself is this : — Do I regard 
the object-matter as the determining notion, by 
which every thing is to be tried before I admit 
it within the logical pale, — or do I, more earnest 
for practical good, and less tender of disfiguring 
the uniform structure by accessions from Gram- 
mar or from Psychology, neglect the object- 
matter, and look straight forward to the work 
which a knowledge of that object-matter may be 
applied to achieve? The answer will depend 
much on the taste of the self-interrogator : there 



INTRODUCTION. 29 

is no tribunal of appeal to bring the question to 
an issue, making one view right and the other 
wrong. The scientific view has, however, the 
advantages of clearness, of completeness, of 
brevity ; and, putting each man in possession of 
the main knowledge required, it will confer on 
every one the power of constructing an art out 
of the science, which will be more useful than 
one externally acquired, as formed with especial 
reference to his own necessities and failings, 
and as more fully appropriated and dyed into 
the grain (iyK6j(pti»<rfi£yov) of his mind : for no 
Art of Logic can be so complete as not to re- 
quire considerable additions and modifications 
on the part of the student, so that each, in fact, 
is in some sense the author of his own art.* 



* This view of Art and Science is not confidently 
offered, for though it will be foand to ground itself on 
that of Aristotle, and not to be discrepant from common 
usage, still it will not reconcile all the opinions on the 
matter, as being contradictory. Any one disposed to 
* pursue the subject may consult, among others, Aristotle, 
An. Post. ii. 19, and £th. Nic. B. yi. The word iTricr- 
rrifiri bears two senses in Aristotle, 1. A habit of the 
mind, (with which may be compared Wolff's definition, 
" habitus asserta demonstrandi/') and 2. A system framed 
by that habit. That r^xvi} and iiriffTrifiri are used in- 
terchangeably by Plato, see his Theaet. 146, C. Also 



30 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

Such are the notions that when hrought to- 
gether, make up the definition of Logic : which 
is a science of thought as to the form, or in 
other words, a science of the laws of thought* 
It remains to add an explanation of certaiQ 
other matters, not integrant parts of this defini- 
tion, but still following from it. First then. 
Logic has been called an a priori science: 
what is the meaning of the words a priori 9 
An a priori cognition is usually explained to 
be one independent of experience; and an a 
posteriori, one which grounds on, and proceeds 
from experience. Now a thing may be either 
independent of all experience whatever, or of 
some particular experience. Of the latter use, 
take the following example. K a man cast a 
stone from his hand, he knows, a priori, that 
it will come to the ground; but he by no means 
has the knowledge independently of all expe- 
rience, since the law of gravitation which in- 



may be consulted, Schleusner. Lex. Nov. Test, words 
ivitrrfififav and rlxvi;. Trendelenburg's Excerpta, pp. 
110, 111; Edinburgh Review, No. 115; Arist. Anal. 
Post. i. 2 ; Whately's Logic, pp. 1 and 61 ; Kirwan's 
Logic, p. 1 ; Kant*s Logic, Introd. ch. ii. (bis division 
into analytic and dialectic, resembles that in the text 
into art and science). Fort-Royal Logic, p. 17. 



INTRODUCTION. 31 

eludes the fact in question, has heen itself 
educed from a prior experience of his own. So 
that in this case, his a priori knowledge 
amounts to nothing more than the possession of 
a prior experience, not of an innate idea, and 
only implies independence of the particular fact 
tinder observation. Now when it is asserted 
that Logic is an a priori science, all that we 
affirm is, that we can predict from our prior 
experience the cogency and accuracy of a de- 
duction drawn in a logical way, without any 
the least inquiry as to the nature of the par- 
ticular example itself. But without all expe- 
rience, and from our internal sources only, we 
could not so determine. In our former phrase, 
our affirming the correctness of any appUcation 
of logical rules is not independent of all, but of 
this, experience. 

No doubt some reader has already antici- 
pated a question which may be discussed here : 
Is Logic solely concerned with thought, and 
not with that medium through which we obtain 
an insight into the thoughts of others, that 
which is the exponent of our own, and without 
using which, we not only cannot express our 
thoughts, but actually do not think — I mean, 
with language ? According to many logicians. 



32 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

language, and not thought, is the adequate 
object matter of logic, which they describe aa 
" an art of properly using words in argument :" 
whilst others expressly insist, that thought or 
internal discourse (sermo intemus), not speech 
or external discourse (sermo extemus)^ is the 
object of logical inquiry. These conflicting 
assertions suggest a difficulty which may be put 
in the following form : If thought, not speech, 
is to be examined by logic, it would seem that 
thinking and language are independent of each 
other, and may be separately treated: yet we 
know from daily experience — ^that not only are 
the connectives of our cognitions, as they pass 
through the mind, mere words, which though 
unspoken, the mind as it were whispers to 
itself; but even many of our cognitions them- 
selves are but symbolical, and their symbols 
nothing else than the substantives which in 
uttered speech we assign them as names. Thus 
the cognition Happiness occurs frequently to 
the moralist, and doubtless when it occurs, he 
understands by it whatsoever marks are in its 
definition ; at the same time, he does not with 
every fresh recurrence realize those marks to 
himself, but substitutes the symbol for the de- 
finition, as a natural abbreviation of the think- 



INTRODUCTION. 33 

ing process. We answer, that it may be true 
that mternal discourse is conducted by means 
of the same symbols as would be used in 
making it external, namely grammatical phrases, 
and yet not true that there is a necessity fox 
the employment of these signs and no others. 
The avoidance of a double process of ratiocina-< 
tion for every train of thought, which, having 
ourselves gone through, we might wish to im* 
part to others, an immediate consequence of 
having two kinds of symbols, one for thought, 
another for speech, would of itself be a suffix 
cient reason for thinking by words ; but a rea- 
son grounded in expedience only, not in any 
necessary connexion between speech and rea* 
soning. If my reader should be unable to 
imagine the possibility of any symbols of thought 
except spoken words, let him reflect for a mo- 
ment on the means which we possess for con- 
versing at a distance, when our spoken lan- 
guage is useless, in our naval signals and the 
telegraph. The use of the latter instrument 
was termed by its inventor Dr. Hooke, " a me- 
thod of discoursing at a distance, not by sound 
but by sight;" and why should it be impos- 
sible to discourse to ourselves " not by sound 
but by sight ?** For example, can we not con^ 

F 



34 LAWS OP THOUGHT. 

ceive the possibility (of course I mean only the 
possibility) of our using as a symbol for the 
united marks which make up our conception of 
happiness, some such remembered image as 
" red flag over blue," or the like, and of our 
growing at last so expert, that to see " red flag 
over blue" would immediately remind us of 
those marks? This will excite a smile; but 
had we been bom deaf and dumb, and placed in 
circumstances to exercise our reflective powers, 
we should beyond all doubt have been forced 
on some analogous invention. And if I am 
reminded that telegraphic signs are not so pro- 
perly signs, as they are signs of signs, I answer 
that the intervention of words between a com- 
bination of flags and the cognition they denote, 
is plainly a mere expedient, founded on the 
universal acceptation of spoken language. Any 
fair account of the successful attempts to hold 
communication with the deaf and dumb — a sub*> 
ject deeply interesting — ^will substantiate all 
that is here advanced. 

Now, though thought employs spoken words, 
yet it having been shown, that after the remo- 
val of spoken words, thought could still pro- 
ceed, it follows from what we have said of 
forms, that the phenomena of speech can be 



INTRODUCTION. 85 

no part of iheform of thought; and, there- 
fore, belong not to Logic The intellect must 
employ signs, but not these signs. <' I be- 
lieve," Coleridge is reported to have said, '* that 
processes of thought might be carried on inde- 
pendent and apart from spoken or written lan- 
guage. I do not in the least doubt, that if Ian* 
g^uage had been denied or withheld from man^ 
or that he had not discovered and improved 
that mode of intercommunication, thought, as 
thought, would have been a process more sim- 
ple, more easy, and more perfect than at pre- 
sent, and would both have included and evolved 
other and better means for its own manifesta- 
tions, than any that exist now." And we are 
not bound to consider in this treatise, such 
matters as equivocation of terms, or the predi- 
cate standing first in a sentence, for the plain 
reason that these are to be provided for in 
Grammar. Grammar must supply Logic with 
symbols ready corrected : an equivocal symbol 
is not a symbol in any available sense, because 
the first condition we exact from a sign is, that 
it serve to recall the thing it represents, with 
which it cannot be said to comply, if it stand 
for half a dozen different things. Thus, if 
Gallus stands both for i^ cock and a French- 



36 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

man (as some logicians quaintly assure us), 
Grammar must devise means, by a capital G, or 
otherwise, to obviate the confusion. Because 
grammarians have neglected to treat of Inter- 
pretation, or the art of connecting thought and 
speech, so that the latter adequately represents 
the former, the logician is not, therefore, bound 
to receive it into Logic. He may, indeed, re- 
cite its rules, as prefatory or supplementary to 
his science, at his pleasure. Still less is he 
warranted in presenting the student with a list 
of the words commonly used ambiguously, taken 
from the whole encyclopaedia of sciences, as 
part of a logical system : such a course smacks 
of the plan of the sophists of Greece, that of 
furnishing certain clever common-places or to- 
pics, excerptions from all sorts of disciplines, 
with a view to the equipment of a knowing dis- 
putant. To teach the Eristic, or disputatory 
art, is another matter than to lay down the 
rules of Lo^c 

A few more general remarks will exhaust 
our introductory matter. Though our science 
of the laws of the understanding leaves out of 
view the content of every cognition, and only 
regards what kind of cognition it is, as concep- 
tion, judgment, or syllogbm, still the know- 



INTRODUCTION. 37 

ledge of the content is indispensable in many 
applications of the necessary rules to a parti- 
cular case. This arises from an imperfection 
in the symbols we use in thinking ; which often 
furnish us with no means of determinDig 
whether the whole or a part of some concep- 
tion is brought into question. Men are ready 
to forgive injuries — Men are mortal — ^both ap- 
pear as judgments, but if we would know-how 
they differ from each other, we must bring in 
our knowledge of the matter to aid us, when it 
will appear that the former speaks of some men 
only, the latter of men in general. This use of 
our knowledge of the matter of judgments is 
no part of Logic, yet it is frequently called in as 
subsidiary to its application ; and only for this 
subsidiary purpose, which no writer who views 
Logic as an art could overlook, has it been 
introduced into the body of certain treatises. 

" Common Logic," says Carlyle, from No- 
valis, '* is the grammar of the higher speech, 

that is, of thought Logic occupies itself 

with the mere dead body of the science of 
thinking." I may add — ^Logic displays the 
skeleton of thought, which does not acquire in- 
dividuality until clothed with the muscles, and 
scarfed with the skin of sciences less dry. It 



38 LAWS OP THOUGHT. 

is the painter's lay-figure, which is now rohed 
for a Brutus, now for a Bacchanal, yet is at 
bottom the same figure still. It is the bare 
trunk and branches of thinking, on which other 
sciences are as the fruit and leaves ; furnishing 
the means of distinguishing tree from tree. 
It is the rhythm of the tune ; the mould of the 
potter, on which a thousand vases are moulded, 
yet itself is none. As other sciences take sim- 
ple facts and classify them, and enunciate the 
rules whereby they are governed, so Logic clas- 
sifies these very rules, abstracting from all 
sciences and laying down the laws that regulate 
them, the givers of laws : wherefore Logic is 
the most abstract of all the sciences. 



LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

PART I. 

CONCEPTIONS. 



LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

PART I.— CONCEPTIONS. 

§ 1. — Cognitions. 

Cognitions, or conscious representations, are 
divided lo^cally into Intuitions and Concep- 
tions. Cognitions in general have sometimes 
been termed Notions and Ideas. 

§ 2. — Intuitions. 

Intuitions are singular cognitions; that is, 
they represent single objects, or individuals. 
This last word is of logical origin, and is ap- 
plied to singular representations, because, unlike 
Conceptions, they cannot be divided without 
ceasing to be what they are — cum dimduntur^ 
pereunt. This will be better understood when 
logical division has been explained. Intuitions 
are derived to us from the senses directly ; or 
else mdirectly by the aid of memory, which from 
its faculty of reproducing sensuous images, has 
been styled ar sixth sense. 

o 



42 laws of thought. 

§ 3. — Conceptions. 

A conception is defined to be a single cogni- 
tion of the common marks of many objects. It 
is formed by Abstraction, or the process by 
which, when contemplating a plurality of objects, 
we neglect their points of difference and observe 
only the notes they have in common ; from 
which we form a new representation. 

Soholion. The term Abstraction has been 
variously explained, because different authors 
have assigned it to different parts of one 
and the same process. With Kant the final 
. act of the process, commonly named General- 
ization, usurps the name here given to the 
whole : whilst with others Abstraction becomes 
almost the same as the Reflection of Kant. But 
the difference is fortunately a verbal one, for 
what the process is, all are agreed, though they 
enumerate its acts differently. In the present 
essay. Abstraction applies to the whole process, 
from first to last, of forming Conceptions, and 
includes the various acts, of Comparison, which 
views various representations together ; of Re- 
flection, which seeks marks whereby these repre- 
sentations may be combined in a single new 
one ; and of Generalization, which finally forms 
this new inclusive representation. 



conceptions. 43. 

§ 4. — Difficulties suggested by the 
foregoing division. 

Some difficulties arise from this division of Cog- 
nitions, as, i. How are imagined representations 
classed, the notion we have of a landscape from 
some poetical description, for example? As 
being formed by marks, they seem to be con- 
ceptions, but on the other hand, as being of 
individuals and as borrowing somethmg of aid 
from the remembrance of similar objects to 
^' envisage^* them, they partake of the nature of 
intuitions. Omitting a nice question as to the 
difference of power in the imaginative faculty, 
which in some cases calls up with a fidelity and 
determinateness almost equal to that of a pic- 
ture, in others cannot go beyond a vague con- 
ception of principal features, we may lay down 
in general that the representations under dis- 
cussion are conceptions, used partially (§ 15). 
Thus having a general notion of landscape^ we 
set apart or exclude some of the instances con- 
tained under it, by aid of the marks of time, 
place, feature, supplied by the description; and 
the more marks enumerated, the fuller the de^ 
termination (§7) and the nearer our concep- 
tion will be to an intuition. 

ii. What are those cognitions, to which, though 



44 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

sensible images, we give the name of the con- 
ception, as a house, a king ? This difficulty has 
been solved already in the Introduction: they 
are both intuition and conception. 

iii. Can there be abstraction without gene- 
ralization, as Whately maintains ? '^ Suppose 
we are speaking of the present king of France," 
says he ; '* he must actually be either at Pai:is 
or elsewhere ; sitting, standing, or in some other 
posture ; and in such and such a dress, &c Yet 
many of these circumstances (which are sepor' 
rahle accidents, and consequently) which are 
regarded as non-essential to the individual^ are 
quite disregarded by us ; and we abstract from 
them what we consider as essential ; thus form- 
ing an abstract notion of the Individual. Yet 
there is here no generalization." To which it 
may be answered, first, that strictly speaking, no 
determination of time, place, or the like, but is 
essential to the notion of the individual at any 
given period, however non-essential to the in^ 
dividual looked at as part of a conception : and 
next, that the very power to distinguish what 
is essential from what is not, proceeds from a 
prior act of generalization, by which we get (in 
the given instance) the conception Jcing^ with 
all that is essential thereto ; and that our notion 



CONCEPTIONS. 45 

of the indiTidual is gained by adding to the con- 
ception such marks, of time, place, &C as suffice 
to determine it. There can be no abstraction 
without generalization somewhere ; in fact, 
though we in name distinguish abstraction from 
generalization, they are but parts of the same 
act* 

§ 5. — Higher and lower Conceptions. 

Abstraction has place not merely in com- 
paring many intuitions to form a conception, 
but also in comparing many conceptions to form 
a higher one. The conceptions thus generated 
from lower conceptions may again be subjected 
to the same course, and the new ones produced 
may again receive the same treatment. But as 
we discard, according to the very definition of 
abstraction, certain marks from our conceptions, 
and retain only certain others, whenever we 
arrive at a conception, the marks of which are 
80 few, that to cast away any, would render it 
unintelligible and incapable of being represented, 
then our liberty of abstracting ceases ; we have 
arrived at the highest conception — or summum 
genuSf and further ascent is impossible. 



46 laws of thought. 

§ 6. — Extension and Intension of Con- . 

ceptions. 

The higher our conception is, the more ohjects 
it contains under it, as Animal is a higher con- 
ception than Mammalia^ and contains more oh- 
jects. This capacity of a conception is called 
its extension. But in proportion as this exten- 
sion increases, the numher of marks decreases, 
and consequently the distinctness of the repre- 
sentation to the mind ; which distinctness is 
termed the intension. So the intension decreases 
as the extension increases, and vice versd. Some 
call the intension, what the conception contains 
in ity i. e. its marks ; and the extension, what it 
contains under it, i. e. the ohjects from which 
it was generated. 

§ 7. — Determination- 

The reverse of the abstractive process, that of 
descending from higher conceptions to lower, 
by resuming the marks laid aside, is called de^ 
termination. As abstraction augments the ex- 
tension by diminishing the marks, so determi- 
nation augments the intension by increasing 
them. In a conception, which we term also a 
genus, the lower conceptions are only partially 



CONCEPTIONS. 47 

marked out, having no marks but those of the 
higher; they are undetermined^ for their own 
marks determine. To add marks to those 
ah'eady belonging to the superior conception, 
taking care that those be not repugnant from 
these, is to determine the species from the 
genus, the lower from the higher conception. 
Intuitions, or representations of individuals, and 
they only, are said to be fiilly determined, be- 
cause with them determination ceases; there 
are no more marks to add. The inclusion of 
conceptions one within another, is called the 
subordination of them. 

§ 8. — Genus and Species. 

Genus and species are relative terms ; and '^ a 
superior conception is relatively to its inferior, 
named genus ; an inferior relatively to its supe- 
rior, species J* [Kant.] The same conception 
is with respect to one ranking under it, a genus^ 
with respect to the one above it, a species. In" 
fima species is the species which cannot be a 
genus ; that is, under which there is no lower 
conception to which it may stand in the relation 
of a genus. It may be doubted whether we can 
ever declare the infima species, since we cannot 
be sure that some marks out of which we might 



48 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

have determined a lower representation have not 
escaped us. Infima species is also defined qtue 
non nisi individua sub se continet. 

§ 9. — Proximate and remote Genus. 

When we regard a species not in relation to 
the conception immediately ahove it, but to one 
still higher, we are said to pass by its proxtmate^ 
and refer it to its remotCf genus. Thus A being 
a conception included in 6, and B in C> B is the 
proximate genus of A, and C the remote. 

§ 10. — Privative Conceptions. 

We have hitherto spoken of conceptions as 
formed from positive marks ; but there is a class 
of them arising from a privation or absence of 
certain marks. Hence conceptions are divided 
into positive and privative. The latter admits 
of subdivision, but as this requires a knowledge 
of the matter of conceptions, it has no place in 
a formal science. The only kind of privatives 
which we recognize here, are those expressed by 
the negative particle prefixed to a positive ; as 
from B, the positive, we gain the notion of not- 
B the privative, whose only mark is that it lacks 
the marks of B. Nothing included in the exten- 
sion or sphere of B, can be included in not-B, 



CONCEPTIONS. 49 



• 



hence they are said to he repugnant or opposed. 
And no third conception from the same marks 
is possihle. 

§ 11. — The Opposition of Positives and 

Privatives. 

The opposition hetween a positive and its priva- 
tive has been termed contradictory, which term 
may produce confusion, for there is no contra- 
diction, properly so called, except between two 
judgments ; and the opposition found in these 
conceptions differs fundamentally from the con- 
tradictory opposition of judgments explained 
hereafter. For here the formation of a positive 
necessitates the cognate privative ; there cannot 
be a B but there is a not-B. But the formation 
of a judgment expels its contradictory: and 
thus what is termed by logicians the contradic- 
tory opposition of conceptions differs from the 
contradictory opposition of judgments, in that 
contradictory conceptions must be tenable to- 
gether, contradictory judgments cannot. 

§ 12. — Form of Conceptions. 

The form of conceptions is nothing more than 
the answer to the question — What do we know 
a priori is essential to all conceptions ? They 

H 



50 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

must be of a certain quantity, universal namely ; 
singular representations being termed intuitions ; 
and of a certain quality, that is, either positive 
or privative. To regard a given conception 
both as to form and matter, is to consider it in 
its " first intention :" to view it as to form alone, 
i. e. to thihk of it only as a conception, without 
regard to what it is a conception of, is to con- 
sider its second intention. 

§ 13. — Resolution and Partition. 

To separate from each other the essential marks 
of a conception is called the resolution of it. 
The separation of the parts of an intuition, by 
which it ceases to be a whole, is termed for dis- 
tinction's sake, partition. This name is the 
more appropriate that the parts so attained can- 
not be regarded as wholes ; in resolution of con. 
ceptions, on the contrary, each of the marks 
becomes in one sense a larger whole than that 
into which it entered as part : for example, the 
resolution of the conception triangle mio Jigure 
and oj^'three-sidesy its marks, generates two 
wholes each of greater extension than the con- 
ception produced by their confluence. Both 
these processes are sometimes improperly called 
division ; improperly, because the avoidance of 
confusion should be our first care in a science, 



CONCEPTIONS. 51 

and the name division has long been appropri^ 
ated by logicians to a strictly logical process 
which divides the extension, not the intensionf 
of conceptions. 

§ 14.«-Di VERSE Genera. 

After the resolution of a conception, it may be 
included in one higher one by this mark, and in 
another by that. Hence it appears that a lower 
conception may stand in the relation of species 
to different genera, according as abstraction 
fixes on one set of marks or another. 

§ 15. — Use of Conceptions. Distri- 
bution. 

Though all conceptions are universal, they may 
still have a particular use ; in other words, we 
can think of part only of a conception instead of 
the whole, when the convenience of thought 
enjoins. Where we represent, judge of, or 
reason from, a whole conception, it is said, in 
technical language, to be distributed ; where a 
part only is treated, we call it undistributed. 

§ 16. — Abstract and Concrete 
Representations. 

Abstract and concrete are relative terms; 
when a higher conception is seen to exist in a 



52 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

lower, or in an intuition, as we see the marks of 
animal in the conception horse or a horse, we 
are said to see the abstract in the concrete. So 
of two cognate conceptions, the more abstract 
bears the name of the abstract, the more deter- 
mined (§ 7) we call the concrete, 

Scholion. These words, abstract and con- 
crete, have already been noticed as having un- 
dergone great changes of meaning; and the 
explanation above is not the only one attached 
to them. 

§ 17. — Division of Conceptions. 

The enumeration of the various species, by ab- 
stracting from which any genus is formed, is 
called a division of such genus. Division re- 
spects only the extension of conceptions (§ 13). 
Its rules are — the species enumerated, called the 
membra dividentia, must exclude one another, 
that is, no part of one is to be contained in any 
other : they must be equal, when taken toge- 
ther, to the divisum, or conception divided. 
The former rule depends on the use of one 
" principle of division" and one only, in each 
division. Thus men are divided, as to charac- 
ter (the principle), into righteous and unright- 
teous ; but not into righteous and Africans, 
as that uses two principles. 



LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

PART II. 

JUDGMENTS. 




LAWS OF THOUGHT. 



PART II JUDGMENTS. 



—Judo ME! 

a declaration of the relation 
between two corapured representations. This 
relation is either, a. of inclusion or exclusion ; 
or, /3. of substitution. Every judgment has three 
parts ; the subject, or representation ahout which 
the judgment is ; the predicate, or representa- 
tion with which the subject is compared ; and 
the copula or nexus, which expresses the mode 
n between them. 



§ 19. — Two Classes op Judgments. 
Judgments of inclwiion, called also attrihu- 
live, are those therein the subject differs from 
the predicate both as to form and matter; and 
where it is declared how far tlie subject comes 
within the sphere or extension of the predicate. 
Judgements of aubatittition are those whose sub- 
ject differs from the predicate as to the form 



t 



56 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

(i. e. differs i&om it not in having marks, which 
is the form of a conception, but in the particular 
marks which it has), but does not differ as to 
the matter; so that the subject and predicate 
are precisely equal, being different representa- 
tions of the same objects. For example, if the 
magnet be the only thing which attracts iron, 
and also the only thing which points to the 
north, both these properties are essential marks 
of the conception magnet. Now if one judge — 
'' that which attracts iron (or, the magnet) al- 
ways points to the north,'' the judgment is suhsti- 
tutivey for the predicate differs from the subject 
in its marks, but not in its objects or sphere. 

§ 20. — Two Predicables corresponding 
TO THE Classes. 

The distinction between these two classes de- 
pends, therefore, on the extension of the predi- 
cate as compared with that of the subject. In 
ottributiye judgments the predicate may be 
greater or less than the subject : in substitutive 
judgments the predicate is precisely equal to the 
subject, so that one could be changed for the 
other. From this difference of comparative ex- 
tension two predicables, or classes of predicates, 
have been formed, namely, attribute and deji" 



JUDGMENTS. 57 

nition ; the former including such predicates as 
are assigned to subjects differing from them in 
form and matter; the latter, those which are 
to their subjects but new forms of the same 
matter. 

Scholion 1. It might appear that the name 
attribute should belong to both predicables. 
But as a definition is in some sort the same as 
the conception of the thing it defines, it cannot 
properly be an attribute of it, since a thing can- 
not be attributed to itself. The name is there- 
fore restricted to that class of predicates where 
something wholly new — ^new as to form and 
matter — ^is assigned to the subject. 

Scholion 2. Aristotle makes four predicables, 
or classes of predicates ; two which can change 
places with their subjects, the form ofthejudg^ 
ment remaining unaltered^ according to the 
rules of conversion hereafter explained ; these 
he calls definition and property: — two which 
cannot^ these are genus and accident. The two 
former have this licence as being exactly equal 
to the subject ; whilst the two latter, as wanting 
this relation of equality, cannot undergo the 
transposition without a certain restriction on the 
quantity of the judgment. 

Now the two predicables preserved in the 

I 



68 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

present system include as much as Aristotle's 
fopr ; that of definition including the convertible 
predicates (property and definition), that of at- 
tribute comprehending the inconvertible (genus 
and accident). To distinguish between property 
and definition, or between genus and accident, 
is metaphysical, not logical. It may, however, 
be shown how property comes under the head 
of definition. A definition, as to its application, 
is such a conception as will enable us to recog- 
nize the definitum — ^with which as to matter it 
is identified — ^under any circumstances. Now 
as the predicating property of a thing is the 
assigning to it something which belongs to it 
alone, and to it all at all times, and as such a 
mark must in fact be an inseparable part of 
itself, and therefore always sufiicing for its re- 
cognition, it is nothing else than what we have 
explained definition to be. As for accident, a 
conception representing it is nothing else than a 
genus in relation to its subject. That a given 
predicate in accident is not at all times the genus 
in relation to a given subject, is a point that 
does not affect the judgment, so long as we do 
not argue from what is temporary to what is 
constant and immutable. Compare Arist. Top. 
I. 5. viii. Pacian Ed. 



JUDGMENTS. 59 

Scholion 3. We have said that a suhstitu- 
tive predicate dififers from its subject in form, 
and not in matter. They do not differ in 
matter, so they must in form, otherwise they 
are the same, . . which last is plainly not the 
case, since the addition of one to the other adds 
something quite new to our cognition. The 
difficulty is, how, being both conceptions, and, 
so far, agreeing in form (sensu primo, p. 12) 
do they yet differ in form? They differ ir^ 
form (sensu secundo, p. 14); that is, though 
they agree in having marks, they have diffh' 
rent marks. They differ in form, in the sense 
of formal part — ^that which makes them what 
they are. 

§21. — Of Definition. 

What is distinctive of the present work turns 
so much on this doctrine of predicables, that it 
will be proper to examine the nature of them at 
more length. And first of Definition. The term 
definition is a relative one, and its correlative is 
the definitum or thing defined. A definition is 
a complete conception of the objects represented 
by the definitum ; complete, that is, in requiring 
no farther determinants (§ 7). No doubt the 
psychological Qrigiii Qf definition is the neces- 



60 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

sity of J'epresenting an object in a manner 
either universally or to us more understood; 
this point, however, does not concern us; we 
Only require of a representation that it have 
the same matter with, and a different form 
ft'om, another representation, to constitute the 
one a definition and the other a definitum; 
and, this being the sole requirement, it follows 
that a definition, as fulfilling the condition, 
may be regarded in turn as a definitum, ac- 
cording to the place it holds in the judgment. 
For the subject is always the definitum, and 
the predicate the definition. 

§22. — Of the Sources of Definition. 

Definition may arise in five ways: i. By 
Resolution (§ 13) in which the definitum is 
resolved into its marks in the definition, ii. 
By Composition, the exact reverse of the last, 
in which the definitum, a conception enume- 
rating its component marks, stands subject to 
a definition implicitly containing those marks, 
iii. By Division (§17) wherein the definitum 
is defined by enumeration of its dividing mem- 
bers, iv. By Colligation, the exact reverse of 
the last, where the definitum enumerates the 
dividing members, and the definition unites 



JUDGMENTS. 61 

them. y. By casual Substitution, where one 
representation is substituted for another on 
none of the four preceding principles, but on 
that of accidental expedience. 

To the first are to be ascribed those expla- 
natory propositions to which the name defi- 
nition is commonly appropriated; the second 
includes the converses (§ 49) of these ; in the 
third, all disjunctive judgments rank ; they are 
judgments where the predicate is but the sub- 
ject logically divided ; and the fourth class con- 
sists of inductive judgments. The fifth com- 
prehends all those judgments not referable to 
any of the former classes, yet possessing the 
property of a subject and predicate identical as 
to matter. 

Scholion. This mention of matter will startle 
the logicians who follow an Edinburgh Reviewer 
quoted above (p* 9). It is nevertheless true, 
that the Yery Jbrm of these judgments depends 
on a certain relation as to matter between the 
parts of them. We must add a caution, that it 
is not logic that explores and takes cognizance 
of the matter of any conception, but some other 
science, according to what the conception is 



62 laws of thought. 

§ 23. — Kinds of Definition as to 
Quantity and Quality. 

Defining judgments are, as to qualityf invar 
riably affirmative, the very function of a nega- 
tive being to render indefinite. They are com- 
monly held to be universal also, that is, to dis' 
tribute (§ 15) the subject, but this is not ne- 
cessary to a definition. Part of a subject may 
be defined as well as the whole, though of 
course the practical use of defining a portion, 
and that not distinguished otherwise^ of a con- 
ception, is very limited. The formal part of all 
judgments lies in the nexus or copula; no 
two judgments dififering either in quantity, 
quality, or relation, have the same nexus really, 
though the grammatical is may stand alike 
in both. But the more we express in our 
nexus, the less confusion we shall be obnoxious 
to ; and for this reason we adopt for the copula 
of substitutive judgments the mathematical sign 
of equality =, with this restriction, that it does 
not signify so much a mere equality, as an ob- 
jective identity. 

Scholion. As in defining we assert some- 
thing is equal to something, it is plain that a 
definition of an undistributed term must be 



JUDGMENTS. 63 

false, if the definition hold true of the same 
subject distributed (§ 1 5). For example, " some 
triangles = figures having three sides and three 
angles** is absolutely false, because ** all tri- 
angles = figures having three sides and three 
angles** is true : for the part cannot be equal 
to that to which the whole is equal. This is 
to be noticed, because in judgments where at' 
tribute is the predicate, the truth of the uni- 
versal necessitates, not precludes, the truth of 
the particular. 

§ 24, — Of the Predicable Attribute, 

Attribute is predicated of a conception, 
wherever the predicate difiPers both in form and 
matter from the subject. Not only must it 
possess dififerent marks, but must include dif- 
ferent objects; it must be a new conception 
both as to intension and extension. If the 
predicate include the same objects as the sub- 
ject, it must contain more or fewer, otherwise 
it is a definition. An attributive judgment is 
of less extensive use in deduction than a sub- 
stitutive. It is sometimes necessary, in dis- 
covery, to treat that which objectively (to others 
more fully informed) is a defining judgment, as 
subjectively a merely attributive one, from our 



64 LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

inability to determine the sphere of the predi- 
cate relatively to the subject. For it is com- 
petent to us to treat any defining judgment as 
an attributive one, but not vice versd, 

§ 25. — Of the Form of Judgments. 

We must now inquire what the form of judg- 
ments is. This we have already declared to 
be " that which constitutes them what they 
are," in other words, that by which they are 
judgments at all. It may be best found by 
reference of it to three distinct heads, namely 
Quantity, Quality, and Relation. To these 
Kant adds a fourth, namely Modality; the 
reasons for renouncing which shall be presently 
stated: the result of them being, that the 
Modality of judgments is not a part of their 
form. 

§ 26. — AS TO Quantity. 

As to Quantity, judgments are either Uni- 
versal, Particular, or Singular, according as the 
subject (about which the judgment is) is a 
whole conception, or part of a conception, or 
only an intuition. A particular judgment is 
one which declares something of a part only 
of its subject (i. e. which judges of a subject 



JUDGMENTS. 65 

undistributed): universal and singular judg- 
ments declare something of the whole of theirs 
(i. e« they judge of a suhject distributed)^ 
Though differing as to the extent of their sub- 
ject as a cognition, these two last are classed 
together, as possessing the common property 
of distributing the subject. 

Schqlion. The reason assigned for classing 
singulars with universals is this. The form of 
judgments does not regard the absolute extent 
of the two terms, but their nexus, or the way 
in which they are conjoined. It would be 
desirable indeed, that the sign of universality 
or particularity, should in all cases be attached 
to the copula, instead of being prefixed to the 
subject. Now in universals, the nexus of the 
two terms is without exception, as by '^ All A 
is B," we mean that " A is always B :" in par- 
ticulars it is contingent and mutable, as by 
'^ some C is D," we mean *' C is sometimes hut 
not always D." Now there can be no other 
nexus, as to the extent to which one belongs 
to the other, than these two — always and not» 
always: it becomes a question then — which 
nexus has place in singular judgments. The 
former : for let it be the latter, then some of 
the subject belongs to the predicate, some does 

K 



66 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

not; therefore the subject is divisible; but it 
is an intuition, therefore an individual, there- 
fore indivisible; therefore a thing which is 
divisible is indivisible, which is absurd. Those 
who wish for a lengthy and erudite Thesis on 
this matter may consult Wallis's Logic. The- 
sis I. 

§ 27. — AS TO Quality. 

Judgments as to quality are either affirma- 
tive or negative ; the former are such as have 
an affirmative nexusy which is either of inclu- 
sion or identity (i. e. of attribution or of defi- 
nition) ; the latter, those containing a negative 
one, which expresses exclusion. 

[Lemma. A sign of negation — ^the par- 
ticle not — may enter into a judgment, and 
yet the judgment be affirmative. To know 
the true negatives, we must see whether the 
copula contains a negation. Privative con- 
ceptions (§ 10) have a negative sign, and yet 
the judgments into which they enter, are not 
of necessity negative.] 

As the including a subject in a predicate 
which is a positive conception, necessitates the 
exclusion of it from the cognate privative (§ 10), 
and as the judgments expressing the two acts 



JUDGMENTS. 67 

are equivalent, we may, when we prefer a 
negative to an affirmative formula in analysis, 
change the one for the other; which is done 
where a privative — ^not-B — is affirmed of a 
suhject, hy denying the cognate positive, of 
the same suhject. Thus " A is not-B" be- 
comes " No A is B." 

§ 28. — AS TO Relation. 

Judgments are of two kinds as to Relation, 
(i. e. as to the comparative sphere of predicate 
and subject, the extension in which they have 
with regard to each other). These are attri- 
buHve and substitutive judgments. The for- 
mer have a predicate of undefined extent ; the 
latter, a predicate exactly equal in sphere^ that 
is, in the objects it embraces, to the subject. 
It may appear that we here transgress the 
bounds of logical form, in prescribing a dis- 
tinction which presupposes a knowledge of the 
matter of the terms, rather than of the nexus. 
But a moment's reflection will show that the 
nexus itself, although expressed in both kinds 
by est and non-est, is perfectly dififerent. In 
the former, est means is included in; in the 
latter, it may be rendered equals: we have 
remedied the grammatical defect by retaining 



68 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

est for the copula in attributive judgments, and 
adopting the mathematical sign of equality (^) 
in substitutive. The predicate of an attributive 
judgment belongs to the predicable of attribute; 
that of a substitutive to the predicable de/i' 
nition. 

§ 29. — The common Division of Judg- 
ments AS TO Relation. 

Judgments are commonly divided into Cate- 
gorical, Hypothetical, and Disj unctive. The first 
(as explained by those who adhere to this divi- 
sion) expresses a relation between two concep- 
tions as subject and predicate, sls Ais JB ; the 
Hypothetical a relation between two judgments 
as condition and conditionate, the condition 
being termed the antecedents and the condition- 
ate the coTisequent ; as " if A is B, X is Y :" 
the Disjunctive, between two or more judgments 
opposed to each other as excluding one another, 
but ibal^ing up when taken together, the sphere 
of all possible cases as to that particular subject- 
matter, as " either A is B, or it is C, or it is D." 
It remains to show how the membra dividentia 
of this division may be absorbed into those of 
ours. 



judgments. 69 

§ 30. — The same dispensed with. 

Of Categorical Judgments, all the negatives 
and part of the affirmatives, rank under the class 
of attributives; the remaining affirmatives, 
those namely where the predicate is but a new 
representation of the same objects as the sub- 
ject, belong to the substitutive or defining 
class. 

H3rpothetical8 are referred to the class of 
Categoricals, as may easily be shown. For the 
h3rpothetical is a sentence consisting of two 
judgments, connected as cause and efifect; the 
antecedent setting forth the cause, and the con- 
sequent the efifect. The nexus is to be sought, 
not in antecedent or consequent separately, but 
in the way they are combined. Now this way 
is no other than the way in which the terms of 
a categorical are combined. For when we affirm 
that « if A is B, X is Y," what is it but to say 
that " the caseyfacty or notion of As being jB, 
is, a caseyfacty or notion of X's being Yf" 
Compare this with any other categorical affirm- 
ation, and no logical — no formal — difference can 
be found. " A is B" asserts that B goes to 
make up the notion of A ; " if A is B, X is Y,** 
asserts in like manner that X being Y, goes to 



70 LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

make up the notion of A being B. Accordingly 
we refer hypotheticals to categoricals, and to 
the substitutive or attributive class of these, 
according to the relative sphere of the predi- 
cate. 

As for disjunctives, they too are reducible to 
categorical judgments. Their subject is a con- 
ception, and their predicate the same conception 
logically divided ; ex. gr. : " Either A is B, or 
M is N, or Y is Z," is readily resolved into 
(^' The possible cases in this matter) are (that 
A is B, M is N, and Y is Z"). As it thus ap- 
pears that subject and predicate differ in form 
but not in matter, which constitutes a substi- 
tutive judgment (see § 19), to that class we 
refer them. 

Inductive judgments also maybe ranked as sub- 
stitutives. For in them the subject is a divided 
conception, and the predicate the same concep- 
tion undivided : they are the converses of dis- 
junctives, and have the same properties. All 
inductive judgments may be exhibited by the 
formula "ar^ J8r = A" as all disjunctives may 
be by " A = a; y z^ 



judgments. 71 

§ 31. — Of Modality as a formal Part 

OF Judgments. 

Aristotle (An. Pr. I. 2. Pacian division) has 
divided Judgments into three kinds, according 
to the mode in which they are held true. i. Pro- 
blematical, which are possibly true, but neither 
subjectively nor objectively certain, ii. Asser- 
torial, which are subjectively true, but not ob- 
jectively, i. e. are valid for the thinker himself 
but not binding on others : and iii. Apodictical, 
which are true both for the thinker and for all 
others. Kant has assigned to this division 
the name of Modality, and has decided that 
it belongs to the form of thought, assigning 
it an equal rank with Quantity, Quality, and 
Relation. 

On the exactness of the division of Modality 
it must be noticed that to many the class of 
judgments called problematical, appear not to 
be judgments at all, but mere expressions of an 
act of comparison which precedes the formation 
of a judgment, for in such sentences as '^ Man 
is possibly immortal," we are essaymg to form 
a judgment, that is, to predicate one conception 
of another, but have not yet done so. These 
would perhaps prefer adopting the division of 



72 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

Clauberg, a Cartesian logician, who makes only 
two classes of judgments, the necessary, and 
those of moral certainty; the etymology of 
which last phrase contains the characteristic of 
the class to which it is appHed, being that class 
in which a subjective certainty, influencing our 
manners (moralis) but not sufficient to con- 
vince others, finds place. 

§ 32. — Reasons for rejecting it. 

Modality has been objected to, and I think 
with justice, as extralogical. But the question 
of its admission or rejection is, perhaps, the 
most dildGicult in all Logic, and requires some 
consideration. 

Is Modality part of the form of every judg- 
ment? If it be, it must be something in the 
judgment itself, any change in which would 
change the judgment. Thus, if an assertorial 
judgment become an apodictical, it is actually, 
on this view, a new judgment. Now all parties 
will allow that the points of form in a judgment 
reside in the copula or nexus : that is, that in 
some A is By there is a different nexus from 
that in all A is By and so on. But when we 
come to apply this admission to Modality, 
opinions are again at issue. The Kantian 



JUDGMENTS. 73 

would urge that the nexus in an assertorial is 
quite distinct from that in an apodictical judg- 
ment; which his opponent denies, declaring 
that the est or non-est of an assertorial and apo- 
dictical have the same force and value. On 
this douhtful point depends the present ques- 
tion, which those who do not understand it> 
have settled in a very summary manner (see p. 
11, note). 

Now it is plainly no answer to the Kantian 
to say, that the difference of nexus does not 
appear in the sign or word expressing it, since 
the same argument would hold against Quan- 
tity as well as Modality, for in men are mortal 
and men are ingeniousy though the former is 
universal and the latter particular, the nexus 
is just the same as far as appears. Defects in 
the signs of thought do not affect thought it- 
self. 

A hetter reason for dismissing Modality is 
found in the fact, that it is so intimately 
blended with psychological matters, as to render 
it at least expedient to refer it to Psychology. 
For the enumeration of degrees of Modality 
given by Kant is not complete ; neither is the 
following, though more ample. 

L 



74 LAWS OF THOUQHT. 

As to Modality a jud^ent may be 

a. Possible, where no discrepancy appears 
between subject and predicate, because we 
have not examined. 

/3. Dotibtfuly where after some trials of 
instances a few are favourable to the judg- 
ment, a few doubtful. 

y. Prohahle, where of a few trials all are 
favourable. 

S. Morally certain for him who judges, 
where the induction of favourable trials is 
wide enough to control his own belief, not 
that of others. 

ff. Morally certain for him and some 
others, viz. those of like character and modes 
of thought, as a sect or a school. 

f. " Physically certain^' (Clauberg) with 
a limit ; where the judgment grounds on an 
induction cognisable by all men, which they 
believe complete, but still admitting of over- 
throw, if future induction should contradict 
it. Of this sort are most truths in natural 
history, as that '^ all rostrate animals are 
birds," proved erroneous by the discovery 
of the omithofynchus. 

1/. Physically certain without limitation ; 
where we know that the induction is com- 



JUDGMENTS. 75 

plete, as " No English mountams are vol- 



canoes." 



0. " Metaphysically certain** (Clauberg), 
where the notion of the predicate enters into 
the subject, as *^ God is immortal." Here 
the '^ proposition of contradiction/* as it is 
called, applies ; for we say, '* if not immortal, 
then not God." 

Now it is plain that these kinds of judgment 
are distinguished from each other by the con- 
dition of the particular thinker, rather than by 
a real difference in the cognitions themselves, 
available for, and tangible by, every intellect 
they may be presented to. In other words, 
the same judgment is commonly held by any 
two thinkers, with different degrees of cer- 
tainty : nay, some minds are so constituted, as 
to be without one or more of the classes enu- 
merated. There is, therefore, every proba- 
bility that Modality lies wholly in the thinker, 
and not in each of his judgments ; and, though 
it is not convincing to say, that it does not 
appear in the nexus, it is at least nearly so to 
find that no examination of that nexus gives 
the slightest ground for distinguishing firom it 
between (say) a " probable" and " morally cer- 
tain" judgment. On these grounds, leave we 



76 



LAWS OF THOUGHT. 



Modality to the psychologist. Still there is 
room for hesitation : the sciences are not sepa- 
rated fi*om each other hy so sharp and clear 
boundaries as to leave no debatable land ; 
Modality is the disputed tract between Logic 
and Psychology.* 

TABLE OF JUDGMENTS AS TO FORM. 

^ a. Uuiyersal, where the whoU 
subject is joined to the 
predicate. 

p. Particular, where part of 
the subject is so joined. 



U 

*d OB 



f Quantity ^ § -< 

r 5> 






o 

¦*•* 

.2 

Form >\, 
S 



Quality 



SB 



^ a. Affirmatiye, where the pre- 
dicate is judged to belong 
to the subject. 

/3. Negative, where it is judged 
not to belong to the sub- 
ject. 






L Relation ^ | -< 



'' a. Attributive, where the pre- 
dicate is a new concep- 
tion assigned to the sub- 
ject bilt differing from it 
in form and matter. 



/3. Substitutive, where the 
predicate is identical with 
the subject as to matter, 
but not as to form. 



• An Edinburgh Reviewer (No. 115) decides this 
question summarily, but then he evidently does not 
fathom its difficulties. 



JUDGMENTS. 77 

Scholion. In the class of Substitutive 
Judgments, those whose predicate is identical 
as to matter and form, (as A = A) commonly 
called tautologous judgments, are not inclu- 
ded. For the act of judging is that of uniting 
two representations into one consciousness ; 
but in A = A there is now, and was before, 
only one representation ; it is not properly a 
judgment at all. 

§ 34. — Universal and Particular Use 

OF Conceptions in Judgments. 

(See § 15.) 

In judging, since conceptions to be compared 
commonly have not the same extension, and 
again, since the purposes of thought do not 
always require us to decide on the whole of a 
conception, the Particular Use of conceptions be- 
comes necessary. It is known from iheform 
of a judgment what terms in it are distributed, 
and what undistributed. 

i. Quantity. Universal Judgments distribute 

their subject ; Particulars do not. 
ii. Quality. Negative Judgments distribute 

the predicate ; Affirmatives do not. 

E. g. " No A is B" distributes its predicate 

B. For let B be undistributed, then there 



78 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

is some part of B from which A is not ex- 
cluded by the judgment; it is therefore 
possible to affirm A of B, and thus *' A is 
B" can be true at the same time with " No 
A is B." But contrary Judgments (see 
below on opposition) cannot be true toge- 
ther, \sA these are contraries. Therefore 
the same judgments can and cannot be true 
together, which is absurd, 
iii. Relation. Substitutive Judgments distri- 
bute the Predicate, Attributives do not. 
E. g. " A = B" distributes its Predicate ; 
for, let the predicate be undistributed, then 
A only = a part of B, and thus B is greater 
than A, therefore not = it. Thus the 
same thing is =, and not =, A ; which is 
absurd. 

§ 35. — ^Different Kinds of Judgments. 

It does not strictly belong to Universal Logic 
to enumerate different kinds of Judgments ac- 
cording to their value, application, or matter; 
but since there are certain divisions which should 
be known, yet are not laid down in the common 
systems of Applied Logic, little apology is ne- 
cessary, after this caution, for introducing them 
here. 



judgments. 79 

§ 36. — Theoretical and Practical 
Judgments.* 

Judgments according to the end they have in 
view, are divided into Theoretical, in which 
something is declared to he, and their end is 
Theory or Speculation : and Practical, in which 
something is declared capahle of heing done, or 
the present concession of this possibility is de- 
manded ; and their end is Practice. 

§ 37. — Demonstrable and Indemon- 
strable Judgments. 

Judgments according to their manifestness 
(evidentia) are divided into Indemonstrable, or 
those which are manifest from the very terms ; 
and Demonstrable, or those which are not thus 
manifest, but require a demonstration. 

§ 38. — The Two preceding Divisions 
regarded together. 

By combining the two preceding divisions, we 
gain definitions of 

i. An Axiom, which is an indemonstrable 
theoretical judgment. 

* In the next three sections Wolff is followed. 



80 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

ii. A Postulate, which is an indemonstrable 
practical judgment. 

iii. A Theorem, which is a demonstrable the- 
oretical judgment. 

iv. A Problem, which is a demonstrable prac- 
tical judgment. 

§ 39. — Corollary or Consectary, 
Lemma, Scholion. 

A JUDGMENT which follows immediately from 
another, is sometimes called a Corollary or 
Consectary. One which does not belong to the 
science in which it appears, but is taken from 
another, is called a Lemma. One which illus- 
trates in some way the science where it appears, 
yet is not an integrant part of it, is a Scholion. 



LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

PART III. 

SYLLOGISMS. 



M 



LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

PART III.-^YLLOGISMS. 

§ 40. — Syllogism. Consequence. 

Syllogism in general is the deduction of one 
judgment £rom one or two others, according 
to certain laws. The connexion between the 
judgment so deduced, and that from which it 
comes, is called the consequenccy though some- 
times this title is metonymically applied to the 
deduced judgment itself. 

§ 41. — ^Immediate and Mediate 
Consequence. 

Immediate consequence is where one judg- 
ment can be deduced from another without the 
intervention of a third: mediate consequence, 
where a third and intermediate judgment is 
employed. It is a fundamental property of all 
consequence that no absolutely new judgment 
is generated by it : the explicit declaration of a 



84 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

judgment implicitly contained in, or necessi- 
tated by, a former one, is the province of con- 
sequence or syllogism. 



CHAPTER A. 

IMMEDIATE CONSEQUENCE. 

§ 42. — Kinds of Immediate Consequence. 

There are several sorts of immediate conse- 
quence, which may be divided into two classes, 
i. those where the conclusion (or judgment de- 
duced) differs in form from the premiss (or 
ground of the deduction) but not in matter, 
that is, not in the cognitions compared but in 
the mode of comparing them : ii. where the con- 
clusion differs in matter from the premiss, by 
additions made to it, yet where the consequence 
is a priori certain, and according to rules 
known without reference to the objects com- 
pared. 

§ 43. — Symbols of the various 
Judgments. 

Preliminary to the explanation of these con- 
sequences, it should be known that certain 



SYLLOGISMS. 



85 



letters have been adopted to stand for judg- 
ments of any given form, as follows : — 





Quantity, 


Quality, 


Relation, 


A denotes an univeraal 


affirmative 


attributive "" 


E 


an universa] 


negative 


attributive 


I 


a particular 


affirmative 


attributive 





a particular 


negative 


attributive 


U 


an universal 


(affirmative) 


substitutive 


Y 


a particular 


(affirmative) 


substitutive ^ 



C3 

/^ bo 



And in the succeeding explanation, the above 
vowels will frequently be used as symbolical of 
the judgments to which they are here appropri- 
ated. 



§ 44. — Opposition. 

Two judgments of the same matter, but differ- 
ing as to form, (§ 42), are said to be opposed^ 
and the relation they bear to each other is that 
of opposition. In many kinds of opposition 
there is involved an immediate consequence, 
either of amotion, wherein the establishing of 
one judgment necessitates the removal or over- 
throw of its opposite ;— or of position, wherein 
the establishing of the one also establishes the 
other. 



86 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 



TABLES OF OPPOSITION OF JUDGMENTS. 

I. 

A . . CONTRARY . . E . . CONTRARY . . U 






V J' i % ^.^'^ 



0° • . ^^ '.3 



£ 



SUBOONTRARY . . O . • SUBCONTRARY 

11. 

A • . SUBORDINATE • . U 



• 2 



^ 8 



p 

00 



<r 



I • . SUBORDINATE . . Y 

§ 45.— Immediate Consequence by Con- 
tradictory Opposition. 

Contradictory opposition is the relation be- 
twixt two judgments differing in Quantity and 
Quality, but not in Relation ; consequently they 
must be as to Relation, attributives, since sub- 



SYLLOGISMS. 87 

stitutives cannot differ in Quality. It exists 
between A and O ; £ and I. 

From the position of any judgment, the amo- 
tion of its contradictory follows as the immediate 
consequence ; and again from the amotion of a 
judgment follows the position of its contradic- 
tory, for the two can neither be trae nor false 
together. 

Scholion. As to the matter of contradictory 
judgments, it is not enough that they contain 
representations of the same objects, but of the 
same objects under the same circumstances^ 
otherwise the contradiction may be merely a 
specious, not a real one. The circumstances to 
be attended to may be reduced to four heads ; 
the contradiction must be of the same judgment, 
i. in the same manner, ii. as to the same point, 
iii. compared with the same standard, iv. at the 
same time. These are explained further, San- 
derson's Logic, P. III. Ch. 29, de ignoratione 
elenchu 

§ 46. — Immediate Consequence by 
Contrary Opposition. 

Contrary opposition is that between universal 
judgments differing in Quality, i. e. between A 
and £, £ and U. 



88 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

The position of a judgment is the amotion of 
its contrary, hut its amotion does not involve 
the position of its contrary. 

§ 47. — SUBCONTRARY OPPOSITION. 

SuBCONTRARY opposition is hetween particular 
judgments of different Quality (I and O, Y and 
O). It has no immediate consequence whether 
of amotion or position. 

§ 48. — Immediate Consequence by 
Subaltern Opposition. 

Subaltern opposition is hetween two attribu- 
tive judgments differing in Quantity only (A 
and I, £ and O). 

The position of the higher (i. e. that where 
a term more is distrihuted) involves the posi- 
tion of the lower ; and the amotion of the lower, 
the amotion of the higher. No consequence 
from position of the lower or amotion of the 
higher. 

§ 49. — Immediate Consequence by 
Pseudo-subaltern Opposition. 

Pseudo-subaltern opposition is hetween 
substitutive judgments of different Quantity (U 
andY). 



SYLLOGISMS. 89 

The position of either is the amotion of the 

« 

other ; no consequence from amotion. 

§ 50. — Immediate Consequence by 
Subordinate Opposition. 

Subordinate opposition is between two judg- 
ments differing in Relation only (A and U, I 
andY). 

The position of the higher implies the posi- 
tion of th^ lower, but not vice versd. No in- 
ference from amotion. 

§ 51. — Immediate Consequence by 
Incompatible Opposition. 

Incompatible opposition is between two judg- 
ments differing in Quantity, Quality, and Re- 
lation (E and Y, U and O). 

The position of either implies the amotion 
of the other. No inference from amotion. 

§ 52. — Immediate Consequence by 
Involute Opposition. 

Involute opposition has place, where, of two 
judgments of one Quality, the higher distri- 
butes both terms and the lower neither; so 
that the latter is involved in the former (I 
inU). 

N 



90 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

The position of the higher detnands the posi- 
tion of the lower; and the amotion of the 
lower, the amotion of the higher. No infer- 
ence from amotion of higher or position of 
lower. 

§ 53. — Immediate Consequence by 
Repugnant Opposition. 

Repugnant opposition exists, where, of two 
judgments of one Quality, each distributes one 
term, but each a diflferent one (A and Y). 

The position of one implies the amotion of 
the other, but not vice versa. 

§ 54. — Conversion of Judgments, and 
Immediate Consequence by it. 

An alteration in the Relation, which is defined 
the respect in which the two terms stand to 
each other, of a Judgment, so that the two terms 
be transposed, provided it be done according to 
certain laws, is termed Conversion. The Judg- 
ment before this alteration we term the Con- 
vertend ; after it, the Converse. The position 
of the Convertend implies the position of the 
Converse as its Immediate Consequence. 



syllogisms. 91 

§ 55. — Different Kinds of Conversion. 

There are two kinds of Conversion, both pos- 
sessing the marks of a, transposition of subject 
and predicate, j3, preservation of the same 
Quality in Convertend and Converse. 

These kinds are, i. Simple Conversion, which 
has the above marks, and which also y, pre- 
serves the same Quantity in Convertend and 
Converse. E, I, and A, are converted in this 
manner. 

ii. Accidental* Conversion, which differs 
irom the former in changing the Quantity. A 
and Y are converted by it. Some logicians 
assert that £ may be, but this is not the case. 
It may indeed be converted simply, and then 
its subaltemate inferred ; but, though the result 
looks Uke an accidental conversion, it is at- 
tained in reality by a double process,- viz. an 
inference by conversion, and another by oppo- 
sition. 

* " Si quaeras, car haec conversio dicatur per Accidens 
ego de nominis ratione non sam admodum solicitas. 
satis est qaod soliti fuerint logici sic loqui ; Deque est 
necesse at rerum Domina (utat sine ratione imposita) 
mutemns." Waius, 



92 laws of thought. 

§ 56. — Laws op Conversion. 

L No term should he distributed in the con- 
verse which was not in the convertend. For, 
the convertend being the sole ground of the 
converse, from which the latter may be ga- 
thered a priori, it follows that we must not 
draw a conclusion wider than the ground war- 
rants> which will occur if we violate this law* 

ii. No term should be undistributed in the 
converse which in the convertend was distri' 
buted. For we should be able to reconvert the 
judgment, and this we cannot do, unless we 
preserve the full extent of the terms in the 
converse : for example, let " All A is B" be er- 
roneously converted " Some B is A," then from 
this converse, being /, which distributes neither 
term (§ 34), we cannot gain the former judg- 
ment, '^ All A is B," which, as A, distributes 
its subject (§ 34) without violating the first 
law of conversion. 

Compliance with these laws it is which pro- 
duces accidental conversion. 

§ 57. — Table of Conversions. • 

A is converted to Y Accid. 
E .—— . — E Simp. 



SYLLOGISMS. 93 / 

I is cooTerted to I Simp. 

O not convertible* 

U is converted to U Simp. 

Y A Accid. 

Scbolion. A becomes Y in obedience 
to law ii. e. g, ** All rational beings are 
responsible'* is converted, not as commonly 
to (I) " Some responsible beings are ra- 
tional/* but to (Y) " some responsible 
beings ^ rational beings," or '^ are all ra- 
tional beings," in wbicb the predicate de- 
fines the subject, and is distributed ( § 34). 

§ 58. — Immediate Consequence by 

Privative Conceptions. 

(See § 10.) 

In this kind of inference, the matter of the 
consequent is different from that of the ground, 
and not the form merely, as in the preceding. 
But the difference is strictly limitable by the 
form of conceptions (§10) and, therefore, not 
extra-logical. The laws of Privative Conse- 
quence are : — i. Where the positive concep- 
tion is affirmed of another, the privative may 



* Bnt O may be changed into I, on the principles 
stated $ 10 and $ 58. 



94 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

be deniedi by inference, and vice versa; as 
« A is B, . • . No A is non-B," " Some A is 
not B . • . some non-B is A." ii. Where a 
positive is affinned of a positive, by inference 
the privative of one may be affirmed of the 
privative of the other. Provided always, that 
if there be an undistributed term in the ground, 
its privative shall stand subject in the conse- 
quent^ as " A is B . • . non-B is non-A . ' . some 
A = B . • . non-A is non-B." If no term is 
distributed, as in I, there is no Privative Con- 
sequence ; if both terms, then the privative of 
either may stand subject. 

Scholion. Though here is transposition of 
terms, it is no logical conversion, because the 
terms are changed as well as transposed. 

§ 59. — ^Immediate Consequence by Added 

Determinants. 

A determinant is a mark added to a concep- 
tion to render its tise (§ 15) more contracted. 
It is by the addition of determinants that we 
form inferior from higher conceptions : but the 
addition of a determinant does not necessarily 
change the conception, as may be gathered from 
its symbol, the word expressing it ; and in these 
cases where the conception remains, pltts the 



SYLLOGISMS. 95 

determinant, the foUowing consequence holds. 
From any judgment as a ground, the same judg- 
ment with hoth its terms further determined 
(i. e. having determinants added) may be in- 
ferred as a consequent, provided, i. That no de- 
terminant be added to one term which is not to 
the other, and ii. That the same distribution of 
terms be in the consequent which was in the 
, ground, Ba:. gr^ All A is B. .'. All A + X is 
B-l-X 

§ 60. — Immediate Consequence by Com- 
pounded Conceptions. 

One Conception may enter another as a mark, 
as " a tyrant" into " the slayer of a tyrant** 
Hence arises an Immediate Consequence. From 
a judgment of simple Conceptions as a ground 
may be inferred as a consequent a Judgment 
of Compound Conceptions, into which the sub- 
ject and predicate of the ground enter as marks 
of subject and predicate respectively, and which 
excepting these marks, is tautologous. Ex.gr* 
A triangle is a figure, therefore he who con- 
structs a triangle constructs a figure. Here too 
the distribution of the incorporated terms must 
be preserved. 



96 laws of thought. 

§ 61. — Immediate Consequences by Dis- 
junction. 

A Disjunctive Judgment is a Substitutive 
whose predicate is the subject divided into mem> 
bers, which taken together make up the subject. 
The process of forming such a predicate we 
have already mentioned as Division. From one 
of its rules> namely, that what is in one member, 
cannot be in any other (which is called the rule 
of mutual exclusion, § 17) there arises an im- 
mediate consequence : from a disjunctive as the 
ground may be inferred the exclusion of one 
membrum from the others. And again, from 
another rule, that the membra must exhaust the 
divisum (§ 17), we gain another immediate con- 
sequence; ftrom a disjunctive as the ground, 
may be inferred as a consequent that the part of 
the divisimi not in one membrum must be in 
one of the others. 

Ex. I. 

All a is X Y or Z. 

.-. The X of A is not the Yor Z of A. 

Ex. II. 

All a is X Y or Z. 
.'. The not'X of A is the Y or Z of A, 



SYLLOGISMS^ 97 

Id all disjunctive syllogisms one of these two 
consequents, and not the disjunctive itself, is the 
true proposition (§ 64). 

§ 62. — Enumeration op Immediate 
Consequences. 

i. Immediate Consequence by Contradictory Opposition. 

ii. Contrary. 

iii. Subaltern. 

iv, Pseado-subaltern. 

V. Subordinate. 

?i. Incompatible. 

vii. Involute. 

viii. Repugnant. 

ix. Simple Conversion. 

X. Accidental. 

xi. Privative Conceptions. 

xii. Added Determinants. 

xiii. Compounded Conceptions. 

xiv. ' Disjunction. 

CHAPTER B. 

MEDIATE CONSEQUENCE. 

§ 63. — A Mediate Consequence, or Medi- 
ATE Syllogism, is the illation of one judg- 
ment from two others in which it is implicitly 
contained. 

Mediate Consequence is founded on this 
Canon, — the agreement or repugnance of one 
conception from another is ascertained by a 

o 



98 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

third conception which either agrees with one 
or with both of the conceptions to he com* 
pared, 

§ 64. — Parts op a Mediate Syllogism. 

It appears from the Canon that a Mediate Syl- 
logism contains three conceptions, which are 
called TermSi namely, the suhject and predicate 
of the conclusion, and the third term used as a 
mean of comparison. The suhject of the con-i 
elusion, heing the term ahout which the whole 
is mainly concerned is emphatically the subject 
of the syllogism, and this I propose to term the 
Primus {quoad nos), its old name of Minor 
never having been appropriate, and being ren- 
dered now stiU less so by the introduction of 
the Identical Judgments U and Y. The predi- 
cate of the conclusion is called the Tertius, its 
former name of Major being discarded for a 
similar reason. The third term, with which 
each of the others is compared, is called as be- 
fore the Medius or Middle. 

As the Canon requires three terms, so it re- 
quires three judgments. In the first of these, 
the Medius is compared with the Tertius (quon-- 
dam Major), and this judgment is the Proposi- 
tion. 



SYLLOGISMS. 99 

In the. second, the Medius is compared with 
the Primus {quondam Minor) and this com- 
parison forms the Assumption. The two names, 
Proposition and Assumption are used as purely 
arbitrary titles here, and not as denoting* any 
particular qualities of the judgments they signify. 

And in the third, the Primus is compared 
with the Tertius, the judgment so formed being 
styled the Conclusion ; or, sometimes, the ques- 
tion, complexion, consequence, inference or illa- 
tion. 

The Proposition and Assumption together are 
named the Premisses. 

§ 65. — Order of the Premisses. 

Logicians are nearly unanimous in placing the 
Proposition before the Assumption, and as it is 
desirable to change nothing except the evil of 
novelty is overbalanced by some gain as to cor- 
rectness, we preserve this order here. Thomas 
Hobbes adopts the contrary order, and I confess 
that his plan appears to be, in by far the majority 
of cases, most consistent with the natural order, 
not to mention a strong argument to be drawn 
in its favour from the evident natural correct- 
ness of the Sorites, which has Premisses in this 
order. An enumeration of cases of each may be 



100 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

found in Hallam's Literature ofEurope^ vol. 
iii. p. 310. 

§ QQ, — The Syllogistic Figures. 

Syllogisms have been divided into three 
classes or Figures, according to the position of 
the Medius in the premisses. In the Jir$t 
Figure the Medius is subject of the proposition 
and predicate of the assumption ; in the second, 
it is predicate of both ; in the third, subject of 
both. 

A fourth Figure, in which the Medius is pre- 
dicate of the proposition and subject of the as- 
sumption, has been added ; but it is at least un- 
necessary, and is described as a useless perver- 
sion of the first, with, instead of the proper 
conclusion, the converse of it, gained by imme- 
diate inference. (§ 55 and 56.) 

Schohon. It is not certain who is the 
inventor of the fourth Figure, nor would it 
confer immortality on his name if ascertained. 
The following passage contains the commonly 
received opinion of the matter. "Invenit 
Galenus [quartam hancce figuram,] ut ei 
attribuit Averroes in cap. viii. lib. i. prior. 
Anal, in libris enim Galeni, qui nunc ex- 
tant, nihil de hac figura legimus, sed in aliis 



SYLLOGISMS. 



101 



fortasse, qui desiderantur, et quos Averroes 
legit, hac de re sermonem fecit Galen us.* 

§ 67. — Scheme of the Syllogistic 

Figures. 

N.B. In this scheme B denotes the Medius, 
A the Tertius, and C the Primus, and in all 
cases the Proposition is kno^n, not by its posi- 
tion, but by containing the comparison of the 
Tertius and Medius. 





Fig. I. 


Fig. II. 


Fig. III. 


Proposition 


B ...A 


A ... B 


B ... A 


Assumption 


C .*• B 


C ¦•• B 


B ... 


Conclusion 


Kj •*. A 


Cy- ... A 


\j ... A 



§ 68. — General Rules of Syllogisms. 

The following rules are educed from the canon 
of Mediate Inference (§ 63) in which the word 
agreement means either an agreement of coin- 
cidence, where one term is definitive of another, 
or of inclusion, where one term comprehends 
the other, — and they are gained by applying 



* Zabarella apud Frobesium. 



102 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

the canon to every possible combination of 
three terms in three figures. 

R. i. In every syllogism there are three 
terms only. 

Remark. This is implied by the canon, 
which only requires two terms to be com- 
pared and a third by which txi compare 
them. 
R. ii. JEach term must he compared with 
every other. 

Remark. This too is implied by the 
canon, for the Medius must be used with 
the other two severally, and the result ex- 
pressed by comparing the two. 
R. iii. Both premisses cannot he negative. 
Remark. This also is plainly supposed 
m the canon, for negatives express dis- 
agreement of terms, and if both are nega- 
tive, then the Medius disagrees both with 
Primus and Tertius, but the canon (§ 63) 
only allows disagreement with one of 
them. 
R. iv. The Medius must he distributed 
(§ 15) once. 

Remark. Else the Primus might be 
compared with one part of it, and the 
Tertius with another, which in reality 
would warrant no comparison of them. 



SYLLOGISMS. 103 

R. V. Not I If I Oy nor O /, can he the 
premisses* 

Remark. For the judgments these 
Towels denote, see § 43. The old rule 
was — ^both premisses cannot be particular 
— here changed, because they may be par- 
ticular if Y form one of them. Y has the 
property unknown to other particulars of 
distributing a term without necessitating 
a distribution in the conclusion. 1 1 as 
premisses offend R. iv. : 10 violate R. vi. : 
and O I either R. iv. or R. vi. according 
to the figure. 

Rules for the Conclusion. 

R. vi. No term distributed (§15 and 34) 
in the condition unless in the premisses. 

Remark. Unless the whole of a term 
has been compared with the medius we 
cannot argue either agreement or the re- 
verse of the whole of that term : we should 
be judging about what had not been com- 
pared. 
R. vii. A negative premiss must have a 
negative conclusion. 

Remark. A negative premiss denotes 
that one term is repugnant to the Medius, 



104 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

and if so, then according to the canon, the 
Primus and Tertius themselves are repug- 
nant, which can only he expressed hy a 
negative. 
R. viii, I or O as premiss must have a 
particular conclusion. 

Remark. Here Y is again excepted, 
for the property mentioned at R. v. To 
violate the present rule invariahly implies 
the violation of some other, as may he 
found hy experiment in any figure. 
R. ix. If the Primus as used is wider by 
position than the Tertiusy the Conclusion can- 
not be universal. 

Remark. The term " wider by posi- 
tion'* only applies to syllogisms into which 
U and Y enter as premisses. The nexui 
of equality between the terms U and Y, 
enables us in certain cases to know a 
priori that one term is of greater exten- 
sion (§6) than another: for example, if 
A be included in B, and C be equal to B, 
it is plain that C is wider than A, for it is 
as wide as what includes it. The words 
'^ as used," mean *' as much of it as is 
used." 
R. X. No conclusion can be an identical 



SYLLOGISMS. 105 

(or substitutive) judgment unless one of the 
premisses is so. 

Remark. Infraction of this rule asserts 
a relation between the terms of the con- 
clusion which the premisses have not war- 
ranted : it compels a violation of R. vi. 
R. xi. No conclusion can be an identical 
judgmenty where the Primus as used, is nar' 
rower by position than the Tertitts* 

Remark. Thus if B be equal to A, 

and some C be in B, then some C cannot 

be equal to A, otherwise the contained 

would be equal to what is as wide as the 

containing, which is absurd. 

R. xii. If in the premisses a term be dc 

dared equal to the Mediusy and the Medius 

when compared with the other term be undis' 

tributed, then the term that is equal cannot be 

distributed in the conclusion. 

Remark. For if a term be equal to 
another, as man is to rational animal, 
then what is affirmed of part of one, can 
only be affirmed so far of part of the other, 
for the objects they represent are the 
same. 
R. xiii. Except in the cases affected by the 

p 



106 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

last three rules, any term distributed in the 
premisses may be so in the conclusion. 

Remark. On the same principle that 
we cannot gather from premisses mo7^e 
than is set down in them, we are war- 
ranted in gathering a>s much as is so set 
down. 

§ 69. — Of the Modes. 

Every combination of premisses and conclu- 
sion in any figure is called a mode ; and these 
vary with the Quantity, Quality, and Relation 
of the judgments. Adopting the vowels to 
signify the various kinds of judgments (§ 43), 
we are enabled to express any mode by three 
vowels, of which the first denotes the Quantity, 
Quality, and Relation of the Proposition ; the 
second, the same of the Assumption ; the third, 
the same of the Conclusion. K the number of 
the figure be added, we can at once exhibit 
the whole logical properties of the syllogism. 
Thus: 

Example, The same at length, 

AIL Fig. i. Prop. All B is A. 

Ass. Some C. is B. 
Concl. Some C is A. 



SYLLOGISMS. 



107 



§ 70. — Table of the Legitimate Modes 

IN ALL Figures. 

The following table is gained by applying tbe 
thirteen rules to all possible combinations of 
three terms in three judgments, retaining only 
such, and with such restrictions, as do not vio- 
late any of them. The references to some of 
the rules, given with certain modes, denote 
that they exemplify in some way the rule re« 
ferred to. 



Pig.l. 


Fig. II. 


Fig. IIL 


A A A 


A EB 

AOO 

AUY. Ruleix. 
AYY. Ruleix. 
E A E 


A A I. Rule vi. 

All 

AUA 

AYA 

EAO 

EIO 

EU E 

EYE 

lAI 

lUI 

OAO 
OUO 

UAY 

UEE 

U I I. Rule xii. 

UOO 

UUU 

UYA. Rulexi. 

YA Y 

YEE 

YUY 


All 


AUA 


A Yl 


e a E 


E I 


E I 


E U E 


B U E 


B YO 


E Y 


I U I 


I U I 


1 Y I 


I Yl 

U A A. Rule xi. 
U E E 


U 


Y 

U A A. Rule xi. 

U E E 


UIL Rulexi. 
U 


U I L Rule xi. . . 
U 


U U U 


U U U 


U Y Y 


U Y Y 


Y E E 


Y A A 


Yl I 

YU A 


YOO 

YUY. Ruleix. 

Y Y Y 


YYI 





108 laws of thought. 

§ 71. — That Reduction is unnecessary. 

Reduction is described as the process of 
bringing a syllogism from an imperfect to a 
perfect figure : in explanation of which we are 
told that the second and third are imperfect 
figures, and the first the sole pe'rfect one. This 
perfection is merely a direct conformity with the 
dictum of Aristotle (Categ. ch. 5). But as in 
fact, the said dictum only applies to the first 
figure, it is ridiculous to call the others imper- 
fect for not conforming to what does not con- 
cern them. In the present treatise, I have 
accommodated the canon or dictum to all the 
figures, and consider inference in one, as per- 
fect as in another. As there can be no need 
then for exhibiting a syllogism in a new and 
not more perfect figure, it is dispensed with: 
not so, however, some of the processes which 
it employed in bringing its terms to the proper 
order ; they will be found, under their old title 
of Conversion, among the Immediate Inferences. 
But in place of the rejected process, it may be 
as well here to explain how syllogisms can be 
exhibited in a less cumbrous manner than by 
the Table already given : from which explana- 
tion, the logical reader will gather incidentally 
the principle on which Reduction is grounded. 



SYLLOGISMS. 109 

To have knowledge is possible in two ways, ' 
says Greek Philosophy. First, the knowledge 
may be active and present to our consciousness ; 
second, it may be quiescent and dormant, so as 
that we are not conscious of it, and yet may 
become so by an act of memory, without recur- 
ring to the original sources whence we derived 
it. Now in evoking a dormant cognition into 
activity, we may observe, that what was single 
and one when at rest, may assume two or three 
shapes when put into motion. For example, 
if one knows that Philip was attacked and 
beaten by Peter, our cognition respecting it 
(when at rest) is nothing more than a concep- 
tion of a certain relation between two persons, 
and is one: but when we come to bring our 
cognition into internal discourse it becomes two, 
for we either think that PhiKp was beaten by 
Peter, or that Peter beat Philip, two distinct 
thoughts, though relating to one fact. In read- 
ing from the tablet of our mind, we may bring 
forward the images in one order, or in another. 
This doctrine is the Statics and Dynamics of 
thinking. The principle which suggests one 
order rather than another is the more imme- 
diate direction of our consciousness to one part 
of the representation; for the leading notion, 



110 LAWS OF THOUGHT, 

or subject, in the cognition may be sought from 
any part of the representation, if complex. 
Thus " Philip was beaten by Peter" answers to 
the question " What has befallen Philip?" the 
notion of Philip being the subject, or that 
about which the thought is : whereas ^^ Peter 
has beaten Philip" is a thought more directly 
about Peter. In brief then, out of absolutely 
the same subjective materials the mind may 
construct two or more thoughts, according to 
the part of the materials whence it seeks its 
leading notion or subject: and though these 
brain-inscribed materials are no thoughts until 
the consciousness is directed towards them, we 
may by a metaphor, term them thoughts at 
rest. 

And this metaphor will help to explain the 
doctrine of the three figures of syllogisms. One 
dormant syllogism may be awakened into dif- 
ferent forms, according to the order in which 
we direct our attention towards its component 
conceptions. And as the truth (i. e. self-con- 
sistency) of our thinking depends on our con- 
struction of each of the forms consistently with 
this dormant type, so if we can adequately re- 
present the type, we shall be able to discover 
the ground of this internal truth compendiously. 



SYLLOGISMS. Ill 

It may also subserve a mnemonic use, espe- 
cially in abstruse subjects, to ascertain not the 
two or more syllogisms formed from the type, 
but the type itself. This may be done simply 
by representing the terms of a cognition by 
circles, whose mutual position expresses the 
position of the conceptions in the type as to 
each other. Thus the judgment A (Univ. Aflf. 
Attr.) is represented by one circle within ano- 
ther, the less being its subject, the greater its 
predicate. An example perhaps may be the 
best explanation. The Syllogism AAA Fig. 
i. (§ 69) may be figured by three concentric 
circles. 




Let A B and C be three conceptions of which 
the first includes the second, and the second the 
third. Now let each have a particular value ; 
let A stand for mortal^ 6 for many and let C 



112 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

represent king. Our cognition of these objects 
as reposited in our mind, stands as is here re- 
presented ; i. e. as to extenstoUy (§6) the cod«- 
ception king is included in many and man in 
mortal, and in evoking this reposited knowledge, 
we may use the mode — ^A A A, Fig. i. as the 
readiest form. 

Thus AAA, Fig. I. 

All men are mortal. 

All kings are men. 

All kings are mortal. 
Here kings were the subject of thought, to 
which we seek to attribute or not the conception 
of mortality y through means of that of humun- 
ity. But change the subject of thought (which 
is always the primus or minor), and let it be A 
instead of C. The Syllogism may stand 

Y Y Y, Fig. I. 

Some m£n ^ kings (or are all kings^ 

Some mortal beings = men, 

Some mortal beings = kings. 
Comparing this with the last it will be found 
that the premisses of either simply converted 
(§ 55) and then transposed, become the pre- 
misses of the other: that in short one is the 



SYLLOGISMS. ' 113 

other backwards. But both are adequately re- 
presented by the single diagram above : which 
diagram may stand for both, and for any others, 
if any there be, which express a gradation of in- 
clusion amongst three conceptions. This hint 
may be used in practising logical analysis : one 
remark must be made> which is, we are never to 
exhibit more in the diagram than the cognition 
warrants, a fault we might easily slide into in 
particular judgments. In the judgment I. (Part. 
Afif. Attr.) we may not infer that because some 
A if B, therefore some also is noU for all A 
may be B, though we have not ascertained it : 
so we must express it in diagram, 

thus : and not thus : 





§ 72.— >0f the Hypothetical Syllogism. 
A Spurious Kind, and its Reduction. 

The Hypothetical Syllogism has a Hypothetical 
Judgment for its Major, and a Categorical for 

Q 



1 14 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

Minor, which Categorical must either assert the 
Antecedent, or deny the Consequent, of the 
Major. 

SyUogisms sometimes assume the Hypotheti- 
cal form, which are nothing more than Catego- 
ricals disguised, most commonly hy the intrusioii 
of the Minor Term into the Major Premiss. 
For example, 

Spirits are invisihle. 

Departed souls are spirits, 

.*. Departed souls are invisihle, 
may stand, 

If departed souls are spirits, they are invisi- 
hle. 

They are spirits, 

.•. They are invisible. 
Such a Syllogism differs in no respect from a 
cryptical (§ 75) one of the common kind, to 
which it is immediately reducible by discarding 
the intruding term, the Subject of both Ante- 
cedent and Consequent, and forming the Major 
of the two remaining Predicates. This plan of 
reduction is to be followed, in all causes where 
the Subject of Antecedent and Consequent is 
the same. And the truth of the Hypothetical 
depends solely on the truth of the Categorical 
it covers. 



SYLLOGISMS. 115 

There are four Moods of this kind o/* Hypo- 
thetical Syllogism, two in which the Minor 
denies, or takes away, part of the Major (called 
modi tollentes) and two in which it lays down 
part of the Major (called modi ponentes). Of 
these four, two have place when the concealed 
Major is an Attributive, two more when it is an 
Identical or Substitutive Judgment. 

The Four Moods are, i. To argue from the 
position (i. e. the establishing for truth) of the 
Antecedent, to the position of the Consequent. 
Example, 

If God is infinitely wise, he must be infi- 
nitely good. 
And He is infinitely wise. 
Therefore He is infinitely good, 
ii. From the Amotion (i. e. the denial) of the 
Consequent to the Amotion of the Antecedent. 
Example, 

« If men were truly charitable, they would 
abstain from aggression, * 

They do not abstain from aggression. 
And therefore are not truly charitable, 
iii. (The Cryptical Categorical being here as 
to Relation a Substitutive or Defining Judg- 
ment). From the Amotion of the Antecedent 
to the Amotion of the Consequent. Example, 



116 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

m 

If brutes have the faculty of choosiD^, in 
two or more equally possible thingSy that 
which best pleases them, they have free 
will. 
But they have not this feculty. 
Therefore they have not free will* 
iv. (The Categorical being a Defining Jadg- 
ment.) From the position of the Conseqaoit 
to the position of the Antecedent. Example, 
If Sir Thomas Browne displays erudition, 
he displays knowledge gained by exten- 
sive reading. 
Now he does display knowledge gained by 

extensive reading, 
Therefore he displays erudition. 
It must be repeated that unless the concealed 
Categorical be an Identical or Defining Jodg^ 
ment, the two last moods are invalid* 



§ 73. — The true Hypothetical. 

The only Hypothetical deserving a separate 
name and explanation, is that wherein one notion 
is affirmed of another in the Consequent, under 
a certain condition only, expressed by the Ante- 
cedent; the Predicate of the Antecedent not 
standing to that of the Consequent as Species to 



SYLLOGISMS. 117 

Genus, but the two members being related as 
Cause and Effect. It has been held that this 
kind of Hypothetical Syllogism is sui generis^ 
nor can possibly be reduced into a Categorical. 
I hope to shew that it is already a Categorical, 
requiring no farther alteration than a slight one 
in the symbols it employs, at present calculated 
to mislead. 

The Copula, though always found in a Judg- 
ment, often occurs when no Judgment takes 
place ; and this is true in the matter in hand ; for 
the Antecedent and Consequent of a Hjrpothe- 
tical Judgment severally contain a Copula, and 
yet are no Judgments at all, but merely com-> 
pound Conceptions. For, let any one examine 
an example of this, ** If A is B, X is Y," he will 
find that he neither affirms B of A, nor Y of X, 
therefore they are no Judgments, but he does 
affirm X + Y of A + B ; or in other words the 
Compound Conception (A determined by 6) is 
the subject to a Predicate formed by the Com- 
pound Conception (X determined by Y). And 
all true Hypothetical should be expressed as 
Categoricals by the following change: 

If AisB, XisY, 

AuB, 

/. X is Y, 



118 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

reduced to, 

(The case of A being B) is (a case of X 

being Y), 
This is (a case of A being B), 
.*. This is (a case of X being Y). 
And the Syllogism as thus expressed pos^ 
sesses every qualification of a Syllogism of the 
Mood A A A of the first Figure, without hav- 
ing lost any property possessed before. 

§ 74. — Of Disjunctive Syllogisms. 

A Disjunctive Syllogism is one which has a 
disjunctive judgment for its proposition. A 
judgment of this kind has already been shewn 
to belong to the class of identical or defining 
Judgments. But the truth is, such a one is not 
the real Proposition of the Syllogism bearing 
its name, but a Categorical derived immediately 
from it. For example, 

All A is B or C, 

It is not B, 

.*. It is C, 
may be readily reduced by substituting a premiss 
fairly deducible (§61) from the disjunctive for 
the Disjunctive itself. It will then stand, 

All (A that is not B) is C, 



SYLLOGISMS. 119 

This is an (A that is not B), 

/. This is C. 
The principle of Disjunctive Judgments will 
appear from the rules of Division. It is briefly 
this, — ^what lies under a Conception must lie in 
one or other of that Conception's dividing parts. 
This holds whether there be two or more dis- 
junct members in the Judgment. And where 
there are more than two, the Syllogism may 
still be exhibited in the Categorical form. Thus^ 

A is B or C or D, 

It is B, 

.*. It is not C or D, 
may be reduced, 

All (A that is B) is (neither C nor D), 

This is (A that is B), 

.*. This is (neither C nor D). 
It may be observed that the formula given 
for the true Hypothetical Syllogism after Re- 
duction will be found convenient for Disjunc- 
tives. (" The case of A being B,") &c. 

§ 75. — Cryptical Syllogisms. 

The term Cryptical is applied to Syllogisms 
which do not appear in scientific order, but have 
undergone some change, for brevity of thought 



120 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

or expression, or some similar cause. Referring 
to what has been said of Reduction, (§ 71), 
crypsis (i. e. disguise) is no error when it ade- 
quately represents the type or pattern of the 
Syllogism latent in the mind, but for full appli- 
cation of the rules of deduction we are com- 
pelled to remove it by supplpng ellipses, re- 
storing inversions, and lopping off redundancies. 
Crypsis in Syllogisms is the act of presenting 
reasoning in an inartificial shape. The d priori 
validity of Cryptical Syllogisms can only be 
recognised when we have the two premisses 
given, for the suppression of the conclusion can 
then be obviated, but the want of a premiss can* 
only be supplied by an appeal to the objects of 
thought. Crypsis (which was probably first 

treated of by Ramus and his followers) may 

* 

occur in many ways. Omission of the Major or 
of the Minor, or of the Conclusion, inver^on of 
the Premisses, or of the Premisses and Conclu- 
sion, iutersertion of extraneous terms or Judg- 
ments, are each of them possible. 

§ 76. — Enthymeme. 

A Cryptical Syllogism produced by the sup- 
pression of a Premiss is called an Enthymeme. 
Scholion. A distinction must be made be- 



SYLLOGISMS. 121r 

tween the logical and rhetorical Elnthymeme. 
The logical I have just described. The rhe- 
torical, as explained by Aristotle, is a Syllo- 
gism with a suppressed major, which if filled 
up would be in A A A in any of the figures. 
But we shall find on referring to the table 
(§ 70) that A A A is only logically valid in 
the first figure ; in the second it would con- 
tain an undistributed middle ; in the third, an 
illicit process of the minor. The two last are 
therefore disowned by Logic. It may seem 
that arguments thus faulty should have no 
place either in 'Logic or Rhetoric; it will 
however a little surprise many to learn that 
the mode of proof termed Circumstantial 
Evidence naturally assumes the shape of a 
string of rhetorical Enthymeme of the second 
figure. For example, " this man is the mur- 
derer, for he was near the spot; he is the 
murderer, for he was found with a discharged 
pistol ; he is the murderer, for he trembled 
when we seized him ; he is the murderer, for 
his clothes were torn as by resistance." Now 
singly, every one of these is a faulty Syllo- 
gism, but accumulated, we find in them the 
ground — not from our logic but our experi- 
ence—of the following judgment, "whoso- 



»f 



122 LAWS OF THOUGHT. 

ever it not found in so many circumstances to 
differ from the murderer, is the murderer ; 
and thence we frame a true logical argument 
condemning him: and this last is properly 
the only logical step in the process. 



§ 77. — Sorites. 

A Chain of Judgments where the Predicate of 
each is the suhject of the succeeding, and the 
suhject of the first and the predicate of the 
last form the conclusion, is termed a Sorites. 
lliis is nothing hut a chain of cryptical Syllo- 
gisms of which the first has no conclusion, the 
last a conclusion hut no assumption, and the 
rest neither assumption nor conclusion. But as 
the conclusion of each serves for assumption to 
that which succeeds, nothing more is requisite 
to exhibit the cr3rptical Syllogisms as perfect, 
than the intersertion of proper conclusions as 
they arise. If the Syllogisms into which it is 
thus resolved, conform to the rules of mediate 
inference, then only is the Sorites proved to be 
correct. The order of the premisses in a Sor- 
ites, so evidently natural, affords a strong argu- 
ment that our placing the Assumption ctfier the 
Proposition is an arbitrary arrangement. 



SYLLOGISMS* 123 

Example of Sorites, The same resolved, 
A is B B is C D is E 

B is C A is B [A is D] 

C is D [.-. A is C] /. A is E. 

DisE 
.-. A is E. C is D 

[A is C] 
[/. A is D]. 

§ 78- — Epichereme or Prosyllogism. 

When a judgment is added to a premiss, in 
proof of it and the cause of its being true, the 
judgment added, with the premiss it proves, 
form an Enthymeme called a Prosyllogism or 
Epichereme. A Prosyllogism then is defined — 
an Enthymeme whose conclusion stands as pre- 
miss in another Syllogism. 

§ 79. — The Dilemma. 

With the Dilemma as involving the discom- 
fiture of an adversary, which its common notion 
does, we have nothing to do here, because such 
matters are only accidental and extraneous to 
thinking, and we are here to explain nothing 
but what is essential to and constitutive of it. 
It is nothing else than a compound of two or 



124 LAWS OP THOUGHT. 

more Hypothetical Syllogisms with the acci- 
dental relation to the matter in hand that one 
of them must he true, and whichever it is, the 
adversary is discomfited. 

The Dilemma proper is a Hypothetical Syl- 
logism, of which either the Antecedent or Con- 
sequent is Disjunctive. Like the ordinary Hy- 
pothetical it has two modes, the affirmative 
(modus ponens) and negative, (modus toUens), 
called respectively the Constructive and De- 
structive Dilemma. 

Constructive Dilemma, 

If A is B or E is F, then C is D, 
But either A is B or £ is F, 
.-. C is D. 

The same exhibited categorically, 

(The cases of A heing B and E being F) 

are (cases of C being D), 
This is (a case of A being B or E being* F), 
.'. This is (a case of C being D). 

Destructive Dilemma. 

K A is B, then C is D or E is F, 
But neither C is D nor E is F, 
.*. A is not B. 



SYLLOGISMS. 125 

The same exhibited categorically. 

(The case of A being B) is (a case of C 

being D or E being F), 
This is not (a case of C being D or £ 

being F), 
•*• This is not (a case of A being B). 

SchoHon. It may seem wrong to treat a 
judgment (which both antecedent and conse- 
quent appear to be) as a conception, still more 
to unite two seeming judgments in one con- 
ception. But it should be repeated, first, 
that the number of marks or determinations 
in a conception, how great soever, does not 
make it the less a conception, provided the 
mind can and does combine them as one re- 
presentation, which is the case here in spite of 
the quasi Copula ; and next, that two or more 
of these qiuisi judgments may be united in 
one conception, if regard be had to the princi- 
ple of unity of representation. Thus, " George 
Sand is a man or a woman ;" here the expo- 
nent of the unity in this disjoined predicate 
would be " human creature," of which man 
and woman are dividing members. 



126 laws of thought. 

§ 80. — Induction. 

According to the common (perhaps to the 
universal) teaching of logicians, Induction is a 
mode of reasoning sui generis : many avoiding 
the attempt to reduce it to a Syllogism at all, 
and others finding in it a new and anomalous 
one, not conforming to the rules of Categoricals. 
The error of these latter arose from no fault in 
their exhibition of the inductive argument, but 
of their doctrine of Syllogisms in general. It 
can be shown that Induction is but an ordinary 
Syllogism with one Substitutive judgment. 

Induction is the reasoning whereby we infer 
that something belongs to a whole because it 
belongs to a sufficient number of its parts : in 
logical induction (i. e. the induction which is 
valid a priori) no enumeration less than entire 
is considered sufficient ; its canon being — ^what 
is true of all the parts of a Conception is true of 
the whole (positis omnibus partibus iisdemque 
junctis ponitur totum). This is called Com' 
plete Induction. 

Example (in A U A, Fig. III.) 

X Y Z are B, 

XYZ = A, 
.-. All A is B. 



SYLLOGISMS. 127 

Incomplete Induction accepts an enumeration 
of instances less than the whole, where the 
whole cannot be observed; and this enumera- 
tion may be either of many or of one case ac- 
cording to the facilities of observation. But it 
holds as an invariable rule that wherever an 
Inductive Judgment is made the basis of a pro- 
cess of reasoning, it is in some way held true as 
a Complete Induction. 

Scholion. Some psychologists have as- 
serted that the Induction from one instance 
only holds in cases of inward experience, 
where " connexionis necessarisB inter subjec- 
tum et praedicatum probe nobis consciisumus.'* 
Later writers enumerate certain notes which 
a sound Induction (of the incomplete kind) 
will possess, such as, i. a ready identification 
with our conceptions of facts ; ii. the power 
of predicting, in cases yet unexamined ; iii. 
the consilience of it with others, '^ where many 
and widely different lines of experience spring 
together into one theory, which explains them 
all/' — See Quarterly/ Review^ No. 135, p. 
233-4.