FORMAL LOGIC: 



OR, 



The Calculus of Inference^ 

Neceflary and Probable. 



BY 

AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN 

Of Trinity College Cambridge^ 

Fellow of the Cambridge Philofbphical Society, Secretary of the Royal 

Agronomical Society, ProfefTor of Mathematics in 

Univerfity College London. 



•^ "* J * ^ 

¦" o ' ¦' ^ ^ 

J "" %. ^ » ^ 



KaAo; yo^o<; iocy tk «utw vofji.ifji.ug j^f)»iTa3,': • j. • 



• 



* ^ u 4 * 



t -• . J ^ 



LONDON: 

TAYLOR AND WALTON, 

Bookfellers and Publifhers to Univerfity College, 
28, Upper Gower Street, 

M DCCQXLVII 






1 



/. 



f'^'-l 









j/'^- 



•'• 






• • • 



• •• • 



•••.? 



• •• • 



• * • 



• *•• • 
t • • • "i • 

• ••• • • «• 

*•• r ••• ••• •• • 



• • • ••• • • • 



• • "•' 



•> • • 




PREFACE. 



np^HE fyftem given in this work extends beyond that 

-*^ commonly received, in feveral diredions. A brief 

ftatement of what is now fubmitted for adoption into 

the theory of inference will be the matter of this preface. 

In the form of the propofition, the copula is made as 
abftrad as the terms : or is confidered as obeying only 
thofe conditions which are neceflary to inference. 

Every name is treated in connexion with its contrary 
or contradi£iory name ; the diftincftion between thefe words 
not being made, and others fupplied in confequence. 
Eight really feparable forms of predication are thus ob- 
tained, between any two names : the eight of the common 
fyftem amounting only to tix, when, as throughout my 
work, the two forms of a convertible propofition are 
confidered as identical. 

The complex propofition is introduced, confifting in 
the coexiftence of two fimple ones. The theory of the 
fyllogifm of complex propofitions is made to precede 
that of the fimple or ordinary fyllogifm ; which laft is 
deduced from it. I have only ufed the word complexy 
htc2i\x{t Jimple was already appropriated (fee page 85). 



IV Preface. 

By the introduftion of contraries, the number of valid 
fyUogiftic forms is increafed to thirty-two, connected to- 
gether by many rules of relation, but all fhewn to contain, 
each with reference to its own difpofition of names and 
contraries, only one form of inference. 

The diftindion of figure is avoided from the beginning 
by introducing into every propofition an order of refer- 
ence to its terms. 

A fimple notation, which includes the common one, 
gives the means of reprefenting every fyllogifm by three 
letters, each accented above or below. By infpeftion of 
one of thefe fymbols it is feen immediately, i. What 
fyllogifm is reprefented, 2. Whether it be valid or in- 
valid, 3. How it is at once to be written down, 4. What 
axiom the inference contains, or what is the ad of the 
mind when it makes that inference (chapter XIV). 

A fubordinate notation is ufed (page (ix:^^ in abbrevia- 
tion of the propofition at length. 

Compound names are confidered, both when the com- 
pofition is conjunctive, and when it is disjunctive. Diftincfl 
notation and rules of transformation are given, and the 
compound fyllogifms are treated as reducible to ordinary 
ones, by invention of compound names. 

The theory of the numerical fyllogifm is invefligated, 
in which, upon the hypothefis of numerical quantity in 
both terms of every propofition, a numerical inference 
is made. 

But, when the numerical relations of the feveral terms 
are fully known, all that is unufual in the quantity of the 
predicate is fhown to be either fuperfluous, or elfe, as I 
have called it, fpurious. 



Preface. v 

The old doArine of modals is made to give place to 
the numerical theory of probability. Many will objed 
to this theory as extralogical. But I cannot fee on what 
definition, founded on real diftindlion, the exclufion of it 
can be maintained. When I am told that logic confiders 
the validity of the inference, independently of the truth 
or falfehood of the matter, or fupplies the conditions 
under which the hypothetical truth of the matter of the 
premifes gives hypothetical truth to the matter of the 
conclufion, I fee a real definition, which propounds for 
confideration the forms and laws of inferential thought. 
But when it is further added that the only hypothetical 
truth fhall be abfolute truth, certain knowledge, I begin 
to fee arbitrary diftindion, wanting the reality of that 
which preceded. Without pretending that logic can take 
cognizance of the probability of any given matter, I 
cannot underftand why the ftudy of the eflfed: which 
partial belief of the premifes produces with refped to the 
conclufion, fhould be feparated from that of the confe- 
quences of fuppofing the former to be abfolutely true. 
Not however to difpute upon names, I mean that I 
fhould maintain, againft thofe who would exclude the 
theory of probability from logic, that, call it by what 
name they like, it fliould accompany logic as a fl:udy. 

I have, of courfe, been obliged to exprefs, in my own 
manner, my own convictions on points of mental philo- 
fophy. But any one will fee that, in all which I have 
propofed for adoption, it matters nothing whether my 
views of the phenomena of thought, or others, be made 
the bafis of the explanation. So far therefore, as I am 



VI Preface. 

confidered as propofing forms of fyllogifm, &c. to the 
logician, and not giving inftrudion to the ftudent of the 
fcience, the reader has nothing to do with my choice of 
the terms in which mental operations are fpoken of. 

In the appendix will be found fome remarks on the 
perfonal controverfy between Sir W. Hamilton of Edin- 
burgh and myfelf, of which I fuppofe the celebrity of my 
opponent, and the appearance of part of it in a journal 
fo widely circulated as the Athenaum^ has caufed many 
ftudents of logic to hear or read fomething. 

At the end of the contents of fome chapters in the 
following table, are a few additions and correftions, to 
which I requeft the reader's attention. 



A. De Morgan. 



Univerjity College^ London^ 
Oftober 14, 1847. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



*#* The articles entered in Italic^ are thofe, the contents of which belong 
to the peculiar fyftem prefented in this work. 

CHAPTER I. Fir/i Notions (pages 1—25). 

Firft notion of Logic, i ; Redu6Uon of propofitions to fimple 
affirmation and negation, 2, 3 ; Diflindtion between negation and 
affirmation requiring a negative, 3 ; how two negatives make an 
affirmative, 4 ; propofitions, 4 ; their relations, contraries and contra- 
diftories, 5 ; (^ntity of fubjeft and predicate, 6 ; Converfes, 7 ; 
fiindamental notion of inference, 8 ; Material repreientation, 8, 9 ; 
fyllogifm, 9 ; its elements, 9 ; fyllogifms of different kinds of conclu- 
fjon, 10, II, 12 ; colledlion of refults, 12 ; rules of fyllogifm, 13, 14; 
weakened conclufions and ftrengthenedpremifesy 1 5 ; the figures, 1 6, 
17, 18; colleBion of effentially different fyllogifms, 18, 19 ; examples, 
19, 20; a fortiori fyllogifm, 20, 21, 22; hypothetical fyllogifm, 22, 
23 ; demonfbation, diredl and indiredl, 23, 24; converfion of a di- 
lemma, 25. 

*^* This chapter may be omitted by thofe who have feme know- 
ledge of the ordinary definitions and phrafeology of logic. It is firi6lly 
confined to the Ariftotelian forms and fyllogifms, and is the reprint of 
a traft publifhed in 1839, under the title of 'Firft Notions or Logic 
(preparatory to the fhidy of Geometry)' : the only alterations are ; — 
the change of phrafeology, as altering * fome X is Y' into * fome Xs 
are Ys,' &c. ; the correSion of a faulty demonflration ; and a few 
omiffions, particularly of fome infufficient remarks on the probability 
of arguments. 

CHAPTER II. — On Obje^Syldeas^and Names {pzges 26 — 46). 

Definition of Logic, 26 ; our pofition with refpeft to mind, 26, 
27 ; Doubt on the uniformity ofprocefs in all minds, 27 ; exiflence of 
things external to the perceiving mind, 28, 29 ; fubjeft and objedl, 
ideal and objeftive, 29, 30 ; idea the fole knowledge, 30 ; objeft, 
why then introduced, 30 ; extent of its meaning, 30, 31 ; abflradtion, 
qujdities, relations, 31, 32; innate ideas, 32 ; diftindlion of necefTary, 



J^ 



xii Contents. 

the figures in detail, 134, 135, 136; Aldrich's verfes on the rules, 
1 36; Explanation of thefe rules, andfubjlitutesfor the fy ft em in which 
contraries are allowed, 137, 138, 139; Method of determining what 
terms are taken dire ^ from thepremijes, and what contrariwife, 140 ; 
Reafonfor the duplication of the fy ft em of chapter ^., 140, 141. 

CHAPTER VIII. — On the numerically definite Syllogif?n (pages 
141 — 170). 

Reafonfor its introduBion, 141 ; definition of numerical definitenefs, 
141, 142; diftinBion between it and perfeSi definitenefs, 142, 143 ; 
Notation for the fimple numerical propofition, 144; Forms of inference 
when only the dire SI middle term is numerically definite, 145, 146; 
Canon of the middle term, 1 45 ; Double inference in the cafe of one 
premife negative, 145, 146 ; This double inference is true in the Arif- 
totelian fyllogifm Bokardo, 146; Application of the phrafeology of 
complex names to the relations of propofitions, 146, 147, 148, 149; 
Identical propofitions, 146, 147; Necejfary confequence, 147; Reafons 
for rejecting the ufual diftinSlion of Contrary and Contradiftory, and 
for introducing fubcontrary andfupercontrary, 148 j Remarks on a uni- 
verfe of propofitions, 149; Abolition of the numerical quantification of 
the predicate, 150, 151; The cafes in which it appears either identical 
with thofe in which it does not appear, or fpurtous, 150, 151; numeri- 
cal forms of the ufual propofitions, 151; Modes of contradicting the 
numerical forms, 152; Definition offpurious propofitions : reafons for 
refufing their introduilion, and excluding them when they appear, 153, 
154; Note in defence of the word fpurious, 153; Spurious conclufions 
may refult from premife s not fpurious, 153, 154; Law of inference, 
154; Contranominal forms of numerical propofitions, partial, (which 
are fpurious) and complete, 155, 156; When one is impofjtble, the 
other is fpurious, I ^j ', Fundamental form of inference, i^j ; Of two 
contranominals, one is always partially fpurious, 158; deduSlion of the 
remaining forms from the fundamental one, 158, 1 59 ; Equations of 
connexion between the numerical quantities, 1 59 ; Enumeration of the 
ufeful fubdivifions of the numerical hypothefis^ 160; Exhibition of the 
fixteen varieties of numerical fyllogiftic inference, 161; Deduction of 
all the ordinary fyllogifms from them, 161, 1 62 ; Cafes in which de- 
finite particulars allow of inference by defcription with refpeSi to the 
middle term, 163 ; Double choice in the mode of expr effing thefe fyllo- 
gifms, 163; Exceptional fyllogifms, afferted to be what are moft 
frequently meant when univerfals are ufed, 1 64 ; Formation of ab 
infirmiori fyllogifms, their connexion with the ordinary ones, 165 ,• For- 
mation of fyllogifms of tranfpofed quantity, 1 66 ; Enumeration of them, 
166, 167; Rules for their formation, 167, 168; Example of their 
occurrence, 168 ; Example of the formation of an opponent numerical 
fyllogifm, 168 ; Remark on what becomes of the fecond inference in a 
partially definite fyftem, 1 69 ; Nonexiftence of definite numerical com- 
plex fyllogifms, 169, 170. 



Contents. xiii 

Additions and correSlions, Page 143, line 12 : Supply the propo- 
fitions X)M,P and Y)N,Q, as deducible from the numbers of in- 
ftances in the feveral names. Page 148, line lo, from the bottom : 
for propolitions read prepofitions. Page 152, line 4: for m read 
m. Page 153, line zz : for will prefently (how us, read have fhown 
us in page 145. Page 154, line z, from the bottom, for ys readis* 
Page 155, line 6 from the bottom, for mXY read mXY. Page 162, 
line 2, after the table : for laft chapter read chapter V. Page 1 66, 
line I Tyfor m^xy read m^xy. Page 167, line 24 : for 6z read()Z. 

CHAPTER IX.— On Probability (pages 170— 191). 

Remark on old and new views of knowledge, 1 70 ; Neceflary 
truths not always identities, inftance, two and two are four, 171 ; 
degrees of belief or knowledge, 171; Degree of knowledge treated as 
a magnitude, 172; Diftm6Uon of ideal and objeftive probability, 
172, 173 ; Rejedlion of the latter, 173 ; Definition of probability as 
referring to degree of belief, 173 ; Illuflration of degree of belief as a 
magnitude, 1 74 j What is perception of magnitude, 1 74 ; Meafure- 
ment of magnitude, 175; Illuflration of various degrees of belief, 
176; Difference of certain and probable, not that of magnitudes 
of various kinds, but that of finite and infinite of the fame kind, 
176, 177 ; the real diflindlionnot thereby abrogated, 178 j Poflulate 
on the acceptance of which the theory of probabilities depends, 1 79 ; 
the affumption of this poflulate, in other cafes, not always fo well 
founded as is fuppofed, 1 79, 180, 181; the difficulties of this poflu- 
late intentionally introduced and infifled on, 181, 182; Meafure of 
probability or credibility, and alfo of authority, 182, 183 ; Rule for 
the formation of this meafure, 1 84 ; Objedlive verification of a re- 
mote conclufion of this rule, 1 84, 185; Probability of the joint hap- 
pening of independent events, 186; Confequences of this rule, 187; 
Problem in which the primary cafes are imequally probable, 187, 
188; Rule of inverfe probabilities, 188, 189, 190; this rule alfo 
holds in calculating the probabilities of reflridled cafes from the unre- 
flridled ones, 190, 191. 

CHAPTER X.— •(}« probable Inference (pages 191 — 210). 

Argument and teftimony, 191, 192; argument never the only vehi- 
cle of information except when demonftrative, 192 ; truth or falfehood 
not thefimple iffue in argument, 192, 193 ; difficulty thereby introduced 
into the judgment of truth or falfehood, 193; entrance of teftimony, 
194; remark on the precept to negleSi authority, 194; Compofition 
of independent tellimonies, 195 ; on the majority of witneffes, 196 ; 
the fame problem, when the event afferted has an antecedent proba- 
bility, 197; queftion of coUufion, 198, 199 ; extenfion of the lafl 
problem to more complicated events, 200 ; Compofition of indepcn- 



xiv Contents. 

dent arguments on the fame fide, 201 ; manner in which the weak- 
nefs of an argument may become an argument or a tejiimony^ 202, 208 ; 
Compojition of arguments on contrary Jtdes, 203 j the fame on fub con- 
trary fide 5 y 204; Compofition of argume?it and teftimony in a quefiion 
of contrary fides y 205 ; More weight due to argument than to teftimony 
of the fame probability y 206 ; Utter rejeSiion of authority, what it 
amounts to, 207, 208 ; EffeSis of the fame arguments on different 
minds, 209 \EffeSl of probable confequence upon an affertion, 209, 210; 
Old fuicidal affertion, explained by probability, 210. 

Additions and corrections. Page 199, line \, from the bottom : 
for (i— \) read (i—Xy*. Page 201, line i^, from the bottom : 
for 7 read ^^. 

CHAPTER XI.— On InduSiton (pages 211—226). 

Explanation of induftion, 211; Redudlion of the procefs to a fyl- 
logifm, 211; Indudlion by connexion, and inftance, 212; Ordinary 
indu6tion not a demonftrative procefs, 212, 213 ; Pure induction, 
incomplete, probability of it, 213, 214; Ordinary miftakes on this 
fubjeft, 215; Examination of Mr. T. B. Macaulay's enumeration of 
infbnces in which fcientific analyfis is ufelefs, 216, 217, 218, 219, 
220, 221, 222, 223, 224; probability of fyllogifms with particular 
premifes, zz/^, zz^, zz6; Circumftantial evidence, 226. 

CHAPTER Xn. — On old logical Terms (pages 227—237). 

Dialedlics, 227 ; limple and complex terms, 227; apprehenfion, 
judgment, difcourfe, 227; Univerfal and fingular, 228; Individuals, 
228 ; categories, predicaments, 228 j fubftance, 228 ; firft and fecond 
fubftancc, 229 ; quantity, continuous and difcrete, 229 j Quality, 
habit, difpofition, paflion, 229 ; Relation, 229 ; Aftion, paffion, imma- 
nent, tranfient, univocal, equivocal, 229, 230; Remaining categories, 
230; predicables, genus, fpecies, 230; difference, property, acci- 
dent, 231 ; caufe, material, formal, efficient, final, 231 j form, mo- 
tion, fubjedl, objeft, 231 ; Subjedive, objedlive, adjundl, 232 ; 
modals, fubftitution of the theory of probabilities for them, 232 ; 
Their ufe in the old philofophy, 232, 233 ; Notions of old logicians 
on quantity, 234; Intenfion or comprehenfion, and extenfion, ob- 
jections to their oppofition as quantities, and references to places in 
this work where the diflindtion has occurred, 234, 235, 236; In- 
ftance, 236 ; Enthymeme, Arifto tie's, and modern, 236, 237. 

Additions and corrections . Page 230, lines 16 and i^, from the 
bottom; tranfpofe the words former and latter. Page 234 line z from 
bottom, for after r^/7</ before. Page 237, note ; I find that etymolo- 
gifts are decidedly of opinion that /o^o-e c, fpcech, and ^pito, flow, have 
different roots, and that the former isfpeech in its primitive meaning. 
The reader muft make the alteration, which however does not affeft 
my fuggeftion. 



Contents. xv 

CHAPTER XIII.— 0« Fallacies (pages 237—286). 

No claffification of fallacies, 237 ; Amufement derived from, 238 ; 
fallacy, fophifm, paradox, paralogifm, 238; Ariftotle's claffification, 
240 ; Pofition of ancients and moderns as to feUacies, 240 ; 
Confequences of the negledl of logic, 241 ; Ariftotle's fpecics of 
^lacies enumerated, 241; Equivocation, 241, 242; Change of 
meanings with time, 243 ; Importance once attached to fuccefsfiil 
equivocation, 244 ; Government fallacies, 244 ; Qualifications of 
meaning, 244, 245 ; Phrafes interpreted by their component words, 
245 ; AfTumption of right over words, 246, 247 ; Equivocating forms 
of predication, 247 ; Amphibology, 247 ; Defefts in the ftrudure 
of language, 247 ; Compofition and divifion, 248 ; Accent, 248, 
249 ; Fallacy of alteration of emphafis, 249, 250 ; di6Uon, 250 ; 
Accident and a diSio fecundum quid, &c., 250, 251, 252; Examina- 
tion of fbme cafes of legal ftriftnefs, 252, 253, 254; Petitio prin- 
cipii, 254; often wrongly imputed, 255; Ariftotle's meaning of it, 
256 ; Meaning of the old logicians, 256 j derivation from the fyllo- 
gflm of principle and example, 257; Charge of petitio principii 
againft all fy Uogifms, 257, 258, 259; Syllogifm fometimes only re- 
quired for diminution of comprehenfion, 259 ; Imperfedl dilemma, 
fophifm of Diodorus Cronus, 259, 260 ; Ignoratio elencbi, 260 ; 
proof of negative, and negative proof, 261, 262 ; aflertions of difpu- 
tants in their own fevour, 262 ; Fallacy of tendencies and neceflary 
confequences, 263 j Fallacy of attributing refults of teftimony to ar- 
gument, ^64 ; Argumentum ad bominem, 265 ; Parallel cafes, 265, 
266 : Fallacies of illuftration, 266, 267 ; Fallacia confequentis, 267 ; 
Incorreft logical forms, 267, 268 ; if on caufa pro caufa, 26S, 269 ; 
Fal/acia p/urimum interrogation urn, 269, 270; Praftices ofbarrifters, 
270; Incorreft ufe of univerfal form, 270, 271 ; Fallacy of the 
extreme cafe, 271 ; Ufe of the extreme cafe, 271, 272 ; Carriage of 
principles, 272 ; Ufe of the word general, zyz ; Confufion of logic 
and perfpedlive, 272, 273 ; General truths, 273 ; Implied univerfals 
not feirly ftated, 273 ; Fallacies of quantity, 274 ; Proverbs, 275 ; 
Fallacies of probability, 275, 276; Fallacy of analogy, 276; Fallacy 
of judging by refults, 276, 277 j Equivocations of ftyle, 277 ; Fal- 
lacy of fynonymes, 277, 278 j Fallacies arifingout of connection of 
principles and rules, 279, 280, 281 ; Want of rule nijt in common 
language, 280; Fallacy of importation of premifes, 281 ; Fallacy of 
retaining conclufions after abandoning premifes, 282 ; Fallacies of 
citation and quotation, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286. 

Additions and correilions. Page 250, lines 3 and 5 ; for mil- 
lenium read millennium, and for Newtonion read Newtonian. 

CHAPTER XIV.— 0« the verbal Defcription of the Syllogifm 
(pages 286 — 296). 

Conditions to be fatisfied, 287 ; Double mode of defcription and 

J 



xvi Contents. 

reference of one to the other, 287, 288 ; Language prof ofedy 288 ; 
Defcription of the cafes of fyllogifm in that language, 289, 290 ; 
Connexion of the univerfal and concomitant fyllogifm with the complex 
one, 291, z()Z'y ^antitative formation of the fyllogifm y 293, 294, 295 ; 
Rules for the formation of the numerical fyllogifm y 295, 296. 

APPENDIX I. — Account of a Controverfy between the Author 
of this Work and Sir William Hamilton of Edinburgh i and 
final reply to the latter (pages 297 — 323). 

APPENDIX II. — On fome Forms of Inference differing from 
thofe of the Arijlotelians (pages 323 — 336). 



f.' 



X.'- 



J^ ^ 



if 



L. 



ELEMENTS OF LOGIC. 



CHAPTER I. 

Firji Notions. 

THE firft notion which a reader can form of Logic is by 
viewing it as the examination of that part of reafoning 
which depends upon the manner in which inferences are formed, 
and the Inveftigation of general maxims and rules for conftrudl* 
ing arguments, fb that the conclufton may contain no inaccuracy 
which was not previoufly aflerted in the premifes. It has fo far 
nothing to do with the truth of the &£ts, opinions, or prefump- 
tions, from which an inference is derived 5 but (imply takes care 
that the inference fhall certainly be true, if the premifes be true. 
Thus, when we fay that all men will die, and that all men are 
rational beings, and thence infer that fome rational beings will 
die, the logical truth of this fentence is the fame whether it be 
true or falfe that men are mortal and rational. This logical truth 
depends upon xhtJlriUfure of the fentence^ zndjiotjapon the par- 
ticular matters fpoken of* Thus, 

Inftead of Write, 

All men will die. Every Y is X. 

All men are rational beings. Every Y is Z. 

Therefore fome rational beings Therefore fome Zs are Xs. 
will die. 

The fecond of thefe is the feme propofltion, logically confidered, 
as the firft ; the confequence in both is virtually contained in, 
and rightly inferred from, the^ premifes. Whether the premifes 
be true or falfe, is not a queftion of logic, but of morals, philofb- 
phy, hiftory, or any other knowledge to which their fubjeS- 

B 



2 Firji Notions of Logic. 

matter belongs : the queftion of logic is, does the conclufion 
certainly follow if the premifes be true ? 

Every aft of reafoning muft mainly confift in comparing to- 
gether different things, and either finding out, or recalling from 
previous knowledge, the points in which they refemble or differ 
from each other. That particular part of reafoning which is 
called inference^ confifls in the comparifon of feveral and different 
things with one and the fame other thing ; and afcertaining the 
refemblances, or differences, of the feveral things, by means of 
the points in which they refemble, or differ from, the thing with 
which all are compared. 

There mufl then be fome propofitions already obtained before 
any inference can be drawn. All propofitions are either affer- 
tions or denials, and are thus divided into affirmative and negative. 
Thus, X is Y, and X is not Y, are the two forms to which 
all propofitions may be reduced. Thefe are, for our prefent 
purpofe, the mofl fimple forms ; though it will frequently hap- 
pen that much circumlocution is needed to reduce propofitions 
to them. Thus, fuppofe the following affertion, * If he fhould 
come to-morrow, he will probably flay till Monday ;' how is 
this to be reduced to the form X is Y ? There is evidently 
fomething fpoken of, fomething faid of it, and an affirmative 
connexion between them. Something, if it happen, that is, the 
happening of fomething, makes the happening of another fome* 
thing probable ; or is one of the things which render the hap- 
pening of the fecond thing probable. 

X is Y 



The happening of his 
arrival to-morrow 



an event from which it may be 
inferred as probable that he 
will ftay till Monday. 



The forms of language will allow the manner of afferting to 
be varied in a great number of ways ; but the reduction to the 
preceding form is always poffible. Thus, ' fo he faid* is an affir- 
mation, reducible as follows : 



What you have jufl 1 f the thing which 

faid (or whatever > is < 
clfe * fo ' refers to) 



Firji Notions of Logic. 3 

By changing ' is * into ' is not,* we make a negative propofi- 
tion ; but care muft always be taken to afcertain whether a 
propofition which appears negative be really fo. The principal 
danger is that of confounding a propofition which is negative 
with another which is affirmative of fomething requiring a nega- 
tive to defcribe it. Thus, ' he refembles the man who was not 
in the room,' is affirmative, and muft not be confounded with 
* he does not refemble the man who was in the room.' Again, 
*• if he fhould come to-morrow, it is probable he will not ftay till 
Monday,' does not mean the fimple denial of the preceding pro- 
pofition, but the affirmation of a direftly oppofite propofition. 
It is, 

:^ is Y 

— ,, , . ^ ,. 1 fan event from which it maybe 

The happening of his j^ I inferred to be /;«probable that 
amval to-morrow, J [^ ^^ ^jn ft^y ^u Monday : 

whereas the following, 

^, , . f u- 1 r^^ event from which it may be 

. , ° is«^/' inferred as probable that he 

arrival to-morrow, J | ^jy ^^^ ^^ j^^^j^^^ 

would be expreflid thus : * If he fhould come to-morrow, that is 
no reafbn why he fhould ftay till Monday/ 

Moreover, the negative words not, no, &c., have two kinds of 
meaning which muft be carefully diftinguifhed. Sometimes they 
deny, and nothing more :. fometimes they are ufed to affirm the 
diredl contrary. In cafes which offer but two alternatives, one 
of which is neceflary, thefe amount to the fame thing, fince the 
denial of one, and the affirmation of the other, are obvioufly 
equivalent propofitions. In many idioms of converfation, the 
negative implies affirmation of the contrary in cafes which offer 
not only alternatives, but degrees of alternatives. Thus, to the 
queftion, ' Is he tall ? ' the fimple anfwer, * No,' moft frequently 
means that he is the contrary of tall, or confiderably under the 
average. But it muft be remembered, that, in all logical reafbn- 
ing, the negation is fimply negation, and nothing more, never 
implying affirmation of the contrary. 

The common propofition that two negatives make an affirm- 
ative, is true only upon the fuppofition that there are but two 



4 Firji Notions of Logic. 

pof&ble things, one of which is denied. Grant that a man muft 
be either able or unable to do a particular thing, and then not 
unable and able are the fame things. But if we fuppofe various 
degrees of performance, and therefore degrees of ability, it is 
falfe, in the common fenfe of the words, that two negatives make 
an aiErmative. Thus, it would be erroneous to fey, * John is 
able to tranflate Virgil, and Thomas is not unable 5 therefore, 
what John can do Thomas can do,' for it is evident that the 
premifes mean that John is fo near to the beft fort of tranflation 
that an affirmation of his ability may be made, while Thomas is 
confiderably lower than John, but not fo near to abfolute defi- 
ciency that his ability may be altogether denied. It will generally 
be found that two negatives imply an affirmative of a weaker 
degree than the pofitive affirmation. 

Each of the propofitions, ' X is Y,' and * X is not Y,' may 
be fubdivided into two fpectes: the univerfal^ in which every 
poffible cafe is included 5 and the particular^ in which it is not 
meant to be afTerted that the affirmation or negation is univerial. 
The four fpecies of propofition are then as follows, each being 
marked with the letter by which writers on logic have always 
diftinguifhed it. 

A Univerfal Affirmative Every X is Y 

E Univerfal Negative No X is Y 

I Particular Affirmative Some Xs are Ys 

O Particular Negative Some Xs are not- Ys 

In common converfation the affirmation of a part is meant to 
imply the denial of the remainder. Thus, by ' fome of the apples 
are ripe/ it is always intended to figniiy that fome are not ripe. 
This IS not the cafe in logical language, but every propofition is 
intended to make its amount of affirmation or denial, and no 
more. When we (ay, * Some X is Y,' or, more grammatically, 
' Some Xs are Ys,' we do not mean to imply that fome are not : 
this may or may not be. Again, the word fome means, ' one or 
more, poffibly all.' The following table will fhew the bearing 
of each propofition on the reft. 

Every Xis J^affirms Some Xs are Ts and denies \a ^ ^ 

Loome Xs are not Ts 



\ 



Firji Notions of Logic. 5 

No Xis l^affirms Some Xs are not Ts and denies] « v v 

LSome Xs are is 

Some Xs are Ts does not contradift? « ,, ^ ^> but denies No X is T 

{Some Xs are not /> J 

Some Xs are not Ts does not contradift] « y eT\^^^ denies Every Xis Y 

ContradiHory propofitions are thofe in which one denies any 
thing that the other affirms 5 contrary propofitions are thofe in 
which^'one denies every thing which the other affirms^ or affirms 
every thing which the other denies. The following pair are 
contraries, 

Every X is Y and No X is Y 

and the following are contradidlories, 

Every X is Y to Some Xs are not Ys 
No X is Y to Some Xs are Ys 

A contrary, therefore, is a complete and total contradictory; 
and a little confideration will make it appear that the decifive 
diftin£tion between contraries and contradidtories lies in this, 
that contraries may both be felfe, but of contradiSories, one 
muft be true and the other falfe. We may fay, * Either P is true, 
or fomething in contradiction of it is true ;' but we cannot fay, 
* Either P is true, or every thing in contradiction of it is true.' 
It is a very common miflake to imagine that the denial of a 
propofition gives a right to affirm the contrary; whereas it fhould 
be, that the affirmation of a propofition gives a right to deny the 
contrary. Thus, if we deny that Every X is Y, we do not affirm 
that No X is Y, but only that Some Xs are not Ys ; while, if we 
affirm 'that Every X is Y, we deny No X is Y, and alfo Some 
Xs are not Ys. 

But, as to contradictories, affirmation of one is denial of the 
other, and denial of one is affirmation of the other. Thus, 
either Every X is Y, or Some Xs are not Ys: affirmation of either 
is denial of the other, and vice verfa. 

Let the ftudent now endeavour to fatisfy himfelf of the fol- 
lowing. Taking the four preceding propofitions. A, E, I, O, 
* let the fimple letter fignify the affirmation, the fame letter in pa- 
renthefes the denial, and the abfence of the letter, that there is 
neither affirmation nor denial. 



From A follow (E), I, (O) 

From E (A), (I), O 

From I . . ^ . (E) 
From O . . . . (A) 



Firjl Notions of Logic. 

From (A) follow O 

From (E) .... I 

From (I) (A),E,0 

From (O) ... A, (E), I 



Thefe may be thus fummed up : The affirmation of a univerfal 
propofition, and the denial of a particular one, enable us to affirm 
or deny all the other three ; but the denial of a univerfal propo- 
fition, and the affirmation of a particular one, leave us unable to 
affirm or deny two of the others. 

In fuch propofitions as * Every X is Y,* * Some Xs are not Ys,' 
&c., X is called the fubje£fj and Y the predicate^ while the verb 

* is ' or * is not,* is called the copula. It is obvious that the 
words of the proportion point out whether the fubjeft is fpoken 
of univerfally or partially, but not fo of the predicate, which it is 
therefore important to examine. Logical writers generally give 
the name of dijiributed fubjefts or predicates to thofe which are 
fpoken of univerfally ; but as this word is rather technical, I fhall 
fay that a fubjeft or predicate enters wholly or partially, accord- 
ing as it is univerfally or particularly fpoken of. 

1. In A, or ' Every X is Y,' the fubjeft enters wholly, but 
the predicate only partially. For it obvioufly fays, ' Among the 
Ys are all the Xs,' * Every X is part of the coUedlion of Ys, fo 
that all the Xs make a part of the Ys, the whole it may be.' 
Thus, * Every horfe is an animal,' does not fpeak of all animals, 
but ftates that all the horfes make up a portion of the animals. 

2. In E, or * No X is Y,' both fubjeS and predicate enter 
wholly. ' No X whatfoever is any one out of all the Ys ; ' 

* fearch the whole coUeftion of Ys, and every Y (hall be found 
to be fomething which is not X.' 

3. In I, or * Some Xs are Ys,' both fubjedl and predicate enter 
partially. * Some of the Xs are found among the Ys, or make 
up a part (the whole poffibly, but not known from the preceding) 
of the Ys.' 

4. In O, or * Some Xs are not Ys,' the fubjedl enters partially, 
and the predicate wholly. * Some Xs are none of them any 
whatfoever of the Ys ; every Y will be found to be no one out 
of a certain portion of the Xs.' 

It appears then that. 

In affirmatives, the predicate enters partially. 



Firjl Notions of Logic. 7 

In negatives, the predicate enters wholly. 

In contradidory propofitions, both fubjedt and predicate enter 
differently in the two. 

The converfe of a propofltion is that which is made by inter- 
changing the fubjed and predicate, as follows : 





The propofltion. 




Its converfe. 


A 


Every X is Y 




Every Y is X 


E 


No XisY 




No Y is X 


I 


Some Xs are Ys 




Some Ys are Xs 


O 


Some Xs are not 


Ys" 


Some Ys are not Xs 



Now, it is a fundamental and felf-evident propofltion, that no 
conlequence mufl be allowed to aifert more widely than its pre- 
mifes \ (b that, for inflance, an aifertion which is only of fome 
Ys can never lead to a refult which is true of all Ys. But if a 
propofltion aflert agreement or difagreement, any,>other propofl- 
tion which afTerts the fame, to the fame extents and no further, 
mufl be a legitimate confequence ; or, if ySu pleafe, mufl 
amount to the whole, or part, of the original aflertion in another 
form. Thus, the converfe of A is not true : for, in * Ev^ry X 
is Y,* the predicate enters partially ; while in * Every Y is X,* 
the fubjeft enters wholly. ' All the Xs make up a part of the 
Ys, then a part of the Ys are among the Xs, or fome Ys are Xs.* 
Hence, the only legitimate converfe of * Every X is Y ' is, * Some 
Ys are Xs.* But in * No X is Y,* both fubjefl: and predicate enter 
wholly, and ' No Y is X ' is, in faft, the fame propofltion as 
' No X is Y.* And * Some Xs are Ys ' is alfo the fame as its con- 
verfe ' Some Ys are Xs : ' here both terms enter partially. But 
' Some Xs are not Ys * admits of no converfe whatever ; it is per- 
fe6Hy confiflent with all aifertions upon Y and X in which Y is 
the fubjeS. Thus neither of the four following lines is incon- 
fiflent with itfelf. 

Some Xs are not Ys and Every Y is X 

Some Xs are not Ys and No Y is X 

Some Xs are not Ys and Some Ys are Xs 

Some Xs are not Ys and Some Ys are not Xs. 

Having thus difcuifed the principal points connedled with the 
fimple aifertion, I pafs to the manner of making two aifertions 



8 Firjl Notions of Logic. 

give a third. Every inftance of this is called 2^fyllogtffn^ the two 
aflertions which form the bafis of the third are called premtfes^ 
and the third itfelf the conclujion. 

If two things both agree with a third in any particular, they 
agree with each other in the fame ; as, if X be of the fame colour as 
Y, arid Z of fhe fame colour as Y, then X is of the fame colour as 
Z. Again, if X differ from Y in any particular in which Z 
agrees with Y, then X and Z differ in that particular. If X be 
not of the (ame colour as Y, and Z be of the feme colour as Y, 
then X is not of the colour of Z. But if X and Z both differ 
from Y in any particular, nothing can be inferred; they may 
either differ in the feme way and to the feme extent, or not. 
Thus, if X and Z be both of different colours from Y, it neither 
follows that they agree, nor differ, in their own colours. 

The paragraph preceding contains the effential parts of all in- 
ference, which confifls in comparing two things with a third, and 
finding from their agreement or difference with that third, their 
agreement or difference with one another. Thus, Every X is 
Y, every Z is Y, allows us to infer that X and Z have all thofe 
qualities in common which are neceffary to Y. Again, from 
every X is Y, and ' No Z is Y,' we infer that X and Z differ 
from one another in all particulars which are effential to Y. The 
preceding forms, however, though they reprefent common reafbn- 
ing better than the ordinary fyllogifm, to which we are now com- 
ing, do not conftitute the ultimate forms of inference. Simple iden-- 
tity or non-identity is the ultimate flite to which every affertion 
may be reduced ; and we fhall, therefore, firft afk, from what 
identities, &c., can other identities, &c., be produced ? Again, 
fince we name objefts in fpecies, each fpecies confifling of a 
number of individuals, and fince our affertion may include all or 
only part of a fpecies, it is further neceffary to afk, in every in- 
ftance, to what extent the conclufion drawn is true, whether of 
all, or only of part ? 

Let us take the fimple affertion, ' Every living man refpires V 
or every living man is one of the things (however varied they 
may be) which refpire. If we were to enclofe all living men in 
a large triangle, and all refpiring objects in a large circle, the pre- 
ceding affertion, if true, would require that the whole of the tri- 
angle fhould be contained in the circle. And in the fame way we 



Firji Notions of Logic. 9 

may reduce any aflertion to the expreffion of a coincidence, total 
or partial, between two figures. Thus, a point in a circle may 
reprefent an individual of one fpecies, and a point in a triangle 
an individual of another fpecies : and we may exprefs that the 
whole of one fpecies is afTerted to be contained or not contained 
in the other by fuch forms as, * All the A is in the O' 5 * None 
of the A is in the O*- 

Any two afTertions about X and Z, each expreffing agreement 
or difagreement, total or partial, with or from Y, and leading to a 
concluflon with refpeft to X or Z, is called a fyUogifm, of which 
Y is called the middle term. The plainefl fyUogifm is the follow- 



ing:— 

Every X is Y 

Every Y is Z 

Therefore Every X is Z 



All the A is in the O 

All the O is in the D 

Therefore All the a is in the n 



In order to find all the pof&ble forms of fyUogifm, we mufl 
make a table of all the elements of which they can confifl ; 
namely — 

Xand Y 
Every X is Y 
No X is Y 
Some Xs are Ys 
Some Xs are not Ys O 
Every Y is X 
Some Ys are not Xs O 

Or their fynohymes, 

A and O 
AU the A is in the O 
None of the a is in the O 
Some of the a is in the O 
Some of the a is not in the Q 
AU tl?e O is in the a 
Some of the O is not in the a O Some of the O is not in the n 

Now, taking any one of the fix relations between X and Y, 
and combining it with either of thofe- between Z and Y, we 
have fix pairs of premifes, and the fame number repeated for 
every different relation of X to Y. We have then thirty-fix 





Zand Y 


A 


Every Z is Y 


E 


No Z is Y 


I 


Some Zs are Ys 


5O 


Some Zs are not Ys 


A 


Every Y is Z 


sO 


Some Ys are not Zs 




D and 


A 


All the D is in the 


E 


None of the D is in the O 


I 


Some of the D is in the Q 





Some of the D is not in the O 


A 


All the is in the p 



I o Firji Notions of Logic. 

forms to confider : but, thirty of thefe (namely, all but (A, A) 
(£, £), &c.,) are half of them repetitions of the other half. Thus, 
' Every X is Y, no Z is Y,* and ' Every Z is Y, no X is Y,' 
are of the fame form, and only differ by changing X into Z and 
Z into X. There are then only 15+6, or 21 diftinft forms, 
fome of which give a neceflary conclufion, while others do not. 
We flmll feleft the former of thefe, clafSfying them by their 
conclufions \ that is, according as the inference is of the form 
A, E, I, or O. 

I. In what manner can a univerial affirmative conclufion be 
drawn ; namely, that one figure is entirely contained in the other ? 
This we can only afTert when we know that one figure is entirely 
contained in the circle, which itfelf is entirely contained in the 
other figure. Thus, 

All the A is in the O A 
All the O is in the D A 
All the A is in the D A 



gure. 1 nus, 

Every X is Y 
Every Y is Z 
Every X is Z 



is the, only way in which a univerfal affirmative conclufion can 
be drawn. 

II. In what manner can a univerfal negative conclufion be 
drawn ; namely, that one figure is entirely exterior to the other ? 
Only when we are able to afTert that one figure' is entirely within, 
and the other entirely without, the circle. Thus, 



Every X is Y 
No Z is Y 
No X is Z 



All the A is in the O A 

None of the n is in the O E 
None of the a is in the D E 



is the only way in which a univerfal negative conclufion can be 
drawn. 

III. In what manner can a particular affirmative conclufion be 
drawn ; namely, that part or all of one figure is contained in the 
other ? Only when we are able to afTert that the whole circle is 
part of one of the figures, and that the whole, or part of the cir- 
cle, is part of the other figure. We have then two forms. 



Every Y is X 
Every Y is Z 
Some Xs are Zs 



All the is in the a A 
All the O is in the D A 
Some of the a is in the a I 



Eveiy Y is X 
Some Ys are Zs 
Some Xs are Zs 



Firji Notions of Logic. 1 1 

All the O is in the A A 

Some of the O is in the D I 

Some of the a is in the a I 



The fecond of thefe contains all that is ftridly neceffary to the 
conclufion, and the firft may be omitted. That which follows 
when an afTertion can be made as to fome, muft follow when the 
fame aiTerdon can be made of all. 

IV. How can a particular negative propofition be inferred ; 
namely, that part, or all of one figure, is not contained in the 
other ? It would feem at firft fight, whenever we are able to 
afiert that part or all of one figure is in the circle, and that part 
or all of the other figure is not. The weakeft fyUogifm from which 
fuch an inference can be drawn would then feem to be as follows. 



Some Xs are Ys 
Some Zs are not Ys 
.\Some Zs are not Xs 



Some of the a is in the O X ^ 
Some of the D is not in the O ^ 
.*. Some of the a is not in the a 



But here it will appear, on a little confideration, that the con- 
clufion is only thus far true ; that thofe Xs which are Ys cannot 
be thofe Zs which are not Ys ; but they may be other Zs, about 
which nothing is aflerted when we fay thztfome Zs are not Ys. 
And fiirther confideration will make it evident, that a conclufion 
of this form can only be arrived at when one of the figures is 
entirely within the circle, and the whole, or part of the other 
without 9 or elfe when the whole of one of the figures is without 
the circle, and the whole or part of the other within ; or laftly, 
when the circle lies entirely within one of the figures, and not 
entirely within the other. That is, the following are the diftinfb 
forms which allow of a particular negative conclufion, in which 
it {hould be remembered that a particular propofition in the pre- 
mifes may always be changed into a univerlal one, without afFedl- 
ing the conclufion. For that which neceflfarily follows from 
" fome,'' follows fi-om " all." 



Every X is Y 
Some Zs are not Ys 
'. Some Zs are not Xs 



All the A is in the O A 

Some of the d is not in the O O 
Some of the D is not in the a O 



12 



Firji Notions of Logic. 



No X is Y 

Some Zs are Ys 
'. Some Zs are not Xs 

Every Y is X 
Some Ys are not Zs 
•. Some Xs are not Zs 



None of the a is in the O E 

Some of the D is in the O I 

Some of the n is not in the a O 

All the O is in the a A 

Some of the O is not in the D O 

Some of the a is not in the D O 



It appears, then, that there are but fix diftin£): fyllogifms. All 
others are made from them by ftrengthening one of the premifes, 
or converting one or both of the premifes, where fuch converfion 
is allowable j or elfe by firft making the converfion, and then 
ftrengthening one of the premifes. And the following arrange- 
ment will fliow that two of them are univerial, three of the others 
being derived from them by weakening one of the premifes in a 
manner which does not deflrroy, but only weakens, the conclu- 



I. %very X is Y 
^very Y is Z 

Every X is Z 



3. Every X is Y 
No Z is Y 

No X is Z 



r ^ 

2. Some Xs are Ys 4. Some Xs are Ys 5. Every X is Y 
Every Y is Z No Z is Y Some Zs are not Ys 

Some Xs are Zs Some Xs are not Zs Some Zs are not Xs 



6. Every Y is X 
Some Ys are not Zs 

Some Xfr'are not Zs 



We may fee how it arifes that one of the partial fyllogifms is 
not immediately derived, like the others, from a univer&l one. 
In the preceding, A £ £ may be confidered as derived from 
A A A, by changing the term in which Y enters univerfally into 
a univerial negative. If this be done with the other term inftead, 
we have 

No X is Y^from which univerial premifes we cannot deduce a 
£very Y is Z) univerfal conclufion, but only fome Zs are not Xs. 

If we weaken one and the other of thefe premifes, as they 
ftand, we obtain 

Some Xs are not Ys No X is Y 

Every Y is Z and Some Ys are Zs 



No conclufion 



Some Zs are not Xs 



Firji Notions of Logic. 1 3 

equivalent to the fourth of the preceding : but if we convert the 
firft premife, and proceed in the fame manner, 

From No Y is X we obtain Some Ys are not Xs 
Every Y is Z Every Y is Z 

Some Zs are not Xs Some Zs are not Xs 

which is legitimate, and is the &me as the laft of the preceding 
lift, with X and Z interchanged. 

Before proceeding to fhow that all the ufual forms are con- 
tained in the preceding, let the reader remark the following rules, 
which may be proved either by coUefting them from the preceding 
cafes, or by independent reafoning. 

1 . The middle term muft enter uni verfally into one or the other 
premife. If it were not fo, then one premife might fpeak of one 
part of the middle term, and the other of another 5 fo that there 
would, in fa£l, be no middle term. Thus, * Every X is Y, Every 
Z is Y,* gives no conclufion : it may be thus ftated \ 

All the Xs make up a part of the Ys 
All the Zs make up a part of the Ys 

And, before we can know that there is any common term of 
comparifon at all, we muft have fome means of fhowing that the 
two parts are to fome extent the fame ; or the preceding premifes 
by themfelves are inconclufive. 

2. No term muft enter the conclufion more generally than it 
is found in the premifes ; thus, if X be fpoken of partially in the 
premifes, it muft enter partially into the conclufion. This is ob- 
vious, fince the conclufion muft afiert no more than the premifes 
imply. 

3. From premifes both negative no conclufion can be drawn. 
For it is obvious, that the mere afllertion of difegreement between 
each of two things and a third, can be no reafon for inferring 
either agreement or difagreement between thefe two things. It 
will not be difficult to reduce any cafe which falls under this rule 
to a breach of the firft rule : thus. No X is Y, No Z is Y, gives 

Every X is (fomething which is not Y) 
Every Z is (fomething which is not Y) 



1 



1 4 ^i^ft Notions of Logic. 

in which the middle term is not fpoken of univerfally in either. 
Again, ' No Y is X, fome Ys are not Zs,' may be converted into 

Every X is (a thing which is not Y) 
Some (things which are not Zs) are Ys 

in which there is no middle term. 

4. From premifes both particular no conclufton can be drawn. 
This is fuiEciently obvious when the firft or fecond rule is broken, 
as in * Some Xs are Ys, Some Zs are Ys.* But it is not immediately 
obvious when the middle term enters one of the premifes uni- 
verfally. The following reafoning will ferve for exercife in the 
preceding refults. Since both premifes are particular in form, 
the middle term can only enter one of them univerfally by being 
the predicate of a negative propofition ; confequently (Rule' 3) 
the other premife muft be affirmative, and, being particular, nei- 
ther of its terms is univerfal. Confequently both the terms as to 
which the conclufion is to be drawn enter partially, and the con- 
clufion (Rule 2) can only be a particular affirmative propofition. 
But if one of the premifes be negative, the conclufion mufl be 
negative (as we fhall immediately fee). This contradi£lion fhows 
that the fuppofition of particular premifes producing a legitimate 
refult is inadmiffible. 

5. If one premife be negative, the conclufion, if any, muft be 
negative. If one term agree with a fecond and difagree with a 
third, no agreement can be inferred between the fecond and 
third. 

6. If one premife be particular, the conclufion muft be p^- 
ticular. This may be fhown as follows. If two propofitions 
P and Q^, together prove a third, R, it is plain that P and the 
denial of R, prove the denial of Q. For P and Q^cannot be true 
together without R- Now if poffible, let P (a particular) and Q^ 
(a univerfal) prove R (a univerfal). Then P (particular) and 
the denial of R (particular) prove the denial of Qj^ But two 
particulars can prove nothing. 

In the preceding fet of fyllogifms we obferve one form only 
which produces A, or E, or I, but three which produce O. 

Let an afTertion be faid to be weakened when it is reduced 
from univerfal to particular, and ftrengthened in the contrary cafe. 
Thus, 'Every X is Z' is called ftronger than *Some Xs are Zs.' 



Firji Notions of Logic. 1 5 

Every ufual form of fyUogifm which can give a legitimate re- 
fult is either one of the preceding fix, or another formed from 
one of the fix, either by changing one of the aflertions into its 
converfe, if that be allowable, or by ftrengthening one of the 
premifes, without altering the conclufion, or both. Thus, 

Some Xs are Ys 7 , . f Some Ys are Xs 

Every Y is Z \ ""ay be wntten J Every Y is Z 

What follows will ftill follow from -< ^^ ^ - rr 

\ Every Y is Z 

for all which is true when * Some Ys are Xs,' is not lefs true when 
« Every Y is X/ 

It would be poffible al(b to form a legitimate (yllogifm by 
weakening the conclufion, when it is univerfal, fince that which 
is true of all is true of fome. Thus, ' Every X is Y, Every Y 
is Z,* which yields ' Every X is Z,* alfo yields ' Some Xs are Zs.* 
But writers on logic have always confidered thefe fyllogifms as 
ufelefs, conceiving it better to draw from any premifes their 
ftrongeft conclufion. In this they were undoubtedly right ; and 
the only queftion is, whether it would not have been advifable 
to make the premifes as weak as poffible, and not to admit any 
fyllogifms in which more appeared than was abfolutely necefiary 
to the conclufion. If fuch had been the pra£bice, then 

Every Y is X, Every Y is Z, therefore Some Xs are Zs 

would have been confidered as formed by a fpurious and unne- 
ceflary excels of aflertion. The minimum of afiertion would be 
contained in either of the following, 

Every Y is X, Some Ys are Zs, therefore Some Xs are Zs 
Some Ys are Xsj Every Y is Z, therefore Some Xs are Zs 

In this chapter, fyllogifms have been divided into two clafies : 
firft, thofe which prove a univerlal conclufion 5 fecondly, thofe 
which prove a partial conclufion, and which are (all but one) 
derived from the firft by weakening one of the premifes, in fuch 
manner as to produce a legitimate but weakened conclufion. 
Thofe of the firft clafs are placed in the firft column, and of the 
other in the fecond. 



i6 



Firji Notions of Logic. 

Univerfal. Particular. 

A Every X is Y 
A Every Y is Z 



Some Xs are Ys 
Every Y is Z 



A Every X is Z 



Some Xs are Zs 

Some Xs are Ys 
No Y is Z 



I 

A 

I 
I 

E 



A Every X is Y 
' E No Y is Z 

E No XisZ 



Some Xs are not Zs O 

Every X is Y A 

Some Zs are not Ys O 



Some Zs are not Xs O 

Every Y is X A 

Some Ys are not Zs O 



Some Xs are not Zs O 

In all works on logic, it is cuftomary to write that premife 
firft which contains the predicate of the conclufion. Thus, 

Every Y is Z Every X is Y 

Every X is Y would be written, and not Every Y is Z 

Every X is Z ^ Every X is Z 

The premifes thus arranged are called major and minor ; the pre- 
dicate of the conclufion being called the major term, and its iiib- 
jeft the minor. Again, in the preceding cafe we fee the various 
fubjefts coming in the order Y, Z ; X, Y ; X, Z : and the num- 
ber of different orders which can appear is four, namely — 

YZ ZY YZ ZY 

XY XY YX YX 



XZ XZ XZ XZ 

which are called the four figures^ and every kind of fyUogifm in 
each figure is called a mood. I now put down the various moods 
of each figure, the letters of which will be a guide to find out 
thofe of the preceding lift from which they are derived. Co 
means that a premife of the preceding lift has been converted ; 
4- that it has been flrengthened ; Co +, that both changes have 
taken place. Thus, 



Firji Notions of Logic. i j 

A Every Y is Z A Every Y is Z 

I Some Xs are Ys becomes A Every Y is X : (Co +) 



I Some Xs are Zs 



I Some Xs are Zs 



And Co + points out the following : If fome Xs be Ys, then 
fome Ys are Xs (Co) ; and all that is true when Some Ys are Xs, 
is true when Every Y is X (+) ; therefore the fecond fyllogifm 
is legitimate, if the firft be fo. 



A Every Y 
A Every X 



A Every X 

E No Y 
A Every X 



E No X 



sZ 

s Y 



FirJi Figure. 

A Every Y is Z 
I Some Xs are Ys 



sZ 

sZ 

sY 



isZ 



I Some Xs are Zs 

E No Y is Z 
I Some Xs are Ys 

O- Some Xs are not Zs 



Second Figure. 
E No Z is Y (Co) E No Z is Y (Co) 

A Every X is Y I Some Xs are if s 

E No XisZ 

A Every Z is Y 

E No XisY(Co) 

E ^o XisZ 



O Some Xs are not Zs* 

A Every Z is Y 

O Some Xs are not Ys 



O Some Xs are not Zs 

Third Figure. 
A Every Y is Z E No Y is Z 

A Every Y is X (Co +) A Every T is X(Co +) 



I Some Xs are Zs 

I Some Ys are Zs (Co) 
A Every Y is X 

I Some Xs are Zs 

A Every Y is Z 

I Some Ys are Xs (Co) 

I Some Xs are Zs 



O Some Xs are not Zs 

Some Ys are not Zs 
A Every Y is X . 

O Some Xs are not Zs 

E No Y is Z 

1 Some Ys are Xs (Co) 

O Some Xs are not Zs 



i8 



Firji Notions of Logic. 

Fourth Figure. 

A Every Z is Y (+) I Some Zs are Ys 

A Every Y is X A Every Y is X 



I Some Xs are Zs 

A Every Z is Y 
E No Y is X 

E Nb XisZ 



I Some Zs are Xs 

E No Z is Y (Co) 
A EveryYisX(Co+) 

O Some Xs are not Zs 



E No Z is Y (Co) 
I Some Ys are Xs (Co) 

O Some Xs are not Zs 

The above is the ancient method of dividing fyllogifms ; but, 
for the prefent purpofe, it will be fuiEcient to confider the fix 
from which the reft can be obtained. And fince fome of the 
fix have X in the predicate of the conclufion, and not Z, I fhalL 
join to them the fix other fyllogifms which are found by tranf- 
pofing Z and X. The complete lift, therefore, of fyllogifms with 
the weakeft premifes and the ftrongeft conclufions, in which a 
comparifbn of X and Z is obtained by compariibn of both with 
Y, is as follows : 



Every X is Y 
Every Y is Z 



Every Z is Y 
Every Y is X 



Every X is Z Every Z is X 



Every X is Y 
No Y is Z 



Every Z is Y 
No Y is X 



No XisZ No ZbX 

Some Xs are Ys Some Zs are Ys 
Every Y is Z Every Y is X 



Some Xs are Ys 
No Y is Z 



Some Zs are Ys 
No Y is X 



Some Xs are not Zs Some Zs are not Xs 

Every X is Y Every Z is Y 

Some Zs are not Ys Some Xs are not Ys 



Some Xs are Zs Some Zs are Xs 



Some Zs are not Xs Some Xs are not Zs 

Every Y is X Every Y is Z 

Some Ys are not Zs Some Ys are not Xs 



Some Xs are not Zs Some Zs are not Xs 



In the lift of page 12, there was nothmg but recapitulation of 
forms, each form admitting a variation by interchanging X and 
Z. This interchange having been made, and the refults col- 
lected as above, if we take every cafe in which Z is the predi- 
cate, or can be nude the predicate by allowable converfion, we 



Firjl Notions of Logit. 1 9 

have a colle£lion of all poffible weakejl forms in which the refult 
is one of the four * Every X is Z/ ' No X is Z/ ' Some Xs are Zs/ 
* Some Xs are not Zs 5 ' as follows. The premifes are written 
in what appeared the moft natural order, without diftinftion of 
major or minor. 

Every X is Y 
Every Y is Z 

Every X is Z 

Some Xs are Ys Some Zs are Ys 

Every Y is Z Every Y is X 



Some Xs are Zs Some Xs are Zs 

Every X is Y Every Z is Y 

No ZisY No XisY 



No X is Z No X is Z 

Some Xs are Ys Every Z is Y Every Y ia X 

No Z is Y Some Xs are not Ys Some Ys are not Zs 

Some Xs are not Zs Some Xs are not Zs Some Xs are not Zs 

Every aiTertion which can be made upon two things by com- 
parifon with any third, that is, every fimple inference, can be 
reduced to one of the preceding forms. Generally fpeaking, one 
of the premifes is^ oinitted, as obvious from the conclufion ; that 
is, one premife being named and the conclufion, that premife is 
implied which is neceffary to make the conclufion good. Thus, 
if I fay, " That race muft have poflfefied fome of the arts of life, 
for they came from Afia," it is obvioufly meant to be aflerted, 
that all races coming from Afia muft have poflTefTed ibme of the 
arts of life. The preceding is then a iyllogifm, as follows : 

That race is * a race of Afiatic origin :* 
Every * race of Afiatic origin* is * a race which muft 
have pofiefied fome of the arts of life : ' 
Therefore, That race is a race which muft have pofieiTed 

fome of the arts of life. , 

A perfon who makes the preceding aflertion either means to 
imply, antecedently to the conclufion, that all Afiatic races muft 
have pofiefied arts, or he talks nonfenfe if he aflert the conclu-r 



20 Tirji Notions of Logic. 

fion pofitively . ' X muft be Z, for it is Y,* can only be an inference 
when * Every Y is Z.' This latter propofition may be called 
the fupprefled premife j and it is in fuch fuppreflfed propofitions 
that the greateft danger; of error lies. It is alfo in fuch propofi- 
tions that men convey opinions which they would not willingly 
exprefs. Thus, the honeft witnefs who faid, * I always thought 
him a re(pe£lable man— he kept his gig/ would probably not 
have admitted in direft terms, * Every man who keeps a gig muft 
be refpeftable.* 

I fhall now give a few detached illuftrations of what precedes. 

** His imbecility of charaSer might have been inferred from 
his pronenefs to &vourites ; for all weak princes have this fail- 
ing." The preceding would fland very well in a hiftory, and 
many would pafs it over as containing very good inference. 
Written, however, in the form of a fyUogifm, it is. 

All weak princes are prone to fevourites 
He was prone to fevourites 

Therefore He was a weak prince 

which is palpably wrong. (Rule i.) The writer of fuch a fen- 
tence as the preceding might have meant to fay, * for all who 
have this failing are weak princes ;' in which cafe he would have 
inferred rightly. Every one fhould be aware that there is much 
falfe form of inference arifing out of badnefs of flyle, which is 
juft as injurious to the habits of the untrained reader as if the 
errors were miftakes of logic in the mind of the writer. 

* X is lefs than Y ; Y is lefs than Z : therefore X is lefs than 
Z.' This, at firft fight, appears to be a fyUogifm ; but, on re- 
ducing it to the ufual form, we find it to be, 

X is (a magnitude lefs than Y) 

Y is (a magnitude lefs than Z) 

Therefore X is (a magnitude lefs than Z) 

which is not a (yllogifm, fince there is no middle term. Evident 
as the preceding is, the following additional propofition mufl be 
formed before it can be made explicitly logical. ' If Y be a mag- 
nitude lefs than Z^ then every magnitude lefs than Y is alfo lefs 
than Z.* There is, then, before the preceding can be reduced 
to a fyllogiftic form, the neceffity of a dedudion from the fecond 



Firjl Notions of Logic. 2 r 

premife, and the fubftitution of the refult inftead of that premife. 
Thus, 

X is lefe than Y 
Lefs than Y is lefs than Z : following from Y is lefe than Z. 

Therefore X is lefs than Z 

But, if the additional argument be examined — namely, if Y be 
lefs than Z, then that which is lefs than Y is lefs than Z— it will 
be found to require precifely the fame conflderations repeated ; 
for the original inference was nothing more. In &£b, it may 
eafily.be feen as follows, that the propofition before us involves 
more than any fimple fyllogtfin can exprefs. When we fay that 
X is lefs than Y, we fay that if X were applied to Y, every part 
of X would match a part of Y, and there would be parts of Y 
remaining over. But when we fay, * Every X is Y,' meaning 
the premife of a common fyllogifm, we fay that every inftance of 
X Is an inftance of Y, without faying any thing as to whether 
there are or are not inftances of Y ftill left> after thofe which 
are alfo X are takeii away. If> then^ we wifh to write an ordi- 
nary iyllogifm in a manner which fhall correfpond with ^ X is le(s 
than Y, Y is lefs than Z, therefore X is lefs than Z,' we muft 
introduce a more definite amount of afifertion than was made in 
the preceding forms. Thus, 

Every X is Y, and there are Ys which are not Xs 
Every Y is Z, and there are Zs which are not Ys 

Therefore Every X is Z, and there are Zs which are not Xs 
Or thus : 

The Ys contain all the Xs, and more 
The Zs contain all the Ys, and more 

The Zs contain all the Xs, and more 
The moft technical form, however, is. 

From Every X is Y ; [Some Ys are not Xs] 

Every Y is Z j [Some Zs are not Ys] 

Follows Every X is Z ; [Some Zs are not Xs] 

This fort of argument is called a fortiori argument, becaufo the 
premifes are more than fufficient to prove the conclufion, and the 
extent of the conclufion is thereby greater than its mere form 
would indicate. Thus, 'X is lefs than Y, Y is lefs than Z^ 



22 Firji Notions of Logic. 

therefore, a fortiori^ X is lefs than Z/ means that the extent to 
which X is lefs than Z muft be greater than that to which X is 
lefs than Y, or Y than Z. In the fyllogifm laft written, either 
of the bracketted premifes might be ftruck out without deftroying 
the conclufion ; which laft would, however, be weakened. As 
it ftands, then, the part of the conclufion, ^ Some Zs are not 
Xs,' follows a fortiori. 

The argument a fortiori may then be defined as a univerfiJly 
aiErmative fyllogifm, in which both of the premifes are fhewn to 
be lefe than the whole truth, or greater. Thus, in * Every X is 
Y, Every Y is Z, therefore Every X is Z,' we do not certainly 
imply that there are more Ys than Xs, or more Zs than Ys, fb 
that we do not know that there are more Zs than Xs. But if 
we be at liberty to ftate the fyllogifm as follows. 

All the Xs make up part (and part only) of the Ys 
Every Y is Z j 

then we are certain that 

All the Xs make up part (and part only) of the Zs. 

But if we be at liberty further to fay that 

All the Xs make up part (and part only) of the Ys 
All the Ys make up part (and part only) of the Zs 

then we conclude that 

All the Xs make up part of part (only) of the Zs 

and the words in Italics mark that quality of the conclufion from 
which the argument is called a fortiori. 

Moft fyUogifms which give an affirmative conclufion are gene- 
rally meant to imply a fortiori arguments, except only in mathe- 
matics. It is feldom, except in the exa£l fciences, that we meet 
with a propofition, * Every X is Z,* which we cannot immediately 
couple with * fome Zs are not Xs.' 

When an argument is completely eftablifhed, with the excep- 
tion of one aflTertion only, fb that the inference may be drawn as 
fbon as that one afTertion is eflablifhed, the refult is ftated in a 
form which bears the name of an hypothetical fyllogifm. The 
word hypothefis means nothing but fiippofition ; and the fpecies 
of fyllogifm juft mentioned firft lays down the afTertion that a 
confequence will be true if a certain condition be fulfilled, and 



Firji Notions of Logic. 23 

then either afferts the fulfilment of the condition, and thence the 
confequence,.or elfe denies the confequence, and thence denies 
the fulfilment of the condition. Thus, if we know that 

When X is Z, it follows that P is Q ; 

then, as foon as we can afcertain that X is Z, we can conclude 
that P is Q ; or, if we can (hew that P is not Q, we know that 
X is not Z. But if we find that X is not Z, we can infer no- 
thing ; for the preceding does not afTert that P is Q^only when 
X is Z, And if we find out that P is Q^we can infer nothing. 
This conditional (yllogifm may be converted into an ordinary 
fyllogifm, as follows. Let K be any * cafe in which X is Z,' and 
V, a * cafe in which P is Q ;* then the preceding aflfertion amounts 
to * Every K is V.* Let L be a particular inftance, the X of 
which may or may not be Z. If X be Z in the inftance under 
difcuffion, or if X be not Z, we have, in the one cafe and the 
other. 

Every K is V Every K is V 

L is a K L is not a K 

Therefore L is a V No conclufion 

Similarly, according as a particular cafe (M) is or is not V, we 
have 

Every K is V Every K is V 

M is a V M is not a V 



No conclufion M is not a K 

That is to fay : the afTertion of an hypothefis is the afTertion of 
its necefTary confequence, and the denial of the neceflfary confe- 
quence is the denial of the hypothefis : but the afTertion of the 
necefTary confequence gives no right to afTert the hypothefis, nor 
does the denial of the hypothefis give any right to deny the truth 
of that which would (were the hypothefis true) be its necefTary 
confequence. 

Demonftration is of two kinds : which arifes from this, that 
every propofition has a contradiftory ; and of thefe two, one 
muft be true and the other muft be falfe. We may then either 
prove a propofition to be true, or its contradictory to be falfe. 
' It is true that every X is Z,' and * it is falfe that there are fome 
Xs which are not Zs,' are the fame propofition ; and the proof 
of either is called the indireft proof of the other. 



24 Firji Notions of Logic. 

But how is any propoiidon to be proved falfe, except by prov- 
ing a contradi£tion to be true ? By proving a necefTary conie- 
quence of the proportion to be falfe. But this is not a complete 
anfwer, fince it involves the neceffity of doing the lame thing ; 
or, fb far as this anfwer goes, one propofition cannot be proved 
falfe unlefe by proving another to be falfe* But it may happen, 
that a necefTary confequence can be obtained which is obvioufly 
and felf-evidently falfe, in which cafe no further proof of the 
falfehood of the hypothefis is neceflary. Thus the proof which 
Euclid gives that all equiangular triangles are equilateral is of the 
following flru£lure, logically confidered. 

(i.) If there be an equiangular triangle not equilateral, it fol- 
lows that a whole can be found which is not greater than its 
part.* 

(2.) It is falfe that there can be any whole which is not greater 
than its part (felf evident). 

(3.) Therefore it is felfe that there is any equiangular triangle 
which is not equilateral ; or all equiangular triangles are equila- 
teral. 

When a propofition is eflablifhed by proving the truth of the 
matters it contains, the demonflradon is called direSf ; when by 
proving the falfehood of every contradi£tory propofition, it is 
called indireSf. The latter fpecies of demonflradon is as logical 
as the former, but not of fo fimple a kind ; whence it is defira- 
ble to ufe the former whenever it can be obtained. 

The ufe of indire<5t demonflradon in the Elements of Euclid 
is almofl endrely confined to thofe propofidons in which the con- 
verfes of fimple propofidons are proved. It frequendy happens 
that an eflablifhed afTerdon of the form 

EveryXisZ (i) 

may be eafily made the means of deducing, 

Every (thing not X) is not Z • • (2) 
which lafl gives 

EveryZisX (3) 

• This IS the propofition in proof of which nearly the whole of the dc- 
monftration of Euclid is fpent. 



Firji Notions of Logic. 25 

The converfion of the fecond propoiition into the third is 
uilially made byanindire£t demonftration,in the following manner : 
If poffible, let there be one Z, which is not X, (2) being true. 
Then there is one thing which is not X and is Z ; but every . 
thing not X is not Z ; therefore there is one thing which is Z 
and is not Z : which is abfurd. It is then abfurd that there 
(hould be one Angle Z which is not X ; or, Every Z is X. 

The following propofidon contains a method which is of fre- 
quent u(e. 

Hypothesis. — Let there be any number of propoiitions or 
afTertions, — three for inftance, X, Y, and Z, — of which it is the 
property that one or the other muft be true, and one only. Let 
there be three other propoiitions, P, Q, and R, of which it is 
alfo the property that one, and one only, muft be true. Let it 
alfo be a connexion of thofe afTertions, that 

When X is true, P is true 
When Y is true, Q^is true 
When Z is true, R is true 

Consequence : then it follows that 

When P is true, X is true 
When Q^is true, Y is true 
When R is true, Z is true 

For, when P is true, then Q^and R muft be felfe 5 coniequently, 
neither Y nor Z can be true, for then Q^ or R would be true. 
But either X, Y, or Z muft be true, therefore X muft be true 5 
or, when P is true, X is true. In a fimilar way the remaining 
afTertions may be proved. 

Cafe I. If When P is Q, X is Z 

When P is not Q, X is not Z 
It follows that When X is Z, P is QJ 

When X is not Z, P is not Q, 

r When X is greater than Z, P is greater than Q 

Cafe 2. If \ When X is equal to Z, P is equal to Q 

I When X is lefs than Z, P is lefs than Q 

r When P is greater than Q, X is greater than Z 
It follows that < When P is equal to Q, X is equal to Z 

tWhenPislefethan Q, X is lefs than Z 



26 



CHAPTER II. 

On OhjeSlSy Ideas^ and Names. 

LOGIC is derived from a Greek word {>Jiyo^ which fignifies 
communication of thought, ufually by fpeech. It is the 
name which is generally given to the branch of inquiry (be it called 
fcience or art), in which the aft of the mind in reafoning is con- 
fldered, particularly with reference to the connexion of thought 
and language. But no definition yet given in few words has 
been found fatisfaftory to any confiderable number of thinking 
peribns. 

All exifting things upon this earth, which have knowledge of 
their own exiftence, polTefs, fome in one degree and fome in 
another, the power of thought^ accompanied by perception^ which 
is the awakening of thought by the efieft of external objeds 
upon the fenfes. By thought I here mean, all mental a£lion, not 
only that comparatively high ftate of it which is peculiar to man, 
but alfo that lower degree of the fame thing which appears to be 
polTefTed by brutes. 

With refpe£t to the mind, confidered as a complicated ap« 
paratus which is to be ftudied, we are not even fo well off as 
thofe would be who had to examine and decide upon the n^ 
chanifm of a watch, merely by obfervation of the fiindlions ' of 
the hands, without being allowed to fee the inflde. A meol^i- 
cian, to whom a watch was prefented for the firfl time, would be 
able to give a good guefs as to its f);ru£lure, from his knowledge of 
other pieces of contrivance. As fbon as he had examined the law of 
the motion of the hands, he might conceivably invent an inflru- 
ment with fimilar properties, in fifty different ways. But in the 
cafe of the mind, we have manifeflations only, without the 
fmallefl power of reference to other fimilar things, or the leafl 
knowledge of flru£ture or procefs, other than what may be 
derived from thofe manifeflations. It is the problem of the watch 
to thofe who have never feeii any mechanifhi at all. 



On ObjeSls^ Ideas^ and Names. 27 

We have nothing more to do with the (cience of mind, 
ufually called metaphyjics^ than to draw a very few neceffary 
diftindlions, which, whatever names we ufe to denote them, are 
matters of fa£l conne£led with our fubje£l. Some modes of 
expreffing them favor one fyftem of metaphyilcs, and fbme 
another ; but ftill they are matters of obferved fa£l. Our words 
muft be very imperfe£t fymbols, drawn from comparifbn of the 
manifeftations of thought with thofe of things in corporeal ex- 
iftence. For inftance, I juft now fpoke of the mind as an 
apparatus, or piece of mechanifm. It is a ftrudlure of fome fort, 
which has the means of fulfilling various purpofes ; and fo far it 
refembles the hand, which by the diipofidon of bone and muicle, 
can be made to perform an immenfe variety of different motions 
and grafps. Where the refemblance begins to be imperfe£t, and 
why, is what we cannot know. In all probability we fhould 
need new modes of perception, other fenfes befides fight, hear- 
ing, and touch, in order to know thought as we know colour, 
iize, or motion. But the purpofe of the prefent treatife is only 
the examination of fome of the manifefladons of thinking power 
in their relation to the language in which they are expreflfed. 
Knowledge of thought and knowledge of the refults of thought, 

* All iyftems make an afTumption of the uniformity of procefs in all 
minds^ carried to an extent the propriety of which ought to be a matter of 
fpecial difcuflion. There are no writers who give us fo much mufi with fo 
little 'why^ as the metaphyficians. If perfons who had only feen die outfide 
of the timepiece, were to invent machines to anfwer its purpofe, they might 
arrive at their obje6l in very different ways. One might u(e the pendulum 
and weight, another the fprings and the balance : one might difcover the 
combination of toothed wheels, another a more complicated a6tion of lever 
upon lever. Are we fun that there are not differences in our minds, fuch 
as the preceding inftance may fuggeft by analogy ; if fo, hvw are we fure ? 
Again, if our minds be as tables with many legs, do we know that a weight 
put upon different tables will be fupported in the fame manner in all. May 
not the fame leg fupport much or all of a certain weight in one mind, and 
little or nothing in another ? I have feen ftriking xnftances of fomething like 
this, among thofe who have examined for themfelves the grounds of the 
mathematical fciences. 

I would not difluade a (hident from metaphyfical inquiry ; on the con* 
trary, I would rather endeavour to promote the defire of entering upon fuch 
fubje6ls : but I would warn him, when he tries to look down his own throat 
with a candle in his hand, to take care that he does not fet his head on fire. 



28 On ObjeSis^ Ideas ^ and Names. 

are very different things. The watch abovemendoned might 
have the fiin£tions of its hands difcovered, might be uied in find- 
ing longitude (and even latitude) all over the world, without the 
parties ufing it having the fmalleft idea of its interior ftru£hire. 

That our minds, fouls, or thinking powers (uie what name 
we may) exift, is the thing of all others of which we are moft 
certain, each for himielf. Next to this, nothing can be more 
certain to us, each for himfelf, than that other things alio exift ; 
other minds, our own bodies, the whole world of matter. But 
between the charader of theie two certainties there is a vaft dif- 
ference* Any one who (hould deny his own exiftence would, 
if ferious, be held beneath argument : he does not know die 
nieaning of his words, or he is falie or mad. But if the fame 
man fhould deny that any thing exifts except himielf, that is, if 
he (hould affirm the whole creation to be a dream of his own 
mind, he would be abfolutely unan(werable. If I (who know he 
is wrong, for / am certain of my own exiftence) argue with him, 
and reduce him to fllence, it is no more than might* happen in 
his dream. A celebrated metaphyfician, Berkeley, maintained 
that with regard to matter^ the above is the ftate of the cafe : 
that our impreffions of matter are only impreffions, communi- 
cated by the Creator without any intervening capfe of communi- 
cation. 

Our moft convincing communicable proof of the exiftence of 
other things, is, not the appearance of obje£ts, but the neceffity 
of admitting that there are other minds befides our own. The 
external inanimate obje£ts might be creations of our own 
thought, or thinking and perceptive fimdiion : they are fo fbme- 
dmes, as in the cafe of infanity, in which the mind has frequendy 
the appearance of making the whole or part of its own external 
world. But when we fee other beings, performing fimilar fimc- 
dons to thofe which we ourielves perform, we come fo irrefiftibly 
to the conclufion that there muft be other fendents like ourfelves, 
that we {hould rather compare a perfon who doubted it to one who 
denied his own exiftence, than to one who fimply denied the real 
external exiftence of the material world. 

* It is not impoillble that in a real dream of fleep, fome one may have 
created an antagonlft who beat him in an argument to prove that he was 
awake. 



On ObjeBs^ Ideas ^ and Names. 29 

When once we have admitted different and independent 
minds, the reality of external obje£ls (external to all thofe minds) 
follows as of courfe. For different minds receive impreffions at 
the fame time, which their power of communication enables 
them to know are (imilar, (o far as any impreffions, one in each 
of two different minds, can be known to be iimilar. There muft 
be zfomewhat independent of thofe minds, which thus z&s upon 
them all at once, and without any choice of their own. This 

fomewhat is what we call an external obje£l : and whether it 
arife in Berkeley's mode, or in any other, matters nothing to us 
here. 

We fhall then, take it for granted that external obje^s a<Shially 
exift, independently of the mind which perceives them. And this 
brings us to an important diftin£tion, which we muft carry with 
us throughout the whole of this work. Beiides the a£tual exter- 
nal obje£l, there is alio the mind which perceives it, and what 
(for want of better words or rather for want of knowing whether 
they be good words or not) we muft call the image of that obje^ 
in the mind^ or the idea which it communicates. The term /ub^ 

jeSf is applied by metaphyilcians to the perceiving mind : and 
thus it is laid that a thing may be confidered fubje^ivefy (with re- 
ference to whaf it is in the mind) or objeSfively (with reference 
to what it is independently of any particular mind). But logicians 
uie the word fiibjeA in another fenfe. In a propoildon fuch as 
* bread is wholefome*, the thing fpoken of, * bread', is called the 
fubjedl of the proportion : and in fa6l the yror A fubjeSf is in com- 
mon language fb frequently confounded with obje^^ that it is al- 
moft hopelefs to fpeak clearly to beginners about themfelves as 

fubjeSfs. I fhall therefore adopt the words ideal and objeSfive^ 
idea and objeSf^ as being, under explanations, as good as any 
others : and better xhdnfubje^ and obje^ for a work on logic. 

^ The word idea^ as here ufed, does not enter in that vague fenfe 
in which it is generally ufed, as if it were an opinion that might be 
right or wrong. It is that which the object gives to the mind, 
or the ftate of the mind produced by the obje£t. Thus the idea 
of ^horfe is the borfe in the mind: and we know no other horfe. 
We admit that there is an external objeSf^ a horfe, which may 
give a horfe in the mind to twenty different perfons : but no one 
of thefe twenty knows the obje£l \ each one only knows his idea. 



30 On ObjeSis^ Ideas ^ and Names. 

There is an objeft, becauie each of the twenty perfons receives 
an idea without communicating with the others : fo that there is 
fomething external to give it them. But when they talk about 
it, under the name of a horfe, they talk about their ideas. They 
all refer to the obje£t, as being the thing they are talking about, 
until the moment they begin to differ: and then they begin to fpeak, 
not of external horfes, but of impreffions on their minds ; at leaft 
this is the cafe with thofe who know what knowledge is ; the pofi- 
tive and the unthinking part of them ftill talk of the horfe. And 
the latter have a great advantage* over the former with thofe 
who are like ibemfelves. 

Why then do we introduce the term objeSf at all, fince all our 
knowledge lies in ideas ? For the fame reafon as we introduce the 
term matter into natural philofophy, when all we know is form, 
flze, colour, weight, &c., no one of which is matter, nor even all 
together. It is convenient to have a word for that external 
fburce from which fenJihU ideas are produced : and it is juft as 
convenient to have a word for the external fource, material or 
not, from which any idea is produced. Again, why do we (peak 
of our power of confidering things either ideally or objeftively, 
when as we can know nothing but ideas, we can have no right 
to (peak of any thing elfe ? The anfwer is that^ juft as in other 
things, when we fpeak of an obje£t, we fpeak i^ the idea of an 
obje£f. We learn to fpeak of the external world, becaufe there 
are others like ourielves who evidently draw ideas from the fame 
fources as ourielves : hence we come to have the idea of thofe 
fources, the idea of external objedbs, as we call them. But we do 
not know thofe fources ; we know only our ideas of them. 

We can even ufe the terms ideal and objeftive in what may 
appear a metaphorical fenfe. When we fpeak of ourfelves in the 
manner of this chapter, we put ourfelves, as it were, in the pofi- 
don of fpe£tators of our own minds : we fpeak and think of our 

* One man afferts a fa3 on his own knowledge, another afferts his full 
cowviBiou of the contrary fa6b. Both ufe the evidence of their fenfes : but 
the fecond knows that fuU cmvt^ion is all that man can have. The firft 
will cany it hollow in a court of juftice, in which perfons are conftantly 
compelled to fwear, not only that they have an impreilion, but that the im- 
preillon is correal ; that is to fay, b the impreillon which mankind in general 
would have, and muft have, and ought to have. 



On ObjeBsy Ideas ^ and Names. 3 1 

own minds obje£tively» And it muft be remembered that by the . 
word ohjeft, we do not mean material objeft only. The mind 
of another, any one of its thoughts or feelings, any relation of 
minds to one another, a treaty of peace, a battle, a difcuffion 
upon a controverted queftion, the right of conveying a freehold, 
— are all objefts, independently of the perfons or things engaged 
in them. They are things external to our minds, of which we 
have ideas. 

An obje£t communicates an idea: but it does not follow that 
every idea is communicated by an object. The mind can create 
ideas in various ways ; or at leaf); can derive, l^ combinations 
which are not found in external exiftence, new colle£tions pf 
ideas. We have a perfefUy diftin£l idea of a unicorn, or a flying 
dragon : when we lay there are no fuch things, we fpeak ob- 
je£lively only : ideally, they have as much exiftence as a horfe or 
a flieep ; to a herald, more. Add to this, that the mind can 
feparate ideas into parts, in fuch manner that the parts alone are 
not ideas of any exifting feparate material objefts, any more than 
the letters of a word are conftituent parts of the meaning of the 
whole. Hence we get what are called qualities and relations. A 
ball may be hard and round, or may have hardnefs and round- 
nefs : but we caQrnot fay that hardnefs and roundnefs are feparate 
external materwobjei^s, though they are obje£):s the ideas of 
which necefTarily accompany our perception of certain obje(fls. 
Thefe ideas are called ahJiraSi as being removed or abftra£ted from 
the complex idea which gives them : the abftra£):ion is made by 
comparifon or obfervation of refemblances. If a perfon had never 
feen any thing round except an apple, he would perhaps never 
think of roundnefs as a diftinft objeft of thought. When he faw 
another round body, which was evidently not an apple, he would 
immediately, by perception of the refemblance, acquire a feparate 
idea of the thing in which they refemble one another^' 

Abftra£tion is not performed upon the ideas of material obje6ls 
only. For inftance, from condu£t of one kind, running through 
a number of a£tions, performed by a number of perfons, we get 
the ideas of goodnefs, wickedneis, talent, courage. But we muft 
not imagine that we can make ideally external reprefentation of 
thefe words. They are objeSfs^ that is to fay, the mind confiders 
them as external to itfelf : but they are not i^terial objects. 



32 On Objedlsy Ideas ^ and Names. 

Some people deny their exiftence, and look upon them as only 
abftradl words, or words under which we ipeak of minds or 
bodies without fpecifying any more than one of the ideas pro- 
duced by thefe minds or bodies. For inftance, they affert that 
when we (ay ' knowledge gives power ' it is really tiiat perfons 
with knowledge are therefore able, or have power, to produce, 
or to do, what perfons without it cannot. This is a queftion 
which it does not concern me here to difcufs. 

Seeing that the mind poflefTes a power of originating new 
combinations of ideas, and alio of abftradbing from complex ideas 
the more Ample ones of which, it feems natural to fay, they are 
compofed, it has long been a queftion among metaphyficians 
whether the mind has any ideas of its own which it pofTefTes in- 
dependently of all fuggeftion from external obje£ls. It is not 
necefTary that I (hould attempt to lead the ftudent to any con- 
clufion* on this fubje£l: for our purpoie, the diftin£lion between 
ideas and obje£ls, though it were falfe, is of more importance 
than that between innate and acquired ideas, though it be true. 
But one of thefe two things muft be true : either we have ideas 
which we do not acquire from or by means of communication 
with the external world (experience, trial of our fenfes) or there 
is a power in the mind of acquiring a certainty and a generality 
which experience alone could not properly give. For inftance, 
we are (atisfied as of our own exiftence that feven and three col- 
lected are the fame as five and five, whatever the ohjeHs may he 

* It has always appeared to me much fuch a queftion as the following. 
There are hooks which certainly catch fiih if put into the water ; and moft 
certainly they have been put into the water. There are then fiih upon them. 
But thefe fiih might have been on fome of them when they were put into the 
water. It is to no purpofe to inquire whether it was fo or not, unleis there 
be fome diitin6lion between the fiihes which may make it a queftion whether 
fome of them could have been bred in the river into which the hooks were 
put. The ii^ind has certainly a power of acquiring and retaining ideas, 
which power, when put into communication widi the external world, it muil 
exercife. There is no mind to experiment upon, except thofe which have 
had fuch communication. Are there found any ideas which we have reaibn 
to think cmdd not have been acquired by this communication ? any fifties 
which could not have come out of the river ? Metaphyficians feem to admit 
that if any ideas be innate, they are thofe of fpace, time, and of caufe and 
efte£l : they feem alfo to admit, that if there be any ideas, which, not being 
innate, are fure to be acquired, they are thefe very ones. 



On ObjeBsy Ideas ^ and 'Names. 3 3 

which are counted: the thing is true of fingers, pebbles, counters, 
fheep, trees, &c. &c. &c. We cannot have affured ourfelves 6f 
this by experience : for example, we know it to be true of peb- 
bles at the North Pole, though we have never been there ; vire 
are as fure of it as of our own exiftence. I do not mean that we 
have a rational con virion only, fit to aft upon, that it is fo at the 
North Pole, becaufe it is ib in every place in which it has been 
tried : if we had nothing elfe, we fliould have this ; but we feel 
that this leffer conviftion is (wallowed up by a greater. We have 
the leffer con virion that the pebbles at the pole fall to the grouAd 
when they are let go : we are very fure of this, without afferting 
that it cannot be otherwife : we fee no impojftbility in thofe peb- 
bles being fuch as always to remain in air wherever they are 
placed.* But that feven and three are no other than five and 
five is a matter which we are prepared to affirm as pofitively of 
the pebbles at the North Pole as of our own fingers, both that it 
is fo, and that it mujl be fo. Whence arifes this a6bual difference 
in point of fiwSl, between our mode of viewing and knowing 

• Metaphyficians, in their fyftems, have often taken this diftin6Uon to be 
one of fyftem only, treating it as a thing to be accepted or r^'efted with 
the fyftem, inftead of an a6hial and indifputable phenomenon which re- 
quires explanation under any fyftem. Dr. Whewell, of all Englifti writers 
on natural fcience I know, is die one who has made the fa6l, as a fa6l, per- 
vade his writings, fometimes attached to a fyftem, fometimes not. The 
following remarks on the general fubje6l are worth confideration : " It is 
indeed, extremely difficult to find, in fpeaking of this fubje6l, expreflions 
which are fatisfa£lory. The reality of the obje6ls which we perceive is a 
profound, apparently an infoluble problem. We cannot but fuppofe that 
exiftence is fomething different from our knowledge of exiftence : — that what 
exifb, does not 'exift merely in our knowing that it does :— truth is truth 
whether we know it or not. Yet how can we conceive truth, otherwife than 
as ibmething known ? How can we conceive things as exifting, without 
conceiving them as obje6ls of perception ? Ideas and Things are conftantly 
oppofed, yet necefTarily coexiftent. How they are thus oppofite and yet iden- 
tical, is the ultimate problem of all philofbphy. The fuccefUve phafes of 
philofophy have confifted in feparating and again uniting thefe two oppofite 
elements \ in dwelling fometimes upon the one and fometimes upon the other, 
as the principal or original or only element ; and then in difcovering that 
fuch an account of the fbite of the cafe was infufficient. Knowledge requires 
ideas. Reality requires things. Ideas and things coexifti Truth //, and is 
known. But the complete explanation of thefe points appears to be beyond 
our reach." 



34 O^ ObjeSiSf Ideas ^ and Names. 

different fpecies of affertions ? the truth of the laft named affer- 
tion IS not born with us, for children are without it, and learn It 
by experience, as we know. The mujt he fo cannot be acquired 
from experience in the common way, for that fame experience 
on which we rely tells us that however often a thing may have 
been found true, whatever rule may have been eftablifhed by re- 
peated inftances, an exception may at laft occur. There fcemis 
then to be in the mind a power of developing, from the ideas 
which experience gives, a real and true diftindbion of neceflary 
and not neceffarj', poflible and impoilible. The things which 
are without us always confirm our necejfary propofitions : but 
how we derive that complete affurance that they will do ib as 
faithfidly as hitherto they have done fo, is not within our powtlT 
to fay. 

Conneded with ideas are the names we give them ; the fpoken 
or written founds by which we think of them, and communicate 
with others about them. To have an idea, and to make it the 
fubjeft of thought as an idea, are two perfeftly diftin£l things : 
the idea of an idea is not the idea itfelf. I doubt whether we 
could have made thought itfelf the fubjeft of thought without 
language. As it is, we give names to our ideas, meaning by a 
name not merely a fingle word, but any coUeftion of words which 
conveys to one mind the idea in another. Thus a-man-in-a- 
black-coat-riding-along-the high-road-on-a-bay-horfe is as much 
the name of an idea as man, black, or horfe. We can coin 
words at pleafure; and, were it worth while, might invent a 
fingle word to ftand for the preceding phrafe. 

Names are ufed indifferently, both for the objefts which pro- 
duce ideas, and for the ideas produced by them. 4Hiis is a dis- 
advantage, and it will frequently be neceffary to fpecify whether 
we fpeak ideally or objeftively. In common converfadon we 
fpeak ideally and think we fpeak objeftively : we take for granted 
that our own ideas are fit to pafs to others, and will convey to 
them the fame ideas as the obje£ts themfelves would have done. 
That this may be the cafe, it is neceffary firft, that the obje£t 
fhould really give us the fame ideas as to others ; fecondly, that 
our words fhould carry from us to our correfpondents the fame 
ideas as thofe which we intended to exprefs by them. How, 
and in what cafes, the firft or the fecond condition is not fid- 



On Objects ^ Ideas ^ and Names. 3 5 

filled, it is impoffible to know or to enumerate. But we have 
nothing to do here except to obferve that we are only incidentally 
concerned with this queftion in a work of logic. We prefume 
fixed and, if objeftive, obje6lively true ideas, with certain names 
attached : fb that it is never in doubt whether a name be or be not 
properly attached to any idea. This method muft be followed in 
all works of fcience : a conceivably attamable end is firft pre- 
fumed to be attained, and the confequences of its attainment are 
ftudied. Then, afterwards, comes the queftion whether this end 
is alwa)rs attained, and if not, why. The way to mend bad roads 
muft come at the end, not at the beginning, of a treatife on the 
art of making good ones. 

Every name has a reference to every idea, either affirmative or 
negative. The term horfe applies to every thing, either pofitively 
or negatively. This (no matter what I am fpeaking of) either is 
or is not a horfe. If there be any doubt about it, either the idea 
is not precife, or the term horfe is ill underftood. A name ought 
to be like a boundary, which clearly and undeniably either fliuts 
in, or fhuts out, every idea that can be fuggefted. It is the im« 
perfection of our minds, our language, and our knowledge of 
external things, that this clear and undeniable inclufion or exclu- 
fion is feldom attainable, except as to ideas which are well within 
the boundary : at and near the boundary itfelf all is vague. There 
are decided greens and decided blues : but between the two 
colours there are fliades of which it muft be unfettled by uni- 
verial agreement to which of the two colours they belong. To 
the eye, green pailes into blue b)ymperceptible gradations :.our 
fenfes will fu^eft no place on wETch all agree, at which one is 
to end and the other to begin. 

But the advance of knowledge has a tendency to fupply means 
of precife definition. Thus, in the inftance above cited, Wol- 
lafton and Fraunhofer have difcovered the black lines which al- 
ways exift in the fpedhiim of fblar colours given by a glafs prifm, 
in the fame relative places. There are definite places in the fpec- 
trum,by the help of which the place of any fhade of colour therein 
exifting may* be afeertained, and means of definition given. 

When a name is complex, it frequently admits of definition, 

• It is quite within the poflibilities of the application of fcience to the 



36 On ObjeBs^ Ideas ^ and Names. 

nominal or real. A name may be faid to be defined nominally 
when we can of rig^t fubftitute for it other terms. In fuch a 
cafe, a perfon may be made to know the meaning of the word 
without accefs to the objeft of which it is to give the idea. Thus, 
an ijland is completely defined in * land furrounded by water.' 
In definition, we do not mean that we are necefTarily to have 
very precife terms in which to explain the name defined : but, as 
the terms of the definition (b is the name which is defined ; ac- 
cording as the firfl are precife or vague, clear or obfcure, (o is the 
fecond. Thus there may b^ a queftion as to the meaning of 
land: is a marfh flicking up out of the water an ifland ? Some 
will fay that, as oppofed to water, a marfh is land, others may 
confider marfh as intermediate between what is commonly called 
[dry] land and water. If there be any vaguenefs, the term ifland 
mufl partake of it : for ifland is but fhort for ' land furrounded by 
water,* whether this phrafe be vague or precife. This fort of de- 
finition is nominaly being the fubflitution of names for names. It 
is complete, for it gives all that the name is to mean. An ifland, 
as fuch, can have nothing necefTarily belonging to it except what 
necefTarily belongs to * land furrounded by water.* By real de- 
finition, I mean fuch an explanation of the word, be it the whole 
of the meaning or only part, as will be fufficient to feparate the 
things contained under that word from all others. Thus the 
following, I believe, is a complete definition of an elephant ; ^an 
animal which naturally drinks by drawing the water into its nofe, 
and then fpirting it into its mouth.' As it happens, the animal 
which does this is the elephant only, of all which are known upon 
the earth : fo long as this is the cafe, fo long the above definition 
anfwers every purpofe ; but it is hx from involving all the ideas 
which arife from the word. Neither fagacity, nor utility, nor the 
produftion of ivory, are necefTarily conne£ted with drinking by 
help of the nofe. And this definition is purely objeftive ; we do 
not mean that every idea we could form of an animal fo drinking 
is to be called an elephant. If a new animal were to be difco- 
vered, having the fame mode of drinking, it would be a matter 
of pure choice whether it fhould be called elephant or not. It 

arts that the time ihould come when the fp^^bum, and the lines in it, will 
be ufed for matching colours in every linoi-draper^s (hop. 



On OSJe^s, Lkas, and Names. jfj 

muft then be fettled whether it (hall be called an elephant, and 
that race of animals (hall be divided into two fpecies, with diftinc-* 
tive definitions ; or whether it (hall have another name, and the 
definition above given (hall be incomplete, as not ferving to draw 
an entire dif);in£tion between the elephant and all other things. 

It will be obferved that the nominal definition includes the real, 
as fbon as the terms of flibflitution are really defined : while the 
real definition may fall fhort of the nominal. 

When a name is clearly underflood, by which we mean when 
of every obje£l of thought we can diflinftly fay, this name does 
or does not, contain that objeft-r— we have faid that the name ap- 
plies to everything, in one way or the other. The word man 
has an application both to Alexander and Bucephalus : the firf); 
was 2L man, the fecond was not. In the formation of language, 
a great many names are, as to their original fignification, of a 
purely negative chara£ler :. thus> parallels are only lines which do 
not meet, aliens are men wha are not Britons (that is, in our 
country). If language were as perfe£b and as copious as we 
could imagine it to be, we fhould have, for every name which has 
a pofidve fignification, another which merely implies all other 
things : thus, as we have a name for a tree, we fhould have an- 
other to fignify every thing that is not a tree. As it is, we have 
fbmetimes a name for the pofitive, and none for the negative, as 
in tree : fbmetimes for the negative and none for the pofitive, as 
in parallel: fometimes for both, as in a frequent ufe of per/on 
and thing. In logic, it is defirable to confider names of inclufion 
with the correfponding names of exclufion : and this I intend to 
do to a much greater extent than is ufual : inventing names of 
exclufion by the prefix not, as in tree and not-tree, man and not- 
man. Let thefe be called contrary j* or £ontradtSfory^ names. 

Let us take a pair of contrary names, as man and not-man. 
It is plain that between them they reprefent everything imaginable 
or real, in the univerfe. But the contraries of common langu^e 
ufually embrace, not the whole univerfe, but fbme one gene- 
ral idea. Thus, of men^ Briton and alien are contraries : every 
man mufl be one of the two^ no man can be both. Not-Briton 
and alien are identical names^and fa are not-alien and Briton. 

* I intend to draw no diilinfiion between thefe words. 



38 On ObjeBs^ Ideas ^ and Names. 

The fame may be faid of integer and fraftion among numbers, 
peer and commoner among fubjefts of the realm, male and fe- 
male among animals, and fo on. In order to exprefs this, let us 
fay that the whole idea under confideration is the univeffe (mean- 
ing merely the whole of which we are confidering parts) and let 
names which have nothing in common, but which between them 
contain the whole idea under confideration, be called contraries 
/«, or with refpeSf to^ that univerfe. Thus, the univerfe being 
mankind, Briton and alien are contraries, as are foldier and civi- 
lian, male and female, &c. : the univerfe being animal, man and 
brute are contraries, &c. 

Names may be reprefented by the letters of the alphabet: thus 
A, B, &c., may ftand for any names we are confidering, fimple or 
complex. The contraries may be reprefented by not-A, not-B, 
&c., but I fhall ufually prefer to denote them by the fmall letters 
a^ A, &c. Thus, everything in the univerfe (whatever that uni- 
verfe may embrace) is either A or not-A, either A or ^, either 
B or b^ &c. Nothing can be both B and b ; every not-B is i, 
and every not-^ is B : and fo on. 

No language, as may well be fuppofed, has been conf);ru6led 
beforehand with any intention of providing for the wants of any 
metaphyfical fyflem. In mofl, it is feen that the neceffity of 
providing for the formation of contrary terms has been obeyed. 
Our own language has borrowed from the Latin as well as from 
its parent: thus we have imperfeSf^ dif agreeable^ as well as un- 
formed and witlefs. There is a choice of contraries without very 
well fettled modes of appropriation : flanding for different de- 
grees of contrariety. Thus we have not perfeSf which is not fb 
ftrong a term as imperfeSi ; and not imperfe£fy the contrary of a 
contrary, which is not fb flrong as perfeSf,. The wants of com- 
mon converfation have fbmetimes retained a term and allowed 
the contrary to fink into difufe ; fbmetimes retained the contrary 
and neglefted the original term ; fbmetimes have even introduced 
the contrary without introducing any term for the original no- 
tion, and allowed no means of expreffing the original notion 
except as the contrary of a contrary. If we could imagine a 
perfeft language, we fhould fuppofe it would contain a mode of 
fignifying the contrary of every name : this indeed our own lan- 
guage may be (aid to have, though fometimes in an awkward and 



On ObjeBs^ Ideas, and Names. 59 

unidiomadc manner. One inflexion, or one additional word, 
may ferve to fignify a contrary of any kind : thus not man is 
efFeftive to denote all that is other than man. But there is a 
wider want, which can only be partially fupplied, for its complete 
fatisfa<Slion would require words almoft beyond the power of 
arithmetic to count : and all that has been done to make it le& 
confifts, in our language and in every other, moftly in the forma- 
tion of compound terms, be they fiibftantive and adje£i;ive, dou- 
ble fubftantives, or any others. A clails of objeds has a fub-clafs 
contained within it, the individuals of which are diftinguifhed 
from all others of the clafs by fomething common to them and 
them only. If the diftinguifhing charaderiftic have been fepa- 
rated, and a word formed to fignify the abftra£i; idea, that word, 
or an adjeftive formed from it (if it be not an adje£Uve) is joined 
with the general name of the clails. Thus we have ftrong men, 
white horles, &c. Or it may happen that the individuals of the 
fub-clafs take, in right of the diftinguifhing chara£i;eriftic, a per- 
feftly new name, and by the moft varied rules. A corn-grinding 
man is called from the implement he ufes, a miller; a meat- 
killing man from the organ which he fupplies, a butchery (if the 
firft idea of the etymology of this word be correfl:). Other men 
ufe mills and other trades feed the mouth : ftill cuftom has fet- 
tled thefe terms, though the firft i^only conne£led with its origin 
by the fpelling, and the fecond by a derivation which muft be 
fought in anodier language. But again, it will more often hap- 
pen that a diftin£i:ive chara£leriftic, belonging to fome only, gives 
no diftin£tive name to thokfomcj which ftill remain an unnamed 
fome out of the whole, to be feparated by the defcription of their 
chara£i:eriftic when wanted, inftead of being the all of a name 
invented to exprefs them, and them alone of their clafs. In fuch 
a predicament, for inftance, are men who have never feen the 
fea, as diftinguifhed from thofe who have feen it. Hence it ap- 
pears that particular propofitions are not fo diftin£): from uni- 
verial ones in real chara£i:er as they are generally made to be. 
If I fay ' fome As are Bs' the reader may well fuppofe that it is 
not often necefTary to advert to this fa£t : had it been fo, a name 
would have been invented fpecially to fignify ' As which are Bs.' 
If this name had been C, the propofltion would have been ' every 
C is B.' . • 



40 On ObjeSis^ Ideas ^ ifnd Names. 

The fame convenience which di£^ates the formation of a name 
for one fub-clafs and not for another, rules in the formation of 
contrary terms, as already noted. And thefe caprices of language 
— for logically confidered they are nothing elfe, though their for- 
mation is far from lawlefs — make it defirable to include in a for- 
mal treatife the mofl complete confideration of all propofitions, 
with reference not only to their terms, but alfb to the contraries 
of thofe terms. Every negative propofition is afErmative, and 
every affirmative is negative. Whatever completely does one of 
the two, include or exclude, alfo does the other. If I fay that 
' no A is B,' then, b being the name of every thing not B in the 
univerfe of the propofition, I fay that * every A is i:* and .if I 
lay that * every A is B,* I fay that * no A is b* Whether a lan- 
guage will happen to poflefs the name B, or i, or both, depends 
on circumflances of which logical preference is never one, ex- 
cept in treatifes of fcience. The Englifh may pofTeis a term for 
B, the French only for b : fo that the fame idea muft be prefented 
in an affirmative form to an Englifhman, as in ' every A is B,* 
and in a negative one to a Frenchman, as ' no A is i.' From 
all this it follows that it is an accident of langu^e whether a pro- 
pofition is univerfal or particular, pofitive or negative. We, 
having the names A and B, may be able to fay * every A is B : ' 
another language, which only games the contrary of B, mufl fay 
* no A is b.* A third language, in which As have not a feparate 
name, but are only individuals of the clafs C, muft fay ^ fbme Cs 
are Bs ; ' while a fourth, which is in the further predicament of 
naming only i, muft have it *fbme Cs are not is.' When we 
come to confider the fyUogifm, we (hall have full confirmation of 
the corre<9:nefs and completenefe of this view. 

It may be objected that the intr6du£i;ion of terms which are 
merely negations of the pofitive ideas contained in other terms 
is a fpecies of fi£lion. I anfwer, that, firft, the fi£lion, if it be a 
fidion, exifts in language, and produces its efFe£ls : nor will it 
eafily be proved more fi£litious than the invention of founds to 
ftand for things. But, fecondly, there is a much more efFe£tive 
anfwer, which will require a little development. 

When writers on lo^c, up to the prefent time, ufe fuch con- 
traries as man and not-man, they mean by the alternative, man 
and cv^Hything elfe. There can be little efFeftive meaning, and 



On ObjeSisy Ideas y and Names. 41 

no ufe, in a claflificatlon "which, becaufe they are not men, in- 
cludes in one word, noUman^ a planet and a pin, a rock and a 
featherbed, bodies and ideas, wifhes and things wifhed for. But 
if we remember that in many, perhaps moft, propofitions, the 
range of thought is much lefs extenfive than the whole univerfe, 
commonly fo called, we begin to find that the whole extent of a 
fubjeft of difcuffion is, for the purpofe of difcui&on, what I have 
called a univerfe^ that is to fay, a range of ideas which is either 
exprefTed or underftood as containing the whole matter under 
confideration. In fuch univerfes, contraries are very common : 
that is, terms each of which excludes every cafe of the other, 
while both together contain the whole. And, it muft be ob- 
ferved that the contraries of a limited univerfe, though it be a 
fufficient real definition of either that it is not the other, are fre- 
quently both of them the objefts from which pofitive ideas are 
obtained. Thus, in the univerfe of property, perfonal and real 
are contraries, and a definition of either is a definition of the 
other. But though each be a negative term as compared with 
the other, no one will fay that the idea conveyed by either is that 
of a mere negation. Money is not laiid, but it is fbmething. And 
even when the contrary term is originally invented merely as a 
negation, it may and does acquire pofitive properties. Thus 
alien is ftrifUy not-Briton : but fuppofe a man taken in arms 
againft the crown on fome fpot within its dominions, and claim- 
ing to be a prifoner of war. The anfwer that he h a Britifh fub- 
je(Sl is a negation : to eftablifh his pofitive claim he firft muft 
prove himfelf an alien, and moreover that he is in another pofitive 
predicament, namely, that he is the fiibje£): of a power *at war 
with Great Britain. Accordingly, of two contraries, neither 
muft be confidered as only the negation of the other : except when 
the univerfe in queftion is fb wide, and the pofitive term lb li- 
mited, that the things contained under the contrary name have 
nothing but the negative quality in common. 

Perception of agreements and difagreements is the foundation 
of all ajfertion : the acquirement of fuch perception with refped 
to any two ideas by the comparifon of both with a third, is the 
procefs of all inference. To infer, by comparifon of abftrad ideas, 
is the peculiar privilege of man ^ to need inference is nis imper- 
fection. To what point man would carry inference if he wanted 



¦a 



r 
i 



.1 



42 On 0bje£isy Ideas, and Names. 

language, how much further the lower animals could carry what 
they have of it if they had langu^e, are queftions on which it is 
vain to (peculate. The words is and is not^ which imply the 
agreement or difagreement of two ideas, muft exift, explicitly or 
implicitly, in every afTertion. And what we call agreement or 
difagreement, may be reduced to identity or non-identity. When 
we fay John is a man, we have the firft and moft objeftive form of 
affertion. Looked at in the moft objeSive point of view it is 
only this, John is one of the individual obje£ts who are called 
man. Looked at ideally, the propofition is more general. The 
idea of man, gathered from inftances, prefents itfelf as a coUedive 
mafs of ideas, of which we can figure to ourfelves an inftance 
without neceflarily calling up the idea of any man that ever ex- 
ifted. In the ideal conception of man, Achilles is a man as 
much as the Duke of Wellington, whether the former ever ex- 
ifted objeftively or no : of all the ideas of man which the mind 
can imagine, the former is. one as well as the latter. 

The feparation of ideas, or formation of abftra£i; ideas, and 
afTertion by means of them, prefents nothing, for our purpofe, 
which differs from the former cafe. If we fay ' this pifture is 
beautiful,' the mere phrafe is incomplete, for ' beautiful' is only an 
attribute, a purely ideal reference to a claf&fication which the 
mind makes, di£lated by its own judgment. The pi£lure being 
a material obje£i;, cannot be anything but an obje£l, cannot be- 
long to any clafs of notions, unlefs that clafs contain obje<Sls. 
What the propofition may mean is to a certain extent dependent 
upon t^e implied fubftandve to which beautiful belongs : that is, 
to the clafs of obje<Sls which the propofition implies the mind to 
have feparated into beautiful and not beautiful. It may be that 
the picture is a beautiful pi£ture : or a beautiful work of art, tak- 
ing its place in that divifion by which not only piftures, but fta- 
tues, buildings, reliefs, &c. are feparated into beautiful and other- 
wife : or a beautiful creation of human thought, placed among 
works of art, imagination, or fcience, &c. in the fubdiviflon beau- 
tiful : or finally, it may be a beautiful things placed with all ob- 
jefts of perception in a fimilar fubdiviflon. 

In all afTertions, however, it is to be noted, once for all, that 
formal hgicj the obje<9: of this treatife, deals with names and not 
with either the ideas or things to which thefe names belong. We 



On ObjeSis, Ideas, and Names. 43 

are concerned with the properties of ' A is B ' and ' A is not B * 
fo far as they prefent an idea independently of any fpecification 
of what A and B mean : with fuch ideas upon propofitions as 
are prefented by their y^r;77j, and are common to all forms of the 
fame kind. The reality of logic is the examination of the ufe of 
is and is not : the tracing of the confequences of the application 
of thefe words. The argument ' when the fiin fhines it is day : 
but it is not day, therefore the fun does not fhine,' contains a 
theory and two fa<Sls, the latter of which is made to follow from 
the former by the theory. That inference is made is feen in the 
word therefore : and the fentence is capable of being put upon its 
trial for truth or falfehood by logical examination. But this exa- 
mination rejedls the meaning of fun and day, the truth of the 
theory and of the fadb ; and only inquires into the right which 
the fentence, of its own ftrufture, gives us to introduce the word 
therefore. It merely enters upon 'when A /V, B is ; but B is 
not ; therefore A is not :* and decides that this is a correfl: junc- 
tion of precedents and confequent, an exhibition of neceflaiy con- 
nexion between what goes before and after therefore^ and a de- 
velopment, in the latter, of what is virtually, though not aftually, 
expreffed in the former. What A and B may mean is of no 
confequence to the inference^ or right to bring in ' A is not.^ 

Thus A and B, divefted of all fpecific meaning, are really 
names as names, independently of thingis : or at leaft may be fo 
confidered. For the truth of the propofition, under all mean- 
ings, gives us a right to fuppofe, if we like, that names are the 
meanings — that is to fay, that we may put it thus, ' When the 
name A is, the name B is: but the name B is not j therefore the 
name A is not. 

It is not therefore the objeft of logic to determine whether 
conclufions be true or falfe ; but whether what are aflerted to 
be conclufions are conclufions. By a conclujion is meant that which 
is and muft be Jhut in with certain other preceding things put in 
firft : it is that which muft have been put into a fentence becaufe 
certain other things were put in. To infer a conclujion is to bring 
in^ as it were, the direfl: ftatement of that which has been virtu- 
ally ftated already — has been Jhut in. When we fay ' A is B, 
B is C ; we conclude A is C ' ; it would be more correft to fay 
* A is B, B is C J we have concluded K is C '. We fliould never 



44 On ObjeStsy Ideas, and Names. 

think of faying ' we have put into a box a man's upper drefe of 
the colour of the trees ; therefore we muft put in a green coat' ; 
— ^we fhould fay * we have put in* To infer the conclufion then 
is to bring in a ftatement that we have concluded. 

Inference does not give us more than there was before : but it 
may make us fee more than we faw before : ideally (peaking, 
then, it does give us (in the mind) more than there was before. 
But the homely truth that no more can come out than was in, 
though accepted as to all material obje£ls even by metaphyficians 
—who are generally well pleaied to find the key of a box which 
contains what they want, though fure that it will put in no more 
than was there already — has been applied to logic, and even to 
mathematics, in depreciation of their rank as branches of know- 
ledge. Thofe who have made this ftrangeft of human errors 
muft have afTumed an ideal omniicience, and looked at human 
imperfe<Slion objedlively. Onmifcience need neither compare 
ideas, nor draw inferences: the conclufion which we deduce 
from premifes, is always prefent with them ; truths are concomi- 
tants^ not confequences. When we fay that one aflertion follows 
from another, we fpeak purely ideally, and defcribe an imperfec- 
tion of our own minds : it is not that the confequence follows 
from the premifes, but that our perception of the confequence fol- 
lows our perception of the premifes : the confequence, obje£Uvely 
(peaking, is in, and with, and of, the premifes. We fpeak wrongly 
if we fpeak ideally, when we (ay that 'A is C,' is in * A is B and 
B is C : in faft, it is only by giving an objedive view to the 
argument, that we can even aflert that it will be feen. To un- 
cultivated minds, this fimple conclufion is never concomitant 
with the premifes, and only with (bme difficulty a confequence. 

From the certainty that a confequence may be made to come 
out, which is an allegorical ufe of the word out^ we a(rume a right 
to declare, by the fame fort of allegor)'^,* that it was in. The 
premifes therefore contain the conclufion : and hence fome have 
(poken as if in ftudying how to draw the conclufion, we were 
ftudying to know what we knew before. All the propofitions 
of pure geometry, which multiply fo faft that it is only a fmall 

* I am of opinion that it is more coniiftent with analogy to fay that the 
hypothecs is contained in its necefTary confequence, than to fay that the for- 
mer contains the latter. My reafon will appear in the courfe of the work. 



On ObjeSisy Ideasy and Names. 45 

and liblated clafs even among mathematicians who know all that 
has been done in that fcience, are certainly contained in, that is 
neceflarily deducible from, a very few fimple notions. But to be 
known from thefe premifes is very different from being known with 
them. 

Another form of the aflertion is that confequences are virtually 
contained in the premifes, or (I fuppofe) as good as contained in 
the premifes. Perfons not fpoiled by fophiftry will fmile when 
they are told that knowing two ftraight lines cannot enclofe a 
fpace, the whole is greater than its part, &c. — they as good as 
knew that the three Interfeflions of oppoftte fides of a hexagon 
infcribed in a circle mufl be in the fame flraight line. Many 
of my readers will learn this now for the firfl time : it will com- 
fort them much to be afTured, on many high authorities, that they 
virtually knew it ever fmce their childhood. They can now pon- 
der upon the diflIn<Stion, as to the flate of their own minds, be- 
tween virtual knowledge and abfolute ignorance. 

There mufl always be fome contention as to the relative value 
of their knowledge between the ftudents of the things which we 
can fee mufl have been, and of the things which, for what 
we can fee, might have been otherwife. How much of the dlf^ 
tin£Uon is due to our ignorance, no one can tell. In the mean 
time, it is of more ufe to point out the advantage, as things are, 
of fludying both kinds of knowledge, than to attempt to inflitute 
a rivalry between them. Thofe who have undervalued the ftudy 
of necefTary confequences, have allowed themfelves, in illuflrat- 
ing their argument, phrafes * which taken literally, mean more 
perhaps than they intended. 

* We might fometimes take them to mean that the (hidy of necefTary 
connexion in logic, mathematics, &C.9 is at leaft ufelefs, if not pernicious. 
Now we fliould Aippofe, if this be what they mean, that clofe connexion, 
fliort of abfolute neceility, muft partake fomewhat of the fame charsl6ler. If 
the abfolute mathematical neceffity that three angles of a triangle are equal 
to two right angles is therefore to be avoided, the ftudy of phyfics, in which 
there are the neceflities which we exprefs by the term la^ws of nature ^ muft 
do fome harm. Hiftory, in which we may fo often count upon the a6Hons 
which motives will produce, cannot be quite faultlefs : and there are laws of 
formation in language which might as well be kept out of fight, for they 
a£l almoft with the uniformity of laws of nature. True knowledge muft 
confift in the ftudy of the a^lions of madmen : that a certain man imagined 



46 On ObjeSlsy Ideas ^ and Names ^ 

The ftudy of logic, then, confidered relatively to human know- 
ledge, ftands in as low a place as that of the humble rules of 
arithmetic, with reference to the vaft extent of mathematics and 
their phyfical applications. Neither is the lefs important for its 
lowlinefs : but it is not every one who can fee that. Writers on 
the fubjeS frequently take a fcope which entitles them to claini 
for logic one of the higheft places : they do not confine them- 
felves to the connexion of premifes and. conclufion, but enter 
upon the periculum et commodum of the formation of the premifes 
themfelves. In the hands of Mr. Mill, for example (and to fome 
extent in thofe of Dr. Whateley) logic is the fcience of diftin- 
guifhing truth from falfehood, lb as both to judge the premifes 
and draw the conclufion, to compare name with name, not only 
as to identity or difference, but in all the varied afTociadons of 
thought which arife out of this comparifbn. 



CHAPTER III. 

On the AbJiraSl Form of the Propqfition. 

IN the preceding chapter, I have endeavoured to put together 
fuch notions on the a£l:ual fources of our knowledge as may 
give the reader the means of thinking upon points which any 
fyflem of logic, however reflrifted, mufl necefTarily luggefl. 
We cannot attempt to conneft our ufe of words with our notions 
of things, without the occurrence of a great many difficulties, a 
great many fources of adverfe theories, and of never-ending dif^ 
putes. We cannot even reprefent phenomena, as phaenomena, 
except in the language of fbme fyflem, and it may be of a wrong 
one. The confidence which the favourers of thefe feveral the- 
ories place in their corre£l:nefs is a fufEcient reafbn for keeping 
the account of the procefs of the underflanding, fb far as it can 
be mlide an exafi: fcience, as diflin£i; as poflible from all of them : 
for they differ widely, and if they agree in anything which can 

himfelf to be Caefar, when he might juft as well have been Newton or Ne- 
buchadnezzar, muft be a real bit of knowledge, not virtually contained in 
anything, elfe, wholly or partially. 



On the AbJiraSi Form of the Propojition. 47 

be diftinfUy apprehended, it Is only in having names of great 
authority enrolled among the partifans of every one. 

In order to examine the laws of inference, of the way of dif- 
tinftly perceiving the right to fay ' therefore,' ' fo that,' ' whence 
it muft be,' &c., &c., in a manner which may be admitted, (o 
far as we go, by all, we muft make this feparation very complete. 
All admit proportions, as ^man is animal,' ^no man is faultlefs;' 
all are, after a little thought, agreed upon the modes of inference : 
but upon the import of a fimple propofition, there is every kind 
of difference. How much we mean, when we fay ' man is ani- 
mal,' and how we arrive at our meaning, is matter for volumes 
on different ftdes of unfettled queftions. 

In order properly to examine the laws of inference, or of any 
thing elfe, we muft firft endeavour to arrive at a diftind abftrac- 
tion of fo much of the idea we are concerned with, as is itfelf the 
precedent reafon, if it be right fo to fpeak, of the law in queftion. 
This is an eafy procefs upon familiar things. We do not give 
the carriers of goods much credit for profundity, in feeing that, 
on a given road, there is only the difference of weight by which 
they are concerned to know how one parcel differs from another; 
and further that, as long as they have to carry a pound, it matters 
nothing whether it be of fugar or iron. It is this procefs which 
we want to perform to the utmoft, upon the fimple propofition. 
Writers on logic, from Ariftotle downwards, have made a large 
and important ftep in fubftituting for fpecific names, with all their 
fuggeftions about them, the mere letters of the alphabet. A, B, 
C, &c. Thefe letters zrej^mbolsj and general fymbols : each of 
them ftands for any one we pleafe of its clafs. But what are 
they fymbols of, names, ideas,* or the objefts which give thofe 
ideas ? The anlwer is, that this is precifely one of thofe confi- 
derations which we may leave behind, in abftrafting what is 
neceflTary to an examination of the laws of inference. The only 
condition is, that we are to confine ourfelves to one or the other. 
When we fay man is animal, it may be that the name man is 
contained in the name animal, that the idea of man is contained 
in that of animal, or that the obje<Sl man is in the obje£i; animal. 
Or if there were twenty more different appropriations of the 

* Meaning of courfe (page 30) ideas of ideas, and ideas of objefts. 



48 On the AbJiraB Form 

fymbols, the fame thing might be (aid of each. This is, I believe, 
the firft ufe of the general fymbol in order of time ; the algebrai- 
cal ufe of letter or other fymbol, to defignate number, being both 
fubfequent and derived. 

When therefore we fay * Every X is Y*, we underftand that 
X is a fymbol which reprefents an inftance of a name, idea, ob- 
jeft, &c., as the cafe may be. There may be more or fewer of 
fuch inftances ; they may be nunierable or innumerable. And the 
fame of Y. The language of logicians has generally been unfa- 
vourable to the diftinft perception of their terms being diftribu- 
tively applicable to clafles of inftances. They have rather been 
quantitative than quantuplicitative : exprefling themfelves as if, in 
faying that animal is a larger or wider term than man, they would 
rather draw their language from the idea of two areas, one of 
which is larger than the other, than from two colle£lions of indi- 
viftble units, one of which is in number more than the other. 
They have even carried this ib far as to make it doubtful, except 
from context, whether their diftinftion between univerial and par- 
ticular is that of all 2Lndfomej or of the whole^and part. If their 
inftances had been white fquares^ their * all Ais B' and ' fome A 
is B' might have applied as well to ^ All the fquare is white' and 
^ Some of the fquare is white' as to ^ All the fquares are white' and 
* Some of the fquares are white.' I (hall take particular care 
to ufe numerical language, as diftinguifhed from magnitudinal, 
throughout this work, introducing of courfe, the plurals Xs, Ys, 
Zs, &c. 

I may mention here another mode of fpeaking, which will, I 
think, appear obje£lionable to all who are much ufed to confi- 
deration of quantity. When a compound idea contains two or 
more fimpler ones, fbme logicians have fpoken as if the com- 
bination were legitimately reprefented by arithmetical addition. 
Thus the combination of the ideas pf animal znd. rational mn& 
give the idea of man : for the two notions co-exift in nothing 
elfe that we know of. Accordingly, fome write animal + ratio- 
nal^=^ man. If this be intended as an abftra£i;ion of the notation of 
arithmetic, for the purpofe of fitting to it entirely different mean- 
ing, there is of courfe no obje£):ion which I need confider here: 
but it feems to me that more is meant, and that thofe who have 
ufed this notation imagine a great refemblance between combining 



N ^-\ ^ pf^^^ Proportion. 49 

ideas, and cumulating them. What the difference is, I cannot 
pretend to fay, any more than I can pretend to fay what the dif- 
ference is between chemically combining volumes of oxygen and 
hydrogen, fo as to produce water, and fimple cumulation of them 
in the fame veffel, fo as to produce a mixed gas : every beginner 
knows that the eleftric'fpark, or fome other inexplicable agency, 
is neceffary to turn the mixed gas into a new chemical combina- 
tion. But that the difference exifts in the former cafe alfo, feems 
to me as clear as any thing I can imagine. Even in chemiftry the 
cumulative notation, which was once thought an all-fufficient mode 
of expreffing the refults of the atomic theory, has failed with the 
progrefs of knowledge. To a confiderable extent, the introduc- 
tion of modes of cumulation as yet anfwers the purpofe : but 
there ftill remain ifomeric compounds, differing in properties^ but 
of the fame compofition. For example, the tartaric and racemic 
acids: of which Profeffor Graham fays [Elements afChemiJiry p. 
158), ''A nearer approach to identity could fcarcely be con- 
ceived than is exhibited by thefe bodies, which are, indeed, the 
fame both in form and compofition But by no treat- 
ment can the one acid be tranfmuted into the other." If the 
above mode of confounding cumulation and combination be ad- 
mifSble, I fuppofe we might eafily give ourfelves a right to fay that 

2 + 2-1- addition = 4 

an equation at which the mathematician would flare. 

So much for the charafteriflics of the terms of a propofition, 
as wanted for the abflraft forms of inference. It remains to 
confider thofe of the connefting copulae is and is not. 

The complete attempt to deal with the term is would go to 
the form and matter of every thing in exijience^ at leafl, if not to 
the poffible form and matter of all that does not exifl, but might. 
As for as it could be done^ it would give the grand Cyclopaedia, 
and its yearly fupplement would be the hiflory of the human ace 
for the time. That logic exifls as a treated fcienCe, arifes from 
the charafteriflics of the word, requifite to be abflrafted in fludy- 
ing inference, being few and eafily apprehended. It may be ufed 
in many fenfes, all having a common property* Names, ideas, 
and objefts, require it in three different fenfes. Speak of names^ 
and fay ^ man is animal' : the is is here ap is of applicability ; to 

£ 



50 On the AbftraSl Form 

whatfoever (idea, obje£l, &c.) man is a name to be applied, to 
that fame (idea, obje£l, &c.) animal is a name to be applied. As 
to ideas, the is is an is of pofTeflion of all eflential cfaara£leriftics ; 
man is an idea which poiTeiTes, contains, prefents, all that is con- 
ftitutive of the idea animaU As to abfolute external objefts, the 
is is an is of identity, the moft common and pofitive ufe of the 
word. Every man is one of the animals ; touch him, you touch 
an animal, deftroy him, you deftroy an animal. 

Thefe fenfes are not all interchangeable. Take the is of iden- 
tity, and the name man is not, as a name, the name animal: the 
idea man is not, as an idea, the idea animal. Now we muft afk, 
what common property is poflefled by each of thefe three notions 
of /j, on which the common laws of inference depend. Common 
laws of inference there certainly are. If the applicability of the 
name A be always accompanied by that of B, and that of B by 
that of C, then that of A is always accompanied by that tH C. If 
the idea A contain all that is eflential to the idea B, and B all that 
is eflential to C, then A contains all that is effential to C. If the 
objefl: A be aftually the objedl: B, and if B be adlually C, then 
A is adlually C. 

The following are the charadleriftics of the- W6rd is which, ex- 
ifting in any propofed meaning of it, make that meaning fatisfy 
the requirements of logicians when they lay down the propofition 
' A is B.' To make the ftatement diftinft, let the propofition 
be doubly fingular, or refer to one inftance of each, one A and 
one B : let it be ^ this one A is this one B.' 

Firft, the double fingular propofition above mentioned, and 
every fuch double-fingular, mufl be indifferent to converflon : the 
* A is B,* and the ' B is A' mufl have the fame meaning, and be 
both true or both felfe. 

Secondly, the connexion /V, exifling between one term and 
each of two others, mufl therefore exifl between thofe two 
others ; fo ' A is B' and ' A is C* mufl give ' B is C 

Thirdly, the effential diflindlion of the term is not is merely 
that is and is not are contradictory alternatives^ one mufl, both 
cannot, be true. 

Every connexion which can be invented and fignified by the 
terms is and is not^ fo as to fatisfy thefe three conditions, makes 
all the rules of logic true. No doubt abfolute identity was the fug- 



of the Propqfition. 51 

gefUng connexion from which all the others arofe : juft as arith- 
metic was the medium in which the forms and laws of algebra 
were fu^efted. But, as now we invent algebras by abftradl- 
ing the forms and laws of operation, and fitting new meanings to 
them, fo we have power to invent new meanings for all the 
forms of inference, in every way in which we have power to 
make meanings of is and is not which fatisfy the above condi- 
tions. For inftance, let X, Y, Z, each be the fymbol attached 
to every inftance of a clafe of material objeds, let is placed be- 
tween two, as in ' X is Y' mean that the two are tied together, 
by by a cord, and let X be confidered as tied to Z when it is 
tied to Y which is tied to Z, &c. There is no fyllogifm but 
what remains true under thefe meanings. Thus 

The fyllogifm Is true in the fenfe 

Every X is Y Every X is tied to a Y 

Some Zs are not Ys Some Zs are not tied to Ys 

.*. Some Zs are not Xs .'.Some Zs are not tied to Xs 

This laft inftance might be confidered as a material reprefen- 
tation of attachment together of ideas in the mind. 

We muft diftinftly obferve that it is not every cafe of infe- 
rence which demands all the charafteriftics to be fetisfied. Thus 
in the moft common cafe of all, ' Every A is B, every B is C, 
therefore every A is C,' of all the three conditions only the fe- 
cond is wanted to fecure the validity of this cafe. Though it be fel- 
dom thought worth while to make this obfervation, yet it is uni- 
ver£d practice to z& upon it, and ib as to introduce into formal 
logic apparent contradi£tions of its own rules. For example,th e 
following are allowed to pafs for fyUogifms, in the ordinary defi- 
nition of that word. 

* Every A is greater than fbme one B j every B is greater than 
fome one C, therefore every A is greater than fome one C' 
And the fame when inftead of greater than is read equal to or 
lefs than. The form which moft commonly appears is the 
pair of doubly fingular propofitions, ' A (one thing) is greater 
than B J B is greater than C ; therefore A is greater than C' 
Here * greater than greater' is ' greater,' the fecond rule is fatisfied, 
and no other is wanted. But this meaning for is (or this fubfti- 
tute for it, if the reader like it better) will not fatisfy all the con- 



52 On the AbftraSl Form 

ditions, and therefore will not apply to all the forms of inference. 

But is in the fenfe ^ is equal to' does fatisfy all the conditions. 
This fenfe of ij, namely agreement in magnitude, is the copula of 
the mathematician's fyUogifm, when he is reafoning on quantity 
only. 

It will probably be affirmed that the generalization thus made, 
or fhown to be poffible, in the conception of the word is for 
purpofes of inference, amounts only to a very frequent, if not 
moft ufual, ufe of the word, namely, as fignifying a certain mode, 
not of identity, but of agreement in quality. As when we fay 
* thefe two things are the fame — in colour' or ' the one thing is 
the other — in colour :* that the name man is the name animal, 
in a certain re(pe<£l, namely, in what the latter can be applied to: 
that the idea man is animal, in both pofTeffing certain charac- 
teriflics : that every objefl man is an obje<Sl animal, in a£l:ual 
fubflance : that A is B in magnitude, — when we fay A equals 
B \ and fo on. But I admit only the converfe, namely, that all 
thefe ufes fatisfy the conditions. It would hardly be for any one 
to fey, that every poffible ufe of is which fatisfies three fuch fim- 
ple requirements, has been or can be exhaufled. Even the 
material example which was jufl now given, cannot be iden- 
tified with any common ufe, or eafily imaginable one, of the 
common verb. But if no invented meaning, proper to fatisfy 
the conditions, can be found, other than already exifls in- more 
or lefs of ufe, flill, thefe conditions are the laws to which the 
word muft fiibmit in its logical acceptation. 

There are common ufes of the word which are not admitted 
in logic : and among them, one of the mofl common, conneftion 
of an obje£t with its quality, and of an idea with one of Its con- 
ftituent or afTociated ideas. As when we fay, the rofe is red, 
prudence is deflrable. Here the logical conditions are not fatis- 
fied. For example, ' red is the rofe,' though a poetical inverfion 
of the firfl afTertion, is not logically true. It is ufual to confider 
fuch propofitions, in logic, as elliptical y thus * the rofe is red' is 
confidered as * the rofe is a^red objeft, or an objeft of red colour ;* 
in which the is now takes one of the fenfes which allows of con- 
verfion. Similarly, in all other cafes, the fubje<Sl and predicate 
V aire made to take the fame character \ both names, both ideas, or 
both obje£):s. This redu£):ion renders unnecefTary both the fludy 



of the Propqfition. 53 

of the varieties of meaning of the word is (meaning varieties out 
of the pale of the conditions above enumerated), and alfo that of 
the tranfitions of meaning within the circle of which the infe- 
rence remains good. 

The moft common ufes of the verb are ; — firft abfolute iden- 
tity, as in ' the thing he fold you is the one I fold him :' fecondly, 
agreement in a certain particular or particulars underftood, as 
in ' He is a negro* (aid of a European in reference to his colour : 
thirdly, pofleffion of a quality, as in ' the rofe is red :' fourthly, 
reference of a fpecies to its genus, as in ' man is an animal.' All 
thefe ufes are independent of the ufe of the verb alone, denoting 
exiftence, as in * man is [i. e. exifts].* In all thefe fenfes, and in 
all which might be ^dded confiftendy with the conditions in page 
50, fome propodtions fometimes admit of having the fenfe of is 
(hifted, and fome do not. Thus, in negative propofitions, the is 
of agreement in particulars may be lawfully converted into that 
of identity : if ' No A is B in colour,' then abfolutely * No A is 
B.' But ' Every A is B' in colour, does not prove ' Every A 
is B. But the firft paii" might be conne£l:ed by a fyllogifm. 

The is of agreement in particulars may always be reduced to 
the is of identity, by alteration of the predicate ; thus ' Every A 
is B in colour* is * Every A is a thing having the colour of one 
of the Bs,* When a fyllogifm has a negative conclufion, and 
the middle term is, or can be made, the predicate of both pre- 
mifes, then the whole fyllogifm can be transformed from one in 
which there is only the is of agreement to one in which there is 
no is but that of identity. For example, fuppofe the premifes to 
be ' No X is Y (in colour) ; every Z is Y (in colour),* not 
meaning neceflarily that all the Ys are of one colour, but reading 
it as ' No X is of the colour of any one of the Ys j every Z is 
of the colour of one of the Ys,* The conclufion is that * no Z 
is X (in colour),' or ' no Z is of the colour of any one of the 
Xs.* But from this it follows that no Z is X, for if any one Z 
were abfolutely X, it would have * the colour of that X. This 

• The reader muft not paint any of the letters during the procels. The 
fenfe in which we fay a door is the fame door as before, after it has been 
painted of a different colour, is not the fenfe of logical identity : it is the 
fame in all but colour and colouring matter \ and the 1/ is one of agreement. 
Except as a joke in fufficient anfwer to a captious obje£lion or a trap, no 



54 On Propojitions . 

laft conclufion can be brought direflly from altered prenniies : 
thus, is being that of identity, we have ' No X is [a thing hav- 
ing the colour of one of the Ys] ; every Z is [a thing having 
the colour of one of the Ys] ; therefore no Z is X.* But fup- 
pofe we take the following premifes, ' Some Ys are not Xs (in 
colour) J every Y is Z (in colour)/ From this it follows that 
fome Zs are not Xs (in colour), and thence that fome Zs are 
not Xs. But we cannot now alter the premifes, fo as to produce 
the laft conclufion from X, Z, and a middle term. 



CHAPTER IV. 

On Propojitions. 

A NAME is a fymbol which is attached to one or more 
objefts of thought, on account of fome refemblance, or 
community of properties. Or elfe it is a fymbol attached to 
fome one or more objects of thought, to diftinguifh them from 
others having the fame properties. Objedls of the fame name 
are, fo far as that name is concerned, undiftinguifhable. And 
one obje61: may have many names, as being one in each of many 
claffes of objefts of thought. 

Names, as explained in chapter II, are exclufively the ob- 
jefts of formal logic. The identity and difference of things is 
defcribed by afferting the right to affert, or the right to deny, the 
application of names. And names, whether fimple or complex, 
will be reprefented by letters of the alphabet, as X, Y, Z. 

A propofition is the affertion of agreement, more or lefe, or 
difegreement, more or- lefs, between two names. \ It expreffes 
that of the objefts of thought called Xs, there are fome which 
are, or are not, found among the obje£ls of thought called Ys : 

change whatever muft take place in the terms of conchifion, during infe- 
rence. The American calculating boy, Zerah Colbum, was aiked how 
many black beans it would take to make ten white ones ; to which he very 
properly anfwered * Ten, if you ikin 'em :' but the ten ikinned beans would 
not be the fame beans as before : except, indeed, to thofe to whom black is 
white. 



On Propqfitions. 55 

• 

that there are objects which have both names, or which have 
one but not the other, or which have neither. 

For the moft part, the objeSs of thought which enter into a 
propofition are fuppofed to be taken, not from the whole univerfe 
of poi&ble obje£ls, but from fome more definite colle£lion of 
them. Thus when we fay '' All animals require air," or that 
the name requiring air belongs to every thing to which the name 
animal belongs, we fhould underftand that we are fpeaking of 
things on this earth : the planets, &c., of which we know no- 
thing, not being included. By the univerfe of a propofltion, I 
mean the whole range of names in which it is exprefled or un- 
derftood that the names in the propofition are foimd. If there 
be no fuch exprei&on nor underftanding, then the univerfe of the 
propofition is the whole range of poffible names. If, the uni- 
verfe being the name U, we have a right to fay ' every X is Y,* 
then we can only extend the univerfe fo as to make it include all 
pofSble names, by faying ' Every X which is U is one of the Ys 
which are Us,' or fbmething equivalent. 

Contrary names, with reference to any one univerfe, are thofe 
which cannot both apply at once, but one or other of which al- 
ways applies. Thus, the univerfe being man^ Briton and alien 
are contraries ; the univerfe being property^ real and perfonal are 
contraries. Names which are contraries in one univerfe, are 
not necefTarily fo in a larger one. Thus in geometry, when the 
univerfe is one plane^ pairs of ftraight lines are either parallels or 
interfe£lors, and never both : parallels and interfe£lors are then 
contraries. But when the ftudent comes to fblid geometry, in 
which all fpace is the univerfe, there are lines which are neither 
parallels nor interfe£lors ; and thefe words are then not contra- 
ries. But names which are contraries in the larger and contain- 
ing univerfe, are necefTarily contraries in the fmaller and contained, 
unlefe the fmaller univerfe abfblutely exclude one name, and then 
the other name is the univerfe. 

In future, I always underftand fbme one univerfe as being that 
in which all names ufed are wholly contained : and alfo (which 
it is very important to bear in mind) that no one name mentioned 
in a propofition fills this univerfe, or applies to everything in it. 
Nothing is more eafy than to treat the fuppofition of a name 
being the univerfe as an extreme cafe. And I (hall denote con- 



56 On Proportions. 

trades by large and fmall letters : thus, X being a name, x is tht 
contrary name. And everything (in the univerfe underftood) is 
either X or x : and nodiing is both. 

A propofition may be either Jtmple and incomplete^ or complex 
2Lnd complete. The fimple propofition only aflerts that Xs are 
Ys, or are not Ys : the complex propofition, which always con- 
fifts of two fimple ones, difpofets in one manner or the other of 
every X and every Y. Thus ' Every X is Y' is a fimple pro- 
pofition : but it forms a part of two complex propofitions. It 
may belong either to * every X is Y and every Y is X,' or to 
^ Every X is Y and fome Ys are not Xs.' 

The propofitions advanced in common life are ufually com- 
plex, with one fimple propofition expreffed and one underftood : 
feuf books of logic have hitherto confidered only the fimple pro- 
pofition. And this laft fbould be confidered before the complex 
form. 

The fimple propofition muft be confidered with refpe6l to 
Jign^ relative quantity^ and order. 

Simple propofitions are of two Jigns: affirmative znd negative. 
It is either * Xs are Ys,' or ' Xs are not Ys.* The phrafes are 
and are not^ or is and is not^ which mark the diftinftion, are 
called copula. 

The relative quantity of a propofition has reference to the 
numbers of inftances of the different names which enter it. The 
diftinflions of quantity ufually recognized are all znd fome* : 
leading to the diftin<ftion of univerfal and particular. Thus 
^ Eyery X is Y' and ' Every. X is not Y' are the univerial affir- 
mative and negative propofitions : the latter is ufually ftated as 
< No X is Y.' And * fome Xs are Ys' arid ' fome Xs are not 
Ys' are the particular affirmative and negative propofitions. And 
when the propofitions are reduced ftriftly to thefe four fornis, 

* Somey in logic^ means one or morey it may be all. He who fays that 
fome are , is nPt U> be held to mean that t^e reft are pot, * Some men 
breathe,' *fome horfes are diftlnguiilhable by fliape from their riders' would 
be held falfe in common language. The reafon is, as above noted, that 
common language uAially adopts the complex particular proportion, and 
implies that fome arc not in faying that fome are. The -ftudcnt cannot be 
too careful to remember this diftin^lion. A particular propofition is only a 
* may be particular.' 



On Propojitions.' ^j 

the firft named, X, is called the y»^yV/?, and the fecond named, 
Y, the predicate^ 

It has been propofed to coaiider the iiniverfal propofitions as 
definite with refpeft to quantity : but this is not quite correS. 
The phrafe 'all Xs are Ys* does not tell us how many Xs 
there are, but thatj be the unknown number of Xs in exi/ience 
what it may, the unknown number mentioned in the propofition 
is the fame. That which is definite is the ratio of the number 
of Xs of the propofition to the Xs of the univerfe. So under- 
flood, however, the * definite quantity,' as an abbreviation, may be 
faid to belong to univerfals. And the indefinitenefs of the parti- 
cular propofition is only hypothetical. It is in our power to fuj>- 
pofe thtfiime to be one half of the whole, or two-thirds, or any 
other fraftion. 

The quantity of the fubjeft is exprefTed ; that of the predicate, 
though not exprefTed, is neceflarily implied by the meaning of 
language. The predicate of an affirmative is particular: the 
predicate of a negative is univerfaL If I fay ' Xs are Ys,' even 
though I fpeak of dl the Xs, I only really fpeak of (o many Ys 
as are compared with Xs and found to agree : and thefe need 
npt be all the Ys, * Every horfe is an animal,' declares that (o 
many horfes as there are to fpeak of, fo many animals are fpoken 
of: and leaves it wholly unfettled whether there be or be not 
more animals left. But if I fhould fay ^ Xs are not Ys,' though 
it fhould be only one X, as in * this X is not a Y,' yet I fpeak of 
every Y which exifls. The afTertion is ' this X is not any one 
whatfoever of all the Ys in exiflence.' A perfbn who fhould 
wifh to verify by adlual infpeftion, ' thefe 20 Xs are Ys* might, 
perchance, be enabled to affirm the refult upon the examination 
of only 20 Ys, if he came firfl upon the right ones. But he 
could not verify ' this one X is not a Y' until he had examined 
every Y in exiflence. This is the common doftrine, but though 
admitting of courfe that the affirmative propofition only enables 
us to infer of fbme inflances of the predicate, yet I think it more 
correal to fay that the predicate itfelf is fpoken of univerfally, but 
indivifibfyj and that in the negative propofition the predicate is 
fpoken of univerfally and divijibly» * Some Xs are Ys' tells 
us that each X mentioned is either the firfl Y, or the fecond Y, 
or the third Y, &c., no Y being excluded from comparifon. But 



58 On Propqfitions. 

' Some Xs are not Ys' tells us that each X mentioned is abfo- 
lutely not the firft Y, nor the fecond, nor the third, &c ; is not, 
in faft, any one of all the Ys. Still, however, the predicate of 
an affirmative yields no more than it vjrould do if the Ys finally 
accepted as Xs were fpecially feparated, and confidered as the 
only Ys (poken of. 

The relation of the univerfal quantity to the whole quantity of 
inftances in exiftence is definite^ being that whole quantity itfelf. 
But the particular quantity is wholly indefinite : * Some Xs are 
Ys' gives no clue to the fra6):ion of all the Xs fpoken of, nor to 
the fra£lion which they make of all the Ys. Common language 
makes a certain conventional approach to definitenefe, which has 
been thrown away in works of logic. ' Some,' ufually means a 
rather fmall fraction of the whole ; a larger fra6):ion would be 
expreffed by ' a good many* ; and fomewhat more than half by 
f moft' ; while a ftill larger proportion would be * a great majo- 
rity' or 'nearly all'. A perfe£Uy definite particular^ as to quan- 
tity, would exprefe how many Xs are in exiftence, how many 
Ys, and how many of the Xs are or are not Ys : as in * 70 out 
of the 100 Xs are among the 200 Ys'. In this chapter I fhall 
treat only the indefinite particular^ leaving the definite particular 
for future confideration. 

The order of a propofition has relation to the choice of fub- 
. jeft and predicate. Thus ' Every X is Y* and ' every Y is X* 
though both eftablifh a univerfal affirmative relation between X 
and Y, yet are in faft two different propofitions. They are called 
converfe forms. When the fubjeft and predicate are of the feme 
fort of quantity, both univerfal or both particular, the converfe 
forms give the fame propofition. Thus * No X is Y' and ' No 
Y is X* are the fame ; neither has any meaning, except perhaps 
of emphafis, which the other has not. And ' Some Xs are Ys' 
is the fame as ' Some Ys are Xs'. The univerfal negative, then, 
in which both terms are univerfal, and the particular affirmative, 
in which both are particular — are necejfarily convertible propofi-- 
tions. But the univerfal affirmative, in which the fubje<St is uni- 
verfal and the predicate particular, and the. particular negative, in 
which the fubjeft is particular, and the predicate univerfal — are 
not neceffarily convertible, and are generally called inconvertible. 
They may be convertible, in one cafe, and inconvertible in an- 



On Propqfitions. 59 

other. But the term inconvertible is not incorreft, for the fol- 
lowing reafon. 

The agreements and difagreements which are treated in logic 
are of this character ; there can only be agreement with one, but 
there may be difagreement with all. If * this X be a Y' it is 
one Y only : it is * this X is either the firft Y, or the fecond 
Y, or the third Y, &c. If there be 100 Ys, there is, to thofe 
who can know it, 99 times as much negation as affirmation in 
the propofition : and yet moft affuredly it is properly called affir- 
mative. But if it be ' this X is not a Y,' we have ' this X is 
not the firft Y, and it is not the fecond Y, and it is not the third 
Y, &c.' The affirmation is what is commonly called disjunctive, 
the negation conjun61:ive. A disjunftive negation would be no 
propofition at all, except that^cne and the fame thing cannot 
be two different things : any X li either not the firft Y or not 
the fecond Y. >^nd in like manner a conjunctive affirmation 
would be an impoffibility : it would ftate that one thing is two 
or more different things. 

We muft be prepared, then, to confider cafes of oppofition in 
which on the one fide there is fixed neceffity, and on the other 
fide poffibility of alternatives : and we muft be prepared to de- 
note thefe by oppofite terms, which, looking to etymology only, 
denote fbced neceffities of oppofite characters. This happens in 
the cafe above : convertible means abfblutely and necefTarily con- 
vertible, inconvertible means convertible or inconvertible as the 
cafe may be. Taking the four forms of one order, we find that 
each of the univerfals cannot exift with either propofition of op- 
pofite form. Thus ' Every X is Y ' cannot be true if either 
'No X is Y' or 'Some Xs are not Ys.:' while ' No X is Y' 
cannot be true if either ' Every X is Y ' or ' Some Xs are Ys.' 
But each of the particulars is necefTarily inconfiftent with nothing 
but the univerfal of oppofite form. That 'Some Xs- are Ys' 
cannot be true if ' No X is Y ' but it may be true if ' Some Xs 
are not Ys.' Arid ' Some Xs are not Ys* cannot be true if 
' Every X is Y,' but it may be true though ' Some Xs are 
Ys.' 

The pair ' Every X is Y' and 'fome Xs are not Ys' are called 
contradidfory : and (o are the pair ' No X is Y ' and ' Some Xs 
are Ys.' Of each pair of contradictories, one muft be true and 



6o On Proportions. 

one muft be falfe : fo that the affirmation of either is the denial 
of the other, and the denial of either is the affirmation of the 
other. The pair ' Every X is Y ' and * No X is Y ' are ufually 
called contraries; contrariety implying the utmoft extreme of 
contradi£lion. Contraries may both be falfe, but cannot both be 
true. The pair ' Some Xs are Ys,' and * Some Xs are not Ys,' 
which may both be true, but cannot both be falfe, are ufually 
CdHed fubcontraries. But, for reafons hereafter to be given, I 
intend to abandon the diftindlion between the words contrary 
and contradiSfory^ and to treat them as fynonymous. And the 
proportions ufually called contraries ^ ' Every X is Y ' and * No 
X is Y' I fhall cAX fubcontraries ; while thofe ufually called y«i- 
contraries 'Some Xs are Ys* and 'Some Xs are not Ys' I (hall 
ctII fupercontraries, . 

I fliall now proceed to an enlarged view of the propofition, 
and to the ftrudlure of a notation proper to reprefent its different 
cafes. 

As ufual, let the univerfal affirmative be denoted by A, the par- 
ticular affirmative by I, the univerfal negative by E, and the par- 
ticular negative by O. This is the extent of the common fym- 
bolic expreffionof propofitions : I propofe to make the following 
additions for this work. Let one particular choice of order, as 
to fubje£): and predicate, be fuppofed eftablifhed as a ftandard of 
reference. As to the letters X, Y, Z, let the order be always 
that of the alphabet, XY, YZ, XZ. Let x, y, z, be the con- 
trary names of X, Y, Z ; and let the fame order be adopted 
in the ftandard of reference. Let the four forms, when choice 
is made out of X, Y, Z, be denoted by Ai, Ei, Ii, Oi ; but when 
the choice is made from the contraries, let them be denoted by 
A', E', r, O'. Thus, with reference to Y and Z, ' Every Y is 
Z' is the Ai of that pair and order : while ' Every y is z' is the 
A'. I fhould recommend Ai and A' to be called the fub-h and 
the fuper-h of the pair and order in queftion : the helps which 
this will give the memory will prefently be very apparent. And 
the fame of L and I', &c. 

Let the following abbreviations be employed ; — 



X)Y means 'Every X is Y* 
X:Y — ' Some Xs are not Ys* 



X. Y means ' No X is Y ' 
X Y -— ' Some Xs are Ys' 



.«« 



On Propojitions. 



6i 



There arc eight diftinft modes, independent of contraries, in 
which a limple propofition may be made by means of X andY. 
Thefe eight modes are X)Y and Y)X, X : Y and Y: X, X. Y and 
Y.X, and XY and YX. But the eight are equivalent only to 
fix : for X . Y and Y. X are the fame, and fo are XY and YX. 
Again, there are fix fimple propofitions between x and y, fix be- 
tween X and y, fix between x and Y. Taking in contraries, 
there are then twenty-four apparent modes of forming a fimple 
propofition from X and Y : but thefe are not all diftin£):. Eight 
of them contain all the reft : thefe eight being the Ai, Ei, L, Oi, 
A', E', r, O', above defcribed. This is feen in the following 
table, the ftudy of which fhould be carefully made. 



A. X)Y = X.y = y)x 
Oi X:Y = Xy = y:x 

El X.Y = X)y = Y)x 
I, XY = X:y = Y:x 



A' x)y=x.Y = Y)X 
O' x:y = xY = Y:X 

E' x.y = x)Y = y)X 
r xy = x:Y = y:X 



I fuppoie moft readers will readily fee the truth of the identities 
here affirmed : if not, the following lAode of illuftration (which 
will be very ufefiil when I come to treat of the fyUogifm) may be 
tried. Let U be the name which is the univerfe of the propo- 
fition : and write down in a line as man^ Us as there are diftin£l 
obje£ls to which this name applies. A dozen will do as well for 
illuftration as a million. Under every U which is an X write 
down X : and x, of courfe, under all the reft. Follow the fame 
plan with Y. The occurrence of letters in the fame column 
fliows that they are names of the fame objeft. The following 
are fpecimens of the eight ftandard varieties of afTertion, to which 
all the reft may be referred. 



A. 




UUUUUUUUUUUU 
XXXXX X X X X X X X 
YYYYYYYYyyyy 

UUUUUUUUUUUU 
XXXXXXX XXXXX 

yyyyYYYYYYyy 

UUUUUUUUUUUU 
XXXX xxxxxxxx 
yyyyyyyYYYYY 




UUUUUUUUUUUU 
xxxxxxxx XXXX 

YYYYYyyyyyyy 

UUUUUUUUUUUU 
XXXXX XXXXXXX 
YYyyyyyyYYYY 

UUUUUUUUUUUU 
XXXXXXXX XXXX 
y y y y y Y YYYYYY 



1«K 



62 On Propofitions. 

In the firft fcheme, Ai, there exift twelve Us, the firft five of 
which are both Xs and Ys, the next three Ys but not Xs, the laft 
four neither Xs nor Ys. This cafe, fo conftru<fted that X)Y is 
true, fhows X.y and y)x. 

The proportions Ai and A', X)Y and x)y, may be called con^ 
tranomtnalj as having each names contrary of thofe in the other. 
It appears, then, that as to inconvertibles, contranominal and con- 
verfe are terms of the fame meaning, for X)Y and y)x are the 
fame, and x:y and Y:X. And fince it is more natural to fpeak 
of direfl: names than of their contraries, it will be beft to attach 
to A' and O' the ideas of Y)X and Y:X 5 but not fo as to forget 
their derivation from x)y and x:y. Obferve alfo that each uni- 
verfal propolition has converted contranominals for its affirmative 
forms. Thus X)Y = y)x : and though X.Y is not y.x, yet if 
we make X.Y take the affirmative form X)y, it is equivalent to 
Y)x. In particular proportions, the negative forms have the 
feme property. The contranominals of the convertible propo- 
rtions Ei and L are of totally different meaning. They have 
Ifever till now been introduced into logic, and a few words of 
exp]»:nation are wanted. 

Firfl as to I' or xy. We here exprefs that fome not-Xs are 
not-Ys, or that there ar^ things in the univerfe which are neither 
Xs nor Ys. That is, X and Y are not contraries. Next as to 
E' or x.y. We here exprefs that no not-X is not-Y, or that 
everything in the univerfe is either X or Y, or both. Thefe lafl 
words are important : by omitting them, we fhould imagine that 
x.y fignifies that X and Y are contraries \ which is not necef^ 
farily true. 

Accordingly, the eight flandard forms of expreffion, with re- 
ference to the order X Y, and exhibited in the form in which it 
will be mofl convenient to think and fpeak of them, are as 
follows, 

>A'orY)XEveryYisX 
\ O' or Y:X Some Ys are not Xs 
( E, or X.Y JNo X is Y U E» or x.y Everything is either X or Y 

C Ii0rXY Some Xs are Ys l( I'orxy Something are neidierXsnorYs. 

Returning to the table, we now fee the following general laws. 

I. Each triad of equivalents contains two inconvertibles and one 

convertible. 2. Of the four, X, Y,x, y, each of the eight forms 



J A, or X) Y Every X is Y 
^ 0| or X: Y Some Xs are not Y$ 
E, or X.Y No X is Y 



On Proportions. 



63 



fpeaks univerlklly of two, and particularly of two. 3. A pro- 
pofition fpeaks in different ways of each name and its contrary 5 
univerfally of one and particularly of the other. 4. The propo- 
fitions called contradictory^ from the common meaning of this 
word, may be fo called in another fenfe : for they fpeak'in the 
fame manner of contraries. Thus X) Y fpeaks univerlklly of X, 
and particularly of Y : its denial, X:Y or y:x, fpeaks univerfally 
of X, and particularly of y. 

Any two of the eight forms being taken, it is clear either that 
they cannot exift together, or that one muft exift when the other 
exifts, or that one may exift either with or without the other. 
The alternatives of each cafe are prefented in the following table. 



A, 
A' 
El 
F 





Con- 


Is indif- 






Is con- 


Denies tains 


ferent to 


Denies tained in 


0,E,E' 


IJ' 


A'O' 


0. 


A. 


E,E' 


O'E'E, 


ri. 


A.O. 


O' 


A' 


E'E. 


I.A,A' 


0.0' 


ET 


I. 


E. 


A,A' 


I'A'A, 


O'O. 


E.I. 


r 


E' 


A'A, 



Is indif- 
ferent to 

A'O'IJ' 
AiOiH. 
ETOiO' 
EJiO'O, 



Let the concomitants of a propolition be thofe to which "ft is 
wholly indifferent. Then it appears that each univerfal has for 
concomitants its contranominal and the contradi61:ory of the laft : 
but each particular has all for concomitants except only its own 
contradi£lory. Each univerfal denies, befides its own contra* 
diftory, the two univerfals of oppofite name ; and contains the 
two particulars of the fame name. The two concomitants of a 
univerfal may be defcribed as its univerfal and its particular con- 
comitant. 

There is a certain fort of repetition in our choice of the four 
forms, combined with the four fele£);ions XY, Xy, xy, xY. If 
any one of the four forms Ai,Ei A'E'be applied to alt the above, 
it will give the four forms derived from XY. Thus the Ai of 
X Y, Xy, xy, xY, are feverally the ;Ai, Ei, A' and E' of X Y ; 
and the E' of X Y, Xy, xy, and xY are feverally the E', A', Ei, 
and Ai of XY : and fb on. It will ferve for exercife to verify 
the above, and ftill more the cafes contained in the following. 

There are four things in a propofition, each of which niay be 
changed into its contrary : fubje£l, predicate, order, and copula. 
Let S be the diredion to change the fubjed): into its contrary : P 



64 On Propofitions. 

the fame for the predicate : let T be the direftion to transform 
the order : and F the direflion to change the form, from affirma- 
tive to negative, or from negative to affirmative. When T enters, 
let it be done laft, to avoid confufion. Thus SPT performed 
upon X)Y gives x)Y from S, x)y, from P, and y)x from T ; 
which is X)Y, fo that in this cafe alteration of fubjefl, predicate, 
and order, is no alteration at all. Let L be the reprefentation of 
no alteration at all. To inveftigate equivalent alterations, ob- 
ferve, firft, that F and P, fingly, are identical : thus F performed 
on X.Y gives X)Y, and P on X.Y gives X.y. And X)Y = 
X.y. This perfeft identity of F and P in effeft, remains in 
all combinations into which T does not enter. But when T 
enters, it is S and F which are identical. Thus ST performed 
on Y)X gives X)y or X .Y : and FT performed on Y)X gives 
X.Y. The reafon is, that T interchanges fubjeft and predicate ; 
fo that F, after T, makes a change which is counterbalanced by 
a change in what was the fubjed. Accordingly, remembering 
that each operation performed twice is no operation at all (thus 
PP is L, and TT is L), we have in all cafes 

P=F, SP=SF, PF=L, SPF=S 

ST=FT, SPT=FPT, SFT=^T, SPFT=PT 

all which fhould be tried for exercife. Again, in a convertible 
propofition, transformation is no alteration or T=L : in an incon- 
vertible one, transformation changes it into its contranominal ; 
or T=SP. Now fet out as follows ; — L, in convertible propo- 
fitions is T ; which in inconvertibles, is SP 5 which, in convertibles 
again, is SPT; which, in inconvertible s again, is TT, or L, 
Put thefe down as follows, writing under them the operations 
which are always equivalent to them, as fhewn above, 

L T SP SPT L 
PF SFT SF PFT PF 

The combinations written under one another are always the 
fame in efie£i; : thofe feparated by double lines have the lame 
tStGt on convertibles : thofe feparated by fmgle lines, have the 
fame efled on inconvertibles. Again P, for convertibles, is the 
fame as PT ; which, for inconvertibles is the fame as PSP, or 
S ; which, for convertibles again, is the fame as ST ; which, for 
inconvertibles, is SSP or P. Thefe treated as before, give the 
table 



On Propqfitions. 65 



P 
F 



PT 
SPFT 



S 
SPF 



ST 
FT 



P 
F 



In thefe two cycles there are L and all the fifteen feleftions 
which can be ipade out of S, P, F, T. And every poffible cafe 
of equivalent changes is contained in thefe two tables. Thus 
PT is in all cafes equivalent to SPFT ; in convertible cafes, to 
P and to F ; in inconvertible ones, to S and to SPF. And no 
other combination is in any cafe equivalent to PT. In verifica- 
tion of thefe tables, obferve that the operation F always occurs 
in the lower line, and never in the upper ; and that this opera- 
tion changes convertibles into inconvertibles, and vice verfd. 
We ought then to expe£l, that the equivalences which, con- 
taining F, apply to inconvertibles, will be thofe which when F is 
ftruck out, apply to convertibles ; and vice verfd. And fo we (hall 
find it : for inftance, SPFT and SPF are equivalent when per- 
formed on inconvertibles ; ftrike out F and we have SPT and 
SP, which are equivalent when performed on convertibles. 

It appears, then, that any change which can be made on a 
propofition, amounts in effeft to L, P, S, or PS. This is another 
verification of the preceding table : for all our forms may be de- 
rived from applying thofe which relate to XY in the cafes of 
Xy, xY, and xy. 

We have seen that Ai and A' both contain L and V \ and that 
El and E' both contain Oi and O'. Hence each of the univerfals 
may be faid to be the Jirengthened form of either of its particulars 
of the fame fign : and each of the particulars the weakened form 
of its univerfals of the feme fign. The only diftinftion which 
appears between the two forms of the convertible particulars, 
XY and YX, xy and yx, is that the ftrengthened forms derived 
from extending the fubjefts are different. Thus xy gives x)y or 
Y)X ; but yx gives y)x or X)Y. 

A complex propofition is one which involves within itfelf the 
aflertionor denial of each and all of the eight fimple propofitions. 
If thefe eight propofitions were all concomitants, or if any num- 
ber of them might be true, and the reft falfe, there would be 
256 poffible cafes of the complex propofition. As it is, owing 
to the connexion eftablifhed in the table of page 63, there are 
y^Mtfeven. 

F 



66 On Proportions. 

Firft, let the names X and Y be fo related that neither of the 
four univerfals are true. Then all the four particulars are true : 
and this is the firft cafe. Let it be called a complex particular j 
and denoted by P. Then, denoting coexiftence of fimple pro- 
pofitions by writing + between their feveral letters, we have 

p=o»+o,+r+ii 

This cafe is of the leaft frequent mention in the theory of the 
fyllogifm. 

Next, let one of the univerial propofitions be true. Then five 
of the other propofitions are fettled, either by affirmation or de- 
nial. There remain the two concomitants, which are contra- 
diftory ; fo that only one is true. Accordingly, with the excep- 
tion of the complex particular juft defcribed, every complex pro- 
pofition muft confift of the coexiftence of a univerial and one of 
its concomitants. But there are not therefore eight more fuch 
propofitions : for A' + Ai and AiH- A' are the fame, and fb are 
El + E' and E' + Ei. The remaining number is then reduced 
to fix, which are 

A. + 0', Ai + A', A' + O, 
E, + r, Ei + F, E' + Ii, 

Thefe muft be feparately examined. 

Firft, take Ai + A' (the order X Y always underftood). We 
have then X)Y and Y)X. That is, there is no obje61: whatfo- 
ever which has one of thefe names, but what alfo has the other. 
The names X and Y are then identical^ not as names, but as 
fubjefts of application. Where either can be applied, there can 
the other alfb. Thus, in geometry (the uhiverfe being plane 
re£lilinear figure) equilateral and equiangular are identical names. 
Not that they agree in etymology nor in meaning : more than 
this, a few words would explain the firft to many who could not 
comprehend the fecond without difficulty. But they agree in 
that what figure foever has a right to either name, it has the fame 
right to the other. It will tend to uniformity of language, if we 
call X, in this cafe, an identical of Y, and Y an identical of X. 
Let the fymbol of an identical be D : then we have 

D=A, + A' 



On Propqfitions. 67 

Next, take Ai + O'. We have then X)Y and Y:X. Every X 
is Y, and fo far there is a charader of i4entity« But fome Ys 
are not Xs ; there are more Ys than Xs, and X ftops fhort of a 
complete claim of identity with Y. Let X be called zfubideft" 
tical of Y (thus man is a fubidentical of animal),^ and let Di de- 
note this cafe. Then 

D,=Ai + 0' 

Let A' + Oi exift. We have then Y)X and X: Y. Every Y 
is X, and fo far there is identity. But fome Xs are not Ys, there 
are more Xs than Ys, or X goes beyond a claim of identity vjrith 
Y. Let X be novjr called a fuperidentical of Y, and let it be 
denoted by D*. Then 

D'=A' + 0, 

- The terms fuperidentical and fubidentical are obvioufly correla- 
tive. If X be either of Y, Y is the other of X. Now let us 
confider Ei + E'. We have then X . Y and x.y. There is no- 
thing which is both X and Y, there is nothing which is neither. 
Confequently X and Y are contraries^ or juft fill up the univerfe. 
Let C be the mark of this relation. Then 

C=E, + F 

Next, take Ei + V. We have then X . Y and xy. Nothing is 
both X and Y, but there are things which are neither. X and 

Y are clear of one another, but do not amount to contraries, 
for they do not fill up the univerfe. Let them be called y«*r<?«- 
trarhsj (thus in the univerfe metal^ gold and Jilver are fubcontra- 
ries, and let Ci denote the relation. Then 

c.=Ei+r 

Laftly, take E' + L. We have x.y and X Y. The names fill 
the univerfe 5 for there is nothing but what is either X or Y. 
But they overfill it 5 for fome things arc both Xs and Ys. There 
is then all the completenefs of a contrary and more. Let X and 

Y be c2S!LQ&fupercontraries^* and let^C denote the relation. Then 

we have 

C=F+Ii 

• The Jupercontrary relation, though effential to a complete fyftem of 
fyllogifin, is not frequently met with. The other extreme of the fupercon- 



68 On Propofitions. 

To complete our language, let Ai or X)Y, with reference to the 
order X Y, be CTWtAfub-^ffirmative ; and A' or VyKj/uperaffirma- 
the. Let Ei or X. Y be cdlled/uhnegative; and E or x.y^fuperneg- 
ative. Let the particulars L, I', and Oi, O', have alfo thefe feveral 
names. This extenfion of our language will require a little ex- 
planation. 

When I fay that X is a fubidentical of Y, I mean that the 
etymological fuggeftions are aftually fetisfied. The whole name 
X, and more, is contained in Y. But when I fay that X is a 
univerfal (ahaffirmative of Y, or X)Y, I mean no more than that 
we have the propofition whofe form is not fuperaffirmative, ac- 
cording to the etymology of that word. An algebraift would 
well underftand the diftinftion at a glance. He has often to 
diftinguifh the cafe in which a is lefs than b from that in which 
a is lefs than or equal to b : the cafe in which the extreme limit 
of the affertion is not included from that in which it is included. 

Again, the word negative had better be viewed as not fo much 
prefenting exclujion for its firft idea, as inclujion in the contrary. 
Thus a fubnegative, when univerfal, is to fuggeft complete in- 
clufion in the contrary, meaning the extreme cafe, poflibly; 
namely, that the fubnegative names may be contraries. Again, 
fupernegative is to fuggeft the idea of fupercontrary, with the 
loweft extreme, the relation of contrary, poffibly included. 

For exercife in this language, and in the ideas which it is 
meant to prefent, I now ftate the following refults. 

Univerfal affirmation, though as a general term, it is to include 
fuper and fub affirmation, yet looked at as one of the three, and 
diftinguiflied from the reft, it means identity. The fame of ne- 
gation and contrariety. Subidentity requires univerfal fubaffir- 
mation and particular fupernegation. Identity is univerfal fub 
and fuper affirmation, both. Superidentity requires univerfal 
fuperaffirmation and particular fubnegation. Subcontrariety re- 
quires univerfal fubnegation and particular fuperaffirmation. Con- 

trary, or the fubidentical, is fo much the eafieft of all our complex relations, 
that the latter rarely allows the former to appear. The firft inftance that 
fuggefted itfelf to me was man and irrational (?& defcriptive of the quality of 
the individual and not of the fpecies) in the univerfe animaL Thefe more 
than fill that univerfe, icUot being common to both. But it is more natural 
to fay that rational (in this fenfe) is fubidentical of nuut. 



On Propofitions . 



69 



trariety is univerfal fub and fuper negation, both. Supercontra- 
riety requires univerfal fupernegation and particular fubaffirma- 
tion. Again, uriiverfal fubaffirmation is either fubidentity or iden- 
tity : particular fubaffirmation is a denial of contrariety and fub- 
contrariety. Univerfal fuperaffirmation is either fuperidentity or 
identity : particular fuperaffirmation denies contrariety and fiiper- 
contrariety. Univerfal fubnegation is either fubcontrariety or 
contrariety : particular fubnegation denies fubidentity and iden- 
tity. Univerfal fupernegation is either fupercontrariety or con- 
trariety: particular fupernegation denies fuperidentity and iden- 
tity. All this is exprefTed in the following table, 



Di afSrms At and O' 


Ai affirms Di or D 


D 


— 


Ai and A' 


A — Di or D or D' 


D' 


^— 


A' and Oi 


A' — D' or D 


c, 





El and r 


E. — Ci or C 


C 


— 


El and F 


E — C. or C or C 


C 


^-. 


E' and Ii 


F — C or C 


Denial of Di 


^-i 


A' or Oi 


Oi denies Di and D 


— D 


.~- 


O' or Oi 


— Di and D, or D' and D 


— D' 


»— 


Ai or O' 


O' — D'andD 


— C. 


^-i 


E' or I. 


I. — Ci and C 


— C 


»— 


r or Ii 


I Ci and C or C and C 


— C 




El or r 


r — C'andC 



Every fubidentical of a name is the fubcontrary of its contrary ; 
every fubcontrary is the fubidentical of the contrary. Treat the 
word contrary as negative, the word identical as pofitive ; and 
the two as of different figns. Then the algebraical rule ' like 
figns give a pofitive, unlike figns a negative,* holds in every cafe : 
including the variety of it fb well known as ' two negatives make 
an affirmative/ When the modifying prepofition comes firft it 
muft be retained; when it comes feconHpit muft be changed. 
Thus the fubcontrary of a contrary is a fubidentical : but the con- 
trary of a fubcontrary is a fuperidendcal. In putting two rela- 
tions together, however, we have got into fyllogifm, as we fhall 
prefendy fee. 

The following tables will fhow a connexion between the ex- 
preffions, for different orders and feledions, which it may be ufefiil 
to verify. 



70 




On Propojitions 


• 




XY 


YX 


xY 


Yx 


Xy 


yX 


xy 


AiO'D. 


A'O.D' 


E' I. C 


E' I, C 


E, r c. 


E. I' C. 


A'OiD' 


A'OiD' 


AiO'D. 


E. r C. 


E, r C. 


F I, C 


E' I. C 


AiO'D, 


E. r cr 


E. 1' C. 


A'OiD' 


AiO'D, 


AiO'D. 


A'OiD' 


E' I, C 


E'I.C 


E'liC 


AiO'D. 


A'OiD' 


A'OiD' 


AiO'D, 


E, r C, 



In Convertibles^ 


In Inconvertiblesy 


changes 


changes 


Sign and Prepofition 


Sign and Prepofition 


Sign -^*^^x 


Sign -- 


Prepofition 


Prepofition 


Neither 


Prepofition 


Sign 


Sign and Prepofition 


Sign and Prepofition 


Sign 


Prepofition 


Neither 



yx 
AiO'Di 
A'OiD' 
F Ii C 
E, r C. 

This table only contains fome of the rules already laid down 
in pp. 64, 65. It expreffes that, for inftance, the Ai, O', and Di 
of XY, are feverally the fame as the Ei, I', and Ci of yX. This 
table may be exhibited thus, the identicals counting as inconvert- 
ibles, the contraries as convertibles. 

Change of 

Subje^ 

Predicate 

Subje6^ and Predicate 

Order 

Subje6V and Order 

Predicate and Order 

Subjefl, Predicate, and Order 

In all cafes, change of fubje£b is change both of fign and pre- 
pofition ; change of predicate is change of fign ; change of fub- 
je£k and predicate is change of prepofition. Thefe three cafes 
are of great importance in the fyllogifm : and the reader would 
do well to conne£b in his mind 

SubjeSf with Sign and prepofition 

SubjeSf and Predicate — Prepofition 

Predicate — Sign 

It is defirable to confider the feveral complex relations as to 
the continuous tranfition from one into another : the growth of 
names concerns not only the etymologift, but the logician alfb. 

With the analogies and affinities by which the dominion of 
one name is extended to inftance after inftance, and clafs after 
clafs — and fbmetimes, in fcientific language at leaft, deprived of 
a part of what it has held — I have here nothing to do. It is 
enough that the phenomena exift which may be defcribed as the 
gradual transformation of one relation into another. The words 
butt and bottle^ for example, are now fubcontraries in the uni- 
verfe receptacle : but the etymology of the fecond word fhows 



On Propojitions. 71 

that it was 3, fubidentical of the firft, being a diminutive. And 
if we were to take the whole clafs butt, bufs, boot, bufhel, box, 
boat, bottle, pottle, &c, which are all of one origin, the number 
of tranfitions would be found to be very large. 

I afTume that all the inftances of a name are counted and 
arranged in its univerfe : a conceivable, though not attainable^ 
fuppofition. Alfo, that the inftances of the name are arranged 
contiguoufly, as in page 61. Whatever the reafon may be 
which di£bates the particular arrangement chofen, it will generally 
happen that the inftances near to the boundary pofTefs the cha- 
ra£teriftics of the name in a fmaller degree than thofe nearer the 
middle. Let the contiguous arrangement be made of all the in- 
ftances of the name Y, the univerfe being U. Let another name 
X begin t6 grow, commencing with one inftance, that is, being 
applied to one of the objefts in the univerfe U, be it a Y or not j 
then to another contiguous, and fo on. We are to enumerate the 
ways in which fiich changes, whether of increafe or diminu- 
tion, may caufe one name to change its relation to another. 
According as the change is made by acceffion or retrenchment, 
it may be denoted by ( + ) or ( — ). 

Let the name X begin within the limits of the name Y : its 
initial relation to Y is then Di . And the poffibility of the 
following continuous changes is obvious : 

Di( + )D( + )D' D,( + )P( + )C 
Di( + )P( + )D' Di( + )P(-)Ci 

Hence Di may become D' through either D or P, but Ci or C 
only through P. Next, let X begin without the limits of Y : 
the initial relation is Ci. We may have then 

C.( + )C(+)C' C.(+)P(+)D' 

Ci (+) P (+) C C, (+) P (-) D, 

Let X be^ both within and without Y : its initial relation is 
then P. And we have 

P(+)D', P(+)C', P(-)D., P(-)C, 

But when (— ) follows Di or D, Ci or C, we have nothing 
except 

D,(-)D,, D(-)Di, C,(-)C., C(-)C. 



72 On Propq/itions. 

If we begin at the other extreme, with the name U, we have 

U (-) D' U (-) C 

Beginning from D' and C we have 

D'(-)D(-)D. D'(-)P(-)C. 

!>'(-) P(-)D. D'(-)P(+)C' 

C (-) C (-) C. C (-) P (-) D. 

C (-) P (-) C. C (-) P ( + ) D' 

But when ( +) follows D' or D, C or C, we have only 
D'(+)D' D(+)D', C(+)C', C(+)C' 

From the above lift it appears that the tranfition which is ac- 
companied by a change of prepofition only can be made either 
through the letter without prepofition or through P : and in all 
cafes with one continued mode of alteration. But when the tranC- 
ition involves change of letter, it can only be made through P : 
with continuation of the mode of alteration when the prepofi- 
tions are different, and change in the mode when they are the 
fame. The following fucceffions contain the arrangement , of the 
refults. 



With one altera- 


With one altera- 


With two altera- 


tion (+) 


tion (— ) 


tions (-| — ) 


D.DD' 


D'DDi 


D.PC. 


D. piy 


D'PDi 


CPD. 


Ci c c 


C C Ci 




C»PC' 


C'PC, 


(- + ) 
D' PC 


D.PC' 


D'PC. 


CPD' 


CPD' 


CPD, 





The following confiderations will further ferve to illuftrate the 
want of the extenfion of the doctrine of propofidons made in 
this chapter, and alfo the completenefs of it. Among our moft 
fundamental diftin£lions is that oi necejjity 2xA fufficiency i of 
what we cannot do without^ and what we can do with ; of that 
which mu/i precede^ and that which can follow. The contraries 
of thefe are non-necejjity and non-fufficiency. In thefe four words, 
applied to both Y and y, we have the defcription of the eight re- 



On Propofitions . 7 3 

lations of X to Y, For inftance Ai or X)Y tells us that to 
have an X, we muft take a Y, or to be X, it is necejfary to be 
Y. Treating all in the fame way, we have 



A. 


X ) Y To take an 


X it is necejfary to take a Y 


A' 


Y)X . . . 


X . . fufficient . . . Y 


E. 


X.Y . . . 


X . . necejfary . . . y 


E' 


x.y ... 


X . • fufficient . • . y 


L 


XY . . . 


X . not necejfary . . y 


r 


xy ... 


X . not fufficient . • y 


0. 


X:Y . . . 


X . not necejfary . . Y 


O' 


Y:X ... 


X • not fufficient . . Y 


1 . 


1 •!•«•. f . 


1 !• 1 n ^ r • .* 



And the convertibility of the ordinary mode of defcription with 
this new one may be eafily {hown in any cafe. For example, 
what can we mean by faying that to take a X, it is not fufficient 
to take what is not Y ? Clearly that by taking not Y, or y, we 
may at the feme time take a x, or that there are xs which are ys. 
And fo on for the reft. 

Of the four pairs XY, Xy, xy, xY, we know that each 
propofition may be expreffed by three, and refufes to be expreffed 
by one. If we now admit the two words impoffible and contingent^ 
meaning by the latter that which, as the cafe may be, is poffible 
or impoffible, we {hall eafily fee the following table for the uni- 
verfals : 

XY Xy xy xY 



A. 
E, 
A' 
E' 



X)Y 
X.Y 
Y)X 
X . y 



N 


[ I 


s 


c 


I 


N 


c 


s 


S 


C 


N 


I 


c 


s 


I 


N 



The letters N, I, S, C, are the initials of necefTary, &c. And 
we read in the firft line, that if X ) Y, then to be X it is necef^ ' 
iary to be Y j to be X, it is impoffible to be y ; to be x it is fuf- 
ficient to be y ; and to be x, it is contingently poffible or impoffible 
to be Y. Again, if by n and s we mean not necejfary and not 
fufficient ; by P, aftually poffible ; and by C, as before (C being 
its own contrary), we have the following table for the parti- 
culars : 



74 



On Proportions, 

XY Xy xy xY 



o. 


X:Y 


n 


P 


s 


C 


L 


X Y 


P 


n 


C 


s 


O' 


Y:X 


s 


C 


n 


P 


r 


xy 


C 


s 


P 


n 



Of the four contrary pairs, n, P, s, C, are related to the par- 
ticulars precifely as N, I, S, C, are to the univerfals. The inter- 
change of Y and y is always accompanied by the interchange of 
N and I, S and C, n and P, s and C ; the interchange of X 
and X is that of N and C, S and I, n and C, s and P ; of both 
X and X, Y and y, is that of N and S, C and I, n and s, C 
and P. 

The complex relations may be thus defcribed. According as 
X is fubidentical, identical, or fuperidentical of Y, to be X it is 
neceffary and not fufficient, neceffary and fufEcient, or not ne- 
ceflary and fufficient, to be Y : according as X is ilibcontrary, ^ 
contrary, or fupercontrary of Y, to be X it is neceffary and not \t 
fufficient, neceffary and fufficient, or not neceffary and fufficient, 
to be y. Or, as in the following table : i T^ 





XY 


Xy 


xy 


xY 


D. 


Ns 


I 


Sn 


P 


C. 


I 


Ns 


P 


Sn 


D' 


Sn 


P 


Ns 


I 


C 


P 


Sn 


I 


Ns 


D 


NS 


I 


NS 


I 


C 


I 


NS 


I 


NS 


P 


nsP 


nsP 


nsP 


nsP 



Inftead of IC and PC, write I and C : for ^^ impoffible, and 
poffible or impoffible as the cafe may be " is ** impoffible " &c. 

The names of the complex relations, fubidentity, identity, &c 
I fuppofe will be held tolerably fatisfafbory : thofe of the flmple 
relations fu^efted in page 68, fubaffirmative &c. have nothing in 
their favor except analogy with the former, and clofe connexion 
with the notation. A little practice in their ufe might ren- 
der thefe laft names available : but it will be advifable to con- 



On Propqfitions. J^ 

ne£b them with names more deicriptive of the meaning, and to 
adopt thefe laft, whether we rejefl: or maintain their fynonymes. 
When X ) Y, the relation of X to Y is well imderftood as 
that of the jfpecies to the genus. We may adopt thefe words, 
with the underftanding that the word fpecies includes the 
extreme cafe in which the fpecies is as extenflve as the genus. 
When X : Y, we may call X a non-fpecies of Y, and Y a non-genus 
of X. When X . Y we may call X an exclufiue or excludent of 
Y, or elfe a non-participant; and alfo Y of X, When XY, we 
may fay that each is participant^ or non-exclujive^ of the other. 
When X . y, which means that X and Y together fill up, or more 
than fill up, the univere, we may fay that they are complemental 
names. When xy, which only means that X and Y do not be- 
tween them contain the univerfe, we may call them non-comple- 
mental. We have then 

Inconvertibles. Name of X with refpe6l to Y. 

%J Ai X)Y fpecies, or fubaffirmative. 

Oi X:Y non-fpecies, or particular fubnegative. 

^Cj A' Y)X genus, or fiiperaffirmative. 

O' Y:X non-genus, or particular fupernegative. 

Convertibles. Name of X and Y with refpe6l to each other. 

El X. Y Exclufives, or non-participants, or fubnegadves. 

L X Y Non-exclufives, or participants, or particular fubaffir- 

E' x.y Complements, or fupernegatives. [madves. 

r xy Non-complements, or pardcular fuperaffirmadves. 

The following exercifes in thefe terms, really contain the de- 
fcripdon of all the fyllogifms in the next chapter. 

Inclufion in the Q)ecies is inclufion in the genus ; and inclufion 
of the genus is inclufion of its parts (fpecies or not). 

Exclufion from the genus is exclufion from the fpecies; and ex- 
clufion of the genus is exclufion of its parts (fpecies or not). 

Inclufion or exclufion of the fpecies is part inclufion or exclu- 
fion of the genus. 

When the fpecies is complemental, fo is the genus : and when 
the genus is not complemental, neither is the fpecies. 

Exclufion from one complement is inclufion in the other. 

Complements of the fame are participants. 



76 On the Syllogifm. 

Two fpecies of one genus, are not complements ; neither are 
two exclufions from the fame. 

The complement of a genus is a non-fpecies j and the com- 
plement is a non-fpecies of the non-complement. 



CHAPTER V. 

On the Syllogifm. 

A SYLLOGISM is the inference of the relation between 
two names from the relation of each of thofe names to a 
third. Three names therefore are involved, the two which ap- 
pear in the conclufion, and the third or middle term^ with which 
the names, or terms, of the conclufion are feverally compared. 
The ftatements expreffing the relations of the two concluding 
terms to the middle term, are the two premifes. In this chapter, 
no ratio of quantities is confidered except the definite all and the 
indefinite fome. 

A fyllogifm may be cither ^mple or complex. A fyUogifm is 
Jimple when in it two fimple propofition$ produce the affirmation 
or denial of a third : or the affirmation of a third, we may fay, 
fince every denial of one fimple propofition is the affirmation 
of another. A complex fyllogifm is one in which two complex 
propofitions produce the affirmation or denial of a third complex 
propofition. 

It might be fuppofed that we ought to begin with the fimple 
fyllogifm, and from thence proceed to the complex. On this 
point I have fome remarks to offer, in juftification of following 
precifely the reverfe plan. 

Hitherto the complex fyllogifm has never made its appearance 
in a work on logic, except in one particular cafe, in which it is 
allowed to be treated as a fimple fyllogifm, though moft obvioufly 
it is not fo. I allude to the common a fortiori argument, as in 
' A is greater than B, B is greater than C, therefore A is greater 
than C* There is no middle term here : the predicate of the 
firft propofition is ' a thing greater than B,* the fubje£b of the 
fecond propofition is ' B.* 

Admitting fully that the quality of the premifes, — that which 



On the Syllogifm. yy 

entitles the conclufion to be made, as it is faid, a fortiori — marks 
this argument out as, if anything, ftronger, clearer, and (could 
fuch a thing be) truer, than a fimple fyUogifm ; yet it is plain 
that the very additional circumftance on which this additional 
cleamefs depends, takes the argument out of a fyUogifm, as de- 
fined by all writers. By beginning with the complex fyUogifm, 
and thence defcending to the fimple one, it wiU be feen that we 
begin with cafes which prefent this a fortiori and clearer charac- 
ter. I think I fhaU fbew that the complex fyUogifm is eafier 
than the fimple one. 

Next, the fyUogifm hitherto confidered has never involved any 
contrary terms ; the confequence of which has been that various 
legitimate modes of inference have been neglefted. Moreover, 
feveral of the ufual fyUogifms are more ftrong than need be in 
the premifes, in order to produce the conclufion. Thus Y)X 
and Y)Z being admitted as premifes, the neceflary conclufion is 
/, XZ. But if Y)X be weakened into Y^, the fame conclufion 
^ follows. If we call a fyUogifm ywW^;w^«/^/, when neither of its 
premifes are ftronger than is neceflfary to produce the conclufion, 
it is obvious that every fundamental fyUogifm which has a parti- 
cular premife, gives at leaft as ftrong a conclufion when that 
particular is ftrengthened into a univerfal. But, except when 
ftrengthening the premife alfo enables us to ftrengthen the con- 
clufion, in which cafe we have a new and different fyUogifm, it 
feems hardly fyftematic to mix with fundamental arguments fyl- 
logifms which have quality or quantity more than is neceflary for 
the conclufion. 

The ufe of the complex fyUogifm will, as we fhall fee, give 
an independent and fyftematic derivation to thefe ftrengthened 
fyUogifms, as well as to the reft. 

Let X and Z be the terms of the conclufion ; and let Y be 
the middle term. Let the premife in which X and Y are com- 
pared come firft of the two. Let the order of reference in each 
cafe be that of the alphabet 

XY YZ XZ 

So that by ftating what X is with refpe£k to Y, and what Y is 
with refpeft to Z, our fyUogifm involves the ftatement of what 
X therefore muft be, or therefore cannot be, with refpeft to Z. 
We can, in every cafe,, exprefs the refult in fimple words. Thus, 



78 On the Syllogifm. 

one of our fyUogifms being what I (hall reprefent by DiDiDi is 
as follows. If X be a fubidentical of Y, and Y a fubidentical of 
Z, then X is a fubidentical of Z. But all this merely amounts 
to the following ^ A fubidentical of a fubidentical is a fubidentical.' 
We have then to examine every way in which Di or D' or Ci 
or C can be combined with Di or D' or Ci or C, giving fixteen 
cafes in all, and all conclufive in one way or the other. Inftead 
of taking an accidental order, and afterwards claffifying the re- 
fults, it will be better to predift the order which will give claffi- 
fication. That order will be to take i. a D followed by another 
of the (ame prepofition 2, a C followed by another of different 
prepotition 3. a D followed by another of a different prepofition. 
4. a C followed by another of a like prepofition. This arrange- 
ment gives us 



1. D,D, D'D' D,C, D'C 

2. CiD' C'Di CiC C'C, 



3, D,D' D'D. D.C D'Ci 

4. CiD, CD' CiCi CC 

Each of thefe cafes will be examined by a method fimilar to that 
propofed in page 61. But a clear perception of the meaning of 
the words will at once di£bate the fixteen refults, which are as 
follows, preceded by the mode in which the fyUogifms are to 
be exprefTed. 

DiDiDi Subidentical of fubidentical is fubidentical. 

D'D'D' Superidentical of fuperidentical is fuperidentical. 

DiCiCi Subidentical of fiibcontraiy is fubcontrary. 

D'C'C Superidentical of fupercontrary is fupercontrary. 

CiD'Ci Subcontrary of fuperidentical is fiibcontrary. 

C'DiC Supercontrary of fiibidentical is fupercontrary. 

CiC'Di Subcontrary of fupercontrary is fubidentical. 

C'CiD' Supercontrary of fubcontrary is fuperidentical. 

DiD':C' Subidentical of fuperidentical is not fupercontrary. 

D'Dr. Ci Superidentical of fubidentical is not fiibcontrary. 

DiC':D' Subidentical of fupercontrary is not fuperidentical. 

D'Cr.Di Superidentical of fubcontrary is not fubidentical. 

CiDr.D' Subcontrary of fubidentical is not fuperidentical. 

C'D':Di Supercontrary of fuperidentical is not fubidentical. 

GCr. G Subcontrary of fubcontrary is not fupercontrary. 

CC':Ci Supercontr^ of fupercontrary is not fubcontrary. 



On the Syllogifm. 79 

In the denials, the extreme limit is included : in the affirma- 
tions it is not. Thus ' not fiiperidentical* and * not fubidentical' 
both include ' not identical ;' and the fame of contraries. In the 
affirmations, extreme limitation of one premife does not alter the 
conclufion : but that of both reduces the conclufion to its extreme 
limit. Thus 

Subcontraiy of identical is fubcontrary. 
Contrary of fuperidentical is fubcontrary. 
Contrary of identical is contrary. 

and fo on. The rules of this fpecies of fyllogifm are as follows. 
For affirmatory conclujions ; — ( i.) Like names in the premifes give 
D in the conclufion, and unlike names C. (2.) D in the firft 
premife requires premifes of the fame prepofition ; C in the firfl 
premife, of different prepofitions. (3.) The prepofition of the 
conclufion agrees with that of the firft premife. For negatory 
conclujions^ the preceding rules are reverfed. Thefe rules will do 
for the prefent, but they afterwards merge in others. 

The fixteen forms of complex conclufion above given are of 
the clearnefs of axioms, as fbon as the terms are diftin£Uy appre- 
hended. The following diagrams will affift, and fhould be ufed 
until the propofitions fuggeft their own meaning. Though there 
be four, yet thefe four are really but one, as will be fhown. 



L 



X 

DiDiD Y 
Z 



i 1 



X 




X 

C,CD.Y 
Z 




i — t 



C'D.C 



Y COD' 



r 



Z 



8o On the Syllogifm. 

In each diagram are three lines, pardy thick and partly open : 
thefe are meant to be laid over one anqjlier, but are kept feparate^^* 
for diftinftnefs. A point on the firft line fignifies a -X or a^ ; ^4 
and one on the fecond or third, a Y or a y, and aZ or a z. 
The univerfe of the propoiitions is fuppofed to be the whole . 
breadth. Points which come under one another are fuppofed to 
reprefent the fame objeft of thought, varioufly named. Thus 
in the firft diagram, when the thick lines contain the points 
named X, Y, and Z, it is {hown that we mean to fay there are 
objefts to which all the three names apply : for there are points 
under one another in the thick part of all the three lines. 

When we read by the letters on the left, the thick lines are 
meant to reprefent the parts in which the Xs, Ys, and Zs muff 
be placed : and when by thofe on the right, the open lines. 
Accordingly, looking at the third diagram, and at the left, we fee 
Ci D' Ci : while in the diagram, it is clear that X is a fubcon- 
trary of Y, or that X . Y and x y 5 and that Y is a fuperidentical 
of Z, or that Z ) Y and Y : Z. And the conclufion is equally 
manifeft, namely, that X is a fubcontrary of Z, But, looking at 
the left, and feeing C Di C, we take the open parts to reprefent 
the fpaces in which Xs, Ys, and Zs are found, and the thick 
parts for thofe in which xs, ys, and zs are found. Here then we 
fee that X is a fupercontrary of Y, that Y is a fubidentical of Z, 
and that, confequently^ X is a fupercontrary of Z. 

Some attempts at laying down the premifes fo as to evade the 
conclufions, will be inftruftive to any one who does not imme- 
diately fee the latter. And formal demonftration is always prac- 
ticable. Thus if X be a fubcontrary of Y, that is, if X and Y 
do not fill the univerfe, and have nothing in common ; and if Y 
be a fuperidentical of Z, or entirely contain Z, without being 
filled by it : then it is clear that X muft be more a fubcontrary 
of Z than of Y, by all the inftances which there are of a Y not 
being a Z. The diagram, however, is fo much clearer than this 
fort of demonftration, that the reader, until he has great com- 
mand of the language, may as well look to the former to fee that 
he is right in the latter. 

It may be convenient, as a matter of language, to fpeak of a 
name as a kind of colle£live whole, confifting of inftances. And 
thus we may talk of one name being entirely in another, or 
partly in and partly out &c, as in h& we have already done. 



On the Syllogifm. 8 1 

All the complex iyllogifms which conclude by affirmation are 
l^bvioufly of the a fortiori chara£ler : I {hould rather fay, thofe 
, y of the firft three diagrams properly and obvioufly, thofe of the 
fourth by an eafy extenfion of language. The marks i 2 3 in the 
middle of the diagrams (how how this is. In the firft, on the 
left, X is more of a fubidentical of Z than it is of Y : the in- 
ftances in which itsy«A-identity appears confift of all thofe which 
prove the fubidentity of X to Y, together with all thofe which 
prove the fubidentity of Y to Z. In the third, read from the 
right, X is more fupercontrary to Z than it is to Y, by all the 
inftances which fliow the fubidentity of Y to Z. In the fourth 
diagram (from the left) we cannot fay that X is more fubidentical 
of Z than of fom^thing elfe, fimply becaufe there is no previous 
fubidentity among the relations. But ftill the diftinguifliing 
charafteriftic of the conclufion takes its quantity from the addi- 
tion of thofe of both the premifes. 

If either of the premifes be brought to the limit which fepa- 
rates it from the relation of an oppofite prepofition ; that is, if 
C or Ci be changed into C, or elfe D' or Di into D : the nature 
of the conclufion is not altered, except by the lofs of the afor- 
tiori chara<9:er. One of the quantities which have hitherto con- 
tributed to the quantity of the conclufion, now difeppears. Thus 
Ci D gives Ci as well as Ci D' ; and C D' gives Ci as well as 
Ci D' J Ci C gives Di as well as Ci C 

Let one of the premifes pafs over the limit, and take the oppo- 
fite prepofition, Choofe Ci D', which gives Ci, and continues 
to give it, though weakened, when the firft Ci becomes C. Then 
let Ci become C : fo that our premifes are C D'. The dia- 
gram is then as follows 

x[ 

CD'Y 




The quantity of the conclufion now depends upon the differ- 
ence between the number of inftances in (12) and (23) and its 
quality upon whether (12) has fewer inftances than (23), or the 
fame number, or more. As I have drawn it, Ci is the conclufion, 
ftill : ftrengthen the firft premife ftill more, and the conclufion 



82 On the Syllogifm 

will pafs through C into C or elfe into P, and in the fecond 
cafe may pafs into D', as in the following diagram 



xl 



CD' Y 
Z 



Nothing is impoiSble except Di or D. Hence C D' enables 
us only to deny Di and its limit D. Treat the other cafes in the 
fame manner, and, remembering that denial is to include denial 
up to the limit (while affirmation only affirms to any thing fliort 
of the limit) we have 

Di D' denies C D' Di denies Ci 

D.G' . . D' D'Ci . , Di 

CiD, . . D' CD' . . Di 

Ci Ci . • C C C • • Ci 

The rules given above in page 79 may be coUefted from the 
inftances. 

As long as we keep contraries out of view, the ultimate ele- 
ment of inference is of a twofold charafter. It is either ' X and 
Z are both Y ; therefore X is Z ' or elfe ' X is Y and Z is not 
Y ; therefore X is not Z ' : X, Y, Z, being fingle inftances of 
three names ; and Y the fame inftance in both premifes. But the 
ufe of contraries enables us to give an affirmative form to the latter 
cafe. It is * X is Y, and not-Z is Y* ; therefore ' X is not-Z*. 

Connefted with this change of expreffion is the following 
theorem : that all the eight affirmatory complex fyllogifms are 
reducible to any one among them : and the fame of the negatory 
ones. The reader may trace this theorem to the order of the 
figures i, 2, 3, being the fame in all the four diagrams. Taking 
DiDiDi as the moft fimple and natural form, and looking at the 
diagram of GD'Ci, we fee the laft as DiDiDi in * X is fubi- 
dentical of y ; y is fubidentical of z ; therefore X is fubidentical 
of z.' If we write the terms of the fyllogifm after its defcriptive 
letters, as in DiDiDi (X YZ) we have the following refults ; — 



DiDiDi (XYZ)=D,DiD, (XYZ) 
DiCiCi (XYZ)=D,DiDi (XYz) 
CiD'Ci(XYZ)=DiDiDi (Xyz) 
CCDi (XYZ)=DiD,Di (XyZ) 



D'D'D' (XYZ)=DiDiD, (xyz) 
D'CC (XYZ)=DiDiDi(xyZ) 
CDiC (XYZ)=DiDiD* (xYZ) 
CCD' (XYZ)=D,DiD, (xYz) 



On the Syllogifm. 83 

Thinking of the firft defcription only as to relations, and of the 
fecond only as to terms, we fee the following rules of connexion. 
In the firft and fecond premifes and terms, there are X and Y 
in the terms, or their contraries, according as there are fub- 
accents or fuperaccents in the relations. But in the conclufion^ 
the term is Z for Di and C, z for D' and Ci. And we may 
thus reduce any fyllogifm involving any one of the eight varieties 
of relation combined with any one of the varieties of terms, 
either to DiDiD. or to X YZ. Thus CiD'C, (XyZ) is DiDiD, 
(XYz), or DiCiCi (XYZ). Not to load the fubjeft with de- 
monftration of forms, I will give at once the general rules by 
which changes of accent and letter are governed : remarking 
that they apply throughout the whole of my fyftem. 

The varieties in queftion are eight : 

XYZ, xyz ; xYZ, Xyz ; XyZ, xYz ; XYz, xyZ. 

in which (thinking of XYZ) all are kept ; or all changed ; or 
one. only kept ; or one only changed. Learn to conneft each 
letter with the propofitions in which it occurs ; marking the pro- 
pofitions, premifes and qonclufion, as I, 2, 3. Conneft X with 
1,3 ; Y with 1,2 5 Z with 2,3. Keeping all, or changing all, 
makes no alteration of letters : keeping only one, or changing 
only one, alters the letters in the premifes in which that one 
occurs. Thus, be the accents what they may, if in DDD we 
change only the firft letter into its contrary, the fyllogifm becomes 
CDC ; and the fame if we keep only the firft letter unchanged. 
As to accents, remember that change of Z produces no eflFeft : 
look then only at X and Y. When either letter is changed into 
its contrary, change the accents belonging to the premifes in 
which that letter comes firft ; 13 for X, 2 for Y, 123 for XY. 
For example, what is CiC'Di (Xyz), Here, as to letters, X 
alone (1,3) is unchanged: th^n CCD becomes DCC. As to 
accents, Y is changed, which comes firft only in 2 : change C 
into Ci. Hence CiC'Di (Xyz)=D,CiCi (XYZ). Here we 
have pafTed from a fyllogifm in Xyz to the correfponding equi- 
valent in XYZ : the rules equally hold for the inverfe procefs, 
and for all combinations of letters. For the change of XYZ 
into Xyz, and that of Xyz into XYZ, have only one defcription : 
the firft only left unchanged. Now fiippofe it required to know 



84 On the Syllogifm. 

what fyllogifm in xYz anfwers to DiCiCi(Xyz). The key words 
are, Y^^ third only unchanged. Alter then DCC into DDD by the 
firft rule, and change all the accents. Thus DiCiCi(Xyz)= 
D'D'D'(xYz). The independent rules are that change of fub- 
jeft only, changes both letter and accent ; predicate only, letter ; 
fubjeft and predicate, accent. Thus to find what D'C'C'(xYz) 
is, exprefled in XYz, the changes are, in the three premifes S, 
neither, S, and D'C'C'(xYz)=C,C'Di(XYz). The following 
table may be verified for exercife : it fhows the effeft of all 
changes except that of the middle term. 



XYZ 


xYZ 


XYz 


xYz 


D,D,D. 


C'DiC 


D.C.C. 


C'CD' 


C'DiC 


D,D.D, 


C'CD' 


DiCiCi 


D.C,C, 

• 


C'CD' 


D,D,D, 


C'DiC 


c'ciy 


D,C.Ci 


C'DiC 


D.D.D1 



Similarly, D'D^D' would have CD'C, D'C'C &c. When 
the middle term only is changed, the table may ftand thuS j — 

XYZ DiDiDi C'DiC D,CiCi C'CiD' 
XyZ CiCDi D'C'C CD'C, lyO'D' 

It will of courfe have been obferyed that the eight fyllogifms 
go in pairs, each one of a pair differing from the odier in acceny 
tuation, and nothing elfe. When we take fets of four, the ones 
put together fhould be thofe in which the firfl premife, or the 
fecond, or the conclufion (whichever we take for a flandard) 
has Di and C, or elfe has D* and Ci. 

The fame rules of transformation apply to negatory complex 
fyllogifms ; thus D'Di:Ci(XYZ) is C'D':Di(Xyz). In fed thefe 
rules do not depend upon the character of the inference, nor even 
upon its validity, but merely on the efFefts produced in the fingle 
propofitions by changes of term. Thus the flatement D'DiCi 
(XYZ), an invalid inference, is the fame flatement (equally in- 
valid of courfe) as is exprefTed in DiC'^D'(xyZ). 

An examination of the complex particular relation P=Ii4-r 
4- Oi 4- O', whether by the diagram or by unaffifled thought, will 
fhow that when this relation exifls between X and Y, it alfo exifls 
between x and Y, X and y, x and y. Hence PC, CP, PD, DP, 



On the Syllogifm. 85 

give P. Moreover, two complex particulars give no poffibility 
of any conclufion, all being equally pofSble. Thus PP may give 
Ci or C or C\ or Di or D or D\ 

Now combine one of the others, as Di, with P : examine PDi 
and DiP. It will be found that the complex particular of a fub- 
identical may be either complex particular, fubidentical, or fuper- 
contrary j or that PDi may be either P, Di or C. Examine all 
the cafes, and the rules will be found in 

(D*C,)P P(D*C) 
(D'C')P P(C*D') 

thus interpreted. Either premife from between the parenthefes, 
with P, in order as written, may have either, and muft have one, 
of the three for its conclufion. That DiP muft give either Di 
Ci or P, and fo muft CiP : but PCi muft have either P, Ci, or D'. 

Before proceeding to the fimple fyllogifm, as I have called it, 
I will ftate that I much doubt the propriety of the terms Jimple 
and complex. Undoubtedly the phrafes are hiftorically juft, for 
each of the fyllogifms which I propofe to call complex is, as 
we fliall fee, neceflarily compofed of three of thofe which are 
always called Jimple. But in another point of view, the phrafe- 
ology ought to be reverfed ; the fimple fyUogifm is the affirma- 
tion of the exiftence of one out of feveral of the complex ones. 
Thus X)Y+Y)Z=X)Z, or AiAiAi, is reaUy (Di or D, not 
known which) (Di or D, not known which) (Dj or D, not 
known which) and aflerts that there is either DiDaDi or DiDDi 
or DDiDi or DDD. ^^ 

But it will be faid, furely the complex propofition requires the 
conjunSfive exiftence of two fimple ones: Di=Ai+0'j and is 
therefore compound at leaft. I anfwer that, on the other hand, 
the fimple propofition requires the disjunSfive exiftence of two 
complex ones: as Ai=Di or D. Which is moft fimple, both^ or 
one or the other ? to me, I think, the firft. Certainly the fyllo- 
gifm DiDiDi is one which I more readily apprehend than Ai Ai Ai. 
Indeed, to moft minds, the latter is the former, if they are left 
to themfelves : and the cafes DiDDi, &c. are only admitted when 
produced and infifted on. 

But further, is the fimple propofition properly called fimple ? 
Is there in it but one aflTertion to deny or admit? Is but one 



86 On the Syllogifm. 

queftion anfwered ? When I affirm * Every X is Y,* I affirm 
I. Comparifbn of X and Y. 2. Coincidences. 3. The greateft 
poffible amount of them. 4. That every X has been ufed in ob- 
taining them. In ' Some Xs are Ys the firft two of the preced- 
ing are employed. In * No X is Y/ we have, i. Comparifon 
of Xs and Ys. 2. Exclufions. 3. The greateft amount. 4. The 
comparifon of every X with every Y. And * Some Xs are not 
Ys' omits the third, and fubftitutes Xs for every X in the fourth. 

Now the fubidentical, for inftance, only contains, befides what 
is in the fubaffirmative, the notion that there are more Ys than 
Xs in exiftence. The fubcontrary confifts, over and above what 
is in the fubnegative, in that Xs and Ys are not every thing that 
the propofition might have applied to : and fo on. On thefe 
confiderations, I think it may be allowed to treat the words Am- 
ple and complex as only of hiftorical reference, and to confider 
the firft as disjundlively connedled with the fecond, the fecond 
as conjunftively connefted with the firft, in the manner above 
noted. I think I fliall make it clear enough, that the paflage 
from the conjundlions to the disjunctions is better fuited to a 
demonftrative fyftem than the converfe. If the plan which I 
propofe ftiould gain any reception, I ftiould imagine that disjunc- 
tive and conjunSfive would be the names given to the clafles 
which I have called fimple and complex : the conjunftive com- 
pofed of feveral of the disjunftive, the disjunftive confifting of 
one or the other out of feveral of the conjunftive. 

When a propofition R, is the neceflary confequence of two 
others, P and Q, it neceflarily follows that the denial of R, muft 
be the denial of one at leaft of P and Q. For every propofition 
admits but of affirmation or denial : and he who affirms both P 
and Q^muft affirm R. If then P be affirmed and R denied, the 
denial of Q^ muft follow : if Q be affirmed and R denied, the 
denial of P muft follow. 

K fimple fyllogifm is one, the two premifes and conclufion of 
which are to be found among the fimple propofitions Ai, Ei, L, 
Oi, A', E', r, O'. Thus we have A,E,E, or X)Y4- Y.Z = 
X.Z, as an inftance. The order of reference is always XY, 
YZ, XZ. 

The following theorems will be neceflary; — i. A particular 
premife cannot be followed by a univerfal conclufion. 



On the Syllogijm. 87 

If poflible, let AJi for example, have a univerfal conclufion. 
Take the complex premifes DiP or (Ai4-0')(Ii4-r + Oi4-0'). 
All that can be inferred is that one of /Ar^^ conclufions (page 85) 
is valid, and neither D nor C : either Di or P or Ci. But if a 
univerfal be true, one of two conclufions muft be valid (page 69) 
and one of them D or C. If then Ai and L alone yielded a 
univerial conclufion, quite as much muft DiP : or a form which 
is indifferent to three conclufions, and not having D nor C, is ne- 
ceffarily produftive of one of two conclufions, one of which is 
D or C. This contradi6Uon cannot exift : or AJr cannot yield 
a univerial conclufion. 

2. From two particular premifes no conclufion can follow* 

If poffible, let IJi yield a conclufion j which by the laft the- 
orem, muft be only particular. Now PP or (L + I' + Oi + O') 
(Ii + 1' 4- Oi + O') is indifferent to all complex conclufions : quite 
as much is IJi. But if thefe premifes yield a particular conclu- 
fion, two complex conclufions are denied (page 69). This con- 
tradiftion cannot exift ; or particular premifes can yield no 
conclufion. 

Let a fimple fyUogifm with premifes and conclufion all univer- 
fal, be called univerfal: and with either premife (and therefore 
the conclufion) particular, be called particular. Then every 
univerfal fyUogifm has two particular fyUogifms deducible from it. 
Thus if Ai£i£i be valid, then Ai joined with the denial of Ei 
gives the denial of Ei : or Adihfeems to be valid. But the altera- 
tion of the places of the propofitions requires us to fay that it is 
A'liL which is valid : and this point requires clofe attention. 

Take A,E,E, or X)Y4- Y.Z=X.Z. Then X)Y with the 

denial of X.Z(or XZ) gives the denial of Y.Z(or YZ) j and 

we have 

X)Y4-XZ=YZ 

This is valid, if the firft be (as it is) valid : but its fymbol is not 
AiLL. For the middle term is, in our notation, made middle in 
the order of reference, which is therefore YX, XZ, YZ : and 
the fyllogifm is A'LL. Similarly we have 

XZ + Y.Z=X:Y 

produced by coupling the denial of X.Z with Y.Z. But this is 
IiEiOi : for the order of reference is now XZ, ZY, XY, and 



88 On the Syllogifm. 

El is not changed by change of order. The rule is as follows. 
When the denials of the conclufion and of a premife are made to 
take the places of that premife and the conclufion, the order of 
reference remains undifturbed as to the tranfpofed terms, and is 
changed as to the ftanding term. This laft muft therefore have 
the prepofition of the inconvertible propofition changed ; but 
not that of the convertible propofition. 

Thus E'AiE', if valid, gives ETO* and I'AT. Again, in a 
fimilar way it may be fhown that from each particular fyUogifm 
follows a univerfal : thus LE'O', if valid, fhows that denial of 
O', and E', give denial of L or A'E'Ei. In this cafe neither is 
valid. And ETOi, befides E'AiE', alfo gives AJT. 

Such claffification of thefe opponent forms as is ufefiil, will pre- 
fently be given. 

Since there are eight forms of aiSertion, with reference to each 
of the orders X Y YZ, it follows that there are fixty-four com- 
binations of a pair of premifes each. But of thefe the only ones 
which have a chance of yielding a conclufion are, i. fixteen 
with premifes both univerfal ; 2. thirty-two with one univerfal 
and one particular. If, for a moment, U ftand for univerfal and 
P for particular, the form of a fyUogifm is either UUUj PUPj 
UPP^ or UUP. Of thefe, the firft, fecond, and third are fo 
related that each form has the other two for its opponents : but 
(he fourth has its own form in each of its opponents. 

Now examine one of the complex affirmative^ fyUogifms, (ay 
DiDiDi, by the diagram in page 79. The premifes are Ai + O' 
and Ai + O', giving the four combinations Ai Ai, AiO*, O'Ai and 
CyO*. The conclufion is Ai + O' : but it is not merely twofold, 
but threefold : for the afhrtiori charafter explained in page 81, 
fhows that O' is obtainable on two different grounds, and is the 
film, as it were, of two different and necefTary parts of the con- 
clufion. That every X is Z, follows from X)Y ^d Y)Z, or 
we hav^ the fyUogifm. 

AiAiA, X)Yh-Y)Z=^X)Z 

But as far as the Zs which are below (12) are concerned, it 
foUows that they are not Xs becaiife they are the Ys which are 
pot Xs ; or we have 

0%Cy Y:X4'Y)Z«=Z:X 



On the Syllogifm. 89 

and as to the Zs below (23) they are not Xs becaufe they are 
not Ys, among which are all the Xs. Accordingly we have 

AiO'O' X)Y + Z:Y=Z:X 

or DiDiDi requires the coexiftenceof A4A4A1, O'AiO', AiO'O'. 
Apply this realbning to the contraries x, y, z, or elfe examine 
D'D'D' in the fame way, and we find that D'D'D' requires the 
coexiftence of A'A'A', 0,A'0,, A'O.O.. 

By applying the preceding refults to x, Y, Z, &c. as in page 
82, or, as is better at firft, by examining all the cafes of the dia- 
gram in page 79, we get the following table of derivations from 
the eight affirmatory complex iyllogifins. The firft column 
(hews the terms which muft be ufed, to deduce all from DiDiDi 



rAiAjA, X)Y + Y)Z=X)Z 

XYZ D,D,D, . . \ 0'A,0' Y:X + Y)Z=Z:X 

IAiO'O' X)Y + Z:Y=Z:X 

r A'A'A' Y)X+Z)Y=Z)X 

X y z D'D'D' . . \ 0.A'0, X : Y + Z)Y=X : Z 

LA'0,0, Y)X + Y:Z=X:Z 

rE'A,E' x.y+Y)Z=x.z 

X YZ C'DiC . . -i liAili XY +Y)Z=XZ 

AE'O'I. x.y+Z:Y=XZ 

rEiA'E, X.Y + Z)Y=X.Z 

Xyz CiD'C. . . ^ I'A'I' xy +Z)Y=xz 

IEiOJ' X.Y+Y:Z=xz 

rA,E,E. X)Y+Y.Z=X.Z 

XYz D,C,C, . . -^ O'EJ' Y:X + Y.Z=xz 

IaJ'I' X)Y+yz =xz 

rA'E'E' Y)X+y.z =x.z 

xyZ D'C'C . . ^ OiE'I. X:Y+y.z =:XZ 

Ia'IJ, Y)X + YZ =XZ 

rE'EiA' x.y+Y.Z=Z)X 

X Yz C'CiD* . . { IiEiO, XY +Y.Z=X:Z 

lETO. x.y +yz =X:Z 

rEiE'A, X.Y+y.z =X)Z 

XyZ CC'D, . . -J I'E'O' xy +y.z=Z:X 

I EiIiO' X.Y + YZ =Z:X 



12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 

12) 
23) 



Before forming any rule, or making any remark, I proceed to 



90 On the Syllogifm. 

coUeft the refults of the remaining cafes. And firft, let a pre- 
mife be brought to its limit, D or C : fay that DiDiDi becomes 
DDiDi. In the diagram it immediately appears that one of the 
particular conclufions is loft ; not contradifted, but nullified : for 
(12) difappears, becaufe X and Y are identical names. That is, 
AiAiAi remains, and AiO'O' : but the concluiion of O'AiO' is 
nullified. But this very circumftance creates, not a new conclu- 
fion, for it is only a part of one already exifting, but a new form 
of deduftion. The premifes are now Ai -f A' and Ai -f O', and 
the conclufion is Ai 4- O'. The fyllogifms AiAi Ai and AiO'O' 
are as before, and for the &me reafons : but there is now the 
combination A'Ai among the premifes, which produces the con- 
clufion L, and we have 

A'AJi Y)X + Y)Z=XZ 

This fyUogifm, though new as far as DiDiDi is concerned, is 
only a ftrengthened form of LAJi, a concomitant of E'AiE'. 
For (page 65) L is true whenever A' is true, fo that A'Ai in- 
cludes IiAi and its neceflTary confequence L. But if L had been 
ftrengthened into Ai inftead of A', we fliould have had AiAJi 
which though perfe£Uy valid, yet admits of a ftronger conclu- 
fion, as feen in AiAiAi. 

Of the two modes of ftrengthening a particular propofition 
(as Ii into Ai or A') there is one which ftrengthens the quantity 
of the firft form of the propofition, and another that of the fecond. 
Thus XY or L becomes X)Y or Ai when the firft form, and 
Y)X or A', when the fecond form, is ftrengthened. Similarly 
Oi or X:Y becomes X.Y or Ei, and y.x or E', according as 
the form ftrengthened is X:Y or y:x. The prepofition remains 
the fame, or changes, according as the firft or fecond form is 
ftrengthened. If the^fry? form of xh^ fecond premife of a fyUo- 
gifm, or the fecond form ofthe^r/i premife, be ftrengthened, no 
ftrength is added to the conclufion. Thus, as far as the fyllo- 
gifms in this chapter are concerned, LAi gives as much as A'Ai, 
and EiOi as EiEi. But if the firft form of the firft premifs, or 
the fecond form of the fecond, be ftrengthened, the conclufion 
has its firft form ftrengthened. 

A very fimple and obvious theorem contains all thefe refults. 
The concluding terms are, in our order of reference, the firft 



On the Syllogifm. 91 

term of the firft premiie and the fecond term of the fecond. The 
concludon is never ftrengthened by augmenting the quantity of 
the middle term, nor only weakened (it may be altogether de- 
ftroyed) by weakening the middle term. A wider field of com- 
pariibn does not by itfelf give more comparifons : nor can more 
comparifons arife except by augmenting the number of things 
compared in that field. Since the conclufion can obvioufly 
fpeak of no more than was in the premifes, no term of that con- 
clufion can be augmented in quantity, until the fame thing has 
taken place in its premife. But no flrengthening of a propofi- 
tion flrengthens both terms : confequently, to make fuch a thing 
efFedlive, it mufl be the concluding, and not the middle, term 
which is ftrengthened. 

The following table is only worth inferting as a coUeftion of 
exercifes. The fourth column fhows the ti^tjirengthenedpar- 
ticular fyllogifms^ as I will call them, having univerfal premifes but 
only a particular conclufion, not flronger than might have been 
inferred from the particular fyllogifm itfelf. 



Alteration 
of 

DiDiDi 

D'D'D' 

D,D,Di 

D'D'D' 

DiCiCi 

D'C'C 

DiCiCi 

D'C'C 

CiD'C. 

C'DiC 

CD'C* 

CDiC 

CiC'Di 

C'CiD' 

CC'D, 

CCiD' 



into 

DD,D, 

D'DD' 

D,DD, 

DD'D' 

DCC. 

D'CC 

D,CC, 

DCC 

CD'C, 

CDC 

CDC, 

CD,C 

CCD. 

CCD' 

GGD, 

CCD' 



removes 



0'A,07 
A'O.0.5 
A,0'0') 
OiA'Oi) 
O'EJ' ) 

A'lili ) 
AJT ^ 
O.E'1. 5 
TAT ) 
E'O'I. ) 
E.OJ' ) 
I.A.I. 5 
I'E'O' ) 
ETO, 5 
EJ.O' ) 
I.E.O. 5 



and Tub- 
ftitutes 

A'AJ, 

AiAT 

A'E,0, 

AiE'O' 

E'A'O, 

E,A,0' 

E'E'I, 

E.E.r 



ftrengthened 
from 

I1A.1, 

A'I.1. 
I'AT 

A.rr 

I.E.O. 

A'0,0, 

I'E'O' 
A.0'0' 
0.A'0, 
ETO, 
O'AiO 
E.I.O' 
O.E'1, 1 
E'O'I, J 
O'EJ' \ 
E.O.I' J 



occurring 
in 

CDiC 

D'CC 

CD'C 

D.CC 

CCD' 

D'D'D' 

CC'D, 

D,D,D. 

D'D'D' 

CCD' 

D.D.D, 

CC'D, 

D'CC 

C'D,C' 

D.CC 

CD'C 



I will now examine the negatory complex fyllogifms, premiling 
however than we cannot get any new conclufions from them. 



92 On the Syllogifm. 

For we have now got all the fixteen cafes in which both pre- 
mifes are univerfal : and we know that there can be no fyllogifm 
with a particular premife, except it have one of thofe with uni- 
verfal premifes for its opponents. 

Take DiD':C' or A. + O' and A' + Oi together deny E' + L, 
that is, deny the coexiftence of E' and L, that is, deny either E' 
or Ii, that is, affert either I' or Ei. This fyllogifm then may be 
written thus, 

(Ai + O') (A' + O,) (either E* or T) 

Now the fa6i is that this disjundlion is fuperfluous ; it is I' 
which is always aflerted, and Ei is never a neceffary confequence 
of D|D'. For AiA' gives I' as already fliown, and AiOi and 
O'A'are inconclufive (and O'Oi of courfe). And the rationale 
of the inference is as follows : fince X is a fubidentical of Y, and 
Y a fuperidentical of Z, it follows that Y is fuperidentical both of 
X and Z ; confequently, Y not filling the univerfe (our fuppo- 
fition throughout) it follows that there are things which are nei- 
ther Xs nor Zs, namely, all which are not Ys. Again, in 
CiCr.C, which the fame reafoning fhows to be only CiCiF, 
none either of X or of Z is in Y, therefore every inflance in Y 
is both X and z. And thus it will appear that in every negatory 
complex concluilon the whole- middle term^ or the whole of its 
contrary^ makes the fubjeft matter of the ftrengthened particular 
fyllogifm which is all that can be coUedted. 

Our conclufion is that no negatory complex fyllogifm is of 
any more logical efFeft than the ftrengthened particular derived 
from it. Thus we may fay that, fb far as the extent and cha- 
rafter of the inference is concerned, the former is the latter. 

I will now pals to the general rules of the complete fyftem of 
fyUogifms ; — 

The reader muft take pains to remember two rules of forma- 
tion, perfeft contraries of each other, for the dependence of the 
accents (or prepojitions) on the Jign (affirmative or negative cha- 
rafter) of the lirft premife. I exprefs them in the briefeft way 
poflible. 

DireSf Rule. Affirmation (in the lirft premife) makes the fecond 
premife agree with both the other proportions, or ifolates no- 
thing : negation makes the fecond premife differ from both the 



On the Syllogifm. 93 

others, or ifolates the fecond premife. Inverfe rule. Affirmation 
ifolates the firji premife^ makes the firft premife diflFer from both 
the others in prepofition : negation ifolates the conclujion^ makes 
the conclufion differ from both the others. Thefe rules might 
be exprefled fo as to make their contrariety more complete. 

Thus in the. ^^^^ rule, affirmative commencement fhows ,., 
prepodtions in the two premifes, and the conclufion ^ru -j.® 
n the firft premife in prepofition : but negative commence- 
ment fhows ",., prepofitions in the two premifes, and the con- 
clufion ^^^."^S with ^^ g^^ premife in prepofition. 
aiiienng rrom '^ 

The fubjefts of the followinjg rules are, 

1. The eight affirmatory complex fyllogifms. 

2. The eight univerfal fimple fyllogifms. 

3. The eight ftrengthened particular fimple fyllogifms. 
4 The fixteen particular fimple fyllogifms. 

Omit the negatory complex fyllogifms, as fully contained in 
the third of this enumeration, and the complex fyllogifms which 
contain the unaccented D or C, as carrying a momentary accent 
for the rule, to be expunged when the formation is completed. 
Confider Di, D, D', Ai, A', Ii, I', as of the affirmative figns, and 
Ci, C, C, El, E', Oi, O', as negative. 

Rule I. In the complex fyUogifm all parts are complex; in 
the univerfal fimple fyllogifm all parts are univerfal ; in the 
ftrengthened particular only the conclufion is particular ; in the 
particular only a premife is univerfal. 

Rule 2. Premifes of like fign have an affirmative conclufion ; 
of unlike fign, a negative. 

Rule 3. The complex, the univerfal, the particulars which 
begin with a particular, follow the direft rule \ the ftrengthened 
particulars, and the particulars which begin with a univerfal (all 
that commence with a univerfal, and conclude with a particular) 
follow the inverfe rule. [Or thus ; all which begin and end 
alike, follow the dire£b rule ; all which begin and end differently, 
the inverfe.] 

The complex fyllogifins and univerfals are eafily remembered 



94 On the Syllogifm. 

by rule : the particulars almoft as eafily. The following fub- 
rules may be noted, as far as thefe laft are concerned. 

Sub-rule i. Firji and fecond premifes, A and O in the firft 
premife demand unlike prepodtions in the two premifes : £ and 
I demand like prepofitions. Thus AiOi muft be inconclufive : 
AiO' muft be conclufive. But EiOi muft be concluftve : and 
EiO' muft be inconclufive. 

Sub-rule 2. FirJi premife and conclujion. A univerfal in the firft 
premife demands an unlike prepofition in the conclufion : a par- 
ticular firft premife, a like prepofition in the conclufion. 

Sub-rule 3. Second premife and conclufion. Every fecond pre- 
mife demands its own prepofition in a conclufion of like fign : 
and the other prepofition in a conclufion of unlike fign. 

As far as the four fpecies are concerned,, every fyUogifm 
formed according to the three rules is valid ; and every one 
not fo formed is invalid. The following remarks are partly 
recapitulatory, partly new. 

Remark I. Every complex fyllogifm gives one univerfal fyUo- 
gifm * and two particular ones, its concomitants : and the con- 
comitants are formed by changing one of the premifes of the 
univerfal and the conclufion, into their particular concomitant 
propofitions (page 63.) 

Remark 2. Every fyllogifm has its contranominal^ which aflerts 
of the contraries in the fame manner as the firft does of the di- 
reft terms : and contranominals have all their accents different, 
as in O'AiO' and OiA'Oi (page 62.) 

Remark 3. Every fyllogifm has two opponents, made by inter- 
changing the contradiftories of one premife and of the conclufion, 
and altering the accent of the remaining premife, if inconverti- 
ble (A or O) (page 88.) 

Remark 4. Every complex fyllogifm has two fuch opponents 
formed in the fame way, the Ds being the inconvertibles, the Cs 
the convertibles. "*Thus (:) meaning denial of^ the opponents of 
CiD'Ci are Ci:Ci:D' and :CiDi:Ci. The firft of thefe is 

(E, + r)(Ii^rE')(O'orA0 

containing the valid fyllogifms EiE'Ai, EJiO', I'E'O' j being 

* SyUogifm^ not preceded by complex^ means iimple fyllogifm. 



On the Syllogifm. 95 

EiE'Ai and its concomitants. And :CiDi:Ci gives E'AiE' (the 
contranominal of EiA'Ei) and its concomitants. And the fame 
of the reft. 

Remark 5. Each univerfal fyllogifm has two weakened forms, 
made by weakening one premife and the conclufion. When the 
firji premife is weakened, it is without change of prepofition : 
but when the fecond, with change. Thus the weakened forms 
of EiA'Ei are O.A'Oi and Eil,0'. 

Remark 6. Each particular fyllogifm has two ftrengthened 
forms, one of which is a univerfal, the other only a ftrengthened 
particular. Thus the ftrengthened forms of OiA'Oi are EiA'Ei 
and E'A'Oi. 

Remark 7. In every fyllogifm except the ftrengthened particu- 
lar, the middle term is univerfal in one premife, and particular in 
the other : and its contrary is therefore the fame. But in the 
ftrengthened particular, the middle term is univerfal in both 
premifes, or particular in both. This affords a complete crite- 
rion of fyllogifm, as will be noticed hereafter : in faft, the com- 
pletenefe of this fyftem crowds us with relations, from many of 
which general rules might be deduced, though they need only 
appear here by cafual remark. 

In O'AiO', A'O.O., I*A.I., E.O.r, O'EJ', A'LL, I*E,0*, 
EiIiO', the middle term enters univerfally in the univerfal, and 
particularly in the particular. In all the others it enters particu- 
larly in the univerfal, and univerfally in the particular. In the 
firft fet, the convertible premifes are all fubs^ the inconvertibles 
are fubs in the fecond premife, zni fupers in the firft. In the 
fecond fet, thefe rules are inverted. 

Remark 8. Of the twelve poffible pairs of premifes AA, AE, 
AI, AO, EA, EE, EI, EO, lA, IE, O A, OE, which can give 
a conclufion, each one w/7/, in two ways, which two ways are 
inverted in their accents. Thus EO appears in E'O'L and 
EiOJ'. The two premife-letters and one acdnt diftate all the 
reft : thus I'A can belong to nothing but TAT. When the 
fyftem is well learnt, it will be found unneceffary to write more 
than I'A, for the fymbol of I'A'P. I now fpeak only of funda- 
mental fyllogifms : the ftrengthened fyllogifm AiAT might be 
fignified by A' A'. 

Remark 9. The fyllogifms of the three firft claffes are all really 



96 On the Syllogifm. 

fpecimens of one, thofe of the fourth of two, among them, with 
the eight variations XYZ, xYZ, X Yz, xYz, XyZ, xyZ, Xyz, 
xyz. The rules for conducing thefe changes are 

Change of fubjeft is change of both accent and letter. 
Change of predicate is change of letter. 

Change of both is change of accent. 

thus to pafs from E'EiA' to Ai£iEi we note in XY change of 
fubjeft, in YZ change of neither, in XZ change of fubjeft : 
therefore xYZ is the fet of terms into which XYZ muft be 
changed : and the E'EiA' fyUogifm of either fet is the AiEiE| 
fyUogifm of the other. 

The 24 fyUogifms, which are 24 with reference to the order 
XY, YZ, XZ, are only I2 if the order ZY, YX, ZX, be 
allowed. Thus AJT of the firft is the TAT of the fecond. 
Thefe fyUogifms are eflentially the feme in the mode of inference 
they afford. To change a fyUogifm into another of the fame mode 
of inference, invert the premifes and change the prepofition of 
all the inconvertibles. Thus A'OiOi and O'AiO' are of the fame 
inference. The pairs which in this point of view are identical are 

E'E,A'=E*FA, 
LEiO. =EiIiO' 
ETOi =rE'0' 



A,A.A, =A'A'A' 
0'A.O'=A'0,0, 
AiO'0'=0,A'0, 



E'A.E'=A'FE' 
I.A.I. =A'L L 
E'O'I. =0*E'I, 



EiA'Ei=A,E,Ei 
I'AT =A,IT 

E,o,r=o'E,r 



The ninth remark admits of confiderable extenfion. The ^fome* 
of a logical propofition.may have a much more definite charafter 
in fome cafes than in others. It may be a felefted, or at leaft a 
diflinguifhabley&^i^, which want nothing but a nominal diflinftion 
to make the particular propofition eafily and ufefuUy univerial. 
Whether it can be done more or lefs eafily, and more or lefs ufe- 
fuUy, is no queflion of formal logic. If it be fuppofed done, the 
particular is converted into a univerfal. In * fome Xs are Ys,' 
if we make a rtame for every X which is Y, fay M, we have 
then ' Every M is Y*. This propofition may be purely identi- 
cal, or it may not. If we call every X which is Y by the name 
M merely becaufe it is Y, then our univerfal is only ' Every X 
which is ThY\ But if the name M be conferred from any 
other circumflance, which diflinguifhes the Xs that are Ys from 
other Xs, then the change from the particular to the univerfal by 



On the Syllogifm. 97 

means of the new reftri6Uon impofed by the new name, is the 
expreffion of new knowledge. 

The quantities in the conclufion are of two kinds. There are 
thofe which are brought in with the terms, and which continue 
in the concluiion fuch as they were introduced in the premifes : 
and there are thofe which depend on the union of the premifes, 
and which are what they are only in virtue of the joint exiftence 
of the premifes. For example, in Ii AJi we have ^ fome Xs are 
Ys, but every Y is Z, therefore fome Xs are Zs' : if we aflc, 
what Xs are Zs, the anfwer is, thofe which are Ys, and no others, 
fo far as this conclufion affirms. But when we look at O'AiO' 
or ' fome Ys are not Xs, and every Y is Z ; therefore fome Zs 
are not Xs : and if we then afk what Zs are not Xs ; the anfwer 
is, that this quantity does not enter with Z, but depends upon the 
other premife, namely, upon the number of Ys which are not Xs. 
In a particular fyUogifm, let us call the quantity of the fubje£l: 
in the concluiion intrinjic or extrinjic according as it is that of 
the premife which introduces that fubjeft, or of the other premife. 
Examination will fhow that in every particular fyUogifm which 
concludes in L or T, in which both terms are particular, the 
quantities of the terms are, of the one intrinfic, of the other ex- 
trinfic : but that where the conclufion is in Oi orO', either the 
quantity of the fubje£t is intrinfic and that of the contrary of the 
predicate extrinfic, or vice verfd. 

When the quantity of a particular term in the ./conclufion is 
intrinfic, the invention of a name will convert the syllogifm into 
a univerfal. Thus LAiAi or X Y + Y)Z =XZ, if M be taken 
to reprefent all thofe Xs which are Ys, and nothing elfe, becomes 
M)Y-f Y)Z=M)Y, of the form A. A. A,. Again, O'AiO' or 
Y:X + Y)Z=Z:X, thrown into the form x:y + z)ys=x:z, be- 
comes m.y + z)y=:m.z, of the form EiAiEi, when the xs which 
are ys are diflinguifhed from the refl of the univerfe by the name 
m. There is nothing either illegitimate or uncommon in diflin- 
guiihing by a peculiar name certain fome (or even uncertain fome^ 
if certainly always the fame fome) of another name. Again, fince 
we know that every univerfal fyllogifm is reducible to the form 
AiAiAi by ufe of contraries, we have now reafon to know that 
there is no fundamental inference, of the kind treated in this chap- 
ter, which is any other than that in A|A|A|, or, the contained 

H 



98 



On the SyUogifm. 



of the contained is contained. And there is no better exercife than 
learning to read off each of the fyllogifms, univerfal and particu- 
lar, into this one form, by perception, and without ufe of rules. 
Take as an inftance X:Y+y.z=XZ : what is the container, 
what is the contained,, and what is the middle container of one 
and contained of theother^ It is a pared of Xs which are con- 
tained in y,. all y in Z, and therefore that parcel of Xs in Z. 

This general principle fuggefts a notation for all the complex, 
univerfel, and fundamental particular,, fyllogifms. If we abbre- 
viate X)Y + Y)Z=X)Z into XYZ), and if we denote by 
XYZ, without ), that it is only a parcel of Xs (all or fome, 
defined or undefined^ but always the fame), we have the fol- 
lowing, 



For AiAiAi read XYZ) or zyx) 

— O'AiO' — xYZ 
_ AiO'O' — Zyx 

For E'AiE' read xYZ) or zyX) 

— IiAiI, — XYZ 

— E'O'Ii — ZyX 

For AiEiEi read X Yzr) or Zyx) 

— O'Eil' — xYz 
_ AiIT — zyx 

For E'EiA' read xYz) or ZyX) 

— I4E1O, — XYz 
_ ETO, — zyX 



For A'A' A' read xyz) or ZYX) 

— OiA'Oi— Xyz 

— A'COi — zYX 

For EiA'Ei read Xyz) or Z Yx) 
_ I'AT — xyz 

— E*0*r — zYx 

For A'E'F read xyZ) or zYX) 

— OiE'Ii — XyZ 

— A'LI. — ZYX 

For EiE'A* read XyZ) or zYx) 

— TFO' — xyZ 

— E,I*0' — ZYx 



Here, ufmg P,Q,R^ as general terms, PQR) denotes that all 
Ps are Qs, and all Qs are Rs, whence all Ps are Rs : while 
PQR only denotes that there is a parcel of Ps among the Qs, 
and all Qs are among the Rs, whence that parcel of Ps is among 
the Rs. 

The rules for the connexion of thefe fyftems are not compli- 
cated, confidering the extent of the cafes they are to include. 
Let the letters A,E, &c. be called proponents ; X,Y,Z, nominal: 
and by the order of the nominals we always mean that X is firft^ 
&c. both in XYZ, and ZYX. The nominals being dire^ 
(X,Y,Z) and contrary (x,y,z), remember that,/fy?. 



On the Syllogifm. 99 

ffir/i ^fi^ft ^d fecond 

An affirmative?y^rd«// proponent denotes that ^t\ fecond and third 

{third* \ third and firft 

nominals agree (are both diredl or both contrary). 

ifirjl ^fi^fl ^^'^ fecond 

A negative<yjrfd«// proponent denotes that thexy^r^W and third 
\third ^ third and firft 

nominals differ (are one direft, one contrary). 

Thus EIO muft give Xyz or xYZ or zyX or ZYx 
lEO muft give X Yz or xyZ or zYX or Zyx 

Secondly^ whether the middle term be Y or y depends only on 
the accent of the middle proponent : a fub-zccent gives Y, a 
Jiiper-zccent gives y. In the univerfal fyUogifm however, either 
gives either. 

Thirdly^ the XYZ fyllogifms are the particulars which begin 
with a particular : and the ZYX iyllogifms are the particulars 
which begin with a univerfal. 

For example, required OiE'I* . Seeing the particular Oi, at the 
beginning, take the order XYZ, feeing the fuperaccent in E' 
make it XyZ. Seeing the negative Oi, let the exifting difagree- 
ment of the firft and fecond nominals continue : and the fame of 
the fecond and third from the negative Ei. Confequently XyZ 
is the fyllogifhi exprefTed in nominals. Or the rationale of 
the inference in OiE'Ii is that a parcel of Xs are among the Zs 
becaufe among the ys which are all among the Zs. 

Again, required the nominal mode of expreffing ETOi . See- 
ing the univerfal E at the beginning, write down ZYX ; for the 
fuperaccent in P, write down ZyX ; for the negative in E', 
continue yX ; for the afiSrmadve in I\ write zy : hence zyX is 
the nominal form of ETOi. 

Required the proponent mode of expreffing x Yz. Here xY, 
Yz, fliow us that the premifes are negative forms, and the direc- 
tion of the order x, Y, z, that the firft premife is particular. 
Then OE are the premifes, and I the conclufion. And Y tells 
us that the middle proponent has a fubaccent. Whence OEJ 
is, fo fer as it goes, the proponent expreflion. And, by the laws 
of form, the other accents muft be as in O'EJ', fince the fyUo- 
gifm follows the dire£^ rule (page 93). 



1 oo On the Syllogifm. 

Required the proponent mode of expref&ng ZYx. Here we 
note in fuccefSon — univerfal commencement — firft premife ne- 
gative — fecond, affirmative — middle accent fub. This gives EIiO 
of the inverfe rule, or E JjO*. 

Required the proponent notation for the univerlal xYZ) or 
zyX). We fee at once EAjE, or E'AiE'. 

The concomitants of a univerial are found by changing the 
firil nominal into the coatrary, in each of the forms, and throw- 
ing away the fign of. univerfality [ ) ] . Thus the concomitants 
of XyZ) or zYx) are xyZ and ZYx. 

The weakened forms of a univerfal are found by merely 
throwing away the fymbol of univerfality [)] from the two 
forms of the univerfal. Thus the weakened forms of XYZ) 
which is alfo zyx) are XYZ and xyx. 

But we have not yet reached the climax of fymbolic fimplicity 
in the mere reprefentation of fyllogifms. An algebraift would 
fay that the ftrudture of the inference, as now confidered, does 
not depend upon the names ; but only upon their reference to 
the names in the fundamental form XYZ). He would there- 
fore propofe a fimple fymbol to reprefent letting alone^ and 
another to reprefent changing into the contrary. Thefe, with a 
fign of complete univerfality, and another of inverfion of order, 
are all that he would find neceflary. Let o and i fignify letting 
alone and changing into the contrary : let the terminal parenthefis <. 
denote complete univerfality, as before, and let inverfion of order 
be denoted by a negative fign prefixed. Thus XYZ or LAJi, 
would be denoted by ooo ; Zjrx or AjO'O' by— on ; AiEiEi 
or XYz) by ooi) or its equivalent— on. Thus— on tells us 
that fome of the Zs are ys, all the ys are xs, whence fome of the 
Zs are xs. To write its proponent form, obferve that — inftrufb 
us to write a univerial firil ; 1 1 to make it affirmative ; i in the 
middle to fuperaccent the middle propofition ; oi to make the 
fecond premife negative. We have then AiO'O' or X)Y + 
Z:Y=Z:X which is Zy-fy)x=Zx, as aiTerted. 

All that relates to univerfals in the preceding, applies to the 
complex fyllogifms. Let a couple of parentheies imply a complex 
fyllogifm : thus DiDiDi may be (XYZ) or (ooo). Then in (oio) 
or (XyZ), we are to fee that X is a fubidentical of y, and y of Z, 
whence X is the fame of Z. But Xy and yZ warn us to write 



On the Syllogifm. i o i 

cmtraries for the firft and fecond premifes and y to fuperaccent 
the middle letter : whence CiC'D* is the fyUogifm expreflfed by 
the names XYZ, The equivalent forms — (loi) and (zYx) ex- 
prefe it by faying that z is a fubidentical of Y and Y of x, whence 
z is a fubidentical of x. 

I now look at the ftrengthened particular fyUogifms. All in- 
ference which is fundamental, that is, which will come from 
nothing weaker than the premifes given, has been reduced to the 
one eai^ cafe of ' the contained of the contained is contained.' 
The ftrengthened particular, the type of which is A'A Ji, obeying 
the inverfe rulfe of formation, and written at more length in Y)X 
•f- Y)Z=XZ, may be ftated thus 'all names are common as to 
what they contain in common/ If we denote this ftrengthened 
fyllogifm by XYZI, a fymbol intended to imply fomething be- 
tween XYZ and XYZ) in the amounts of quantity introduced, 
we fliall find that the eight, ftrengthened fyUogifms muft be re- 
preiented by 

A'AiIi =XYZ1 AiA'r = xyzl 
A'EiOi=XYzl AiE'0'= xyZI 
E'A'Oi=Xyzl E4AiO'= xYZI 
E'E'Ii =XyZI E4EJ' = xYzl 

The rules of connexion are precifely thofe for the particular 
fyUogifms : and inverfion is abfblutely inefFedive. Thus XYZI 
=ZYXI. 

A few words will ferve to difpofe of the mixed complex fylltn 
gifms in which a complex preniife is combined with a Ample one, 
univerlal or particular. Firft, when a complex and a univerfal 
are premifed, and figns and accents are as in the direSf rule (page 
92), the conclufion is as it would be if the A were heightened 
into D, or E into C. Thus EiD' gives C*, the fame as CjD'. 
For El is C or Ci, and both CD' and Ciiy give d, but with 
different quantities. But if the premifes be conftru£l:ed on the 
inverfe rule, there is no more inference than can be obtained 
when the complex premife is lowered into a univerfal : or we 
have only a ftrengthened particular. Thus in DjE' or (Aj-h 
0')E', A*E' gives the ftrengthened particular AiE'O', and O'F 
is inconclufive. And when the complex premife is combined 
with a particular, we have only what would follow if the com- 
plex premife were lowered into a univerfal. Thus DJ', or 



I02 On the Syllogifm. 

(A4-fO')r can only give AJT; and DT or ( A* + Oi)r gives no 
conclufion, for AT is inconclufive. 

The clafEfication of opponent forms may be thus treated. 
We know that opponent forms of AEE, for inftance, be it Ai 
E4E4 or A'E'E', muft be lEO and AIL Now whether AiEiEi 
fliall have LEiOi or EiLO', whether A'lJi or LAiL, depends upon 
the introdu£tion of a new and arbitrary notion of the order to be 
adopted. Our firft fyUogifm being defcribed by XY, YZ, XZ, 
the opponent which ends in the contradi£tion of the firft premife 
is in XZ, YZ, XY ; which, keeping Z middle, is either to be 
defcribed with reference to XZ, ZY, XY, or to YZ, ZX, YX. 
Now in adopting the firft of thefe three orders, there is nothing 
which compels us therefore to prefer thle fecond to the third, or 
vice verfa. 

The efFed of the change of order which confifts in the inter- 
change of Z and X is as follows. The premifes change places ; 
A and O with altered accents, altered alfo in the conclufion, E 
and I with unaltered accents. Thus AJT becomes I' AT; 
E'O'Ii becomes OiE'L . Accordingly, it is matter of new ar- 
rangement whether for inftance, LEiOi or EJiO' fliall be called 
the opponent of AiEiEi ; and I prefer to give the name to both. 
The confequence is, the following diftribution of opponents ; — 

AA AO OA 



EE EO OE 



AE EA AI lA EI IE. 



The three fets reprefent letters combined in reprefentation of pre- 
mifes : the firft two containing fix fyllogifms each, the third 
twelve. The third muft be divided into two fets of fix each, in 
one of which the fubaccents are in greater number, in the other 
the fuperaccents. There are then four fets in all. Pick any 
two out of a fet, which only differ in change of order : thefe two 
have the fame opponent forms, namely, the other four of the 
fet. For inftance, A'lJi and LA'Ii, in which fubaccents predo- 
minate. Take AE, EA, EI, IE, and complete fyllogifms in 
fuch manner as to make fubaccents predominate : giving AiEiEi, 
EiA'Ei, EiLO' LEiOi. The laft four are the opponents of the 
firft two. 

In the fet of ftrengthened particulars the opponent forms will 
be found to be univerfals weakened in the conclufion without 



On the SyVogtfm. ixy^ 

being weakened in the premifes. Thus AiA'I' has A'E'O' for 
one of its opponents : but A'E' may produce the univerlal con* 
duflon E' as well as its weaker form 0\ 

Some readers, particularly thofe who have a tindture of algebra, 
are more helped by fymbolic notation than by language : with 
others it is the converfe. To fuit the latter, obferve that the 
language of page 78 may eaflly be adapted to fimple fyllo^fins. 
Thus Ai being fubafErmation, L may be fbme fubafErmation, O' 
may be fome fupernegation ; and fo on. Thus inftead of E'I'Oi we 
may fay that ' fupernegation of fbme fiiperaffirmation gives fbme 
fubnegatipn/ Pra£i;ice in this language would make the phrafe 
fuggeft fomethmg more than the notation it is derived from. 
The phrafe refers to Z : there is a term partially fuperaffirmed 
of Z, namely Y ; and a complete fubnegative of Y, namely X. 
The partial fubaffirmation declares fome things neither Y nor Z ; 
the complete fupernegation declares that whatever is not Y is X. 
Confequently there are fome Xs which are not Zs : or X is a 
partial fubnegative of Z. This fubje£t will be refumed. 



In what precedes are two views of the dedu£^ion of all tlie 
varieties of fyUogifm, The firft, taking the complex fyllogifm as 
the fource, conne£ts the flrengthened fyllogifms and the parti- 
cular ones with the univerfals, and thus in h,&. reduces every 
thing to the conilituents of DiDiDi or DD^Di. The fecond pro- 
ceeds from Ai Ai Ai, A^ AJi, AiIT, and L AiL, and forms the clafTes 
of univerfal, ftrengthened, and particular, fyllogifms by fubfli- 
tudng contraries in every way in which it can be done. Thefe 
two fyftems have clofe connexion, but not fo clofe as might 
perhaps be thought : for LAJi is not one of thofe which are 
connected with AiAiAi in the formation of a complex fyllo- 
gifm. 

The two new views which I now proceed to ^ve are alfo 
clofely conne£ted, and different from the former ones, in which 
we held it equally admiffible to refer one of the concludmg terms 
to the middle, as in X)Y, or the middle to one of the concluding 
terms, as in Y)X. But now I afk whether it be not poflible fo 



I04 On the Syllogifm. 

to conftru£t the fyftem, that we may firft lay down the middle 
term and its contrary, as conftituting the univerfe of the fyUo- 
gifm, and then complete the premifes and their conclufion, by 
properly laying down the concluding terms in their [daces. We 
may fucceed, if, in the firft inftance, we confider none but con- 
vertible propofitions. And this we can do ; for univerlal ex- 
clufion and particular inclufion comprehend all aflertion. Thus 
univerfal inclufion is only univerfal exclufion from the contrary, 
and particular exclufion is only particular inclufion in the con* 
trary. 

Setting out then with the middle term and its contrary, and 
reftridling ourfelves to E and I, let E fignify (univerfal) exclu- 
fion from the middle term, and e firom its contrary ; let I fignify 
(particular) inclufion in the middle term, and i in its contrary* 
Choofing a pair of concluding terms, we reje£t II, li, and ii on 
grounds already demonftrated, and very eafily feen in this view, 
and proceed to confider Ee, EE and ee, EI and ei, Ei and el. 

Ee. From this a univerfal conclufion muft follow. If one 
term be completely excluded from the middle and the other from 
its contrary, the terms are completely excluded each from the 
other. The fundamental forms are, 

EiA'E.,X.Y + Z.y=X.Z ; A1E4E1, X.y+Z.Y=X.Z 

and by ufe of XZ, Xz, xZ, xz, we thus bring out the eight uni- 
verfal fyllogifms. 

EE and ee. From thefe a particular inclufion muft follow. 
Exclufion of both terms from a third, gives partial inclufion of 
their contraries in each other : for all that third term belongs 
to the contraries of the other two. The fundamental forms 
are, 

EiEiF, X.Yh-Z.Y=xz ; A,AT X.y + Z.y=xz 

from which, as before, the eight ftrengthened fyllogifms are de- 
duced. 

EI and ei. From thefe a particular inclufion muft follow. 
The exclufion of one term from a third, and the inclufion of 
part of a fecond term in that third, tell us that part of the par- 
ticularized term is in the contrary of the univerfalized term; 
The fundamental forms are. 



On the Syllogifm. 105 

EJ.O', X,Y + ZY ==Zx 5 AiO'O', X.y + Zy =Zx 
I.EiO,,XY H-Z.Y=Xz 5 O.A'Oi,Xy H-Z.y=Xz 

from which the fixteen particular iyllogifms are deduced. 

Ei and el. From thefe no conclufion can be drawn. All that 
is fignified is that one concluding term is wholly excluded froth 
a third, and the fecond partially excluded (or included in the 
contrary). 

It thus appears that a fyUogifm with one particular premife is 
valid when the premifes reduced to convertible forms, fliow the 
middle term in both or the contrary of it in both ; otherwife, 
invalid. Alio, that the conclufion in its convertible form, takes 
dire£Hy from the particular premife and contrariwife from the 
univerfal. 

It alfo appears that a fyUogifm with both premifes univerfal is 
always valid; with a univerfal conclufion when the premifes 
(made convertible) (how one the middle term and the other its 
contrary ; with a particular conclufion when both (how the mid- 
dle term or both its contrary. And the convertible form of the 
conclufion takes dire£^ly from both in the firft cafe, and contra- 
riwife from both in the fecond. 

The other view which I here propofe is really a different 
mode of looking at that jufl given. By the time we have made 
every name carry its contrary, as a matter of courfe, we become 
prepared to take the following view of the nature of a propofi- 
tion. A name by itfelf is a found or a fymbol : its relation to 
things (be they obje£ls or ideas) is twofold. There may be in 
rerum natura that to which the name applies, or there may not. 
I do not here fpeak of how many things there may be to which 
a name applies : it is not effential to kfiow whether they be more 
or fewer, either abfblutely or relatively. The introdudtion of 
contraries may be made the expulfion of quantity. With refer- 
ence to application, then, let a name be called pojjible or impof-' 
fihle according as the thing to which it applies can be found or 

not. 

A name may be compounded of others ; the compound name 
being that of everjrthing to which all the components apply. 
Thus wild animal is the name of all things to which both the 
names wild and animal apply. To call this compound name 






io6 On the Syllogifm. 

impofSble is to fay that there is not fuch a thing as a wild animal : 
to call it pof&ble is to fay that there is fuch a thmg. 

X and Y being two names, the compound name may be re- 
prefented by X Y when poffible, and by XY) when impoffible. 
This does not alter the meaning of our fymbol XY, as hitherto 
ufed : as yet it has been ' there are Xs which are Ys' and now 
it is ' XY, the name of that which is both X and Y, is the 
name of fome thing or things ; ' and thefe two are the &me in 
meaning, fo far as their ufe in inference is concerned. Nor need 
XY), as juft defined, be treated as a departure from, otherwife 
than as an extenfion of, the ufe of X)Y, In X)Y, we alTert 
that X is fomething, namely Y : in X) we aflfert that X is nothing 
whatever, ^The proper notation, however, for indicating that 
the name X has no application, is X)u, u being the contrary of 
U, which laft includes everything in the univerfe fpoken of; b 
that u may denote nonexiftence. 

The propofition ' Every X is Y * afferts that Xy is the name 
of nothing, or X) Y=Xy)« Similarly ' No X is Y ' afferts that 
XY is the name of nothing, or X.Y=XY). But ' Some Xs 
are Ys* and * Some Xs are not Ys' merely aflert the poffibility 
of the names X Y and Xy. . 

A fyllogifm, then, is the aflfertion that from the poffibility or 
impoffibility of the names produced by compounding X or x, 
Z or z, each with Y or y, may be inferred the poffibility or im- 
poffibility of a name compounded of X or x with Z or z. The 
rules of the laft fyftem are now fo eafily changed into the lan- 
guage of the prefent one^ that it is hardly worth while to ftate 
more than one for example. Thus, if X compounded with Y, 
and Z compounded with y, both give impoffible names, then X 
compounded with Z gives an impoffible name. This is X Y) -f 
Zy)=ZX) or X.Y-hZ.y=Z.X, or EiA'E, 

The view here taken of compound names will be extended 
in the next chapter. 



On the Syltogifm. 107 



CHAPTER VI. 

On the Syllogifm. 

WHEN the premifes of a fyllogifin are true, the conclufion 
is alfo true, and when the conclufion Is falfe, one or 
both of the premifes are falfe. There are two kinds of modifica- 
tions which it may be ufeful to confider : thofe which concern 
the entrance of the propofitlon into the argument ; and thofe 
which aiFe£^ the connexion of the fubje£t and predicate. 

As to the propofition itfelf, it may be true or falfe abfblutely, 
or it may have any degree of truth, credibility, or probability. 
This relation will be hereafter confidered ; and, according to the 
principles of Chapter IX. (b far as the propofition is probable 
it is credible, and fb &r as it is credible, it is true. But as to 
other modes of looking at the iyllogifm, are we entitled to fay 
that every thing which can be announced as to the premifes may 
be announced in the fame fenfe as to the conclufion ? The an- 
fwer is, that we cannot make fuch announcement abfblutely ; but 
of the premifes as derived from that conclufion we can make it. 
In what manner foever two premifes are applicable, their conclu- 
fion as from thofe premifes is alfb applicable : becaufe the conclu- 
fion is in the premifes. For inflance, in the fyllogifm ' all men are 
trees, all trees are rational, therefore all men are rational,' the 
premifes are abfurd and falfe, and the conclufion taken indepen- 
dently is rational and true : but that conclufion, as from thofe 
premifes, is as abfurd as the premifes themfelves. Again, in ^ all 
pirates are convidted, all convi£ls are punifhed, therefore all 
pirates are punifhed,' the premifes are defirable^ and fb is the 
conclufion with thofe premifes. But the conclufion is not de- 
firable in itfelf: as that pirates fhould be punifhed with or with- 
out trial. Neither may we fay ' X ought to be Y and Y ought 
to be Z, therefore X ought to be Z' except in this manner, that 
we afErm X ought to be Z in a particular way. We may not 
even fay that when * X ought to be Y, and Y /j Z ' it follows 
that ' X ought to be Z,* for it may be that Y ought not to be Z. 
Thus a royalifl, in 1655, would fay that the hundred excluded 



io8 On the Syllogifm. 

members of Cromwell's parliament ought to be allowed to take 
their feats, and alfo that aJl who took any feats in that parliament 
were rebels ; but he would not infer that the hundred members 
ought to be rebels. There is nothing which, being the property 
of the premifes, is neceflarily the independent property of the 
conclufion, except abfolute truth. It fhould be noted that in 
common language and writing, the ufual meaning of conclufions 
is that they are ftated as of their premifes and to ftand or fall 
with them, even as to truth* Though a conclufion may be true 
when its premifes are falfe, the proponent does not mean, for the 
moft part, to claim more than his premifes will give, nor that 
any thing fhould ftand longer than the premifes ftand. 

Next, we are not to argue from what we may fey of a propo- 
fition to what we may fay of the inftances it contains, except as 
to what concerns the truth of thofe inftances, or elfe to what 
concerns the inftances as parts of a whole. If I (ay ' Every X 
is Y * I aflert, no doubt, of each X independently of the reft : 
that is, the truth of * Every X is Y* involves the truth of ' this 
X is Y.* But if, to take fomething elfe, I maintain ' Every X 
is Y' to be adefirable rule, I do not therefore aflert *this X is 
Y ' to be a deflrable cafe, except upon an implied neceflity that 
there fhould be a rule. And if I (ay that 'every X is Y' is 
unintelligible, I do not fay that 'this X is Y^ is unintelligible; 
and (b on. Thus, where there muft be a rule, as in law, ' eviery 
man's houfe is his caftle' is defirable, becaufe there is but one 
alternative ' no man's houfe, &c.' But the propo(ition, by itfelf^ 
may not be deiirable as to the inftance of a generally reputed 
thief or receiver. 

There is one cafe, however, in which a term cannot be ap- 
plied to the general propofition, unlefs it can be applied in a 
higher degree to the inftances. The propofition ' Every X is Y' 
cannot be announced as of any degree of probability, unlefs each 
inftance has a much higher degree of probability. If /tt, v, ^, &c. 
be the probabilities of the feveral inftances, fuppoied independent, 
that of the propofition (Chapter IX.) is fAvp... which produfl muft 
be le(s than that of any one of the fra£tions of which it is formed. 

I now come to the corifideration of circumftances which mo- 
di(y the internal ftruAure of the premifes themfelves. And firft 
of conditions. 



¦V- 



\ 



On the Syllogifm. 109 

A conditional propofition is only a grammatical variation of 
the ordinary one ; as in ' If it be X, then it is Y/ The common 
form of this, ' Every X is Y,* is called categoricaly or predicative. 
Of the two forms, categorical and conditional, either may always 
be reduced to the other ; as follows, 

' Every X is Y' or « If X, then it is Y' 
* No X is Y' or ' If X, then it is not Y' 

The particular proportions might be given conditionally in 
various ways, but the transformation is not fo common. Thus 
' fome Xs are Ys' might be ' if X, then it may be Y' or * if X, 
then Y muft not therefore be denied of it,* &c. 

Of the two common fubje<Sl-matters of names, ideas and 
propoiitions, it is moil, common to apply the categorical form to 
the firft, and the conditional form to the fecond : in truth we 
might call the conditional form a grammatical convenience for 
the exprefSon of dependence of propofitions on one another, 
and of names which require complicated forms of exprefSon. 
Thus in pages 2 and 3, the conditional forms, containing if^ are 
more fimple than the correfponding categorical forms. 

A condition may be either necejfary^ ov fufficient^ or both. A 
neceflfary condition is that without which the thing cannot be ; a 
fiifEcient condition is one with which the thing muft be. In 
pages 73, 74, 1 have fufficiently pointed out the completenefs of 
the connexion between the conditional and the categorical forms. 
In any one cafe the fufEcient muft contain all that is neceflary, 
and may contain more. ^ 

After what is faid in page 23, it is not neceflary to dwell on 
the reduction of a conditional* iyllogifm to a categorical one. 
The premifes contain the conclufion : whatever gives us the 
premifes, gives us the conclufion. But I think that the reduc- 
tion of conditional to categorical forms, though juft, and, for in- 
ference, complete, is not the reprefentation of the whole of what 
pafTes in our minds. 

As an example of what I mean, look forward to the nume- 
rical fyftem of Chapter VIII. Precedent to all propofitions, 

* Wallis, as far as I know, was the firft who aflerted that all fyllogifms 
are, or can be made, categorical. He did this in the fecond thefis attached 
to his logic, headed Syllogifmi Hypothetici^ aliique Compqfiti, referendi funt 
omnes ad Ariftotelicos Categoricorum Modos. 



no On the Syllogijm. 

there are the numerical conditions which prefcribe the limits of 
the univerfe under confideration. Say there are 250 inftances in 
that univerfe : this is the firft condition. Of thefe 100 are Xs and 
200 are Ys ; giving a (econd and third condition. If we take a 
propofition, as 20X Y, and a(k whether it be fpurious or not, we 
have reference to the three conditions underftood. But this is not 
neceffary : for it would be poffible categorically to exprefs thefe 
conditions by ' 2oXs out of 100 in a univerfe of 250 inftances 
containing 20oYs are to be found among thofe 200 Ys ? It is 
of courfe the rule of brevity not to drag about thefe conditions 
with every propofition which is employed, but rather to ftate 
them once for all. There is however (bmething more. The 
conditions are a reftridtion upon the arguments intended to be 
introduced, and a reftri£^ion throughout. The attachment of 
them to each individual propofition does not exprelsthis : if they 
be feen in twenty confecutive propofitions, there is no more than 
a prefumpdon that they are to be feen in the twenty-firft. It is 
better that the limits allowed fhould be marked out by one boun- 
dary than that the feveral arguments fhould each have a defcrip- 
tion of the boundary to itfelf. 

Juft as a univerfe of names is defined by fpecifying one or 
more names to conftitute colle6lively xJtiQfummum genus ^ or uni- 
verfe^ fb one of propofitions may be defined by ftadng propofi- 
tions which are to be true, or which are not to be contradicted, as 
the cafe may be. Thefe propofitions may be conditions preced- 
ing all, or fome only, of the premife^ which are ufed in argu- 
ment; or fome may precede fome, and others others. In 
analyfing arguments, it would be found that many propofitions 
which enter as premifes, enter each with a condition underftood, 
and well underftood, to be granted. Whatever the conditions 
may be, fo long as the confequent propofitions a£t logically toge- 
ther to produce the final refult, then that fame refult depends at 
laft only on the conditions, and muft be afiSrmed when the con- 
ditions, and their connexion with their confequents, are affirmed. 
But then it muft be underftood that the refult alfo ftands upon 
the conditions, and may fall with them. Let us now examine 
the common fyllogifm, and fee whether there be any preceding 
conditions, on which the refult depends. 

On looking into any writer on logic, we fhall fee that exiftence 



On the SylJogifm. 1 1 1 

is claimed for the fignifications of all the names. Never, in the 
ftatement of a proportion, do we find any room left for the alter- 
native, fuppofe there Jhould be no fuch things, Exiftence as ob- 
je£ts, or exiftence as ideas, is tacitly claimed for the terms of 
every iyllogifm. The exiftence of an idea we muft grant when- 
ever it is diftinSly apprehended, and (therefore) not felf-contra- 
didlory : we cannot for inftance admit the notion of a lamp 
which is both metal and not metal; but, as an idea, we are at 
liberty to figure to ourfelves fuch a lamp as that with which 
Aladdin made his fortune. An attempt at a felf-contradi£ting 
idea is no idea ; we have not that apprehenfion of it in which an 
idea confifts : but in no other way can we fay that the attempt 
to produce an idea fails. It may then be more convenient here 
to dwell on ohjeSfive definition of terms, as more eaflly con- 
ceived with relation to exiftence and non-exiftence. Accordingly, 
let us take the propofitions X)Y and X .Y, of the character of 
which the particulars muft partake, as to the point before us. 
By the meaning of y, in relation to Y, it follows that every thing 
is either Y or y : if we fay that Y does not exift, then every thing 
is y. If then X exift, and Y do not, the propofition X) Y, or 
X.y is falfe, and X)y, or X.Y is true. If neither X nor Y 
exift, I will not fo far imitate fome of the queftions of the fchools 
as to attempt to fettle what nonexifting things agree or difagree. 
If Y exift, but not X, then y)x is certainly true, but not thence 
X)Y, for when x is, as here, the whole univerfe, the proof of 
y)x=X)Y foils to prefent intelligible ideas, that is, fails to be a 
proof. But Y)x or ,Y. X is true. 

If all my readers were mathematicians, I might purfue thefe 
extreme cafes, as having intereft on account of their analogy 
with the extreme cafes which the entrance of zero and of infinite 
magnitude oblige him to confider. But as thofe who are not 
madiematicians would not be interefted in the analogy, and thofe 
who are can purfue the fubjedt for themfelves, I will go on to 
fay that the preceding order is not the natural one. We cannot, 
to ufeful purpofe, laying down the truth of the propofition, y?fy?, 
then proceed to enquire how the non-exiftence of one or both 
terms afFe6ls the propofition. The exiftence of the terms muft 
be firft fettled, and then the truth or falfehood of the propofition. 
The affirmative propofition requires the exiftence of both terms : 



112 On the Syllogifm, 

the negative propofition, of one ; being neceflarily true if the 
other term do not exiil, and depending upon the matter, as 
ufual, if it do exift. 

Let us make the exiftence of the terms to be preceding con- 
ditions of the proportions. The fyllogifm AiAiAi is then as 
follows, 

If X and Y both exift. Every X is Y 

If Z alfo exift Every Y is Z 

Therefore If X, Y, Z all exift Every X is Z, 

As to the concluding terms, X and Z, they remain, as it were, 
to tell their own ftory. Whatever conditions accompany their 
introdudtion unto the premifes, thefe (ame conditions may be 
conceived to accompany them in the conclufion. But the middle 
term difappears : and, not (bowing itfelf in the conclufion, the 
conditions which accompany it muft be exprefely preferved. 
The conclufion then is ' every X is Z, if Y exift' which may be 
thrown into theform of a dilemma, ' Either every X is Z, or Y 
does not exift*. 

But taking X and Z to exift, let us confider the following fyl- 
logifm, as it appears to be^ 

Every X is ( Y, if Y exift) 
Every (Y, if Y exift) is Z 
Therefore Every X is Z. 

If this be not a valid fyUogifnj, what expreffed law of the ordi- 
nary treatifes does it break ? The middle term, a curious one, is 
ftridUy middle : but there is no rule for excluding middle terms 
of a certain degree of Angularity. That it does break, and very 
obvioufly, an implied rule, I grant. And as to this work, the 
rule laid down in Chapter III. is broken in its fecond condition 
(page 50). The two ufes of the word is do not amount to one 
fuch ufe as is made in the conclufion. That X is (conditionally) 
Y which is (on the feme condition) Z, gives that X is (on the 
fame condition) Z. Accordingly, the abfblute conclufion is only 
true upon fuch conditions as give the middle term abfolute ex- 
iftence. 

But it muft be particularly noted that it is enough if this ex- 



On the Syllogifm. 1 1 3 

iftence be given to the middle term by the fulfilment of the 
conditions which precede the entrance of one of the concluding 
terms., The condition of the aft of inference is, that the com- 
panion muft be really made, if the terms to be compared with 
the middle term really exiil, or, which is the fame, if the condi- 
tions upder which they are to enter be fatisfied. The other terms 
being ready, there muft then be a real middle term : and there 
will be, if the mere entrance of one of the concluding terms be 
proof of the exiftence of a middle term ; while, if the other terms 
cannot be brought in, from nonexiftence, there is no occafion to 
inquire about a middle term, for it is otherwife known that the 
comparifon cannot be completed. I will take two concrete 
ififtances, in the firil; of which one of the concluding terms, if 
exifting, is held to furnifh a middle term as real as itfelf, and in 
the fecond of which no fuch fuppofition occurs. Of courfe I have 
nothing here to do with the truth of the premifes. 

Philip Francis, (if the author of Junius), was an accufer whofe 
filence was fimultaneous with a government appointment : an 
accufer &c. reflefts difgrace upon the government (if they knew 
that their nominee was the accufer): therefore Francis (if &c.) 
reflefts difgrace upon government (if &c.). 

Homer (if there were fuch a perfon) was a perfedl poet (if 
ever there were one) : a perfeft poet (if &c.) is faultlefs in 
morals: therefore Homer (if &c.) was faultlefs in morals. 

The firft inference is good, even though we grant that our 
only poflible mode of knowing of the exiftence of an accufer &c. 
is by eftablifhing that Francis was Junius : it is even good againft 
one who fhould afTert that the accufer &c. is a contradiftion in 
terms in every actual and imaginable cafe except that of Junius. 

In the fecond cafe, we put it that the man Homer (if he ever 
exifted ; fome critics having contended for the contrary) was a 
perfefl: poet, if ever there were one. There may never have 
been one ; and then Homer (exiftent or nonexiftent) was not a 
perfeft poet. There is no condition here, which being fulfilled, 
is held to amount to an afTertion that the middle term muft have 
exifted : but the condition of the exiftence of the middle term is 
independent. Accordingly, the fecond inference is not good : it 
ihould be Homer (if &c.) was a perfeft poet, if ever there were 
one : that is, or elfe there never was a perfefl: poet. 

I 



114 On the Syllogifm. 

Thefe points refer to the matter of a fyllogifm, and not to the 
form ; or rather, perhaps, hold a kind of intermediate relation. 

There is another procefs which is often neceflary, in the 
formation of the premifes of a fyllogifm, involving a transforma- 
tion which is neither done by fyllogifm, nor immediately reducible 
to it. It is the fubftitution, in a compound phrafe, of the name 
of the genus for that of the fpecies, when the ufe of the name 
is particular. For example, ' man is animal, therefore the head 
of a man is the head of an animal * is inference, but not fyllo- 
gifm. And it is not mere fubftitution of identity, as would be ' the 
head of a man is the head of z rational animal* but a fubftitution 
of a larger term in a particular fenfe. 

Perhaps fome readers may think they can reduce the above to 
a fyllogifm. If man and head were connefted in a manner which 
could be made fubjeft and predicate, fomething of the fort might 
be done, but in appearance only. For example, ' Every man is 
an animal, therefore he who kills a man kills an animal.' It 
may be faid that this is equivalent to a ftatemcnt that in ' Every 
man is an animal ; fome one kills a man ; therefore fome one 
kills an animal,' the firft premife, and the fecond premife condi^ 
tionalfyj involve the conclufion as conditionally. This I admit : 
but the laft is not a fyllogifm : and involves the very difficulty in 
queftion. ' Every man is an animal ; fome one is the killer of 
a man' : here is no middle term. To bring the firft premiie 
into ' Every killer of a man is the killer of an animal' is juft the 
thing wanted. By the principles of chapter III, undoubtedly 
the copula is might in certain inferences be combined with the 
copula killsj or with any verb. But fo fimple a cafe as the pre- 
ceding is not the whole difficulty. If any one fliould think he 
can fyUogize as to the inftances I have yet given, let him try the 
following. ' Certain men^ upon the report of certain other men 
to a third fet of men j put a fourth fet of men at variance with a 
fifth fet of men,* Now every man is an animal : and therefore 
' Certain animals^ upon the report of certain other animals j &c.' 
Let the firft defcription be turned into the fecond, by any num- 
ber of fyUogifms, and by help of ' Every man is an animal.' 

The truth is, that in the formation of premifes, as well as in 
their ufe, there is a poftulate which is conftantly applied, and there- 
fore of courfe conftantly demanded. And it fliould be demanded 
openly. It contains the dictum de omni et nullo (fee the next chap- 



On the Syllogifm. 1 1 5 

ter), and it is as follows. For every term ufed univerfally lefi 
may be iiibftituted, and for every term ufed particularly, more. 
The fpecies may take the place of the genus, when all the genus 
is fpoken of: the genus may take the place of the fpecies when 
fome of the fpecies is mentioned, or the genus, ufed particularly, 
may take the place of the fpecies ufed univerfally. Not only in 
fyllogifms, but in all the ramifications of the defcription of a com- 
plex term. Thus for 'men who are not Europeans* maybe 
fubftituted ' animals who are not Englifli.' If this poftulate be 
applied to the unftrengthened forms of the Ariftotelian Syllogifm, 
(page 17) it will be feen that all which contain A are immediate 
applications of it, and all the others eaiily derived. 

I now pafe to the confideration of the invention of names, and 
of the diftinftions which are made to exift for the want of it. 

Any one may invent a name, that is, may choofe a found or 
fymbol which is to apply to any clafe of ideas or of objefts. The 
clafs fhould, no doubt, be well defined : but fmall caution is here 
neceffary, for invented words are generally muqh more definite 
than thofe which have undergone public u&ge. They come from 
the coiner's hand as {harp at the edge as a new halfpenny : and in 
procefs of time we look in vain for any edge at all. The right 
of invention being unlimited, and the a£tual flock having been 
got together without any uniform rule of formation, there can 
be no reafon why we Jhould admit any dtJiinSlion which can he ah^ 
rogated by the invention of a name^ fo far as inference is con- 
cerned. I do not difpute that the modes of fupplying the want 
of names may be of importance in many points of view : what 
I deny is, that they create any peculiar modes of inference. 

The invention of names mufl either be by aftually pointing 
out objefts named, or by defcription in terms of other names. 
With the former mode of invention, as ' let this, that, &c (fliow- 
ing them) be called X* we can have nothing to do. As to the 
latter, we may make a fymbolic defcription of the procefs by join- 
ing together the names to be ufed, with a fymbol indicative of 
the mode of ufing them, in extenfion of the fyflem in page io6. 
Thus, P, Q, R, being certain names, if we wifh to give a name 
to everything which is all three, we may join them thus, PQR : 
if we wifh to give a name to every thing which is either of the 
three (one or more of them) we may write P,Q,R : if we want 
to fignify any thing that is either both P and Q, or R, we have 



1 1 6 On the Syllogifm. 

PQ,R. The contrary of PQR is p,q,r ; that of P,Q,R is pqr ; 
that of PQ,R is (p,q)r : in contraries, conjunftion and disjunc- 
tion change places. This notation would enable us to exprefe 
any complication of the preceding conditions : thus, to name that 
which is one and one only of the three, we have Pqr, Qrp, 
Rpq; for that which is two and two only, PQr, QRp? RPq- 
Thus, XY includes the inftances common to X and Y ; but 
X,Y mcludes all X and all Y : accordingly X,Y is a wider term 
than X Y, except when X and Y are identical. As in page io6, 
XY, the term, fuppofed to exift, is XY, the propofition of chapter 
IV ; if we wifh to diftinguifli, we may make X-Y the term, and 
X Y the propofition, the hyphen having its common grammatical 
ufe. Thus, X-Y P-Q tells us the fame as X YP-Q, both mean- 
ing, for inference J no more than that there exift objefts or ideas 
to which the four names are applicable. But the firft tells it 
thus, fome XYs are PQs ; and the fecond thus, fome things are 
Xs, Ys, and PQs. 

With refpeft to this and other cafes of notation, repulfive 
as they may appear, the reader who refiifes them is in one of two 
circumftances. Either he wants to give his afTent or difient to 
what is faid of the form by means of the matter, which is jsafing 
the difficulty by avoiding it, and ftepping out of logic : or elfe he 
defires to have it in a fhape in which he may get that moft futile 
of all acquifitions, called a general idea^ which is truly, to ufe 
the contrary adjeftive term as colloquially, nothing particular^ a 
whole without parts. 

If the difficulty of abftradl aflertion be to be got over, the 
eafieft way is by firft conquering that of abftraft exprei&on, to 
the extent of becoming able to make a little ufe of it. 

Suppofe we afk for the alternative of the following fuppofition, 
' Both X, and either P, or Q and one of the two R or S.' This 
is no impoffible complication : for inftance, ' He was rich, and 
if not abfolutely mad, was weaknefs itfelf fubjefted either to bad 
advice or to moft unfavourable circumftances.' The reprefen- 
tation of the complex term is X {P, Q(R,S)} 5 of the contrary, 

• " Je vous avoue, dit . . . ,, que j'ai cm en devincr quclquc chofe, ct que 
je n'ai pas entendu le refte. L'abbe de . . . . a ce difcours, fit reflexion que 
c'etait ainfi que lui-meme avait toujours lu, ct que la plupart dcs hommes 
ne lifaient guerc autremcnt." 



On the SyllogiffH* 1 1 7 

X, p(q,rs) or x,pq,prs. If not the above, he was either not rich, 
or both not mad and not very weak, or neither mad nor badly 
advifed, nor unfavourably circumftanced. 

When a name thus formed, whether conjunftively or disjunc- 
tively, enters a (imple inference, it gives rife to what have been 
called the copulative fyUogifm, the disjunSfive fyllogifm, and the 
dilemma. The two laft are not well diftinguifhed by their defi- 
nitions as given : the disjunctive fyllogifm feems to be that in 
which names are confidered disjundlively, the dilemma that in 
which propojitions are fb ufed. But a propofition entering as part 
of a propofition, enters merely as a name, the predicates being 
ufually only true ox falfe^ or fome equivalent terms. A propofi- 
tion may only enter for its matter, or it may enter in fuch a way 
that its truth is the matter : in this lafl cafe it is only as a name 
that it is the fubjeft of inference. Thus, ' It is true that he was 
fired at* is ' the affertion (that he was fired at) is a true afTertion.* 
I believe the befl way would be to apply the term disjunSfive 
argument fo as to include the dilemma, marking by the latter 
word (as a term rather of rhetoric than of logic) every argument 
in which the disjun£):ive propofition is meant to be a difficulty 
for the opponent on every cafe, or horn^ of it. 

Whatever has right to the name P, and alfo to the name Q, 
has right to the compound name PQ^ This is an abfolute 
identity, for by the name PQ^ we fignify nothing but what has 
right to both names. According X)P + X)Q==X)PQ^is not a 
fyllogifm, nor even an inference, but only the affertion of our 
right to ufe at our pleafure either one of two ways of faying the 
fame thing inflead of the other. But can we not efFeft the re- 
du£):ion fyllogiflically ? Let Y be identical with PQ ; we have 
then PQ) Y and Y)PQ, and alfo Y)P and Y)Q. Add to thefe 
X)P and X)Q, and we have all the propofitions afferted. But 
we cannot deduce from them alone X)Y, the refult wanted, by 
any fyUogiflic combination of the fix. Nor mufl it be thought 
furprifing that we cannot, by a train of argument, arrive at de- 
monftration of it being allowable to give to anything which has 
right to two names, a third name invented exprefsly to fignify 
that which has fuch right. We might as well attempt to fyllo- 
gize into the refult, that a perfon who fells the meat he has killed 
is a butcher. 



1 1 8 On the Syllogijm. 

I lay ftrefs upon this, to an extent which may for a moment 
appear like diligently grinding nothing in a mill which might be 
better employed, for two reafons. Firft, the young mathema- 
tician is very apt to try, in algebra, to make one principle deduce 
another by mere force of fymbols : and the above attempt may 
{how him what he is liable to! Secondly, I am inclined to fup- 
pofe that the diftinftion drawn between the clafles of fyllogifms 
to which I prefently come, and the ordinary categorical ones, is 
due to what muft be defcribed in my language as a want of per- 
ception of the abfolute, lefs than inferential (fo to (peak) identity 
ofX)P + X)Q,and X)PQ. But all other proportions of the 
kind, however fimple, may be made dedu£):ions. For inftance, 
' if X be both P and Q, and if P be R, and Q^be S, then X is 
both CLand S' is thus deduced: X)P + P)R=X)R, and X)Ct 
+ Q)S=X)S, and X)R + X)S is X)RS. Even P)R + Q)R= 
P,Q)R is deducible; being P)R + Q)R=r)p-|-r)q=r)pq=: 
P,Q)R. Thus it is feen that, as foon as the conjunSfive poftu- 
late is laid down, the identity of the correfponding disjun£):ive 
poftulate with it may be fhown. Next, if X muft be either P 
or Q, or X)P,Q, and if P be always R, and Q^be always S, then 
X)R,S may be deduced from the preceding. 

Firft, that X)P and Y)CLgive XY)PCLcan be deduced; evi- 
dent as it may be, it is a fucceffion of applications. X Y)X + 
X)P gives XY)P,and XY)Y + Y)CLgives XY)Q,and XY)P 
+ XY)Ctis XY)PCLby the poftulate. Next, X)P,Ct is pq)x, 
and P)R is r)p, and Q)S is s)q, whence, as juft proved rs)pq. 
Now, rs)pq-hpq)x=rs)x, which is X)R,S. It will be a good 
exercife for the reader to tranflate this proof into ordinary lan- 
guage. 

I may now proceed to extend this idea and notation relative 
to propofitions of complex terms. The complexity conftfts in 
the terms being conjundlively or disjunctively formed from other 
terms, as in PQ, that to which both the names P and (^belong 
conjunilively ; and as in P,Q^that to which one (or both) of 
the names P and (^belong disjunftively. The contrary of PQ^ 
is p,q; that of P,0 is pq. Not both is either not one or not the 
other, or not either. Not either P nor ^(which we might denote 
by ;P,Q^or •P,Q) is logically ^ not P and not QJ or pq: and 
this is then the contrary of P,Q. 



On the Syllogifm. 119 

The disjun<Elive name is of two very difFerent charadlers, ac- 
cording as it appears in the univerfal or particular form : fo very 
difFerent that it has really difFerent names in the two cafes, 
copulative and disjunSfive. This diflin<9;ion I here throw away : 
oppofing disjunSfive^ (having one or more of the names) to 
conjunSfive^ (having all the names). The disjunftive particle or 
has the fame meaning with the diflributive copulative and^ when 
ufed in a univerfal. Thus, ' Every thing which is P or Q is 
R or S ' means ' Every P and every Q is R «r S/ But P(^ is 
always ' both P and Q^in one/ Accordingly 



Conjunftive 
Disjunftive 



PQR ufes and colleftively. 

P,0,R in a univerfal ufes and diflributively, 
P,Q,R in a particular ufes or disjunftively, in 
the common fenfe of that word. 



'Either P or Q^is true,' is an ambiguous phrafe, which is 
P,Q)T or T)P,Q according to the context. 

The manner in which the component of a name enters, whe- 
ther conjundlivcly or disjunftively, is to pafs as it were for a part 
of the quality of the name itfelf. Thus the contrary of P (con- 
jundlive, as indicated by the abfence of the comma) is ,p (dis- 
jundlive, as indicated by the comma). To tefl this afTertion about 
the mode of making contraries, let us afk what is that of ' one 
only of the two P or QJ' We know it of courfe to be ' both or 
neither'.' The name propofed is Pq, Qp and its contrary is 
(p,Q)(q,P), that is, one of the two p,Q, and one of the two q,P« 
It is then either pq, pP, qQ, or PQ^: the fecond and third can- 
not exifl, therefore it is pq, PQ, as already feen. I need hardly 
have remarked that (P,Q)(R,S) is PR, PS, QR, QS. 

Obfcrve that though X)PQ gives X)P, and that XPQ gives 
XP, we may not fay that XY)P gives X)P, nor that X)P,Ct 
gives X)P. But any disjunftive element may be rejefted from 
a univerfal term, and any conjunftive element from a par- 
ticular one. Thus P)QR gives P)CL and P,Q)R gives P)R. 
Alfo P.Q,R gives P,ciand PQ:R,S gives P:R. All thefe rules 
are really one, namely that PQ is of the fame extent at leafl as 
PQR. This will appear from our rules of tranfpofition prefently 
given,^ 



i 20 On the Syllogtfm. 

Let change from one member of the propofition to the other 
be called tranfpojition. I proceed to inquire how many tranfpo- 
fitions the various forms will bear, and what they are. It will 
however be neceffary to complete our forms by the recognition, as 
a propofition, of the fimple affertion of exiftence or non-exiftence. 
By XU we mean that there are in the univerfe things to which 
the name X applies, and we (peak only of fuch things under the 
name. Accordingly X)U and XU do not differ in meaning. 
By u, the contrary of U, we can only denote non-exiftence ; 
thus X.U or X)u throws the name X out of confideration. 
Thus Y)X=U)X,y ; Y.X= YX)u, &c. To fignify, for in- 
ftance, that X and Y are complements (contraries or fubcon- 
traries, page 75) we have U)X,Y, which our rules will tranf- 
pofe into xy)u, or x.y. 

Having to confider fubjeft and predicate, conjunftive and dif- 
junftive, affirmative and negative, univerfal and particular, we 
muft think of fixteen different forms. Thus the four forms of 
the univerfal affirmative are 

XY)PQ ; X,Y)PCb XY)P,Q ; X,Y)P,Cl 

It will be beft here to negleft the contranominal converfes of 
A and O equally with the fimple converfes of E and I : thus 
XY)PQ may be read as identical with p,q)x,y. There is alfo 
one obvious tranfpofition which we muft not merely negleft but 
throw out ; fince it does not give a refult identical with its prede- 
cefTor. I mean the tranfpofition of M)PQ^into MP)Q,: the 
fecond follows from the firft but not the firft fromi the fecond. 
Alfo the correfponding change of M.P,Q^into Mp.Q, for the 
fame reafon. 

This being premifed, the following are the rules ; — 

Direff tranfpofition is the change from one member to the 
other without alteration of name or junftion : contrary^ with 
alteration of both. 

The convertibles (E,I) allow direft tranfpofition of conjundlive 
elements either way, from fubjeft to predicate, or from predicate 
to fubjeft : and thefe are the only direft tranfpofitions. Thus 
X.YZ=XY.Z, and X-YZ=XY-Z. 

The inconvertibles (A,0) allow contrary tranfpofition of con- 
junflive elements from fubjecl to predicate, and of disjun6liv6 



On the Syllogifm. 



121 



elements from predicate to fubjeft : beft remembered by allow- 
ing SP to ftand for conjunSfive and PS for disjunSfive. And thefe 
are the only contrary tranfpofitions. Thus XY)M=X)M5y 
and M)X,Y=My)X. 

An element that can be rejefted cannot be tranfpofed, and 
vice verfd. Thus X,Y)M gives X)M, and Y cannot be tranf- 
pofed. 

The following table exhibits the varieties of the forms A and 
£, equivalents being written under one another, and converfions, 
contranominal or fimple, oppofite. 



XY)P,Q 


pq)x,y 


XY.PQ. 


PQ.XY 


Xp)Q,y 


Yq)P,x 


XP.QY 


QY.XP 


Xq)P,y 


Yp)Q,x 


XQ.PY 


PY.XQ, 


X)P,Q,y 


pqY)x 


X.PQY 


PQY.X 


Y)P,Q,x 


pqX)y 


Y.PQX 


PQX.Y 


P)Q,x,y 


XYq)P 


P.QXY 


QXY.P 


q)P,'',y 


XYp)Q, 


Q.PXY 


PXY.Q. 


XYpq)u 


U)P,Q,x,y 


XYPQ.U 


U.XYPQ. 


XY)PQ 


p»q)x.y 


XY.P,Q, 


P,Q.XY 


X)PQ,y 


[p,q]Y)x 


X.[P,Q]Y 


[P,Q]Y X 


Y)PQ,x 


[p,q]X)y 


Y.[P,Q]X 


[P,Q]X.Y 


XY[p,q])u 


U)[x,y],PQ. 


XY[P,Q].U 


U.XY[P,Q] 

c 


x,Y)p,a 


pq)xy 


X,Y.PQ, 


PQX,Y 


[X,Y]p)CL 


q)^,P 


[X,Y]P.CL 


Q.[X,Y]P 


[X,Y]q)P 


p)xy,Q. 


[X,Y]Q.P 


P.[X,Y]Q. 


[X,Y]pq)u 


U)xy,P,a 


[X,Y]PQ.U 


U.[X,Y]PQ, 


X,Y)PQ. 


p.q)xy 


X,Y.P,Q. 


P,Q.X,Y 


[x>y][p>q])" 


U)xy,PQ 


[X,Y][P,Q].UU.[X,Y][P,Q] 



If for ) we write (:) in the left hand divifions, and erafe the(.) 
and ufe the hyphens of page 1 15, on the right, we have the tranf* 
pofitions of O and I. And if we write p and q for P and Q^on 
the left, and change the form X)Y into X.y, we thereby change 
the forms of A into thofe of E. If more than two element? 
were ufed, the tranfpofitions would now be perfeftly eafy. 

It appears that there are no lefs than fixteen A forms into 



122 On the Syllogifm. 

which XY)P,Q^majr be varied : the reafon is that both fubjeft 
and predicate are tranfpofibly conftrufted. But XY)PQ (hows 
only a tranfpofible fubjeft j X,Y)P,Q only a tranfpofible predi- 
cate : and thefe have only four forms each. Laftly, X,Y)PQ, 
having neither tranfpofible, has only two forms. By tranfpofi- 
bly conftrufted, I mean capable of having the elements feparated 
by tranfpofition. The whole term is always tranfpofible : that is, 
the complete fubjeft, or the complete predicate, may be looked 
on as conjunftive or disjundlive, at pleafure. Thus in X)Y, if 
we confider this as XU)Y,u, we may make this yU)x,u or y)x. 
So that the ordinary contranominal converfion may be confidered 
as a cafe of the more general rule. Juft as, in arithmetic, a num- 
ber, 5, may be made to obey the laws of ^ + i as + 5, or of ab 

as I X 5. 

Syllogifms of complex terms might be widely varied, even if w^ 
chofe to confider only each firft cafe of the preceding table as 
fundamental. Thus 

XY)P,CL+VW)P,Q=(x,y)-(v,w) AiAT 

would give fixty-four varieties of premifes. I now proceed to 
fhow that the ordinary disjunctive and dilemmatic forms are 
really common fyllogifms with complex terms, reducible to ordi- 
nary fyllogifms by invention of names. 

Example I. Every S is either P, Q, R ; no P is S ; no Q^is 
S ; therefore every S is R. Let S reprefent ' the true propofi- 
tion' (fingular), and let P, Q, R be names of propofitions, and 
this then reprefents a very common form, which would be ex- 
preflTed thus ' either A is B, or C is D, or E is F j but A is not 
B, C is not D ; therefore E is F.' I fay that, where the necef- 
fary names exift, the final ftep of this could not be diftinguifhed 
from a common fyUogifm ; which accordingly it becomes by in- 
vention of names. 

We have S)P,Q,R, whence Spq)R. But S.P and S.Q^or S)p 
and S)q give S)pq, with which S)S combined gives S)pqS. And 
S)pqS + pqS)R=S)R. Let M be the name of what is S and not P 
and not Q, and the thing required is done. Here then is a fyUogifm 
of the ordinary kind, to one premife of which we are led by a 
ufe of the conjunSfive pojlulate (page 1 16) : the neceffity for which 
is the diftinCtion between the clafs we are confidering and others. 
It happens here that two of the terms of our final fyUogifm are 



On the Syllogifm. 123 

identical : for Spq is of no greater extent than S. But the ufe 
made of S)S is perfeSly legitimate. 

ExampU 2. 'If A be B, E is F; and if C be D, E is F; but 
either A is B or C is D ; therefore E is F/ This can be re- 
duced to 

P)R + Q)R + S)P,Q=S)R 

which is immediately made a common fyllogifm by changing 
P)R+Q)RintoP,Q)R. _ 

Example 3. ' From P follows Q,; and from R follows S j but 
Q^and S cannot both be true ; therefore P and R cannot both 
be true.* This may be reduced to 

P)CL+R)S + T.QS=T.PR 
orPR)QS +T.QS=T.PR 

Example 4. ' Every X is either P, Q, or R ; but every P is 
M, every Q is M, every R is M ; therefore every X is M.* 
This is a common form of the dilemma ; it is obvioufly reduci- 
ble to P,Q,R)M+X)P,Q,R=X)M. 

Example 5. ' Every X is either P or Q, and every Q is X/ 
This is wholly inconclufive, and leads to an identical refiilt, as 
follows ; X)P,Q gives Xp)Q, which with Q)X gives Xp)X, 
a neceflary proportion . 

Example 6. If we throw X)R into the form X)R,R, we have 
Xr)R, or ' Every X which is not R is R/ a con tradition in 
terms. But it evidently implies that there can be no Xs which 
are not Rs j and thus alfo we return to X)R, Take ' every X 
is either P, Q, or R ; every P is M ; every Q is M ; and every 
M is R.' Here X)P,Q,R=Xr)P,Q, which with P,Q)M gives 
Xr)M, which with M)R gives Xr)R or X)R. 

Example 7, ' Every X is either P or Q, and onlv one/ This 
gives two propofitions, X)P,Q + X.PQ. Now X)XP,XQ is 
identical with X)P,Q, and this may be looked on as an extreme 
cafe of 

X)P,Q + X)Y=X)PY,QY 
but X.PQ gives XP)q and XQ)p, from which we can obtain 

X)XP,XQ +XP)q + XQ)p=X)p,q 

Hence X)P,Q,+X)p,q=X)[P,Q,][p,q.] 

==X)Pp,Pq,Qp,Qq=X)Pq,Qp 
fince Pp and Qq are fubjeil to X.Pp and X.Qq. All this being 



1 24 On the Syllogijtn. 

worked out in fyllogiftic detail, {hows us that the tranfidon from 
' Every X is P or Q, and no X is both' to ' Every X"is either 
P and not Q, or Q and not P* is capable of being made fyUo- 
giftically. The ihident of logic may thus acquire the idea, 
which fo foon becomes familiar to the ftudent of mathematics, 
of perfectly felf-evident propofitions which are deducible from 
one another, as diftinguiflied from thofe which are not. 

Example 8. ' Every X is one only of the two, P or Q ; 
every Y is both P and Q, except when P is M, and then it is 
neither ; therefore no X is Y.* Here is a cafe in which it is the 
fail of the exception and not its nature which determines the 
inference : M may be anything. This ought to appear in our 
reduftion : and it does appear in this way. From X)P,Q it is 
obvious that X)P,Q,R,S, and fyllogiftically demonftrable from 
X)P,Q, and Xrs)X. Now in the fecond premife we have 

Y)PQm,pqM, or [p,q,M][P,Q,m])y 
or pQ,Pq,PM,QM,pm,qm)y ' - 

from which, by rejeftion, follows pQ,Pq)y. And the firft pre- 
mife is X)Pq,Qp. Whence X)y or X.Y. 

It is not neceflary to multiply examples : I will conclude this 
part of the fubjeft by pointing out that the ordinary propofitions 
X)Y, &c. are, with reference to their inftances, disjun£lively 
compofed : the difference between the univerfal and particular 
lying in the latter being indefinite in the number of its inftances. 
Thus, if there be three Xs and four Ys, the four propofitions 
are, applying the name to each inftance, as feen written at length in 
X,X,X)Y,Y,Y,Y5 X,X,X.Y,Y,Y,Y; (X,X,X)(Y,Y,Y,Y)5 
and (X,X,X):Y,Y,Y,Y. 

The propofition in page 25, is a cafe of the preceding method. 
I leave the reader to {how it, and alfb that the hypothefis is 
{lightly overftated. 

I now come to the forites^ the heap or chain of fyllogi{ins, in 
which the conclufion of the firft is a premife of the fecond, and 
(b on. Take a fet of terms, P, Q, R, S, &c. and let the order 
of reference be PQ, QR, RS, &c. Then AiAiAiAi &c. is a 
forites, and the only one ufually confidered : thus, 

P)Q+Q)R+R)S+S)T=P)T 



On the Syllogijtn. 125 

The firft two links give P.)R, which with the third gives P)Sy 
which with the fourth gives P)T, Thus we have link 5 y inter- 
mediate conclujions^ and tl final conclufion. 

A great number of different forites may be formed, under the 
following conditions, 

The firft particular propofition which occurs, be it link or 
conclufion, prevents any future link from being particular : for 
all the conclufions thence become particular. 

Examine the cafes of fyUogifm which proceed by the firft 
rule of accentuation (page 92), that is, which have beginning and 
ending both univerial, or both particular : thefe only can occur 
in a forites, except at the end, or in the place where a particular 
propofition firft enters. It will be found that the conclufion, 
when the argument goes on, muft come after fomething con- 
ne£led with that which comes after it by the firft rule of ac- 
centuation : except at the place where a particular conclufion 
comes in for the firft time. For inftance, E|E' gives Ai, which, 
ftill keeping conclufions univerfal, muft be followed by Ai or Ei, 
which follow El hj the firft rule. Again, take OiE', which gives 
Ii ; this muft be followed either by Ai or Ei, which follow E' by 
the feme rule : and fo on. Accordingly, 

Any chain of univerials, in which affirmation is followed by a 
like prepofition, and negation by a different one, as AiAiEiA' 
E'AiEiE', &c. may be part of the chain of a forites. And the 
chain muft be either of this kind wholly, or once only broken in 
one of two ways : either by the direft entrance of a particular 
propofition, or by a breach of the rule. In a chain of this kind, 
unbroken, the conclufions are affirmative or negative, according 
as an even or odd number of negatives goes to the formation of 
them. All the conclufions have the fame accent as the firft link. 

Let a particular premife be introduced, as in AiEiET &c. 
The accent of the particular introduced muft b6 the fame as 
or contrary to that of the firft link, according as the preceding 
number of negatives is odd or even. For the accent of the firft 
link remains as long as the conclufion is univerfal, and a fyllo- 
gifm with the fecond premife particular follows the fecond 
rule. Thus, inferting the intermediate conclufions,* the above is 
AiEi(Ei)E\A,)r(r). And after {V) muft come A' or F, fo 
that the firft rule ftill continues. But the accent of the conclu- 
fions changes. 



126 On the Sylhgifm. 

Now let the rule of accentuation be broken. The accent of 
the conclufton ftill requires the firft rule to be refumed. Thus, 
EiE'(rule unbroken) gives Ai, and EiEi (rule broken) gives T, 
and Ai requires Ai or E| to follow E', while V requires A' or 
E' to follow El. This one breach of rule only changes the con- 
clufion from univerial to particular. The accent of the condu- 
fion changes as before. 

The links of a forites, then, are either a chain of univerfids 
following the firft rule of accentuation, or fuch a chain with one 
breach of the rule, or fuch a chain with one particular inferted, 
of the fame or contrary accent to the firft link, according as the 
preceding negatives are odd or even, and made the commence- 
ment of the refumption of the rule (if broken). In all the cafes 
the conclufion is affirmative or negative according as the preced- 
ing negatives are even or odd in number : the unbroken chain 
has a univerfal conclufion with the accent of the firft link, and 
the broken one a particular with the contrary accent. 



A'E'EiA'E' 
E'A'A'F 



EiA'AiEiFAi 
EiOTO'O' 



A,E,A'0,A'F 
EiEJTO' 



Here are examples of the three kinds. The chain is in the 
firft row, the intermediate and final conclufions in the iecond. 
Thus the fecond example prefents the fyllogifms EiA'Ei, EiAiO', 
O'EiF, TE'O', O'AiO' ; and at length is 

P.Q + R)Q + R)S + S.T+t.u + U(V=V:P 

The forites ufually confidered are only AiAiAi. • . • and 

A' A' A' To thefe might be added without abandoning 

the Ariftotelian fyllogifm, fuch as AiEiA'A'A' . . . ., AiEiA'AiAi 
.... But it would not be very eafy to follow the chain in thought 
without introducing the intermediate conclufions, and thus de- 
ftroying the fpecific charafter of the procefs. 

And juft as the ordinary univerfal fyllogifm can be reduced to 
AiAiAi, fo the univerfal forites can always be reduced to a chain 
of A,. Thus A'E'EiA'E' or 

Q)PH-q.r+R.S + T)S + t.u =p.u 
is u)T +T)S + S)r +r)Q +Q)P=u)P 



V. 



X27 



CHAPTER VII. 

On the Artftotelian Syllogijm. 

FROM the time of Ariftotle until now, the formal inference 
has been a matter of ftudy. In the writings of the great 
philofbpher, and in a fbmewhat fcattered manner, are found the 
materials out of which was conftrufted the fyftem of fyllogifm 
now and always prevalent : and two diftinft principles of exclu- 
fion appear to be a£ted on. Perhaps it would be more corre£fc 
to fay that the followers colleded two diftin£l principles of ex- 
clufion from the writings of the mailer, by help of the afTumption 
that everything not ufed by the teacher was forbidden to the 
learner. I cannot find that Ariftotle either limits his reader in 
this manner, or that he anywhere implies that he has exhaufted 
all poffible modes of fyUogizing. But whether thefe exclufions 
are to be attributed to the followers alone, or whether thofe who 
have more knowledge of his writings than myfelf can fix them 
upon the leader, this much is certain, that they were adopted, 
and have in all time didlated the limits of the fyllogifm. Of all 
men, Ariftotle is the one of whom his followers have worfliipped 
his defefts as well as his excellencies : which is what he himfelf 
never did to any man living or dead \ indeed, he has been accufed 
of the contrary fault. 

The firft of thefe exclufions is connefted with the celebrated 
diSium de omni et nullo^ namely, that what is diftributively afiirmed 
or denied of all, is diftributively afiirmed or denied of every fome 
which that all contains. It is there faid that in every fyllogifm 
the middle term muft be univerfal in one of the premifes, in order 
that we may be fure that the affirmation or denial in the other 
premife may be made of (bme or all of the things about which 
affirmation or denial has been made in the firft. This law, as 
we fhatl fee, is only a particular cafe of the truth : it is enough 
that the two premifes together affirm or deny of more than all 
the inftances of the middle term. If there be a hundred boxes, 
into which a hundred and one articles of two different kinds are 



128 On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

to be put, not more than one of each kind into any one box, 
feme one box, if not more, will have two articles, one of each 
kind, put into it. The common do£):rine has it, that an article 
of one particular kind muft be put into every box, and then (bme 
one or more of another kind into one or more of the boxes, be- 
fore it may be affirmed that one or more of different kinds are 
found together. This exclufion is a iimple miftake, the mere 
fubftitution of the aflertion that none but a certain law of infe- 
rence can exift, for the determination that no other Jhall exift. 
Any one is at liberty to limit the inferences he will ufe, in any 
manner he pleafes : but he may err if he declare his own. arbi- 
trary boundary to be a natural limit impofed by the laws of 
thought. 

The other exclufion may involve, on the (ame terms, an error 
of the fame kind ; or may equally be the expreffion of arbitrary 
will: but there is what is more reafonably matter of opinion about 
it. Ariftotle will have no contrary terms :.not-man, he (ays, is not 
the name of anything. He afterwards calls it an indefinite or 
aoriji name, becaufe, as he aflerts, it is both the name of exifting 
and non-exifting things. If he had here made the diftin&ion 
between ideal and objeftive, he would have feen that man and 
noUman equally belong to both (objectively) exifting and non- 
exifting things : man^ for example, belongs as a name to Achilles 
and the feven champions of Chriftendom, whether they ever ex- 
ifted in objeftive reality or not : and not-man belongs, in either 
cafe, to their horfes. I think, however, that the exclufion was 
probably diftated by the want of a definite notion of the extent 
of the field of argument, which I have called the univerfe of the 
propofitions. Adopt fuch a definite notion, and, as fuiEciently 
{hown, there is no more reafon to attach the mere idea of ne- 
gation to the contrary, than to the direft term. 

The exclufion of contraries throws out the propofitions E' 
and r, or x.y and xy, which cannot be exprefled without either 
contraries, as in x.y=x)Y=y)X, and xy=x:Y=y:X, or refe- 
rence to things not named by X and Y, as in ' Every thing is 
either X or Y* and ' Some things are neither Xs nor Ys,* the 
moft natural readings of 'No not-Xs are not-Ys, and 'Some not- 
Xs are not-Ys.* There remain then fix modes of connexion of 
X and Y, namely X)Y and Y)X, X:Y and Y:X, and XY( = 



On the Ariftotelian Syllogifm. 1 29 

YX) and X.Y( = Y.X). Thefe fix are made eight ; for in the 
common fyftem, XY and YX are confidered as diftindl: in form, 
and alfo X.Y and Y.X. But thefe eight are only treated as 
four : for reference to order is not made in the fimple propofi- 
tion. Thus X)Y and Y)X are both denoted by A, XY and 
YX by I, X.Y and Y.X by E, and X:Y and Y:X by O. But 
the ftandard of order which is negle£led as to the propofition by 
itfelf, is adopted in the fyUogifm in the following manner. 

The predicate of the conclufion is called the major term, and 
the fubje(9: of the conclufion the minor term. This language is 
fafhioned upon the idea of an affirmative propofition, in which 
major and minor have reference to magnitude. In ' every X is Z ' 
Z is a name which entirely contains X and is therefore at leaji 
as great as X, greater than or equal to X. Here is, before it 
was introduced into mathematics, the idea now fo familiar to the 
mathematician, of allowing his language to include the extreme 
limit of its meaning. When the fame terms are applied to 
negative propofitions, the notion of magnitudinal inclufion is 
loft; and major and minor, being ftill retained, muft be pre- 
fiimed to refer to real or fuppofed importance. The premifes 
are called major and minor, according as they contain the major 
or minor term of the conclufion : and the major premife is always 
written firft. Accordingly, Z and X being the major and minor 
terms, there are four poffible arrangements, which are called the 
four figures. Ariftotle gives three, and tradition has it that 
Galen fupplied the fourth in number and order. 

I. YZ 2. ZY 3. YZ 4. ZY 
XY XY YX YX 



XZ XZ XZ XZ 

To me, the moft fimple arrangement is that which takes up 
what was left off with, as in the fourth figure : and ' X is in Y, 
Y is in Z, therefore X is in Z ' is more natural than ' Y is in Z, 
X is in Y, therefore X is in Z.' 

It is now plain, that whenever one only of the three propofi- 
tions is convertible, there are two diftinft ways in which the 
fyUogifm may be written : when two only, four : and when all 
three (if there were fuch a thing), eight. 



1 30 On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

The iyftem rejefts all conclufions which may be made 
ftronger : thus when X . Z follows, it does not allow X : Z to 
make a diftinft form. But when X)Z is the conclufion, it does 
not rejeft ZX, for, not confidering ZX as identical with XZ, it 
does not confider X)Z as a ftrengthened form of ZX. But it 
does not rejedl iyllogifms in which as ftrong a concluiion can be 
deduced from a weaker premife : accordingly, we muft fearch 
for Ariftotelian forms among the ftrengthened fyllogifms of 
chapter V, as well as among the fundamental ones. Now, 
taking all the forms which {how neither E' or T, let us write 
down the fymbols of them, and the number of cafes we may 
expeft from each. Moreover, (ince transformation of order 
makes no difference here, I put the fyllogifms together as in 
page 96, into twelve pairs. 

Fundamental AiAiAi, A'AW, i; O'AiO', A'OiOi, i; 
AiO'0',OiA'Oi, i; E'AiE', A'E'E', rejefted; LAJi, A'lJi, 4; 
E'O'Ii, OiE'Ii, rejeaed ; EiA'Ei, AiEiEi, 4 ; TAT, AJT, re- 
jefted; EiOJ', O'E.I', rejefted; E'EiA', EiE'Ai, rejeaed; 
IiEiOi, EJiO', 4 ; ETOi, rE'O', rejeaed. 

Weakened KiAili^ I. 

Strengthened A'AiL, I ; AiAT, rejeaed ; A'EiOi, EiAiO', 
2 ; AiE'O', E'A'Oi, rejeaed ; E'E'L, rejeaed ; EiEJ', rejeaed. 

There are then fifteen fundamental, one weakened, and three 
ftrengthened, forms of fyUogifm in the received fyftem. I now 
put them down, with their derivations, forms of expreffion in 
full, ordinary fymbols, figures into which they fall, and the magic 
words by which they have been denoted for many centuries, 
words which I take to be more full of meaning than any that 
ever were made. 

Fundamental, 

AiAiAi A'A'A' Y)Z+X)Y=X)Z AAA I Barbara 

O'AiO' A'OiOi Y:Z + Y)X=X:Z OAO III Bokardo 

AiO'O' OiA'Oi Z)Y + X:Y=X:Z AOO II Baroko 

IiAJi A'lJi Y)Z + XY =XZ All I Darii 

— — Y)Z + YX =XZ All III Datifi 

— — ZY +Y)X=XZ lAI IV Dimaris 

— — YZ +Y)X=XZ lAI III Difamis 



131 



EiA'E, A.E,E, 



On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

Fundamental. 

Y.Z + X)Y=X.Z 
Z.Y + X)Y=X.Z 
Z)Y + Y.X=X.Z 
Z)Y + X.Y=X.Z 
Y.Z-fXY=X:Z 

— — Z.Y + XY=X:Z 

— — Y.Z + YX=X:Z 

— — Z.Y + YX=X:Z 

Weakened. 
A,A,I, A'A'Ii Z)Y + Y)X=XZ AAI IV Bramantip 



E,I.O' LE.O. 



EAE 


I 


Celarent 


EAE 


II 


Cefare 


AEE 


IV 


Camenes 


AEE 


II 


Camejiret 


EIO 


I 


Ferio 


EIO 


II 


Feji'tm 


EIO 


III 


Ferifon 


EIO 


IV 


Frejifon 



A'AiIi A'AJi 
A'EiOi EiAtOV 



Strengthened. 

Y)Z + Y)X=XZ AAI III Darapti 

Y.Z + Y)X=X:Z EAO III Fehpton 

Z.Y + Y)X=X:Z EAO IV Fefapo 



The words which repfefent the different moods (as they are 
called) are ufually colleded under their figures in the following 
lines. 

Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris, 
Cefare, Cameftres, Feftino, Baroko, fecundae. 
Tertia Darapti, Difainis, Datiii, Felapton, 
Bokardo, Ferifon habet. Q^arta infuper addit 
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fefapo, Frefifon. 

The Yowck of the different words give the iymbol of the 
fyllogifm ; thus A, A, A, are ktn in Barbara, The confonants 
in the firfl: figure have no fpecial meaning: but in the other 
figures every confbnant except T and N (which are only eu- 
phonic) has its meaning as follows ; — every mood of every figure 
can (with two exceptions) in one way or another, be reduced to 
a mood of the firft figure : and the letters fhow the way of doing 
it. The initial tells to which mood the reduftion brings us : 
thus Cefare is reduced to Celarent, and alfo Cameflres ; Feflino 
is reduced to Ferio, and fo on. The two exceptions are denoted 
by the letter K (as in Baroko and Bokardo) ; we (hall prefently 
notice them further. And S means that the preceding premife is to 
be fimply converted. P, that what was called converfion per acci- 



132 On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

dens is to be made, ZX for X)Z, or X)Z for ZX : accordingly, 
P only occurs in the weakened or ftrengthened fyllogifms. M 
means that the premifes are to be tranfpofed. Thus the meaning of 
the word Difamis is nothing lefs than what follows. ' There is a 
fyUogifm in which the middle term is the fubje£l of both pre- 
mifes, and^hen reduced to the firft figure it becomes Darii: 
the major premife, which muft be converted in reduftion, is a 
particular affirmative : the minor premife, which muft become 
the major one in reduction, is a univerial affirmative : and the 
conclufion, which muft be converted in reduftion, is a particular 
affirmative.* Thus, 

YZ + Y)X = XZ Difamis 
becomes Y)X + ZY =ZX Darii 

The moods Baroko and Bokardo do not admit of reduftion to 
the firft figure, by any fair ufe of the phrafe : but the logicians 
were determined they fhould do fo, and they accordingly hit 
upon the following plan, which they called reduftion per impofji" 
bile. AOO and OAO being the opponent forms (pages 88, 
and 102) of AAA, the two moods in queftion were connefted 
with Barbara (whence their letter B) by fliowing that the latter 
would make the denial of their conclufions force one premife to 
contradidt the other. Thus, Baroko^ or if Z)Y and X : Y then 
X : Z was proved in the firft figure as follows. If under thefe 
premifes, X:Z be not true, then X)Z is true j but Z)Y is true : 
and Z)Y + X)Z, by Barbara^ gives X)Y. But X:Y : there- 
fore, i{ Baroko be not a legitimate form, X)Y and X:Y are both 
true at once, which is abfurd. Had contraries been ufed, 
Z)Y + X : Y=X : Z would have been thrown into the firft figure 
as y)z + Xy=Xz, ^X)^7r/V, or y.Z + Xy=X:Z, Ferio. And 
Y;Z + Y)X=X:Z, Bokardo^ is feen reduced to the firft figure 
in Y)X + zY=zX,Z)^r/7. 

Ariftotle did not ufe the fourth figure, confidering it, as is 
faid, to be only an inverfion of the firft. The introduftion of it 
among the figures is attributed to Galen, and it does not often 
appear in ordinary works of logic before the beginning of the laft 
century. If the order of the premifes be inverted, fo as to make 
the firft figure appear, the major and minor terms will appear 
wrongly placed in the conclufion. The words ufed for dxefc 



On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm . 133 

indire<a moods of the firft figure were ufually the fifth and fol- 
lowing ones in 

'Barbara^ Celarent^ Darii^ Ferto^ Baralip-/^« 
Celantes, Dabitis, Fapefmo, Frifefom-(?r«;w 

the final fyllables in Italics being only euphonic (Frifefmo-orum 
would have been, more correal). Some ufed the words Farefmo 
and Firefmo* 

In calling the jtnoods of the fourth figure by the name of in- 
direft moods of the firft figure, notice was taken of the circum- 
ftance that a tranfpofition of the premifes would give the ar- 
rangement of the firft figure, in every thing but the proper 
arrangement of major and minor terms, which is inverted. A 
little confideration will fhow the reader that the earlier Ariftote- 
lians were wifer than the later ones in this matter. Confider the 
fourth and firft figures as coincident, and the arbitrary notion of 
arrangement by major and minor vanifhes. It was not till this 
mere matter of difcipline was m^de an article of faith that the 
fourth figure had^any ground of feceffion from the firft. 

It might feem as if the union of the firft and fourth figures 
would demand that of the fecond and third : the firft pair con- 
taining all the moods in which the middle term occupies different 
places in the two premifes, the fecond pair thofe in which it has 
the fame place in both. If this were done, each of the two main 
fubdivifions muft be itfelf fubdivided into two. And this would 
perhaps have been the more Ikilful mode of divifion. 

The diftinftion of figures has been condemned by many, and 
particularly by Kant. Whether attacked or defended, it is efTen- 
tial that the true grounds of the fide taken fhould be more ex- 
plicitly ftated than is often done. The root of the diftinftion of 
figure is undoubtedly the diftinft'ion between the two forms XY 
and YX, X . Y and Y. X. It would be equally abfurd, either to 
deny the identity of XY and YX, confidered as material of 
inference, or to deny their difference in many other points of 
view. In this work I am concerned only with what can be 
inferred, and to what extent of quantity, and accordingly the dif- 
tinftion is to me immaterial. But if I had not merely to ftudy 
the way of ufing premifes, but alfo that of arriving at them, it 
might very well happen that the afpe£ls under which the fame 



134 0« the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

inference is feen in difFerent figures would give it very different 
fliades of charafter. A fimple inftance will fliow that though 
the comparifon, and its extent, are all that can be attended to in 
forming the conclufion, thefe points of meaning are not the only 
ones. A perfon who wiflied to conteft the old ufe of the word 
greerty as applied to unripe fruit, would fay that ' fome green 
fruits are ripe,* if he wanted fpecially to fliow the mifapplication 
of the word. But if he rather wanted to fliow the badneis of 
the method of denying ripenefs, he would fay ' fome ripe fruits 
are green.* The propofitions are endlefs in which, X and Y 
being the terms, it is at one time X which is brought to Y for 
comparifon, and at another Y to X. The fubjeft of a propofi^ 
tion is always the objeft of examination ; whether the form be 
X)Y, X*Y, XY, or X:Y, we examine and report upon the Xs. 
If we arrange the four figures feparately, we ftiall better fee 
their feveral peculiarities. 

Firjl Figure, 



Barbara Y)Z + X)Y=X)Z 
Darii Y)Z-fXY =:XZ 



Celarent Y.Z-fX)Y=X.Z 
Ferio Y.Z + XY=X:Z 



What is here declared, is in every cafe the di^hun de omni et 
nullo in its fimpleft form, in a manner which juftifies the prefe- 
rence given to this figure. The middle term being completely 
contained in, or completely excluded from, the major term ; fuch 
incluficMi or exclufion then follows of all fuch part of the minor 
term as is declared in the fecond premife to be in the middle 
term. The inference then is in this fentence ' What is true of 
the whole middle term, is true of its part/ And it is obvious 
that in this figure the major premife muft be univerfal, the minor 
premife affirmative. The four forms are all found among the 
conclufions. I think that the inverfion of the premifes which 
the fyftem of chapter V. employs will be found to give the forms 
which are moft eafily tranflated into language independent of the 
middle term. The fentence ' All (or fome) of the Xs are what 
muft be Zs, therefore all (or fome) of the Xs are Zs' includes 
Barbara and Darii: and ' All (or fome) of the Xs are what can- 
not be Zs, and therefore cannot be Zs,' contains Celarent and 
Ferio. 



On the Arijioteltan Byllogifm. 135 

Second Figure. 

Cefare Z.Y + X)Y=X.Z Camejlres Z)Y + X.Y=X.Z 
Fejfino Z. Y + XY =X :Z Baroko Z)Y + X : Y==X :Z 

In this figure (in which only negatives can be proved) the ap- 
pearance of the diftum is not fo direft. The terms of the 
conclufion are both objefts of examination, and one is wholly 
included, and the whole or part of the other excluded (Celare, 
Cameftres, and Baroko) or one is wholly excluded, and the whole 
or part of the other included (Ceiare, Cameftres, and Feftino). 
Or rather, to juftify the diftin£lion, we fhould fay that the whole 

of the maior term is 1 j j and the whole of the minor 
^ excluded 

• 1 J J which gives or in which the whole of the minor 
mcluded ° Ceiare 

is therefore excluded from the major ; or elfe the whole of the 

. included , _^ r^u • excluded ,.1 . 
maior is 1 j j and part of the minor .111 which gives 
•^ excluded '^ included ° 

P n . in which that part of the minor is excluded from the 

major. And it is evident enough why the premifes muft be of 
different figns. ' 

In the firft figure, though all the forms be eflentially one, 
(page 98,) the reduftion of either to the form Barbara requires 
either the explicit ufe of contraries, or invention of a name fub- 
identical to X, Accordingly, no mood of that figure is reducible 
to any other by the ufually admitted reductions. But this cannot 
be faid of any of the other figures. In the one before us, Cefare 
and Cameftres are identical, even without changing the figure. 
That which is Cefare when X is major and Z minor, is Camef 
tres when X is minor and Z major. In the firft figure, the 
feme attempt made on Celarent or Darii^ removes them into 
another figure. 

Third Figure. 
Darapti Y)Z + Y)X=XZ 



Difamis YZ +Y)X=XZ 
Datift Y)Z + YX =XZ 



Felapton Y.Z + Y)X=X:Z 
Bokardo Y:Z -f Y)X=X :Z 
Ferifon Y.Z + YX =X:Z 



The firft and fecond figures contain a pair of univerfals each. 



136 On the Arijlotelian SyUogiJm. 

with one particular derived from each, by a legitimate weakening of 
one premife and the conclufion at the fame time : but in no in- 
ftance is the quantity of the middle term weakened. And all 
the fyUogifms in thefe two figures are fundamental (page 77). 
In the cafe now before us, both the leading fyUegifms are not 
fundamental, but ftrengthened,. and capable of being weakened in 
two different ways. The middle term is here examined in both 
premifes : if it be wholly included in, or excluded from, one of 
the concluding terms, and wholly or partly included in, or ex- 
cluded from, the other (but not fo that there fliall be exclu- 
fion from both) we have it that the whole or part mentioned in 
one cafe is included in, or excluded from, that which the whole 
is included in, or excluded from, in the other. There can be 
none but particular conclufions. 

Fourth Figure, 
Bramantip Z)Y + Y)X=XZ Camenes Z)Y + Y.X=X.Z 



Dimaris ZY +Y)X=XZ 

Fefapo Z.Y + Y)X=X:Z 
Frejifon Z.Y + YX =X;Z 

We have now one univerfal fyUogifm in a form which does not 
admit of being weakened in this figure^ and two ftrengthened 
fyllogifms, each of which has one weakened form, one of them, 
Bramantip^ admitting a ftronger conclufion in another figure. 
Every conclufion except A appears. The mode of inference of 
the three firft fyllogifms has been defcribed in the other'figures. 
In Fefapo and Frefifon, the perfe£l exclufion of the major term 
from the middle, accompanied by the total or partial inclufion of 
the middle in the minor, fecures the exclufion from the major, 
of as much of the minor as it has in common with the middle. 
I {hall now proceed to the rules ufually given, and to fome 
remarks on the degree in which they apply to the more general 
fyftem in chapter V. Aldrich gives them as follows — 

Diftribuas medium : nee quartus terminus adfit : 
Utraque nee praemifla negans, nee particularis : 
Seftetur partem conclufio dcteriorem j 
Et non diftribuat, nifi cum praemiflTa, negetvc. 



On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. \ 37 

Thefe rules, I need hardly fay, are perfeftly correft, when the 
contraries of the terms are excluded, and alfo all notion of quan- 
tity except all, or the indefinite fome. Taking them in the natu- 
ral order, which veriification has a little difturbed, we have ; — 

1. There are to be but three terms, of which it is underftood 
two only appear in the conclufion, the excluded or middle term 
appearing in both of the premiies. This is true in my fy(lem, 
when by terms are underftood alfo contraries of terms. I fliould 
fuppofe that there can be no objeftion to the admiffion of con- 
traries, unlefe there be one to the conception of a contrary. Any 
one may, with Ariftotle, obje£l to the word not-man, as not the 
name of anything : on the grounds which immediately induced 
him to call it an aorift, or indefinite, name. But it can hardly 
be affirmed that any one admitting not-man as a name, fliould 
thereupon refufe to recognife the identity of ' horfe is not man,* 
with ' horfe is not-man.* 

2. The middle term is to be dijiributed in one or the oth^r of 
the premifes. By diftributed is here meant univerfally fpoken of. 
I do not ufe this term in the prefent work, becaufe I do not fee 
why, in any deducible meaning of the word dijiributed^ it can be 
applied to univerfal as diftinguiflied from particular. In ufing a 
name, it feems to me that we always diftribute : that is, fcatter 
as it were, the general name over the inftances to which it is to 
apply. When I fay fome horfes are animals, I diftribute certain 
horfes among the animals ; and when all, all. Leaving the word, 
the principle is one which clearly muft be true whenever we are 
reftricSled in quantity to all or fome (indefinite), and when con- 
traries are not admitted. In the former cafe we have, in one 
form or another, to make m-\-n greater than v\ (chapter VIII.) 
when we cannot know what relation either morn has to >j, unlefs 
one of them, or both, be equal to r\. We have no alternative 
then, but to require that m or n fliall be r\. The cafes in which 
there is apparently no dependence on v\ will be difcuffed in 
the next chapter. 

But when contraries are introduced, this rule is not univerfally 
true. The exception is feen in 

AiATorX)Y-fZ)Y=xz. 

If all the Xs be Ys, and alfo all the Zs, it follows that there are 
things which are neither Xs nor Zs, namely, all which are not 



138 On the Arijlotelian Syllogifm. 

Ys. It is here, as elfewhere, implied that the middle term is 
not the univerfe of the propofition. 

When we come, then, to ufe contraries, the fimple rule of the 
middle term is no longer univerfally true. What other rule are 
we to put in its place ? We know, of courfe, that every fyllo- 
gifm can be reduced to an Ariftotelian fyUogifm, and even to one 
or other of two among them, AiAi Ai or Ii AJi, or to the firft of 
thefe, if we be at liberty to ufe invention of names (page 97), 
Again, each term, or its contrary, is mentioned univerfally in 
every propofition : fo that there is certainly one way in which 
every pair of premifes may be made to exhibit a middle term 
univerfally ufed in one of them. The rule to be fubftituted for 
the dtjhrihuas medium is, that all pairs of uiiiverfels are con- 
clufive, but a univerfal and a particular require that the middle 
term (hould alfo be a univerfal and a particular, that is, univerial 
in one and particular in the other. Thus, in X)Y + Z)Y, as it 
ftands, the middle is particular in both ; tranfpofe intay)x+y)z 
and the middle is now univerfal in both, by which we fee the 
Ariftotelian conclufion. Again, in X)Y + ZY, which is of the 
fame kind, the tranfpofition gives y)x-fZ:y, which is faulty, 
becaufe, though there be a particular premife, there is not any- 
where a particular middle term. The cafes in which the middle 
is of the fame name in both places (univerfal in four, particular 
in four), are the ftrengthened fyllogifms only. There is nothing 
to be furprifed at in its thus appearing that the particularity of 
the middle term is juft as much a teft of a good fyUogifm as its 
univerfality : of every name and its contrary, one enters univer- 
fally, and one particularly, in every propofition which contains 
it ; and the fyftem in chapter V. is as much concerned with con- 
trary as with direft terms. It is thence vifible beforehand, to the 
mathematician at leaft, that any teft muft be defective, unlefs 
univerfal and particular enter into it in the fame manner. 

The above contains a complete canon of validity, as fbon as 
the law of the three terms is underftood, which is only a law of 
definition. We may ftate it as follows : Two premifes conclude 
— when both are univerfal, always ; when one only is univerfal^ 
fo often as it happens that the middle term (be it Y or y) is once 
only univerfal ; when neither is univerfal, never. By this rule 
alone the thirty-two condufive cafes can be diftinguifhed from 
the thirty-two inconclufive ones. 



On the Ariftotelian Syllogtfm. 139 

3. When both premifes are negative, there is no Ariftotelian 
fyUogifm. In the fyftem completed by contraries, there are eight 
fuch fyllogifms, as many in fa£l, as there are with premifes both 
affirmative. But a pair of negative premifes never conclude with 
both terms of the premifes, but with the contrary of one or 
both : and this muft be fubftituted, as a rule of conclufion, for 
the one juft named. 

4. Both premifes muft not be particular. This rule, which 
relates wholly to quantity, muft be preferved in every fyftem 
which admits no definite ratio, except that of one to one, or 
all (pages 56, 57). I cannot learn that any writer on logic 
ever propounded even the very fimple cafe of ' Moft Ys are 
Xs, moft Ys are Zs, therefore fome Xs are Zs,* as a legiti- 
mate inference. And this, though it is certain that the quanti- 
tative prefix moji (plurimi) has before now excited difcuffion as 
to whether it belonged to a univerfal or a particular. 

5. By feSfetur partem conclujio detertorem it is underftood that 
the negative is called weaker or lower (deterior) than the affir- 
mative, and the particular than the univerfal ; and that the con- 
clufion is to be as weak as negative, or as particular, if there be 
a premife which is negative or particular. This rule muft be 
preferved, when contraries are introduced, fo far as relates to 
particulars. But fo far as negatives are concerned, the rule muft 
be that one negative premife gives a negative conclufion, ind two 
an affirmative one. 

7. The laft line, et non dijirihuat^ nifi cum premijfa^ negetvey 
fpoils the fymmetry to procure a verfe. The conclufion is not 
to be negative without a negative premife : that is, affirmative 
premifes give an affirmative conclufion. Alfo, no term is to be 
diftributively, (/. e. univerfally) taken in the conclufion, "unlefs it 
were fo taken in its premife. A breach of this rule would be 
equivalent to drawing a conclufion about what was not (or about 
mor^ than was) introduced into the premifes. 

When contraries are introduced, the diftinftion between pofi- 
tive and negative is made to appear, what it really is, one of 
language, or rather one of choice of names. But the diftin£lion 
of form is not abolifhed, but is exadlly what it was before. We 
cannot lay down any rules for the formation of the conclufion 
unlefs, in our eight ftandard forms, we preferve the mode of 



140 On the Arijiotelian Syllogifm. 

writing which belongs to the fundamental derivation of the 
forms (page 61). Thus, the order being XY, A' is x)y and not 
Y)X, and O' is x:y and not Y:X. This method of writing 
being reftored, when neceffary, in pages 89 and 91, it follows 
immediately that the rule of accentuation in the notation gives 
the rule by which we determine whether the conclufion takes 
the terms from the premifes, or prefers contraries. According as 
the prepofition of the conclufion agrees with or difFers from that of 
a premife, fo does the conclufion take a term from that premife, 
or its contrary. Thus, A|A|A| takes both terms from the pre- 
mifes, but AiAT takes a contrary from the firft premife only. 
This laft we fee if we write the fyUogifm as X)Y-hy)z=xz. 
Accordingly, we have — 

Syllogifms taking both concluding terms direSf from the premifes. 
Univerfals which begin with A 5 particulars which begin with I : 
eight in number ; being all which ifolate no accent. 

taking the firjl term only from the premife. Univerfals begin- 
ning with E ; particulars beginning with O : eight in number; 
being all which ifolate the middle accent. 

Taking the fecond term only from the premife. Strengthened 
forms and particulars which begin with A : eight in number, 
being all which ifolate the firft accent. 

Taking neither term from the premifes. Strengthened forms 
and particulars which begin with E : eight in number, being all 
which ifolate the third accent. 

This is a new mode of ftating the law of accentuation (pages 
92-3) which I have preferred to place here, for fear of overload- 
ing chapter V. with rules. I have not ftated one half of thofe 
which fuggefted themfelves. This multiplicity of relations is a 
prefumption of the completenefs of the fyftem. 

In the Ariftotelian fyftem, there is multiplication of the fame 
modes of inference, under the varieties of figure. In that which 
I propofe, there is a reduplication of moft of the eflTential cafes 5 
for whatever cafe is found, the fame is alfo found with X and Z 
interchanged, and alfo the order of the premifes. Again, whatever 
cafe is found, it is found contranominally ; or with all the accents 
(or prepofitions) altered. There are other ways (and many of 
them) in which the fyftem is only in one half a duplicate of what 
it is in the other. If all thefe modes of dividing the fyftem into 



On the Arijlotelian Syllogifm. 141 

two correlative parts divided it into the fame two parts, there can 
be no queftion that one alone of thqfe parts fliould have been 
prefented as the objedl of confideration. But this does not hap- 
pen in any inftance : fo that it is impoflible to difpenfe with the 
whole of the thirty-two cafes. The Ariftotelian cafes do not 
form or include any half whatever of this fyftem. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

On- the numerically definite Syllogifm. 

IN the laft chapter I confidered no other quantity in names 
except all and fome : the latter meaning ' one or more, it 
may be all.* To this extent of quantity we are limited in moft 
kinds of reafoning, by want of knowledge of the definite extent 
of our propofitions : and the few phrafes (page 58), as ' moft,* 
' a good many,* &c. by which we endeavour to eftablifh differ- 
ences of extent in ordinary converfation, have been hitherto held 
inadmifSble into logic. In this fcience it feems to have been 
always intended that the bafes on which its forms are conftrufted 
fliall be nothing but the fuppofition of the moft imperfeft and 
inaccurate knowledge. Though in geometry we are permitted 
to aflume as the objedl of reafoning the ideal ftraight line, the 
' length without breadth ' of Euclid, which has no objeftive pro- 
totype, and though we fee the advantage of reafoning upon ideas, 
and allowing the eflential inaccuracies of material application to 
produce no effe£l except in material application, — yet in the con- 
fideration of the pure forms of thought, the learner has always 
been denied the advantage of ftudying the more perfeft fyftem of 
which his inferences are the imperfeft imitation. 

The ordinary univerfal propofitions are of a certain approach 
to definite characSler, both of them with refpeft to their fubjefts, 
and the negative one with refpecl to its predicate alfo. In X) Y 
for example, what is known is as much known of any one X as 
of any other. Perfeft definitenefs would confift in a more exacl 
degree of defcription, and would require a higher degree of know- 
ledge. But in this chapter I fpeak only of numerical definite- 



142 On the numerically 

nefs, of the fuppofition that we know how many things we arc 
talking about. We may be well content to examine what we 
fhould do if we were a ftep or two higher in the fcale of creation, 
if by fo doing we can manage to add fomething to our methods 
of inference in the higheft to which we have as yet attained. 

A numerically definite proportion is of this kind* Suppofe 
the whole number of Xs and Ys to be known : lay there are 
100 Xs and 200 Ys in exiftence. Then an affirmative propo- 
rtion of the fort in queflion is feen in * 45 Xs (or more*) are 
each of them one of 70 Ys* : and a negative propofition in 
* 45 Xs (or more) are no one of them to be found among 
70 Ys/ 

Biit it mufl be particularly noticed that in fpeaking of a num- 
ber of Xs, as 45 Xs, I do not mean certain 45 Xs which can 
be diflinguifhed from all the refl, fo that of any X it is poffible 
to be known whether it belong to the 45 of the propofition, or to 
the remaining 55. This degree of definitenefs is one flep higher 
than that which I here propofe to confider, and which is defcribed 
by * there are 45 Xs which are contained among 70 Ys, it not 
being known which Xs are the 45 Xs, nor which Ys are the 
70 Ys :* or elfe by * there are 45 Xs which are not any of them 
identical with any one of 70 Ys, the precife Xs and Ys in 
queflion being unknown/ 

It cannot of courfe be difputed that if any thing fhould necef^ 
farily follow from any 45 Xs being found among any 70 Ys, it 
will not the lefs follow from our knowing which are the Xs and 
which are the Ys. But this lafl fuppofition only brings uS to 
really univcrfal propofitions. If, there being 100 Xs, 45 of 
them can be fpecifically feparated from the refl, fo as to be 
known, the procefs of feparation is equivalent to putting them 



• Thefe words (or more) fhow that the word definite has reference only 
to the Ith-wer boundary. Of courfe nothing can be fhown in right of ** 45 
or more, perhaps " except what is true in right of the 45. It is defirable 
that as the premifes, fo fhould be the conclufion, of a fyllogifin : this would 
not be the cafe if we ufed premifes definite both ways. For example^ tfafie 
being 100 Ys in exiftence, it will prefently appear that ' ExaSly 55 Ys are 
Xs and exactly 60 Ys are Zs,** though it enable us to fay that ' 1 5 Xs are 
Zs' does not allow us to fay * Exa6Wy 15 Xs are Zs,' but only ^ 15 Xs (or 
more) are Zs.* 



definite Syllogifm. 143 

under a feparate name, fubidentical to X, and the reft, which are 
equally diftinguifhable, under another name, alfo fubidentical to 
X, and contrary of the firft name, when the univerfe is X. 
Whether the name be long or fliort, does not matter, nor 
whether it carry the feparating diftinftion in its etymology or 
not. To feparate in any way inftance from inftance by lan- 
guage, is to name. 

If then 45 definite Xs were known to be contained among 
70 definite Ys, and if thefe Xs were each named M, and thofe 
Ys each N, and if the reft of the Xs and Ys were named P 
and Q, we fhould have the following propofitions, 

M)X, P)X, N)Y, Q)Y, M)N, M.P,.N.Q, 

and all inferences. Moreover, in each cafe, we fliould have the 
total number of inftances which are contained under each name ; 
the numbers carrying with them evidence that every X is either 
M or P, and every Y either N or Q. Subftitute M.N for 
M)N and we have the correfponding negative propofition. 

But if 45 unfeparated and infeparable Xs be fuppofed known 
each to be among 70 fimilarly fituated Ys, there is no immediate 
method of making any other propofition out of the terms X and 
Y except its converfe, that 45 of thefe 70 Ys are 45 Xs, and (if 
the whole number of Ys be known, fay 200) that there are 45 
Xs which are not any one among 200—70, or 130 Ys. This is 
then a fimple propofition, which becomes of a highly complex 
charaAer, when the Xs and Ys named in it are taken as defi- 
nitely feparable from, the reft. I fliall call it the Jimp le numerical 
propofition. 

The diftinftion may be eafily illuftrated by example. " All 
the planets but one' is a particular propofition; it is ^ fome 
planets :' there is no one planet of right included in it. But 
* all the planets except Neptune' is a univerfal propofition : * a- 
planet-not-Neptune' is a name of Mercury, of Venus, &c. ; 
and of every planet it can be ftated whether it be in the name 
or not. That which is true inferentially of * all the planets but 
one' left particular, is true of ' all the planets but Neptune :* 
but that which is true of the latter is not neceflTarily true of the 
former. 

Taking X, Y, Z as the terms of the fyUogifm, | the number 



1 44 0« the numerically 

of Xs in exiftence, u the number of Ys, and f the number of 
Zs, and y the number of inftances in the univerfe, there are of 
courfe fixteen pofSble cafes of knowledge, more or lefs, of thefe 
primary quantities, from all unknown to all known. Of thefe 
fixteen cafes, it will be requifite to confider two only, Firft, 
when the extent y\ of the middle term is known, and all the 
reft unknown ; fecondly, when all are known. The algebraical 
formulae of the latter cafe will enable us to point out how the 
fuppofition of any lefe degree of knowledge would afFe£t our 
power of inference. 

I propofe the following notation. Let »iX Y denote either of 
the equivalent propofltions, that m Xs are to be found among the 
Ys, or that m Ys are to be found among the Xs. Let fwX:«Y 
denote either of the equivalent propofltions, that there are m Xs 
which are not any one among n Ys, or n Ys which are not any 
one among m Xs. 

The fymbol loX is the algebraical fymbol for ten equal Xs 
added together, X being a magnitude: it is then a colle£five 
fymbol. In this work, X being a name, it implies every one 
out of ten inftances of that name, diftributively^ but not collec- 
tively. This diftinftion is very material, not only in this chap- 
ter, but throughout every part of logic, * Every X is Y* is 
diftributively true, when, by * Every X * we mean each one X : 
fo that the propofltion is * The firft X is Y, and the fecond X 
is Y, and the third X is Y, &c.* In this cafe the fubjeft is X, 
and the word every belongs to the quantity of the propofltion. 
But ' every X is Y* is colle^fively true, when we do not mean 
that any one X is a Y, nor that any number of Xs are Ys, but 
that all the Xs make a Y. In this cafe the propofltion v^Jin- 
gular : there is but one inftance of the fubjeft mentioned Jxhat 
fubjeft being, not X, but the coUeftion ' all the Xs.' Thui* the 
ten men are members of a committee* is diftributive : * the ten 
men are a committee' is coUeftive. 

If, in fuch a propofltion as loXY, we were to fuppofe the 
10 Xs fpecifically feparated from the reft, being certain aiSgnable 
ten individuals from among all the Xs, then loX becomes a name 
for each of the ten, as much as X, and may be confldered as a 
univerfal term. And now loXY and {ioX})Y mean the (ame 
things. 



definite Syllogifm. 145 

Let u be known, and u only of the four, i/, |, u, f . The only 
colle£lions of premifes which it is neceflary to confider are 

;wXYh-«YZ 
»iXY + «Z:jY 
»iX:rY + «Z:xY 

Without fome knowledge of the number of ys, of which by 
fiippofition we have none, it would be ufelefs to attempt to draw 
an inference from a pair in which Y and y enter together, par- 
tially quantified, as in »iX Y + «Z : ry. And «Zy merely amounts 
to «Z:>iY. 

The above three are all we need confider : and even of thefe 
the third is incapable of inference, fince both premifes are nega- 
tive, and moreover, not reducible to a pofitive form by ufe of 
contraries, the only way in which negative premifes really acquire 
a conclufion in chapter V. 

Let us firft confider the premifes wX Y -f « YZ. They tell 
us that among the u Ys we find m Xs and n Zs : accordingly, 
neither m nor n exceeds >i. If m and n together fall fhort of u, 
nothing can be inferred : Y is extenfive enough (that is, there 
are inftances enough of Y) to hold the m Xs and the n Zs with- 
out any coincidence of an X with a Z. As to other Xs or Zs, 
we do not know whether they exift ; or, if they exift, we do not 
know that any one of them is a Y. But if m and n together 
exceed 97, it is impoffible that m Xs and n Zs can find place 
among u Ys, except by putting either two Xs or two Zs, or an 
X and a Z, with one of the Ys. Now as by the nature of the 
fuppofitions, there cannot be two Xs, nor two Zs, to one Y, we 
muft have the inference iXZ as often as there are units in the 
excefs oim-^-n over u. That is, 

;7iXY-|-«YZ=(/w + «— u) XZ 

Next, let us take »zXY + «Z:jY. There may be two in- 
ferences, perfe6Uy diftinft from each other, the connexion of 
which can only be explained in the more general fyftem to which 
we fhall prefently come. Firft, let m and s together exceed ij. 
Then m + s — u of the Ys have the common property of being 
Xs, and of being clear of the n Zs. Accordingly, we have 

;wX Y + «Z : j Y = ( w + j— «)X : «Z 

L 



1 46 On the numerically 

Next, let » 4- J be greater than u. Take the s Ys among which 
no one of the n X^ is found. Becaufe «-|-j is greater than u, n 
is greater than u — j, the number of Ys left. Accordingly, 
n — (u — 5) of the n Zs cannot be any Ys, and therefore cannot 
be any of the m Xs which are Ys. Hence we have 

/wXY + «Z:jY=/wX :(«-!- J— >i)Z 

In the appendix to this chapter (at the end of the work) will 
be feen the manner in which all the Ariftotelian fyllogifms can 
be brought under the firft cafe, and the firft* inference of the 
fecond cafe. No Ariftoteli^ fyUogifm can be deduced from the 
fecond inference except what j=>?, in which cafe it agrees with 
the firft. For, when s is not u, we muft, to make liich a fyllo- 
gifm, have »z=»j, and then, to make «Z:xY Ariftotelian, s not 
being ly, we muft have all the Zs in «, or «=f. We thus get 
Y)X + jY:Z, the premifes ofBokardo, But the conclufion is 
iiX:(f+j — >i)Z, that of Bokardo being jX:Z. And this will 
be found to be the only Ariftotelian fyUogifm which has this 
fecond and numerically quantified inference, depending upon the 
number of Zs exceeding the number of Ys unnamed in the par- 
ticular premife. 

I now proceed to fuppofe that all the quantities are taken into 
account. Some preliminary confiderations will be ufeful, as 
follows. 

Let two propofitions be called identical, when, either of them 
being true, the other muft be true alfo : fo that nothing can be 
inferred from the one, which does not equally follow from the 
other. Such propofitions are X.Y and Y.X, fuch are X)Y 
and y)x, and fo on. Again, two propofitions may be identical 
relatively to a third : thus, P being true, Q^ and R may either 
follow from the other ; accordingly, as long as it is underftood 
that P is true, Q^ and R may, relatively to that fuppofition, be 
treated as identical. 

The word identical^ as applied to propofitions^ is here made to 
mean more than ufual, but not with more licenfe than when the 
word is applied to names. Thus, man and rational animal are 

* I was not in poiTefiion of the fecond inference till I had written what is 
in page 157. 



definite Syllogifm. 147 

not identical names, qua names, for they neither (pell nor found 
alike : the identity underftood is that of meaning ; where one 
applies, there fhall the other apply alfo. Similarly, as to propo- 
fitions (of which fubjeft, predicate, and copula are the material 
parts, juft as (pelling and found are thofe of names), identity does 
not confift in famenefs of parts, nor in reducibility to famenefe, but 
in fimultaneous truth or falfehood, fo that what either is, be it true 
or falfe, the other is alfo, in every cafe. Thus two propofitions, 
one of which fignifies that an end has been gained, and the other 
that the fole and fufficient means of gaining it have been ufed, 
are identical. 

All the theory of names^ their application or non^application^ 
may be applied to propofitions^ their truth ox falfehood. To fay 
that a propofition is true in a certain cafe, is to fay that a certain 
name applies to a certain cafe : to fay that it is &lie, is to fay 
that a certain name does not apply, but that its contrary does. 
That contrary is what logicians ufually call contradi£fory : and 
the name is not fimply true or falfe^ but the adjeftive attached to 
the propofition. The conditions under which we are to (peak 
limit us to a number of cafes which conftitute what we may now 
call, not the univerfs of the names in the propofitions^ but the 
univerfe of the truth or falfehood of the propofitions. Thus we 
(hall fuppofe ourfelves now to be fpeaking, not of all inftances to 
which the name U applies, but of all in which the propofition U 
is true^ ot in which the name * true U* applies. A cafe in 
which a propofition P is true may be marked P, one in which it 
is falfe, p. We may now apply the names fubidentical, &c. and 
the fymbols, together with all the fyUogifms, complex and fimple ; 
but on each a remark may be neceffary. 

Subidenticaly identical^ and fuperidenticaU If P be a propo- 
fition fubidentical of Q, that is, if every cafe in which P is true be 
one in which Q is true, but fo that Q is fometimes true when P 
is not, the propofition Q' is ufually mentioned as effential to P, 
and as a neceffary confequence of it. Whenever P is true, Q is 
true ; Q neceffarily follows from P ; if Q be falfe, P cannot be 
true ; Q is effential to P ; are all mere fynonymes. Accord- 
ingly ^neceffary confequent^ and ^ fuperidentical or identical are 
fynonymous terms : that is (page 68), neceffary confequent and 
fuper affirmative. Identity of courfe confifts in each propofition 



1 48 On the numerically 

being true when the other is true. I think that, according to 
general notions, it would be held more juft to fay that a propo- 
fition contains its neceflary confequence than that it is contained: 
but a moment^s confideration will fliow that the latter analogy is 
at leaft as found. If the fecond be true whenever the firft is 
true, it may be true in other cafes alfo : fo that we only fay the 
iecond contains the firft, and it may be more. 

Subcontrary, contrary^ and fupercontrary. It is ufual to call 
' No X is Y * and * Every X is Y ' by the name of contraries, 
and to fey that ' contraries may be both felfe, but cannot be both 
true.* This is a technical ufe of the word : in common lan- 
guage we fbould fay that either a propofition or its contrary muft 
be true ; * have you any thing to fay to the contrary ' generally 
means what a logician would exprefs by putting the word con- 
tradi£fory in the place of contrary. I am compelled to ufe the 
words contrary and contradiftory as fynonymous : at which com- 
pulfion I am well pleafed, never having feen any good reafon 
why, in the fcience which confiders the relations of diSfa^ the 
contraria ihould be any thing but the contra di£fa. The proper 
word for contrary, commonly ufed to exprefs the relation of X)Y 
and X. Y, is fubcontrary. Here are two propofitions P and Q 
which cannot both be true, but may both be falfe : here is a pair 
which can never be afTerted of the fame inftance, and of which, 
in many inftances, neither can apply. In the fame manner, the 
propofitbns X Y and X : Y, ufually called fubcontrary (for no 
reafon that I can find except that they are written under the fb 
called contraries in a fcheme or diagram very common in books 
of logic) fhould be called fupercontrary : they are never both 
falfe, and may be both true. This is a complete inverfion of 
the uiiial propofitions : an inverfion which feems to me to be 
imperatively required, if only my ufe offub znAfuper in Chapter 
IV. be allowed. 

In applying thefe names to propofitions, it muft be remem- 
bered that we make the fame fort of afcent which we make in 
pafHng from fpecific to univerfal arithmetic, in ufing a fymbd 
to ftand for any number at pleafure. For inftance ; — Perh^ 
it may be thought that X Y and X : Y may fometimes be only 
contraries, and not fupercontrarie^, becaufe there may be names 
which make one only true and not both. But this is not corred : 



definite Syllogifm. 149 

for we are confidering the propofidon itfclf as an inftance among 
propofitions^ not the propofition as flibdirifible into inftances, in 
which name is compared with name. In (peaking of propo- 
fitions, it is change from ufe of one name to ufe of another, or 
from ufe of one number to ufe of another, which is change of 
inftance : not change from one inftance of name to another. 
And juft as in a univerfe of names, every name introduced is 
fiippofed to belong, or not to belong, to every inftance in that 
univerfe : fo in a univerfe of propofitions, I fuppofe every propo- 
fition, or its contrary, to apply (whether it be or be not known 
which applies) in every inftance. We have never confidered 
fuch a thing as the univerfe U, in which there are cafes in which 
neither X nor x applies : we liippofe there is always a power of 
declaring that the name X muft either belong or not belong 
to each inftance. In like manner, all the propofitions in each 
univerfe now confidered, are fuppofed to be connected with all 
the names in queftion : fo that X, Y, being two of them in their 
order of reference, Ai or Oi is true in each cafe, and A^ or O', 
El or L, and E' or P* We might, if we pleafed, enter upon a 
wider fyftem. For though we cannot imagine of any obje£l of 
thought, but that it is either X or not X, be X what name it 
may, yet we can imagine of propofitions that they may be wholly 
inapplicable, as being neither true nor &lfe. The firft afierdon 
is all the more true, that it could hardly be exemplified without 
exciting laughter : as I fliould do if I reminded the reader that a 
book is either a cornfield or not a cornfield. We have never 
confidered names under more predicaments than two; never, 
for inftance, as if we were to fuppofe three names X^, Xj, X3, of 
which everything muft be one or the other, and nothing can be 
more than one. But we ftiould be led to extend our fyftem if 
we confidered propofitions under three points of view, as true, 
falfe, or inapplicable. We may confine ourfelves to fingle alter- 
natives either by introducing not-true (including both falfe and 
inapplicable) as the recognized contrary of true : or elfe by con- 
fining our refults to univerfes in which there is always applica- 
bility, fo that true or falfe holds in every cafe. The latter hypo- 
thefis will beft fuit my prefent purpofe. 

This digreffion is fomewhat out of place here, but I have 
preferred to retain the matter of it until I had occafion to ufe it. 



1 50 On the numerically 

I now proceed to affert that the fimple numerical propofition 
has no occafion for a numerically definite predicate. Let us 
confider firft an affirmative propofition, lay * Of lo Xs, each 
is to be found among fome 15 Ys/ Of courfe it is fuppofed 
there are 15 or more Ys in exiftence. With this let us compare 
* 10 Xs are to be found among the Ys.* Thefe two propofitions 
are identical : if 10 Xs be among 15 Ys, there are 10 Xs among 
the Ys : and if 10 Xs be among the Ys they are certainly 10 
Ys 5 put on 5 more Ys at pleafure, and'they can be faid to be 
among 15 Ys in juft as many ways ^ we can choofe 5 more Ys 
to make up the 15. Note, that if the 10 Xs were among certain 
fpecified 15 Ys, then, though the firft propofition would give the 
fecond, the fecond would not neceflarily give the firft. But we 
are now fuppofing that numerical feleftion is only numerically 
definite : definite as to the number, not as to the inftances which 
make up that number. When therefore we lay * 10 Xs are 
among 15 Ys' we lay neither more nor lefs than when we lay 
10 Xs are among the Ys.* It is in fa£l ' 10 of the Xs are 10 
of the Ys' and the converfe ' 10 of the Ys are 10 of the Xs' is 
the fame propofition. 

Now let us take a negative propofition, * 10 of the Xs are not 
to be found, any one of them^ among fome 15 Ys,' abbreviated 
into * 10 Xs are not in 15 Ys.' If there be 25 Ys in exiftence 
this propofition muft be true ; mean X and Y what they may. 
It is as true as that the X which is one Y is not any other Y. 
Say there are 25 or more Ys : take any 10 Xs you choofe, and 
put them down on any 10 Ys you choofe. Then certainly 
there are 15 Ys left, no one of which is any of thofe 10 Xs. 
Again, if there be 25 Xs in exiftence, ftill the propofition muft 
be true. For if the 15 Ys were all there are, and they were all 
Xs, there ftill remain 10 Xs which are not any one in the 15 Ys. 
Accordingly, the propofition ' m Xs are all clear of n Ys,' when- 
ever either the whole number of Xs, or the whole number of 
Ys, exceeds m + n^ fays no more than is conveyed in our perma- 
nent underftanding that no obje£l of thought can be more than 
one X or one Y. But let it be otherwife ; let neither Xs nor 
Ys be as many as wx + « in number. Say there are 20 Xs and 
23 Ys and let 10 Xs be clear of 15 Ys. There muft now be 
at leaft 154-10—20, or 5 Ys which are no Xs at ally and at 
leaft 15 4- 10—23, o*" 2 Xs which are no Ys at all. Fu-ft, it is 



definite Syllogifm. 151 

plain that there are no 10 Xs among thofe Ys which are clear of 
15 Ys : for there are but 23 Ys in all. Therefore, 2 at leaft 
of thefe 10 Xs muft be Xs which are not Ys: which with 8 
Xs that may be Ys, will be clear of the remaining 15 Ys. 
Therefore 2 Xs at leaft are not Ys. Again, there are no 15 
Ys among thofe Xs which are war of 10 Xs, for there are but 
20 Xs in all. Five Ys which are not Xs muft exift, which 
with 10 that may be Xs, will be clear of the remaining 10 Xs. 
Accordingly, if the whole numb^ of Xs be J, and the whole 
number of Ys be >i, the propofition * there are m Xs which are 
no one to be found among n Ys' is effentially true of every cafe of 
that univerfe, whenever »z + « is lefs than either ^ or u. But 
when m-\-n IS greater than both ^ and >i, there are two propo- 
fitions, neceflarily involved, which are not effentials of all cafes 
of that univerfe : namely, that there are /« + «— g Ys which are 
not any Xs, and /w-f «— >i Xs which are not any Ys. 

But, it may be afked, if n ihould be lefs than ^, and m-^-n 
greater than », but ftill lefs than ^, may we not affirm that 
»z + «— u Xs are not Ys? Undoubtedly we may, but then we 
do not affirm fo much as already belongs to every cafe of the 
univerfe. For if ^ be greater than u, no more than u Xs can be 
Ys, and there are left ^— u Xs which cannot be Ys : and ^— ly 
is, in the cafe fuppofed, more than »i4- «.—»». 

Let V be the number of inftances in the univerfe, J and u being 
the number of Xs and of Ys. The following ufes of the notation 
will be readily feen to exprefs preceding refults, or others imme- 
diately deducible. 

^ greater than r\ (^— u)X :>|Y or (5— i)Xy 

u greater than g (»»— 5) Y : |X or (u— ^JYx 

m + n greater than ^ and than u gives 

;«X:«Y=(w + «-i,)X:iiY=(w + «-H)Y:HX 

X)Y=gXY =((;->j)yx =gY:(i;-|)x 

X:Y=w2X:>jY =mXy =my:(i/— 5)x 

Y)X =>,XY =(i;-|)xy =i,X:(i/-i,)y 

Y:X=mY:lX '=mYx =;«x:(i/->,)y 

Y.X=gXy =„Yx =gy:(i/-yx =„x:(i/-„)y 

XY =;wXY =;wX:(i/-»,)y=mY:((;~g)x 
x.y =(i/-|)xY =(i;->,)yX =(i;-5)Y:|X =(i;-.>,)X:i,Y 
xy =mxY =:»ix:uY =wy:JX 



Ai 
Oi 
A' 
O' 
Ei 
L 

r 



152 On the numerically 

I now examine the modes of contradifting »iXY and »iX : « Y. 
As to the firft, it is obvious that {m always meaning that m are, 
but that more may be) either m or more Xs are Ys, or elfe 
^— m+i or more Xs are not Ys. The contradidlion then is 
either of the equivalents 

(g-.;„+i)X:i,Y and(u-w+i)Y:gX 

It will be fatisfe6lory to evolve the contradiftion of mX. : « Y 
by a method which wfll again demonftrate the cafes in which no 
contradiftion exifts ; or in which the propofition is always true. 
Let us put the two names in the leaft fevourable pofition for 
making mXinY true. Let^ then be the number of Xs which 
are not Ys, all the reft being Ys. Take the p Xs which are not 
Ys {p muft not be fo great as m^ for then the propofition is 
made good by the Xs which are not any Ys) and m-^p from 
thofe which are Ys. All the m Xs thus obtained are clear of 
n—{m-^p) or n^m+p Ys. Let this juft be n : that is, let 
p=zm-\'n^n. Then ^— ^, the number of Xs which are Ys, is 
J— (»z4-«— >j) or i^ + Yi'-m—n. Let but one more X be Y, 
and the propofition begins to be contradidled : for now »i + »— 
u— I Xs are not Ys, we muft take up u + 1 — « of thofe which are 
Ys to make m Xs, and there only remain u— (>»+ i— «) or « — i 
Ys clear of the m Xs. And it is plain that if we cannot do it by 
ufing firft all the Xs which are not Ys at all, ftill lefs can it be 
done by ufing thofe which are. Accordingly the contradidlion of 
mXinY is 

{i^ + r,^m^n+ l)XY 

Then, in order to have a propofition which can be contra- 
di£ted, m + n muft be greater than ^, or equal to J+ 1 at leaft, 
for otherwife ^-f>j— m— «-f-i would be greater than u, or more 
Ys than n muft be Xs, which is abfurd: and fimilarly /» + » 
muft be greater than n, Otherwife, all contradiction is abfurd, 
or mX : « Y is always true. 

Afliiming thefe laft conditions, however, the contradi£tion of 
mX : nY is made eafier. To be capable of contradiftion, it muft 
amount to (/w + « — »j)X : »jY. Now when »« + « — >i Xs are not 
Ys, and no more, ^4-»»— »^— » Xs are Ys. One or more 



definite Syllogifm. 153 

above this, or let (5+u— »«— «+ i)XY, and mXinY cannot be 
true. 

Thus much for contradiftoiy or contrary propofitions, I 
fhall prefently confider the contranominal propofitions. 

We muft guard ourfelves from prefcribing the ufe of any premife 
which neceflarily belongs to all cafes in the univerfe (of propo- 
fitions). Let P be a propofition which may or may not be true, 
laid down as a premife, and Q a propofition which is true in 
every cafe. Let R be their neceffary confequence, or legitimate 
inference : then it is not * whenever P and Q are true, R is 
true,* but * whenever P is true, R is true/ So fer as R is a con- 
fequence of Q, lb far it is a confequence of every thing which 
neceflarily gives Q ; and thus it is a confequence of the fuppofed 
conftitution of the univerfe from which the propofitions are 
taken. Now this conftitution is always underftood ; it may be 
a convenience that R fhould be.deduced by firft deducing Q, but 
it cannot be a neceflity. And R is a confequence of P and this 
conftitution, not of P and Q. 

For example, let the univerfe of propofitions be all that can 
be formed out of the fuppofitions of the exiftence of 20 Xs, and 
30 Ys, and 40 Zs, in one univerfe of names. Let us join to- 
gether 15XY and loZ : 20Y. Our rules of inference will pre- 
fently fhow us, that 5X : loZ is the neceflary confequence of 
thefe premifes : but this refult is not only true when 15XY is 
true, without anything elfe, but even without that; becaufe 
5 + 10 f5dls fhort of 40. 

Again, we muft guard ourfelves from adopting the conclufion 

which follows from premifes, when that conclufion is true in all 

cafes by the conftitution of the univerfe : it is then a fort of 

fpurious* conclufion, legitimate enough as an inference, but of a 

perfe6Uy diftin£t charafter from inferences which would bear 

• To this word, as here ufed, I have heard much obje6Uon ; and wheh I fii-ft 
took it, it was unwillingly, and for want of a better. But on further confi- 
deration I am well fatisfied with it. The obje6Uon arifes from the idea of 
ialfe or worthlefs being generally attached to the word. But, though it may 
be ufual for fpurious things to be worthlefs, it is not neceffary. If a London 
maker of razors fhould put the name of a great Sheffield houfe upon them, 
thofe razors would be fpurious. Suppofe them as good as thofe of the Shef- 
field maker, or better, they are flill fpurious : though it may be true enough 



154 On the numerically 

doubt but for the premifes, or would bear contradiftion under 
other premifes. Say that in the above univerfe we join the pro- 
pofitions 15XY and 30Z : 20 Y. Both thefe propofitipns are 
capable of contradiftion : the fecond is 20Z : v\Y (u means 30, 
but the fymbol reminds the reader that 30 is all) or 10 Y : ^ 
{i being 40).. Now, by laws of inference, 15XY + 30Z : 20 Y 
yields 5X : 30Z, which is always true in that univerfe. 

Here is a cafe in which premifes capable of contradiftion give 
a conclufion which is not. 

The rule of inference is obvioufly as follows. We cannot 
fliow that Xs are Zs by comparifon of both with a third name, 
unlefs we can afEgn a number of inftances of that third name, 
more than filled up by Xs and Zs : that is to lay, fuch that the 
very leaft number of Xs and Zs which it can contain are together 
more in number than there are feparate places to put them in. 
If our premifes, for example, feparate fome 30 Ys, and didlate 
that among thofe 30 Ys there muft be 20 Xs and 15 Zs, it is 
clear that there muft be at leaft 5 Zs which are Xs. For if we 
put down the 20 Xs which are to go in, and try to put the 
Zs into feparate places, we are ftopped as foon as we have filled 
up the 10 remaining out of the 30 Ys, and muft put the other 
5 Zs among the Ys which have been made Xs. Accordingly, 
fo many Xs at leaft muft be Zs as there are units in the number 
by which the Xs and Zs to be placed, together exceed the num- 
ber of places for them. All the other rules of inference are 
modifications of this. For example, to prove that 10 Xs are not 
Zs, we muft fliow fome number of inftances (be they Ys or ys, 
or part one and part the other) overfull (in the above fenfe) of 
Xs and zs, to the amount of 10 at leaft \ fo that 10 Xs are zs, 
or are not Zs. To prove that fome xs are ys, we muft {how a 
number of inftances in which the leaji numbers of xs and zs 

that the chances are rather in favour of their refembling the ware of Peter 
Pindar's hero. In this work, a fpurious inference is that which pafles for 
the confequencc of certain premifes, but does not in reality follow from 
thofe premifes any more than from an infinity of others : being true by the 
conftitution of the univerfe. It is made to have the mark of thofe premifes, 
when in truth we cannot know whether thofe premifes be poflible or not, 
until we have firft examined a conftitution which virtually contains our con- 
clufion. 



definite Syllogifm. 155 

which it can contain, overfill it, or in which the greateji number 
of Xs and Zs which it can contain underfill it, or do not fill it, 
though made completely feparate. 

In examining the fundamental laws of fyUogiftic inference, it 
is not neceffary to confider any thing but the pofitive forms. 
For mXinY, when not fpurious (and we fliall fee that the 
fpurious cafes may be rejefted) is (»i + «— >j)X:>jY, which is 
(fw-fw— >?)Xy or (/w-fw— |)xY. There are, then, but two 
fundamental cafes : one in which the predicates are the fame, 
one in which they are contraries. We fliall accordingly have to 
confider 

mXY H- nZY and mXY H- «Zy : 

and it will prefently appear that not more than one, even of 
thefe, is abfolutely neceflary. In each cafe we muft a(k, what 
colleftive inftances of Y or of y, or partly of one and partly of 
the other, receive any dilation as to how they are to be filled 
with Xs, with xs, with Zs, or with zs : and what is the leaft 
number of each which can be allowed to every fuch coUeftion. 
But there is yet fomething to do, fuggefted by the preceding 
remarks. Let us take one propofition, a type of all we fliall 
have to confider, fay mXY. This means that XY is true to at 
leaft m inftances. Now, this propofition may involve Xy, or 
xY, or xy. Firft, as to Xy. To get the leaft number of Xs 
among the ys, we muft put the greateft number among the Ys. 
If all the Xs will go among the Ys (or if u be greater than or 
equal to |) there need be no Xs among the ys : but if not (or if 
71 be lefs than |) then |— u Xs muft be among the ys, in every 
cafe. Accordingly 

mXY gives (|— w)Xy 

where by |— u underftand o, not only when | is equal to >?, but 
when it is lefs. This refult is fpurious, fince it is true or falfe, 
by the mere conftitution of the univerfe, independently of mX Y,^ 
Secondly, as to xY. Since mXY is equally »zYX, the lame 
reafoning fliows that 

mXY gives (u— |)xY 

where u— | is to be underftood in the fame way. This refult is 
alfo fpurious for a like reafon. 



156 On the numerically 

Thirdly, as to xy. Since there muft be m Xs among the Ys, 
the greateft poffible number of xs is d— ;?<. If this be as great 
as i;— I, the whole number of xs, there need be no xs among 
the ys : but if >i— wx be lefs than i/— 5, there muft then be at leaft 
I/— I— (>?— »i) xs among the ys, or y+m— |— >j. Confequently 

wXY=(y+OT— )?— I) xy. 

I here put the fign = becaufe thefe proportions are really equi- 
valents. Treat the fecond in the lame way as that which de- 
duced it from the firft, and we have 



(i/ + W2— u— |)xy=(y + i; + »i— u— I — i/— u — i/— |)XY 

=;7iXY 

\{ U'\-m be not greater than u + lj the equivalent does not exift. 

We are already well acquainted with one cafe of this propofition. 

Let OT=|: then wXY is X)Y and the equivalent becomes 

(y— >j)xy, which, as i/— >i is the whole number of ys, is y)x. 

The rule is, if two names have a certain number of inftances 

at leaft in common, to the whole number in the univerfe add 

that number of inftances, and fee if the fum exceed the whole 

number of inftances of both names together. If it do fo, the 

excefs fliows the leaft number of inftances which the contraries 

of thefe two names muft have in common. Follow this rule, 

and we have 

wXY=(i/ + OT— u— I) xy 

OTxY =(| + /w— >j)Xy . 

ntjLy =(»j+OT— |)xY 

fwxy =(|4- u + OT— i/)XY 

Here are exhibited the equivalent contranominal forms. The 
following refults may now be deduced. 

Firft, thefe contranominals being formed in the lame way, 
each from the other, in any one pair, whatever we prove of the 
firft from the fecond, we alio prove of the fecond from the firft. 
, The mathematician would call them conjugate pairs. Next, fince 
all the four pairs are but verfions of the firft, with difference of 
names, whatever we prove univerlally of the firft pair, we prove 
of all. Now, taking the firft of any pair and making it poffible, 
which is done by allowing m not to exceed the number of either 
of the names mentioned, the fecond may be poffible or impoffi- 



definite Syllogifm. 157 

ble, according as the fubtradHon indicated can be done or not. 
But whenever the fecond is impojjible^ the firfl is fpurious. Take 
»2XY, and let (i;+/w— |— )))xy be impoffible, or u-^-m (and ftill 
more v) lefs than l-fu. Now as all the | Xs and r\ Ys muft find 
place in the v inftances of the univerfe, and | + >j exceeds i/, we 
muft, in every cafe of the univerfe of propofitions, have at leaft 
(l4->i— v)XY. But v-k-m is lefs than | + >? or ! + »»—«' greater 
than m : confequently, mXY is fpurious, a larger propofition 
being always true. 

As we are not to admit fpurious propofitions among our pre- 
mifes, we had better write all premifes double, putting down each 
of the forms, and making double forms of inference. The pre- 
fence of the fymbols of all neceflfary fubtraftions will remind the 
reader of the fuppofitions which muft be made, to infure a legiti- 
mate fyUogifm. I now take the feveral forms. 

m XY n ZY^ (;7i4-«->i)XZ 

(i;4-»2-- l-^»j) xy "^(i;4-«— f— >i) zy (i;4-»2 4-«— i— I— O^z 

The law of inference here tells us (page 154,) that m-^-n being 
greater than u, (»i -|-«— >i)XZ, be it fpurious or not, follows from 
the upper premifes. The lower premifes alfo give their inference 
if 

(y-|-»z— I— >j) + (y+«— f— u) be greater than i;— u 

v-^vi being the number of the ys. This laft is equivalent to fay- 
ing that i;+w2 + « is greater than | + >? + f. Firft, remark that 
one fpurious premife neceflarily gives a fpurious conclufion. Say 
that i/ + m is lefs than ! + >?, or that mXY is fpurious. Then, 
fince y-f »2 is lefs than | + >j, and n does not exceed f, it follows 
that v^m-\'n is lefs than l + w + f ; whence the contranominal 

of the conclufion does not exift, or the conclufion is fpurious, as 
aflerted. 

Next, obferve that the conclufion may be fpurious, though 

neither of the premifes be fo. For though v + m be greater than 

l + u, and 1/4- « than f-|->?, and therefore 2y+OT + « greater than 

| + f+2>i, or i/ + fw + « + (y— >j) greater than u + | + f, it by no 

means follows that v-^m + n alone is greater than u + | + f. . It 

is alfo vifible in the mode of formation of the fecond inference, 

that to (ay y + Tw exceeds |4-»J> and v + n exceeds f + »Jj only gives 



158 On the numerically 

exijience to the premifes : to give them conclufion, the fiim of 
the two exceffes muft itfelf exceed i/— >j, the whole number 
of ys. 

Thirdly, we muft not omit to examine the poffible cafe in 
which a premife is partially fpurious. For example, there are 10 
Xs and 20 Ys in a univerfe of 25 inftances ; accordingly, 10 -f- 
20—25, or 5, of the Xs muft be Ys. Let one of the premifes be 
8XY : this is not then all contingent, and capable of contra- 
diftion ; we only learn fdmething about 3 out of the 8 Xs, And 
I call this propofition partially fpurious. But it will give no 
trouble : for we muft deal with the premifes and their contra- 
nominal equivalents before we can pronounce for a. conclufion; 
and of two propofitions which are contranominal equivalents of 
each other, one mujl be partially fpurious. To fliow this, obferve 
that if triKY be not partially fpurious, it is becaufe u is greater 
than |-|->j; or 2v than l + u + i/j or (v— |) + (i/— >i) than v. But 
then the numbers of xs and ys together exceed the whole num- 
ber of inftances in the univerfe ; whence feme xs muft be ys, or 
the contranominal equivalent of niXY is partially {purious. 

Now, to write down the various forms of inference. There 
are fixteen ways of trying for an inference : we may combine a 
propofition in X Y, or xy, or xY, or Xy, with one in XZ, or xz, 
or xZ, or Xz. But thefe fixteen cafes really combine four and 
four into only four diftinft cafes. Thus the one we have been 
confidering, really contains the combinations of XY and YZ, 
X Y and yz, xy and YZ, and xy and yz. It is in our power to 
make either pair the principal pair, and to give the other pair as 
contranominals of the firft pair. 

Thus, we may write the cafe of inference we have been con- 
fidering, as in the firft of the following lift, the others being ob- 
tained from the firft, by changing X into x, or Z into z, or both. 
The fign -f placed in the middle implies the coexiftence of the 
four propofitions : and independent numeral letters are introduced 
as feen, which will prefently be connefted with the others by 
equations, inftead of being exprefled in terms of them. 



mXY 



_, «YZ \ ^ ipXZ 
' «'yz J 1^'xz 



The equations prefently given for 
this cafe apply with certain changes 
to the other cafes. 



definite Syllogifm. 



mxY 1 «YZ) 

w'Xjr "'"«'yz j 



mXY . »Yz 



(pxZ 

yxz 



mxy 



+«'yz} = { 



*Xz 
p'xZ 



mxY j^«Yz 1 
w'Xy+n'yZj 



f/.xz 
t^'XZ 



Here X and x are made to change 
their former places : in the equa- 
tions, I and I' muft change places. 

Here Z and z change places : 
muft i and ^' in the equations. 

Here X and x, and alfo Z and z, 
change places ; as muft | and |', 
and ( and {', in the equations. 



as 



In the new manner of writing the form we have already con- 
fidered, being the firft of the four, we have juft written 

;«' for y + ;w— I— u • p for m-i- n ^n 

»' fory+»— f— » . ^'for t/ +;« + »— >j—|—f 

Let us write |', rj\ i\ for i/—|, tz—u, y— f, the numbers of xs, 

ys, and zs : and then, | + |', v^n\ f + ^', being all the fame, (for 
each is u) we may write u— |' for I— >j', ^'~| for I'— f, and fo on. 
That is, in the difference of two, one of which is accented, we 
may interchange, the letters if we pleafe. The equations of con- 
ne£bion for the firft or ftandard cafe, are then 












pz=m + n^ 



or ;w' + «' + l— V'- 
or m'+«'+f— I*— 







ormH-«H-|' 
or ;« + « + {'¦ 









I 



For the fecond cafe we muft write ;w'=mH-|— )i=:»2 + >7'— I*, 
and fo on. I now proceed to the feveral divifions into which 
our ufual modes of thinking make it convenient to feparate the 
cafes of this moft general form. 



1 60 On the numerically 

Firft, when every thing is numerically definite. In this cafe, 
as feen, every form requires an examination of the premifes and 
conclufion, as to whether they are or are not (purious. 

Secondly, when t/, the number of inftances in the whole uni- 
verfe of names, is wholly unknown. In this cafe I* is indefinite 
when I is definite, and vice verfd ; and fimilarly one at leaft of 
each two, » or u', f or 4"', is indefinite. There are then no Ipu- 
rious conclufions ; or, which is the fame thing, none which are 
known to be fuch : for the fpurioufnefs of a premife or conclu- 
fion confifts in our knowing that it muft be true of its two terms, 
independently of all comparifon of thofe terms with a third. 

Thirdly, when |, », f, are all indefinite, as well as y. In this 
cafe, as here ftated, there is no poffibility of inference. We can- 
not tell whether ;w + » be or be not greater than u, if we do not 
know what )i is, in any manner, or to any extent. 

But here we introduce that degree of definitenefs by which 
we diftinguifh the univerfal from the particular (or poffible parti- 
cular, fee page 56) propofition. If we can know that either of 
the two, m and «, is the fame as u (greater neither can be) then 
we know that m-\-n \% greater than n. And at the fame time 
we make Y univerfal, in one or the other of the premifes. And 
the fame if we can know that either nf or »' is u'. 

The following are the forms which may all be derived from 
the firft, by ufing all the varieties of contrary nanies and contra- 
nominal equivalents. If we want, for inftance, to fliow the con- 
nexion of the fourteenth with the firft, we throw the firft into 
the form 

(;w + >i' - l)xy + « YZ = (»2 + « + >i' - 1- Oxz 

We then change x into X, and Z into z, changing at the 
fame time I into f and i into ^ : and thus we get 

(;;, + ,'«|')Xy + «Yz=(;7z4-« + »'-l'-OXZ 

Now, for m + j}'— I' write nf^ that is, for m write ;«'— >j'-f 4' 
and we have 

m'Xy + «Yz=(;w' + «-{')XZ . 

which is one of the forms of the fourteenth. And (« +»i'— |)xz 
is only the contranominal of (;w'4-«— {')XZ. 



t. mXY 

2. ;w'xy 

3. mXY 

4. nf'XY 

5. mxY 

6. m'Xy 

7. »JxY 
m^Xy 
mXY 



8. 

9- 
10. 

II. 

12. 

13- 

14. 

15- 



mxy 
mXY 

mxY 
m^Xy 
mxY 



16. m'Xy 



definite Syllogifm* 1 6 i 

H-«YZ=(/w + «— ),)XZ=(mH-» + >j'— I— f)xz 

H-«YZ=(« + ;w'-|')XZ=(;w' + »-Oxz 

+ «'yz =(/« + «'— {')XZ =(»' + »/— |)xz 

+ «'yz =«(;w' + «' + >,-?'-|')XZ=(;w' + «'-i,')xz 

H-«YZ=(;w + »— >j)xZ=(»j + « + )i'— I'— f)Xz 

+ «YZ=(« + ;w'-|)xZ=(;w' + «-OXz 

H-«'yz =(m + »'— ^')xZ =(»' + »/— |')Xz 

+ «'yz =(;w' + «' + „-f'-|)xZ=(;w' + «'-),')Xz 

+ «Yz =(»/ + «— >i)Xz=(»jH-« + >j'— I— {')xZ 

H-«Yz=(« +;w'-|')Xz=(»i' + «-OxZ 

+ «'yZ=(^ +«'— f)Xz =(«' + »! -|)xZ 

H-«'yZ=:(;w'+«' + >,-f-|')Xz=(/72' + «'->j')xZ 

+ «Yz =(»! +«— >j)xz=(»i + «H->j'— I'— O^Z 

+ «Yz =(« + m'-|)xz=(;w' + «-OXZ 

+ «'yZ = (»2 + «' - {)xz =(«' + ;«- |')XZ 

+ «'yZ=(»i' + «' + >i-f-|)xz=(m' + «'->7')XZ 



The lyllogifms of chapter V are all particular cafes of the 
above lift, obtained as follows : — 



I. 



2. 



4- 



m =)| 


A'LI. 


9- 


m =)) 


A'0.0. 


m =j), n ^i 


A'A'A' 




m=Vin ={' 


A'E'E' 


n =» 


I.AJ. 




« =« 


I.E.O. 


« ==),, OT =1 


AiAiAi 




«=)),«/ =1 


A.E,E. 


OT =«, « =j) 


A'A.1. 




»I r=», « =« 


A'E,0. 


m=i^n =i 


AiAT 




m=i n =^ 


A.E'0' 


/«'=|' 


A'LI. 


10. 


«'=!' 


A'0.0. 


« ={ 


I'AT 




« =4' 


I'E'O' 


«/'=!', » =f 


A'A'A' 




«'=!',» =f' 


A'E'E' 


«=| 


A,rr 


II. 


/»=! 


A.0'0' 


»•={' 


I.A,I. 




«'=f 


I.E,0. 


»,=|, »•={' 


AiAiAi 




OT=|,»'=f 


A.E,E, 


»»'=«• 


AJ'I' 


12; 


«'=«' 


A.0'0' 


/«'-),', «' -{' 


AiAiAi 




OT'=r,', «' =f 


AiEiE. 


«•=„' 


I'AT 




«'=«' 


I'E'O' 


_i 1 _,i >? 


A'A'A' 




_? 1 „? i? 


A'E'E' 


/«'-«', «' -«• 


A.A'I' 




/»' — »', «' =»' 


A.E'0' 


«' = ? «'={' 


A'A.1. 




»,' = |' «' = 4- 


A'EiO. 



M 



it 


?2 On the numerically 




5. 


m 's=.Y\ 


E.I.O' 13. 


m =») 


E.O.I' 




m =>j, n =f 


EiA'E. 




m =)), n ={• 


EiE'A. 




n =>j 


O'AiO' 




« =« 


O'E.1' 




n =:yi, m =4' 


E'AiE' 




» =)) m =1' 


E'EiA' 




m Yl , « =>) 


E.A.O' 




m =j) » ^>j 


E.E,r 




m =k\ n =f 


E'A'O, 




»i =1* « =f' 


E'E'I, 


6. 


/»'=! 


EJ.O' 


14. 


ot'=| 


E.O.I' 




n =? 


0,A'0. 




» ={• 


O.E'I. 




«'-!,« -f 


EiA'E, 




«'=!, » ={• 


EiE'A, 


7- 


»i=|' 


E'l'O. 


15- 


m =? 


E'O'I, 




«'=f' 


0'A,0' 




«'=f 


O'E.1' 




w =1', «' ={• 


E'AiE' 




«=!',« =f 


E'E,A' • 


8. 


/«'=),' 


ETO, 


16. 


m'=),' 


E'O'I. 




m'=„', «' =f' 


E'AiE' 




»,'=«', «• =? 


E'E.A' 




«'=„' 


0.A'0. 




«' =„• 


O.E'I. 




«• =„', «'=! 


E.A'E. 




«' =„' /k'=| 


E.E'A, 




w'=,', «' =„' 


E'A'O. 




»,'=„', »' =«' 


E'E'I, 




ot'=| «'={' 


E,A,0' 




m'=| »'=f 


E.E,r 



We have thus another mode of eftablifliing the completenefs 
of the fyftem of fyllogifm, laid down in the laft chapter : that is, 
of the fyftem in which there is only the common univerfal and 
particular quantity. Thefe fyUogifms of numerical quantity, in 
which conditions of inference belonging to every imaginable cafe 
are reprefented by the general forms which numerical fymbols 
take in algebra, muft of neceflity be the moft general of their 
kind. And examination makes it clear that, except the preced- 
ing, there can be no fyllogifm exifting between X, Y, Z, and their 
contraries. Many fubordinate laws of connexion might be no- 
ticed between the general forms and their particular cafes. Thus, 
each univerfal occurs three times, each fundamental particular 
twice, and each ftrengthened particular twice. The firft form 
in pages 158, 159, gives only affirmative, the fourth only negative, 
premifes : the fecond and third one of each kind, commencing with 
a negative in the fecond, and with an affirmative in the third. 

There are two remarkable fpecies of fyllogifm (or rather, 
which ought to have been remarkable) : which I fhall now pro- 
ceed to notice. 

The diftinilion of larger and fmaller part, when divifion into 



definite Syllogifm. 163 

two parts is made, is as much received into the common idiom 
of language as the diftinftion of whole and part itfelf. ' Moft of 
the Xs are Ys/ is nearly as common as ' All the Xs are Ys :' 
though ' feweft of the Xs are Ys/ is only feen as ' moft of the 
Xs are not Ys.' The fyUogifms which can be made legitimate 
by the ufe of this language will do equally well for any fradbion, 
provided we couple with it the fraftion complemental to unity 
(which in the cafe of one half is one half itfelf). Let a and /S 
ftand for two fraftions which have unity for their liim, as \ and 
4» Let »X Y and ^X : Y indicate that lefe than the fraftion a 
of the Xs are or are not Ys. Let «XY and "X: Y indicate 
that more than the fraftion a of the Xs are or are not Ys. 

Then the following fyUogifms arife from the cafes with the 
numbers prefixed. 



I. -YX +^YX =XZ 

4. «y:X +^y:Z =:xz 

5. -Y:X-f-PYZ =Z:X 
8. «yX +^y:Z =X:Z 



9. -YX H.^Y:Z=X:Z 

12. «y:X +^yZ =Z:X 

13. -Y:X+<»Y:Z=xz 
16. «yX -j-'^yZ =XZ 



It will be feen that here are but three really diftinft forms ; of 
which the fimpleft examples are as follows, 

Moft Ys are Xs; Moft Ys are Zs ; therefore fome Xs are Zs. 
Moft Ys are Xs ; Moft Ys are not Zs ; therefore fome Xs are 

not Zs. 
Moft Ys are not Xs ; Moft Ys are not Zs 5 therefore fome 

thin^are neither Zs nor Xs. 

It is hardly neceffary to obferve that in one of the premifes 
* more than' may be reduced to * as much as :' but not in both. 
Thus, if two-fevenths exaftly of the Ys be Xs, and more than 
five-fevenths of the Ys be Zs, it follows that fome Xs are Zs. 

The above fyUogifms admit a change of premife, as follows : 
If we fay that more than |^ths of the Ys are Xs, we thereby fay 
that lefs than f ths of the Ys are xs : or -YX and ^Y : X are the 
fame propofitions. Thus, ^moft are' is equivalent to ' a minority 
(none included) are not.' Hence we have 

^Y:X-f-.Y:Z=XZ 
and fo on. Or we may combine the two forms, as in 

«YX-f^Y:Z=XZ 



164 On the numerically 

The abave are the only fyllogifms in which indefinite particu- 
lars give conclufions, by reafon of that approach to definitenefs 
which confifts in defcribing what fraftions of the middle term are 
fpoken of, at leaft, or at moft. But they are not the only fyllo- 
gifms of the fame general Ipecies. In every cafe inference follows 
when there is a certain preponderance ; and the largenefe of the 
inference depends upon the extent of that preponderance. Thus 
in (12) there is an Xz inference when ;w'h-«'4->j exceeds ? + ^': 
fo many units as there are in this excefs, lb many Xs (at leaft) 
are zs. Now in every cafe, a pair of univerfal premifes give in- 
ference : and in every cafe there muft be a degree of approach 
to univerfality at which inference begins. The ordinary fyllo- 
gifms, I fufpeft, are, and are meant to be, not fuch as ' Every 
X is Y, every Y is Z, therefore every X is Z,' but ' generally 
fpeaking X is Y, and generally fpeaking Y is Z, therefore gene- 
rally fpeaking X is Z.' And by ' generally fpeaking* is meant 
the affertion that an enormous majority of inftances make the 
affertion true. A fyUogifm of this fort is the oppofite of the a 
fortiori fyUogifm ; and might be faid to be true ab injirmiori. If 
we have X)Y with p exceptions, and Y)Z with q exceptions ; 
then, in form (i.) we have w=$— jp,«=>j— y, and »« + «— )j= 
£— jp— ^» As longythen, as the number of exceptions altogether 
fall fliort of the number of Xs, there is inference : if the total 
number of exceptions be very fmall, compared with the number 
o.f Xs, there is the ' generally fpeaking' kind of inference. Ex- 
amine all the univerfal cafes, and it will be found that the (ame 
law prevails ; namely, that there is inference when the numbers 
of exceptional inftances in both premifes together do not amount 
to the number of inftances in the univerfal term of the conclu- 
fion ; and that there is exceptional univerfality (as we may call it) 
in the conclufion, whenever the whcde amount of exception is 
very fmall, compared with that number of inftances. 

This leads us to what I will call the theory of exceptional 
particular fyllogifms. We have feen that the eight complex 
affirmatory fyllogifms, which are all a fortiori in their conclu- 
fionsr, afford each two particular fyllogifms. We have denoted 
coexiftence by + ; and the coexiftence of two propofitions gives 
more than either. Let us denote exceptive coexiftence by — : 
thus, P — Q means that the propofition P is true except in the 



definite Syllogifm . 165 

inftances contained in Q. Thus, X)Y — X : Y means that every 
X (with fome exceptions) is Y. This is, of courfe, Ai — Oi, and 
only differs from L in the mode of expreffion not being ' fome 
more than none at all' but ' fome lefs than all.' In the expref- 
fion 

(Ai— 0.)(Ai— O0(Ai-O,) 

we have the fymbol of the ab infirmiori fyllogifm ftated above, 
fiibjeft to the poffibility of nonexiftence if the number of excep- 
tions in the two premifes fliould exceed the number of inftances 
in the univerfal term of the conclufion. If we look at Aid, as 
a fymbol defcriptive of premifes, we fee one of the inconclufive 
forms ; that is, a form from which we cannot draw an inference. 
But this is only becaufe our inferences are all pofitive, and imply 
aflertion of fufficiency in the premifes. There is no ufe (except 
to (how the manner in which the parts of a fyftem hang together) 
in declarations of infuffictency : for we know that all colleftions 
of premifes, whatever they may be fufficient for, will be infuf- 
ficient for an infinite number of different things. And it is 
important to remember that while fufficiency is accompanied by 
muji be J infufficiency only allows may be. From AiAi the con- 
clufion Ai mtf/i be true : from Aid (and as far as thefe are con- 
cerned) it may be falfe. Accordingly AidOi and OiAiOi may 
ferve to exprefs the two defecfts of (Ai — Oi)(Ai — Oi)(Ai — Oi) 
from AiAiAi, exifting in the ab infirmiori fyllogifm, and poffibly 
preventing conclufion altogether: juft as AiO'O' and O'AiO' 
£how the additional conditions by the fulfilment of which AiAiAi 
is elevated into the a fortiori fyllogifm D1D1D4. It is worth 
while to dwell upon the varieties of this cafe. The ab infirmiori 
fyUogifms of the ftrengthened particulars were previoufly confi- 
dered. 

In all the cafes yet treated, we have had, more or lefs^ the 
power of giving inftances in common language, without recourfe 
to numerical relation exprefled in unufual terms. This of courfe, 
is always the cafe in the fyllogifms of chapter V. ; and we 
have given one common injiance (though never met with in books 
of logic) from each fet of ab infirmiori fyllogifms. But there are 
ftill cafes of the fame fort to be confidered. Though in our de- 
finite relation (page 56) of all^ we ufually (in books of logic at 



1 66 On the numerically 

leaft) make the relation exift, for each propofition, between the 
terms of the propofition itfelf, yet it may be a(ked whether we 
cannot fometimes infer fuch a fpecies of univerfel as this, ^ for 
every Z there is an X which is Y ;' Z being one of the names 
of the fecond premife. If we examine the firft two cafes, which 
will be guide enough, we fliall find the following refiilts from the 
new fuppofitions now made. 

1. ;w=f,«=^, gives i'XY + ^YZ=)?'xz : or if for every Z 
there be an X which is Y, and for every X a Z which is Y, 
then, fo many ys as there are, fo many things which are neither 
X nor Z. This fyUogifm has little new meaning, and no new 
application : it requires ^=f, and therefore X)Y and Z)Y. 

2. ;w'=f, gives f xy + « YZ=«xz, or if for every Z there be 
that which is neither X nor Y, and if fome Ys be Zs, there are 
as many inftances which are neither X nor Z. This is a new and 
efFeftive form. 

2. «=^', gives m'^y-j-J'YZ=;w'XZ, a new form. 

Thefe two cafes will be prefently further confidered. Now, 
obferve that if m-^-n in the firft form, or m^ + n in the fecond, 
be V, that is, if the pair m and « be ^ and ^', or yi and >?', or f and 
{', we have inference of the kind required. The firft form gives 
no new fyllogifm : fince u is more than >?, Ys which are Xs, and Ys 
which are Zs, to the number of t/, give the form (i.) by the main 
law of inference (page 154). In the fecond form, if m^-\-n=Uj 
we diftribute among the Ys and ys, Zs and xs to the full number 
of both, fo that wherever there are not xs (that is, wherever 
there are Xs) there are Zs : or X)Z as obtained from the form. 

But everyway of conftrufting/n'xyH-«YZ=:(m' + «— |')XZ 
which gives ;w'-j-«5=t/, is only a cafe of AiAiAi. For m^ cannot 
exceed »', and n cannot exceed » : and m^-]-n being u or u + A 
we muft have m^=^yf and «=)i ; whence the aflertion made. The 
forms we are now in fearch of, fo far as quite new, are all con- 
tained in the two new ones above noted ; and of thefe, the fecond 
is but a transformation of the firft. The eight varieties derived 
from ufe of contraries, or from the forms in page 161, beginning 
with the fimpleft, are 



CXY +«Z:„Y=«X:^ 
fX:»,YH.«ZY =«X:i'Z 



f'XY +«yz =«XZ 
f'X:„Y + »Y:fZ=»XZ 



eY:|X + «Z:>iY=«xz 
fxy H-wZY =«xz 



definite Syllogifm. 1 67 

^'Y:|X + »yz =«Z:|X 
^'xy +«Y:{Z=;iZ:|X 



Thefe are fyllogifms, which exhibit a curious kind of antago- 
nifm to the particular fyllogifms. Take the fyUogifm AiO'O', the 
terms being M, Y,Z ; we have then M) Y + Z : Y = Z : M. Of 
courfe the conclufion M : Z is not legitimate from thefe premifes 
alone : but if M have as many inftances as Z, then M : Z is 
legitimate. For if Ms, as many as there are Zs, be among the 
Ys, and fome of the Zs be not among the Ys, though all the 
reft were, there would not be enough to match all the Ms, or 
fome Ms are not Zs. Now, let M be a name given to an X 
which is Y, and let fuch Xs have as many inftances as Z, and 
the above becomes the firft of the fyllogifms in the laft lift. 
Thus, LO'Oi is legitimate, if the quantity of the fubjeft men- 
tioned in Ii be taken from the Zs. The fecond fyllogifm is EJiO', 
altered into OJiOi in the fame manner. 

The reader may find all the refults of the above cafe in the 
following rule, in which it is underftood that all the iiiper-propo- 
fitions are to be written either way : thus, A' is written x)y, 
or Y)X, and O' is «x:)jy, or «Y: |X (page 62). Write down 
any pair of particulars, followed by I if the pair be of the fame 
fign, and O if the pair be of different figns : as in OOI or lOO. 
Accent the pair in contradiftion to either the direft rule (page 
62) as far as the words affirmative and negative are concerned : 
that is, let a negative beginning ifolate nothing, and an affir- 
motive beginning ifolate the middle propofition: or elfe, ac- 
cent the pair according to the inverfe rule. Thus, OiOiL 
and O'OT contradift the direft rule, and O'O'L and OiOJ' 
preferve the inverfe rule. To make thefe fyllogifins good (in the 
particular way in queftion) proceed thus : — When the direSf rule 
is contradidled, take the quantity of the firjl concluding term 
from the total of tht fecond^ if the fecond premife be affirmative, 
and from its contrary, if negative. When the inverfe rule is 
preferved, take the quantity of the fecond from the total of 
the firJl. Thus, in O'OT the direfl: rule is contradifted : 

and it ftands ;w'x:»'y + «'y'f'^=/^''^^* ^^^ fecond premife is 
negative, the total of its predicate f' inftances, that of the con- 
trary ^ Accordingly, fx:>j'yH-«'y:i'z=»'xz, or fY:|X-f 



1 68 On the numerically 

w'Z : )} Y =«'xz, which is one of the forms already obtained. Again, 
O'O'Ii prefer ves the inverfe rule, and is ;w'x:}i'y + ^Z-*1^~ 
pX!L. The total of the .firft term is ^ inftances. Hence, 
m\:v!y^^Z : viY=m'XZ,orm'Y :^X + |'Z : 11 Y=:m'XZ, which 
is derived from one of the forms given, by interchanging X 
and Z. 

This clafs of fyUogifms with tranfpofed quantity naturally leads 
to the queftion. Is it ufed ? Do fuch fyUogifms occur in ordi- 
nary or in literary life ? If not, there is no reafon for felefting 
them from the infinite number of cafes which the numeri- 
cally definite fyftem affords. To try this, fuppofe a perfon, on 
reviewing his purchafes for the day, finds, by his countercheques, 
that he has certainly drawn as many cheques on his banker (and 
may be more) as he has made purchafes. But he knows that he 
paid fome of his purchafes in money, or otherwife than by 
cheques. He infers then that he has drawn cheques for fome- 
thing elfe except that day's purchafes. He infers rightly enough 5 
but his inference cannot be reduced to a common fyUogifm, with 
the names in queftion for terms. It is really a fyUogifm of tranf- 
pofed quantity, as follows : — 

For every ^memorandum of a purchafe' a ' countercheque ' 
is a ' tranfacSlion involving the drawing of a cheque.' 

Some ' purchafes' are not ' tranfaftions involving, &c.' 

Therefore fome 'countercheques' are not * memoranda of pur- 
chafes.' 

It may be worth while to give one inftance of the verification 
of the contradiftory form. By page 152 it appears that the con- 
tradiftion of mXY is (|— ;w+ i)Xy, or (i^— »«+ i)xY, and that 
of »i'Xy is (I— m'H- j)XY, or (}^'— ;»'+ i)xy. 

To rnKY join the contrary of (»i + «— }i)XZ, or (| + ij— »i 
— «+ i)Xz : we have then 

mYXH-(| + ii-.m— « + i)zX; 

the inference of which is (/n + lH-ii— m— «+ 1— |)Yz, that is, 
(j^— »+ i)Yz, the contrary of «YZ. 

Returning to the forms in page 161, it wiU be obferved that we 
have no double inferences. In every cafe we have made ufe of 
one form of inference : if u be known, the other is a real equi- 
valent ; or elfe it is impoffible, and as we have feen, then the 



X 



definite Syllogifm. 169 

firft is fpurious. If v be not known, then the fecond is either 
perfe6Hy indefinite, or elfe identical with the one chofen. Ex- 
amination will (how that in every one of the cafes cited in page 
161, the neglefted form of inference is only faved from perfefl: 
indefinitenefs when we are able to apply the word all to one or other 
of the terms : the number being as indefinite as before ; the rela- 
tion thus obtained being definite. Take the firft form, and make 
«==*j ; by the firft inference we then get the fyUogifm IiAJi : by 
the fecond, we get (;«-j-y— |--i')xz, indefinite both in number 
and relation. We do not know what y, |, and f are. If we 
knew as much as that m-^-u is lefs than l + f, we fliould know 
our inference to be fpurious,* it being not the lefs an inference. 
Now, add the condition m=i: the firft inference gives the fyl- 
logifm AiAiAi, the fecond inference now becomes {u—i)xz : 
definite relation enters, and we have z)x, or X)Z, or Ai, as 
before. And the fame of the other forms. 

The reader may perhaps fuppofe that I ought to have com- 
menced this chapter with the complex numerical fyllogifm, in 
imitation of the method which I followed in treating the ordinary 
fyllogifm. But in truth there is no fyftem of complex fyllogifm 
of perfeft numerical definitenefs both in premifes and conclufion. 
To fliow this, let m^XY with the comma, mean that there are 
exadlly m Xs which are Ys, neither more nor fewer. Accord- 
ingly niyKY is a fynonyme for ;wXY-j-(ii— ;w)xY. Now com- 
bine mjXY and «,ZY, or 

{mXY + ;r::^ xY)(«z y + ;r=^zY) 

We then have mXY + nZY = (;w -f « — >j)XZ 
(>j—;w)xYh-(>i— «)zY=(>j— m— »)xz 

mXY + (>,-»)zY=(»i-«)Xz 
(>j— ;w)xY-fwZY =(«— ;w)xZ 

* I muft again remind the reader, of the diftin6lion between jpurious and 
illegitimate^ which exifts in my languztge. The fpurious inference follows 
from the premifes, and is perfeftly good and true : but from the conftitution 
of the univerfe, it will always be true, whatever premifes in that univerfe are 
taken. The illegitimate inference is that which does not follow from the 
premifes. A conclufion not knotun to be fpurious, that is, there not being 
the means of knowledge, // not fpurious : but an illegitimate conclufion can- 
not be made legitimate, that is, following from the premifes, by any further 
knowledge. 



170 On the numerically definite Syllogifm. 

Two only of thefe have meaning : let them be the two upper 
ones. We can affign then Z or z to (/« + «— }i) + (»«—«), or 
to 2»i— n of the Xs, But there are not all of the Xs here : for 
m is lefe than vj, and than |, whence 2m is lefs than ii + 1, or 
2m --v^ lefs than |. The reft of the Xs, l+i^— 2»i in number, 
may, for aught thefe premifes declare, be either Zs or zs. 



CHAPTER IX. 

On Probability. 

THE moft difficult inquiry which any one can propofe to 
himfelf is to find out what any thing is : in all probability 
we do not know what we are talking about when we aflc fuch a 
queftion. The philofophers of the middle ages were much con* 
cerned with the /V, or ej/ence^ of things : they argued to their own 
minds, with great juftice, that if they could only find out what a 
thing is, they fhould find out all about it : they tried, and failed. 
Their fucceflbrs, taking warning by their example, have inverted 
the propofition ; and have fatisfied themfelves that the only way 
of finding what a thing is, lies in finding what we can about it ; 
that modes of relation and connexion are all we can know of the 
eflience of any thing ; in fliort, that the proverb *tell me who you 
are with, and I will tell you what you are,' applies as much to 
the nature of things as to the charafters of men. We are apt 
to think that we know more of the effence of objefts than of 
ideas ; or rather, of ideas which have an objeftive fource, than 
of thofe which are the confequence of the mind's zSdon upon 
them. I doubt whether the reverie be not the cafe : at any rate, 
when we content ourfelves with inquiry into properties and rela- 
tions, we have certain knowledge upon our moft abftra£l ideas. 
The objeft of this chapter is the confideration of the degrees of 
knowledge itfelf. That which we know, of which we are cer- 
tain, of which we are well afTured nothing could periiiade us to 
the contrary, is the exiftence of our own minds, thoughts,, and 
perceptions, the two laft when actually prefent. This higheft 
;knowledge, this abfblute certainty, admits of no imagination of 
the poffibility of falfehood. We cannot, by ftopping to confider. 



On Probability. iji 

make ourfelves more fure than we are already, that we exift, 
think, fee, &c. Next to this, come the things of which we can- 
not but fay at laji we are as certain of them as of our own exif- 
tence ; but of which, neverthelefs, we are obliged to fay that we 
arrive at them by procefs, by reflecSlion. Thefe we call necejfary 
truths (page 33), The necejjity of admitting thefe things caufes 
fome to imagine that they are merely identities, that they amount 
to faying that when a thing is, it is : but this is not correft. To 
fay that two and two make four (which muft be), and that a 
certain man wears a black coat (when he does fo) both involve 
the pure identity that whatever is, is ; and not one more than 
the other. Nor is two and two identically four, though necef^ 
farily fo. Our definitions of number arife in the procefs of Am- 
ple counting. Throw a pebble into a bafket, and we fay one : 
throw in another, and we fay two ; yet one more, and we fay 
three^ and fo on. The full definitions of the fucceffive numbers 
are feen in 

1 (i + i) {(i + i) + i} [{(n.i)4-i} + i],&c. 

That three and one are four is definition : it is our pleafure to 
give the name four to 3 -f i. But that 3 + 1 is 2 -f 2 is neither 
definition nor pure identity. It is not even true that ' two and 
two' is four; that 

[{(i + i)+l} + i] is (l+l)-f(H-i) 

It is true, no doubt, that ' two and two' is four, in amount, 
value, &c. but not in form, conftruftion, definition, &c. 

There is no further ufe in drawing diftinftion between the 
knowledge which we have of our own exiftence, and that of two 
and two amounting to four. This abfolute and inafTailable feel- 
ing we (hall call certainty. We have lower grades of knowledge, 
which we ufiially call degrees of beliefs but they are x^T^y degrees 
of knowledge, A man knows at this moment that two and two 
make four : did he know it yefterday ? He feels perfectly certain 
that he knew it yefterday. But he may have been fei«ed with a 
fit yefterday, which kept him in unconfcioufhefs all day : and 
thofe about him may have been warned by the medical man not 
to give him the leaft hint of what has taken place. He could 
fwear, as oaths are ufually underftood, that it was not fo : if he 






ijl On Probability. 

could not fwear to this, no man could Iwear to anything except 
neceffary truths. But he could not regard the affertion that it 
was not lb, as incapable of contradidlion : he knows it well, but, 
as long as it may poffibly be contradifted, he cannot but fay that 
he might know it better. 

It may feem a ftrange thing to treat knowledge as a magnitude, 
in the fame manner as length, or weight, or furface. This is 
what all writers do who treat of probability, and what all their 
readers have done, long before they ever faw a book on the fubjeft . 
But it is not cuftomary to make the ftatement fo openly as I 
now do : and I confider that fome juftification of it is neceffary. 

By degree of probability we really mean, or ought to mean, 
degree of belief. It is true that we may, if we like, divide pro- 
bability into ideal and objeftive, and that we muft do fo, in order 
to reprefent common language. It is perfedUy correft to fey ' It 
is much more likely than not, whether you know it or not^ that 
rain will foon follow the fall of the barometer.' We mean that 
rain does foon follow much more often than not, and that there 
do exift the means of arriving at this knowledge. The thing is fo, 
every one will fay, and can be known. It is not remembered, 
perhaps, that there is an ideal probability^ a pure ftate of the mind, 
involved in this affertion : namely, that the things which have been 
are correft reprefentatives of the things which are to be. That 
up to this 2 1 ft of June, 1847, ^^^ above ftatenicnt has been true, 
ever fihce^e'tiarometer Was ufed as a weather-glafe, is not de- 
nied by any who have examined it : that the connexion ^of 
natural phenomena will, for fome time to come, be what it has 
been, cannot be fettled by examination : we all have ftrong rea- 
fon to believe it, but our knowledge is idealj as diftinguiftied 
from objeSfive, And it will be found that, frame what circum- 
ftances we may, we cannot invent a cafe of purely objeftive pro- 
bability. I put ten white balls and ten black ones into an urn, 
and lock the door of the room. I may feel well affured that, 
when I unlock the room again, and draw a ball, I am juftified 
in faying it is an even chance that it will be a white one. If all 
the metaphyficians who ever wrote on probability were to witnels 
the trial, they would, each in his own fenfe and manner, hold me 
right in my affertion. But how many things there are to be 
taken for granted ! Do my eyes ftill diftinguifli colours as be- 



On Probability. IJ2 

fore ? Some perfons never do, and eyes alter with age. Has 
the black paint melted, and blackened the white balls ? Has any 
one elfe poflefled a key of the room, or got in at the window, 
and changed the balls ? We may be very fure^ as thofe words 
are commonly ufed, that none of thefe things have happened, and 
it may turn out (and I have no doubt will do fo, if the reader try 
the circumftances) that the ten white and ten black balls will be 
found, as diftinguifhable as ever, and unchanged. But for all 
that, there is much to be aflumed in reckoning upon fuch a 
refult, which is not fo objeftive (in the fenfe in which I have 
ufed the word) as the knowledge of what the balls were when 
they were put into the urn. We have to aflume all that is re- 
quifite to make our experience of the paft the means of judging 
the future. 

Having made this illuftration to draw a diftinftion, I now pre- 
mife that I throw away objeftive probability altogether, and con- 
lider the word as meaning TfieTtafe of the mmd with refpeft to 
an affertion, a coming event, or any other matter on which ab- 
folute knowledge does not exift. ' It is more probable than im- 
probable' means in this chapter ' I believe that it will happen 
more than I believe that it will not happen.' Or rather ^ I ought 
to believe, &c. :' for it may happen that the ftate of mind which 
/J, is not the ftate of mind which (hould be. D'Alembert be- 
lieved that it was two to one that the firft head which the throw 
of a halfpenny was to give would occur before the third throw : 
a jufter view of the mode of applying the theory would have 
taught him it was three to one. But he believed it, and thought 
he could (how reafon for his belief: to him the probability was 
two to one. But I fliall fay, for all that, that the probability is 
three to one : meaning, that in the univerfal opinion of thofe who 
examine the fubjeft, the ftate of mind to which a perfon ought 
to be able to bring himfelf is to look three times as confidently 
upon the arrival as upon the non-arrival. 

Probability then, refers to and implies belief, more pr lefs, and 
belief is but another name for imperfedl knowledge, or it may be, 
exprefles the mind in a ftate of imperfeft knowledge. There is 
accurate meaning in the phrafe ' to the beft of his knowledge and 
belief^ the firft word applying to the ftate of his circumftances 
with refpedl to external objefts, the fecond to the ftate of his 



174 On Probability. 

mind with refpeft to the circumftances. But we cannot make 
any ufe of the diftinftion here : what we know is to regulate 
what we believe ; nor can we make any effeftive ufe of what 
we know, except in obtaining and defcribing what we believe, or 
ought to believe. According to common idiom, belief is often 
a lower degree of knowledge : but it is imperative upon us to 
drop all the quantitative diftinftions of common life, or rather 
to remodel them, when we come to the conftru<Stion of a 
fcience of quantity. 

I have faid that we treat knowledge and belief as magnitudes : 
I will now put a broad illuftration of what I mean. We know, 
(fuppofe it known) that an urn contains nothing but two balls, 
one white and one black, undiftinguifliable by feeling : and we 
know (fuppofe this alfo) that a ball is to be drawn. Disjundlively 
then we know * white will be drawn : black will be drawn,' one 
or the other muft be. How do we ftand as to ' white will be 
drawn,' and ' black will be drawn,' feparately ? Clearly in no 
preponderance with refpeft to either. May we then properly 
and reafbnably fay that we divide our knowledge and belief of 
the event ' one or the other' into two halves, and give one half 
to each. I can conceive much objeftion to this fuppofition : 
but, whether they formally make it or not, I am fure writers on 
probability a6l upon it, and are accepted by their readers. 

Let us confider what magnitude is, that is to fay, how we 
know we are talking about a magnitude. ,We know that when- 
ever we can -attach a diftinfl: conception of more and lefe to dif- 
ferent inftances, fo as to fay this has more than that, we are 
talking of comparable magnitudes. - We fpeak of a quantity of 
talent, or of prudence : we fay one man has more talent than 
another, and one man more prudence than another : but we never 
fay that one man has more talent than another has prudence. If 
we occafionally fay he (the fame one man) has more talent than 
prudence, it is only as an abbreviation : we mean that he has not 
prudence enough to guide his talent. Juft as we might fay (though 
we do not) that there is more cart than horfe, when the horfe 
cannot draw the cart : jufl as, fpeaking very loofely, we do fay, 
the prejfure of the atmofphere is not fifty inches ; meaning that it 
is not enough to balance *the prefTure of fifty inches of mercury 
in the barometer. And thus, both up to, and beyond our mean$ 



On Probability. 175 

of meafurement, we form to ourfelves diftinfl: notions of com- 
parable magnitudes, and incomparable magnitudes, as well as of 
the meaning of the fomewhat incorreft, but eafily amended, 
figures of fpeech by whurh we fometimes talk of comparing the 
latter. 

But the objeft of all quantitative fcience is not merely magni- 
tude, but the meafurement of magnitude. And when are we en- 
titled to fay that we can meafure magnitude ? As foon as we 
know how, from the greater, to take off a part equal to the lefs : 
a procefe which neceflarily involves the teft of which is the 
greater, and which is the lefs, and, in certain cafes, as it may 
happen, of neither being the greater nor the lefs. As to fome 
magnitudes, the clear idea of meafurement comes foon : in the 
cafe of length, for example. But let us take a more difficult 
one, and trace the fteps by which we acquire and fix the idea : 
fay weight. What weight is, we need not know : the Newto- 
nian, who makes it depend on the earth's attradlion, and the 
Ariftotelian, who referred it to an impulfe which all bodies pof- 
fefs to feek their natural places^ are quite at one on their notions 
of the mcafiirable magnitude which their feveral philofophies dif- 
cufe. We know it as a magnitude before we give it a name : 
any child can difcover the more that there is in a bullet, and the 
lefs that there is in a cork of twice its fize. Had it not been for 
the fimple contrivance of the balance, which we are well afliired 
(how, it matters not here) enables us to poife equal weights 
againft one another, that is, to detecSt equality and inequality, 
and thence to afcertain how many times the greater contains the 
lefs, we might not to this day have had much clearer ideas on the 
fubjeft of weight, as a magnitude, than we have on thofe of 
talent, prudence, or felf-denial, looked at in the fame light. All 
who are ever fo little of geometers will remember the time when 
their notions of an angle, as a magmf ude, were as vague as, per- 
haps more fb than, thofe of a moral quality : and they will alfo 
remember the fleps by which this vaguenefs became clearnefs 
and precifion. 

Now a very little confideration will fhow us that, the moment 
we begin to talk of our belief (the mind's meafure of our know- 
ledge) of propofitions fet before us, we recognize the relations 
called more and lefs. Does the child feel that the bullet has 



I ^jt On Probability. 

more fomething than the cork one bit better than an educated 
man feels that his belief in the ftory of the death of Caefar is 
more than his belief in that of the death of Remus. Let any 
one try whether he have not in his mind the means of arranging 
the following fet in order of magnitude of belief, including within 
that term all the range which comes between certain knowledge 
of the falfehood, and certain knowledge of the truth, of an affer- 
tion. Let them be i. Caefar invaded Britain with the fole view 
of benefiting the natives. 2. Two and two make five. 3. Two 
and two make four. 4. Caefar invaded Britain, 5. Romulus 
founded Rome. He will probably difcover the gradations of 
neceffary truth, moral certainty, reafonable prefumption, utter 
incredibility, and neceflary falfehood. Thefe are but names given 
to diflFerent ftates of the mind with refpeft to knowledge of pro- 
pofitions afferted \ and I fay they exprefs different ftates of 
quantity. 

The only difficulty, and a ferious one it can be made, may be 
ftated in the following queftion ; — Are we to confider the fort 
of belief which we have of a neceflary propofition (as two and 
two make four), that is, abfolute knowledge, to which contra- 
diftion is glaring abfurdity — as only a ftrengthened or augmented 
fpecimen of the fort of knowledge which we have of any con- 
tingent propofition (fuch as Caelar invaded Britain) which may 
have been, or might have been, felfe, and can be contradi£):ed 
without abfurdity ? I anlwer, we can eafily fhow that the dif- 
ference of the two cafes is connected with the difference be- 
tween finite and infinite, not between two magnitudes of dif- 
ferent kinds. The mathematician will eafily apprehend this, 
and will look upon the various difficulties which furround even 
the explanation as upon things to which he is well accuftomed, 
and which he underftands by many parallel inftances. We can 
invent circumftances under which a contingent propofition (hall 
make any degree of approach to neceffity which we pleafe, but 
fo that no aftual attainment fhall be arrived at. If an urn con- 
tain balls, and if one ball muft be drawn, then, the balls being 
all white, it is neceffary that a white ball muft be drawn, as 
neceffary as that two and two being in any place, there are four 
in that place : for there are no degrees of neceffity. But let it 
be that there are black balls alfb, at the rate of one to a thoufand 



On Probability. 17 7 

white ones : the drawing of a white ball is no longer neceflary \ 
but there is ftill a ftrong degree of affurance that a white ball 
will be drawn. We do not readily fee how much : becaufe the 
urn has no vifible relation to our ufiial cafes of judgment. But 
let it be made to reprefent the life of a youth of twenty : and let 
the drawing of a white ball reprefent his living to come of age, 
and of a black one his death in the interval. There ought to be 
feven black balls to the thoufand white ones to make the cafes 
parallel. And yet we know that our affurance of his furvival is 
generally very ftrong : be it wife affurance or not, it exifts, and 
we aft upon it. Now fuppofe the rate to be one black to a mil- 
lion of white : the affurance is much increafed, but ftill there is 
no neceflity ; the black ball may be drawn. Take one black to 
a million of million of white, or a million of million of million, 
&c. : long before we have arrived at fuch a point, we have loft 
all conception of the quantitative difference between our belief in 
drawing a white ball, and our belief that two and two are four. 
We fay it is almofi impojjible that one trial fhould give a black 
ball : and this very phrafe is a recognition of the famenefs for 
which I am contending. Except on the fuppofition of fuch 
(amenefs, there is no almoji impojjible^ nor nearly certain. Be* 
tween the impoflible and the poflible, the certain and the not 
certain, there muft be every imaginable difference, if we do not 
.admit unlimited approach. For it will clearly not be contended 
that, reprefenting certainty, fay by 100, we can make an ap- 
proach to it by an uncertainty counting as, fay 90, but nothing 
higher. Reprefenting the ftate of abfolute knowledge by 100, any 
one, with a little confideration, will fay that the laws of thought 
fix no numerical limit to our approach towards this ftate : but 
that things (hort of certainty are capable of being brought within 
any degree of nearnefe to certainty. On fuch confiderations, I 
(hall affume that necefSty on the one hand, a certainty for, and 
impoffibility on the other, a certainty againft, are extreme limits, 
which being reprefented by quantities, may allow our knowledge 
of all contingent propofitions to be reprefented by intermediate 
quantities. 

It muft be fully allowed, nay, imperatively infifted on, that 
nothing in the numerical view, tending to connecS): neceffary and 
contingent propositions, can at all leffen the diftindlion between 

N 



178 On Probability. 

them ; nor give the latter any refemblance to the former, except 
only in the quantities by which they are indicated. Though 
there be only one black ball to as many white ones as would fill 
the vifible univerfe, yet between that cafe and the one of no 
black balls muft always exift the efTential difference, that in the 
former a black ball may be drawn, and in the latter it cannot. 
But this very great diftinftion between the neceflarily certain 
and the contingent, is it compatible with their being reprefented 
by numerical quantities as near to one another as we pleafe ? I 
anfwer that all who are acquainted with the relations of quantity 
are aware that nearnefe of value is no bar to any amount of dif- 
ference of properties. A common fradlion, for inftance, may 
be made as near as we pleafe in value to an integer : but there 
do not exift, even among propofitions, more effential, or more 
ftriking, differences, than thofe which exift between the properties 
of integers and of fraftions: There are crowds of theorems (I 
fliould rather (ay unlimited crowds of clafTes of theorems) which 
are always true when integers are ufed, and never true when 
fraftions are ufed. Let any quantities be named, integer or frac- 
tional, and it is eaiy to make claiTes of theorems which are true 
for thofe quantities, and not for any others, however near to them. 
The reader who is not a mathematician muft rely upon the know- 
ledge of the one who is, that the difference between two quan- 
tities, no matter how nearly equal, may be connected with other 
differences as complete, and by practice as eafily recognized, as 
the difference between necefTary and contingent truth. 

I will take it then that all the grades of knowledge, from 
knowledge of impoffibility to knowledge of neceffity, are capable 
of being quantitatively conceived. The next queftion is, are 
thefe quantities capable, in any cafe^ of meafurement, or of com- 
parifon with one another. At prefent, we ftand as the child 
ftands with refpeft to the bullet and the cork : perceptive of 
more and lefs, but without a balance by which to make compa- 
riibns. To fhow the poftulate on which our balance depends, 
let us fuppofe an urn, which, to our knowledge, contains white, 
black, red, green, and blue balls, one of each colour. It is within 
our knowledge that a ball muft be drawn : accordingly we have 
full knowledge (and of courfe entire belief) that the refuit ' no 
bair is impoffible, and that * white, or black, or red, or green, or 



On Probability. 179 

blue' is neceffary. To the refult 'white' we accord a certain 
probability, that is, a certain amount of belief. If a man tell us 
that white will be drawn, we may hold him rafh, but we do not 
pronounce his communication incredible : let another tell us that 
' black, or red, or green, or blue' will be drawn, and we hold him 
not fo rafli, and his communication more credible. We may 
hold with either, if he will defcribe his knowledge and belief as 
partial, and give them their proper amounts. Now, whether we 
fliall proceed, or flop fhort at this point, depends upon our ac- 
ceptance or non-acceptance of the following postulate : — 

When any number of events are disjunctively poflible, fo that 
one of them may happen, but not more than one, the meafure 
of our belief that one out of any fome of them will happen, 
ought to be the amount of the meafures of our feparate beliefs 
in each one of thofe fome. 

I mean that any one fhould (ay. A, B, C, being things of 
which not more than one can happen, * my belief that one of the 
three will happen is the fum of my feparate beliefs in A, and in 
B, and in C This is the poftulate on which the balance de- 
pends ; and there is a fimilar poftulate before we can ufe the 
phyfical balance. The only difference (and that but apparent) 
is that we are to fpeak of weights coUeftively, and of events dif- 
junSively. The weight of the (conjunftive) mafs is the fum of the 
weights of its parts : the credibility of the (disjunftive) event is the 
fum of the credibilities of its components. There are feveral 
may-bes^ any one of which may become a has-been : when we 
(peak disjunSfively^ it is of the will-be,^ which cannot be faid of 
more than one : the may-be of an event defcribed as contained in 
' A, B, C,' is to be reprefented as in quantity the fum of thofe 
in ' A,' in ' B,' and in * C 

Is it matter of mere necelEty that, talking of phyfical weight, 
the weight of the whole is equal to the fum of the weights of the 
parts ? We have learnt to admit this poftulate, of which no 
man ever doubted : but no one can fay that it was neceffary. 
The laws of matter and mind being both what they are, the con- 
nexion between phyfical colleftion and mental fummation is, I 
grant, neceffary : the fimpleft of manual, and the fimpleft of 
mental, operations, are and, with us, muft be, concomitants. 

But, in the firft place, it -is not true that the weight of the 




1 8 o On Probability . 

whole is equal to the fum of the weights of the parts, in the 
manner in which the reader probably imagines it to be true. Let 
the firft part we hang on the balance be the weight which is 
correftly meafured by W. Then if we hang under it another 
weight, as correftly reprefented by V, we think we are quite fure 
when we fey that the colleftive mafs muft have a weight W -f V 
becaufe its parts have the weights W and V. But its parts have 

not the weights W and V. The 
weight of V is diminifhed by the 
upward attradHon of W, and is, 
fey, V— M : the weight of W is 
as much increafed by the down- 
ward attraftion of V, and is W 
-f-Mr And though V—M and 
W + M added together do give V + W, yet it was not in this 
way that the reader made out his neceffary truth. The univer- 
fal equality of aftion and reaftion did not exift in the thoughts of 
the firft perfon who formed a diftinfl: conception of the weight 
of the whole as compofed of the fum of that of the parts : and he 
was only right by the (fo far as he was concerned) accidental 
•circumftance, that two things of which he knew nothing, coun- 
terbalanced each other's efFefts. Nor do we know at this mo- 
ment, as of neceiEty, that the propofition is correft. We have 
much reafon to think that the law of equality of aftion and reac- 
tion is mathematically true : but, let it fail to the amount of only 
one^grain in a thoufend million of tons, and the propofition is 
not true, but only nearly true. 

Again, the co-exiftence of thofe laws of mind and matter 
which beft, fo to fpeak, fit each other, and which make the phe- 
nomena of the external world, after due confideration, appear to 
be almoft what they mti/f have been, is not, to our apprehenfions, 
a neceffary coexiftence. We can imagine the following refult, 
though we cannot trace what the fiiU confequences of it would 
be on the expreffion of the laws of thought. Conceive fentient 
beings, to whom the fimpleft mode of arithmetical fucceffion is 
not o, I, 2, 3, &c. but I, 10, lOO, lOop, &c. their powers of 
numeration being fo conftrufted that the fecond of thefe fliccef- 
fions has that charafter of fundamental fimplicity which we 
attach to the firft. 0£ courfe, their primary fymbols would be 



On Probability. 181 

fignificative of i, 10, 100, &c. It would be impoffible for us to 
conceive any mode by which ten or any other number could be 
thus fundamentally attached to unity, in a manner fhared by no 
third number : but, I am not faying, ' Imagine how this could 
be,' but, ' Imagine that it is/ There is no contradiction in the 
fuppofition, either to itfelf, or, till we know much more of the 
mind than we now do, to anything elfe. Beings fo conftituted 
would have logarithmic brains ; and if, thus conftituted, they 
were placed among our material laws of exiftence, the manner 
in which the weight of the whole is to be inferred from thofe of 
the parts, would be a profound myftery for ages, only to be folved 
in an advanced ftage of mathematical fcience, A recent mode 
of conftrufting mathematical tables, which generally carries with 
it the name of its eminent inventor, Gaufs, would conftitute 
one of their principal necefSties : they would have to ufe it as 
their only mode (except adual experiment) of finding out that 
what we reprefent by 156 and 200, together make {and this 
making would be a complicated procefs) 356. 

Inftead, then, of trying to eftablifh it as perfeftly natural and 
neceflary to (ay that our belief of * one of the two A or B, when 
both cannot happen,' is, quantitatively fpeaking, the fum of our 
belief in A, and our belief in B, I have rather endeavoured to 
fhow that the analogous cafes with which we firft think of com- 
paring this propofition, other kinds of compofition, are not fo 
natural and neceflary as is fuppofed. There 'are two ways of 
levelling ; by bringing up the lower, or bringing down the higher. 
And I particularly wifli in this chapter to prevent the reader 
from accepting the arithmetical doftrine of probability quite fo 
rapidly as is ufually done. In furtherance of this objefl, I pro- 
ceed to the following poflible objeftion. 

It may be faid, you have, by thus formally identifying proba- 
bility with belief, and ftating a poftulate which, in exprefs terms, 
has not the moft axiomatic degree of evidence, rendered fome- 
what difficult that which in the ordinary view of fimple chances, 
is very eafy. This charge, I hope, is true : fuch was my inten- 
tion, at leaft. And my reafon is, that in the ordinary view of 
the fubjeft, one of two things occurs : either probability is fepa- 
rated by definition from ftate of belief, though it be known that 
the two words will afterwards be confounded without any per- 



i82 On Probability 

miiEon ; or elfe the poftulate is tacitly aflfumed^ and the difficulty 
which I fuppofemyrdf charged with introducing, is flurred over. 
Take a common queftion j — An urn has two white balls and 
five black ones : there are feven equally likely drawings, two 
white ; therefore the chance or probability of drawing a white 
ball is called two-fevenths. But the chance of either particular 
white ball is one-feventh. Now firft, if any one fhould fay 
that this is mere definition, I can, of courfe, allow it : but it then 
remains to fhow what connexion this defined probability has with 
any. ordinary acceptation of the word. But if, probability mean- 
ing belief, or fentiment of probability aftually exifting in the 
mind, or index of the proper degree of belief, &c. &c. — the 
above ftatement be made as fundamentally evident, I fhould then 
a(k how it is known that the probability of * one or the other 
white ball being drawn ' is properly fet down as the fum of the 
probabilities of the feparate white balls. And I cannot conceive 
any anfwer except that it is by an aflumption of the poftulate. 
That fuch aflumption will finally be knowingly made, on the 
fulleft conviftion, by every one who ftudies the theory, I have 
no doubt whatever : nor that it has been made, no matter in 
what words, nor with what clearnefs of avowal, by every one 
who has ftudied that theory. And therefor-e I hold it defirable 
that the beginner fhould know what I have here told him. 

It is iridifFerent, as far as the theory is concerned, what nu- 
merical fcale of belief we take. We might, if we pleafed, copy 
Fahrenheit's thermometer, fet down knowledge of impoffi- 
bility as 32°, perfeft certainty a,s 212°, and other ftates of mind 
accordingly. Thus, 122° would reprefent perfedl indecifion, 
belief inclining neither way, an even chance. But this would 
complicate our formulae : the ufual and preferable plan is to af- 
fume o as the index of knowledge of impoffibility, i as that of 
certainty, and intermediate fractions for the intermediate ftates. 
This mode of eftimation makes formulae and procefTes fo much 
more eafy than any other, that it muft be adopted ; but there is 
a ftrong objeftion to it in one point of view : as follows. 

When we fpeak of belief in common life, we always mean 
that we confider the objeft of belief more likely than not : the 
ftate of mind in which we rather rejeft than admit, we call 
wwbelief. When the mind is quite unbalanced either way, we 



On Probability. 1 8 3 

have no word to exprefs it, becaufe the ftate is not a popular* 
one. The quantitative theory calls by the name of belief every 
admiffion of poffibility. When there is only one black ball .to a 
million of white ones, there is fome belief that a black ball will 
be drawn ; a much larger belief in a white one. It would be 
advantageous in fome refpefts that o fhould reprefent the ftate 
of indifference, +1, that of knowledge of certainty, and — i, 
that of knowledge of impoflibility. But this would complicate 
formulae too much. I confider it therefore defirable to ufe the 
common meafures and formulae, but to affociate them with the 
one juft propofed, in the following manner. 

When a perfon tells us that his belief in an aiTertion is, fay tV> 
meaning that he confiders it 3 for and 7 againft, or 7 to 3 againft, 
we (hould fay in common talk that he difbelieves, but not very 
ftrongly. In the language of this theory, we fay that he both 
believes and difbelieves, the latter more ftrongly than the former. 
Let us add that bis authority is againft the conclufion. If he fay 
that it is in his mind an even chance, or that he has no opinion 
one way or the other, let us fay that he gives no authority either 
way. If we adapt this definition to the fuppofition that + i and 
— I reprefent the extremes of authority for and againft, we have 
the following rules. The meafure of authority is twice the mea- 
fure of belief diminifhed by unity, for, when pofitive, againft, 
when negative : the meafure of belief is half of unity increafed 
(algebraically) by the meafure of authority. If a reprefent the 
meafure of belief, and A that of authority, then 

A=:?2^— I , ^=|(i-f-A) 

It is alfo advifable to have a term to reprefent what are ufiially 
called the odds. Some might think it defirable to rid the fubje£): 
as much as pofEble of words derived from gambling : aftrono- 
mers have done the fame thing with the phrafes of aftrology, and 
chemifts with thofe of alchemy. When it is 7 for and 3 againft. 



* Many minds, and almoft ^11 uneducated ones, can hardly retain an 
intermediate ftate. Put it to the firft comer, what he thinks on the queftion 
whether there be volcanoes on the unfeen fide of the moon larger than 
thofe on our fide. The odds are, that though he has never thought of the 
queftion, he has a pretty ftifF opinion in three feconds. 



184 On Probability. 

it might be fkid that the relative tejiimony for, is ^ and that 
againft, f. But the brevity of the firft phrafe will jnfure its con- 
tinuance, let who will try to change it- 

The ordinary rule is a confequence of the notions hereinbefore 
laid down, and of the particular mode of naeafurement adopted. 
It is as follows ; — When all the things that can happen can be 
refolved into a number of equally probable (or credible) cafes, 
fome favourable and fome unfavourable to the event under con- 
fideration, then the fra£Hon which the favourable cafes are of all 
the cafes, meafures the probability (or credibility) of the arrival 
of the event : and the fraftion which the unfevourable cafes are 
of all Ae cafes, meafures the probability (or credibility) of the 
non-arrival. There are, for inflance, in an urn, 5 white, 4 blacky 
and 3 red balls, 12 in all. It is afTumed that we know them to 
be equally likely to be drawn ; which here means no more than 
that we know nothing to the contrary. That one ball mufl be 
drawn, is fuppofed certainly known. Accordingly, our belief in 
' one or another' is reprefented 1^ i : which is, by the poftulate, 
the fum of the feveral credibilities of the balls ; which laft are all 
equal. Therefore each ball has tV : and by the fame poflulate, 
the event ' one or other of the white balls' or the drawing of a 
white ball, has A ; of a black ball A ; of a red ball, -^z* 

Inflances like the above, in which we invent all the cafes and 
have arbitrary power over their number, are the only ones on 
which we can employ a priori numerical reafoning. They are 
alfo the only ones on which we can try experiments. It is im- 
portant to know whether, as a matter of fail, our belief, nume- 
rically formed, will be approximately juftified by the refults of 
trial. And this juftification is found to exifl^ in the following 
way. It is a remote, but certain, conclufion from the theory, 
requiring mathematical reafoning too complicated to introduce 
here, that events will, in the long run, happen in numbers pro- 
portional to the objeftive probabilities under which the trials are 
made. For inflance ; — if a die be correftly formed, fo that no 
one face has more tendency than another to fall upwards, the 
probability of throwing an ace is ^ ; that of not throwing an ace 
is ^. The theory tells us its own worthlefTnefs, if in the long 
run, not-ace do not occur five times as often as ace. If 60,000 
trials were made, the theory would tell us to expeft about 10,000 



On Probability. 185 

aces and about 50,000 not-aces. Praftice confirms the theory : 
not, that I know of, in the adlual cafe juft cited, but in fimilar 
ones. I will ftate an inftance. 

Throw a half-penny up, and if it give tail^ repeat the throw, 
and fo on, till head arrives : and let this fucceflion be called zfet. 
The probability that a fet fhall confift of one throw, is fhewn 
by the theory to be 4 > that it fhall have two throws, |. ; three 
throws, -J. ; and fo on. If a very large number of fets be tried, 
we are to expeft that about half will be of one throw, about a 
quarter of two throws, about an eighth of three throws ; and fo 
on, as long as the number is large enough to give any pro{pe£l 
of fomething like an average. This experiment has been tried 
twice : once by the celebrated Buffon, and once by a young 
pupil of mine, for his own fatisfaSion ; both in 2,048 fets. The 
reiults were as follows ; the third column (bowing the number 
of each kind which the theory afferts to be moft probable. 

B H 

Head at the firft throw 
No head till the 2nd throw 

3rd — 

4th — 

Sth - 

6th — 

7th — 

8th — 

9th — 

loth — 

nth — 

I2th — 

13th — 

14th — 

15th — 

i6th — 

&c — 

2048 2048 2048 

In Buffon's trials, there were altogether 1992 tails to 2048 
heads, ^ind in Mr. H's there were 2044 tails to 2048 heads. 
Inftances in which we can command all the cafes are to the 



I06I 


1048 


1024 


494 


507 


512 


232 


248 


256 


137 


99 


128 


56 


71 


64 


29 


38 


32 


25 


17 


16 


8 


9 


8 


6 


5 


4 





3 


2 





I 


I 





















I 


> I 













I 










J 



1 86 On Probability. 

mind, in this theory, what accei&ble lengths are to the eye. We 
can meafure the latter by a rule, and fo train the organ to judge 
of lengths which cannot be approached, or cafes in which the 
rule is not at hand. 

I fhall now refer the reader to other works on the fubjeft, for 
further details on the operative part, and proceed to juft as much 
as is neceflary for the particular purpofe of the next chapter, 
namely, the application of the hypothefis of meafure of belief to 
queftions of argument and teftimony. Two theorems will be 
enough : the firft relating to independent events, the fecond to 
the probability of events which are neither wholly independent, 
nor wholly confequent, either upon the other. The word event 
is ufed in the wideft poffible fenfe : it does not even neceflarily 
mean future event. Unlefs our knowledge, either of the cir- 
cumftances, or of the event itfelf, thereby undergo fome altera- 
tion, it is nothing to us how whether it has happened, or is to 
happen. 

Let there be two events, P and Q, of which the probabilities 
are the fraftions a and h ; and let them be wholly independent of 
one another, the arrival or non-arrival of either being perfeftly 
independent of that of the other. The probability that both 
fhall happen is the produdl of a and h : and fimilarly for more 
events than two. Suppofe, to take an inftance, that a\%^ and h 
is \, We muft then confider P as an event which has 3 ways 
of failing to 4 of happening : if we would have an urn from 
which the credibility of drawing a white ball fhould be that of 
the happening of P, we muft put in 4 white balls and 3 not 
white (fay black) balls. Similarly to reprefent Q, we muft have 
an urn of 3 white and 2 black balls. Now to aicertain the 
profpeft of drawing white from both urns, we muft count all 
the, cafes. A ball from the urn of 7 may be combined with one 
from the urn of 5, in 7 x 5 or 35 ways. But a white ball from 
the firft urn may be combined with a white ball from the fecond, 
in 4x 3 or 12 different ways. There are then 35 cafes in all, 
12 of which are favourable : hence the probability in favour of 
white from both (which is that of the two events both happen- 
ing) is 

12 4x3 ^ 4 3 , 

— or ^^—^ or -tx- or ah. 

35 7x5 7 5 



On Probability. 187 

Similar reafoning may be applied to more events than two. 
This theorem has a large number of confequences, fome of 
which we may notice. 

When a is the probability for, i— ^ is the probability againft. 
This I fhall always denote by a^ : fimilarly b^ will ftand for i — i; 
and fo on. 

Required the probability that of a number of independent 
events, P,Q,R, &c one or more fhall happen. Let ajf^c^ ice. be 
the feveral probabilities, then that of their all failing isthe pro- 
duft tf'^V .... and that of their not all failing (or of one or 
more happening) is i— ^'^V .... Accordingly, if there be 
only two events, for 'one or both' we have i— (i— tf)(i— ^) 
wj^ich is a-^b^—ab. If the number of events be », and all 
equally probable/(fo that a=b=::Cy &c.) for * one or more ' we 
have I— ^'^ or i — (i— ^)". 

It is a confequence of this laft that, however unlikely an event 
may be, it is fure (in the common fenfe of the word) to happen, 
if the trial can be repeated as often as we pleafe. However 
fmall a may be, or however near to unity i — ^, « may be taken 
fo great that ( 1 — ^)" fhall be as fmall as we pleafe, or 1 — ( i —ay 
as near to unity as we pleafe, or thd' probability that the unlikely 
event will happen once or more in n times, as great as we pleafe. 
Let ^=i:(^+ 1), which means that the odds are ^ to i againfl 
the event on any one trial : the following rough deductions will 
fhow what kind'^of refults the formula gives, true within an in- 
flance or two when k is confiderable. In ^^ inflances it is an 
even chance that the event happens once or more ; in 2*3^, it is 
9 to I ; in 4'6^, 99 to i ; 6*9^, 999 to i ; 9'2^, 9999 to I : 
and in 23^, it is ten thouland millions to i. Thus, fuppofe at 
each trial it is a hundred to one againfl fuccefs. Then of thofe 
who try 70 efforts, as many will fucceed once or more as will 
altogether fail, in the long run. Of thofe who try 6900 times, 
only one of a thoufand will always fail. A perfbn who will not 
examine an afTertion that comes to him with ten to one againfl 
it, mufl count it an even chance that he . throws away one or 
more truths, if he follow his plan feven times. 

Let us now fuppofe that there are reafons why the feveral in- 
flances which can arrive are not equally credible. Suppofe the 
urn to contain a white, a black, and a red ball, and ourfelves to 



1 88 On Probability. 

have reafbns to think the balls not equally probable or credible, 
but that 6, 5, and 2 are the proportions of the degrees of belief 
we fliould accord to them feverally. If then bx reprefent the 
probability of a black ball, ^x and 2x will reprefent thofe of the 
other two feverally. By the poftulate, I'^x reprefents that of one 
or the other. But this is certainty ; whence x muft be tVj ^^^ 
-^, -/j, and -^ are the probabilities of the white, black, and red 
balls. That is to fey, when the feveral inftances are unequally 
probable, we muft count each inftance as though it occurred a 
number of times proportioned to its probability, and then proceed 
as in the cafe of equally probable inftances. Thus, in the above, 
inftead of faying (as we fhould do if the balls were equally pro- 
bable) that the probability of the white ball is 

I r • • 6 6^ 

we fay it is 5 or 7— 

i + i + i, ^ 64-5 + 2; bm-^sm + 2m 

would do, m being any number or fra£lion whatfoever. 

Now fuppofe two urns, one of all white balls, and the other 
of all black ones. If we actually draw a ball, and find it white, 
we know that the urn chofen to draw from muft have been the 
firft : the fecond could not have given that drawing. But fup- 
pofe the firft urn to have 99 white balls to one black, and the 
fecond one white to 1000 black. If we now draw again, and 
draw a white one, not knowing from which we drew, we feel 
almoft certain, from the drawing, that we have chofen the firft 
urn. We ftill feel almoji certain that the fecond urn would have 
given a black ball. This inverfion of circumftances, this conclu- 
fion that the circumftances under which the event did happen, 
are moft probably thofe which would have been moft likely to 
bring about the event, is of the utmoft evidence to our minds : 
but the queftion now before us is, are we to call it a fecond poftu- 
late, or is it deducible from the other one ? It is io deducible, 
and is not a fecond poftulate ; but it has not been ufual to give a 
very diftindl account of the deduftion.* If it could not be made, 

* So well eftablifhed is this ipecies of inverfion in the mind^ that both 
Laplace and PoiiTon, the two moft eminent mathematical writers on the fub- 
je6^, of the prefent century, have in a certain cafe afTumed that an equation 
which gives the moft probable value of x in terms of j', is therefore the one 
which gives the moft probable value of j' in terms of x. This is carrying 
the principle too far. 



On Probability. 1 89 

the following procefs would, no doubt, be fufEcient : it has often 
been held io. Let the urns have 6 white balls to i black, and 2 
white balls to 9 black. Then the probabilities of drawing a 
white ball from the two are y and ^ which are in the propor- 
tion of 33 to 7. If, becaufe when we choofe the firft urn, we 
have nearly five times as much chance of a white ball as the 
fecond one would give, we conclude that a known white ball 
from an unknown urn is in that proportion more likely to have 
come from the firft urn ; we fliall have || and -^^ for the proper 
degrees of belief in the two urns. For if 33^ be that for the 
firft urn, then ^x muft, by the aflumption, be that for the 
fecond : and for one or the other, we have 40jir. But this is 
certainty ; whence x muft be^. 

To reduce this refult to dependence upon the firft poftulate, 
proceed as follows. The probability that two events are con- 
ne^dy our belief, that is, in the connexion^ muft be the fame 
whether the two events, or either of them, have happened, or 
whether they be yet to happen : unlefs there be fomething 
in the happening which alters our knowledge, and puts us in 
a different ftate for forming a judgment. Suppofe I make up 
my mind, rightly or wrongly, as to how far I will believe that 
a white ball", if drawn, will have been drawn from the firft urn. 
An inftant after, I am told that the trial I anticipated has been 
made, and the contingency which I fuppofed has occurred ; a 
white ball has been drawn. I know no more than I took myfelf 
to know in my hypothefis ; and cannot therefore have any 
means of altering my opinion. Now, without altering the pro- 
portions in the urns, change the numbers of the balls, fo that 
there may be the fame total number in each : let them be 

{66 white, 11 black} {14 white, 63 black} 

Now put each ball in an urn by itfelf, 154 urns In all. This 
gives TTT to ^^y ^^^ l^^j ^f 1 choofe an urn at hazard. But it 
was fb before : as to the firft of the two urns for inftance, 4 was 
the probability of choofing that urn, and j^ that of choofing one 
particular ball from it : and 4x rr is if^* If we then remove 
all the urns with black balls, fo that a white ball muft be drawn, 
the chance of its being one of the 66 is 4| or |^. If without 
removing the black balls, we think of the probability of a white 



190 On Probability. 

ball, if drawn, being of the 66, or of the 14, the credibilities of 
thofe fuppofitions are as 66 to 14. If, having chofen an urn, we 
find it contains a white ball, the fame probabilities are ftill in 
that proportion. 

The rules derived from fimilar reafoning, whether for judging 
of the probabilities of precedents from an obferved confequent, 
or for judging of the probabilities of events which reftrift each 
other, are precifely the fame, as follows. If the probability of 
the obferved event, fuppofed ftill future, from the feveral poffible 
precedents, feverally fuppofed aftually to exift, be ^,^,f , &c : then, 
when the event is known to have happened, the probabilities 
that it happened from the feveral precedents are 

for the firft, for the fecond, &c. 



^ + A + f + . .. a + b + c . 

Again, if there be feveral events, which are not all that could 
have happened ; and if, by a new arrangement (pr by additional 
knowledge of old ones) we find that thefe feveral events are now 
made all that can happen, without alteration of their relative cre- 
dibilities : their probabilities are found by the fame rule. If ^ , b^ 
f, &c. be the probabilities of the feveral events, when not reftrifted 
to be the only ones : then, after the rcftriftion, the probability 
of the firft is ^-r(^ + ^ + . . .)j ^^ ^^^ fecond, ^-r(^ + A + .. .) 
and fo on. 

We* may obtain a very diftin£t notion of this laft theorem, as 
follows. Suppofe two events, which are among thofe that can 
happen, and let one, fay, be twice as probable as the other. This 
means, that among all the independent, and equally likely, cafes, 
there are twice as many favourable to the firft as to the fecond. 
Now, fuppofe by fbme alteration of fuppofitions, the introdu£tion 
of new knowledge, for inftance, it is found, all the cafes remain- 
ing as before, that all are prevented from happening except thefe 
two events. This new ftate of things does not alter the cafes in 
number : accordingly, the proportion of the probabilities of the 
two events is as before, two to one. But now one of them muft 
happen : or the fiim of thefe probabilities muft be unity. It 
follows then that one of them is |, and the other |. The fame 
reafoning may be applied to more complicated cafes. 

It frequently happens, when different problems are fblved by 



On Probability. 191 

the fame formula, that they may be confidered as the fame pro- 
blem in two different points of view : and alfo that one and the 
feme problem may be confidered as belonging to either clafe. 
For inftance ; — Let there be two witneffes, whofe credibilities 
(or the probabilities that in any given inftance they are correft) 
are a and b. As long as we do not know that they are talking 
about the fame thing, the probability that both will tell truth is 
ab. But the moment we knowUhat they both affert the feme 
thing, the problem is changed : they muft now be either both 
right or both wrong ; before, one might have been right and 
the other wrong. To take the firft view of the problem, we 
have now an obferved event, both ftate that the circumftance 
did happen. There are two precedents ; the event did, or did 
not, happen. If it did, the probability of the obferved event 
(which is then that both are right) would be ab ; if it did not, it 
would then be (i— ^)(i— A). Accordingly, the probability that 
the obferved event did happen, will be, by the rule above, ab 
divided by ^^ + (1— ^)(i— A). 

If we take the fecond view, we have, before the reftriftion, 
four poflible cafes, the probabilities of which are ^i, ^(i— A), 
^(i— ^) and (i— ^)(i— i). After the reftriftion, only the firft 
and fourth are poflible : whence the conclufion is as juft given. 
Full exemplifications of thefe methods will be found in the next 
chapter. 



CHAPTER X. 

On probable Inference. 

THERE are two fources of conviftion, argument and /{/?/- 
mony^ reafon why the thing fliould be, ftatement that the 
thing is. When the argument is neceflTarily good, we call it 
demonjiration : when the ftatement can be abfolutely relied on, 
we call it authority. Both words are ufed in lower than their 
abfolute fenfes ; thus, very cogent arguments are often called 
demonftration, and very good evidence, authority. 

I fliall fuppofe all the arguments I fpeak of to be logically 



192 On Probability. 

valid ; that is, having conclufions which certainly follow from 
the premifes. If then the premifes be all true, the conclufion is 
certainly true. If ^, i, r, &c. be the probabilities of the indepen- 
dent premifes, or the independent propofitions from which pre- 
mifes are deduced, then the produft abc. . . is the probability that 
the argument is every way good. 

Argument being offer of proof, its failure is only feilure of 
proof : and the conclufion may yet be true. But teftimony is an 
aflfertion of the truth of the conclufion ; and its failure can only 
be failure of truth. If a propofition of Euclid turn out to be 
badly demonftrated, the enunciation need not therefore be falfe. 
An argument may prove, difprove, or neither prove nor dis- 
prove : a teftimony cannot be * true, falfe, or neither true nor 
falfe. This diftinftion generally gains no more than a one-fided 
admiffion : perfons begin to fee it when fome over-zealous bro- 
ther writes weakly on their own fide of a queftion ; but they are 
very apt to think, with refpeft to the other fide, that anfwering 
the arguments is difproving the conclufion. 

Teftimony is, for the above reafon, more eafily underftood than 
argument. It is the moft efffeftive mode of conveying know- 
ledge to the uneducated. But it muft.not be fuppofed that, in 
any ftage of reafon, argument can be the only vehicle of infor- 
mation, even on fubjedls called argumentative. This point is 
one of great importance. 

When argument is demonftration, it eftablifhes its conclufion 
againft all teftimony. The idea of an infallible witnefs bearing 
evidence againft a demonftrated conclufion, is a contradi£lion. 
That n confecutive numbers have a fum which is divifible by », 
whenever n is odd, is demonftrated. If a thoufand of the beft 
qualified witnefTes that ever lived, both for honefly and arith- 
metic, were to fwear that they had difcovered 10 1 very high 
confecutive numbers, the fum of which is not divifible by 10 1, 
any mere beginner in mathematics would be more fure that a 
thoufand good witnefTes had loft their wits or their charafters, 
than any one elfe can be of anything not admitting of demon- 
ftration. 

But when argument does not amount to demonftration, not 
only is the truth or falfehood of the conclufion matter of credi- 
bility, but the ifTue of the argument is not that mere truth or 



On Probability. 193 

falfehood. It does not iftand thus : * According as this argument 
is good or bad, fo is the conclufion true or falfe/ but ' According 
as this argument is good or bad, fo is the conclufion true in this 
way^ or not true in this way^ (that is, either falfe, or true in fome 
other way).' If we were to fay * men are trees, and trees have 
reafon, therefore men have reafon,' we have a perfeftly logical 
argument, falfe in the matter of both premifes : but we cannot 
deny the conclufion. 

Suppofe now that an argument is prefented to us of which we 
are fatisfied that the likeywill prove their conclufions to be true 
in the particular modes afferted, in nine cafes out of ten. What 
are we to fay of the truth or falfehood of the conclufion ? We 
have -^ of belief to its being true in one particular way : how 
much fliall we add for other poffible ways ? Are we to reft in 
the conclufion as having 9 to i for it, or are we to allow more ? 
We cannot fay, let us confine ourfelves to the grounds we have 
got, and believe or difbelieve, not in the conclufion, but in the 
conclufion as obtained in that one way. 

I take it for granted that the mind muft have a ftate with 
refpeft to every aflfertion prefented to it, with reafon, or without 
reafon. Every propofition, the terms of which convey any mean- 
ing, at once, when brought forward, puts the hearer into fome 
degree of belief, or, if we ufe the common phrafe, of belief or 
unbelief: including, of courfe, the intermediate ftate, which is as 
clearly marked upon our fcale as any other. Men who are 
accuftomed to fufpend their opinion, as it is called, that is, to 
throw themfelves into the intermediate ftate when they have 
no definite reafon to think either way, are interefted in this 
queftion as much as any others. If there be fome ftate, though 
not numerically appreciable, in which their belief muft be, there 
is fome ftate, which they would rather know numerically than 
not, in which it ought to be. In the preceding cafe, fuppofe it 
known that 9 to i, or -^jy, is granted to the conclufion from the 
argument alone, and any one wiflies to fufpend his opinion as to 
the remaining tV- Is he to grant half of that 7%, and fay that 
\i5 + vf5 or \% is what he would wifli to make the meafure of his 
belief, if he knew how ? The confideration of this queftion will 
enter among others. 

The manner in which he deals with the refult of the argument 



194 On Probability. 

muft depend upon tejiimony^ uflng the word in its wideft fenfe. 
Firft, every man has, as juft noticed, a teftimony in his own 
mind as to every propofition. He may fet out with the inter- 
mediate ftate : he may have no reafon to lean either way, and 
may know it; that is to fay, he may have to apply an argument 
of T?^ to an exifting probability of ^. Or he may have previous 
good reafon, or bad reafon, which makes him lean to the affer- 
tion or denial ; and the meafure of this leaning muft then be 
combined with -^5. Or he may have other teftimony to combine 
with that of his own previous ftate. Any way, he cannot have 
a definite opinion on the bare truth or falfehood of the conclufion 
of the argument, without appeal to the previous ftate of his own 
mind at leaft, if not to that of others. 

It is generally faid that we are to throw away authority, and 
judge by argument alone ; that our reafon is to be convinced, 
and not biafled by the opinion of others ; that no conclufions are 
worth anything, except thofe which a man forms for himfelf. All 
the forms in which this frequent caution is exprefled, I take to 
be diftortions of the very needful warning not to allow authority 
more weight than is properly due to it : a warning, by the way, 
which is juft as much wanted with refpeft to argument as to 
authority. For every miftake which has been made by taking 
authorities on truji (that is, taking bad witnefles to prove the 
goodnefs of aflerted good ones), one miftake at l^aft has been 
made by taking arguments on preponderance: that is, treating 
them as proving their conclufion, as foon as they fliow it to be 
more likely than its contradiftion. 

To form the habit of allowing authority no more weight than 
is due to it, and the fame of argument, is undoubtedly one great 
objeft of mental cultivation : but it ought not to be forgotten 
that it is another and juft as great an objeft to form the habit of 
allowing them no lefs. Suppofe an argument of value t?^ is pre- 
fented, and that at the fame time we have the teftimony of a 
witnefs againft the conclufion, of whom we know that he leads 
us right 1000 times for each once that he mifleads us. Is there 
any fenfe in reducing this witnefs to one of no authority, or of an 
even chance, upon the principle of depending on argument only? 
Except the argument be demonftration, we muft be prepared to 
-admit that a witnefs may be as good as an argument, or better. 



On Probability. 195 

I fhall now proceed to the feveral problems which this fubjeft 
requires, confidering firft teftimony alone, next argument alone, 
and then the two in combination. 

Problem I. There are independent teftimonies to the truth of 
an aflertion, of the value ^, y, f, &c. (one of them being the 
initial teftimony of the mind itfelf which is to form the judg- 
ment) : required the value of the united teftimony. 

Let fj! be i— ^t, &c. as in page 187. Here is a problem of 
the fame clafs as in page 190 ; the reftridlions are, that all the 
teftimonies are right, or all wrong, the independent chances of 
which are /av^. . . and At'v'^'. . . Hence the probabilities are 



f..»j 



\ — rn — for; rrn — agamlt, 

Obferve, firft, that any numbers proportional to /tA, /a' &c. will 
do as well : and if the produfts have a common denominator, 
(as generally they have) the numerators only need be ufed. Se- 
condly, the eafieft way of exprefEng the refult is by faymg that it 
is /Ltvf . . . to /t^'v'f'. . . for, or /ttVy. , , to [jlv^. . . againft. 

For inftance, let it be in my mind 99 to one againft an afler- 
tion, that is, I bear only the teftimony tot in favour of it. Let 
four witncfles, for whofe accuracy it is 2 to i, 3 to i, 4 to i, 5 
to I, depofe in favour of it : \ want to know how it ought to 
ftand in my mind. The teftimonies for and againft, are 

JL £ 3 4 5. and 99 ^ I I 1, 
100 3 4 5 6 100 3 4 5 o 

Hence, neglefting the common denominator, it ought to be 
1x2x3x4x5 to 99X IX IX IX I, or 120 to 99, or 40 to 33, 
for the aflertion. 

Obferve that in faying the witnefs gives teftimony, iay |, it is 
of no confequence whether it be a queftion of judgment, or of 
veracity, or of both together. I mean that, come how it may, I 
am fatisfied that when he fays anything, it is 2 to i he fays what 
is correal. 

An eafy rule for the more common modes of expreflion pre- 
fents itfelf thus. The combined relative teftimony is the produdl 
of the feparate relative teftimonies. Thus, two witnefles of 6 
truths to one error, and of 7 truths to one error, are equivalent 



196 On Probability. 

to one witnefs of 42 (or 6x7) truths to one error. Three wit- 
nefles of 8, 6, 5 truths to 7, 3, 1 1 errors are equivalent to one 
witnefs of 80 truths to 77 errors. 

A jury of twelve equally truftworthy perfons, after conferring 
together, agree to an aflertion on which previoufly I had no 
leaning. Suppofing me fully fatisfied that fuch agreement gives 
100 to I for their refult, what am I to think of the deliberate 
opinion of any one among them, that is, of his opinion after he 
has had the advantage of difcuiBon with others. 

Let fjL be the value of fuch teftimony from any one ; then by 
the queftion 



Afc^ : (i— /tty^ : : 100 : i, or /a : i— /a :: y^ioo : i 

iay as I '468 to i. That is, I think inconfiftently if I rely on 
the united verdidl as upon 100 to i, unlefs I am prepared to 
think it 1468 to 1000, or about 3 to 2, for each juror alone. 

Ofm-\-n equally truftworthy jurors, a majority m are for, and 
n againft, a conclufion. If ^ be the value of the teftimony of 
each, then the odds are to be taken as being /**"(!— /tA)** for, and 
/Lt"(i—/A)'^ againft. 'But 



m — » 



At'"(i— At)** : /a'»(i— /a)*" :: /U""* : (i— At) 

which are exaftly as if the majority ;w— « had been all, and 
unanimous. From the original formula it will appear that two 
equally good teftimonies on oppofite fides produce no effeft on 
the refult. 

If then, the unanimity of the jury box in this country could 
be confidered as that of deliberate conviftibn, we might fay that 
a larger jury, with the condition that the majority fliould exceed 
the. minority by 12 at leaft, would be always as good, and often 
better" But there are various confiderations which prevent the 
above refult from being applicable. The neceffity of being unan- 
imous, as our law ftands, may lower the value of the verdid. On 
the other hand, a jury of 30, required to find by a majority of 12, 
would generally proceed to a vote before they had put the matter 
to each other with the real defire to gain opinion which the pre- 
ffent praftice produces : confequently, the value of their verdift 
would perhaps be lower than that, of the majority only, required 
to be unanimous. 



On Probability. \ 97 

The theory thus appears to confirm the notion on which we 
often aft, that a given excefs of majority over minority, is of the 
fame value whatever the numbers in the two may be. And this 
might be the cafe, if the thing called deliberation in a large body, 
were as well adapted to the difcovery of truth as the fame thing 
in a fmaller one. The reader muft remember that this teft does 
not compare the one witnefs on his own judgment with a num- 
ber after common deliberation ; but the firft, after common deli- 
beration with others, is compared with the whole. 

But in this, and all the problems of this chapter, the diftinftion 
muft be carefully drawn between the credibility of a circumftance 
at one time and at another. For example, a witnefs enters with 
ID to I in his favour, and owing to combination with others, the 
refult comes out that it is 100 to i he is in error in the par- 
ticular matter on which he gives evidence. We cannot believe 
both that it is 10 to i he is right, and 100 to i that he is wrong. 
What we believe is the latter, for the cafe in queftion. 

As another inftance, fuppofe m independent witneffes of equal 
goodneis (/t*) unite in affirming that a certain ball was drawn from 
a lottery of n balls : collufion being fuppofed impoffible. My 
knowledge of the circumftances of the affirmation here alters the 
problem. If n be confiderable, it is almoft impoffible that the 
witneffes, by independent falfehood or error, fliould all pitch on 
the fame wrong ball. To find the bias this ought to give me to 
the conclufion that they have told the truth, I muft obferve that 
there being «— i balls not drawn, whichever of thefe any one 
choofes, by error, the chance of any one of the reft choofing the 
fame is i-r(«— i), the probability that all the ;«— i fliall choofe 
the fame is !-=-(« — i )*"-*. Hence, the odds are as /**" to (i— /t*)** 
multiplied by the laft-named expreffion, or as («— i)'^'V"' to 
( I — /£*)*". If n be very great, the odds may be enormous for the- 
affertion, even though /tt, the credibility of each witnefs, may be 
fmall. In cafes of ordinary evidence, the thing afferted is ufually 
one out of almoft an infinite number of equally poffible affertions, 
and the agreement of even two witneffes (for when m is two or 
upwards, n appears in the formula) is certain conviftion, if, as 
affumed, we know the two witneffes to be not in collufion. If 
^= i-r-«, which is as much as to (ay that the evidence of each 
witnefs makes a ball no more likely to have been the one drawn, 



198 On Probability. 

becaufe he fays it, that it was on our mere knowledge that a ball 
had been drawn, it turns out i to «^ I for the truth of the affer- 
tion, juft as it was before the evidence. But let /tA=(i 4-«)-7-»> 
a being any fraftion, however fmall, that is, let each witnefs 
make the aflertion more probable than at firft, however little: 
then the odds for its truth become 

{l^-aY to(l ?L.V~i(«— i^a) 

which odds may be made as great as we pleafe, by (iifficiently in- 
creafing m. That is to fay, however little each witnefs may be 
good for, in real fupport of the aflertion, or in making it more 
probable than it is of itfelf, a fufficient number of witnefles, cer- 
tainly independent, will give it any degree of credibility what- 
ever. 

The ftudent of this fubjefl: is always ftruck by the frequency 
of the problems in which the fcience confirms an ordinary notion 
of common life, or is confirmed by it, according to his ftate of 
mind with refpeft to the whole doftrine. It is impoflible to fay 
that we have a theory made to explain common phenomena, and 
hence affording no reafon for furprife that it does explain them. 
The firft principles are too few and two fimple, the train of 
deduftion ends in conclufions far too remote. I believe hundreds 
of cafes might be cited in which the refults of this theory are 
found already eftabliflied by the common fenfe of mankind : in 
many of them, the mathematical fciences were not powerful 
enough to give the modes of calculation, when the principles of 
the theory were firft digefted. 

There are problems, however, in which we cannot eafily 
come into poflTeffion of data on which many will agree. The 
fimple queftion of independent witnefles is not one of them : 
but the queftion of collufion is. One of the difficulties is as 
follows. We cannot inftitute independent hypothefes upon the 
goodnefs of the witnefles and the probability of their having con- 
ferred upon their evidence. They declare, expreflly or by im- 
plication, that they have not done fo : if they have, there is falfe- 
hood in one part of their evidence ; or, which makes the difficulty 
ftill greater, there may have been general, but (as they aflTert or 
imply) not particular conference : they may have been biafled by 



On Probability. 1 99 

each other, without knowing how or to what extent. The firft 
ftep in one view of the problem Is eafily made, as follows. 

Let fjL be the value of the evidence of each witnefs, m their 
number, n the number of aflertions they have power to choofe 
from, all as before. Let a be the probability that there has been 
particular conference between them. There are then four cafes 
to which the problem is reftrifted :— (i) they have conferred and 
agreed to fpeak truth ; (2) they have not conferred and all fpeak 
truth ; (3) they have conferred and agreed on a falfehood; (4) 
they have not conferred and have all lighted upon the fame falfe- 
hood. The a priori probabilities of thefe four cafes are 



« / \ « / \« (I— M(i— At)*" 



and the odds that they fpeak the truth (fuppofing n (o great that 
we may rejeft the fourth cafe) are /a*" to a(i— /tc)*". Now 
comes the praftical difficulty of this queftion ; — How are x and 
fjL to be conne6led ? Every cafe which is worth examining fup- 
pofes that the greater the chance of there having been particular 
conference, the lefe is the witnefs worth from that very circum- 
ftance. For it is to be remembered that we are not generally 
able to give the witnefs a character wholly independent of his 
evidence in the cafe before us ; in hiftorical queftions, for in- 
ftance, it frequently happens that we have nothing but the wit- 
neffes to try* the cafe by, and nothing but the cafe to try the 
witnefles by. A very common occurrence is this ; — that a cafe 
is one in which no one would throw any doubt upon the wit- 
nefles, except for fuipicion of conference, and juft as much doubt 
as there is fuipicion of conference. This makes /a=i— a, and 
gives ( I —a) ix"*"*"^ for the odds in favour of the aflfertion. On this 
fuppofition, it follows that whenever the chances are againft all 
the witneflTes having conferred particularly, their number, if great 
enough, ought to give any degree of credibility to the aflirtion. 

• This gives rife to two great tendencies, which very nearly divide the 
world among them. Some fettle the cafe in their own minds, and then try 
the witnefles : fome fettle the witnefles and then try the cafe : not a few 
bring their fecond refult back again to juftify their firft aflumption. When 
there are two unknown quantities with only one equation, it is eafy for thofe 
who will aflume either to find the other. But the difiiculty is to find the 
moft probable value of both. 



200 On Probability. 

Problem 2. Let there be any number of different affertions, of 
which one muft be true, and only one : or of which one may be 
true, and not more than one : or of which any given number 
may be true, but not more : required the probability of any one 
poiEble cafe. 

The folution of all thefe varieties depends on one principle, 
explained in page 190 ; requiring the previous probabilities of all 
the confident cafes to be compared. As an inftance, fuppofe 
four affertions, A,B,C,D, and fuppofe /t*,v,f',cr, to be the probabi- 
lities from teftimony, for each of them. If either of them have 
feveral teftimonies, their united force muft be afcertained by the 
laft problem. Firft, let it be that one of them muft be true, 
and one only. The probabilities in favour of A,B,C,D, are in 
the proportion of Atv'^V, v/t*y(r', /J/t^'vV, and a-fjUv^^, Either of 
thefe, divided by the fum of all, reprefents the probability of its 
cafe. Secondly, let it be that one of them only can be true, and 
all may be falfe. Put on the fifth quantity /a'^V'^'j ^^^ ^^ ^^^^ 
in which all are falfe. For example, there are four diftin£l 
affertions, not more than one of which can be true. The fepa- 
rate evidences for thefe four affertions give them the probabili- 
ties f, T?-r, \ and ^, There is a certain affertion which is true if 
either of the firft three be true : required the probability of that 
affertion. Here, neglefting the common denominator, which 
is 7x11x8x5 in every cafe, the probabilities of the feveral 
affertions, and that of all being falfe, are as 2.8.7.1, 3.5.7.1, 
1.5.8. 1, 4.5.8.7, and 5.8.7.1, or as 112, 105, 40, 1 120, and 
280. The odds for one of the firft three cafes againft one of 
the other two are 112 + 105+40 to 1120 + 280 or as 257 to 
1400 ; or it is 1400 to 257 againft the truth of the affertion. 

Suppofe the condition were that two of the affertions, but not 
more, may be truej and that one muft be true. Then the pof- 
fible cafes, meaning by an accent that the affertion is not true, 
are AB'C'D', BA'CD', CA'B'D', DA'B'C, ABC'D', ACB'D', 
ADB'C, BCA'D', BDA'C, CDA'B'. Confequently, the pro- 
babilities of thefe cafes are in the proportion of fAv^p^a\ ' vfJp^ff\ 
Pf/!v^cr\ &c. And the odds in favour of, fay A, being true, are as 
the fum of all the terms which contain /t*, to the fum of thofe 
which contain /t*'. 

When we wifh to fignify that no evidence is offered either for 



On Probability. 201 

or againft one of the affertions, we muft put it down as having 
the teftimony 4« To put down o in the place of 4 would be to 
make an infallible witnefs declare that it is not true. Suppofe 
there are four affertions, one of which muft be true and one 
only : evidence of goodnefs ^ is offered for the firft, and none 
either way for the others. Required the probability of the firft. 
The probabilities of the four affertions are in the proportion of 
4.1.1. 1, 1.3.1. 1, 1.3.1. 1, and 1.3.1. 1, and it is 4 to 9 for the 
firft, or 9 to 4 againft it. 

Problem 3. Arguments being fuppofed logically good, and the 
probabilities of their proving their conclufions (that is, of all 
their premifes being true) being called their validities, let there 
be a conclufion for which a number of arguments are prefented, 
of validities ^, A, f, &c. Required the probability that the con- 
clufion is proved. 

This problem differs from thofe which precede in a material 
point. Teftimonies are all true together or all falfe together : 
but one of the arguments may be perfeftly found, though all the 
reft be prepofterous. The queftion then is, what is the chance 
that one or more of the arguments proves its conclufion. That 
all fliall fail, the probability is ^'AV .... that all fliall not fail, the 
probability is i— ^'AV .... Accordingly, if we fuppofe n equal 
arguments, each of validity a^ the probability that the conclufion 
is proved is i — (i — ^)". And, as in page 187J if the odds againft 
each argument be ^ to i, then, the number of fuch arguments 
being as much as ' k^ the conclufion is rendered as likely as not. 

But are we really to believe, having arguments againft the 
validity of each of which it is 10 to i, that feven fuch arguments 
make the conclufion about as likely to be true as not. If fuch 
be the cafe, the theory, ufually fo accordant with common notions, 
is ftrangely at variance with them. This point will require fome 
further confideration. 

In this problem I confider only argument, and not teftimony, 
which, neverthelefs, cannot be finally excluded (fee page 194). 
If the conclufion be one on which our minds are wholly un- 
biaffed to begin with, it may feem that we have no efcape from 
the preceding refult. And to it we muft oppofe, for confidera- 
tion at leaft, the common opinion of mankind that ftrong argu- 
ments are the prefumption of truth, weak arguments of falfehood. 



202 On Probability. 

If a controverfialift were to bring forward a hundred arguments, 
and if his opponent were fo far to anfwer them as to make it ten 
to one againft each, there can be no doubt that the latter would 
be confidered as having fairly contradifted the former. 

We muft not forget that argument, in a great many cafes, in- 
volves and produces the efFe6l of teftimony, and this in an eafily 
explicable and perfectly juftifiable manner. If I were to pick up 
a bit of paper in the ftreets, on which an argument is written, 
for a conclufion on which I have no previous opinion, and by an 
unknown writer, and if I could fay that that argument left on 
my mind the impreiEon of ten to one againft its validity, I might 
be prepared to allow it to ftand as giving -rr of probability, and 
upon that fuppofition to combine it with my previous opinion, 4> 
as in the next problem. But fuppofe it is on a queftion of 
phyfics, and Newton is the propofer of it, and that it is his only 
argument, and therefore, I conclude, his beft. The cafe is now 
entirely altered : pofEbly the conclufion is one on which the 
following argument would have great probability : 'If this con- 
clufion were true, it could be proved ; if it could be proved, 
Newton could have proved it; therefore if it were true, 
Newton could have proved it : but Newton cannot prove it ; 
therefore it is not true.' If the cafe be fuch that the two pre- 
mifes of this laft argument have each 9 to i for it, or -j^ ; then, 
though the original argument give iV for the conclufion, the mere 
circumftance of Newton bringing this argument as his beft is -^^ 
againft it. If Newton at the fame time declare his belief in the 
conclufion, we have on one fide his argument and his authority, 
on the other fide the argument arifing from his being reduced 
^to fuch an argument. 

That fuch confideratipns have weight, we know : and that 
they ought to have weight, we may eafily fee. It is of courfe, 
dependent upon the particular conclufion what weight ftiall be 
attached to the aflfertion, ' if this conclufion were true it could 
be proved.' The courts of law conftantly aft upon this princi- 
ple. They confider (very juftly I think) that evidence, however 
good it may be, is much lowered by not being die beft evidence 
that could be brought forward. If a man be alive, and capable 
of being produced with fufficient eafe, they will not take any 
number of good witnefles to the faft of his having been very 



On Probability. 203 

recently alive. In enumerating the arguments, then, for or 
againft a propofition, thofe muft be included, if any, which arife 
out of the nature, mode of produ£lion, or producers, of any 
among them. And until this has been properly done, we are 
not in a condition to apply the methods of the prefent chapter. 

Problem 4. A conclufion and its contradiftion being produced, 
one or the other of which muft be true, and arguments being 
produced on both fides, required the probability that the conclu- 
fion is proved, difproved (/. e, the contradiction proved), or left 
neither proved nor difproved. 

Colleft all the arguments for the conclufion, as in the laft 
problem, and let a be the probability that one or more of them 
prove the conclufion. Similarly, let b be the probability that one 
or more of the oppofite arguments prove the contradiction. Both 
thefe cafes cannot be true, though both may be falfe. The pro- 
babilities of the different cafes are thus derived. Either the 
conclufion is proved, and the contradiftion not proved, or the 
conclufion not proved and the contradi£lion proved, or both are 
left unproved. The probabilities for thefe cafes are as ^(i— i), 
b{ I — ^) and ( i — tf )( i "-^)j and the probability that the conclufion 
is proved is ^(i— i) divided by the fum of the three, and fo on. 
The fraftion (i— tf)(i— i) divided by this fum may be called the 
inconclujivenefs of the combined arguments. The manner in 
which this inconclufivenefs is to be diftributed between the hypo- 
thefis of the truth and falfehood of the conclufion muft depend 
upon teftimony, in the complete fenfe of the word. 

The predominance of one fide or the other, as far as argu- 
ments only are concerned, depends on which is the greateft, 
^(i— i) or i(i— ^), or fimply on which is the greateft, a or b. 
If the arguments on both fides be very ftrong, or a and b both very 
near to unity, then, though ^(i— A) and A(i— ^) are both fmall, 
yet (i— ^)(i— i) is very fmall compared with either. The ratio 
of ^(i— i) to b{i^a) on which the degree of predominance de- 
pends, may, confiftently with this fuppofitipn, be anything what- 
ever. But we cannot pretend that, when oppofite fides are thus 
both nearly demonftrated, the mind can take cognizance of the 
predominance which depends upon the ratio of the fmall and 
imperceptible defefts from abfolute certainty. The neceflary 
confequence is, that the arguments are evenly balanced, and are 



2 04 On Probability. 

as if they were equal : there is no fenfible notion of predominance. 
This is the ftate to which moft well conduced oppofitions of 
argument bring a good many of their followers. They are fairly 
outwitted by both fides, and unable to anfwer either, and the 
conclufion to which they come is determined by their own pre- 
vious impreflions, and by the authorities to which they attach 
moft weight ; and thefe are, of courfe, thofe which favour their 
own previoufly adopted fide of the queftion. 

When no argument is produced on one fide of the queftion, 
the cafe is very different from the cafe of the preceding problems, 
in which no teftimony is produced. Here the queftion is, * Has 
the conclufion been proved or not proved ; ' and when no argu- 
ment is produced, we are certain it has not been proved. Ac- 
cordingly, if no argument were urged for the contradiftion, we 
fhould have i— i=i, or i=o. 

If, in the preceding problem, the two fides of the queftion be 
not contradiftions, but fubcontradiftions, of which neither need 
be true, but both cannot be, the problem is folved in the fame 
way, for the cafes are juft the fame. But we may introduce a 
diftinftion which the former cafe would not admit. When one 
muft be true, every argument againft one is of equal force for 
the other ; which is not the cafe when neither need be true. 
Let there, then, be arguments for the firft conclufion and againft 
it, and let a and p be the probabilities that one or more of the 
arguments for, prove it, or againft, difprove it. Let b and q be 
the fimilar probabilities for the fecond conclufion. Then, there 
are thefe cafes : — i. The arguments (or fome of them) for the 
firft are valid, againft it invalid, and thok for the fecond are 
invalid (it matters nothing whether thofe agalnjl the fecond be 
valid or invalid). 2. The arguments for the firft are invalid, 
thofe for the fecond valid, and againft it invalid, 3. The argu- 
ments againft the firft are valid, and thofe for it invalid. 4. The 
arguments againft the fecond are valid, and thofe for it invalid. 
5. All the arguments are invalid. Accordingly, the probabilities 
that the firft is proved, that it is difproved, that the fecond is 
proved, that it is difproved, and that neither of the two is proved 
nor difproved, are in the proportion of ^(i— ^)(i— ^), (i— ^y)^} 
*(i-^)(i-./7), (i-%, and (i-^)(i-^)(i«./>)(i-y). 

Problem 5. Given both teftimony and argument to both fides 



On Probability. 205 

of a con tradition, one fide of which muft be true, required the 
probability of the truth of each fide. 

This is the moft important of our cafes, as reprefenting all 
ordinary controverfy. CoUeft all the teftimonies, and let their 
united force for the firft fide be ^, and, from the nature of this 
cafe, I — ^ for the other fide. Let a and b be the probabilities 
that the firft fide and the fecond fide are proved by one or more 
of the arguments in their favour. Now, obferve that, for the 
truth or either fide, it is not eflTential that the argument for it 
fhould be valid, but only that the argument againft it fhould be 
invalid. Accordingly, the probabilities of the two fides are in 
the proportion of ^(i— i) and (i— |a)(i— ^), and the probabili- 
ties of the two fides are reprefented by 



Firft, let there be no teftimony either way : we muft then have 
yit=J=i— /a; confequently, thefe probabilities are as i — b to 
I — /7. Let no argument have been offered for the fecond fide, 
or let i=o. Then we have i to i— ^, for the odds, or 
1-1.(2— /?) for the probability of the firft fide being true. It has 
been ufual to fay that if an argument be prefented of which the 
probability is a^ the truth of the conclufion has alfo the probabi- 
lity a. Probably the above was the cafe intended as to teftimony, 
&c., and the probability fhould then have been 

or /7 + i ^— 

7.— a 2 — a 

which is always greater than a. Or, as we might expe£l, the 
poffibility of the conclufion being true, though the argument 
fhould be invalid, always adds fomething to the probability of its 
being true. Moreover, i-r(2— ^) is always greater than i : or 
any argument, however weak, adds fomething to the force of 
the previous probability. The fame thing is true in every cafe. 
Suppofe a new argument to be produced for the firft fide, of the 
force k. The efFeft upon the formula is to change i— <7 into 
(i— ^)(i— i^), and the odds in favour of the conclufion are in- 
creafed in the proportion of i to i— -^. But this is to be under- 



2o6 On Probability. 

ffood ftriflly in the fenfe defcribed in page 202, namely, we are 
to fuppofe that the newly produced argument is fingle, that is, 
does not by the circumftances of its produftion caufe itfelf to be 
accompanied by an argument for the fecond fide, or againft the 
firft. If this laft fliould happen, and the argument thus created 
for the fecond fide have the force /, the odds are altered in the 
proportion of i — / to i — ^. 

From the above it appears that oppofite arguments of the 
force a and b are exaftly equivalent to a teftimony the odds for 
the truth of which are as i — i to i — tf. Thus, fuppofe we have 
for a conclufion witneffes whofe teftimonies are worth ^, f, ^, 
T^^; arguments for of the feveral forces, |, TT?i; and arguments 
againft of the forces §, tt> t« Writing numerators only, we put 
down 

For, 2, 2, 4, 9 ; 7, 9, I : 

Againft, i^ i, 3> ^ 5 4» i> 3- 

Hence it is, 2. 2. 4. 9. 7. 9. i to i. i. 3. i. 4. i. 3, or 

252 to I for the conclufion. 

An argument, we fhould infer beforehand, is better than a 
teftimony of the fame force ; for the failure of the argument is 
nothing againft the conclufion, but the failure of the teftimony is 
its overthrow. So fays the formula alfo : the introduftion of a 
teftimony of the value ^, not before received, alters the exifting 
odds in the proportion of ^ to i—kx but the introduftion of an 
argument of the fame force alters them in the greater proportion 
of I to I— ^. Thus, the introduction of the teftimony of a 
perfon who is as often wrong as right (4) alters the odds in the 
proportion of i to i, or does not alter them at all : but the intro- 
duftion of an argument which is as likely as not to prove the 
conclufion, alters them in the proportion of i to 1—4, or of 
2 to I. 

Are we not in the habit, unconfcioufly, of recognizing fome 
fuch diftinftion ? Do we not give much more weight to argu- 
ment than to teftimony ? I fufpe<3: the anfwer ftiould be in the 
affirmative : that an argument of 3 to i does convince us much 
more than a teftimony of 3 to i. I fufpeft we ftiow it, not in 
numerical appreciation, of courfe, but in liftening to and allow- 



On Probability. 207 

ing weight to arguments, when we fhould refufe teftimony of 
the fame charafter. 

It may be doubted, however, whether we have much fcope 
for experiment on the lower degrees either of teftimony or argu- 
ment. Perhaps it is not often we meet a witnefs, whether as 
bearing teftimony of veracity to a faft, or of judgment to a con- 
clufion, whofe evidence is as low as 4 ; and the fame perhaps of 
an argument. 

I have fpoken, in the previous part of this chapter, of the 
rejection of authority, that is, of teftimony, authority being only 
high teftimony. Let us now examine by the formula and fee 
what it amounts to. Let a be the probability that the argument 
proves its conclufion : and let us therefore perlift in faying that 
a is the probability for the truth of the conclufion. In the for- 
mula, b being=o, let (x be made ^-r(i +^), it will be found that 
the probability for the conclufion, (x divided by /t-t + (i — /it)(i — /?), 
comes out a^ as required. Confequently, in the cafe of a fingle 
argument, the total rejeftion, as it would be thought, of all tefti- 
mony, is really equivalent to accompanying every argument by a 
teftimony lefs than 4? depending upon its own force. It is to 
declare that, by the laws of thought, an argument of -^ is of its 
own nature accompanied by a witnefs of iV, one of |^ by a wit- 
nefs of f , and fo on ; this is clearly not what was meant. Nor, 
I fuppofe, can it be meant that we are arbitrarily to ftart with the 
teftimony i^ and to reduce our own evidence, and that of all 
others, to the fame. If there be any fenfe in which the rejeftion 
of authority is defenfible, It muft be when we are required to 
proceed as if we were in perfeft ignorance what the value of the 
authority is. We cannot fuppofe it to be as likely to have one value 
as another. Suppofe, for inftance, that the arguments have un- 
known propofers : we cannot treat their authorities as if they were 
juft as likely to be exceffively high or low as to be very near 
to none at all. The more rational fuppofition is that the autho- 
rity fhould be more likely to be fmall than great, as likely to be 
againft as for, and very unlikely to be exceiSvely great either for 
.or againft. I cannot here enter into the mode in which fuch an 
hypothefis can be exprefled or ufed : but the refult of the finipleft 
formula which fatisfies the above conditions, is as follows: — 
Let r=(i— i)-r(i— ^), b and a meaning as above j then the 



2o8 On Probability. 

probability that the conclufion is true, which has a for the 
validity of its argument, &c. is 

r(r5— 6rH 3r + 6rlogr + 2)-T-(r— i)* 

where logr means the Naperian logarithm (99-43rds of the 
common logarithm will be near enough for the prefent purpofe). 
If, for inftance, r=2, which, on the fuppofition of no previous 
balance of teftimony, would give 2 to i for the conclufion, the 
formula juft written gives •636, or 636 to 364, fomething lefs 
than 2 to I. 

In the cafe firft difcuffed in page 202, it may be thought that 
the weaknefs of a propofed argument, from one who fliould have 
brought a better, if there had been one, may be confidered as a 
tejiimony againft the conclufion rather than an argument. Sup- 
pofe his argument, for inftance, to have only the probability ^. 
He tells us then, that after he has done his beft, it is 9 to i 
againft the propofition being proved. If we are very confident 
that it could be proved, if true, and that he could do it, if any 
one, he comes before us as a teftimony of 9 to i againft the 
truth of the conclufion, or very nearly fo. If we take, then, all 
that his argument wants of demonftration, as fo much evidence 
from him againft the conclufion, this amounts to fuppofing that, 
a being the validity of his argument, a is alfo his teftimony for 
the conclufion (and i — <7 that againft it). If there be only argu- 
ment for, and none againft, and if our minds be previoufly unbi- 
aflid, we reprefent this cafe by putting a iox (jl \n the formula, 
and the odds for the conclufion are then as ^ to (i— ^)*. On 
this fuppofition, which I incline to think well worthy of attention, 
we fliould not confider an unoppofed argument from an acute 
reafbner as giving the conclufion to be as likely as not, unlefi 
a={i—aY or ^="382, a little more than j. Were it not for 
our peculiar introduction of teftimony, then, the conclufion being 
as likely as not to begin with, an argument which has any pro- 
bability of proving it, would have made it more likely than not, 
as before feen. 

But that the introduced teftimony fliould be exaftly as above, 
is a mere fuppofition. If it were a mathematical propofition, 
for inftance, and Euler were to declare himfelf unable to give 
more than a probability of proof, I, for one, fliould confider him 



On Probability. 209 

as giving a much higher rate of teftimony againft the truth of 
the aiTertion than is flippofed in the preceding. But all this has 
reference to the queftion how to meafure teftimonies and va- 
lidities in particular cafes, which is quite a diftinA thing from 
the inveftigation of the way to ufe them when meafiu'ed. 

In cafes in which the number of arguments is multiplied, it 
generally happens that they ftand or fall together, in parcels : 
namely, that the feme ^lure which makes one invalid, neceffarily 
makes others invalid. In this cafe, independent arguments muft 
be feledled, and the probabilities for them alone employed. 

We fee in this problem an illuftradon of the commonly ob- 
ferved refult, that the feme argument produces very different 
final conclufions in two different minds ; and this when, fb far as 
can be judged, both are difpofed to give the feme probabilities to 
the feveral premifes of the argument. The initial odds, come 
how they may, or /* to i — /*, fhould be altered by the arguments 
in the proportion of i— i to i— <7. Accordingly, b and a being 
the fame to both parties, their belief in the conclufion may have 
any kind of difference, if (x be not the feme thing to both. 

Problem 6. Given an affertion. A, which has the probability 
a ; what does that probability become, when it is made known 
that there is the probability m that B is a neceffary confequence 
of A, B having the probability b ? And what does the probabi- 
lity of B then become ? 

Firfl, let A and B not be inconfiflent. The cafes are now as 
follows, with reipedl to A. Either A is true, and it is not true 
that both the connexion exifls and B is falfe : or A is falfe. This 
is much too concife a flatement for the beginner, except when it 
is fuppofed left to him to verify it by collecting all the cafes. The 
odds for the truth of A, either as above or by the collection, 
are tf{i— »2(i— i)} to i— ^. As to B, either B is true, or Bis 
falfe and it is not true that A and the connexion are both true. 
Accordingly, the odds for B are as ^ to (i— i)(i— »itf). 

The reader mufl remember that when B neceffarily follows 
from A, B mufl be true when A is true, but may be true when 
A is falfe ; while A mufl be felfe when B is falfe. And now we 
fee that a propofition is not neceffarily unlikely, becaufe it is very 
likely to lead to an incredibility, or even to an abfolute impoffi- 
bility. Let i=o, or let B be impoffible : then the odds for A 

p 



210 On Probability . 

are as <7(i— w) to i— ^. Say that it is 9 to i that the connec- 
"tion exifts ; then thefe odds are as a to 10(1-/7). If a be 
greater than -fij ftiU A remains more likely than not, even when 
it is 9 to I that it leads to the abfurdity B. 

Secondly, let A and B be inconliftent, fo that both cannot be 
true. Either then A is true, B falfe, and the connexion does 
not exift ; or A is falfe. The odds for A are then 3S a{i—b) 
(i— ;w) to I— tf. With refpeft to B, either B is true and A is 
falfe, or B is falfe, and A and the connexion are not both true. 
The odds for B are then as b[i—a) to (i— ^)(i— »2^). 
' Among the early fophifms with which the Greeks tried the 
power of logic, as a formal mode of detefting fallacies, was the 
conftruiSion of what we may C2iSl fuicidal propofitions, affertions 
the truth of which would be their own felfehood. If a man 
fhould fay ' I lie,' he fpeaks neithef truth nor falfehood ; for if 
he fay true, he lies, and if he lie, he fpeaks truth. Such a fpeech 
cannot be interpreted. Again, the Cretan, Epimenides, faid that 
all the Cretans were incredible liars ; is he to be believed or not ? 
If we believe him, we muft, he being a Cretan, difbelieve him. 
Some ftated it thus ; — ' If we believe him, then the Cretans are 
liars, and we fhould not believe him ; then there is no evidence 
againft the Cretans, or we may believe him, fo that the evidence 
againft the Cretans revives, &c. &c. &c. Refer fuch a propo- 
rtion to the theory of probabilities, and the difficulty immediately 
difappears. Whatever the credit of Epimenides as a witne& 
may be, that is, whatever, upon his word, the odds may be for his 
. proportion, the fame odds are there againft him from the propo- 
fition itfelf. Thefe equal conflifting teflimonies balance one 
another (problem i) and leave the effeft of other teflimonies to 
the fame point unaltered. The fophifm of Epimenides, as flated, 
is but an extreme cafe of the fecond of the problems before us. 
The propofition B is inconfiflent with A, and the connexion is 
certain (»2=i): the odds for B mufl then be as i(i— «) to 
(i— ^)(i — a)^ or as ^ to i— ^, exaftly what they are independ- 
ently of the previous afTertion. 



On InduSlion. 21 1 



CHAPTER XI. 

On Induction. 

THE theory of what is now called induSfion muft occupy a 
large fpace in every work which profeffes to treat of the 
matter of arguments 5 but there is not much to fay upon the gen- 
uine meaning of the word, in any fyftem of formal logic. And that 
little would be lefs, if it were not for the miftaken oppofition 
which it has long been cuftomary to confider as exifting between 
the induftive procefs and the reft of our fubjeft. 

By induftion (l^raywyii) is meant the inference of a univerfal 
propofition by the feparate inference of all the particulars of 
which it is compofed : whether thefe particulars defcend fo low 
as fingle inftances or not. Thus if X be a name which includes 
P,Q,R, fo that every thing which is X muft be one of the 
three : then if it be fhown feparately that every P is Y, and that 
every Q is Y, and that every R is Y 5 it follows that every X 
is Y. And this laft is faid to be proved by indudion. Thus 
(Chapter VI). 

X)P,Q,R4-P)Y + Q)Y+R)Y=X)Y 

is an induftive procefs. In form, it may be reduced as in page 
123, to one ordinary fyUogifm. 

Complete induction is demonftration, and ftri^lly fyUogiftic in 
its charafter. In the preceding procefs we have y)p, y)q, y)r, 
which give y)pqr : and X)P,Q,R is pqr)x ; whence y)x, or X) Y. 
It is a queftion of names, that is, it depends upon the exiftence 
or nonexiftence of names, whether a complete induction fliall 
preferve that form, or lofe it in the appearance of a Barbara fyUo- 
gifm, formed by help of the conjunftive poftulate of Chapter VI. 

But when the number of fpecies or inftances contained under 
a name X is above enumeration, and it is therefore practically 
impoffible to coUedl and examine all the cafes, the final induc- 
tion, that is, the ftatement of a univerfal from its particulars, 
becomes impofHble, except as a probab/e Astement: unlefs it 
(hould happen that we can deteft fbme law connefting the fpe- 
cies or inftances, by which the refult, when obtained as to a 
certain number, may be inferred as to the reft. 



212 On InduSiion. 

This laft named kind of induifion by connexion^ is common 
enough in mathematics, but can hardly occur in any other kind 
of knowledge. In an innumerable feries of propofitions, repre- 
fented by Pi,P2,P3,P4, &c, it may and does happen that means 
will exift of fhowing that when any confecutive number, fuppofe 
three, of them are true, the next muft be true. When this 
happens, a formal indu£lion may be made, as (bon as the three 
firft are eftablifhed. For by the law of connexion, Pi,P2, and P3, 
eftablifh P4 5 but ?^;P^ and P4, eftablifh P^ ; and then P3,P4, 
and P5, eftablifh Pg j and fo on ad infinitum. It is to be obferved 
that this is really induSfion : there is no way, in this procefs, of 
compelling an opponent to admit the truth of P,oo without 
forcing him, if he decline to admit it otherwife, through all the 
previous cafes. 

As an eafy inftance, obferve the proof that the fquare of any 
number is equal to the fum of as many confecutive odd numbers, 
beginning with unity, as there are units in that number : as ken, 
in 

6x6=1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9+11 

Take any number, n ; and write n m (reprefenting a unit by 
a dot) in rank and file. To enlarge this figure into (« + i) (« + i)s, 
we muft place n more dots at each of two adjacent fides, and 
one more at the corner. So that the (quare of n is turned into 
the fquare of »+ 1 by adding 2«+ 1, which is the («+ i)th odd 
number. Thus 100 x 100 is turned into loi x lOi by adding 
the loift odd number, or 201. If then the theorem alleged be 
true of « X », it is therefore true of (« + 1 ) x (« + 1). But it is 
true of the firft number, i x i being i ; therefore it is true of the 
fecond, or 2x2=1 + 3; therefore it is true of the third, or 
3x3=1+3 + 5; andfoon. 

But when we can neither examine every cafe, nor frame a 
method of connefting one cafe with another, no abfolutely de- 
monftrative induftion can exift. That which is ufually called by . 
the name is the declaration of a univerfal truth from the enumer- 
ation of fome particulars, being the affumption that the unex- 
amined particulars will agree with thofe which have been ex- 
amined, in every point in which thofe which have been examined 
agree with one another. The refult thus obtained is one of 



On InduSlion. 213 

probability ; and though a moral certainty, or an unimpcachably 
high degree of probability, can eafily be obtained, and aftually is 
obtained, and though moft of our conclufions with refpeft to the 
external world are really thus obtained, yet it is an error to put 
the refultof fuch an induction in the fame clafs with that of a de- 
monftration. There is no objeftion whatever to any one faying 
that the former refults are to his mind more certain than thofe of 

• 

the latter : the fa<3: may be that they are fo. The difFerence 
between neceffary and contingent propofitions lies in the quali- 
ties from which they receive thofe adjeftives, more than in 
difFerence of credibility, I know that a ftone will fall to the 
ground, when let go : and I know that a fquare number muji be 
equal to the fum of the odd numbers, as above : and though, 
when I flop to think, I do become fenfible of more affurance for 
the fecbnd than for the firft, yet it is only on reflexion that I 
can diftinguifh the certainty from that which is fo near to it. 

The rule of probability of a pure induSfion is eafily given, 
Suppofing the fimple queftion to be whether X is or is not Y, 
there being no previous circumftances whatfoever to make us 
think that any one X is more likely than not to be Y, or left 
likely than not. Thefe are the circumftances of what I call a 
pure induction. To begin with, it is i to 1 that the firft X ex- 
amined fliall be a Y : if this be done, and'Xi be a Y, then it is 
2 to I that Xj (hall be a Y ; fhould it fo happen, then it is 3 to 

I that X3 (hall be a Y. Generally, when the firft m Xs have 
all been examined, and all turn out to be Ys, it is ;w + 1 to I 
that the (;7i+ i)th X fliall be a Y, 

The fimplicity of this rule muft not lead the ftudent to fuppofe 
he can find a fimple reafon for it. Let 10 Xs have been exam- 
ined and found to be Ys : what do we affert when we fay it is 

I I to I that the I ith X fliall be a Y ? We aflert that if an in- 
finite number of urns were coUefted, each having white balls and 
black balls in infinite number but in a definite ratio, and fo that 
every poffible ratio of white balls to black ones occurs once ; and 
if every poffible way of drawing eleven balls, the firft ten of 
which are white, were felefted and put afide : then, of thofe put 
afide, there are eleven in which the eleventh ball is white, for 
one in which the eleventh ball is black. The reader will find 
fome difficulty in forming a diftinft conception of this, and of 



214 O^ Induction. 

courfe will find it impoffible to have any axiomatic perception of 
the truth or felfefiood of the refult. 

It may be worth while to fhow that a fuppofidon making fome 
degree of approach to the preceding circumftances will give fome 
approach to the refult. Firft, in lieu of an infinite number of 
balls in each box, which is fuppofed only that withdrawal of a 
definite number may not alter the ratio, let each ball drawn be 
put back again, which will anfwer the fame purpofe. Let there 
be only ten urns with ten balls in each, of which let the firft 
have one white, the fecond two white, &c. and the laft all white. 
The number of ways of drawing eleven white balls fucceffively 
out of any one urn is the eleventh power of the number of white 
balls in the urn : that of drawing ten white balls followed by one 
black one is the tenth power of the number of white balls mul- 
tiplied by the number of black ones. If we were to put together 
all the firft, and then all the fecond, we fhould find about 2i 
times as many ways of arriving at the firft refult (ten white, fol- 
lowed by a white) as the fecond (ten white followed by a black). 
But if we now increafed the number of urns, and took a hundred, 
having one, two, &c. white balls, we fhould find inftead of 21, 
a number much nearer to 1 1 ; and (o on. 

Accordingly, when without any previoufly formed bias, we 
find that m Xs, fucceffively examined, are each of them a Y, we 
ought then to believe it to be w + 1 to I that the next, or 
(»2+ i)th X, will be a Y. And further, a being a fradion lefs 
than unity, we have a right to fay there is the probability i — ^?"+* 
that the Xs make up the fraftion a or more, of the Ys. Or 
thus ; — if the fraftion a be, fay ^ and if mhe 10: then if the 
10 firft Xs be all Ys, the probability that 7. or more of the Xs 
are Ys is juft that of drawing one or more black balls in 1 1 
drawings, from an urn in which ^ of the balls are always white. 

If, for example, the firft 100 Xs were all Ys, it would be 
found to be 1000 to i that 93^^ per cent, at leaft, of all the Xs 
are Ys. 

If as before, the firft m Xs obferved have all been Ys, and we 
afk what probability thence, and thence only, arifes that the next 
n Xs examined fliall all be Ys, the anfwer is that the odds in fit- 
vour of it are »i + I to «, and againft it n to m-^i. No induc- 
tion then, however extenfive, can by itfelf, afFord much probability 



On InduBion. 2 1 5 

to a univerfal concluiion, if the number of inftances to be exam- 
ined be very great compared with thofe which have been exam- 
ined. If 100 inftances have been examined, and 1000 remain, it 
is 1000 to lOi againft all the thoufand being as the hundred. 

This refult is at variance with all our notions ; and yet it is 
demonftrably as rational as any other refult of the theory. The 
truth is, that our notions are not wholly formed on what I have 
called the pure induSfion. In this it is fuppofed that we know no 
reafbn to judge, except the mere mode of occurrence of the in- 
duced inftances. Accordingly, the probabilities fliown by the 
above rules are merely minima^ which may be augmented by 
other fources of knowledge. For inftance, the ftrong belief, 
founded upon the moft extenfive previous induftion, that pheno- 
mena are regulated by uniform laws, makes the firft inftance of a 
new cafe^ by itfelf, furnifli as ftrong a prefiimption as many in- 
ftances would do, independently of fuch belief and reafon for it. 

With this however I have nothing farther to do, except to 
obferve that, in the language of many, induction is ufed in a fenfe 
very different from its original and logical one. It is made to 
mean, not the coUeftion of a univerfal from particulars, but the 
mode of arrival at a common caufe for varied, but fimilar, phe- 
nomena. A great part of what is thus called induftion confifts 
in difcovery of differences^ not refemblances. Under this confufed 
ufe of language, the ufual theory is introduced, namely, that 
Ariftotle was oppofed to all induftion, that Bacon was oppofed 
to every thing elfe, that the whole world up to the time of Bacon 
followed Ariftotle, that the former was the firft who ftiowed the 
way to oppofe the latter, that each had a logic of his own, &c. 
&c. The whole of this account abounds with miftatements. 
The admitted and fufficiently ftriking difference between the 
philofophy of modern and ancient times, in all natural and mate- 
rial branches of inquiry, is not fo eafily explained as by choofing 
two men, one to bear all the blame, the other all the credit : nor 
are Copernicus, Gilbert, Tycho Brahe, Galileo, and the other 
predecefTors of the Novum Organum^ deftined to be always de- 
prived of their proper rank. 

What is now called induction, meaning the difcovery of laws 
from inftances, and higher laws from lower ones, is beyond the 
province of formal logic. Its inftruments are induftion properly 



2 1 6 On InduStion. 

(o called, reparation of apparently related, but xeally diftind par- 
ticulars (the negledl of which was far more hurtful to the old 
philofophy than a neglefl of induflion proper would have been, 
even had it exifted) mathematical deduftion, ordinary. logic, &c. 
&c. &c. It is the ufe of the whole box of tools : and it would 
be as abfurd to attempt it here, as to append a chapter on car- 
pentry to a defcription of the mode of cutting the teeth of a few. 
* The proceffes of Ariftotle and of Bacon are equally thofe which 
we are in the habit of performing every day of our lives. But 
fome perform them well, and fome ill. It is extraordinary that 
there fhould be fuch divifion of opinion on the queftion whether 
a careful analyfis of them, and ftudy of the parts into which they 
decompofe, is of any ufe towards performing them well. On 
this point, and on the charafter of Bacon's office in philofophy, 
a living writer, to whom I fhould think it likely that many yet 
unborn would owe their firfl notions of Bacon's writings, ex- 
prefTes himfelf in a manner which I quote, and comment on at 
length, as the befl expofition I can find, of a clafs of opinions 
which is very prevalent, and, I fully believe, to the prejudice of 
fober thought and accurate knowledge. 



The vulgar notion about Bacon we take to be this, that he invented a 
new method of arriving at truth, which method is called Indu6tiony and that 
he detected fome ^llacy in the fyllogiftic reafoning which had been in vogue 
before his time. This notion is about as well founded as that of the people 
who, in the middle ages, imagined that Virgil was a great conjuror. Many 
who are far too well informed to talk fuch extravagant nonfenfe, entertain 
what we think incorre6l notions as .to what Bacon really effe£i:ed in this 
matter. 

The indu6tive method has been pra6Ufed ever (ince the beginning of the 
world, by every human being. It is conftantly pra6lifed by the moft igno- 
rant clown, by the moft thoughtlefs fchoolboy, by the very child at the 
breaft. That method leads the clown to the conclufion that if he fows 
barley, he (hall not reap wheat« By that method a fchoolboy learns that a 
cloudy day is the beft for catching trout. The v^ry infant, we imagine, is 
led by indu6tion to expe£l milk from hb mother or nurfe, and none from 
his father. 

Not only is it not true that Bacon invented the indu£live method j but 
it is not true that he was the firft perfon who corre6tiy analyfed that method 
and explained its ufes. Ariftotle had long before pointed out the abiurdity 
of fuppofing that fyllogiftic reafoning could ever condu6l men to the diico- 
very of any new principle, had ihown that fuch difcoveries muft be made by 



On InduStton. 217 



lndu6Uon, and by induction alone, and had given the hiftory of the indu^ve 
proce&, concifely indeed, but with great perfpicuity and precifion. 

Again, we are not inclined to afcribe much pra6lical value to that analy- 
£s of the indu6tive method which Bacon has given in the fecond book of 
the Novum Organum, It is indeed an elaborate and correal analyfis. But 
it is an analyiis of that which we are all doing from 'morning to night, and 
which we continue to do even in our dreams. A plain man iinds his fto- 
mach out of order. He never heard Lord Bacon^s name. But he proceeds 
in the ftri6left conformity with the rules laid down in the fecond book of 
the Novum Organum, and fatisfies himfelf that minced pies have done the 
mifchief. " I eat minced pies on Monday and Wednefday, and I was kept 
awake by indigeftion all night. ^' This is the comparentia ad intelleSum in" 
Jiantiarum convenientium, " I did not eat any on Tuefday and Friday, and 
I was quite well." This is the comparentia injiantiarum in proximo qua 
natura daiaprivantur, ** I ate very fparingly of them on Sunday, and was 
very (lightly indifpofed in the evening. But on Chriftmas-day I almoft 
dined on them, and was fo ill that I was in great danger." This is the 
comparentia jnftantiarum fecundum magis et minus, " It cannot have been 
the brandy which I took with them 5 for I have drunk brandy daily for 
years without being the worfe for it." This is the rejeSio naturarum. Our 
invalid then proceeds to what is termed by Bacon the Findemiatio, and pro- 
nounces that minced pies do not agree with him. 

We repeat that we diipute neither the ingenuity noi* the accuracy of the 
theory contained in the fecond book of the Novum Organum ; but we think 
that Bacon greatly overrated its utility. We conceive that the indu6live 
procefs, like many other proceffes, is not likely to be better performed 
merely becaufe men know how they perform it. William Tell would not 
have been one whit more likely to cleave the apple if he had known that 
his arrow would defcribe a parabola under the influence of the attraction of 
the earth. Captain Barclay would not have been more likely to walk a 
thoufand miles in a thoufand hours, if he had known the place and name of 
every mufcle in his legs. Monfieur Jourdain probably did not pronounce 
D and F more corre6Uy after he had been apprifed that D is pronounced 
by touching the teeth with the end of the tongue, and F by putting the 
upper teeth on the lower lip; We cannot perceive that the ftudy of gram- 
mar makes the fmalleft difference in the fpeech of people who -have always 
lived in good fociety. Not one Londoner in ten thoufand can lay down 
the proper rules for the ufe of vjiU ^xAJhaU, Yet not one Londoner in a 
million ever mifplaces his vnU 2xAJhaU, Dr. Robertibn could, undoubtedly, 
have written a luminous differtation on the ufe of thefe words. Yet, even in 
his lateft work, he fometimes mifplaced them ludicroufly. No man ufes 
figures of fpeech with more propriety becaufe he knows that one figure of 
fpeech is called a metonymy, and another a fynecdoche. A drayman in a 
paflion calls out * You are a pretty fellow,* without fufpe6ling that he is 
uttering irony, and that irony is one of the four primary tropes. The old 
fyftems of rhetoric were never regarded by the moil experienced and diA 
ceming judges as of any ufe for the purpofe of forming an orator. " Ego 



21 8 On InduStion. 

hanc vim intelligo" faid Cicero "efle in praeceptis omnibus, non uteafecuti 
oratores eloquentiae laudem lint adepti, fed quae fua fponte homines eloquen- 
tes facerent, «a quofdam obfervaffe, atque id egiffe 5 fie effe non eloquentiam 
ex artificio, fed artificium ex eloquentia natum." We muft own that we 
entertain the fame opinion concerning the ftudy of Logic, which Cicero 
entertained concerning the ftudy of Rhetoric. A man of fenfe fyllogizes In 
celarent and cefare all day long without fufpe6Hng it : and though he may 
not know what an ignoratio elenchi is, has no difficulty in expofing it when- 
ever he falls in with it. — (< Lord Bacon^ in Critical and Ht/iorical EJfays 
contributed to the Edinburgh Review. By Thomas Babington Macaulay.) 

This brilliant paflage has, I have no doubt, appeared to many 
completely decifive of the queftion which it affirms ; and, as fo 
often happens in like cafes, there is a certain exaggeration againft 
which it is of truth. It is good againft thofe who confound 
analyfis and recombination of exifting materials with introduftion 
of them : and who might profefs to fee in agriculture fomething 
which would have benefited mankind, though plants and animals 
had not been natural produfts of the foil. But I now proceed 
to examine it, againft thofe who affirm that Ariftotle and Bacon 
are of no ufe, and who very frequently fall into the common 
logical fallacy of fuppofing that their cafe is proved, as foon as it 
is made out that they are not of all the ufe : which Mr. Macau- 
lay himfelf has done, except as againft the exaggerators afore&id. 

We reafon induftively from morning till night, and even in 
our dreams. True : and how badly we often do it, particularly 
in fleep. A plain man is then produced, to reafon on Bacon's 
principles : and Mr. Macaulay has imitated a plain man better 
than he intended, by making him do it wrongly. Look over 
the indu£lion, and it will appear that the cafe is not made out ; 
an exclufion is wanting : it may have been the mixture of minced 
pies and brandy which did the mifchief. The plain man fhould 
have tri6d minced pies without brandy ; but he had drunk the 
latter daily for years, and it never ftruck him. This is precifely 
one of the points in which we are moft apt to deceive ourfelves, 
and for which we moft need to have rccourfe to the complete- 
nefs of a fyftem of rules j fomething is left taken for granted. 
The things of courfe, our daily habits, are neglected in the 
confideration of anything of a lefs ufual character : the plain man 
left off the minced pies upon trial ; but not the brandy : Chrift- 



On In4u£iion. 219 

mas mifchief muft be referred, he thinks, entirely to Chriftmas 
fare, if at all. 

But even if this omiffion had been fupplied, and the refult found 
to confirm the conclufion, yet the plain man has flopped where 
the plain man frequently does flop, at what Bacon calls the 
Vindemiatio prima^ the rudiments of interpretation. Gomplete- 
nefs is feldom anything but ftudy and fyflem. Philofophy ought 
to bring him to the refult that daily brandy has made that fpirit 
ceafe to give the ftimulus which, were its ufe only occafiondl, 
would enable his flomach to bear an unufually rich diet for a 
fhorttime. Our plain friend is precifely in the pofition of a 
bankrupt who curfes the times, on reafbning flri<^ly Baconian as 
far as it goes, and forgets that a cafual tightnefs in the money 
market would never have upfet him, if it had not been for the 
previous years of extravagant living and rafli fpeculation. 

But there are many proceffes which are not better performed 
becaufe men know '' how they perform them." Mr. Macaulay 
here means '* becaufe men know the laws of that part of the 
procefs which nature does for them.*' That men fhould not 
know better how to perform for knowing how they perform 
is almoft a contradiftion in terms, William Tell knew how to 
{hoot all the better for knowing which end of the arrow he was 
accuftomed to fit to the ftring : had he wanted this knowledge, 
his chance of cleaving the apple would have been much dimi- 
niflied. But he would not have been improved by knowing 
that his arrow defcribed a parabola. True, becaufe it did not do 
fo. The centre of gravity of the arrow would defcribe a para- 
bola, if it were not for the refiftance of the air ; or fomething to 
near it as to be undiftinguiihable. But, taking the defeription 
as roughly correft, William Tell did know, induftiv'ely, that the 
arrow defcribes a curve, concave to the earth : and had made 
thoufands of experiments in connexion of the two ends of that 
curve, which were all that he was concerned with. It is no ar- 
gument againfl the ftudy, as a ftudy, of induSfion^ that the amount 
of ufeful refult which it had recorded in the mind of William 
Tell in the fhape of habit, would not have been augmented by 
deduSiive knowledge of an intermediate7?^/«j with which he had 
nothing to do. But let knowledge advance, under both modes 
of progrefs, and Tell becomes an artillery officer, the rude arrow 



220 On InduSlion. 

a truly fhaped and balanced ball, means of meafurement are ap- 
plied, the true curve is more correftly reprefented than by the 
parabola, and thirty pounds of iron are thrown to four times the 
diftance which an arrow ever reached, and with a certainty al- 
moft equal to that of the legend. 

But if Captain Barclay had known the places and names of 
the mufcles, he would not have been more likely to walk a thou- 
fand miles in a thou&nd hours. The inftance is far fetched : 
becaufe the feat confifted in the exhibition of power of endurance 
acquired by practice. If my denial feem as far fetched, it is the 
fault of the propofer. Captain Barclay muft, by habit, by in- 
duction, have acquired facility in varying his pace and geflure 
fo as to eafe the mufcles. Had he been well acquainted with the 
difpojition and ufes of thefe organs to be^ with (towards which 
knowledge of their places and names would have contributed) he 
would have learnt this art more eafily. Though not altogether 
ad elenchuniy yet I may fay that in this cafe the efFe£l of fuch 
knowledge would have been that he would have been kfs likely 
to have performed the feat. Had he directed his attention to 
fbme fcience of obfervation, he would not have needed to have 
fought &me, or exhauflion of remarkable energy, in fiich a tri- 
fling purfuit. And further, in a very common cafe, mechanics 
has taught what few ever learn by induction, though they have 
conflant opportunities of doing it : namely, that in walking, the 
ordinary praflice of fwinging the arms is injurious and tiring • 
that a very trifling amount of it tells ferioufly in a long journey. 
Here is one ufeful refult, which natural induction does not com- 
monly teach, and there may be many more of the fame kind : 
the queflion between it and regular fludy requires the confldera- 
tion, not only of what is done, and whether it might be done 
better, but of what is not done. 

Next, M. Jourdain did not pronounce D and F more cor- 
re£Uy after his attention had been called to the details of the z(k 
of pronunciation. None but Moliere ever knew whether he did 
or not : but all who have watched the progrefs of inflru£tion 
know that the bad habits or natural imperfe£tions of children are 
removed or alleviated by making them practice mechanical pro- 
nunciation, with perceptive adoption of rules. In every one of 
a few detached inflances in which I have feen children at their 



On InduBion. 221 

reading leilbns in France, I have noticed that a return upon the 
habits of pronunciation is always a part of the exercife: and that 
the letters are pronounced with that diftinft effort which makes 
the pupil fenfible of the a£tion required. I have always attri- 
buted to this practice the more uniform ftandard of pronunciation 
which prevails among the educated French, as compared with 
ourfelves. 

But the ftudy of grammar makes no difference in the fpeech 
of people who have always lived in good fbciety. If Mr, Macau- 
lay mean merely as to the ufe of Jhall and «////, and the like, it 
may certainly be faid that the perpetual ufe of fpeech (which is 
not reafoning) does enable every one to form the habits of thofe 
about him. But that grammar, as a whole, produces no efFe£l 
upon tHe fpeech of good fociety, is one fide of a balanced matter 
of opinion. Many contend that it has produced, in our gene- 
ration and the one above it, a very unfortunate efFeft : they aver 
that the purity and character of our Englifh has been deteriorated 
by Lindley Murray and his fchool, and that we much want better 
grammar teaching. On the fubje£i: of Jhall and willy it is re- 
markable that Mr. Macaulay, whom a vigorous &culty of illuf- 
tration, combined with imm^nfe reading, enables to flrew his 
path with inflances, has to invent his cafe, and to refer to a 
treatife which Robertfbn could have written. But it is not 
enough : if we grant that fuch a treatife would have been lumi-- 
nousy we may be fafe j but would it have been correal ? And 
further, knowledge mufl abdicate at once, if we pronounce ufe- 
lefs all that has been clearly explained by thofe who have not 
rightly praftifed. Bacon himfelf might have taken exfors ipfa^ 
fecandi for his motto. 

Next, it is faid that no man ufes figures of fpeech more cor- 
reftly becaufe he knows that one is metonymy and znoi^ex fynec- 
doche. True ; and in like manner no man confiilts his books 
more eafily becaufe he has a bookcafe. But, having the book- 
cafe, he arranges his books in it, and then he knows where to 
find them. Mr. Macaulay dwells throughout upon nomencla- 
ture. I might infifl upon its fuperflru£ture : but even mere 
naming is ufeful, when the meaning of the name is clearly under-^ 
flood. A mind well flocked with underflood names cannot 
keep itfelf from being conftantly in the a6l of claffification, 



222 On InduBion. 

which contains indu£lion. The mere involuntary reference of 
inftance number two to inftance number one, which is made 
when we remember that the:recond muft have the fame name as 
the firft, is comparifon and induction, leads to refledion, culti- 
vates tafte, and gives power. The drayman, who calls out in a 
paflion, " You are a pretty fellow !'* without knowing that he 
is uttering irony, is an incomplete pi<£hire : there is omitted a 
wifli relative to the eyes of his opponent, and an adjedtive which 
is (in fuch quarrels) fometimes prophetically, but feldom defcrip- 
tively, true. The value of the difference between this favage 
irony and the more elegant form of it which is fo pleafing in the 
defcription of the plain man's induction quoted above, is not 
within the comprehenfion of the drayman : the foundation of a 
better mode of expreffion than undifciplined rhetoric furniflies, fo 
far as its adoption is matter of tafte, was laid by thofe who placed 
irony among the primary tropes. Good tafte is a refult of com- 
panions, which could not have been made without nomenclature. 

Did Cicero declare that fyftems of rhetoric are not of any ufe ? 
The very quotation appears to mean that thefe {yikems^ pracepta, 
have their power ; that men get them by obfervation, and -put 
them into praftice. The ea fecuti oratores refers to what was 
done in the firft inftance, by the firft eloquent men^ fuafponte. 
Moft truly does he fey that the art of rhetoric is derived from 
eloquence, and not vice verfd : moft falfely, as far as can be 
judged, does he feem to infinuate that it was all done at one 
4ep ; firft, fbme one or more confummate orators, fecondly, a 
finifhed fyftem, drawn from obfervation of their methods. Per- 
haps he intended a particular reference to a certain orator then 
namelefs : the fentence, thus conftrued, contains nothing but 
matter which Tully is likely enough to have whifpered to 
Cicero. 

A fyftem is a tool, and it muft be employed upon materials 
which different men furnifh from their different means. But 
the coat muft be cut according to the cloth, both in flze and 
quality : no reproach to the fciffors, nor prejudice to their fupe- 
riority over the fharpened wood of the fevage, even though prac- 
tice will enable him to ufe the latter better than any civilized 
man who is not a tailor can ufe the former. The formation of 
tool?, mental or material, is a cyclical procefs. The firft iron 



On InduSiion. 223 

was obtained by help of wood ; one of the firft ufes of it was to 
make better tools, toget more iron, with which better tools ftill 
were made, and fo on. And in this way we may trace back any 
art to natural tools, and to materials which are to be had for the 
gathering. The aflertion made by Mr. Macaulay, and many 
others, that in logic only, of all the abftraft fciences, our natural 
means are as good as thofe which refult from diligent analyfis, is 
one which terminates in an iflue of faft. The inftances given 
are contained in the aflertion that a man offenfe fyUogizes in cefare 
and celarent all day long without fufpeSiing itj and though he 
does not know what an ignoratio elenchi is, can always dete£l 
it when he meets with it. 

Mr. Macaulay begins with an indefinite term, a man offenfe : 
and the claufe is deficient in logical perfpicuity. Firft, what is a 
man offenfe ? I grant that I fhould doubt the fenfe of a man who 
could not make the inferences defcribed by cefare and celarent » 
But do men become men of fenfe by nature, without education ? 
if yes, I deny the aflirtion that men of fenfe reafon (corre£Uy) in 
cefare^ &c. The man of fenfe who is not educated is as likely 
to afliert that cefaro is all that can be obtained, or to invent the 
foxvn fefape^ as the plain man to forget to try the mince pies 
without brandy before he concludes. If no, then the afliertion 
is itfelf ignoratio elenchi : for the very queftion is how to make 
men of fenfe ; can they not be, ceteris paribus^ formed better and 
fafter with ftudy of logic than without : it being agreed on all 
hands that this man of fenfe is always a practical logician. 

Next, a man of fenfe reafbns, &c. without fufpefting it. 
Sufpe6bing what ? that he is reafoning, or that he is reafoning in 
cefare ? I fuppofe the latter : that is to fay, I take it to be meant 
that a man of fenfe may (not muft^ for fome Ariftotelians are men 
of fenfe) not know that the logicians call the form of reafoning 
he ufes cefare. This is cafily granted : but what is it but the 
celebrated ignoratio elenchi of Locke, who fancied that he raifed 
an objeflion againft the pretentions of the logicians, when he 
declared he never could believe that God had made men only 
two-legged, and left it to Ariftotle to make them rational. No 
one ever denied that men reafbned before Ariftotle, and would 
have reafoned ftill if he had never lived. 

Mr. Macaulay, probably without fb much as a new application 



224 On InduSlion. 

to the inkftand, after falling into the ignoratio elenchi^ fingles out 
this vfery fallacy as the one which a man of fenfe is fure to dete£t. 
But if there be a fallacy which is the ilaple of paralogifm, it is 
this one. Dele6lat domi^ for ordinary difcuffion (efpecially after 
dinner) is little elfe ; impedit foris^ for three fourths of public 
debate, from the Houfes of Parliament downwards, is made up 
of it. A man who expofes it in converfation is confidered a 
tirefome, and if he do it often, an uncourteous perfbn : he '' has 
no converfation," he '' harps upon one fubjeS," he '* won't let 
you fpeak.'* 

I have made the above comments upon a very marked paflage 
of an eminent writer, in preference to introducing their fub- 
ftance as a difTertation of my own, that I might have the advan- 
tage of the reader feeing that I meet real arguments, inilead of 
my own verfion or feleftion. It woidd probably be difficult to 
find a better concentration of the fubflancc of the antagonift 
views, with refpeS to the formal fludy of reafbning, than is 
contained in my quotation from Mr. Macaulay : and I may fafely 
take his adoption of them as proof that thefe views yet require 
the notice of a writer on logic. . 



There is one refult of the theory of probabilities, clofely con- 
nected with induction proper, which it will be advifable to notice 
here. 

When the fyllogifm is declared illegitimate, on account of 
both premifes being particular, a probable conclufion of great 
flrength may be admitted in many cafes. This mufl be the 
more infifled on, becaufe it is too common to attend to nothing 
but the demonflrative fyllogifm, leaving all of which the con- 
clufions are only probable, however probable, entirely out of 
view. 

I take as the inflance the fyllogifm, or imperfeft fyllogifm, 
' Some Xs are Ys, fome Zs are Ys, therefore there is fomc pro- 
bability that fome Xs are Zs.* If the number of Xs and Zs 
together exceed the number of Ys (as in Chapter VIII) there is 
a certainty that fome Xs are Zs. Let us then fuppofe this is 
not the cafe. 

Let the whole number of Ys In exiflence be >;, and let m and 



On InduSiion. ^ 225 

n be the numbers of Xs and Zs which are among them. I 
fhall confider two diftinft cafes : — Firft, when the diftribution 
of the Xs and Zs among the Ys is utterly unknown ; fecondly, 
when their diftribution is that of contiguity^ that is, when the Ys 
being for fome reafon arranged in a particular order, the Xs 
which are Ys are fucceffive Ys, and the feme of the Zs which 
are Ys. 

For the firft cafe a very rough notion will do, confined to the 
fuppofition that few Xs and Zs are mentioned, compared with 
the whole number of Ys, When the Xs and Zs together make 
a large proportion of the Ys in number, then, if we have no 
reafon for making them contiguous, or otherwife limiting the 
equdlly probable arrangements, it may be (aid to be a moral cer- 
tainty that fome Xs are Zs. 

In the firft cafe, if we divide 43 times the produft of m and n 
by TOO times >?, it gives us a fufficient notion* (not large enough) 
of the common logarithm of ^, the odds in favour of fome 
Xs being Zs being ^ to i. Say there are 1000 Ys, and that 
TOO Xs are Ys and 100 Zs are Ys. Then 43 x 100 x 100 
divided by 100 x 1000 is 4*3, which is the logarithm of 20,000. 
It is then more than 20,000 to i that, in this cafe, one or 
more Xs are Zs. A more exaft rule is as follows. To 43^^ 
divided by ioo>i add its hundredth part, and to the refult add 
fuch a fraftion of itfelf as ;« + « is of 2u. Thus 43^^-7- ioo>? 
being 4*3, which, with Its hundredth part is 4*3435 and ;w + « 
(200) being the tenth part of 2u (or 2000), we add to 4*343 its 
tenth part, giving 4*777, which is about the logarithm of 6o,00O» 
ftill under the mark. It is more than 60,000 to i that fome Xs 
are Zs. When the fraftions are very fmall, this rule is accurate 
enough, if n be confiderable. Its refult is, that if y\ be very con- 
fiderable, and if a perceptible fraftion of the Ys be Xs, and a 
perceptible fraction Zs, and if we really have no reafon to make 
the limitation of contiguity or the like^ then we are juftified in 
treating it as a moral certainty that fome Xs are Zs, But I fuf- 
peft the relation of contiguity, to which I now proceed, better 
reprefents the aftual ftate of the cafe in ordinary argument. 

When the Xs which are Ys are contiguous, and alfo the Zs 
which are Ys, the probability that no Xs are Zs is the fraftion 
having the produft of >»—;« — «+ 1 and u— /«— « + 2 for nu-* 



226 On InduSlion. 

merator, and the produft of u— ;«+ 1 and u— «-f i for denomi- 
nator. Thus in the example above propofed, looo Ys contaming 
among them lOO Xs and lOO Zs (each fet contiguous) we have 
80 1 X 802 for numerator and 901 x 901 for denominator. This 
fraction is about 8-tenths j fo that it is now 8 to 2, or 4 to i, 
againji any Xs being Zs. 

In order to find the probability againft the number of Xs 
which are Zs exceeding i, add k to both the multipliers in the 
numerator, which then become >?— /w — « + i+i and >?—;«—» 
H-i-f2. For example, there are lOO Ys, containing 30 Xs and 
60 Zs (each fet contiguoufly) : what is the chance againft the 
number of Xs which are Zs exceeding 10? The numerator is 
21X22: the denominator is 71x41. This fra£Hon is 462 by 
291 1 ; whence it is 462 to 2449 againft^ or 2449 to 462 (more 
than 5 to i)for^ the number of Xs which are Zs exceeding lO. 

The chances, it is to be remembered, are all minima: ex- 
cept when we mean that m Xs, and not more^ are Ys, &c. Thefe 
queftions may ferve to give fome notion of the manner in which 
arguments not logically conclufive, may be morally fo. 

What is called circumjiantial evidence is a fpecies of indudion 
by probability. The thing required to be found has the marks 
P,Q,R,S, &c. : this Y has the marks P,Q,R,S, &c. : there is then 
a certain amount of circumftantial evidence that this Y is the 
thing we want to find. If it can be fhown that there is but one 
thing which has all thefe marks, then the circumftantial evidence 
is demonftrative. But if there were, fay 100 Ys, of which 5 
have the mark P, 5 the mark Q, &c., then having afcertained 
one Y which has all the marks, the queftion is, what chance is 
there againft another Y having them all : the fame chance, at 
leaft, is there that the Y found is the one fought. Inftead how- 
ever, of attempting the problem in this way, which is never 
reforted to for want of data (I mean that the refemblance which 
the rough proceffes of our minds bear to thofe of the theory of 
probabilities does not here exift) I take it as follows. If the 
poiTeffion of the mark P give a certain probability to the Y 
found being that fought, it is as a witnefs whofe teftimony has a 
certain credibility. Similariy for Q,R,S, &c. Compound thefe 
teftimonies, when known, by the rule in page 195, and the refult 
is the value of the circumftantial evidence. 



227 



CHAPTER XII. 
On old Logical Terms. 

IN this chapter I propofe to fay fomething on a few terms of 
the old Logic, which though they keep their places in works 
on the fubjeft, and have fome of them paiTed into common lan- 
guage, are very little ufed. They relate generally to the fimple 
notion, and the name by which it is expreffed : and have little of 
fpecial reference, either to the propofition or fyllogifm. They 
are moftly derived from Ariftotle, whofe incidental expreffions 
became or give rife to technical terms, and whofe fingle fentences 
were amplified into chapters. And here, as in other places, I 
have nothing to do with the degree of correftnefs with which 
Ariftotle's meaning was apprehended, nor even with how much 
was drawn from Ariftotle and how much added to him, but only 
with the aflual phrafes and their ufual meaning. 

The words logic and diale^ics* are now ufually taken as 
meaning the fame thing : the old diftindion is that dialectics is 
the part of logic in which common and probable, but not necef- 
fary, principles, are ufed. But the diftinftion is neither clearly 
laid down, nor faithfully adhered to, even by Ariftotle himfelf. 

The term (in this work always called name) was divided into 
fimple and complex: the fimple term was the mere name, the 
complex term was what all moderns call the affirmative propofi-- 
tion. Thus man and run were fimple terms : man runSj a com- 
plex term. Later writers rejefted this confufion : and divided 
the a£ls of the mind confidered in logic into apprehenfion, judg- 
ment^ and difcourfe^ taking cognizance of notions, propofitions^ 
and arguments. The common meaning of the word difcourfe^ 

* Our language is capricious with regard to the ufe of iingular and plural 
of words in ic : thus we have logic and dialecticr, arithmetic and mathema- 
ticr, phyiic and phyficr for medicine and natural philofophy. Some modern 
writers are beginning to adhere uniformly to the fingular, in which I cannot 
follow them^ for I am afraid an Engliih ear would not bear with mat/te- 
mafic as a fubftantive. Would it not belter coniift with the genius of our 
language if the plurals were to be always ufed, and the fingulars made ad- 
jectives without the termination al> 



228 On old Logical Herms. 

(which now generally applies to ibmething fpoken) is derived 
from its place in this divifion. The word argument^ which is 
now equivalent to reafontng againft oppojition exprejfed or implied^ 
was originally nothing but the middle term of a fyUogifm. 

The fimple term was univerfal or Jingular : univerfal, when 
of more inftances than one, as man, horfe, ftar ; lingular, when 
of one inftance only, as the fun, the firft man, the pole-ftar, this 
book. Singular names were called individuals^ from the etymo- 
logy of the word, as belonging jto objefts not divifible into 
inftances to each of which the name could be applied. I have 
not dwelt upon the diftin£tion between Angular and univerfal, 
becaufe it is ineffeflive in inference. And moreover, a lingular 
propofition is only objeftively fingular, but ideally plural. ' Jidius 
Caeiar was a Roman' : in point of fa£t, there was but one Cseiar. 
But take any imaginary repetition of the circumftances of Caelar^s 
life ; fuch, for inftance as occurs to thofe who have thought of 
the poffibility of the lame courfe of events returning into exift- 
ence after a certain cycle : and then the term Csefar becomes 
plural. Or, even without fo forced a luppofition, we may lay 
that, if we defcribe Caeiar, we muft defcribe a Roman : that our 
delinition of Caeiar is fo clofe as to fit only one man that ever 
lived, makes no elTential difference in the chara£ler of the prp- 
polition. 

But a further diftin£tion which was made divided lingular 
terms into fubjefts of univerlal, and lubjeSs of particular, propo- 
litions. A determinate (or definite) individual, as Csefar, this 
man, was the former : a vague (or indefinite) individual, as a 
certain man, the firft comer, was the latter. The diftinftion is 
that of ' fome man * and ' this one man.' 

Certain notions of eflence or relation, accompanying the ap- 
prehenlion of a name, were called categoriesy or predicaments^ 
meaning ' modes of alTertion with relpeft to ' the objeS named. 
Ariftode gave ten categories, and might have given ten hundred. 
In their ufual Latin form they were fuhftaniiay quantitaSy quali^ 
taSy relatioy aSfioy pajjioy ubiy quandoy Jitusy habitus. 

The word tranflated by fubftance, ktrloy means mode of being: 
and its literal Latin is ejfentiay eflence. It is ctUXqA fubjlance (that 
which ftands under) as fupporting accidentSy prefently explained* 
It is fdx too metaphylical a term to come into common life with- 



On old Logical Terms. 229 

out fome degradation : and accordingly it there means that of 
which a thing is compofed, whether material or not. Accordingly 
we have the material fubftance of a coat, the intellefkual fub- 
ftance of an argument. But, as we ufe the word, its meaning 
belongs to the other predicaments. In faft, the fubftance of the 
old logicians ftands, as to exiftence, in the fame fituation as mat- 
ter (page 30) with refpedl: to our fenfible perceptions, or objeSi 
with refpeft to our ideas. The fubftance, it was faid, is per fe 
fubjijiens^ while the accident could not be faid ejfe^ but inejfe. 
The diftinftion between the fubftance (mode of being) and the* 
material fubftance (in the modern fenfe) may be helped by the 
diftinSion between fubjiantia prima and fubjiantia fecunda^ the 
firft referring to the individual, the fecond to the general term. 
Thus the fubftance of ]ohn^ 2ls John^w^s fub^antia prima; as 
man, fubjiantia fecunda. All thefe very metaphyfical notions 
were the ftudent's firft introdu£tion to logic, and were confidered 
as of the utmoft importance. 

The predicament of quantity^ derived from the notion of whole 
and part, was conceived as either continuous or difcrete. In con- 
tinuous quantity, the unit was divifible, in difcrete, indivifible. 
Thus ten feet is continuous, ten men difcrete. The diftinftion 
is precifely that of magnitudinal and numerical. 

^ality was fubdivided into i. Habit and difpojition^ the latter 
term being ufed for the imperfeft ftate of the former 2. Power 
and want of it 3. Patibilis qua lit as and paj/ioj applied to the 
ideas of that which is undergone, the firft permanently, the fecond 
for a time. 4. Form ^nd figure. 

Relation then, as now, referred to the fuggeftions derived from 
comparifon of twathings or ideas. It was divided into verbal 
and real [fecundum did zxAJecundum ejfe). Thus the relation of 
profit to profitable was verbal : that of father to fon^ or of above 
to belbw^ real. The two things related, or correlatives^ were called 
fubjeSf and term : fo that of two correlatives, giving two oppofite 
relations, the fubjeft of either was the term of the other. The 
fundamentum of the relation was that in which it took its rife, 
when it had a beginning. 

ASfion and pajjion^ the produftion and reception of an efFeft, 
requiring the producing agent^ and the receiving patient^ were 
divided into immanent^ or enduring in the agent, and tranfient^ 






y 



230 On old Logical Terms. 

or paf&ng out to another. Actions were univocal^ or aquivocal^ 
according as their eiFeds were of the fame or different fpecies, 
A few years before the publication of Newton's Principia, it was 
taught in a work imported into Cambridge that when mice bred 
mice, the adion was univocal, but when the sun bred mice (the 
writer muft have been thinking of Ariftode and fome of the 
fchoolmen) aequivocal. There was alfo the terminus a quo and the 
terminus ad quem to reprefent the ftate before and the ftate after 
the aftion. Thus, when all this nonfenfe was fent to Coventry, 
the terminus a quo was an immenfe quantity of univocally bred 
learning of the preceding kind ; the terminus ad quem was the 
rooting up of the wheat of logic with the tares. 

The where (as to abfolute pofition), the tvhen^ and the Jite 
(relative pofition) gave no peculiar terms of fubdivifion. The 
habitus (sxe/v) referring to pojfejjion generally in the firft inftance, 
was materialized by fome of the old logicians till it related to 
drefi only, or habit in the thence acquired meaning. 

The word predicament (and category as well) has been intro- 
cuced into common language to fignify a fet of eircumftances 
under which any thing takes place. It is then no longer con- 
fined to the above predicaments, nor is there any occafion that it 
fhould be. 

The predicahles {KamyopifABva) are diftinguifhed from predica^ 
ments {Harnyoplai) in that the former belong to any fimple notion 
or name, and may be predicated of it : the latter belong to the 
connexion (when affirmative) between two names. They are 
(aid to be five in number, genus, JpecieSy differentia^ proprium^ 
and accidens. 

The words genus znii /pedes have preferved their old meaning. 
If there be a number of names of which each is fubidentical of 
the one which follows, fay V, W, X, Y, Z : then of any two, fay 
W and X, X is a genus containing the /pedes W. Here Z is 
the /ummum genus^ and V the infima /pedes : X is the genus 
proximum of W, Y the genus remotum. In what I have called a 
univer/e^ which is a /ummum genus^ having for its infima /pedes 
the individual inftance of any name in it, the iiiperidentical is the 
genus, the fubidentical the fpecies. Subcontraries (and contraries) 
are oppofite /pedes ; fupercontraries and complex particulars have 
no ancient name. 



^ ^ 



On old Logical T'erms. 231 

The differentia is that by which one clafs (be it fpecies or 
genus, the difference. being accordingly ttrm^A Jpecific or generic) 
is diftinguiflied from another. Thus the difference (or one differ- 
ence) feparating the fpecies man fvom. the other fpecies of the 
genus animal^ is the epithet rational. 

The proprium (or property) is that which belongs to the fpecies 
only^ whether it be to all or only to fome : thus to ftudy, and to 
fpeak, are equally propria of man. But the old commentators 
give definitions of the property as follows. There are four 
kinds. I. That which belongs to the fpecies alone, but not to 
all. 2. To all the fpecies, but not to that alone. 3. To the 
fpecies only, and to all of it, but not at all times. 4. To tha 
fpecies alone, to all, and always. 

The accidens (or accident), is that which may fometimes be- 
long to the individual of a fpecies, but not neceffarily, nor to that 
fpecies alone. In modern language, the term is limited to what 
is unufual and unexpected. 

The word caufe was ufed by the ancients in a wider fenfe 
than by us : more nearly in the fenfe of the Latin caufa^ or the^ 
Italian cofa. Caufes were diftinguiflied into material^ formal^ 
efficient^ ?iXiA final. The material caufe was the very matter of 
a thing, confidered as a kind of giver of exiftence ; ^^ formal 
caufe was its form, in the fame light j the efficient caufe (our 
common Englifli word) the agent or precedent ; and the final 
caufe, the ultimate end or objeft, confidered as a reafon for the 
exiftence of the thing. Sometimes writers ftill talk of final 
caufes, and are as unintelligible to moft readers as if they had 
talked of final beginnings. 

The word form was ufed in a wider fenfe than that of figure 
or fliape, to mean, as it were, law of exiftence, mode, difpofition, 
arrangement. Mere figure or fliape was only one of the acci^ 
dental forms ^ as diftinguiflied ftova fubjlantial forms ^ belonging to 
the fubftance. And motion was as Widely ufed z&form : it meant 
any alteration. Thus, corruption was one of the motions of mat- 
ter. Change from place to place, to which the modern word is 
confined, was local motion. 

The original ufe of the ttvms fubjeSf and objeSf is to denote a 
thing confidered as that which may have fomething inherent in 
it, or attached to it, or fpoken of it, &c. ; and as that which may 



232 On old Logical Terms. 

be objeSfed to the mind or reafbn, or made to come in its way. 
Thus it was iaid that matter is the fubjeSf of thofe properties 
which are the objeSfs of the mind in natural philoibphy. The 
tranHtion to the modem fenfe of objeSf^ namely, end propofed, is 
natural enough. In modern times, fiibje£l and obje£t are ufed* 
with rcfpeS to knowledge : the fiibjeft being the mind in which 
it is, the obje£l being the external fburce from which it comes. 
¥ or fubjeSfive and objeSfive I have in this work ufed ideal and oIh 
jeSfive (page 29). AdjunSf was the technical term for that 
which is in the fubjed. 

K modal propofition was one in which the affirmation or nega^ 
tion Vas expreiTed as more or lefs probable : including all that is 
technically under probability (Chapter IX) from neceffity to 
impoffibility. The theory of probabilities I take to be the un- 
known God which the fchoolmen ignorantly worlhipped when 
they fo dealt with this fpecies of enunciation, that it was faid to be 
beyond human determination whether they moft tortured the 
modals, or the modals them. Their gradations were necejfary^ 
contingent^ pojjible^ impoj/ible; contingent meaning more likely 
than not, poffible left likely than not. Thefe they conne£):ed 
with the four modes of enunciation. A, I, O, E, and when by 
fome is meant more than halfy the connexion is good. The con- 
troverfy about modal forms continues up to this day among 
logicians who are not mathematicians : I fhould fuppoie that the 
latter would never give it a thought, except as a branch of the 
theory of probabilities, and except as to the confideration how 
the terms by which the non-mathematical logician indicates his 
degrees of belief are to be placed upon the numerical fcale. In 
like manner he reads the thermometer by graduation, and though 
he admits the freezing and boiling point, which have an origin 
in nature, he leaves temperate, fummer heat, blood heat, &c. to 
the fancy of thofe who choofe to employ them. 

At the feme time it is clear that thefe modal forms were con- 
fidered not merely as ufeful in expreffion of the nature and amount 
of belief, but as fuggeftive of real branches of inquiry, iubfervient 
to that great a priori inquiry into the nature of things to which 

* See a full account of thefe words in Sir William Hamilton's notes to 
Reid, p. 8o'6, &c. 



On old Logical Terms. 233 

mediaeval logic was applied. We are not fit to judge of the in- 
ftrumental part of this philofophy, unlefs we confider alfo the 
materials on which it was founded. In an age in which much 
more faith was demanded of the ftudent than now; when he was 
much more frequently required to decide in one way or the 
other upon a fingle teftimony; when, in addition to the non- 
mythic wonders recorded in ancient writers, which there was no 
mode of contradifting, all that was known of immenfe regions 
and countries refted upon very few accounts, and thofe filled 
with ftories quite as ftrange : — the abfence of other means of 
diftinguifhing truth fi'om falfehood obliged thofe who thought to 
lay much ftrefs upon a priori confiderations. It matters litue to 
us whether we infer the necejjity of man being a walking animal 
from the non-arrival of exceptions, and thence the univerfality 
of the rule, or the univerfality from the fuppofed perfefl induSion 
of inftances, and thence the neceffity. But it was of much more 
confequence to the old logician : of more real coniequence. He 
did not know but that any day of the week might bring from 
Cathay or Tartary an account of men who ran on four wheels 
of flefli and blood, or grew planted in the ground like Polydorus 
in the ^neid, as well evidenced as a great many nearly as mar- 
vellous ftories. As he could not pretend to inductive and demon- 
ftrative univerfality, even upon the queftion of the form of his 
own race, he was obliged to combine with his argument the an- 
tecedent teftimony of his own and other minds, in the manner 
which the real doftrine of modals (page 205) fhows to be necefr 
fary in all non-demonftrated conclufions. It is true that he fre- 
quently confounded the predifpofition of minds with the confti- 
tution of objefts ; the teftimony with the thing teftified about. 

We (hall never have true knowledge of the fchools of the 
middle ages, until thofe who have ftudied both their philofophy, 
their phyfics, and their ftate of tradition, will look at their 
weapons of controverfy as both oflfenfive and defenfive, and give 
a fair account of the amount of proteftion afforded by the firft, 
in the exifting ftate of the fecond and third.. It would alfo be 
advifable to confider whether, looking at the power of communi- 
cation by land and fea, and all the circumftances of literary inter- 
courfe, it would have been prafticable to place the knowledge of 
the earth and its details upon any better footing of evidence. 



• ' 



234 On old Logical Terms. 

One leading feature of the fchoolmen, acute as they were, and 
as to reprefentation of notions, inventive, and which is ihared by 
many more modem writers who have not difciplined themfelves 
mathematically, is (een in their employment of quantity : there 
are inftances of the ftrange ufe, the wrong ufe, and the no-ufe. 
Moft of them arife from indiftin£l apprehenflon of continuity, 
which obliges them to accept fuch ftages of quantity as are ex- 
prefled by exifting terms, without any efibrt to fill up gaps. 
There is alfo a flovenlinefs of definition in what rdates to quan- 
tity. Thus dozens of inflances might be given in which the 
fome of the particular propofition is fo defined that we might 
fuppofe it is * fome, not all,' inflead of * fome, it may be all,' and 
the former is the expreis definition of fome writers: and it is only 
when we find in rules that XY does not allow us to infer X : Y, 
nor to contradia X)Y, that we afcertain the real intended 
meaning. ** Logicians," fays Sir William Hamilton, '' have 
referred the quantifying predefignations plurimiy and the like, to 
the mofl oppofite heads; fome making them univerfal, fome 
particular, and fome between both." They mufl have had curi- 
ous ideas of quantity who made the propofition * mofl Xs are 
Ys' either univerfal, or between the univerfal and particular : I 
fhould fuppofe that thofe who did the latter mufl have imagined 
fome to refer to a minority. 

There is a flrange notion of quantity revived in modem times, 
which confifls in making plurality 0/ attributes a part of the quan- 
tity of a notion. It is called its intenfiue quantity ^ or its intenjion^ or 
comprehenjion. It is oppofed to extenjive quantity^ or extenjion^ 
which is the more common notion of quantity, referring to the 
number of fpecies or of individuals (it may be either, the individual 
is the real infima fpecies) contained under the name. Thus man is 
not fo extenfive as animal^ but more intenfive ; the attribute ratio- 
nal ^y^s greater comprehenfion. But * man refiding in Europe* is 
lefs extenfive and more comprehenfive than either. It is faid that 
the greater the intenfive quantity the lefs the extenfive, but this is 
not true, unlefs no two of the figns ofintenfion be properties of 
the fame fpecies. Thus, according to fuch flatements as I have 
feen, ' man, refiding in Europe, drawing breath north of the 
equator, feeing the fun rife after thofe in America,' would be a 
more intenflvcly quantified notion than ^ man refiding in Europe' ; 



On old Logical Terms. 235 

but certainly not more extenfvue^ for the third and fourth dements 
of the notion muft belong to thofe men to whom the firft and fe- 
cond belong. Thus, in the Port-Royal Logic, one of the earlieft 
modern works (according to Sir W. Hamilton), in which the dif- 
tinflion is drawn, it is faid that the comprehenjion of the idea of a 
triangle includes fpace, figure, three fides, three angles, and the 
equality of the angles to two right angles. But the idea of recti- 
linear three-Jided figure has juft as much extenfion. 

The relation between comprehenfion and extenfion exifts, and 
is ufeful : but not, I think, as that of different kinds of quantity. 
In page 148, where I hold that the propofition is contained in its 
neceflTary confequence, the view is one of extenfion : the ordinary 
view is one of comprehenfion. * Every cafe in which P is true, 
is a cafe in which Q is true,* tells us that all the P-cafes are con- 
tained, as to extent (number and location of inftances), among 
the Q-cafes. But, as to comprehenfion, every P-cafe contains 
all that diftinguifhes a Q-cafe from other things. When, in 
page 47, it is faid that the idea of man is contained in that of 
animal, I fpeak of extenfion : all the inftances to which the firft 
idea applies are among thofe to which the fecond applies. But, 
as to comprehenfion, the idea of animal is contained in that of 
man : all that defines animal goes to the definition of man, and 
other things befides. In page 50, the " is of poflTeffion of all 
eflential charafteriftics,*' refers to comprehenfion ; the ** is of 
identity" to extenfion : both pofiTeffing equally the chara£ber$ 
under which the verb may occur in logic. There is no diftin<EUon 
which affefts inference : for X)Y has exadUy the fame proper- 
ties whether we interpret it as expreffing that Y has all the ex- 
tenfion of X, and may be more ; or that X has all that Y has in 
comprehenfion, and may be more. 

In pages 115, &c. we have the mode of reprefenting names 
of more or lefs comprehenfion. Thus, P, Q, R, &c. being cha- 
rafteriftics, the obvious- propofition PQ)P, illuftrates the theorem 
that where the comprehenfion of one name has all that of a fe- 
cond (as PQ^h^ that of P) the extent of the fecond is at leaft 
a^ great as that of the firft. And the felf-evident poftulate in page 
115, by which we may diminifh the extent of a term univerfally 
ufed, or increafe that of one particularly ufed, may be expreffed in 
language of comprehenfion. That is, we may augment the com- 



236 On old Logical Terms. 

prehenfion of a univerfal, or diminifh that of a particular. Thus, 
X)Y gives XP)Y, and X. Y gives XP.Y : but X)YP gives 
X)Y. 

It will be eafily feen that comprehenfion has the (irft attribute 
of quantity (page 174) : there is more and lefs about it. But it is 
not of the meafurable kind (page 175). As to extent, 200 in- 
ftances bear a definite ratio to 100, which we can ufe, becaufe 
our inftances are homogeneous. But different qualities or defcrip- 
tions can never be numerically fummed as attributes, to any pur- 
pofe arifing out of their number. Does the idea of rational ant-- 
mal^ two defcriptive terms, fuggeft any ufeful idea of duplication^ 
when compared with that of animal alone. When we fay that 
a chair and a table are more furniture than a chair, which is true, 
we never can cumulate them to any purpofe, except by abftraft- 
ing fome homogeneous idea, as of bulk, price, weight, &c. To 
give equal quantitative weight to attributes, as attributes, feems 
to me abfurd : to ufe them numerically otherwife, is at prefent 
impofCble. 

The reader will have\feen the origin of feveral very common 
terms, which are ufed in a (enfe coinciding with, or at leaft much 
refembling, that put upon them by the fchoolmen. But there is 
one which has diametrically changed its meaning ; it is the word 
injlance. The word injiantia (and alfo svcrrao'ig) implied a cafe 
againjly not for ; the latter was exemplum: fo that injiance to the 
contrary would have been tautology. 

I have referred the word enthymeme to this chapter, though it 
is always regularly explained in connexion with the fyUogifm. 
According to Ariftotle, 'Evdi/^u^ kari o-uXXoyia-fMi arehiig l| eUotcov 
Kou oyifAslav^ an enthymeme is an imperfeft fyUogifm from probables 
and figns : the modem critics rejeft the word arE^ij, imperfeSf^ as 
interpolated. The word Jign feems to mean indication, fymptom, 
or efffeft, which makes the caufe almoft neceflary or highly 
probable. But the fchools took the word enthymeme to mean a 
fyUogifm with a fuppreffed and implied premife, fuch as * He mufl 
be mortal, being a man.* I cannot help fu(pe6ling that Ariftotle * 



* He fays all that is communicated (XfT/frcu) of the predicate, will be 
afTerted in words QiAna^riu) of the fubjeft. Thefe two different tenfes of 
two different verbs are often both tranilated by dicitur. Why did they 



On Fallacies. 237 

made no difference between a fuppreffed premife, clearly intended 
and diftinftly received, and one formally given. It feems to me 
that we might as well diftinguifh a written from a fpoken fyUo- 
gifm, as to the logical charafler of the two. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

On Fallacies. 

THERE is no fuch thing as a claffification of the ways in 
which men may arrive at an error: it is much to be 
doubted whether there ever can be. As to mere inference, the 
main obje£l of this work, it is reducible to rules : thefe rules 
being all obeyed, an inference, as an inference, is good ; confe- 
quently a bad inference is a breach of one or more of thefe rules. 
Except, then, by the produftion of examples to exercife a be- 
ginner in the deteftion of breaches of rule, there is nothing to do 
in a chapter on fallacies, fo far as thofe of inference are con- 
cerned. Neverthelefs, there are many points connefted with the 
matter of premifes, to which it is very defirable to draw a reader's 
attention : and above all to queflions in which it is not at firft 
obvious whether the miftake be in the matter or in the form ; or 
in which it may be the one or the other, according to the fenfe 
put upon the words. 

If there be anything ridentem dicere verum quod vetat^ writers 
on logic have in all ages moft grievoufly neglefted the prohibition 
in treating this fubjeft, and have given the ftudent a prefcriptive 
right to fome amufement. One reafbn of this was, that the 



occur ? For various reafons, I allow myfelf to fuipef):, though not fcholar 
enough to maintain, that x^ generally meant communication, paflage 
from one mind to another by any means, as much at leaft with reference to 
the receiving, as to the imparting, mind : and that it is here oppofed to pno-tc, 
fpeeth, in that fenfe. Throw the verbs back to their primary meanings, 
and it will be ' That which is picked up of the predicate, Uti^Wfiyw out about 
the fubjeft.' If my conjefture be correft, the modem enthymeme is here 
put on the fame footing as the fully exprefTed fyllogifm. 



.* 






238 On Fallacies. 

Greeks endeavoured to try the new art by inventing inferences 
the fklfehood of which could not be dete£bed by its rules. Thefe, 
as may be fuppofed, were whimfical efforts of reafbning : never- 
thelefs, they have been handed down from book to book, unfur- 
paffed in their way. Another reafon is, that jefts, puns, &c. are 
for the moft part only fellacies fo obvious that they excite laugh- 
ter J and the greater number of them can be fhown to break one 
or another of the rules of logic. Accordingly, they furnifh 
ftriking examples of thefe rules ; the application of which, in k- 
rious terms, has itfelf a tafte of the ludicrous. Boccacio has, by 
his inimitable mode of narration, made a good ftory the jeft of 
which could be defcribed as confiding in nothmg more than the 
affumpdon that what can be predicated of ftorks* in general 
can be predicated of roafted ftorks: which is what logicians 
would call the fallacia accidentisj or arguing a didfo Jimpliciter^ 
ad dictum fecundum quid. 

The terms fallacy^ fophifm^ paradox^ and paralogifm^ are ap- 
plied to offences againft logic ; but not with equal propriety. 
Fallacy and fophifm may technically have been firft applied to 
arguments in which there is a failure of logic : but it is now very 
common to. apply them alfo to arguments in which there is a 
wifehood of faft, or error of principle, though logically treated ; 
and if this lafl: ufe be not corre£l, writers on logic have lanc- 
tioned it in their examples. Many perfbns go further, and call 
the erroneous ftatement itfelf a fallacy : that men are in the 
habit of walking on their heads, they would fay is a very obvious 
fallacy. A paradox is properly fomething which is contrary to 
general opinion : but it is frequently ufed to fignify fomediing 
felf-contradi£l:ory : thus the new(paper which recently avowed 



• A fervant who was roafting a ftork for his mafter was prevailec^upon 
by his fweetheart to cut off a leg for her to cat. When the bird cam^ upon 
table, the raafter defired to know what was become of the other leg. T^ 
man anfwered that ftorks had never more than one leg. The mafter, very 
angry, but determined to ftrike his fervant dumb before he puniihed lum, 
took him next day into the fields where they faw ftorks, fbudding each on 
one leg, as ftorks do. The fervant turned triumphantly to his mafter : on 
which the latter ftiouted, and the birds put down their other legs and flew 
away. << Ah, Sir,"" faid the fervant, << you did not ftiout to the ftork at din- 
ner yefterday : if you had done fo, he would have (hown his other leg too.*' 



On Fallacies. 239 

its opinion that the repeal of the corn laws would make food 
both cheap and dear is faid to have maintained a paradox. The 
modern ufe of the word implies difre(pe£l:, but it was not fo for- 
merly. Thus in the fixteenth century the opinion of the earth's 
motion was ftyled the paradox of Copernicus by writers who 
meant neither praife nor blame, but only reference to the opinion 
of Copernicus as an unufual one. The more precife writers of 
our day ufe the word paradox for an opinion fo very Angular and 
improbable, that the holder of it is chargeable with an undue 
bias in favor of fingularity or improbability for its own fake. 
Paralogtfm^ by its etymology, is beft fitted to fignify an offence 
againft the formal rules of inference. It has been frequently 
abufed by mathematical writers, who have fignified by it errors 
of ftatement, and undue afiiimptions : but it is not completely^ 
fpoiled for the purpofe, and I fhall therefore ufe it to denote a 
formal error in inference, as a particular clafe of fallacy or fo- 
phifm, words which it would now be difficult to diftinguifh in 
meaning. Some have defined paralogifm to be that by which a 
man deceives himfelf, and fophifm that by which he tries to de- 
ceive others : on what grounds I do not know. 

The queftion of a premife being right or wrong in faft or 
principle, unlefs indeed it contradict itfelf, does not belong to 
logic : nor could it fo belong unlefe logic were made, in the wideft 
fenfe, that attempt at the attainment of the cognitio h^ri which 
fome have defined it to be. All that relates to the colleClion of 
true premifes with refpeft to the vegetable world belongs to 
botany; with refpeCl to the heavenly bodies, to aftronomyj with 
refpeft ta the relation of man to his Creator, to theology. Even 
were it within the province of logic, it would be impoffible, in 
lefs fpace than an encyclopaedia, to enter upon queflions con- 
nefted with the matter of fyllogifms. With regard to paralogifms, 
or logical fallacies, (fo called, as an error about the meafure of 
^j^c^ ift called a geometrical tvvox) the claffification under breach 
vqf: rules would be good in form, but would afford no bafis for 
the treatment of the fubjeft. Thofe who bring them forward 
feldom proceed in direft defiance of rule, but in various modes 
of evafion. Thefe it would be almoft impoffible to arrange in 
fatisfaClory order. 

Ariftotle made a claffification of fallacies, which was of courfe 



240 On Fallacies. 

adhered to by the writers of the middle ages. In this, as in 
every other place, when I fpeak of Ariftotle and his fyftem, I 
fpeak of it as underftood by thofe writers. How far they dif- 
dndly comprehended their mafter is a queftion into which I 
could not enter here, even if I were competent to write on the 
fubje£l. It is, however, (iifficiently apparent that the logic of 
Ariftotle is not of the purely formal charader which marked the 
diale£bics of the middle ages : there is a much more decided 
introduction of the attempt to write on the matter of fyUogifm 
than many perfbns think there is. The daffification of fallacies 
feems to be one proof of this : and the interpretation of that claf- 
fificadon by the middle writers feems to add their teftimony to 
the afTertion : in this part of the fubjed they abandon techni- 
calities almoft entirely. 

It ought to be e(pecially remembered that we are very difFe- 
ently fituated from thofe writers, not as to what is fallacy, but 
as to what the fpecimens of it produced are likely to be. Out 
of a world of general principles declared by authority, or declared 
to be ielf-evident by authority, they had to produce logical de- 
ductions ; and, of courie, the pure fyUogifm and its rules were 
to them as familiar as the alphabet. The idea of an abfolute and 
glaring offence againft the ftruClure of the fyllogifm being flip- 
ported one moment after it was challenged, would no more 
fuggeft itfelf to the mind of a writer on logic than it would now 
occur to a writer on aftronomy that the accidental errer (which 
might happen to any one) of affixing four cipher^ inftead of five 
in multiplying by a hundred thoufand would be maintained after 
expofure. Accordingly, their formal chapters on fallacies would 
naturally relate, if not entirely to fallacies of matter, at leaft to 
thofe in which the fallacy of matter very clofely hinges upon that 
of form. And (b it is in all the old fyftems which I have exam* 
ined. The Ariftotelian divifion (or rather feleCtion, for it is far 
from including everything) lends itfelf eafily to this adaptation. 

We, on the contrary, live in an age in which formal logic has 
long been nearly banifhed from education : entirely, we may fay, 
from the education of the habits. The ftudents of all our uni- 
verfities (Cambridge excepted) may have heard leftures and 
learnt the forms of fyUogifm to this day : but the pra£lice has 
been fmall : and out of the univerfities (and too often in them) 
the very name of logic is a bye- word. 



On Fallacies. 241 

The philofophers who made the difcovery (or what has been 
allowed to pafs for one) that Bacon invented a new fpecies 
of logic which was to fuperfede that of Ariftotle, and their fol- 
lowers, have fucceeded by falfe hiftory and falfer theory, in driv- 
ing out from our fyftem all ftudy of the connexion between 
thought and language. The growth of inaccurate expreffion 
which this has produced, gives us fwarms of legiflators, preachers, 
and teachers of all kinds, who can only deal with their own 
meaning as bad fpellers deal with a hard word, put together 
letters which give a certain refemblance, more or lefe as the cafe 
may be. Hence, what have been aptly called ** the flipfhod judg- 
ments and crippled arguments which every-day talkers arc content 
to ufe.*' Offences againft the laws of fyllogifm (which are all laws 
of common fenfe) are as common as any fpecies of fellacy : not 
that they are always offences in the fpeaker*s or writer's mind, 
but that they frequently originate in his attempt to fpeak his 
mind. And the excufe is, that he meant differently from what 
he faid : which is received becaufe no one can throw the firft ftone 
at it, but which in the middle ages would have been regarded 
as a plea of guilty. The current notions about what logic is, are 
beautiful and wonderful. I have heard a difputant, an educated 
man, a graduate, efcape from allowing himfelf to be convinced 
that he was arguing with a middle term particular in both pre- 
mifes by declaring thztfaSfs were better thzn fyllogifms : the form 
of his argument would have proved that men are plants, becaufe 
both require air. '' I" he faid, " produce you fa£f5^ like Bacon : 
you quibble about their combination, like Ariftotle." 

The Ariftotelian fyftem of fallacies contains two fubdivifions. 
In the firft, which are in diSfione^ or in voce^ the miftake is (aid 
to confift in the ufe of words: in the fecond, which are extra 
diSfionem^ or in re^ it is faid to be in the matter. 

Of the firft fet fix kinds were diftinguifhed, as follows : — 

I. Mquivocatio or Homonymia^ in which a word is ufed in two 
different fenfes ; giving really no middle term (if the middle term 
be in queftion) or a term in the conclufion which is not the fame 
name as that ufed in the premifes. For example, ' All criminal 
anions ought to be punifhed by law : profecutions for theft are 
criminal a£lions ; therefore, profecutions for theft ought to be 
punifhed by law.' Here the middle term is doubly ambiguous, 

R 



242 On Fallacies. 

both criminal and aSlion having different fenfes in the two pre- 
mifes. But here, as in many other cafes, the choice lies with 
the fophift to bring the fellacy under the head to which we refer 
it or not. It may pleafe him to affert that he means the fame 
thing by criminal aSfion in both premifes ; in which cafe, the in- 
ference is logical, but one or the other premife muft be denied 
as to the matter. Again, * Finis rei eft illius perfeftio ; mors eft 
finis vitae ; ergo mors eft vitae perfeftio.* Here the ambiguity 
may be thrown either on finis or on perfeSfio. The following 
example can be traced through books for three centuries. ' Every 
dog runs on four legs ; Sirius (the dog-ftar) is a dog ; therefore 
Sirius runs on four legs.* It has been the defeft of many old 
works on logic that all their examples have been of that obvious 
abfurdity, which is well enough in one or two inftances. Such 
as ' Nothing is better than wifdom and virtue ; dry bread is bet- 
ter than nothing ; therefore, dry bread is better than wifdom and 
virtue.* Some of the old examples are ^ A moufe eats cheefe ; 
a moufe is one fyUable ; therefore one fyUable eats cheefe.* And 
again, ^ Ifte pannus eft de Anglia ; Anglia eft terra ; ergo, ifte 
pannus eft de terra.* 

Where the fyUogifm is formally put, equivocation of the mid- 
dle term is generally feen with great eafe. The moft difficult 
exception is, I think, the old fallacy, in which giving the name 
of the genus is confounded with giving the name of the fpecies, 
and thereby, of courfe, giving the name of the genus. As in ' To 
call you an animal is to fpeak truth ; to call you an afs is to call 
you an animal ; therefore, to call you an afs is to fpeak truth.* 
This equivocation will puzzle a beginner as to its form, and the 
more fo from the evident falfehood of the matter. The middle 
term is '' He who fays that you are one among all animals.** He 
{peaks truth ; and the one who calls you an afs or a goofe, cer- 
tainly fays that you are one among all animals. The equivocation 
is in the two different ufes of the word one ; in the firft premife, 
it is an entirely indefinite one ; in the fecond it is "a lefs indefinite 
one. This one is not attached to the quantity of the middle term, 
which is univerfal in the firft premife, and particular in the fe- 
cond : but is part of the middle term itfelf. 

The manner in which the ferious fallacy of equivocation moft 
frequently appears, is in the connexion of the old affociations of 



On Fallacies. 243 

a word which has fhifted its meaning with the altered meaning of 
the fame. The word loyal, for inftance, originally meaning no 
more (and no lefs) than lawful^ which, as applied to a man, meant 
one who refpefted the laws, and had not forfeited any right by 
mifbehaviour, now means attached to the Crown and to the title 
of the holder of it. In contefts for fucceffion, the winner would, 
of courfe, affume that lawful men were on his fide. In more 
recent times, the term was always felf-applied, at eleftions, by 
thofe who fupported the party which had the confidence of the 
Crown for the time being: but on fuch occafions, abftinence 
from the fallacy which the French call the vote du fait is the 
utmoft which can be expected of human nature. 

The word publication has gradually changed its meaning, ex- 
cept in the courts of law. It ftood for communication to others^ 
without reference to the mode of communication, or the number 
of recipients. Gradually, as printing became the eafieft and moft 
ufual mode of publication, and confequently the one moft fre- 
quently reforted to, the word acquired its modern meaning : if 
we fay a man publilhes his travels, we mean that he writes and 
prints a book defcriptive of them. I fufped that many perfons 
have come within the danger of the law, by not knowing that to 
write a letter which contains defamation, and to fend it to another 
perfon to read, is publijhing a libel; that is, by imagining that 
they were fafe from the confequences of publifhing, as long as 
they did not print. In the fame manner, the well-eftablifhed 
rule that the firft publifher of a difcovery is to be held the difco- 
verer, unlefs the contrary can be proved, is mifunderftood by 
many, who put the word printer in the place of publifher. I 
could almoft fancy that fome perfons think rules ought to travel 
in meaning, with the words in which they are exprefTed. 

A fimilar change has taken place in the meaning of the word 
to utter^ the fenfe of which is to give outy but which now means 
ufually to give out of the mouth in words. As yet, I am not 
aware that any perfon charged with the utterance of counterfeit 
coin has pleaded that no one ever uttered coin except the prin- 
cefs in the fairy tale : but there is no faying to what we may 
come, with good example, and under high authority. 

It may almoft be a queftion whether, in the time of Ariftotlc, 
fuccefsful equivocation, that is, undete£l:ed at the moment, woukt 



244 On Fallacies. 

not have been held binding on the difputant who had failed to 
ActsSt it. The genius of uncultivated nations leads them to 
place undue force in the verbal meaning of engagements and 
admiffions, independently of the underftanding with which they 
are made. Jacob kept the bleffing which he obtained by a trick, 
though it was intended for Eiau : Lycurgus feems to have ^irly 
bound the Spartans to follow his laws till he returned, though he 
only intimated a ihort abfence, and made it eternal : and the 
Hindoo god who begged for three fteps of land in the ihape of 
a dwarf, and took earth, fea and fky in that of a giant, feems to 
have been held as claiming no more than was granted. The 
great flrefs laid by Ariflotle on fo many different forms of verbal 
deception, may have arifen from a remaining tendency among 
difputants to be very ferious about what we ihould now call play 
upon words. 

Governments permit what would otherwife be equivocation to 
take a flrong air of truth, by legiflating in detail againfl the prin- 
ciples of their own meafures. The window-tax is a fpecial in- 
ftance. A newfpaper calls it a tax upon the light which God's 
beneficence has given to all. The anfwer would be plain enough, 
namely, that it is an income tax levied upon a ufe of that light 
which (how truly matters not here) is afTerted to be a fair criterion 
of income. But this anfwer is deflroyed by the permiffion to 
block up windows, and thereby evade the tax : which is thus 
made to fall upon the light ufed, and not upon the means of 
ufing it which the fize of the houfe affords. According to the 
principle of this impofl, the blocked window is as fair a crite- 
rion of the income of the occupant as the open one, and ihould 
have been fo confidered. 

Among the forms which the fallacy of equivocation frequently 
afTumes, is that of the fbphifl' altering or qualifying the known 
meaning of a word in his own mind, without giving the other 
party any notice : fo that there may be, if not two meanings in 
( e mind, yet different meanings in the two minds concerned. 
4 perfon afTerts that ' Nobody denies, &c. &c.' Should this go 
down, the point is gained ; what nobody denies mufl be undeni- 
able. But ihould it be contefled (and it will generally be found 
that the things which nobody denies are matters of fbme diffe- 
rence of opinion, while thofe which nobody can deny are quite 



On Fallacies. 245 

fure to be points of conftant controverfy) the evafion is ready. 
It is no fenfible perfon, or nobody that underftands the fubje<9:, 
nobody that is anybody, in fhort : while perhaps it cannot be 
fettled who does, or who does not, underftand the fubjeft, until, 
among other things, the very point in difpute is determined. 

There is a wide range of equivocations arifing out of mean- 
ings which are fometimes implied and fometimes not. A large 
clafs of them is made by the ufual, but not univerfal, practice, 
of giving to the thing the name pf that which it is intended 
to be, whether the attempt be fuccefsful or not. This is now 
abbreviation or courtefy 5 but it was the rule. According to old 
definitions, bad reafoning is reafoning, fyllogifmus fophtfticus is a 
fyUogifm, and in an old book now before me, the fruits and efFefts 
of demonftration are fcience, opinion, and ignorance^ the latter 
containing belief of falfehood derived from had demonftration, 
which we fhould now call no demonftration. 

One fallacy of our time, and a very favourite one, is the fet- 
tlement of the merit of a perfon, or an opinion, not by arguing 
the place of that perfon or opinion in its fpecies, but by arbitrary 
alteration of the boundary of the fpecies, with the intent of ex- 
cluding the individual in queftion altogether. 

It is fomewhat analogous to the proceeding of the landlord 
who unroofs the houfe to get rid of a tenant. Thus we have 
had the controverfy whether Pope was a poet^ not whether he 
was a good poet or a bad one, but whether he was a poet at all. 
The difputants, or fome of them, claimed a right to define a poet, 
and decided that none but verfe-makers of a certain goodnefs (to 
be fettled by themfelves) were poets. They might juft as well 
have decided, on their own authority, that none but men of a 
certain amount of reafoning power were men. Had they done 
this laft, as long as they fixed the amount at a figure which in- 
cluded themfelves under the name, nobody would have thought 
they materially altered the extent of the term : it is not eafy to 
fee why they have rights fo arbitrary, over words the objeftive 
definitions of which are nearly as well fixed as that of man. 

Another form of the Macy of equivocation is the afluming, 
without exprefs ftatement, that the meaning of a phrafe can be 
determined by joining the meanings of its feveral words : which 
is not always true in any language. When two words come to- 



246 On Fallacies. 

gether, it often happens that their diftionary meanings would 
never enable us to arrive at their known and ufual (and therefore 
proper) compound meaning : though they might help us in ex- 
plaining how that lafl: meaning arofe. A perfon undertakes to 
crofe a bridge in an incredibly (hort time : and redeems his pledge 
by croffing the bridge as one would crofs a ftreet, that is, by 
traverfing the breadth. Now, though it be true that, in general, 
to crofs is to go over the breadth, or fhorter dimenfion, yet in 
the cafe before usj the phrafe is elliptical, and fignifies croffing 
the river upon the bridge. Nor can it be faid that this common 
meaning is incorreft : that which is common and well known is, 
in language, always corre£l. No reafonable perfon would fay 
that a French newfpaper is wrong in reporting an army to be a 
cheval fur la riviere^ becaufe a river is not a horfe. This literal 
(or rather unlettered) mode of interpretation is adopted among 
gamblers in fettling bets : and is of itfelf enough to raife a ftrong 
prefumption that their occupation is not that of well-educated 
men. 

It is common enough in controverfy, for one fide or the other 
to have fixed meanings of words in his own mind, on which he 
proceeds without any inquiry as to whether thofe. meanings will 
be conveyed by the words to the other fide, or to the reader. It 
is very difficult to avoid this form of the fallacy, without giving 
the meanings of the moft eflential terms, on the firft occafions 
of their occurrence. It is not uncommon to meet with a writer 
who appears to believe, at leaft who certainly afts upon, the 
notion that the right over words refides in him, and that others 
are wrong fo far as they differ from him. I do not only mean 
that there are many who have an undue belief in their own 
judgments, both as to words and things : but I fpeak of thofe 
who, though fhowing a proper modefly in refpeft to their own 
conclufions, feem to be unable to do the fame with refpeft to 
their definitions of words. If all mankind had fpoken one lan- 
guage, we cannot doubt that there would have been a powerful, 
perhaps a univerfal, fchool of philofophers who would have be- 
lieved in the inherent connexion between names and things ; 
who would have taken the found man to be the mode of agita- 
ting the air which is eflTentially communicative of the ideas of 
reafon, cookery, bipedality, &c. The writers of whom I fpeak. 



On Fallacies. 247 

are more or lefe of this fchool ; they treat words as abiblute 
images of things by right of the letters which (pell them. " The 
French," faid the lailor, "call a cabbage zfl)oe; the fools ! why 
can't they call it a cabbage, when they muft know it is one ?" 

Equivocation may be ufed in the form of a propofition ; as 
for inftance, in throwing what ought to be an affirmative into 
the form of a qualified negative, with the view. of making the 
negative form produce an impreffion. Thus a controverfial 
writer will aflert that his opponent has not attempted to touch a 
certain point, except by the abfurd aflertion, &c. &c. &c. To 
which the other party might juftly reply, " Your own words 
fhow that I have made the attempt, though your phrafe has a 
tendency, perhaps intended, to make your reader think that there 
is none, or at leaft to blind him to the difference between none 
and none that you approve of.* 

2. The fallacia amphiboliay or amphibologia^ differs in nothing 
from the laft, except in the equivocation being in the conftruc- 
tion of a phrafe,. and not in a (ingle term : as in confounding that 
which is Plato's (property) with that which is Plato's (writing). 
Or, as in ' Qui funt domini fui funt fui juris ; fervi funt do- 
mini fui ; ergo fervi funt fui juris.' The ambiguities of con- 
ftruflion in our language, arifing from want of inflexions and 
genders are tolerably (and intolerably) numerous. The dif- 
ficulty of determining the emphatic word often gives a doubt as 
to the meaning. But very often indeed there is a want of the 
diftinftion which the algebraift makes when he writes three-and- 
four tens as diftinguifhed from three and four-tens: (3 + 4). 10 
and 3 -1-4. 10. It cannot, for inftance, be faid whether ' I intend 
to do it and to go there to-morrow * means that it will be done 
to-morrow or not. It may be either — (I intend to do it and to go 
there) to-morrow, or — I intend to do it and (to go there to-mor- 
row). The prefumption may be for the firft conftrudtion : but 
it is only a prefumption, not a rule of the language. In an inftance 
cited by Dr. Whateley — "If this day happen to be Sunday, 
this form of prayer fliall be ufed and the feft kept the next day 
following," the conftruftion is ambiguous, and the intended mean- 
ing probably againft the prefumption. There is a book of the 
laft century, written by a " teacher of mathematics, and writing 
mafter to Eton College." Were mathematics taught at Eton, 



248 On Fallacies. 

or not ? Punftuation may be an affiftance ; but it fo often hap- 
pens that the author leaves that point to the printer, that it is 
hardly fefe to rely upon it. Printers punftuate correftly when 
the meaning is clear : but when it is ambiguous, they may be 
as apt to take the wrong meaning as any other readers. 

3, 4. Th^fallacia compojitionis^ 2nA fallacia divifionisj confift 
in joining or feparadng thofe things which ought not to be joined 
or feparated. If we may fay that A is X and B is Y, fo that A 
and B is X and Y, we have no right to infer that we may form 
the compound and colleftive names 'A and B,' and 'X and Y,' 
and fay that * A and B* is *X and Y.* Thus two and three are 
even and odd : but five is not even and odd. Again, two and 
five are four and three ; but neither is two four, nor five three. 
It mufl be remembered that the word ally in a propofition, is not 
necefTarily fignificative of a univerfal propofition : it may be a 
part of the defcription of the fubjeft. Thus in ' all the peers are 
a houfe of Parliament,* we do not ufe the words all the peers in 
the fame fenfe as when we fay ' all the peers derive their titles 
from the Crown.* In the fecond cafe the fubje£l of the propo- 
fition is peer ; and the term all is diflributive, fynonymous with 
each and every. In the firfl cafe the fubjeft is all the peers^ and 
the term all is coUeftive, no more diflinguifhing one peer from 
another than one of John's fingers is diflinguifhed from another 
in the phrafe, ' John is a man/ The fame remarks may be made 
on the word fome; as in 'fome peers are dukes,* and ^fbme peers 
are the committee of privileges.* The all zndfome of the quan- 
tity of the propofition are diflributive terms ; the all and fome of 
the fubjeft are coUeftive. Again, all men are a fpecies (of ani- 
mals) which no number of men are, wanting the refl. All men 
here make the one individual .objeft of thought of a fingular pro- 
pofition. This amounts to an ambiguity of conflruftion, an 
amphibologia^ as do mofl fources of fellacy falling under this head, 
which can therefore hardly be confidered as anything more than 
a cafe of the laft We want another idiom or the algebraical 
diflinftion, as in ' All (peers) hold of the Crown ; (all peers) are 
a houfe of Parliament.* 

5. The fallacia profodia or accent us was an ambiguity arifing 
from pronunciation, and its introduftion feems to lead to very 
minute fubdivifion of the fubjedl, and to enfure the entrance of 



On Fallacies. 249 

none but ludicrous examples. Burgerfdicius does not think it 
unworthy of hitnfelf to defcend to the following, ' Omnis equus 
eft beftia ; omnis juftus eft aequus, ergo omnis juftus eft beftia.' 
An older writer has ' Tu es qui es 5 quies eft requies ; ergo, tu 
es requies.' Thefe are mere puns j and the makers of them 
were fairly beaten by the contriver of ' Two men eat oyfters for 
a wager, one eat ninety-nine, the other eat two more, for he eat 
a hundred and won.' But more ferious fallacies may be referred 
to this head. A very forced emphafis upon one word may, ac- 
cording to ufual notions, fuggeft falfe meanings. Thus, ' thou 
flialt not bear falfe witnefs againft thy neighbour,' is frequently 
read from the pulpit either fo as to convey the oppofite of a pro- 
hibition, or to fuggeft that fubornation is not forbidden, or that 
anything falfe except evidence is permitted, or that it may be 
given y^r him, or that it is only againft neighbours that falfe wit- 
nefs may not be borne. 

A ftatement of what was faid, with the fuppreffion of fuch 
tone as was meant to accompany it, is thtfallacia accentus, Gef- 
ture and manner often make the difference between irony or 
farcafm, and ordinary affertion. A perfon who quotes another, 
omitting anything which ferves tofliow th^ animus of the meaning; 
or one who without notice puts any word of the author he cites 
in italics, fo as to alter its emphafis ; or one who attempts to 
heighten his own affertions, fo as to make them imply more than 
he would openly fay, by italics, or notes of exclamation, or 
otherwife, is guilty of the fallacia accentus. 

To this fallacy I fhould refer one of very common occurrence, 
the alteration of an opponent's propofition fo as to prefent it in "^ 
a manner which is logically equivalent, but which alters the em- 
phafis, either as noticed in page 134, or in any other manner. It 
is generally not reafoning, but retort, which is the objeft of the 
alteration : for inference cannot be altered by changing a propo- 
fition into a logical equivalent, but a fmart repartee may be very 
effeftive againft 'Some Xs are Ys,' but flat enough againft *fome 
Ys are Xs.' And even when the proponent miftakes his own 
meaning, and mifcalculates his own emphafis, ftill, if the miftalce 
be obvious, there is fallacy in taking advantage of it ; for he who 
communicates in fuch incorre<9: terms as (how what the corred 
ones are, does, in faft, communicate in corredl terms, to all who 



250 On Fallacies. 

fee the fhowing. Of courfe, refped for logic never ftood in the 
way of a fucceisful retort from the time of Ariftode till now, nor 
will on this fide of the millenium. /A fpeculator once wrote to 
a fcientific fociety, to challenge them to an (on his part) and* 
Newtonion controverfy, relying on it that he could contend in 
mechanics, though avowedly ignorant of geometry. He was 
anfwered by a recommendation to fludy mathematics and dyna- 
mics. His rejoinder was an angry pamphlet, in which, indignant 
at the unfairnefs, as he took it to be, of the recommendation, he 
exclaimed, ^ I did not confefs my ignorance of dynamics.' Had 
he been worth the anfwering, it would have been impoffible to 
refifl the reply ' No, but you fhowed it.' Had he written, as he 
meant ' It was not dynamics of which I confefTed ignorance,' 
and had an opponent written, as many would have done, ' You 
fay, fir, that you did not confefs your ignorance of dynamics : 
indeed you did not, you contented yourfelf with an ample difplay 
of it/ he would have ufed thtfallacia accentusA Nor would he, in 
my opinion, have been clear of it though he haa only taken advan- 
tage of a wrong, but evidendy wrong, placement of emphafis on 
the part of the afTailant. The ufe of fuch a weapon, as to its 
legitimacy, depends entirely upon the manner in which the quef^ 
tion fhall be fettled how for irony is allowable. Where the anfwer 
is in the affirmative, a very obvious fallacy, as a farcafm, may be 
permitted. But I may here obferve, that irony itfelf is generally 
accompanied by the /allacia accenttis ; perhaps cannot be afTumed 
without it. A writer difclaims attempting a certain talk as above 
his powers, or doubts about deciding a propofition as beyond his 
knowledge. A felf-fufficient opponent is very efFeftive in afTur- 
ing him that his diffidence is highly commendable, and fully jufli- 
fied by the circumflances. 

6. The jfallacia Jigura diatoms y 2S explained, means literally 
a miflake in grammar and nothing elfe ; as that heczuk ^uvius 
is aqua it is humidAy or that becaufe aqua is feminine, fb is poeta. 

All thefe fallacies in diSiione come under the head of ambiguous 
language, and amount to nothing but giving the fyUogifm four 
terms, two of them under the fame name. The fallacies extra 
diSfionem are fet down as follows. 

I. The fallacia accidentis j and 2. That a diSfo fecundum quid 
ad di^um Jimpliciter. The firfl of thefe ought to be called that 



On Fallacies. 251 

of a diSfo Jimpliciter ad diSfum fecundum quid^ for the two are 
correlative in the manner defcribed in the two phrafes. The firft 
confifts in inferring of the fubjecSl with an accident that which 
was premifed of the fubjecSl only : the fecond in inferring of the 
fubjedl only that which was premifed of the fubjeft with an acci- 
dent. The firft example of the fecond muft needs be * What you 
bought yefterday, you eat to-day ; you bought raw meat yefter- 
day 5 therefore, you eat raw meat to-day.' This piece of meat 
has remained uncooked, as frelh as ever, a prodigious time. It 
was raw when Reifch mentioned it in the Margarita Philofo- 
phica in 1496 : and Dr. Whateley found it in juft the fame ftate 
in 1826. Of the firft, we may give the inftance 'Wine is per- 
nicious ; therefore, it ought to be forbidden.* The exprefled 
premife refers to wine ufed immoderately: the conclufion is 
meant to refer to wine however ufed. This fpecies of fallacy 
occurs whenever more or lefs ftrefs is laid upon an accident, 
or upon any view of the fubjeft, in the conclufion, than was 
done in the premifes. As in the following : — ' All that leads to 
fuch philofophy as that of the fchoolmen, with their logic, muft 
be unworthy to be ftudied, except hiftorically.' The intent of 
fuch a fentence is not formally to propofe the falfe fyUogifm, 
' The fchoolmen had that which led them to a falfe philofophy 5 
the fchoolmen had logic j therefore, logic led them to a falfe phi- 
lofophy,' but only to take the chance of the ftreis thus laid upon 
logic producing a difpofition to fuppofe that the logic was in fault. 
The premifes are really : — 

The philofophy of the fchool-1 f 

men (who paid particular atten- / is i a falfe philofophy. 

tion to logic) J [ 

{that the guides to which 
Ihould be neglefted, except 
as hiftory, 

whence it is rightly inferred that the guides to fuch a philofophy 
as that of the fchoolmen (who ftudied logic) are only of hiftorical 
ufe. And the fame thing might equally be inferred of the fchool- 
men who ate mutton, a praftice to which moft of them were as 
much addifted, no doubt, as to making fyllogifms. The art of 



252 On Fallacies. 

the fbphift conflfts in making the accident which is either un- 
fairly introduced, or withdrawn, or fubftituted, have an apparently 
relevant relation to the fubjedl itfelf. Undoubtedly, the fchool- 
men's logic has a connexion with their philofophy which the 
mutton they ate has not : but as long as it is not the connexion 
which permits the inference, it is abfblutely irrelevant. 

All the fallacies which attempt the fubftitution of a thing in 
one form for defame thing (as it is called) in another, belong to 
this head : fuch as that of the man who claimed to have had one 
knife twenty years, giving it fbmetimes a new handle, and fome- 
times a new blade. The anfwer given by the calculating boy 
(page 54, note) was, relatively to the queftion, a worthy aniwer, 
and took advantage of the common notion that a bean, after 
being (kinned, is ftill a bean, as before. More ferious difficulties 
have arifen from the attempt to feparate the effintial from the 
accidental^ particularly with regard to material objefts. The 
Cartefians denied weight, hardnefe, &c. to be eflential to mat- 
ter, until at laft they made it nothing but fpace, and contended 
that a cubic foot of iron contained no more matter than a cubic 
foot of air. 

The law, in criminal cafes, demands a degree of accuracy in 
the ftatement of the fecundum quid which many people think is 
abfurd : and it appears to me that the lawyers often help the 
popular mifapprehenfion, and give it excufe, by confounding 
errors of things with errors of words, after the example of the 
world at large. Any error of any kind, provided it be fmall in 
amount, pafles for a miftake in words only, by virtue of its fmall- 
nefs. By a miftake in words, I mean the addition or omiflion 
of words which, whatever they might do under another ftate of 
things, do not, as matters ftand, affect the meaning. 

Take two inftances, as follows j — Some years ago^ a man was 
tried for ftealing a ham, and was acquitted upon the ground that 
what was proved againft him was that he had ftolen a portion of 
a ham. Very recently, a man was convifted of perjury, * in the 
year 1846,* and an objeftion (which the judge thought of impor- 
tance enough to referve) was taken, on the ground that it ought 
to have been ' in the year of our Lord 1846.* There may, of 
courfe, be acknowledged rules, which, as long as they are rules, 
muft be obeyed, and which may make the fecond miftake as ne- 



'4te 



On Fallacies. 253 

ceflarily vitiate an indi£lment as the firft. But, in difcufling the 
policy of the rules, it would feem to me that the two cafes are 
entirely different. In both, no doubt, the reft of the indiftment 
might, by implication, make good the meaning required : but 
there feems a great difference between allowing the remainder to 
correft an errorj and allowing it to make good an infufficiency 
(fuppofing the date, in the fecond cafe, to be really infufficient). 
In the fecond cafe, the accufed may fee the omifEon as well as 
another, ^nd may confider of his defence againft every alterna- 
tive : in the firft, he may be aftually led to appear in court 
with a defence not relevant to what will be brought againft him. 
The fecond may be a hardfliip, the firft is an injuftice. And this, 
even on the fuppofition that the reft of the indiftment is to be 
allowed in explanation : for we have no more right to fuppofe 
tha| the true parts will correft the erroneous ones, than that the 
erroneous parts will affeft the conftruftion of the true ones. But 
there is good reafon to think that the fufficient defcription of one 
fentence may fupply what is wanted in the infufficient defcription 
of another, when infufficiency is all. 

But, perhaps, it will be held to be the better rule, that the re- 
mainder of the indidlment fliould not be allowed in explanation. 
It will then be admitted by all that a material error, or a material 
infufficiency, fliould be allowed to nullify the charge. The dif- 
ference between the law and common opinion entirely relates 
to what conftitutes a material amount of one or the other. And 
here it is impoffible to bring the two together : for the law muft 
judge (pecies, while the common opinion will never rife above 
the cafe before it. In the two inftances, which by many will be 
held equally abfurd, a great difference will be feen by any who 
will imagine the two defcriptions, in each cafe, to be put before 
two different perfcns. One is told that a man has ftolen a ham ; 
another that he has ftolen a part of a ham. The firft will think 
he has robbed a provifion warehoufe, and is a deliberate thief: 
the fecond may fuppofe that he has pilfered from a cook-fliop, 
poffibly from hunger. As things ftand, the two defcriptions 
may fuggeft different amounts of criminality, and different mo- 
tives. But put the fecond pair of defcriptions in the feme way* 
One perfon is told that a man perjured himfelf in the year 1846 ; 
and another, that he perjured himfelf in the year of our Lord 



254 On Fallacies. 

1846. As things ftand, there is no imaginable difference : for 
there is only one era from which we reckon. The two defcrip- 
tions mean the fame thing : nor can it even be (aid that one is 
complete and the other incomplete; but only that one is leis 
incomplete than the other. The next queftion might have been> 
what lord was meant, our Lord Jefiis Chrift, or our Lord the 
King ? both being phrafes of law. The anfwer will be, that the 
number 1846 leaves no doubt which was meant. A very good 
anfwer, certainly ; but equally conclufive as to the fimple phrafe 
' in the year 1846.' The firfl cafe is one in which the two de- 
fcriptions have a real difference of meaning : it is not (o in the 
fecond. 

3. The petitio priticipii^s one of the logical terms which has 
almofl found its way into ordinary life. It is tranflated by the 
phrafe begging the quejlion^ that is, afTuming the thing which is 
to be proved. This is alfb called reafoning in a circle^ coming 
round, in the way of conclufion, to what has been already for- 
mally afTumed, in a manner expreffed or implied. I Ihall referve 
what I have to fay on the juflice of this tranflation, and take it 
for the prefent as good. 

Every coUeftive fet of premifes contains all its valid conclu- 
fions ; and we may fairly fay that, fpeaking objeftively of the 
premifes, the affumption of them is the affumption of the con- 
clufion ; though, ideally fpeaking, the prefence of the premifes 
in the mind is not neceffarily the prefence of the conclufion. But 
by this fellacy is meant the abfblute affumption of the fingle con- 
clufion, or a mere equivalent to it, as a fingle premife. If the 
conclufion be * Every X is Z ' and if it be formally known that 
A and X are identical names, and alfb B and Z, then to affume 
* Every A is B' as a premife in proving ' Every X is Z* would 
be a manifefl petitio principii^ or begging of the queflion. But 
even this mufl be faid hypothetically ; it is fuppofed fully agreed 
between the difputants that the two identities are granted. Let 
it be. otherwife, and there is no petitio principii : it is then fair to 
propound A)B, which, if difputed, is to be proved, and afterwards 
to reafon as in A)B-f B)Z=A)Z, X)A-f A)Z=X)Z. Striaiy 
fpeaking, there is no formal petitio principii except when the very 
propofition to be proved, and not a mere fynonyme of it, is 
affumed. This of courfe, rarely occurs : fo that the fallacy to 



On Fallacies. 255 

be guarded againft is the aflTumption of that which is too nearly 
the fame as the conclufion required. And then the fellacy is 
nothing diftinfl: in itfelf : but merely amounts to putting forward 
and claiming to have granted that which Ihould not be granted. 
When this is done, it matters little as to the charadler of the 
fallacy, whether the undue claim be made for a propofition which 
is nearer to, or further from, the conclufion to be proved. When 
proof is offered, the advancement of the conclufion in other words 
is of courfe not petitio principii : when proof is not offered, the 
affumption of that which (with other things proved) would prove 
the conclufion, is a fallacy of the fame charadter in all cafes. 
There is an opponent fallacy to the petitio principii which, I fuf^ 
peft, is of the more frequent occurrence : it is the habit of many 
to treat an advanced propofition as a begging of the queflion the 
moment they fee that, if eflablifhed, it would eflablilh the quef^ 
tion. Before the advancer has more than flated his thefis, and 
before he has time to add that he propofes to prove it, he is 
treated as a fophifl on his opponent's perception of the relevancy 
(if proved) of his firfl flep. Are there not perfons who think 
that to prove any previous propofition, which neceflarily leads to 
the conclufion adverfe to them,* is taking an unfair advantage ? 

There is another cafe in which begging the queflion may be 
unjuflly imputed. It ihould be remembered that demonjirative 
inference is not the only kind of inference : there is elucidatory 
Inference, recapitulatory inference, &c. A propofition may have 
its afTerted explanation prefented as a fyllogifm, the inference of 
which, as demonflration, might well be called a refiilt of petitio 
principii. Say ' it never could have been doubted that men would 
apply fcience to the produftion of food.* If there fhould be any 
hefitation about this, the explanation of man under the phrafe 
which is exclufively charadleriflic of him, rational animal^ would 
remove it : the animal mufl have food, the rational being will 
have fcience. But it would be begging the queflion to affert that 
the fyllogifm of elucidation ' A rational animal is, &c. ; man is, 
&c ; therefore man is, &c.' is a demonflration. And out of this 
arifes the fallacy of prefuming that an author meant demonjlration^ 
when he can only be fairly conflrued to have attempted elucida- 
tion of what he fuppofed would, upon that elucidation, h^ granted. 
The forms of language are much the fame in the two cafes. 



/ 



256 On Fallacies. 

It has been obierved that Ariftode hardly ever uies the phrafe 
a^X^ ouTBta-Ocuj principlum pet ere : it is.ro si ofx^i and to bv apxh 
that which is (ought to come) out of, or is in, the principle* By 
the word principium he diftin£Uy means that which can be known 
ofitfelf. He lays down five ways of ajfuming that which ought 
to .come out of a felf-known principle, of which be^ng the ques- 
tion is the firft. The others are afTuming the univerfal to prove 
the particular ; afTuming a particular to help to prove the uni- 
verfel ; afluming all the particulars of which the imiverfal may 
be compofed ; and afluming fbmething which obvioufly demon- 
ftrates the conclufion. 

Among the earlier modem writers, as far as I have feen them, 
there is (bme diverfity in their defcription of the petitio principii. 
That the principium was meant to be the thing known of itielf, 
the af xj5 of Ariflotle, as far as the introdu6l:ion of the word is 
concerned, feems clear enough. Was it not then by a mere cor- 
ruption that it was frequently confounded with the conclufion, 
the ' quod in principio qusefitum fiiit ? ' Did not the fame in- 
accuracy, ? which confounds the to sva^xv of Ariflotle with the 
a^X^ itfelf, govern the change of the word ? Mofl writers take 
the fallacy of the petitio- principii as meaning that in which the 
conclufion is deduced either from itfelf, or from fomething which 
requires proof more, or at leaft as much, ignotius aut aque igno- 
turn. But fome, in their definitions, and flill more in their ex- 
amples, fupport the following meaning, which I ftrongly fufpe£l 
to be the true derivation of the phrafe, however the principium 
and quod in principio might afterwards have been confounded with 
one another. The philofbphy of the time confifled in a large 
variety of general propofitions (principles) deduced from autho- 
rity, and fuppofed to be ultimately derived from intrinfic evidence, 
felf-known, or elfe by logical derivation from fuch principles. 
Thefe were at the command of the difputant, his opponent could 
not but admit each and all of them : the laws of difputation de- 
manded! the afTent which the geometer requires for his poflu- 

• Sir W. Hamilton of Edinburgh (notes on Reid, p. 761,) fays that 
principium is always ufed for that on which fomething elfe depends. 

f Does a traditional remnant of this convention ftill linger in the not un- 
frequent notion that a difputant is entitled to the conceffion of his principia ? 
Wc 'ifed to hear * You muft grant me my firft principles, elfe I cannot 



On Fallacies. 257 

lates. Except when, now and then, literary foclety was fliaken 
to its very foundations by a difpute which afFefted any of them, 
as a nominalift controverfy or the like moral earthquake. The 
moft frequent fyUogifm was one which, having the form Barbara^ 
had a principium for its major, and an exemplum for its minor : 
as in * All men are mortal {principium) ; Socrates is a man (ex- 
emplum); therefore Socrates is mortal. The petitio principii^ 
then, occurred, when any one, to prove his cafe, made it an ex- 
ample of a principle which was not among thofe received, with- 
out offering to bring the former under the logical empire of the 
latter. And fome writers define the fallacy as occurring Ji 
contingat in fyllogifmo principium petere ; where by principium 
they mean the principle which generally occurs in the major pre- 
mife, and by their inftances they clearly (how that they mean to 
include nothing but the finiple fyllogifm of principle and example. 
They would leave us to infer that if any one (hould happen to 
conftrudl a fyllogifm in which both premifes are principles, one 
or both not received, the inference, though denied by fimple 
denial of one or both premifes, would not be confidered as tech- 
nically the petitio principiiy which with them was, as it were, 
petitio principii exemplum continentis. 

It has often been afTerted that all fyllogifm is a begging of the 
queflion, or a petitio principii in the modern fenfe, an afTumption 
of the conclufion. That all premifes do, when the argument is 
objectively confidered, contain their conclufion, is beyond a doubt : 
and a writer on logic does but little who does not make his reader 
fully alive to this. But the phrafe, as applied to a good fyllo- 
gifm, is a mifapprehenfion of meaning : for its definition refers 
it to what is afTumed in one premife. The mofl fallacious pair 
of premifes, though expreflly conflru£led to form a certain con- 
clufion, without the leafl reference to their truth, would not be 
afTuming the queflion, or an equivalent. But a further charge 
has been made againfl the fyllogifm, namely that very often the 
conclufion, fb far from being deduced from the principle, is 
aftually required to deduce it : that for inflance, in ' All men are 

argue/ Cardinal Richelieu's anfwer to his applicant's ilfaut 'vi'ure, namely^ 
Je n*en *vois pas la necej/itey had fomething of inhumanity in it : but, as 
applied to the Mais, MonfieuTy i7y2i«^y^ ^^«/^r of the preceding aflumption, 
it would generally be quite the reverfe. 

S 



J 8 On Fallacies* 

mortal; Plato is a man; therefore Plato is mortal' we dp not 
know that Plato is mortal becaufe all men are mortal, but that 
we need to know that Plato is mortal, in order to know that it 
is really true that all men are mortal. There is much ingenuity 
in this argument : but I think a little confideration, not of the 
fyllogifm, but of how we ftand with refpeft to the fyllogifm, will 
anlwer it. 

When we fey that A is B, we do not merely mean that the 
thing called A is the thing called B : if we fpoke of objedls as 
objefts, it would not matter under what name, and * A is B ' would 
be no other than ' B is B ' and the very propofition itfelf would 
be of its own nature a mere-identity, an affertion that what is, is. 
It feems fo me that between objedls, thus viewed, there can nei- 
ther be propofitions nor fyllogifms. A may remind us of a thing 
as fuggefting one idea to our minds ; B of the fame thing as 
fuggefting another : and the propofition ' A is B ' then aflerts that 
the two ftates of our mind are from the. fame external fource. 
Our logic, in wholly feparating names from objefts, and dealing 
only with the former, makes a fort of fymbolic reprefentation of 
the diftinftion between ideas and objedls. 

Now the objeftion above ftated to the fyllogifm appears to me 
to be founded upon thinking of the obje£t, as if it had no names. 
Suppofe all things marked, each with every name which can be 
applied to it. Undoubtedly then, each one marked man will 
have the mark mortal upon him, and fome the mark Plato^ it 
may be : and by the time all the marks are put on, and to a per- 
fon who is fuppofed to be immediately cognizant of the flmul- 
taneous exiftence of two or more marks on the fame thing, it 
would be an abfurdity to attempt any fyllogifm at all. What 
coexiftence of marks could there be which he muft not be fup- 
pofed to have noted in making the induftion neceflary for a uni- 
verfal propofition. When he colle6l:ed the elements of All men 

are mortal ' he few among the refl and fet it down. But 

man ^ 

fuppofe that his knowledge is not acquired, as to different mark^, 

all at once : but that each coincidence of marks is to be a fepa- 

rate acquifition to his mind. Then he does not know, by the 

time he has found out that ' All men are mortal * whether Plato 

be mortal or not. Plato may be a flatue, a dog, or a book written 



On Fallacies. 259 

by a man of that name. Plato does not carry man with it : his 
major tells him nothing about Plato, until he has the minor, 
* Plato is a man ' and then, no doubt, he has abfolutely acquired 
the conclufion ' Plato is mortal.* The whole objeftion tacitly 
aflumes the fuperfluity of the minor ; that is, tacitly aflfumes we 
know Plato to be a man, as foon as we know him to be Plato. 
Grant the minor to be fuperfluous, and no doubt we grant the 
necefEty of connefting the major and the conclufion to be fuper- 
fluous alfo. Grant any degree of neceffity, or of want of neceC- 
fity, to the minor, and the fame is granted to the connexion of 
the major and conclufion. 

In the preceding cafe, the (yllogifm is looked upon as one of 
communication, by the authors of the obje6l:ion 5 while at the 
fame time it is tacitly aflTumed that the minor does not commu* 
nicate : Plato, by virtue of our acquaintance with the name, is 
taken to be a man. 

Moreover, it is to be noted that the propofition ufed in argu- 
ment, whether to ourfelves or to others, is very frequently not 
fo much the mere attribution of one idea to another, as a decla- 
ration that pro hac vic£ the idea contained in the more extenfive 
term is all that is wanted, and that the diflFerences- which con- 
ftitute the fpecies are not to the purpofe. Or (page 234) it is 
the diminution of the comprehenfion which is neceflfary, and the 
increafe of extenfion is only contingent. It is ftripping the com- 
plex idea of the unnecefiary parts, to prevent only what is requi- 
fite. Thus any one who will afiiert that, in the Mofiuc account, 
no animal life whatever was deftroyed by flaughter before the 
deluge, muft be convinced by being reminded that an antedilu- 
vian (Cain) killed Abel who was a man and therefore an animal. 

With the petitio principii may be claflTed (for it might alfo be 
referred to other fallacies) cafes of the imperfect dilemma. Sup^ 
pofe we fay ' Either M or N muft be trufe : if M be true, Z is 
impoffible ; if N be true, Z is impoflible ; therefore Z is impof- 
fible.' Now if the disjunSive premife ought to have been * ei- 
ther M or N or Z is true,' here would have been almoft an ex- 
prefs petitio principii. For example, fay * A body muft either be 
in the ftate A or the ftate B ; it cannot change in the ftate A j 
it cannot change in the ftate B ; therefore, it cannot change at 
all.' Now, if the alternative A or B be neceflary3 the correal 



26o On Fallacies. 

ftatement may be * A body muft either be in the ftate A, or in 
the ftate B, or in the ftate of tranfition from one to the other.* 
Of this kind is the celebrated fophifm of Diodorus Cronus, that 
motion is impoffible, for all that a body does, it does either in 
the place in which it is, or in the place in which it is not, and it 
cannot move in the place in which it is, and certainly not in the 
place in which it is not. Now, motion is merely the name of 
the tranfition from the place in which it is (but will not be) to 
that in which it is not (but will be). It is reported that the in- 
ventor of this fophifm fent for a furgeon to fet his diflocated 
flioulder, and was anfwered that his flioulder could not have been 
put out either in the place in which it was, or in the place in 
which it was not ; and therefore, that it was not hurt at all. 

4. The ignoratio elenchi^ or ignorance of the refutation^ is what 
we fliould now call anfwering to the wrong point : or proving 
fomething which is not contradiftory of the thing aflerted. It 
may be confldered either as an error of form or of matter ; and 
it is, of all the fallacies, that which has the wideft range. Such, 
for inftance, as the cafe of a writer I have read, who admits that 
certain evidence, if given at all, would prove a certain point ; and 
admits that fuch evidence has been given : but refufes to admit 
the point as proved, becaufe the evidence was given in aniwer to 
objeSions, and in a fecond pamphlet. The pleadings in our courts 
of law, previous to trial, are intended to produce,out of the varieties 
of ftatement which are made by parties, the real points at ifliie ; 
lb that the defence may not be ignoratio elenchij nor the cafe the 
counter-fallacy, which has no correlative name, but might be 
called ignoratio conclujionis. If a man were to fue another for 
debt, for goods fold and delivered, and if defendant were to reply 
that he had paid for the goods furniflied, and plaintiff were to 
rejoin that he could find no record of that payment in his books ; 
the fallacy would be palpably committed. The rejoinder, fup- 
pofed true, fliows that either defendant has not paid, or plaintiff 
keeps negligent accounts ; and is a dilemma, one horn of which 
only contradicts the defence. It is plaintifPs bufinefs to prove 
the fale, from what is in his books, not the abfence of payment 
from what is not ; and it is then defendant's bufinefs to prove 
the payment by his vouchers. 

It is commonly faid that no one can be required to prove a 



On Fallacies. 261 

negative, and often that no one can prove a negative. There is 
much confufion about this : for any one who proves a pofitive, 
proves an infinite number of negatives. Every thing that can be 
proved to be in St. Paul's Cathedral at any one moment is fairly 
proved not to be in more places than I can undertake to enume- 
rate. What is meant is, that it is difEcuIt, and may be impoffible, 
to prove a negative without proving a pofitive. Accordingly, 
when the two fides of the queftion confift of a pofitive and nega- 
tive, the burden of proof is generally confidered to lie upon the 
perfon whofe intereft it is to eftablifli the pofitive. This being 
underftood, it is ignoratio elenchi to attempt to transfer the charge 
of proving the negative to the other party. But this rule is by 
no means without exception : there are many departures from it 
in the law, for example, though not und^ the moft logical 
phrafes. For inftance, a homicide, as fuch, is confidered by the 
law a murderer, unlefe, failing juftification, he can prove that he 
had no malice. Here, in the language of the law, the homicide, 
fuppofed unjuftifiable, is in itfelf a prefumption of malice, which 
the accufed is to rebut. It is not true, in point of faft, that fuch 
prefumption exifts on the mere cafe of homicide, independent of 
the manner of it : if the law will confult its own records, it will 
find that, for one homicide with malice of which it has had to 
take cognizance, there are dozens at leaft, done in heat of blood, 
and called manflaughters. But the cafe ftands thus ;— the alter- 
natives are few, fo that proving the negative of one, which the 
accufed is called on to do, can be done by proving the affirmative 
one out of a fmall number. There are but malice, heat of blood, 
miladventure, infanity, &c. to which the a£lion can be referred. 
Of thefe few things, it is eafier for the accufed to eftablifli fome 
one out of feveral, above all when motive is in queftion (of which 
only himfelf can be in poflfeffion of the moft perfeft knowledge) 
than it is for the profecutor to eftablifli a particular one. And 
the principle on which he is called on to eftablifli a negative (or 
rather another pofitive) is that the burden of proof fairly lies on 
the one to whom it will be by much the eafieft. The proof of 
a negative, then, being as eaiy as, in facSt identical with, the 
proof of one of the pofitive alternatives, fuch proof may, from 
the circumftances, lie upon a difputant, particularly when the 
number of the alternatives is few. But the negative proofs a 



262 On Fallacies. 

very different thing, is of its own nature hardly attainable, and 
therefore hardly to be required. A book has been miflaid ; is it 
in one room or the other ? If found in the fecond room, there 
is proof of the negative as to the firft \ and almoft any one who 
can read can be trufted to fay, on Jiis own knowledge, that in a 
certain room there is a certain book. But to give negative proof 
as to the firft room, it muft be made certain, firft, that every 
book .in the room has been found and examined, fecondly, that 
it has been correftly examined. No one, in fed, can prove 
more than that he cannot find the book : whether the book be 
there or not, is another queftion, to be fettled by our opinion of 
the vigilance and competency of the fearcher, Controverfialifts 
conftantly lay too much ftrefs on their own negative proofs, on 
their / cannot find^ even as to cafes in which it is palpably not 
their intereft to find. 

Somewhat akin to the preceding is the conftant fallacy of con- 
troverfialifts, conveyed in their ftrong aflertion of the refults of 
their own arguments. Few can bear to admit that there is a 
queftion for others to decide j and after fumming up both fides, 
to feparate the points which the reader is to pronounce upon. 
They muft decide for him, and thus zGt both counfel and judge : 
probably becaufe their arguments are not fo convincing to their 
own minds as they wifli them to be to the reader's. They prove, 
at the utmoft, their own conviftion that they have the right fide : 
but the thing to be proved is that fuch convidbion is well founded. 
They know the maxim Si vis me fitre^ dolendum eft primtim ipfe 
tibi^ and think it will hold good of the reaibn, as well as of the 
feelings : as it will, to fome. The confequence is, that the deli- 
berate reader fufpefts them, and feels inclined rather to differ 
than agree : he will not dance to a writer who pipes too much. 
Juft as " Pll tell you a capital thing," fets the hearer upon avoid- 
ing laughter, and gives him notice to try ; fo * I intend to give 
moft unimpeachable proof,* puts the judicious reader upon look- 
ing for inadmiffible affumptions, and he is feldom allowed by 
fuch writers to look in vain. But, if the difputant who begins by 
declaring his intention to be irrefiftible, be fufpicious, the one 
who ends by announcing that he is fo, is abfolutely felf-convi6l:ed. 
If it be very clear, why fliould he fay it ? Does he tell his reader 
that he muft remember to diftinguifh the black letters from the 



On Fallacies. 263 

white paper, or does he print at the top of the book ' keep this 
fide uppermoft ?' Thefe things (effential as they are) he really 
does leave to the reader : but he dares not truft the latter to find 
out (though he fays it is as clear as black and white) that his ar- 
guments are fo flrong and fo good, that nothing but wilful dif^ 
honefly, or hopelefs prejudice, can refifl their force. 

Another common form of the ignoratio elenchi^ lies in attri- 
buting to the conclufion afTerted fome ultimate end or tendency. 
Thus, an argument in favour of checking the powfer of the 
Crown is called Jacobinifm ; of an increafe of that power, abfo- 
lutifm : though the argument propofed may be found, indepen- 
dently of its propofer's wifhes. This is a cafe in which the refult 
of the method is juflifiable, though the method is wrong. Many 
readers will remember the advice given by an old judge to a 
young one, ' Give your judgments without reafons ; mofl likely 
your decifions will be right ; and it is jufl as likely that your 
reafons will be wrong.* This advice fhould be followed by many 
of thofe who judge or decide arguments. The propofer is of a 
known opinion, which gives him a flrong bias towards the con- 
clufion of the argument. He is a witnefs (page 205), and the 
efFeS upon the mind of the receiver is to be that of the united 
argument and teflimony* The teflimony is, in the receiver's 
mind, of a low order ; the propofer is a radical, and the receiver 
is of opinion that a radical would pick a pocket : or elfe, perhaps, 
the propofer is a tory, and the receiver is of the belief that a tory 
mufl have picked a pocket. Thefe opinions may be right or 
wrong ; but they exifl : and there is certainly no formal fallacy 
in admitting them, as afFefting the teflimony, to fubtradl from 
the probability of the truth of the conclufion. But there is a 
formal fallacy, a decided ignoratio elenchiy in throwing all the in- 
difpofition to receive upon the invalidity of the argument. 

There is a much more culpable form of the fame fpecies. 
If fuch a conclufion were admitted, it would lead to iiich and 
fuch another conclufion, which is not to be admitted. In quef^ 
tions of abfolute demonflration, this procefs is found : if B be 
certainly falfe, and if it be the necefTary confequence of A, then 
A mufl alfo be falfe. But it is unfound when it takes the form, 
' I believe B to be falfe ; I believe it to follow from A ; there- 
fore I afTume a right to difbelieve A whatever evidence may be 



264 On Fallacies. 

offered for it ? This fallacy is fufficiently expofed in page 209. 
There is a tradition of a Cambridge profeffor who was once 
aflced in a mathematical diicuffion ^ I fuppoie you will admit that 
the whole is greater than its part,* and who anfwered, ' Not I, 
until I fee what ufe you are going to make of it.* This was no 
doubt the extreme cafe ; the more ordinary one arifes in a great 
meafure from the great fallacy of all, the determination to have 
a particular conclufion, and to find arguments for it. Obferve a 
certain perfon who is led on by a wily opponent in converfation : 
nothing is prefented to him except what his reafbn fully concurs 
in, and no inference except what is indifputable. At a (iidden 
turn of the argument, he fees a favourite conclufion, which he 
cares more for than for all the reafbnings that ever were put 
together, upfet and broken to pieces. He confiders himfelf an 
ill-ufed man, entrapped, fwindled out of his lawful goods ; and 
he therefore returns upon his fleps, and finds out that fome of 
the things which he admitted when he did not fee their con- 
fequences, are no longer admiiBble. Neither he nor the oppo- 
nent has the leafl idea of the nature of probable arguments, and 
of their oppofition : both proceed as if the train of reafbning were 
either demonflration or nothing. The conclufion, formed perhaps 
upon teflimony, which is more likely to be a guide to truth for 
the mind in queflion than any appreciation of argument which 
that mind could make, mufl, according to the maxims of the age, 
be referred to argument, and argument only. The perpetual and 
wilful fallacy of that mind is the determination that all argument 
fhall fupport, and no argument fhall fhake, the conclufion. If 
there were only a diflinfb perception of another fource of con- 
viftion, fo flrong that ordinary argument can neither materially 
weaken, nor materially confirm itj there Would be fenfe in the 
conclufion ; fenfe, becaufe there is truth. Right or wrong, fuch 
is the fource of mofl convi6lions in, perhaps, mofl minds : fuch 
fource ought therefore to be acknowledged. It would be an ex- 
cellent thing, if, in any difputed matter, thofe who are better 
fatisfied by authority of the truth of one fide of the conclufion 
than of the validity of argument in general, would avow it, keep 
their own fide, and let others do the fame. But here is the diffi- 
culty : the perfons who fhould avow fuch a ftate of mind are as 
much difpofed to make converts as others : they do not like to 



On Fallacies. j£6^ 

debar themfelves from diflTemination of their opinions. Accor- 
dingly they propound their beft argumeitts, be they what they 
may, as what ought to produce all the convi£Uon which them- 
felves feel. On this point fee page 194. 

The whole clafs of argumenta ad hominem^ having fortie refe- 
rence to the particular perfbn to whom the argument is addrefle3, 
will generally be found to partake of the fallacy in queftion. Such 
are recrimination and charge of inconfiftency^ as, ' You cannot dfe 
this affertion, becaufe in fuch another cafe you oppofe it.* But 
if the original argument itfelf fhould be a perfonal attack, then 
fuch a retort as the preceding may be a valid defence. 

In many fuch argumenta ad hqminem^ it is not abfolutely fhe 
fame argument which is turned againft the propofer, but one 
which is ailerted to be like to it, or parallel to it. But parallel 
cafes are dangerous things, liable to be parallel in immaterial 
points, and divergent in material ones. A celebrated writer on 
logic aflert^, that no one who eats meat ought to objeft to the 
occupation of a fportfmaii on the ground of cruelty. The parallel 
will not exift until, for the perfon who eats meat, we fubftitute 
one who turns butcher for amufement. There is, or was, a vul- 
gar notion that butchers cannot fit on a jury. Suppofe that fuch 
a law were propofed, on the ground of the habits arifing from 
continual infliftion of death. Would it really be a counter-argu- 
ment that men who eat meat have the fame animus and are liable 
to acquire the fame habits. It is contended (juftly or not) that 
a defire to take life for fport is a cruel deCre ; to anfwer that 
thofe who eat flefli from which life has been taken by others have 
therefore alfo cruel defires, ought to be called arguing a diSfo 
fecundum quid ad diSfum fecundum alterum quid. The matter is 
clear enough. Cruelty of intention (the thing in queftion) muft 
be fettled by our judgment of the circumftance in which the 
fport confifts. A perfon who feeks bodily exercife and the ex- 
citement of the chafe, and who can acknowledge to himfelf that 
his obje£t is gained on the birds which he mifTes, as well as upon 
thofe which he hits, even if thoughtlefs, cannot be faid to a<3: 
with cruelty of intention. But the fportfman, as he calls himfelf, 
who collefts his game in one place, merely that he may kill, 
without exercife, or feeling of (kill, is either culpably thoughtlefs, 
or elfe a favage, who delights in the infliftion of death. Let any 



266 On Fallacies. 

man afk himSAfj whether in the event of hb beii^ called upon to 
vote for a perfe^ty abfoltite ibvereign, he would fed much con- 
cerned to inquire whether die candidate was or was not a fyoirtf- 
man of the firft kind : and dien let him afk himfelf the &me 
queftion with re(ped to the fecond. 

The moft amufing, and perhaps the moft common, example 
of the igmratio ehncbiy is die taking exception to ibme part of 
an muftradon which has nothing to do with the paralld. The 
word illuftradon (though it mean throwing light upon a thing) 
» ufually confined to that ibrt of l^ht which is derived from 
fhowing a proceis of difficulty employed upon an eafier cafe. 
The firfl &llacy may be committed by the illuflrator. He has 
before him the fubje<% matter of die premifes, their connexion in 
the proceis of inference, and the refiilt produced. Either may 
be illuflrated ; thus, if it be doubtfiil whether fuch premifes 
may be employed, the illuflrator may throw away his mode of 
connexion, and choofe another : if the procefs of inference be 
doubtful, he may choofe other premifes : and fb on. But he may 
illuflrate the wrong point : and this is a fallacy very common to 
teachers and leihirers. The greatefl difficulty in the way of 
learners is not knowing exa£Hy in what* their difficulty confifls ; 
and they are apt to think that when fomething is made clear, it 
mufl be the fomething. I am of opinion that the examples 
given of fyllogifms in works of logic are examples of wrong 
illuflration. The point in quefKon is the form, the objeft is to 
produce convifl^ion of the form, of its necefTary validity. If the 
fludent receive help from an example flated both in matter and 
form, the odds are that the help is derived fi-om the plainnefs 
of the matter, and from his conviiSlion of the matter of the con- 
clufion. If this be the cafe, he has not got over his difficulty. 
Many learners are puzzled to fee that ' Every Y is X' is not a 
neceflary confequence of ' Every X is Y.' If the want of con- 

• Every learner, in every fubjeft, (hould accuftom himfelf to endeavour 
to ftate the point of difficulty in ^writing, whether he want to ftiow the re- 
fult to another. or not. I wifh I had kept a record of the number of times 
which I have infifted on this being done, previoufly to undertaking the ex- 
planation, and of the proportion of them in which the writer has acknow- 
ledged that he faw his way as foon as he attempted to a(k the road in precife 
written language. That proportion is much more than one half. , Truly 
faid Bacon, that writing makes an exa6l man. 



On Fallacies. 267 

nexion be eftablifhed by an inftance, as by appealing to their 
knowledge that every bird is not a goofe, though every goofe be 
a bird, their knowledge of the propofition is not logical. The 
right perception may, no doubt, be acquired by reflec^on on in- 
ftances : but the minds which are beft fatisfied by material in- 
ftances, are alfo thofe which give themfelves no further trouble. 

The illuftration being fuppofed correft, there is more than one 
fallacious mode of oppofing it. Some perfons will difpute the very 
method of illuftration of form, in which the fame mode of infer- 
ence is applied to eafier matter ; but thefe are mere beginners, hardly 
even entitled to a name which fuppofes the poflibility of progrefs. 
Others will deny the analogy of the matter, and thefe there is no 
means of meeting : for illuftration is ad homtnem^ and the per- 
ception of it cannot be made purely and formally inferential : a 
denier of the force of an illuftration is inexpugnable as long as 
he only denies. But when he attempts more^ when he indicates 
the point in which the illuftration fails, he very often fells into the 
error of attacking an immaterial point. If any one were to con- 
tend (as fome do) that it is unlawful to take the life of any ani- 
mal, he might be afked what he would fay if Guy Faux had 
trained a pigeon to carry the match to the vault, would it have 
been lawful to ftioot the bird on its way or not ? There are not 
a few who would think it an anftver to fay that he could not 
have trained the pigeon, or that pigeons were not then trained 
to carry. 

5. The /allacia confequentis (now very often called a nonfe- 
quitur) is the fimple affirmation of a conclufion which does not 
follow from the premifes. If the fchoolmen had lived in our 
day, they would have joined with this the affirmation of logical 
form applied to that which wants it, a very common thing among 
us. A little time ago, either the editor or a large-type correfpon- 
dent (I forget which) of a newfpaper imputed to the clergy the 
maintenance of the ' logic ' of the following as ' confecutive and 
without flaw.* This was hard on the clergy (particularly the 
Oxonians) for there was no middle term, neither of the conclud- 
ing terms was in the premifes, and one negative premife gave a 
poiitive conclufion. It ran thus, 

Epifcopacy is of Scripture origin. 



268 On Fallacies. 

The church of England is the only epifcopal church in Eng- 
land, 

Ergo, the church eftablifhed is the church that fhould be fup- 
ported. 

Many cafes offend fo flighdy that the offence is not perceived. 
For inftance ' knowledge gives power, power is defirable, there- 
fore knowledge is defirable' is not a fyllogifm ; there is no mid- 
die term. It is a forites, as follows, ' knowledge is a giver of 
power, the giver* of power is the giver of a defirable thing, the 
giver of a defirable thing is defirable, therefore knowledge is de- 
firable.' 

It fhould be noted, however, that the copula 'gives' refem- 
bles 'is greater than' (page 5) and is an admiffible copula in in- 
ferences with no converfion, provided that ' A gives B and B gives 
C,' implies ' A gives C,' The fame may be faid of the verbs to 
bring, to make, to lift, &c. And many of thefe verbs are, by 
the unfeen operation of their having the efFeft of is in inference, 
often fupplanted by the latter verb in phrafeology. Thus we 
fay ' murder is death to the perpetrator* where the copula is 
brings; 'two and two are four* the copula being 'have the 
value of &c. But this practice may lead to &llacies, as above 
fhown : which muft be avoided by attention to the clafs of verbs 
which communicate their a<S):ion or ftate, fuch as make, give, 
bring, lift, draw, rule, hold, &c. &c. All thefe verbs are applied 
to denote the caufe of the feveral actions : fo, to give that which 
gives, or to bring that which brings, is to give or to bring. The 
boy who was faid to rule the Greeks becaufe he ruled his mo- 
ther, who ruled Alcibiades, who ruled the Athenians, who ruled 
the Greeks, would have been corredUy faid fb to do, if the mat- 
ters of rule had been the fame throughout. 

6. The non caufa pro caufa. This is the miflake of imagin- 
ing necefTary connexion where there is none, in the way of caufe^ 
confidered in the widefl fenfe of the word. The idioms of lan- 
guage abound in it, that is, make their mere expreffions of phe- 
nomena attribute them to apparent caufes, without intent to 
affert real connexion. Thus we fay that a tree throws a fhadow, 

* Becaufe power Is defirable. See page 115, as to this ftcp. 



On Fallacies. 269 

to defcribe that it hinders the h'ght. When the level of a billiard 
table is not good, the favoured pocket is faid to draw the balls. 
A particular cafe of this fallacy, which is often illuftrated by 
the words poji hoc^ ergo propter hoc^ is the conclufion that what 
follows in time follows as a confequence. When things are feen 
together, there is frequently an afliimption of neceflary connexion. 
There is, of courfe, a prefumption of connexion : if A and B have 
never been feen apart, there* is probability (the amount of which 
depends upon the number of inftances obferved) that the removal 
of one would be the removal of the other. It is when there is 
only one inftance to proceed upon that the aflumption falls under 
this fallacy \ were there but two, induftive probability might be, 
faid to begin. The fallacy could then confift only in eftimating 
the probability too high. , 

As may be fuppofed, the non caufa pro caufa arifes more often 
from mere ignorance than any other fallacy. To take the two 
inftances that I happened to meet with neareft to the time of 
writing this page 5 — Walpole, remarking on the uniform praftice 
among the old writing-mafters of putting their portraits at the 
beginning of their works, remarks that thiefe men feem to think 
their profeflion gives pofterity a particular intereft in their fea- 
tures. Probably they did not think about it : the u(age of the 
day prevented any man from being chargeable with undue va- 
nity who exhibited his phyfiognomy, and mojl of the writing 
majiers were themf elves engravers^ and either did their own por- 
traits, or more probably made ufe of their acquaintance with the 
more celebrated engravers for whom they did the under drudgery, 
to get themfelves done on eafy terms. Again, Noble (in his con- 
tinuation of Granger) remarks that Saunderfon had fuch a pro- 
found knowledge of muftc, that he could diftinguifh the fifth 
part of a note. The author did not know, firft, that any perfon 
who cannot diftinguifh lefs than the fifth part of a note to begin 
with, fhould be bound over to keep the peace if he exhibit the 
leaft intention of learning any mufical inftrument in which in- 
tonation depends upon the ear ; and fecondly, that if Saunderfon 
were not fo gifted by nature, knowledge of mufic would no more 
have fupplied the defect, than knowledge of optics would give 
him fight. 
^ The/allacia plurium interrogationum confifts in trying to get 



270 On Fallacies. 

one anfwer to feveral queftions in one. It is (bmetimes ufed by 
barrifters in the examination of witnefles, who endeavour to get 
yes or no to a complex queftion which ought to be partly anfivered 
in each way, meaning to ufe the anfwer obtained, as for the whole, 
when they have got it for a part. An advocate is ibmedmes 
guilty of the argument a diSfo fecundum quid ad diSfum fimpli" 
citer : it is his bufinefs to do for his client all that his client might 
honejily do for himfelf. Is not the word in Italics frequently 
omitted ?. Might any man honeftly try to do for himielf all that 
counfel frequently try to do for him ? We are often reminded of 
the two men who dole the leg of mutton ; one could fwear he 
had not got it, the other that he had not taken it. The counfel 
is doing his duty by his client ; the client has left the matter to 
his counfel. Between the unexecuted intention of the client, 
and the unintended execution of the counfel, there may be a 
wrong done, and, if we are to believe the ufual maxims, no 
wrong doer. The anfwer of the owner of the leg of mutton is 
fbmetimes to the point, ' Well, gentlemen, all I can fay is, there 
is a rogue between you.* That a barrifter is able to put off his 
forenfic principles with his wig, nay more, that he becomes an 
upright and impartial judge in another wig, is curious, but cer- 
tainly true. 

The above were the forms of fallacy laid down as moft effen- 
tial to be ftudied by thofe who were in the habit of appealing to 
principles fuppofed to be univerfally admitted, and of throwing 
all deduction into iyllogiftic form. Modern difcuflions, more 
favourable, in feveral points, to the difcovery of truth, are con- 
ducted without any conventional authority which can compel 
precifion of ftatement : and the fiegled): of formal logic occa- 
fions the frequent occurrence of thefe offences againft mere rules 
which the old enumeration of fallacies feems to have confidered 
as fufEciently guarded againft by the rules themfelves, and fuf- 
ficiently defcribed under one head, the fallacia confequentis. For 
example, it would have been a childifti miftake, under the old 
fyftem, to have afferted the univerial propofition, meaning the 
particular one, becaufe the thing is true in moft cafes. The rule 
was imperative : not all muft be fomey and even ally when not 
known to be ally was fome* But in our day nothing is more 
common than to hear and read affertions made in all the form, 



¦•v.. 



On Fallacies. 271 

and intended to have all the power, of univerfals, of which no- 
thing can be faid except that mpft of the cafes are true. If a 
contradiftion be afferted.and proved by an inftance, the anfwer 
is ' Oh ! that is an extreme cafe.^ But the affertion had been 
made of all cafes. It turns out that it was meant only for ordi- 
nary cafes 5 why it was not fo ftated muft be referred to one of 
three caufes 5 — a mind which wants the habit of precifion which 
formal logic has a tendency to fofter, a defire to give more 
ftrength to a conclufion than honeftly belongs to it, or a fallacy 
intended to have its chance of reception. 

The application of the extreme cafe is very often the only teft 
by which an ambiguous affumption can be dealt with : no won- 
der that the aiTumer fhould dread and proteft againft a procefs 
which is as powerful as the fign of the crofs was once believed 
to be againft evil fpirits. Where anything is aflerted which is 
true with exceptions, there is often great difficulty in forcing the 
aflertor to attempt to lay down a canon by which to diftinguilh 
the rule from the exception. Every thing depends upon it : for 
the queftion will always be whether the example belongs to the 
rule or the exception. When one cafe is brought forward which 
is certainly exception, the aflertor will, in nine cafes out of ten, 
refufe to fee why it is brought forward. He will treat it as a 
fallacious argument againft the rule, inftead of admitting that it 
is a good reafon why he fliould define the method of diftinguilh- 
ing the exceptions : he will virtually, and perhaps abfolutely, de- 
mand that all which is certainly exception ftiall be kept back, 
fimply that he may be able to aflume that there is no occafion to 
acknowledge the difficulty of the uncertain cafes. 

The ufe of the extreme cafe, its decifive effedl: In matters of 
demonftration, may furnifh prefumption as to what it is likely to 
be in matters of aflerted near approach. As in the following in- 
ftance. It feems almoft matter of courfe, when ftated, to thofe 
who have not ftudied the fubjeft of life contingencies, that the 
proper value of a life annuity is that of the annuity made certain 
during the average exiftence of fuch lives as that of the annuitant. 
That if, for example, perfons aged 22 live, one with another, 
40 years, an office which receives from every fuch perfon the 
prefent value of forty payments certain, will, without gain or lofs, 
in the long run, be able to pay the annuities. If this be (as was 



272 On Fallacies. 

ftoutly contended by fome writers of the laft century) a univerial 
truth, it will hold in this extreme cafe. Let there be two per- 
fons, one of whom is certain to die within a year from the grant 
(and therefore never claims anything) and the other of whom is 
certain to live for ever. It is clear that the value of an annuity 
to both is o + the value of a perpetual annuity. But the average 
life of both is eternal : one perpetual duration makes the average 
of any fet in which it is, perpetual. Hence by the falfe rule the 
value is two perpetual annuities, or juft double of the truth. 

We might fuppofe that moft perfons have no idea of a uni- 
verial propofition : but ufe the language, never intending all to 
fignify more than moji. And in the fame manner principles are 
ftated broadly and generally^ which the aflfertor is afterwards at 
liberty to deny under the phrafe that he does not carry tbemfo 
far as the inflance named. It would not do to avow that the 
principle is not always true : fo it is flated to be always true^ but 
not capable of being carried more than a certain length. Kyq 
not many perfons under fome confiifion about the meaning of 
the word general^ In fcience it always has the meaning of ««/- 
verfal: and the feme in old Englifh. Thus the catechifm of 
the church of England afTerts that there are two facraments 
which are generally neceflary to falvation : meaning necefTary for 
all of the genus in queflion, be it man, Chriflian, member of the 
church, or any other. But in modern and vernacular Englifh, 
general means only ufualy and generally means ufually. 

A great deal of what is called evafion belongs to this head, 
or to that of the ignoratio elenchiy as the fbphifl anfwers. The 
advocates, for inflance, of the abfblute unlawfulnefs of war never 
tell, unlefs prefTed, what they think of the cafe of refiflance to 
invafion. Is the country to be given up to the firfl foreigner 
who choofes to come for it ? Sometimes the extreme cafe comes 
into play : fbmetimes the afTertion that no one will come ; which 
is irrelevant as to the queflion what would be right if he did 
come. 

Among amufing modern evafions are * There is no occafton to 
confider that* and *I do'nt confider it in that point of view ^ 
Any one who watches the manner in which men defend their 
opinions will frequently fee * A is B and B is C, therefore A is 
C* anfwered, not by denial of either premife, but by * that i^ not 



On Fallacies. 273 

the proper point of view* or ' I don't fee it in that light/ This 
ihould be called the confufion between logic and perfpeftive. 

The denial of one univerial is often made to amount to, or to 
pafs into, the aflfertion of the oppofite, or fubcontrary, univerfal. 
This craving after general truths, the moft manifeft fault of the 
old logicians in their choice of premiies, did not expire with them. 
Bacon fays ' the mind delights in ipringing up to the moft gene- 
ral axioms, that it may find rejl.^ Many perfons are defirous of 
' fettled opinions,' which is well ; unlefs by fettled opinions they 
mean univerfal, as is often the cafe. That (bme are and fome 
are not is no fettlement : it makes every cafe require examina- 
tion, to fee under which it falls. And with the above we may 
couple the tendency to believe that refutation of an argument is 
proof of the faliehood of its conclufion, and that a falfe confe- 
quence muft be a falfe propofition. Hence it arifes that fb many 
perfons dare not give up any argument in favour of a propofition 
which they fully believe : they think they abandon the propo- 
fition. 

It fbmetimes happens that an aflertion is piade, which it is 
difficult to fuppofe can be anything but a cafe of a univerfal pro- 
pofition : and yet the afTertor takes care not to make his pro- 
pofition univerfal, but perfifts in the particular cafe. A logician 
in our day has afTerted that when Calvin fays that all officers of 
the church ihould be elefted by the people, he muft be under- 
ftood as fpeaking in reference to deacons only, becaufe the 
aflfertion is made in the chapter on deacons. If it had been 
roundly ftated that all univerfal propofitions are to have their 
univerfes limited by the headings of the works or chapters in 
which they occur — for inftance^ that the afTertion that all men 
are mortal, occurring in a hiftory of England, is to be taken as 
made of Englifhmen only — there would have been at leaft no 
ambiguity. But as it is, we are left to furmife whether this be 
meant, or whether the propofition be to apply to Calvin only, or 
to Reformers only, or to men whofe names begin with C, &c. 
The odds are that the application of a univerfal propofition will 
be di£lated by the heading of a chapter : but the extent to which 
a premife is aJferUd as true is not to be judged of by that to which 
it is wanted for ufe : and the lefs, the nearer we go to the day of 
the old logicians. 



274 O^ Fallacies. 

Wrong views of the quantity of a proportion are as frequent 
as any fallacies. Sonuy meaning moft, ^ndfomty meaning few, 
are frequently confounded. This is the neceflaiy confequence 
of the nature of human knowledge, in which we can but rarely 
form a definite idea of the proportion which the extent fpoken of 
bears to the whole. It is part of the value of the mathematical 
theory of probabilities, that the mind is accuftomed to the view 
of refults drawn from perfe£Uy definite fuppofed cafes y as ufelefs, 
it may be, in themfelves, as many of the queflions in a book of 
arithmetic, but neverthelefe good for exerciie. It is not furprif- 
ing that fallacies about quantity fhould be capable of mofl flrik- 
ing expofure in queflions concerning meafurable quantity, that 
is, in queftions of mathematics : nor that there fhould be clafTes 
of fallacy of which it is difficult to illuflrate the deteftion by any 
other inflances. What can be more clear, for example, to ordi- 
nary apprehenfions than the broad flatement that ' of things of 
the fame kind, that which is ibmetimes right mufl be better than 
that which is always wrong.' But a little confideration will 
fuggefl that what is always wrong may be as good as that which 
is fometimes right, if we do not know how to diflinguifh the 
cafes in which the latter is right: and alfo that what is not 
much wrong, generally, may be more ufeful than that which is 
moflly very wrong, when it is not abfolutely right, A watch 
which does not go is right twice a day : but it is not fo ufeful as 
one which does go, though very badly. 

To give an account of all the fallacies which depend upon 
wrong notions of quantity would require much fpace, and more 
afTumption of mathematical knowledge in my reader than is con- 
fiflent with my plan. But I may mention the miflaken ufe of 
abfolute terms and notions in queflions of degree. There can 
be, a difputant will fay, but a right and a wrong ; and if this be 
not right, it is wrong. Many perfons will announce that their 
watches are quite right, abfolutely at the true time, to a fecond : 
and will end by giving the time which was fhown when they 
looked, as being accurately that of the inflant at which they 
announce it. The proverb Frujira fit per plura, quod fieri po^ 
teji per pauciora contains an inaccuracy of degree : a bargain 
which cofls twenty fhillings and is worth . fifteen, is not twenty 
fhillings lofl, but only five, though the vexation of the party 
overreached will feldom fufFer him to fee this. 



On Fallacies. 275 

« 

Proverbs in general are liable to this miftake. They are often 
uied in exacStly the fame manner as the firft principles of the old 
logicians. In hSt^ remembering that thefe firft principles were 
bandied from mouth to mouth till they were perfeftly proverbial^ 
as we now call it, among the learned 5 and obferving the appli- 
cation of our modern proverbs, as made by the mafs of thofe 
who have not profited by mental diicipline, we may fee that the 
faults of the ichoolmen are only thofe of the ordinary human 
mind. It is hard indeed if there be a purpofe which a proverb 
cannot be found to ferve : it is a univerfal propofition of no very 
definite meaning, fan£Honed by ufage, having the appearance of 
authority, and capable of ftretching or contradling like Prince 
Ahmed's pavilion. One only is allowable — In generalibus latet 
error : this deftroys all the reft, and then, when clofely looked 
at— commits fuicide. 

All miftakes of probability are eflentially miftakes of quantity, , 
the fubftitution of one amount of knowledge and belief for an- 
other. It is often difficult to convey a proper notion of the 
degree of force which is meant to be given 5 and ftill more fo 
to retain it throughout the whole of a difcuifion. A perfon be- 
gins by ftating an explanation as poffible, or probable enough to 
require confideration, as the cafe may be. The forms of language 
by which we endeavour to exprefe diflTerent degrees of probability 
are eafily interchanged ; fo that, without intentional difhonefty 
(but not always) the propofition may be made to Aide out of one 
degree into another. I am iatisfied that many writers would 
fhrink from ietting down, in the margin, each time they make a 
certain aflertion, the numerical degree of probability with which 
they think they are juftified in prefenting it. Very often it hap- 
pens that a conclufion produced from a balance of arguments, 
2sA firjl prefented vfii\\ the appearance of confidence which might 
be reprefented by a claim of fuch odds as four to one in its favour, 
is afterwards ufed as if it were a moral certainty. The writer 
who thus proceeds, would not do {o if he were required to write 
4 in the margin every time he ufes that conclufion. This would 
prevent his falling into the error in which his parti(an readers are 
generally fure to be more than ready to go with him, namely, 
turning all balances for, into demon ftration, and all balances 
againft, into evidences of impoffibility. 

One of the great fallacies of evidence is the difpofition to dwell 



276 On Fallacies. 

on the a<^ual poffibOity of its being falfe : a poffibility which muft 
exift when it is not demonftrative. Counfel can bewilder juries 
in this way till they almoft doubt their own fenfes. A man is 
fhot, and another man, with a recently difcharged piftol in his 
hand, is found hiding within fifty yards of the fpot, and ten mi- 
nutes of the time. It does not follow that the man fo found 
committed the murder : and cafes have happened, in which it has 
turned out that a perfon convidled upon evidence as ftrong as the 
above, has been afterwards found to be innocent. An aftute 
defender makes thefe cafes his prominent ones : he omits to men- 
tion that it is not one in a thoufand againfl whom fuch evidence 
exifls, except when guilty. 

All the makers of fyflems v^ho arrange the univerfe, fquare the 
circle, and fo forth, not only comfort themfelves by thinking of 
the negleft which Copernicus and other real difcoverers met 
with for a time, but fometimes fucceed in making followers. 
Thefe lafl forget that for every true improvement which has 
been for fome time unregarded, a thoufand abfurdities have met 
that fate permanently. It is not wife to tofs up for a chance of 
being in advance of the age, by taking up at hazard one of the 
things which the age pafTes over. As little will it do to defpife 
the ufual track for attaining an objeft, becaufe (as always hap- 
pens) there are fbme who are gifted with energies to make a road 
for themfelves. Dr. Johnfbn tells a flory of a lady who ferioufly 
meditated leaving out the clafScs in her fon*s education, becaufe 
fhe had heard Shakfpeare knew little of them. Telford is a 
flanding proof (it is fuppofed by fbme) that fpecial training is 
not eflfential for an engineer. 

The difpofition to judge the prudence of an aftion by its refult, 
contains a fallacy when it is applied to fingle inflances only, or 
to few in number. That which, under the circumflances, is the 
prudent rule of conduft, may, neverthelefs end in fomething as bad 
as could have refulted from want of circumfpeftion. But upon 
dozens of inflances, fuch a balance would appear in favour of pru- 
dence as would leave no doubt in favour of the rule of conduft, even 
in the inflances in which it failed. The fallacy confifls in judging 
from the refult about the conduft of one who had only the previous 
circumftances to guide him. * You afted unwifely, as is proved 
by the refult,' is a paralogifm, except when it implies ^ You did. 



On Fallacies. 277 

as it happens in this inftance, take a courfe which did not lead to 
the defired refiilt.* Take a ftrong cafe, and the abfurdity will be 
feen. A chemift makes up a prefcription wrongly, and his cut- 
tomer leaves him for another : this other, {o it may happen, makes 
it up ftill more wrongly, and poifons the patient. Who would 
venture to iay that he acSted unwifely, as is proved by the refult, 
in leaving the tradefman whom he knew to be carelefs, for another 
of whom he knew no harm. The only way in which blame can 
be imputed^ is when it can be faid ^ You afted unwifely, in not 
finding out, as you might have done, that the refult which has 
happened is the one which was likely to happen.' One refult 
proves very little as to the fuperior wifdom of the courfe which 
produced it \ feveral may give a prefumption of it, and the greater 
the number, the greater the prefumption. 

So little is this thought of, that the common phrafe, * I a£led 
for the bed,' meaning originally ^ I a£led in the manner which 
under the circumftances, appeared likely to lead to the beft re- 
fults,' very often lofes its proper meahing, and is ufed as fynony- 
mous with ' I afted with good intentions.* 

Thefe, and many other points, I can. only flightly touch on : 
I will proceed to notice a few other caufes of error. 

And firft, of equivocations of ftyle. I have before referred to 
fuch a phenomenon as the alteration of a good fyllogifm into a 
bad one, to nia^e the fentence read better. But nothing ever 
reads well (for a continuance) except the ,jmtural current of a 
writer's thought. I fhould like it to be the law of letters, that 
every book fhould have inferted in it the printer's affidavit, fetting 
forth the number of verbal erafures in the manufcript, fair copies 
being illegal. It would be worth at leafl one review. 

There is a wilful and deliberate equivocation, which it is 
fuppofed the age demands. It is the ufe of fynonymes, or fup- 
pofed fynonymes, to prevent the fame word from occurring twice 
in the fame pafTage. So far is the neceffity of this praftice recog- 
nized, that there are few printing-offices in London, the readers 
of which do not query the fecond introduction of any word which 
prominently appears twice. And then the author obeys the hint, 
flrikes out one of the offenders, fticks in a di<5ionary equivalent, 
and would have been content if the printer's reader had done it 
for him. And fb he writes a goodjiyle. To be fure, he does not 



\ 



278 On Fallacies. 

fay what he meant, cxaftly 5 for fynonymes are feldom or never 
logical equivalents : but what is that to elegance of expreffion ? 

The demand for non-recurrence of words arifes from the pub- 
lic (I beg its pardon) not knowing how to read. If, when a 
word occurs twice, the proper emphafes were looked for, and 
obferved, there would be nothing ofFenfive about the repetition. 
It is the reader who makes one and one into two, by giving both 
units equal value. Take this fentence from Johnfon, (the firft 
I happened to light on, in the preface to Shakfpeare), and read 
it firft as follows : — " He therefore indulged his natural difpojition: 
and his difpojition^ as Rymer has remarked, led him to comedy :'' 
and then as follows — ^^ He therefore indulged his natural difpoji- 
tion; and his difpoiition, as Rymer has remarked, led him to 
comedy." This reading is what the context requires, and the ill 
efFeft of the repetition is next to nothing. Take the next fen- 
tence : — '' In tragedy he often writes^ with great appearance of 
toil and ftudy, what is written at laji with little felicity : but in 
his comic fcenes he feems*to produce,, without labour^ what no 
labour can improve.** Thefe were the firft inftances I found, 
from a chance opening of the Elegant Extra^s^ purpofely chofen 
as a mifcellany. The laws of thought generally didlate this rule, 
that the firft occurrence of a word is the more emphatic of the 
two : the leflbn of experience is, that a writer who prevents re- 
currence by the ufe of the didUonary of fynonymes, is a good 
ftyle-maker for none but a bad reader, and may very poffibly be 
a good arguer for none but a bad logician. Of courfe, I ftiould 
not deny that recurrence of both word and emphafis is a defeat:, 
if it be frequent. 

The confiifion between the means and th^ end,^ and putting 
one in the place of the other, is well enough known in morals : 
but there is a correfponding tendency to forget the diftinftion 
between the principle which is to be a£led on, and the rule of 
aftion by which adherence to that principle is fecured. A refe- 
rence to the derived rule is in all refpefts as good as one to the 
firft principle, between parties who underftand both, and the 
connexion between them. But thofe who underftand the rule 
only, are apt to forget that a rule may or may not be the true 
expreffion of a principle, according to the circumftances ixi which 
it is propofed to apply it. If, indeed, it were of univerfal appli- 



On Fallacies. 279 

cation, thofe who do and thofe who do not underftand the prin- 
ciple might be on the feme footing as to fecurity : but there are 
few fuch rules. 

The preceding caution may be applied in all departments of 
thought, in law and in logic, in morals and in arithmetic. It is 
impoiEble, for inftance, to ftate the rule of three in fuch a man- 
ner as eafily to include the cafes in which it fhall apply, and ex- 
clude thofe to which it does not. To fey that it muft be ufed 
where the fourth quantity, the one fought, is to be a fourth pro- 
portional to the three which are given, though correal, ftill leaves 
it open to inquiry what are the cafes in which this condition is to 
be fetisfied : and many cafes might be, and are propofed, in which 
the inquiry is not eafy to a beginner. In law, there are not only 
rules, but rules for their application. To an unlearned fpedator, 
particularly in the courts of equity, in which the advocate addrefles 
a judge, and not a jury, the argument takes that technical fQrm 
which makes many perfons think that the whole law is, at beft, 
only arbitrary rule. It may be that fome of thofe who there 
addrefs the court can make nothing better of it : and juft as there 
are arithmeticians, and good ones too, who are but the flaves, and 
never the mafters, of their procefles, fo there may be advocates, 
and even judges, who have not one element of the legiflator in 
them. But there are enough of a higher (pecies. 

The great art of ufing rules is to apply them in aid, and not 
in contravention, of the principles which they are intended to 
embody. A rule may have exceptions, it is faid ; but this is 
hardly a correfl: ftatement. A rule with exceptions is no rule, 
unlefs the exceptions be definite and determinable : in which cafe 
the exceptions are exclufions by another rule. The parallel is 
perfect between rules and propofitions (page 143). Thus, ' All 
Europe, except Spain and Portugal ' is a univerfel propofition ; 
but 'AH the ftates of Europe except two* is a particular one. A 
rule which applies to all ftates iexcept Spain and Portugal is a 
rule : but a rule which applies to all except two (unknown) is no 
rule. When it is ftated, in ordinary language, that every rule is 
fubjefl: to exception, it is meant, for the moft part, that the cir- 
cumftances under which adherence to the rule gains the objed, 
are thofe which moft frequently occur, and that the circumftances 
under which adherence to the rule would defeat the objeft are 



28o On Fallacies. 

rare. If this were remembered, much confiifion would often be 
feved. We want a word which fhall fo fer exprefs rule^ that it 
fhall imply that which will generally fucceed, without the notion 
of obligation which accompanies that of rule^ and which perpetu- 
ally mifleads. We want, in fad, the rule niji of the courts, which 
is to be a rule unlefe caufe be fhown againft it : and which will, 
in moft cafes, be ultimately made abfolute, but is not abiblute 
from the beginning. 

The common miftake is, that the rule niJi is an abfolute rule, 
and that therefore it may be fubftituted for its l^ing objefl: or 
firft principle, and that even the very words which exprefe -that 
obje£l gained, may be taken as equally expref&ve of iatisfa6tion 
of the rule, and vice verfa. For inftance, it is commonly ftated 
that the rule by which a difcoverer is determined, is publication ; 
that he who firft publifhes the difcovery, is to he held the difco- 
verer ; one lapfe more, and it is faid that he is the difcoverer ; 
yet one more, and it will be faid that the publication is the difco- 
very. The very remarkable circumftances attending the recent 
difcovery of the planet Neptune^ involving points of peculiar iii- 
tereft and delicacy, have caufed this rule to be much difcuiled, and 
have brought out every variety of ftatement of it. The thing to 
be determined is the actual truth of the quejiion^ the real hiftory 
of the human mind with regard to it. No one has a right under 
any rule, no matter what its authority, nor by whom impofed, to 
fubftitute the thing which is not, for the thing which is, or the 
lefs probable for the more probable. If philofophers were to at- 
tempt, by a law of their own filming, to fiibftitute the conven- 
tional refult for the real one, the common fenfe of mankind would 
difpute their authority, and reverie their decifion. The firft rule 
{niJi) is undoubtedly that the firft printer is the firft publifher, the 
fecond, that the firft publiftier is the difcoverer. Thefe will, un- 
lefs caufc be fhown againft them, be made abfclute in every cafe. 
A notion which is very prevalent, namely, that the firft publifher 
has therefore the rights of the difcoverer, is as incorred as that 
the firft printer is therefore the firft publijher. To take the cur- 
rent language, one would fuppofe that printing one hundred 
copies would be held better than circulating one thoufand in 
manufcript, and that even though the firft publifher could be 
proved to have plagiarifed, he has ftill the rights of difcovery* 



On Fallacies. 281; 

Juft as (page 244) early notions make laws of literal interpre- 
tation fuperfede thofe of intended meanings fo, in the earlier 
ftages of law, rules are often made to over-ride the principles on 
which they profefs to be founded, and to defeat truth and common 
fenfe. There is more excufe here than there would be in a 
queftion of fcience, for peace and convenience are main obje£);s 
of law, and it may be that rigid adherence to a rule, as a rule, at 
a certain avowed facrifice of truth and juftice, may be the only 
practicable means of preventing a larger (acrifice of both. In old 
times, the rule. of affiliation. Pater eft quern nuptia demonjlranty 
was. held fo abfolutely, that the hufband of the mother would be 
the le^l father, though the two had been confined in two diffe- 
rent jails a hundred miles apart for twelve months preceding the 
birth of the child. The modern law has made this rule to be no 
more than it ought to be, namely, one which muft hold unlefs 
the contrary be proved. 

I&is not uncommon, in difputation, to fall into the &llacy of 
making out conclufions for others by fupplying premifes. One 
fays that A is B ; another will take for granted that he mufl be- 
lieve B is C, and will therefore confider him as maintaining that 
A is C. But it may be that the other party, maintaining that 
A is B, may, by denying that A is C, really intend to deny that 
B is C. In religious controverfy, nothing is more common than 
to reprefent fe£ls and individuals as avowing all that is efleemed 
by thofe who make the reprefentation to be what, upon their pre- 
mifes, they ought to avow. All parties feem more or lefs afraid 
of allowing their opponents to fpeak for themfelves. Again, as 
to fubje£ls in which men go in parties, it is not very uncommon 
to take one premife from fome individuals of a party, another 
from others, and to fix the logical conclufion of the two upon 
the whole party : when perhaps ,the conclufion is denied by all, 
fome of whom deny the firfl premife by affirming the fecond, 
while the refl deny the fecond by affirming the firfl. Any fe£k 
of Chriflians might be made atheifls by logical confequence, if it 
were permitted to join together the premifes of different feftions 
among them into one argument. This is a fallacy which, how- 
ever common, could eafily be avoided, and would be, if thofe 
who ufe it cared for anything but viftory. But there is another 
form of the fame, which every one is fubjeft to, and which it is 



282 On Fallacies. 

not fo eafy to perceive. It is that of drawing upon our former 
felves for the premifes which are to guide us for the time being. 
Conclufions remain in our minds long after the grounds on which 
they were formed are abandoned : and it may happen that one 
premife of an argument will ftill have force, when the very rea- 
fbns on which the fecond premife is now admitted are contra- 
diftory of thofe which once induced us to admit the firft. Thus 
many who have learnt to advocate the legal toleration of opinions 
which they ftill believe, by force of education, to be abfolute 
crimes againft fociety, are logically the advocates of toleration of 
crime ; whereas, the arguments which they have learned to think 
valid for the firft premife, ought, if worth anything, to teach 
them to deny the fecond. I have myfelf heard from one mouth 
in one converfation (of courfe not in one part of it) that all fins 
againft the Creator are fins againft fociety, that all fins againft 
fociety ought to be punifhed by fociety, that certain opinions then 
named are fins againft the Creator, and that it is the height of 
injuftlce to punifh any one for his opinions. 

In printed controverfy, the ftatement of the oppofite opinion 
or afTertion may be made by defcription without citation (by 
chapter or page), by defcription with citation, or by quotation 
with or without defcription. The firft is not allowable. The 
prefumption is ftrong that a perfon who oppofes an opinion, im-^ 
putes an error, or makes a charge, upon the writings of another, 
is bound at leaft to cite, in a manner which cannot be miftaken, 
the part of thofe writings to which he refers. There are writers 
who refer defcriptively and even commehtatively, putting the 
reference of citation, and thus (as Bayle fays Moreri conftantly 
does) lead the reader to fuppofe that the words of their para- 
phrafe and comment are thofe of the pafTage itfelf. I do not fee 
that quotation is obligatory, though highly defirable : but the 
reader muft remember, when there is only citation, that it is not 
the author cited who fpeaks, but the perfon who brings him for- 
ward. It is a man*s own account of his own witnefs : with the 
advantage of an apparent offer of enabling the reader to go and 
verify the ftatement for himfelf. If the citer be honeft, the paf^ 
fage in queftion exifts: if judicious, it is to the efFedt ftated. 
Confequently, whenever the citer*s honefly or judgment is ex- 
prefsly in queftion, no mere citation is admiffible. 



On Fallacies. 283 

When citations are few they ought perhaps to be quotations : 
when they are many, it may be impra<5Hcable to make them (b. 
But extenfive citation ought to be encouraged. Lazy readers 
do not like it : they are not pleafed to have a power of verifica- 
tion offered of which they do not mean to avail themfelves j and 
they would rather, in cafe of being mifled, have to throw the 
blame upon the author than upon their own non-acceptance of 
the offered means of verification. Accordingly, they exprefs 
their difguft at ** pages loaded with references/* But the more 
diligent readers confider every citation as a boon. At the fame 
time it is to be remembered that there are writers who, relying 
on the common difinclination to verify, add a large number of 
citations, and give the appearance of a ftrong body of authorities, 
which are often nothing to the purpofe, and fometimes not taken 
from a£tual examination, but copied from other writers. 

Perhaps the greatefl and mofl dangerous vice of the day, in 
the matter of reference, is the pradice of citing citations, and 
quoting quotations, as if they came from the original fources, 
inflead of being only copies. It is in truth the reader's own 
fault if he be taken in by this, or by the falfe appearance of au- 
thority jufl alluded to j for it is in his own power to certify him- 
felf of the truth : though there may be difficulty when the cita- 
tions are many, or when fome of them are from very rare books. 
Honefly and policy both demand the exprefs flatement of every 
citation and quotation which is made through another fburce. 
If a perfbn quote what he finds of Cicero in Bacon, it fhould be 
' Cicero (cited by Bacon) fays, &c.* It has happened often 
enough that a quoter has been convidted of altering his author, 
and has had no anfwer to make except that he took the paffage 
from fome previous quoter. 

Quotations are frequently made with intentional omiffion and 
alteration. But no rule ought to be more inflexible than that 
all which is within the marks of quotation ought to be a literal 
tranfcript of the book quoted. Sometimes the omifiion is made 
becaufe part of the fentence is unneceffary, as the quoter thinks^ 
But this is jufl the point which he has no bufinefs to decide 
without letting his reader know that he has decided it, which is 

eafily done by thie recognized mark of omiffion ( ) If 

a perfon would quote the iEneid for the antiquity of Carthage, 



284 On Fallacies. 

he has no bufiriels to write down, as from Virgil, ' Urbs aritiqua 

fuit Carthago : * it fhould be * Urbs antiqua fuit Carthago,* 

if he decide upon omitting * Tyrii tenuere coloni.' In this cafe,* 
not only may the omiffion make the propoAtion appear more 
categorical than it is in the original, turning it from ' There was 
an old city, Carthage,* rather towards ' Carthage was an old city ; * 
but a reader may choofe to think that the omitted words qualify 
the epithet, or even offer proof deftrudlive of it. What if he 
fhould deny the antiquity of Tyre ? The omijjion may (or may 
not) be right, but the omiflion without notice, or fupprejjion^ is 
certainly wrong. 

Moreover, it is dangerous to truth to fhorten without notice, 
inafmuch as thofe who quote the quotation will be apt to do the 
&me thing ; that is, thinking they have the whole paffage, to 
fhorten it further. What this may end in, no one can predid : 
but miflakes have been brought about in this way quite as abfurd 
as any that ever were made. It may reafbnably be fiippofed 
that many very ludicrous errors arife thus. A good many years 
ago, I fucceeded, by means of a fhortened quotation, put away 
until it was wanted, in arriving at, and publifhing, the conclufion 
that Archimedes was once fuppofed to have been an anceflor of 
Henry IV. of France.* The real purport of the fentence was that 
he was fuppofed to have been an anceflor of the Sicilian martyr 
St. Lucia, on whofe day Henry IV. was born. It has happened 
that A has been faid to have afferted in a fecond book, that B 
related the death of C, when the truth is that A faid in the firfl 
book that B died many years before C (See the Companion to the 
Almanack for 1846, page 27). I do not ipeak of omiffions made 
becaufe the part omitted would prove more than the quoter 
likes : this of courfe is fraud. 

Unjuflifiable as unnoted omiffions may be, ftill more fo are 
additions and alterations. Writers have fometimes inferted glofTes 
of their own, into the text which they quote, either as addition 
or alteration. Explanatory additions may eafily be made within 
brackets [ ], which are underflood marks of (uch a thing : but 
alterations are intolerable. But why, the reader may afk, are 
fuch things infifled on ? Is not the fimple rule, Be honeft^ 
enough to include thefe and hundreds of things like them, with- 
out detail ? To this I reply that within a twelvemonth before 



On Fallacies. 285 

the time I write this, a clergyman, a man of high education and 
charafter both, publiihed a fermon in which he gave a verfe 
from the Bible within marks of quotation, in which he wilfully 
ftruck out one word, and inferted another, without notice : and 
his fermon went through feveral editions, either without detec- 
tion, or without that detedion leading to fuccefeful remonftrance. 
I do not fuppofe there was difhonefty here ; but rather the fol- 
lowing reafoning ; — ' I am fure it was meant; therefore I may 
ftate that it was laid.' Such reafoning is one of the curfes of our 
literature. 

There is one alteration within the marks of quotation which 
may at firft feem reafbnable : it is alteration of grammar to bring 
the quoted phrafes into connefted Engliih with the quoter's 
context. As when a man fays '' I know" and another perfon^ 
quoting him, fays '' He knows." But it is furely juft as eafy 
to put down He fays '' I Jcnow." There is often an alteration 
of emphafis in this adaptation of grammar, and generally an in- 
troduction of irony : and it is xht premier pas to fomething worfe. 
As far as I have feen, thofe who do it as a matter of courfe, arc 
apt fometimes to put their own paraphrafes under marks of quo- 
tation. A writer fhould fuit his own grammar to that of his 
quotation^ and not the converfe. 

Omiffion of context, preceding or following the quotation, 
may alter its character entirely : and this is one of the moft fre- 
quent of the fallacies of reference, both intentional and uninten- 
tional. The only way to infure full confidence is to give the egg 
in its {hell : that is, to begin at a point which clearly precedes 
the immediate fubje£t of quotation, and to continue until the 
matter is as clearly paft : to give a fentence preceding and a 
fentence following the matter quoted for its own fake, diftin- 
guifhing the latter. This is not always conclufive : becaufe the 
fubjecl may be refumed in a fentence or two, or in another part 
of the book. But it will inform the reader, in moft cafes, whe- 
ther he is or is not likely to differ from the quoter as to the 
meaning of the part quoted. And this refers particularly to quo- 
tations of opinion : thofe of fafl: may often be more briefly 
treated with fafety. 

In quoting ancient authors, in cafes where the text is not no- 
torious, the various readings (hould be given, efpecially when it 



286 On Fallacies. 

is an author whofe text has an indiiFerent reputation for accuracy. 
Or if this cannot be done, the edition fhould be cited. Shameful 
things have occurred in controverfy, by omiffion of a part of the 
ordinary text, which the quoter chofe to conjider as an interpola- 
tion, without choofing to confider that the reader ought to have 
liberty to judge for himfelf on that point* 

Among the cafes of indire6t citation, fhould be included that 
in which a book is mentioned as exifting, not on the authority 
of the writcr*s own eyes, but on that of a catalogue. The num- 
ber of nonexifting books which are entered in catalogues and 
copied, as to their titles, into other works, is greater than any 
one who has not examined for himfelf would fuppofe pofEble. 
In thofe who know this, confidence is deftroyed ; and this ibme- 
times afFedls queftions of opinion. I am told that Dugald Stewart, 
who had a ftrong notion of the pradlical impoffibility of pre- 
fenting Euclid in a fyUogiftic form, never would believe that it 
had been done by Herlinus and Dafypodius. Such a work is 
entered in catalogues : but I muft fay that the ftate of catalogues 
is fuch that Stewart or any one elfe had fiill right to doubt of 
any work, upon no other than catalogue evidence. The work 
does exift, and I have a copy of it. But, feeing how matters 
ftand, no one has a right to declare that an old book ever was 
written, without informing his reader on what fort of evidence 
he relies. 



CHAPTER XIV, ' 

On the Verbal Defcription of the Syllogi/m. 

IN page 75, 1 have made a firft attempt to exprefs the rela- 
tions of propofitions in language which will make iyllo^ 
gifms capable of verbal defcription, and the inference of their 
conclufions matter of felf-evidence. It is deflrable that this fhould 
be more fully done, and I accordingly renew the attempt, with 
the beft words of defcription which I can find or make. Any 
one who can fuggeft words which better convey the meaning to 
himfelf, will find it eafy to fubftitute them for thofe which I 
have ufed. 



Defcription of the Syllogifm,. 287 

The conditions to be fatisfied are, that the words fhould have 
as much imported meaning as poffible, that ever)r word and its 
contrary fhould have the connexion of contrariety well marked, 
and that the verbal defcriptions fhould be capable of. being eafily 
formed from the fymbolic notation. As may be fuppofed, thefe 
conditions are to fbme extent contradiftory of each other : the 
facrifice of either to the others is then to be made to the moft 
advantageous efFecSt. 

There are two ways in which it may be necefTary to defcribe 
the iyllogifm. Firfl, the one hitherto ufed throughout this work, 
in which one concluding term is referred to the other by the in- 
tervention of the middle term : what X is of Y, and what Y is of 
Z, determine what X is of Z. Secondly, that in which the two 
terms are referred to one another by comparifon of both with the 
middle term : what X and Z feverally are of Y determine what 
X is of Z. 

In the firfl mode, the middle term is mentioned, and its de* 
fcription is middle in the fentence ; while the reference term is 
underflood in the predicate of each defcription. Thus when we' 
fay ' a fubcontrary of a fupercontrary is a fubidentical,' it is that 
a fubcontrary of 2i fupercontrary (of 2) is a fubidentical (of Z) j 
and th^ fupercontrary of Z is the middle term. 

In the fecond mode, the middle term is underflood in the fub- 
jeft, and the concluding terms in the predicate, of the defcrip- 
tion of the iyllogifm. Thus when we fay * genus and (pecies are 
genus and fpecies,* it means that two terms which are feverally 
genus and fpecies of the middle term (one entirely containing, 
the other entirely contained in, the middle term) are genus and 
fpecies to one another (the firft genus, the fecond fpecies). 

Now it will be very eafily feen, that the way to change the 
firft defcription into the fecond is as follows. Say the defcrip- 
tion runs thus, * P of Q is R.' If Q be its own correlative, as 
happens when Y and Z are convertibly connected, then ' P of 
Q ' merely becomes ' P and Q :* but if Q^have another, Q% for 
its correlative, then ' P of Q* becomes ' P and QJ.' Again, if 
R be its own correlative, its plural takes its place : but if R have 
R® for its correlative, it becomes * R. and R®.' Thus 'fubcon- 
trary of fupercontrary is fubidentical ' of the firft mode, becomes 
' fubcontrary and fupercontrary are fubidentical and fuperidenti- 



288 On the Verbal Defcription 

cal ' meaning that Ci and C of the middle term are Di and D' 
of each other. But * fubcontrary of fuperidentical is fubcontrary ' 
becomes * fiibcontrary and fubidentical are fiibconlraries.* 

I need hardly fey that * P of Q is R ' with refpeft to X in 
terms of Z, muft be read ' Q» of P* is R» ' with refpeft to Z in 
terms of X. This riile we have already ufed. 

It is thus fhown that it is only neceflary to dwell on the firft 
mode ; and now arifes the queftion what words are to be em- 
ployed in defcribing the eight ftandard proportions. After a 
good deal of confideradon, I prefer to denote the univerfel rela- 
tions by pofitive terms, and their contrary particulars by the cor- 
refponding negative ones : not without full perception of the 
(acrifice which enfues of the firft condition above mentioned to 
the third. 

The words genus znA /pedes immediately fu^eft themfelves to 
denote the relation of Y to X and X to Y in X) Y. Thefe are 
to be underftood as employed up to their limit ; or the genus and 
fpecies may be coextenfive. For two names which have no- 
thing in common, as in X . Y, I propofe to fay that they are ex- 
ternals of each other. And for two names which have nothing 
out of one or the other, as in x .y, that they are complements of 
each other. Remember that complemental does not mean only 
juji complemental (which is contrary), but may be contrary or 
fupercontrary. 

In X:Y, I call X a nort-fpectes of Y, and Y a non-genus of X. 
Thefe words have not as much as I could wifib of imported 
meaning, nor are there any pofitive terms which I can propofe 
to fupply their places. They appear as fynonymous with not 
entirely contained in and not containing the whole. In XY, let 
X and Y be non-externals ; and in xy, let X and Y be non-com- 
plements. Accordingly, in defcribing what X is with refped to 
Y, we have as follows, fhowing the fubflitutions which occur in 
reading the fyllogiflic fymbols into this language. 



Ai, fpecies 
A', genus 
£i, external 
E', complement 



Oij non-fpecies, 
O', non-genus. 

Ii, non-external. 

r, non-complement. 



If we condAtx genus and complement as larger terms^ znd Jpecies 



of the Syllogifm. 289 

and external 21^ fmaller mesj and if we put down each univerfal 
followed by its two weakened particulars) writing firft that which 
is of the fame accent, we have 



Univerial. 

A' ^Genus 

Ai Species 

E' Complement 



Firfl weakened form. 

r non-complement 
Ii non-external 
O' non-genus 



El External I Oi non-fpecies | 



Second weakened form, 

Ii non-external. 

r non-complement. 
Oi non-(pecies. 
O' non-genus. 



Thus it appears that the primary weakened, form of a larger 
name contains a larger name, and of a fmaller a fmaller : and 
the contrary for the fecondary forms. The words primary and 
fecondary do not refer to importance, but only to order of deri- 
vation : thus Ai was in our table X)Y, weakened into XY, 
before it became y)x, weakened into yx or xy. 

The rules for forming particular fyllogifms by weakening uni- 
verfal premifes may now be repeated. In a univerfal fyUogifm, 
fubftitute for thefr/l premife and for the conclufion their primary 
weakened forms, or for the fecond premife and for the conclufion 
xheix fecondary weakened forms. In a ftrengthened fyllogifm, 
fubftitute for thefirji premife its fecondary form, or for the fecond 
premife its primary form. 

I now write down the whole body of fyllogifms, that the rea- 
der may exercife himfelf in the independent comprehenfion of 
their meaning, and in affent to their inferences ; deducing the 
particular fyllogifms from the univerfals only. 

Univerfal and particular Syllogifms. 

Symbol. Defcription of X with refpe£l to Z. 

AiAi Ai Species of fpecies is fpecies. 

IiAiL Non-external of fpecies is non-external. 

AiIT Species of non-complement is non-complement. 

A' A' A' Genus of genus is genus. 

TAT Non-complement of genus is non-complement. 

A'LL Genus of non-external is non-external. 

AiEiEi Species of external is external. 
IiEiOi Non-external of external is non-fpecies. 
AiO'O' Species of non-genus is non-genus. 

u 



A 



On the verbal Defer iption 

Genus of complement is complement. 
Non-complement of complement is non-genus. 
Genus of non-fpecies is non-fpecies. 

External of genus is external. 
Non-fpecies of genus is non-lpecies. 
External of non-external is non-genus. 

Complement of fpecies is complement. 
Non-genus of (pecies is non-genus. 
Complement of non-complement is non-fpecies. 

External of complement is fpecies. 
Non-fpecies of complement is non-external. 
External of non-fpecies is non-complement. 

C( mplement of external is genus. 
Non-genus of external is non-complement. 
Complement of non-genus is non-external. 

Strengthened Syllogijms. 

AiAT Species of genus is non-complement. 

A'AiL Genus of fpecies is non-external. 

AiE'O' Species of complement is non-genus. 

A'EiOi Genus of external is non-fpecies. 

El AiO' External of fpecies is non-genus. 

E'A'Oi Complement of genus is non-fpecies. 

EiEiF External of external is non-complement. 

E'E'Ii Complement of complement is non-external. 

No perfbn could propofe to himfelf a better exercife in the 
acquifition of >command over language, than praftifing the de- 
monftrations of thefe relations, or more properly their redu6^ion 
into fpecific fhowing, as to the matter of the inference, in what its 
extent confifts. For inftance, ' the complement of a non-com- 
plement is a non-fpecies* : How, and by how much ? The non- 
complement leaves fomething which is neither in the term un- 
derflood, nor in that non-complement. This, the complement 
of that non-complement muft fill up : and by this then, at leaft, 
the complement of the non-complement is not in the term under- 
ftood, of which it is therefore lb far non-fpecies. 



r 

of the Syllogifm. 291 

In the preceding view, I have particularly confidered the con- 
nexion between contrary forms, and the adaptation of language 
to that connexion. But in the firft derivation of the fimple fyl- 
logifms (page 88) the univerfals were related, not to their con- 
trarie§4 but to their particular concomitants. I now proceed to 
the confideration of this view, and to the juftification, on felf- 
evident principles, of the aflertion that there is a real and ftriking 
affinity between the univerlal iyllogifm and its concomitants, as 
AiAiAi and O'AiO', E'EiA' and ETOi, &c. 

The complex propofitions Di, D', and Ci contain each a uni- 
verial which, in common language, is generally confounded with 
it, and a particular, the exiftence of which is therefore for the 
moft part fuppoied in thought to accompany the univerfal. The 
remaining univerfal, E', is differently circumfljnced : if we fay 
that X and Y complete the univerfe, we fhould generally mean 
that they only juft complete it, and fhould not think of.the fuper- 
contrary relation, or of their overcompleting it. To be contained 
but not to fill ; to contain with room to fpare, or to overfill ; to 
exclude and be excluded without completion ; and to exclude and 
be excluded with completion (or to complete and be completed 
without incluflon) ; — are our mofl ufual ideas of the relations of 
the extent of names. 

The reduction of the complex propofltion to the fimple uni- 
verfal, when done by removal of the concomitant particular^ is 
in all cafes a lowering of the quantity, by the removal of an ex- 
cefs, as follows : — 

Di means that X is contained in Y, and more is contained. 

D* means that X contains Y, and contains more. 

Ci means that X excludes Y, and excludes more. 

C means that X completes Y, and *more than completes. 

Drop the fecond claufes, and Di, &c. are reduced to Ai, &c. 
Drop the firfl claufes, and it would feem as if we had flill the 



* The alteration of grammar here feen is in deference to the word com" 
pletCy the befl I can get. In this propofition, the verb refers to tAe uni'verfiy 
and it is X(joins in completing the univerfe) Y and joins in completing more 
(than the univerfe). 



292 On the verbal Defcription 

complex propofitions ; for m&re will contain its tacit reference to 
that which it is more than. Let this tacit reference be dropped, 
and then we have, inftead of the whole complex propofition,'only 
its particular. And this abandonment is adually made in com- 
mon language, by what would be called perhaps a lax, but is a 
very logical, ufe of the word more. ' There are more than fifh on 
the dry land,* would be perfe6Uy intelligible, and not as implying 
that there were any fifh : ' he was actuated by more than the 
motive, &c.* very often means 'other than the motive' &c. 

Now, in the complex fyllogifm, as we have feen (page 81), the 
exceffive part of the conclufion (whence comes its fecond claufe, 
its additive more) is the fiim of the exceffive parts of the premifes. 
If one of the complex premifes be deprived of its aflertion of 
excefs, or lowered into a fimple univerial, the conclufion ftill 
remains, though not a fortiori^ neceflarily. This being done, the 
valid excefs of the conclufion depends upon the excefs of the remain^ 
ing premife ; and the concomitant particular fyllogifm, confidered 
as part of the mixed complex fyllogifm, is the expreffion of this, 
without the reft. Finally, the excefs may be ufed in the lax, or 
non-correlative, fenie, and then the concomitant fyllogifm ftands 
by itfelf. 

For example, OiA'Oi may be read thus : — Confider Oi as 
concomitant of A' in D'. ' X contains more than [fomething 
that is not in] Y ; Z contains X ; therefore, Z contains more 
than [fomething that is not in] Y.' If ' more than Y* mean ' Y 
and more,* this would be D'A'D'. Again, O'EJ' is ' more than 
X [fomething not X] is contained in Y ; Y excludes Z ; there- 
fore, X excludes more than Z [fomething not in Z].* If * more 
than X ' were ' X and more,' &c. : this would be DiEiCi. And 
fo on for other cafes. 

I now proceed to what I may call the quantitative defcription 
of the fyllogifm : by which I mean the expreffion of its cafes in 
terms of the quantities only of its names and propofitions, leaving 
the alternative of affirmation and negation to be fettled by the 
law of thefe quantities. My reafon for the prefentation of the 
fyftem in fo many different points of view will be obvious enough : 
that which claims to be complete, muft fhow itfelf to contain juft 
the fame, and no more, as to refults, whatever may be the prin- 
ciple which is chofen as the bafis of conftru£tion. 



of the Syllogifm. 293 

Every propofition, in fpeaking of two names, fpeaks of their 
contraries, and (page 63) of the four terms, two direft and two 
contrary, two are univerfel and two are particular. Since univer- 
fal and particular are themfelves properly contraries, (for 'Every 
X' is ' Xs, known to be all' and ' Some Xs* are 'Xs, not known to 
be air) let us fignify the univerlal and particular forms of the 
propojition by V and v. Again, fpeaking of a name^ let its mode 
of entry, univerfal and particular, be denoted by T and t. Writ- 
ing down V( or v) applied to T( or t), T( or t) we can make eight 
varieties, which give us the eight ftandard forms applied to one 
order, fay X Y ; as follows : — 



A, = V(Tt) A' =V(tT) Ei=V(TT) 



E'=V(tt) 



O' = V (Tt) Oi = V (tT) r = V (TT) Ii =v (tt) 

Thus I' or xy, may be defcribed as the particular in which 
both terms are univerfal : for X and Y are both univerfal in xy, 
or x: Y, or y:X. And v(TT) defcribes it thus. 

If, underftanding the order to be XY, YZ, XZ, we write 
down any three propofitions, we make an attempt at a fyUogifm, 
valid or not, as the cafe may be : as in 

V(Tt).v(tt).V(tT) or VvV(Tt,tt,tT) 

which muft be AJiA'. It will affift the memory to obferve that 
fub-fymbols have VT or vt at the beginning, fuper-iymbols vT or 
Vt. Alfo, that affirmatives have an even number of capitals 
{none* or two) and negatives an odd number [one or three). A 
univerfal and its particular concomitant have the fame entries of 
T and t, and contranominals have inverted modes of entry of 
thefe letters. The convertibles have T in both places, or t : the 
inconvertibles have T and t. 

Firfl, it is unnecefTary to write down the term-letters of the 
conclufion, for they mufl be taken from the premifes, in every 
cafe in which the conclufion is the flrongefl that can be drawn 
from the premifes ; and our fyflem has no others (nor, indeed, 



* The reader mufl here follow the mathematician in confidering o as an 
even number. 



294 On the verbal Defer iption 

has the Ariftotelian any other except Bramantip), Thus, TT,tt 
being the term letters of the premifes, ftrike out the fecond T 
and the firft t, which refer to the middle term, and Tt muft be- 
long to the conclufion. To prove this, obferve that we know 
that t in the premife cannot give T in the conclufion : therefore 
T cannot give t ; for if, the term being Z, T gave t, then, put- 
ting z properly in its place, t would give T, which it cannot. 
Again, we know that the valid forms, as to propofitions, are 
VVV, VVv, vVv, Vvv ; fo that v occurring once only, muft 
come third, and V muft come in the firft pair. Further, in the 
four term letters of the premifes, VVV, vVv, Vvv, require Tt, 
or tT, to come in the middle, while VVv alone requires TT, 
or tt. Obferve thefe laws, and every formation which can take 
place under them leads to a valid fyllogifm. Putting dots to re- 
prefent a blank place, we form the eight univerfal fyllogifms by 
filling up the blanks in VVV(. . t,T . .) and VVV(. . T,t . .) ; 
the eight ftrengthened fyllogifms from VVv(. . T,T . .) and 
VVv(. . t,t . .) ; the eight particulars which begin with a univer- 
fal from Vvv(. • t,T . .) and Vvv(. . T,t . •) ; and the eight par- 
ticulars which begin with a particular from vVv(. . t,T . .) and 
vVv(. .T,t..). And, under the rules juft given, we have no 
other cafes. 

Taking the preceding as a bafis, we might make the rules of 
accentuation follow from it. For, fince the firft blank in our 
fymbol, and the firft concluding term, muft agree, and fince ac- 
cents depend only on the firft two letters in the fymbol of a pro- 
pofition, we may proceed as follows. Let K and L, each of 
them, mean T or t, as the cafe may be, but with the provifo that 
what it means in either place it fliall mean in the other. Then, 
in VVV(KT,tL,KL) and in vVv(KT,tL,KL), in which fym- 
bols of conclufion are introduced, we fee that the firft and third 
accents muft agree, which is part of the direft rule. As to the 
firft and fecond accents, they agree in the firft inftance above, if 
K be t, which puts an even number of capitals in the firft fym- 
bol VKT, or an afiirmative propofition at the commencement : 
they differ if K be T, which puts a negative propofition firft. 
In the fecond inftance, they agree if K be T, which puts an 
affirmative firft, &c. I leave it to the reader to deduce the other 
cafes of this rule, the inverfe rule, and alfo that premifes give an 



of the Syllogifm. 295 

afErmative, or a negative, conclulion, according as they have like 
or unlike figns. And thus it will appear, that the fymbolic rules 
given in chapter V, are really expreffions of the general rules of 
quantity. 

It will be obferved that the concomitant fyUogifms of a univer- 
fal have the fame term letters as that univerfal, and only change 
VVV into Vvv, or vVv. Alfo, that the inverted fyUogifms of 
page 96 only invert the order of all the term-letters, and the 
letters of the premifes, when different. 

Thus, EiA'Ei being VVV(TT,tT), its concomitants TAT 
and EiOiI', are vVv(TT,tT) and Vvv(TT,tT). But the in- 
verted form AiEiEi is VVV(Tt,TT). Contranominals have 
different quantities in all the term-letters. The weakened forms 
of a univerfal change the firft premife letter and the firft term 
letter, or the fecond of both. Thus, EiE'Ai being V V V(TT,tt), 
its weakened forms, OiE'Ii and EiOJ', are vVv(tT,tt) and 
Vvv(TT,tT). 

The forms of the numerical fyUogiftn (page 161) may be re- 
covered by few and eafy rules, in which the premifes as they fland 
determine the conclufion, as follows : — Let | be defignated as 
the number of X, and S as that of x ; and fo on. Let a term 
of the conclufion be called direSf when it is in the premife, and 
inverfe when its contrary is in the premife. Then, 

1. In every cafe, the conclufion has the fum of the quantities 
mentioned in the premifes, as part of the expreffion of its quan- 
tity. 

2. For every inverfe term in the conclufion, the number of 
its direft term appears in the quantity of the conclufion, fub- 
tra£l:ed. Thus, x in a premife, with X in the conclufion, mufl 
have — ? in the concluding quantity. But the dire6t terms of 
the conclufion never introduce anything into the concluding 
number. 

3. When the entrances of the middle term are fimilar (YY, 
or yy), the terms of the two forms of conclufion are both diredl 
and both inverfe, with fubtraftion of the number of the middle 
term in the former, addition of the number of its contrary in the 
latter. Thus, yy gives — u' in the direft, +>i in the inverfe 
form. 

4. When the entrances of the middle term are difEmilar ( Yy, 



296 On the verbal Defcription^ &c. 

or y Y), each form of conclufion has one diredl and one inverfc 
term ; and no number from the middle term enters the conclud- 
ing quantity. 

Thus, the conclufions from [wxY + wYZ^are immediately 
written down as 

(»! + «— >?)xZ and (»i + «+Vi'—|'—OXz: 
while thofe from mx Y 4- «'yz are at once 

(;w4.«'_|»)Xz and (»i + «'— ?')xZ 

There are relations exifting between the forms of the fyUo- 
gifm which I have not confidered. For inftancc, the defcription 
of X with refpedi to Z being that it is a fpecies, (At), the de- 
fcription of its contrary, x, is thatjt is a fupercontrary, (E'). If 
then we give the name of contradefcriptives to Ai and E' we find 
that A' and Ei, L and O', I' and Oi, are alio contradefcriptives. 
The arrangement of fyllogifms by contradefcriptives, and the laws 
of connexion thence refulting, will be an eaiy exercife for the 
ftudent. 



APPENDIX. 



I. 



Account of a Controverfy between the Author of this Work and 
Sir JVilliam Hamilton of Edinburgh ; and 
final reply to the latter. 

THIS appendix contains an account of a controverfy in which fbme 
of the matters treated in the preceding work involved me with 
Sir William Hamilton, Profeflbr of Logic and Metaphyfics in the Uni- 
verlity of Edinburgh. It has produced four publications (to which I 
(hall refer as I, II, III, IV) namely : 

I. * Statement in anfwer to an aflertion made by Sir William Hamil- 
ton, Bart by Auguflus De Morgan, .... (London, odlavo, R. and 

E. Taylor, pp. l6, publiihed April 30, 1847.) 

II. * A letter to Augufhis De Morgan, Efq on his claim to an 

independent redifcovery of a new principle in the theory of fyllogifm. 
From Sir William Hamilton, Bart. Subjoined, the whole previous cor- 
refpondence, and a pofticript in anfwer to Profeflbr De Morgan's " State- 
ment,*" (London and Edinburgh, odlavo, Longman and Co., Maclachlan 
and Co. pp. 44, exclulive of * Profpedlus' hereinafter mentioned : re- 
ceived by me May 22, 1847.) 

III. Letter from me to Sir W. Hamilton, dated May 24, publiihed 
in the Athenaum Journal of May 29. 

IV. Letter from Sir W. Hamilton to me, dated June 2, publiihed in 
the fame Journal of June 5. 

There are two queilions involved, one concerning my charaAer, the 
other purely literary. The former ilands thus. March 13, Sir W. 
Hamilton informed me by letter that (the Italics are his own words) to 
him // // manifeft that for a certain principle I was wholly indebted to his 
information f zndthat ifYJhould give \l forth as a /peculation of my own 
(which I had done to himfelf, and meant to do, as he knew, and have 
iince done, in print) I ihould, even though recognizing always his pri" 
ority, be guilty both of an injurious breach of confidence towards him and 
offalfe dealing towards the public. This hypothetical charge y and dero- 
gatory fuppofition of which he may formerly have furmifed the pojjtbility 
(fuch are his fubiequent qualifications of it) is unrefervedly retrafted at 
the beginning and end of II : but it is frequently iniinuated in the mid- 
dlCf by propoiing things as difficult to be explained otherwife, by hint 
that others may believe it, by hopes that they will not, by charges of 
falfehood, kc, &c. For the /^r/Vi?/ charge is fubitituted imputation of 



298 Appendix. 

lapfe of memory, intelledlual confufion, &c. The following is the pro- 
gramme of the firft intended argument, (II. p. 4.) 

* I confefs, that, for a time, I regarded your pretention, as an attempt 
' at plagiarifm, cool as it was contemptible. 

* From this view, feeling, information, refledUon turned me ; and I 

* now. Sir, tender you my fincere apology, for admitting, though founded 

* on your own ftatements, an opinion fb derogatory of one, otherwife fo 

* well entitled to refpedl. 

* In itfelf, this view was, to me, painful and revolting. — The cha- 

* rafter, too, which you bear among your friends, I found to be wholly 

* incompatible with a fuppoiition fo odious. You are repreiented as an 
' adlive and able man, profound in Mathematics, curious in Logic, wholly 
' incapable of intentional deceit, but not incapable of chronological miA 
' takes. Your habitual confufion of times is, indeed, remarkable, even 

* from our correfpondence. Your dates are there, not unfrequently of 

* the wrong month, and not always, even of the right year. With much 

* acutenefs, your works fliow you deficient in architeftonic power, the 

* concomitant of lucid thinking; and, that you are not guiltlefs of Intel- 

* leftual rafhnefs is fufficiently manifefl, from your pretention to advance 

* Logic, without having even mattered its principles.* 

With regard to the fubfequent infinuation of a retraced charge, my 
explanation (believing as I do, that Sir W. Hamilton always (peaks fub- 
jedive truth) is that his mind ihfeniibly fell back to its old bias as he 
felt that the fubftitute for his charge wanted flrength : my conclufion is, 
that it is unnecefTary henceforward to notice any thing he may fay or 
write on my charafter : and my determination is to aft accordingly. 

Sir W. Hamilton's pamphlet contains about a fcore and a half of quo- 
tations, on which hang fundry jokes and fneers, fbme of them at mathe- 
maticians in general, and myfelf as one of the body. On thefe I fhall 
only fay that my notions of the common fenfe of controverfy, and my 
determination to perfift, generally, in the tone of relpeft to my oppo- 
nent's learning and charafter which I have hitherto preferved, would, 
were there nothing elfe, prevent my adopting the habit of which they 
are fpecimens. But as no man willingly ftands an unreturned fire of 
Bicetiae without defiring to prove that his forbearance does not arife from 
want of ammunition, I will permit myfelf (difclaiming the animus under 
which fuch things are ufually written) jufi: to (how that quotation, ap- 
plication, allufion, fneer, joke, and fling at an opponent's ftudies, are all 
among the weapons which I could have employed, if I had thought 
them worthy of my antagonift, or of thofe whom I want to convince. 

I might, for inibnce, have written fomething like the following ; — 

Among the aflets of the old logicians, difcovered when the fchools 
were fwept out, there was found, as is well known, the queftion Vtrum 
chimiera bombinans in vacuo poffet comedere fecundas intentiones : a very 
good title, as Curll would have faid, wanting nothing but a treatife 
written to it. Now whether it be comedere, or whether the fchoolmen 
invented comedere. Sir W. Hamilton, on whom their mantle has fallen, 
has written the treatife, and fuccefsfully maintained the affirmative. His 



Appendix. ^99 

notion that his communication could give any hint^ is clearly and apdy 
defcribed by chimara^ his ftyle by bombinans, his proof by vacuum: and" 
the fecond intentions^ above noticed^ chewed up and given forth with 
his firft ones, are a praAical example of the poffibility of the Q^E.I. He, 
or rather the bombinating chimaera which has perfonified itfelf in his 
form, as the sAo^ ovsipo$ did in that of Neftor, is thus both retraftor 
and detradlor. But though the traniition from flops to folids generally 
indicates convalefcence, yet, as here made manifeft, the paflage from 
liquid to dental may be only the growing weaknefs, the perifcence, of the 
cafe. 

I aflert the following documents to be all that are relevant with 
refpeft to the literary part of the controverfy. They are given at the 
end of this appendix. 

A is an extradl from a communication of mine to the Cambridge 
Philofophical Society, made before I received any communication what- 
foever Grom Sir W. Hamilton. I aflert it to contain a diftinft an- 
nouncement and ufe of' the principle of fi/tf;r/(^r////^/r of the middle term, 
be that middle term fubjedl or predicate. On this point the reader is to 
judge. 

B is a communication from Sir W, Hamilton to me. The reader 
is to judge firft, whether it contain anything which is intelligible with 
refpedl to any fyftem of fyllogifm ; fecondly, whether, if it ihould fo con- 
tain anything, that fomething would have been information to me who 
had written A, on fome matter afterwards found in C. 

C is the relevant part of an addition made by me to A, when the 
latter came before me in proof. The reader is to judge firft, whether C 
contain anything more than an application of A ; fecondly, if fo, whe- 
ther that fomething more is derived from anything intelligibly hinted at 
in B. 

The only bare faft on which Sir W. Hamilton and myfelf are at 
ifliie is this. I aflert and maintain that the matter of C was written in 
my pofleflion before I received B : Sir W. Hamilton holds me mif- 
taken, and thinks he can prove from the correfpondence that in this 
point my memory has failed. This I continue to treat as irrelevant : 
for we are both agreed that the corpus deliSii, if deliSium there be, lies 
in C containing fomething not fubflantially contained in A, but fuffi- 
cientiy hinted at in B. Any reader who thinks that C does contain 
fomething fuggefted by B which is not in A, may declare againft the 
corre6biefs of my memory; any one who thinks the contrary, will hold 
it of no confequence whether my memory on the difputed fa6l be good 
or bad. With the^f^ reader I have no cafe : with the fecond I have 
all I think worth caring about. 

Sir. W. Hamilton maintains my letters to be eflential parts of the 
cafe. They may become fo, as foon as it is pointed out what C contains 
which is hinted at in B, and not contained in fubftance or principle, in 
A. When Sir W. Hamilton points out, by citation from C, what he 
alleges to have been taken, and by citation from B, what he thinks it 
has been taken from, and when I thereupon fail to produce equivalent 



' 3^^ Appendix. 

knowledge from A or clfe to expofe the irrelevance of his citation from 
B — then thofe letters may become of importance. This he has not done, 
though fpecially challenged to do fo : and when I come to difcufs III 
and IV, it ihall appear that he admits he has not done it. 

I now give the beft account I can of the origin of the difpute, pre- 
mifing, that up to this 3d of September, 1847, 1 do not abfolutely know 
what the fyftem is which I am charged with appropriating. There is a 
fyftem which I think is moll probably the thing in queftion : but a fyf- 
tem containing a defeat of fo glaring a charadler, that I will not attribute 
it to Sir W. Hamilton, who defcribes his own as '* adequately tefted 
and matured" until he expreffly claims it, or until I have the moll indu- 
bitable proof. 

In the common, or Ariflotelian propofition, the quantities of the fub- 
je£l and predicate are determined, the lirll by exprejjion or implication, 
the fecond by the nature of the copula (fee page 57 of this work). And 
the only quantities confidered are all^iAfome ; the latter meaning any- 
thing that not none may mean, fome, it may be all but not known to be 
all, perhaps not more than one. The matter contained in A fuggefled 
itfelf to me in the funmier of 1846, and was forwarded to Cambridge 
with the reft of the memoir on the 4th of Oftober. 

I will now introduce Sir W. Hamilton's defcription of the various 
kinds of quantity (11 p. 31, 32). 

' Your *' Statement" is chiefly plaulible from a wretched confulion 

* of diftind things. This confufion, with which you delude yourfelfi 

* and many of your readers, is of two independent fchemes of logical 

* quantification ; the one, aflerting an increafe in the expreflly quantified 

* terms, the other, a minuter divifion of the forms of quantification itfelf 

* To dilintricate this entanglement, we have fimply to confider, in their 

* contrafts, the three following fchemes of quantification : — 

' The firft fcheme is that which logically — confines all exprefled 

* quantity to the Subject, prefuming the Predicate to be taken — in »^- 

* gative propolitions, always determinately in its great eft and leaft ex- 

* tenfion (univerfally and iingularly), in affirmative propoiitions, always 

* indeterminately in fome part of its extenfion (particularly). 

' T\iQ fecond fcheme is that which logically extends the expreffion 

* of quantity to both the propofitional terms, and allows the Predicate to 

* be of any quantity, in propolitions of either quality. This not only 

* fupplies a capital defeft, but affords a principle on which Logic ob- 

* tains a new and general development. 

* The third fcheme is that which logically — admits more exprejfed 

* quantities than a determinately leaft or greateft extenfion (quantity fin- 

* gular and univerfal), and an indeterminately partial extenfion (quantity 

* particular.) This, though it corre6ls, perhaps, an omiffion, yields no 
' principle for a general logical development. 

' The firft do6lrine is the common or Ariftotelic ; the fecond is mine; 

* and in the third — in fo far as you have gone, and apart from the con- 
' fideration of right or wrong — I do not queftion your originality. 

* Now, the fecond and third fchemes are both oppofed to the firft, 
' but in different refpefts ; confequently the fecond and third may, each 



Appendix. 301 

* of them, combine with itfelf, either the whole other, or that part of 

* the firft to which it is not itfelf oppofed. More is impoffible. 

* Let the following be noted :* — Tour old view (that in the body of 

* the Cambridge Memoir) is a combination of the rniKDfcheme ofquan- 
' tification with the first ; your new view (that in its Addition) is a 

* combination ofthemuLufcheme of quantification with the second: and 

* the confufion^ of which you are now guilty ^ is the recent and uniform^ 

* and perverfe identification ^ in your present " Statement^* of the second 

* fcheme with the third. 

* Before, however, proceeding to comment on your confufion of the 

* fecond and third fchemes, I may alfo relieve a confiilion in the term 

* definite and its reverfe, indefinite ^ as applied to logical quantification. 

* In the firft ^ common, or Ariftotelic meaning, definite y or more pre- 

* cifely predefinite {Bio^KPtog, 7ffpof$iOpiar6$,) is equivalent to exprej/ed, 

* overt y or, more proximately, to dejignate and pre-defignate s in this 

* fenfe, definite quantity denotes exprejfed^ in oppofition to merely under- 

* ftoody quantity. 

* In hit fecond meaning, that which I have always ufed, (and certain 

* ancients, I find, were before me,) definite is equivalent to determinately 

* marked out ; a fenfe in which definite quantity is extenfion undivided 

* or indivifibhy univerfal or fingular (this including any colledled plu- 

* rality of individuals) as oppofed to particular quantity. 

* In the third meaning, which you have ufurped, definite is equivalent 

* to numerically fpecified ; and in this fenfe, a definite is an arithmetically 

* articulate quantity, as oppofed to one arithmetically inarticulate. — 

* This your meaning of the word I did not, before the appearance of 

* your ** Statement," apprehend ; for of courfe I prefumed you to ufe it 

* in its firft or common meaning, from which you never hint that you 

* confcioufly intend to deviate.* 

Three fchemes of quantity are here mentioned. 

Firft, the ordinary one. 

Secondly, that in which the ordinary quantities ^ alldxAfome^ are ap- 
plied in every way to both fubjeft and predicate. 

Thirdly, that in which numerically definite quantity is applied to 
fubjedl or predicate or both : the eifential diftindlion of this cafe is nume- 
rical definitenefs : it really contains the fecond fyftem, when numerical 
•quantity is algebraically expreifed. Of thefe, it appears. Sir W. Ha- 
milton claims the fecond, or rather, the application of fuch a fcheme to 
the fyllogifm. What then is it ? I fuppofe it to be the following. My 
order of reference is XY. 

* Let the following alfo be noted : — My old view (that in the body of the Cam- 
bridge papor) is entirely on ^^Jirji fcheme, except in one digrejpve fedlion and one 
fubfequent paragraph (from both of which A is quoted) in which the ficond znd third 
are combined : my next view (that in the addition) is alfo a combination of the fecond 
and third fchemes : and my *^ Statement** contained alfo a uniform, but not recent, 
identification of the Cune fecond znd third fchemes, which I never feparated in thought 
until I faw this paragraph. Any one who can form an opinion of the way in which 
the fubjedl would prefent itfelf to the mind of a mathematician, will fee that the fecond 
fcheme would prefent itfelf concomitantly with, and as an eflential part of, the alge- 
braical form of the third. A. De M. 



302 Appendix. 

All X is till Y means that X and Y are identical : it is my D. All 
X is fome Y is Ai. Some X is all T is A'. Some X is fome Y is I|- 
As to negative propofitions. All X is not all T is £4. Some X is not 
all T is Oi. All X is not fome T is O'. Some X is not fome T is true 
of all pairs of terms one of which is plural. In its indefinite fbrm^ it is 
what I have in Chapter VIII. c^Hltdifpurious, 

The propofitions of this fyftem are then the complex D, or A|+A', 
the fix Ariftotclian forms Ai, A', Ei, Oi, O', Ii, and the fpurious form, 
which may be called U. In looking over (Sept. 5) Sir W. Hamilton's 
pamphlet, I happened to light on the afiertion (incidentally made) that 
his fyftem gives thirty-fix valid moods in each figure. On examining 
the preceding fyftem, I find this to be the cafe. I fhould not have pub- 
lifhed the refults, had not Sir W. Hamilton made it neceflary for me 
to conmient on them. I fhall denote the propofition U, or * Some Xs 
are not fome Ys ' by X : : Y ; and I fhall, fuppofing each cafe to be formed 
in the firft figure, then tranfpofe it into my own notation. 

1. There ^xt fifteen forms in which D enters. Whenever D is either 
of the premifes, the other premife and conclulion agree. Thus wc have 
AjDAi, DUU, &c. &c. 

2. Fifteen Ariftotelian forms AjAjA,, A'A'A'; AiEjEi, EjA'Ei; 
AjO'O', O.A'04; A'O.Oi, O'AjO'; A'lJ,, IiAJi; E^O', IiE^O.; 
A'A I • A'EiO E A O'. 

3* 'six more' U fyllogifins A'O'U, OiAjU; A'UU, UAjU; I|0'U, 
O4I1U. 

The two things to be confidered are ; — the introdudUon of the iden- 
tical propofition ; and that of the fpurious one, as I call it. 

It is, I fuppofe, a fundamental rule of all formal logic, that every pro- 
pofition muft have its denial, its contradidUon. Now D has no fimple 
contradiction in this fyftem : that O' and Oi both contradid it (and sdfo 
E|) is true : but the mere contradiAion is the disjunction ' O' or O/. 
A perfon who can fhow that one or the other of thcfe is true, has de* 
monftratively contradided D, even though it could be proved impofiible 
to determine which of the two it is. 

The propofition U is ufually fpurious. But if we introduce it, wc 
muft introduce its contradidory alfo. Now if either X or Y be plural 
names, it muft be true : confequendy, the contradiction of U is * X and 
Y are lingular names, and X is Y.' When a fyllogifm having the pre- 
miie U is introduced, either that premife may be contradicted, or it may 
not. If it may, there is no form to do it in : if it may not, then it is a 
fpurious propofition, and cannot, by combination with others, prove 
anything but a like fpurious concluiion. 

Let X : : Y denote ' Some Xs are not fome Ys,' and X,Y, denote * there 
is but one X and one Y, and X is Y.' Then either X; : Y or XjY, muft 
be true, and one only. A logical fyftem which admits one and not the 
other, which contains an afiertion incapable of contradiction without 
going out of the fyftem, can hardly be faid to be *' adequately tefted and 
matured,*' and is not felf-complete. The propofition X,Y, includes in 
itfelf the conditions of D, and is a kind of ftngular form of D. 



Appendix. 303 

I prefumc, from the number of Sir W. Hamilton's moods, thirtyfixy 
as above obtained, that the contradidUon neither of D nor of U finds a 
place. Admit them, and the contradiftion of U alone (call it V) de-- 
mands iizteen new moods in each figure. I will now proceed. 

In my publication, fpeaking now of (A) what was fent to Cambridge 
before I communicated with Sir W. Hamilton, I had no quantification 
intermediate between the ordinary one, and the numerical one applied 
to either fubjedl or predicate, as wanted in the canon of the middle term 
there given. Look at the laft of the feven fyllogifms in xHa&fecond extraSt, 
where both the predicates, being of the middle term are quantified, and the 
condition of validity is quantitatively ftatcd. But for * Yi+Y, lefs than 
1 * fliould be read/y,+y» greater than i.* The equivalence of this 
to * Yi+Y, lefs than i ' is a miftake. In tkt Jirft extraSt, the general 
canon is given which is afterwards ufed in C. 

Up to the time when Sir W. Hamilton publilhed his letter in reply 
to my ftatement, (II), I never had feparated the idea of his fecond fcheme 
of quantification from that of the third. 

Thus then we flood on Odlober 3, when I fent my paper to Cam- 
bridge. Sir W. Hamilton had been teaching the application of the 
ordinary quantities to both fubjedt and predicate : I had arrived at the 
algebraical reprefentation of the numerical quantification of terms, whe- 
ther fubjed or predicate matters not, as long as they were middle terms. 

1846, OHober 6. My communication (containing A) was in the 
hands of Dr. Whewell (as he informs me) for tranfmiffion to the Cam^ 
bridge Society : I never faw it again till the next February. October 
7, Sir W. Hamilton wrote to me, in anfwer to an application of mine 
on the hiftory of the fyllogifm, further informing me that he taught an 
extenfion and Amplification of its theory , which he offered to commu- 
nicate. November 2, (the offer having been accepted) Sir W. Ha- 
milton forwarded the communication B, which I give entire ; confifling 
of a letter, and the Requifites which he had furnifhed to his iludents, 
for a prize Eflay. December 28, he wrote again, forwarding a printed 
ProfpeSius of his intended work on logic. This is not material ; for, 
on receiving it, I thought certain, what from the previous communica- 
tion I had thought poffible, that Sir W. Hamilton was in pofTeffion of 
the theory of numerically definite fyllogifms (but this was a miflake of 
mine, as will prefently appear). I accordingly, to preferve my own 
rights, immediately forwarded (as will prefently be flated more in de- 
tail) an identifying defcription of the fheets of paper on which my nu- 
merical theory was written, and an account of both my fyftems (in 
letters dated December 31, 1846, and January i, 1847). Of this. Sir 
W. Hamilton (who has publifhed both letters) is my witnefs. 1 847, 
February 27^ I d^ted the addition to the proof fheet of my Cambridge 
paper, which was defpatched to Cambridge the next day. This addi- 
tion contains C, which itfelf contains (in fubftance) all that part of my 
letter of January i which refers to the difputed point. March 1 3, Sir 
W. Hamilton wrote the letter containing the charge of plagiarifm ; hav- 
ing been for two months prevented by illnefs from refuming the fubjedi. 



304 Appendix. 

All fubfequcnt correfpondencc referred to proceedings, and not to the 
fubjeft matter of the charge. 

Many days before the middle of Oftober, I had applied the fyftem of 
quantification in the manner (hewn in C. Sir W. Hamilton thinks my 
memory has failed here : I know better. My memory does not depend 
upon a date, but upon the opening of the Univerfity Collegp Seifion, 
which takes place in the middle of Odlober. But it matters nothing, 
for the notion of the complete quantification of a predicate, when wanted 
becaufe it is the middle term, will prove the pofleffion of that procefs as 
well as quantification in all cafes whether wanted or not. On receiving 
B, I looked with curiofity at 2®, on which, in faft. Sir W. Hamilton 
grounds his declaration of having made a communication. He demands 
of his pupils, 

* The reafons why common language makes an ellipfis of the exprejfed 
quantity, frequently of the fubjeS, and more frequently of the predicate, 
though both have always their quantities in thought.' 

On looking at this, and feeing mention of the quantities which the 
terms have in thought, in common language, I took it for granted that 
the common quantities were fpoken of: namely, that of the fubjeft horn. 
the tenor of the propofition, that of the predicate from the nature of the 
copula. I never fhould have imagined that in the common language of 
common people, there were any other quantities, even if, in their minds, 
the predicate have thefe. Had this been all, I fhould have pafled it over, 
as referring to common quantities, and making common people a little 
more oi logicians, as to the predicate, than I have found them to be. 
That this common language meant the language of any fcientific fyftem, I 
had not the leaft idea : ftill lefs that it referred to the language of the 
writer's own unprinted fyftem, current only between himfelf and his 
hearers. And, though I gained a fufpicion that Sir W. Hamilton might 
have (which he had not) adopted numerical quantification, it was not 
from this pafTage, which by itfelf was nothing, but from what is now 
coming, which made this pafTage ambiguous. 

On looking further into B, (which fee) I found that Sir William's 
fyftem, whatever it might be, noted defe6ls in the converfion ofpropofi- 
tions, and a general canon of fyllogifm. Now I had two fyftems, each 
of which had its own Way of adding to the converfions, and each its 
own canon of fyllogifm. In my firit fyftem (which has now grown into 
Chapter V) the permanent introdudUon of the contranominals is a com- 
pletion of converfion : and the redudlion, by the remarks in pages 96, 
&c. of all fyllogifms to univerfal affirmative premifes, was the canon of 
fyllogifm. In the fecond, feen in A and C, which has grown into 
Chapter VIII, there is the univerfality of fimple converfion, and the 
canon of the middle term. Sir W. Hamilton may deny (I believe he 
does) that thefe are canons : let it be fo ; but I took them for canons, 
and thought of them when I faw the word canon in his fummary. And 
then the quefUon was, had Sir W. Hamilton one of thefe fyftems, or a 
third one ? I had been throughout our correfpondencc well pleafed with 
the idea that I had hit upon fomething in common with Sir W. Ha- 
milton ; and in my anfwer to communication B I faid. 



Appendix. 305 

' I am not at all clear that I fliall not have to claim only, /ccondary 

* originality on feveral points. When I fee ** defefts of the common 
'dodlrine of converfion" and a *'fupremc canon** of categorical fyUo- 

* gifm, I muft wait for further information I think I may yet be 

* able to flatter myfelf that I have followed you in fome points unknow- 
*ingly.' 

The reader will obferve that this inftru£Uve communication is fup- 
pofed to tell me, that in my thoughts the predicate has all kinds of 
quantity : though in truth bothohave their quantities is not Englifh for 
either may have any one of two /pedes of quantity. Sir W, Hamilton 
has exprefled (perhaps) the di6lum which is to have taught me new 
quantification, in terms of that new quantification unknowii. By both 
have quantities he feems to aflert that he meant both have all quantities. 
That both have their quantities, is true in the conmion fyftem : thefe 
words, which exprefs a truth of the common fyftem. Sir W. Hamilton 
declares to be a fure mode of communicating the difierenc^ between his 
fyftem and the common one* This may do in his own Icdlure room, 
in which he has the arbitrium et jus et norma hquendi in his own 
hands. A diftindUvely unmeaning phrafe may, in virtue of his expla- 
nations, pafs current between him and his pupils : and a private bank, 
of courfe, muft receive its own notes. But they are not lawful tender 
anywhere : nor good tender out of the neighbourhood. 

I fliall now proceed to the letters in the Athenaeum (III and IV). 
Thefe contain the ifl!ues raifed by the pamphlets : my fliort letter con- 
tains the ftrength of my cafe : I am to prefunie that my opponent's 
letter contains the ftreagth of his anfwer, and I think it does fo. At 
leaft I can fee nothing ftronger in his pamphlet. 



Mr. De Morjgan. 

I take this mode of acknowledg. 
ing the receipt of your printed 
letters to me. I promifed you an 
anfwer, if you would bring for- 
ward the grounds of your aflTertion 
that I had afted with breach of 
confidence and falfc dealing. But 
you now admit that your grounds 
are no grounds ; you declare your 
convidion that (though chargeable 
with confufion, want of memory, 
&c. &c.) I have adled with good 
faith ; and you ofier a proper re- 
traftion and apology. You ftate in 
various places and manners, that 
though you are fatisfied of my in- 
tegrity, all may not be fo; and, 
thereupon, you call for an anfwer. 
But I think that others will be 



Sir W. Hamilton. 

In reply to your letter in the laft 
number of the Athenaum: — you 
were not wrong to abandon your 
promife ** of trying the ftrength of 
my pofition ;** for never was there 
a weaker pretenfion than that, by 
you, fo fuicidally maintained. You 
would, indeed, have been quite 
right had you never hazarded a 
fecond word ; for every additional 
fentence you have written is ano- 
ther mif-ftatement, calling, fome- 
times, for another correftion. 



3o6 



Appendix. 



quite fatisfied with your own an- 
fwer to your pwn charge. 

There is nothing left which I 
care to difcufs with you. Our 
views of logic, their coincidences, 
their differences, their firft dates, 
my memory, &c. I am content to 
leave to thofe who will read my 
ftatement and your letters, with 
two remarks. 

There is no ftrength in an abandoned pofition. My pamphlet was 
publiihed in defence of my own character: when Sir Wm. Hamilton 
retraced his charge of breach of confidence and falfe dealing, there was 
nothing to which I flood engaged, nothing I cared to write feparate 
pamphlets on, efpecially when the approach of this prefent publication 
was confidered. Any one who reads page 9 of my pamphlet, in which 
the promife was made, will fee that it has reference to what I there call 
''the infamy which would attach to any one who had deferved the 
terms he ufed for the conduft he defcribcd." I certainly forgot to fay 
*' unlefs you retraft : " but as he had already refufed to retradl (though 
he had propofed to Jufpend the charge, provided I would then undergo 
an examination) it did not enter into my head to provide for fuch a con- 
tingency. The affertions about weaknefs, misflatement, &c. are for the 
reader's judgment. I did not, in this letter, allude expreflly to Sir W. 
Hamilton's various infinuations that the old charge might be true : both 
becaufe, at the firfl hurried reading, I did not become aware of their 
extent ; and alfo, becaufe I wifhed to take time before I made up my 
mind as to the way of treating what I faw of them. 



Mr. De Morgan. 

I. As foon as the queflion of 
character was difpofed of, it .was 
your bufinefs to fhow that my Ad- 
dition* written after I communi- 
cated with you, contained fome 
principle not contained in my Me- 
moiry\ written before I communi- 
cated withj you. This you do 
not do. You aflert, and you de- 
fcribe, and you fum up ; but you do 
not quote,-^ — except a few words, 
which are not in that part of my 
Memoir which I declared to con- 
tain the principles ufed in my 
Addition, 



Sir W. Hamilton. 

You do not deny, that your cor- 
refpondence aflerts a claim to the 
principle communicated to you by 
me ; but you complain that I have 
not fhown that your Addition in- 
volves a new do6lrine, uncontained 
in that part ! [from the overt con- 
tradidlions of its other parts I had] 
of your Memoir which you de- 
clared to contain the principles 
ufed in your Addition, And this 
you can fay, when I explicitly 
flated that '* throughout the whole 
paper (the Memoir) not only is 
there much in contradidlion — there 



• Here given in C. f Here given in A, fo far as relevant. 

X Sir W. Hamilton*8 part of this is B. 



Appendix. 307 

is abfolutely nothing in (more then 
fortuitous) conformity with the 
theory of a quantified predicate" 
(L. p. 34). This, too, you can 
fay whilft before your eyes, unan- 
ffveredf there was lying ** ray for- 
mal requefiy that you would point 
out any pajfage of your previous 
writings in which this dodlrine 
(that aSterted in your ' Statementy 
of a quantification of the middle 
term, be it fubjeft or predicate) is 
contained" (Ibid) — for 1 could find 
none ; and none has by you been 
indicated, 

I do deny, in one fenfe, that my correfpondence aflerts a claim to the 
principle communicated by Sir W. Hamilton : for I deny that he com- 
municated any principle, I prefume of courfe that the Profpeftus and 
letter fent on the 28 th of December are out of the queftion : fince I 
gave the fyftem on which the charge was made by return of poll. Sir 
W. Hamilton has very properly confined himfelf, in his pamphlet, to 
his communication (B) of November 2, as containing the communica- 
tion which he afferts me to have ufed. Let the reader look through it 
and ajfk himfelf what new principle is communicated, and where. 

Sir W. Hamilton aflerts that he has ftiown my Addition to contain 
a new doctrine, not contained in one definite part of my memoir y by the 
contradidions of its other parts. Let P, Q^ R, be parts of a memoir ; 
and S an addition. By fhowing that P and Q^contradift one another. 
Sir W. Hamilton thinks he fhows that S contains a doctrine not in- 
volved in R. The fad is, that all my memoir except ' Sedlion iii. On 
the quantity of propofitions* and one other paragraph (from both which 
A is taken) belongs to the fyflem of Chapter V. in this work : while 
SedUon iii., the other paragraph, and the addition^ belong to Chapter 
VIII. Let the reader take notice that Sir W. Haniilton (who, by the 
way, feems to confider * I explicitly flated * as a fufficient anfwer to 
'you have not fhown ') does ^nd fomething in my memoir in conformity 
with the theory of a quantified predicate. He fays it is fortuitous : 
but it did not feem to him requifite to bring it forward, and point out 
Its fort uitoufnefs. This point is for the reader to judge of, *'How 
dare you," he fays, *' rob me of my quantified predicate." " Good Sir," 
I anfwer, ** I had it before I knew you." " What if you had," he 
replies, " it is enough if I inform you that it was only by accident." 

Sir W. Hamilton cannot find either in the memoir or the addition 
(he fays here only in the previous writings, but in his pamphlet (p. 34) 
he flates it of both memoir and addition), any thing about the do6lrine 
of quantification of the middle term, whether it be fubjedl or predicate, 
which doftrine he fays // repugnant to all that is there taught. It is 



3o8 Appendix. 

true that in the next fentence he refers to previous toritings^ as cited. I 
will therefore conclude that Sir William included the addition by mis- 
take, and meant the memoir only. Whether my Section iii. (A) is or 
is not full of quantification of the middle term, without reference to 
whether that middle term be fubjeft or predicate, I am quite content to 
leave to the reader. Sir W. Hamilton fays he cannot find it. This I 
believe, and wonder at : but it does not follow that it is not there. Let 
the reader look. 

m 

Again, when Sir W. Hamilton averted that C contains fomething 
which I got from him, and which is therefore not in A, I repeat that 
he ought to have pointed out what it is. His afiertion that he cannot 
find it in A neither proves that it // not in A, nor that it // in C. 

This is the pinch which obliged him to write forty-four pages of ^r- 
eufation in anfwer to fixteen of defence : and this is the point on which 
the queilion will finally turn. I am tedioufly often obliged to bring 
the whole matter to its ABC; but what elie can I do with an oppo- 
nent who writes an ignoratio elenchi of forty-four pages long. 

Sir W. Hamilton is not good at finding. Inmiediately after what 
he has quoted from himfelf as above, comes the following paflage; — 

* In regard to your third afTertion, that ^^perfeStly definite quantifica- 

* tion defiroys the necejfity of diftinguifi?ing JfuljeB and predicate ;*^ this 

* is altogether a miflake. It is not " definite quantification,** (in what- 

* ever fenfe the word definite be employed), but the quantification of both 
' the terms which ** deftroys the neceflity of diftinguifhing fubjeft and 
' predicate ;** and this by fhowing, that propofitions are merely equations ^ 

* and enabling us to convert them a!i—fimply.* 

I now quote from myfelf. Of the two Sentences now coming. Sir 
W. Hamilton quotes the firft, omits the fecond, which fhows that my 
phrafe ^perfeBly definite * means definite in both terms ^ and then makes 
the preceding remark. 

* In fad, perfectly definite quantification deftroys the neceflity of dif- 

* tinguifhing fubjeft and predicate. To fay that iomc 20 Xs out of 50, 

* are all to be found among 70 Ys, or that 20 out of 50 Xs are 20 out of 

* 70 Ys, is precifely the fame thing as faying that 20 out of 70 Ys are 

* 20 out of 50 Xs.* 

In a writer of whom difhoneft intention might be concluded, we 
fhould know how to explain the omiflion of the fecond fentence. But 
there is no diihonefty in Sir W. Hamilton : the omiffion muft be 
referred to the fame difpofition which prevents him from feeing quan- 
tification of the middle term in A. What I take that difpofition to be, 
matters nothing to my reader. Perhaps this fentence alone will enable 
fome to deteft that I had not any idea of the fecond fyftem ofquantifi- 
tion independently of the third. 

Mr. De Morgan. Sir W. Hamilton. 

2. All the alleged inconfiften- You fay, that my expofure of 

cics which you find in my letters, your inconfiftencies is unavailing, 
&c. will not help you till you have except ** I fhow that my commu- 



Appendix. 



309 



done this: — and even then^ you 
will have to Ihow that your com- 
munication was intelligible. 

In glancing over my letters and 
the mafs of notes which you have 
written on them, I fee that I have 
feveral times ufed inaccurate lan- 
guage, as people do in hurried let- 
ters. Still more often you have 
mifunderftood me. If my occa- 
iional inaccuracy and your occa- 
iional mifunderftanding fhould be 
held to furnifh fome excufe for you 
when you precipitately charged me 
with diflionourable conduft, I Ihall . 
be better pleafed than not. 



nication was intelligible.'* You 
forget that it is for you to explain 
how, having **fubfcribed toi^ as 
having " rightly undfrjioodi^ twen- 
ty-two fentences of my profpeftus 
(L. pp. 19, 16), you could fubfe- 
quently declare that communica- 
tion to be unintelligible ! ! (L. p. 
59). I have now no doubt, how- 
ever, that you then ^'fubfcribed 
to '* more fentences than, by you, 
were ** rightly underllood." In- 
deed, had you only betimes avowed 
that all you had *' fubfcribed to, as 
rightly underftood," was to you 
really unintelligible, and that the 
repetition of my dodbine was in 
your mouth mere empty found, 
two pamphlets might have ealily 
been ipared. 



Firft, the profpeBus is not the ** communication." The communica- 
tion is that of November 2 (B). Let the reader look at it, and fee 
whether it be intelligible communication of new principle. 

In my pamphlet 1 have feveral times fpoken of the conmiunication, 
though there were two. This was natural enough, inafmuch as there 
was one communication (that of Nov. 2), on which the charge was made 
againU which that pamphlet was a defence* Sir Wm. Hamilton has 
never ventured to maintain that I derived anything from the communi- 
cation of Dec. 28, containing the profpedhis, to which I replied on the 
evening I received it, as prefently mentioned. But he makes, in various 
places of which the above is one, a mixture of the two communica- 
tions. 

Secondly, I have looked carefully at pages 19 and .16 of Sir Wm. 
Hamilton's letter, and at all the refl of otlr correfpondence, without find- 
ing that I have ever admitted that I fubfcribed to any part of the prof- 
peftus as by me " rightly underflood." Page 59 is no doubt a mifprmt 
for 39. I have neither found, nor have I the flightefl remembrance of, 
any fubfcription of mine to any thing Sir Wm. Hamilton ever wrote as 

rightly underflood," 

I repeat the account given in my pamphlet of the manner in which I 
fubfcribed to this profpeftus ; — 

* The next communication is dated Dec. 28, and confifled of — i. A 

* letter. 2. A printed profpedhis of Sir William Hamilton's intended 
' work on logic. Nothing turns on this, for the fimple reafon that my 

* anfwer contained the mofl exprefs and formal proof that, come by it 

* how I might, I was then in the mofl complete written pofTeflion of all 

* I have fince publifhed. . . . The profpedus which accompanied this letter 



€t 



3 1 o Appendix. 

* is very full on the refults which Sir William Hamilton can produce 

* from his principles ; but gives nothing, I think, certainly nothing intel- 

* ligible to me, on thofe principles themfelves. 

* As foon as I faw thefe refults, I inftantly faw that many of them 

* agreed with my own. I had then no doubt that we poflefTed fomething 

* in common ; and I faid fo very diftinftly in my reply. As the reader 

* will prefently fee, this firft impreffion has not been confirmed. Feeling 

* it now time to fecure whatever of independent difcovery might belong 

* to me, I anfwered Sir William Hamilton in two letters, dated Decem- 

* ber 3 1 and January i . In thefe letters — 

* I. I returned the printed profpedhis with the refults underlined 

* which my fyflem would produce. 

* 2. I ftated that I had a fyftem written on certain fheets of paper, 

* which I defcribed as to number, fize, &c., adding the head words of 

* each page. I felt inclined to get the fignature of fome good witnefs put 

* upon thefe papers ; but at the fame time I felt reluftant that Sir Wil- 

* liam Hamilton Ihould fee, if it ever became neceffary to produce thefe 

* papers, that I had been taking precautions againft him. I therefore de- 

* termined to make himfelf my witnefs. 

* 3. I flated diflindlly the firft principles of both my fyftems, and the 

* fyllogiftic formulae to which they lead.* 

Thirdly, I fubftantiate the above, fo far as the fubfcription is con- 
cerned, by quoting two pafFages from Sir W. Hamilton's publication 
of my letter of December 31. 

* I received your obliging communication this morning and am now 

* fully fatisfied that I have, in one of my views of fyllogifm, arrived at 

* your views in fubftance, or fomething fo like them, that I could fub- 

* fcribe in my own fenfe to a great part of your paper This 

* chapter [meaning the one on the fheets of paper above referred to] 

* I might exprefs in your words wherever they are underlined in the 
' profpeftus which I returti, hoping you will fend another.' 

Where are thofe words *' rightly underftood " which Sir W. Ha- 
milton attributes to me three times in one paragraph ? 

He muft have been quoting from memory. Seeing bis refults, I 
found they were alfo my refults s io I told him that I could " fubfcribe" 
(and I cannot find I have ufed this word more than once, and it is in 
page 19 referred to by Sir William) " in my own fenfe to a great part 
of" his ''paper." If words can fpeak meaning, I here tell him that I 
fubfcribe in my own fenfe, leaving it to the future to fhow whether I 
fubfcribe in his, that is, whether I underfland him rightly. 

[I was reading this for the prefs, when I found out the words which, 
applied in one fenfe hypothetically to one of his refults. Sir W. Hamilton 
has transferred in a different fenfe to all. One of his refults, fpeaking 
of the moods, is the eftablifhment of * Their numerical equality under 
all the figures/ the Italics being his. I could not make out the Englifh 
of this. The others I underfiood in the grammatical fenfe. For ex- 
ample, * The abrogation of the fpecial laws of fyllogifm* is intelligible : 
I did not know whether my fenfe of thefe words, that is to fay, my 



Appendix. 3 1 1 

abrogation of thofe laws, was the fame as Sir W. Hamilton's ; ftill that 
he did abrogate certain laws was clear. But numerical equality of moods 
I could only underftand as referring to the numerical quantities which 
I fuppofed (the reader will remember that I fent back the profpeftus by 
the next poft, and had little time to look at it) Sir W. Hamilton's fyftem 
to contain. It means, I find, that there are the fame number of moods 
in all figures : but to attribute numerical equality to different things is a 
mode of faying that there is the fame number of them in different fets to 
which I was unaccuftomed. Having however, as I thought, divined 
what the Englifh of this might mean, I underlined it, adding (as Sir W. 
Hamilton ftates in one of the foot-notes; which I never remarked till 
now) thefe words, '* If I underftand this rightly I may underline it I 
think." I meant, " If I can make out the zvords.^* This underftand 
rightly. Sir W. Hamilton adlually takes from this fentence, joins it to 
my " fubfcription " mentioned in another document, and reprefents me 
as declaring that I have ** fubfcribed to as rightly underftood^^ twenty-two 
fentences, &c., and himfelf as quoting from one paffage.] 

But, had I betimes avowed my non-underftanding, two pamphlets 
might have been fpared. Where are we now ? I did avow my not un- 
derftanding the firft communication, and my fubfcribing to the fecond 
in my own fenfe. To which Sir W. Hamilton fubfequently anfwered 
to the effeft that I fpoke falfe, that I did underftand the firft ^ for that 
I had fent him, in letters written immediately after the fecond was 
received, his " fundamental do6lrine " and ** many of its moft important 
confequences.*' What have I been contending for all along, except 
that the dodlrine of his firft communication was to me mere empty found, 
and that all I was able to produce when I received xht fecond, was my 
own ? But Sir. W. Hamilton adually gives me a right to fay, with 
reference to the fecond, the more developed and more intelligible com- 
munication, that I did not underftand it, infifts upon my faying it, and 
reproaches me for not faying it. Well then, to ufe a Scottifh phrafe, 
the lefs I lie when I fay I did not underftand the firft, which is the 
point at ifTue. So that, as to the matter of our controverfy. Sir W. Ham- 
ilton admits that there was (fortuitous he calls it) entrance of the theory 
of the quantified predicate in my writings prior to his communications; 
and as to the conduft of it, he admits that I did not underftand his 
communication ; and in the face of faft, reproaches me with maintain- 
ing that I did till after the pamphlets were written : when it was of the 
efTence of my fbtement, firft, that I did not underftand, fecondly that 
neither I nor any one elfe could have underftood, fave only the pupils 
to whpm the requifites were addrefTed. 

Mr. De Morgan. Sir W. Hamilton. 

Your copious and flafhing cri- I difregard your mifreprefenta- 

ticifms on my intelleft (by which tion that ** I avenge myfelf for the 

you avenge yourfelf for the retrac- retra6Uon of my afperfion on your 

tion of your afperfion on my integ- integrity by my copious and flafh- 

rity), I will profit by fo far as I ing criticifms on your intelled." 



312 

difcover them to be true : the reft 
Ihall amufe me; — and the whole 
will be good for the printer. Take 
one retort from me on the fame 
terms. You have much fkill in 
forming new words; and^ as is 
hiT, you put your own image and 
fuperfcription on your own coin- 
age. I think you have got into 
the habit of afTuming the fame 
authority over that already exifting 
portion of our language which is 
conmionly faid to belong to the 
Queen — and that you need an in- 
terpreter. If I can arrive at your 
meaning by the time I write the 
preface to my work on logic, I 
will ftate your claim, accompanied 
by your own words ; if not, I can 
ftill ftate your own words. Till 
then, I have nothing more to fay. 



Appendix. 



When your (excufable) irritation 
has fubftded, you will fee that I 
could only iecure you from a ver- 
di^ of plagiarifm by brining you 
in as fufiering under an illuiion. 
What, however, is all in all ; — ^my 
criticifms will not, I think, be 
found untrue. 

If guilty of lefe majelty by re- 
ference to the Queen's Englifti, 
have I not my accufer as abettor ? 
For you not only pafted my min- 
tages (quantify and quantification) 
as current coin ; but, in borrow- 
ing, aftually *' thanked me for the 
words" (L. p. 22). However, 
my verbal innovations are, at leaft, 
not elementary blunders. I do 
not, for example, confound a term 
with a proportion, the middle with 
the conclufion of a fyllogifnu 



Sir W. Hamilton unconfcioufly adapts his language to a very true 
fuppolition, namely, that he has, in his pamphlet, made himfelf the jury 
in this cafe. He is unfortunate about the mintage. I fay to him * You 
make new words well, but I am afraid you alter the old ones.' To 
which he replies * Why, you thanked me for my new words.' So I did, 
and fo I do again : but what has that to do with the lefe majefty part 
of my inftnuation. 

Sir W. Hamilton fays that I have fomewhere (where he does not 
fay) ufed term for proportion , middle for conclufon, colleBively for dif- 
tributively. This may be ; fuch flips of the pen are common enough. 
He fets them down as blunders of ignorance. I am not afraid the 
reader will follow him. He ought to have faid where they occur, that 
is, when he firft mentioned them, in his pamphlet. Till I put thefe 
letters together, I was fatisfied, on Sir Wm. Hamilton's ftatement, that 
I had done all thefe enormities : but now, after the cafe of ** rightly 
underftood*^ which I have juft had to difcufs, I do not feel fo well fatif- 
fied. 

Sir W. Hamilton, 

Finally, I beg leave to remind you. — There is now evidence in your 
pofleflion that for feven years, at leaft, the doftrine of a quantified pre- 
dicate has been puclickly taught by me ; whilft, on your part, there is 
a counter aiTertion or innuendo, which, as you cannot prove, it concerns 
your chamber formally to annul. 

I never denied that Sir W. Hamilton had taught a doftrine of the 
quantified predicate. By the time I wrote my pamphlet, I was pretty 



Appendix. 313 

fure that it was not the fame as mine. Sir W. Hamilton's anfwer 
confirmed me in this, as appears in page 300. 

I now come to mention a part of the difcuflion which I fhould per- 
haps have omitted, if I had not pledged myfelf in my pamphlet to give 
an account of a certain offer which I there made to Sir William Ham- 
ilton, in the event of that offer not being accepted. It is a curious 
inftance of that difpofition to hold a correfpondent or an opponent 
capable of folving enigmas, and bound to do it, which appears in his 
prefuming that (fee B, paragraph 2°) an obfcure reference to what is 
done in common language would enable me to guefs at the uncommon 
language of his fyftem and his ledlures. I infert it, alfo, as a fpecimen 
of the various mifunderftandings and mifapprehenfions which Sir W. 
Hamilton imputes to me, referring to a matter which readers will fepa- 
rately comprehend. Had I fpace or inclination to deal with them all, 
I believe I could ferve them all in the fame way. 

O^. 7, 1846, I learnt from Sir Wm. Hamilton that his doftrine 
had obtained confiderable publicity through the notes and ejfays of his 
ftudents. In my reply, referring to this fyftem, and to his offer of 
communicating it, I afked if he had a pupil whom he could truft with 
the conmiunication ; the anfwer was B, prefently given. But, Dec. 28, in 
fending the profjpiedhis. Sir W. Hamilton informed me that, before 
forwarding it (the firft communication in which that he had other than 
Ariftotelian quantification was intelligibly announced) he had waited for 

a reply from Mr. , *That gentleman' continues Sir W. 

Hamilton, in words fome of which I place in Italics ' was a pupil of 

* mine £\x years ago, and obtained one of the higheft honours of the clafs ; 

* he was therefore fully competent to afford you information, which I 

* begged him to do, in regard to my logical dodlrines as they were taught 

* fo far back, I knew him to be a graduate of your College, and he tells 

* me that he was for three years a pupil of your own. If you are ftill 
' interefted in the matter, you can therefore obtain from him as an 

* acquaintance, what information yoii wifh, more agreeably than from a 

* ftranger. When he attended me, befides the twofold wholes in which 

* the fyllogifm proceeds, the quantification of the predicate, and the effeft 

* of that on the doftrine of converiion, on the dodbine of iyllogiflic 

* moods, on the fjpecial fyUogiftic rules, &c., were topics dif cuffed, and 

* partly given out for exercifes. They were, in fail, then mere common- 

* place * 

Jan. 13, 1847, Mr. called on me at Univerfity College, after 

an evening lefture of mine, put his notes into my hands, and has fince 
flated (in which I have no doubt he is correft, though I do not remem- 
ber it) that he informed me he toas doubtful whether they contained 
exactly what I wanted, and that he would gladly furnifh any additional 
information. Now I conceived, as I thought it was intended by Sir 
W. Hamilton I fhould do, that the notes of one of the beft fludents, 
even if not exadlly what I wanted, were fure to contain fomething of 
the mere commonplace (by which I took to be meant the ordinary matter 
of the ledures) which was dif cuffed, and given out as exercifes to thofe 



314 Appendix. 

who attended. But in thefe notes I found nothing on quantification (I 
had now this key word, which did not appear in the main communica- 
tion B) differing from what is ufuai ; and after expreffing this in my 
pamphlet, I proceeded as follows : 

* But if there really be anything in which Sir William Hamilton has 

* preceded me, I fhall be, of all men except himielf, moft interelled in 
' his having his full rights. And I make him this offer, and will take his 
' acceptance of it as reparation in full for his fufpicions and aflertions. 
' With the confent of the gentleman to whom thefe notes belong, which 

* I am fure will not be refiifed to our joint application, I will forward to 

* him a copy of their table of contents, having more than a hundred and 

* Mty headings. From thefe Sir William Hamilton fhall feleft thofe 
'which are, in his opinion, fure to contain proof of his priority on any 

* point which I have invefligated. Of thefe I will have copies made and 
' fent to him : and will print in the work on Logic which I am preparing 
' (and in fome one part of it) the parts which he fhall feleft as fit to 
' prove (or to fhow that he coixld prove, let him call it as he likes) his 

* cafe, or the germs of his cafe (as he pleafes, again). Provided always, 

* that the matter fhall not run beyond fome eight or a dozen odlavo pages 
' of fmall print. And I on my part propofe that I fhall be allowed to 

* print, to one-half the amount felefted by Sir William Hamilton, of ad- 

* ditional extraft : but if this be refiifed I will not infifl on it. With this 

* I will put a heading fully defcriptive of the reafon and meaning of the 
' infertion, and fuch diflinft reference and account at the beginning of 

* the prefece as fhall be fure to call the reader's attention to it. So that 

* my book fhall eflablifh the claim, if it can be eflablifhed from the notes 

* of one of the befl ftudents. If this offer be not accepted, an account of 

* it will take the place of any other refult. If Sir William Hamilton, or 
' any one elfe, can propofe anything to make this offer fairer, I fhall pro- 

* bably not be found indifpofed to accept the addition. And though, I 

* will frankly fay, my prefent convi6tion is that the acceptance of the 
' offer would alone caufe my work to knock Sir William Hamilton's 
' affertions to atoms, yet I will pledge myfelf, in any cafe, to abide by it. 

Had our places in this difcufSon been changed, I fhould have taken 
care that no reader of my anfwer fhould have been left in ignorance of 
fo fair an offer on the part of my opponent : more efpecially if that 
opponent had been accufed by me of fraud and falfehood, in a manner 
which I felt obliged formally to retradl. But Sir Wm. Hamilton does 
not notice the offer, even by an allufion : and refers to the notes in the 
following way : 

* In regard to Mr — and his Notes, I beg leave to fay, that in 

* my relative letters, neither to that gentleman nor to you, did I ever 

* refer to his Notes of my leftures, but exclufively to his perfonal infor^ 

* mation in regard to them. And for a fufficient reafon. The Paragraphs 

* on Logic dictated to, and taken down by, my fhidents, on which I after- 

* wards preled, were written fo far back as the year 1837, and prior to 

* many of my new views, and to the whole dodrine of a quantified predi- 

* cate. Thefe views, as developed, were, and are, introduced in a great 



Appendix. 3 1 5 

* meafure as corre6lions of the common dodrine ; in the older Notes 

* efjpecially, they may, therefore, not appear in the didlated and numbered 

* Paragraphs at all ; whilft, frequently, (particularly at firft,) they were 
' given out as data, on wliich, previous to farther comment, the ftudents 
' were called on or excited to write expolitory Eflays. I diftindlly recol- 
' left, that in the Seffion during which Mr. — ^— attended my courfe of 

* Logic ( 1 840-1) it was required, on the hypothelis of a quantified pre- 

* dicate, — to ftate in detail, the valid moods of each fyllogilfic figure ; and 

* I, further, diftin6lly recolleft, that Mr. was one of thofe who 

' eiTayed this problem. If wrong on this point, I fhall admit that my 

* memory is as treacherous as yours. It was, indeed, quite natural, that 

* Mr. fhould give, and that you (hould receive, his Notes ; but, 

* of courfe, you could have fought or obtained no perfonal information 

* from him, in reference to the point in queflion, without mentioning the 

* faft Were it, however, requifite to give proof from Notes of fo 

* manifefl a faft, I doubt not that fcores of fludents would be willing to 

* place theirs at my difpofal. 

On the appearance of Sir W. Hamilton's pamphlet, Mr. 

wrote him a very flraightforward letter, of which he fent me a copy, 
with permiffion to both of us to ufe it. The general tenor is that Sir 
W. Hamilton is corredl in his flatements of what he had taught (which 
flatements I never impugned as to faft ; I did not know what they 

meant). On the point in queflion Mr, fays (the Italics are 

mine); — 

'During the Seffion in which I attended your leftures (1840 and 
' 1841) your new fyftem, bafed on the thorough going quantification of 
' the predicate (the fecond of the three fyflems mentioned in page 3 1 of 
' your publifhed letter) and its confequences in making all propofitions 

* fimply convertible &c. was not developed by you in your ordinary feries 
' of Lectures, I believe it was not touched upon in them, but it was partly 

* explained to the clafs verbally^ and then given out as afubjeiifor Ef- 
*fays. When the EfTays were given in they were read aloud in the clafs, 

* and commented upon by you, and in fo doing you fully explained the 
' fyflem as '* a fiill extenfion and thereby a complete fimplification of the 

* fylldgiftic theory." 

* Thefe fads which were flrongly fixed in my memory, becaufe I 
' believe on that occafion I happened to be the only EfTayifl who had 

* rightly apprehended and worked out the thefis, will account for the 

* circumflance that my notes, which were originally taken in fhorthand, 

* although containing a full Report of all your ordinary Leftures, are 

* completely filent on the fubjeft." 

The reader may find out, if he can, where Sir W. Hamilton re- 
ferred to perfonal information ^s difUnguifhed from notes, or to his 
teaching of his new fyflem, as a matter diftinft from that of his ordinary 
leftures : and mufl judge what his fuccefs is in faying what he means 

* I think this fhould be extempore: meaning that Sir W. Hamilton ufually reads his 
ledhires. 



3 1 6 Appendix. 

to fay. And he may find out further, how I was to guefs that the 
mere commonplace of the topics dif cuffed in Sir William's teaching was to 
come, after an interval of fix years, from his old pupil's perfonal infor^ 
mation, and not from the fiiU and (as I found them) excellent notes which 
he made at the time. 

I fhould add that Mr. , fubfequently to the printed contro- 

verfy, anfwered every query which I put to him on Sir W. Hamilton's 
fyftem, but did not feel juftified (as in a like cafe I fliould not either) in 
anfwering pofitively as to the minute details of it, after laying it by for 
years. 

I have mentioned one or two inftances in which, as feems to me. 
Sir W. Hamilton has a ftrange idea of the fenfe of his own words : I 
will now take one of the cafes in which he has dealt as ftrangely with 
mine. The way in which we ufe language, is one of the means which 
the reader has, for forming his judgment on the whole of this difpute : 
and he muft decide which of us is incapable of giving to the phrafes of 
the other their proper fignification. 

When I returned to Sir W. Hamilton his profpe6his, with thofe 
parts underlined which I could interpret in my own fenfe, the more 
important parts relating to logical mood and figure were not thus un- 
derlined. In the accompanying letter, I ufed thefe words, * To mood 
and figure, I have attended but little ; what I get on thefe points will 
be from your hint, or from your book.' The whole letter was on what 
I had done in the way of inveftigation, not of elementary reading : and 
I may fafely fay that it is clear I meant that I had not made mood and 
figure, as conftituent parts of a theory of fyUogifm, fubjedls of inveftiga- 
tiony with a view to new properties. But Sir W. Hamilton, in two 
places, makes me avow ignorance of the ordinary fyftem of mood and 
figure. In a foot-note to the above, he fays, ** And yet, though con- 
' fefledly to feek in the very alphabet of the fcience, Mr. De Morg^ 
' would be a logical inventor ! What is here acknowledged in terms, H 
*fufficiently manifefted from miftakes."* And in his pamphlet (ir."p» 
9), he reprefents me as * no proficient — no thorough ftudent, — ^in thi 
fcience;' and refers to this paragraph of mine as the ground of the 
aflertion. It would have been ftrange, if, avowing ignorance of the 
ordinary doftrine of mood and figure, I had faid that what I ftiould get 
on thefe points muft be from Sir W. Hamilton's hint or unpublifhed 
book, when any ordinary treatife would have given it : fo ftrange, that 
this claufe ought, I think, to have fuggefted the obvious meaning. Is 
Sir W. Hamilton's interpretation a fair one ? I do not doubt that he 
meant it to be fair. What I afk is, has he the power to read fairly as 
well as the will ? 

The two preceding cafes (that of the notes and that of the avowed 
ignorance) are fpecimens of Sir W. Hamilton's give and take, of the 



• Sir W. Hamilton fhould have cited a few : but when he declares I have made 
elementary blunders, he does not give io much as a reference. The plan is a fafe one. 



Appendix. 317 

manner in which he expedb to be underllood, and of that in which he 
claims a right to underftand. They are alfo, of courfe, fpecimens of 
my own. 
In (A), the fymbols A, E, I, O, are the A4, E|, I4, 0|, of this work : 

and a, e, i, o, are the A', E', I', O', 

(A) From the paper as fent to Cambridge before I bad any communica- 
tion whatfoever from Sir William Hamilton (without any corrections ), 

Section III. On the quantity of propofitions. 

** The logical ufe of the word fome, as merely * more than none,* 
needs no further explanation. Exa6i knowledge of the extent of a pro- 
pofition would coniift in knowing, for inftance in * fome Xs are not Ys* 
both what proportion of the Xs are fpoken of, and what proportion 
exifts between the whole number of Xs and of Ys. The want of this 
information compels us to divide the exponents of our proportion into 
o, more than o not neceflarily i, and i. An algebraill learns to con- 
fider the diftindion between o and quantity as identical, for many 
purpofes, with that between one quantity and another : the logician 
muft (all writers imply) keep the diftindion between o and a, however 
fmall a may be, as facred as that between o and i — a ; there being but 
the fame form for the two cafes. We fliall now fee that this matter 
has not been fidly examined. 

** Inference muil confift in bringing each two things which are to be 
compared into comparifon with a third. Many comparifons may be 
made at once, but there muft be this procefs in every one. When the 
comparifon is that of identity, of is or // not, it can only be in its ulti- 
mate or individual cafe, one of the two following : — * This X is a Y, 
this Z is the very fame Y, therefore this X is this Z ; or elfe * This X 
is.a^ Y, this Z is not the very fame Y, therefore this X is not this Z.' 
'And. colledively, it muft be either *Each of thefe Xs is a Y; each of 
thefe Ys is a Z ; therefore each of thefe Xs is a Z ;* or elfe * Each #f 
thefe Xs is a Y, no one of thefe Ys is a Z, therefore no one of thefe 
Xs is a Z.' 

*' All that is eflential then to a fyllogifm is that its premifes ftiall 
mention a number of Ys, of each of which they ftiall affirm either that 
it is both X and Z, or that it is one and is not the other. The pre- 
mifes may mention more : but it is enough that this much can be picked 
out ; and it is in this laft procefs that inference conftfts. 

*' Ariftotle noticed but one way of being fure that the fame Ys are 
fpoken of in both premifes ; namely, by fpeaking of all of them in one 
at leaft. But this is only a cafe of the rule : for all that is necefTary is 
that more Ys in number than there exifi feparate Ysfl?dll be fpoken of in 
both premifes together. Having to make /?/+» greater than unity, when 
neither m nor n is fo, he admitted only that cafe in which one of the 
two m or n, is unity and the other is anything except o. Here then 
are two fy Uogifms which ought to have appeared, but do not. 



31 8 Appendix. 



Moll of the Ys are Xs Moft of the Ys are Xs 

Moft of the Ys are Zs Moft of the Ys are not Zs 



.'. Some Xs are Zs .*. Some of the Xs are not Zs 

And inftead of moft, or 4+^> of the Ys, may be fubftituted any two 
fraftions which have a fum greater than unity. If thefe fraftions be m 
and n, then the middle term is at leaft the fraftion «r+»— i of the Ys. 
It is not really even neceflary that all the Ys fhould enter in one pre- 
mifs or the other : for more than the fra£lion m-^-n — I of the whole 
may be repeated twice. 

*' And in truth it is this mode of fyllogifing that we are frequently 
obliged to have recourfe to ; perhaps more often than not in our uni- 
verfal fyllogiims. ' All men are capable of fome inftruftion ; all who 
are capable of any inftrufUon can learn to diftinguifti their right and left 
hands by name ; therefore all men can learn to do fo.' Let the word 
all in thefe two cafes mean only all but one, and the books on logic tell 
us with one voice that the fyllogifm has particular premifcs, and no con- 
clujion can be drawn. But in faft idiots are capable of no inftruftion, 
many are deaf and dumb, fome are without hands : and yet a concluiion 
is admiflible. Here m and n are each very near to unity, and w+/r — I 
is therefore near to unity. Some will fay that this is a probable con- 
clufio^h : that in the cafe of any one perfon it means there is the chance 
m that he can receive inftruftion, and n that one fo gifted can be made 
to name his right and left hand : therefore mXn (very near unity) is 
the chance that this man can learn fo much. 

** But I cannot fee how in this inftance the probability is anything 
but another fort of inference from the demonftrable concluiion of the 
fyllogifm, which muft exift under the premifes given. Belides which, 
even if we admit the fyllogifm as only probable with regard to any 
one man, it is abfolute and demonftrative in regard to the propolition 
with which it concludes. 

. *' But this is not the only cafe in which the middle term need not 
enter univerfally : this however is matter for the next Seftion. I now 
go on to another point." 



Extraa II. 



'* I now take the two cafes in which particular premifes may give a 
concluiion : namely 



I,, XY+XY=XZ XY+Y:Z=:X:Z O 



10 



on the fuppolition that the Ys mentioned in both premiles are in num- 
ber more than all the Ys. If Y, and Y^^ ftand for the fra6Uons of the 
whole number of Ys mentioned or implied in the two premifes, and y ^ 
and yj^ for the fradlions of the ys implied or mentioned, we Ihall by a 



Appendix. 3 1 9 

repetition of the procefs on YX+YZ=XZ (the other being obtained 
in the courfe of the procefs) arrive at the following refults or their 
counterparts: remembering that Yj+Y^ is greater or lefs than i, ac- 
cording as y J +^g is lefs or greater. 

Defignation. Sylloglfm. Condition of its exigence. 

Ijj YX + YZ = XZ Y , +Y^ greater than i 

O^, YX+Y:Z=:XZ . 

/«, Y:X+Y:Z = ;rz 

O^ X:Y + j^2 =X:Z Y,+Y, lefs than i 

hi y^ -¥ y^ =z xz 

Ooi X:Y + j2 z= X:Z 

loo X:Y + Z:Y= XZ 

(B) Communication received on the J^tb or ^th of November from Sir 
William Hamilton y being the pretext for his charge that I have, with 
injurious breach of confidence towards himfelf and falfe dealing to- 
wards the public , appropriated his ** Fundamental Do Slrine of Syllo^ 
gifm^^ privately communicated to me: and, after the retraSlion of that 
charge, noticed in pages 297, ^9 for the ajfertion that I have done the 
fame thing unconfcioufiy. 

" 16, Great King Street, 
November znd, .1846. 

** Dear Sir, — I have been longer than I anticipated in anfwering 
your laft letter, I now fend you a copy of the requifites for the prize 
Eflay, which I gave out to my ftudents at the clofe of laft feffion. It 
will ihow you the nature of my doftrine of fyllogifm, in one of its 
halves. The other, which is not there touched on, regards the two 
wholes, or quantities in which a fyllogifm is caft. I had intended fend- 
ing you a copy of a more articulate ftatement which I meant, at any 
rate, to have drawn up ; but I have not as yet been able to write this» 
I will fend it wheti it is done. From what you ftate of your fyftem 
having * little in common with the old one,* and from the contents of 
your Firft Notions, we Ihall not, I find, at all interfere, for my dodlrine 
is limply that of Ariftotle, fully developed. 

It wUl give me great pleafure if I can be of any ufe, in your invefti- 
gations concerning the hiftory of Logical do6lrines. I have paid great 
attention to this fubjedl, on which I found, that I could obtain litde or 
no information from the profefFed hiftorians of Logic ; and my collec- 
tion of Logical books is probably the moft complete in this country. 
But, as I mentioned to you in my former letter, it is only in fubordinate 
matters that in abftraR Logic there has been any progrefs. 

" I remain, dear Sir, very truly yours, 

*' W. Hamilton." 



320 Appendix. 

EJJay on the new Analytic of Logical Forms. 

Without wiihing to prefcribe any definite order, it is required that 
there fhould be Hated in the Eflay, — 

I®. What \jy^Q poftttlates as a condition of its applicability. ^ 

2**. The reafons why common language makes an ellipfis of the ex- 
prejfed quantity — ^frequently of the fuhjeHy and more frequendy of the 
predicate y though both have always their quanddes in thought. \Tbis 
paragraph is the one on which Sir W. Hamilton principally relies"], 

3°. Converfion of propojitions — on the common do^rine. 

4**. Defedls of this. 

5<^. Figure and Af^^^Z of Categorical fyllogifm, and Redudion, — on 
common dodlrine (General ilatement). 

6**. Defedls of this (General ftatement). 

7**. The oncfupreme Canon of Categorical Syllogifms. 

8®. The evolution, from this canon, of all thtfpecies of Syllogifin. 

9®. The evolution, from this canon, of all the general laws of cate- 
gorical Syllogifms. 

lo®. The error oi xhi^ fpecial laws for the feveral Figures of Catego- 
rical Syllogifin. 

II**. How many Figures are there. 

12°. What are the Canons of xht feveral Figures. 

13**. How many moods are there in all the Figures : fhowing in con- 
crete examples, through all the Moods, the uneffential variation which 
Figure makes in a fyllogiim. 

(Thofe which follow 13® were wrong numbered.) 

15®. What relation do the Figures hold to extenfion and comprehen- 
fion. 

16°. Why have the fecondzxA third Figures no determinate major 
and minor premifes and two indiflFerent conclufions : while the firft Fi- 
gure has a determinate major and minor premife, and a fingle proximate 
conclufion. 

17°. What relation do the Figures hold to Deduction and InduBion, 

N.B. This Eflay open for competition to all ftudents of the clafs of 
Logic and Metaphyfics during the lafl or during the enfuing feflion. 

April 15th, 1846. 

(C) Extract from the Addition to my Paper, taken, as can be Jbown,^ 

from the papers which I gave the means of identifying in January 

lafty and which papers (though I hold it immaterial) I affert to have 

been written before I received any logical communication from Sir 

William Hamilton. (To be compared with the extracts given in A). 

'* Since this paper was written, I found that the whole theory of the 
fyllogifm might be deduced from the confideration of propofitions in a 
form in which definite quantity of afTertion is given both to the fubjedl 
and the predicate of a propofition. I had committed this view to 
paper, when I learned from Sir William Hamilton of Edinburgh, that 



Appendix. 321 

he had for fome time paft publicly taught a theory of the fyUogifm 
diflfering in detail and extent from that of Arillotle. From the pro- 
fpeftus of an intended work on logic, which Sir William Hamilton has 
recently iflued, at the end of his edition of Reid, as well as from infor- 
mation, conveyed to me by himfelf in general terms, I Ihould fuppofe it 
will be found that I have been more or lefs anticipated in the view juft 
alluded to. To what extent this has been the cafe, I cannot now 
afcertain; but the book of which the profpedlus juft named is an 
announcement, will fettle that queftion. From the extraordinary extent 
of its author's learning in the hiftory of philofophy, and the acutenefs of 
his written articles on the fubje^l, all who are interefted in logic will 
look for its appearance with more than common intereft. 

" The footing upon which we Ihould be glad to put propofitions, if 
our knowledge were minute enough, is the following. We ihould ftate 
how many individuals there are under the names which are the fubjeft 
and predicate, and of how many of each we mean to fpeak. Thus, 
inftead of * Some Xs are Ys,' it would be, ' Every one of a fpecified Xs 
is one or other of b fpecified Ys.' And the negative form would be as 
in * No one of a fpecified Xs is any one of ^ fpecified Ys.* If propofi- 
tions be ftated in this way, the conditions of inference are as follows. 
Let the effeHive number of a propofition be the number of mentioned 
cafes ofth&fubjeSi^ if it be an affirmative propofition, or of the middle 
term, if it be a negative propofition. Thus, in * Each one of 50 Xs is 
one or other of 70 Ys,' is a propofition, the effe6live number of which 
is always 50. But ' No one of 50 Xs is any one of 70 Ys ' is a propo- 
fition, the effe6Uve number of which is 50 or 70, according as X or Y 
is the middle term of the fyUogifm in which it is to be ufed. Then 
two propofitions, each of two terms, and having one term in common, 
admit an inference when i. They are not both negative. 2. The 
fum of the eflfedUve numbers of the two premifes is greater than the 
whole number of exifling cafes of the middle term. And the excefs of 
that fum above the number of cafes of the middle term is the number 
of the cafes in the affirmative premifs which are the fubjedb of inference. 
Thus, if there be 100 Ys, and we can fay that each of 50 Xs is one or 
other of 80 Ys, and that no one of 20 Zs is any one of 60 Ys ; — the 
effedUve numbers are 50 and 60. And 50+60 exceeding 100 by 10, 
there are 10 Xs, of which we may affirm that no one of them is any 
one of 20 Zs mentioned. 

'* The following brief fummary will enable the reader to obferve the 
complete dedu6Uon of all the Ariftotelian forms, and the various modes 
of inference from fpecific particulars, of which a fhort account has 
already been given. 

" Let a be the whole number of Xs ; and / the number fpecified in 
the premifs. Let c be the whole number of Zs 5 and w the number 
fpecified in the premifs. Let b be the whole number of Ys ; and u and 
V the numbers fpecified in the premifes of x and z. Let X,Y„ denote 
that each of / Xs is affirmed to be one out of « Ys : and X| : Y« that 
each of t Xs is denied to be any one out of u Ys. Let X„^„ fignify m 



322 Appendix. 

Xs taken out of a larger fpecified number n ; and fo on. Then the five 
poffible fyllogifms, on the condition that no contraries are to enter either 
premiies or conclufion, are as follows : — 

1 . X|Y,+Z„y^ :r X| ^ w-*, # ^w — ^/ + 1*-^, wX|. 

2 . X< Y.+ YpZ^ n Xj 4. „^_^^ , Z^ :=: Z^ 4. ,^__4^ ^^ 
3 • Y«X<+ Y^Zjp :r: X« ^ p_4^ i Z,o= Z^ ^ ^^^^ „ X<. 
4» X<Y„+Z^: Y^ zz X^^^.^^ , : Z^ 

5. Y.X<+Z^: Y^ =r X^^„^, , : Z^ 

'* The condition of inference exprefles itfelf ; in the X^,^, of the con- 
clufion, m muft neither be o nor negative. The firft cafe gives no 
Ariftotelian fyllogifm ; the middle term never entering univerfally (of 
neceffity) into any of its forms, under any degree of fpecification which 
the ufual modes of fpeaking allow. The other cafes divide the old fyl- 
logifms among themfelves in the following manner : they are written {o 
as to ihow that there is fometimes a little difference of amount of fpeci- 
fication between the refults of different figures, which changes in the 
reduction from one figure to another. The Rpman numerals mark the 
figures. 



/ = ^, v. 
t<a, v\ 



b 

h 
h 
b 



u-zTLbyVzib 
u <^byV b 
uzzb, V <^b 



4. fzzayvzzbyfvzsc 

MyVZlbyWSZC 

ay v:=iby wzLC 
ayvzzbywzsic 

V^lbyW^^C 

vmbyfo^^c 
ayV=zby 

byvzzby zo^c 

by vziby w^=c 

vzzby zv^-c 

v^iby w=c 

uzzby w=zc 



y)z.+ x)Y.=x)Z^ 

X)Y.+ Y)Z. - - 
Y)Z„+X,Y.=X'Z, 
X,Y, +Y)Z„=Z,,„X,. 



'Za,irX 



«.» 



Y)X,- 
Y.X,- 
Y)X,. 



• Y)Z^=iZ«^ ,pX^^ , 
¦Y„)Z^z:2r, wXr, t 



f=ia.v=z 



5. u: 

u 



Y . Z+X)Y.=X . Z 
Z . Y+X)Y.z=X . Z 
X)Y„+Z . Y=Z . X 
X)Y„+Y . Z=:Z . X 

Z . Y+X,Y„=X,: Z 
X)Y^-|-Z„:YizZ^: X 

Y.Z+Y)X'=X, ,:Z 
Z.Y+Y)X=:X/,:Z 
Y.Z+Y„X,=X;,:Z 
Z . Y+Y„X'=X„ , : Z 
Y,:Z+Y)X*=X;,,:Z 



Barbara I. 
Bramantip IV. 
Darii I. 
Dimaris IV. 

Darapti III. 
D if amis III. 
Datifi III. 

Celarent I. 
Cefare II. 
Cameftres II. 
Camenes IV* 
Ferio I. 
Feftino II. 
Baroko II. 

Felapton III. 
Fefapo IV. 
Ferifo III. 
Frefifon IV. 
Bokardo III. 



I conclude by fubmitting to the reader what I began with, namely, 
that until Sir William Hamilton produces fomething from C, intelligi- 
bly hinted at in B, and neither fubftantially contained in the matter, nor 



Appendix. 323 

immediately deducible from the principles, of A, he has no right what- 
ever to affert that I have borrowed from him confcioufly or unconfci- 
oufly. I have not found any perfon who thinks that fuch a thing can 
be produced : and I leave every reader to form his own opinion whether 
it can be done or not. 



APPENDIX 11. 
On fome forms of inference differing from thofe of the Arijlotelians. 

I THINK it defirable to ftate all I know of any attempt to deal with 
the forms pf inference otherwife than in the Ariftotelian method. 
Since the time of Wallis, three well known mathematicians have written 
on the fubjedl, Euler, Lambert, and Gergonne : there may have been 
others, but I have not met with them. 

Euler's ' Lettres a une Princefle d'AUemagne fur quelques fujets de 
Phyfiqueet de Philofophie* (3 vols. 8vo. Peterfburg 1768-1772, accord- 
ing to Fufs) contain the repreientation of the fyllogifm hy fenjtble terms, 
namely, areas. There was a Paris edition by Condorcet and Lacroix, 
in 1787, as is ilated by Dr Henry Hunter, who publifhed an Englifh 
tranllation from it and from the original edition, London, 1795, 2 vols. 
8vo. Euler makes ufe of circles to reprefent the terms. In a traft 
publifhed (or completed) in 183 1, in the Library of Ufefiil Knowledge, 
under the name of * the Study and Difficulties of Mathematics* I fell 
upon this method before I knew what Euler had done, uiing, for dif- 
tindlion, fquares, circles, and triangles, as in Chapter I. of this work. 
The author of the ''Outlines'* prefently mentioned, has what I con- 
fider a very happy improvement on Euler. The propofition * fome X 
is Y,* is reprefented by the latter as the circle of X, partly infide and 
partly outfide the Y. The author of the " Outlines*' puts a broken 
fegment of the circle of X infide the circle of Y, leaving it unfettled 
whether the refl of the circle is united to the broken piece, or tranf- 
ferred elfewhere.* 

But Euler had been preceded in the publication of this idea by Lam- 
bert, in his ' Neues Organon, &c.' Leipzig, 1764, 2 vols. 8vo. In 
this work, the terms are reprefented by lines, and identical extents by 
parts of the lines vertically under one another, as in page 79. The 
whole notion is reprefented by continuous line, the part left indefinite 
in particular propofitions by dotted line. Some of the contranominal 
forms are more diflindly mentioned than is ufual, but there is no intro- 
dudlion that I can find of any form of inference which is not Ariflote- 
lian. 

* I fhould fay that Euler does not ufe the numerical, but the magnitu iinal notion, 
(fee page 48 of this work). 



324 Appendix. 

In the feventh volume of the Annales de Mathematiques (Nifmes, 
1 816 and 1 817, 4to.) there is a paper by the editor, M. Gcrgonne, 
entitled EJfai de dialeSique rationelle. I did not fee this paper, nor 
Lambert's work, until after my memoir in the Tranfa6tions of the 
Cambridge Society had been publifhed. The fecond would have given 
me no hint : the firft might have done fo. There is the idea, and fbme 
formal ufe, of a complex propofition : but the divilion is erroneous. 
The fubidentical, identical, and fuperidentical forms are there; thefe 
are not eafily miiled : the others which Gergonne ufes are, the complete 
exclufion (the contrary or fub contrary of my fyftem, which, disjundlively, 
are only the conmion univerfal negative) and partial inclufion zoitb par- 
tial exclufion (the complex particular ^ or fupercontrary, of mine). The 
ufe of contraries is expreflly* forbidden, the old codverfion by contra- 
pofition formally declared falfe, and the particular propofition aflerted 
to be incapable of being made univerfal. But M. Gergonne's complex 
propofitions, fuch as they are, are ufed in a manner refembling that in 
chapter V, of this work, though requiring a feparate tdtonnement for 
many things the analogues of which appear as connefted refults of my 
fyftem. Accordingly, I am bound to attribute to M. Gergonne the firft 
publication of the idea of tf complex fyllogifm, and of the comparifon of 
the fimple one with it. But numerical ftatement is not hinted at. 

Sir William Hamilton's fyftem dates, as to its publication in ledhires, 
from 1 841, as far as has yet appeared. What I have to fay of it will 
be found in another appendix. 

In 1 842, there was publifhed anonymoufly * Outline of the laws of 
thought'; London and Oxford (Pickering, and Graham) oSavo in twos 
(fmall). The author is the Rev. Wm. Thomfon, tutor of Queen's 
College, Oxford. It is a very acute work, and learned. The fyftem of 
propofitions is extendedby the introdu6lion of both the common quanti- 
fications of the predicate into the affirmatives only^ which introduces the 
propofitions U and Y, as the author calls them, or ''All Xs are all Ys," 
and "Some Xs are all Ys." 

The memoir in the Cambridge Tranfa6lions in which I gave the firft 
account of what has fince grown into Chapters IV, V, VIII, and X, of 
this work, is deferibed as to date in the preceding appendix. With re- 
ference to the fubjeft of chapter V, I may note the following defers 
of that memoir : i . That only one arrangement of X and Z as pre- 
mifes being taken, only half the fyftem is given, and many correlative 
arrangements are not obtained (fee page 140). 2. That owing to my 
not feeing diftinftly that each univerfal propofition has two weakened 
forms, the fyllogifms AjA'I' and E'E'Ii are confidered as a clafs apart. 
3. That much of the power of forming eafy rules is not gained, by the 
order of reference being made XY, ZY, XZ, inftead of XY, YZ, XZ. 
The former appears at firft the more natural order, and is certainly 

• I am told that feme works on logic ufed in the Irifli- colleges formally announce 
that the truth of the [ordinary] laws of fyllogifm depends upon the q^clufion of contra- 
ries : but I have not -met with any of them. 



Appendix. 32^ 

more eaiily defcribed ; namely, to refer each of the concluding terms to 
the middle term, with which both are compared. I obferve, iince, 
that M. Gergonne adopts this laft order of reference ; but the other is 
by an inmienfe deal more convenient in its refults, as I think I have 
fhown. 

With refpeft to the numerical quantification, what I did in the Me- 
moir and Addition is given in full in the preceding appendix. Sir 
William Hamilton, who diftindUy renounces all claim to the '* arithme- 
tically articulate" fyftem, and doubts whether it afford any bafis for a 
logical developement, ftates that he had formerly obtained the ** ultia- 
total quantification" (page 317) and thrown it away as a cumbrous and 
ufelefs fubtlety, without publiihing it, as I underftand, in any way. To 
his reply, he appends a note which I think it defirable to republifh at 
length, as a document in the hiftory of this fpeculation, and that I may 
make that hiftory complete (II. p. 41). 

* I have avoided, in the previous letter and poftfcript, all details in 
' regard to the third fcheme of quantification (p. 32); becaufe that fcheme 
' except in fo far as it is confounded with the fecond, has no bearing in 
'the controverfy; and I admit that whatever Mr. De Morgan has 

* therein accomplifhed, he has accomplifhed independently of me. Fur- 
' ther, I fhall not deny him any claim of priority to whatever he may 

* have ftated in our correfpondence, in reference to this third fcheme. 

* Finally, I fhall acknowledge, for I think it not improbable, that his 
' fyllogiim (p. 1 9) fuggefled a reconfideration, on my fickbed, of a cer- 
' tain former fpeculation, in regard to the ultratotal quantification of the 

* middle term in both premifes together ; — a fpeculation determined by 
' the vacillation of the logicians, touching the predefignations morey mofly 

* &c. but which I had laid, afide, as a ufelefs and cumbrous fubtlety. 

* Ariftotle,- followed by the logicians, did not introduce into his doc- 
' trine of fyllogifm, any quantification between the abfolutely univerfal 

* and the merely particular predefignations, for valid reafons. — 1°, Such 

* quantifications were of no value or application in the one whole (the 

* univerfal, potential, logical), or, as I would amplify it, in the two cor- 
' relative and counter wholes (the logical, — and the formal, adlual, 
' metaphyfical,) with which Logic is converfant. For all that is out of 
' clafljfication, all that has no reference to genus and fpecies, is out of 
' Logic, indeed out of Philofophy ; for Philofophy tends always to the 

* univerfal and iiecefTary. Thus the higheft canons of dedu£live reafon- 
' ing, the diSia de Omni et de Nulloy were founded on, and for, the 

* procedure from the univerfal whole to the fubjeft parts ; whilft, con- 
' verfely, the principle of indu6live reafoning was eflablifhed on, and for, 

* the (real or prefumed) colleftion of all the fubjeft parts as conftituting 
' the univerfal whole. — 2°, The integrate or mathematical whole, on 
' the contrary, (whether continuous or difcrete) the philofophers con- 
' temned. For whilft, as Ariftotle obferves, in mathematics genus and 

* fpecies are of no account ; it is, almoft exclufively, in the mathemati- 

* cal whole, that quantities are compared together, through a middle 

* term, in neither premife, equal to the whole. But this reafoning, in 



-y^ 



326 Appendix. 

which the middle term is never univerfal, and the concludon always 
particular, is, — as vague, partial, and contingent,— of little or no value 
in philofophy. It was accordingly ignored in Logic ; and the prede- 
fignations more moj}, &c., as I have faid, referred, to univerfal, or, 
(as was moft common) to particular, or to neither, quantity. This 
difcrepancy among Logicians long ago attraded my attention ; and I 
faw, at once, that the poffibility of inference confidered abfolutely, 
depended, exclufively on the quantifications of the middle term, in both 
premifes, being, together, more than its poffible totality — its diftribution, 
in any one. At the fame time I was impreffed — i^, with the almoft 
utter inutility of fuch reafbning, in a philofophical relation : and 2®, 
alarmed with the load of valid moods which its recognition in Logic 
would introduce. The mere quantification of the predicate, under the 
two pure quantities of definite and indefinite^ and the two qualities of 
affirmative and negative ^ gives (abftra6lly) in each figure, thirty fix 
valid moods ; which, (if my prefent calculation be correal,) would be 
multiplied, by the introdu6lion of the two hybrid or ambiguous quan- 
tifications of a majority and a half, to the fearful amount oi four hun- 
dred and eighty valid moods for each figure. Though not, at the 
time, fully aware of the flrength of thefe obje6lions, they however 
prevented me from breaking down the old limitation ; but as my fu- 
preme canon of Syllogifm proceeds on the mere formal poffibility of 
reafoning, it of courfe comprehends all the legitimate forms of quanti- 
fication. It is ; — What worft relation of fubjeSl and predicate^ fubfifts 
between either of two terms and a common third term^ with which one^ 
at leafty is pofitively related s — that relation fubfifts between the two 
terms them/elves : in other words ;: — In as far as two notions both 
agree, or one agreeing, the other dif agrees, with a common third notion : 
— info far, thofe notions agree or dif agree with each other. This canon 
applies, and proximately, to all categorical fyllogifms, — in extenfion 
and comprehenfion, — affirmative and negative, — and of any figure. It 
determines all the varieties of fuch fyllogifms ; is developed into all 
their general, and fuperfedes all their fpecial, laws. In fhort, without 
violating this canon, no categorical reafoning can, formally, be wrong. 
Now, this canon fuppofes that the two extremes are compared together, 
through the fame common middle ; and this cannot but be, if the 
middle, whether, fubjeft or predicate, in both its quantifications to- 
gether, exceed its totality, though not taken in that totality in either 
premife, 

* But, as I have flated, I was moved to the reconfideration of this 
whole matter ; and it may have been Mr. De Morgan's fyllogifm in 
our correfpondence (p. 19), which gave the fuggeflion. The refult 
was the opinion, that thefe two quantifications fhould be taken into 
account by Logic, as authentic forms, but then relegated, as of little 
ufe in praftice, and cumbering the fcience with a fuperfluous mafs of 
moods. As to Mr. De Morgan's flatement in our correfpondence (p. 
21) of the principle on which (by his later fyftem) fuch fyllogifms 
proceed, this, to ufe his own expreffion, ** I did not comprehend at 



Appendix. 327 

* all ;*• nor do I now,* having, to ipeak with the Rabbis, *' referved it 
^ for the advent of Elias." I faw however, that, be it what it might, 

* it had no analogy with mine ; indeed, even from the fiiller cxpofition 

* of his doftrines, contained in the body of the Cambridge Memoir and 
^ its Addition, which I afterwards received, I can find no indication 

* of his having generalifed either, i ° the comprebenfive principle of all 

* inference y that the two quantifications of the middle term, Jhould, to- 
' get her y exceed it as a fingle whole ; or, 2°, under a non-diftributed 

* middle^ the T7fo exclufive forms of its quantification. On receipt, 
' however, of Mr. De Morgan's Cambridge Memoir, I faw, or thought 

* I faw, in the body of the paper, on his oldyitvfy fome manifeftation of 

* a lefs erroneous doftrine upon this point, than that afterwards contained 

* in his Letters and Addition, upon his new. Accordingly, to obviate 

* all mifconftru6lion, I wrote immediately the following letter,f of which 

* an account has been previoufly given (p. 26, note). 

Edinburgh, 30M March^ 184.7* 

' Your paper read to the Society I have curforily perufed ; but though 
•* oppofed to many of its do^ines, I admire the ingenuity which charac- 

* The palTages which Sir William Hamilton does not underftand, are the following, 
and alfo that relating to the effe^ve terms, in C of the preceding appendix. 

*< Now fuppofe propofitions in which the quantitative part of the preceding is made 
more definite. Say that 

Xt y« I and Xt : Ya | 

mean 
Every one of t Xs | No oiie of t Xs 

is one or other of u Ys j is any one of u Ys 

Let the effeBive number of cafes in a propofition be the number which it makes ef- 
fedlive in inference. Then the efFe^ve number in a pofitive propofition is the num- 
ber of cafes of the y«^V<5?. 

The effe^ve number in a negative propofidon is the number of cafes of the mddle 
term. 

And the criterion of inference being pofiible, is that the fum of the efFe^ve num- 
bers of the two premifes (not both negative) is greater than the %vbole number of cafes 
of the middle term. 

And the exceis is the number of cafes involved in the inference, of all which are 
mentioned in the conclufion-term (or terms) of the pofitive premifs (or premifes). 

For inftance, let b be the whole number of Ys in exiftence : I afk whether w€ caa 
infer anything firom 

Xt Yq efFe^ve number t 

Anfwer, if t -4~ ^ ^ greater than b, we can infer 

Xt^.v..4i : Zw 

Or, if each of t Xs be one or other of u Ys, and no one of w Zs be any one of v Ys, 
then if t and v together are more in number than there are Ys, we may infer that no 
one of t + v — b Xs is any one of the w Zs juft fpoken of." 

f This letter (the firft paragraph of which is omitted, as not relevant to this appen- 
dix,) was addrefled to me, and was fent open to my friend Dr. Sharpey, to be deli- 
vered to me. Dr. Sharpey refufcd to deliver (and, as it happened, I was as much 
prepared to refufe to receive) any thing on the literary fubjeft matter of the con troverfy 
which did not contain a retradtion of Sir W. Hamilton's then fubfifting charge againft 
me. Accordingly, I never faw it till it appeared in print. 



328 Appendix. 

' terifes it throughout. On one point, I find we coincide, in principle, 

* at leaft, againft logicians in general. They have referred the quantify- 
' ing predefignations pturimiy and the like, to the moft oppofite heads ; 

* fome making them univerfal, — fome, particular, — and fome between 

* both ; (for you are not correft in faying, (p. 6), that logicians are 

* unanimous in regarding them as particular, [though moft do]). This 

* confli6tion attracted my attention ; and a little confideration fliowed 

* me, that befides the quantification of the pure quantities, univerfal zx\A. 

* particular y (which I call definite and indefinite^ there are two others of 

* thefe, mixed and half developed, which ought to be taken into account 

* by the logician, as affording valid inference ; but which, without fcien- 

* tific error, cannot be referred either to univerfal, (definite,) or to par- 

* ticular, (indefinite) quantity, far lefs left to vacillate ambiguoufly be- 

* tween thefe. I accordingly introduced them into my modification, in 
' Englifh doggerel, of ** Afferit Ay* tff r., which [in the original caft] I 

* formerly faid was at your fervice ; and as it affords a brief view of my 
' dodlrine on this point, I may now quote it. 

* A, it affirms ofthisy that, all,* 

Whilft E denies oi any^ 
I, it affirms, whilft O denies, 
Oifome (or few or many). 

* Thus A affirms, as E denies. 

And definitely either ; 
Thus I affirms, as O denies, 
And definitely neither. 

* A halfy left femi-definite. 

Is worthy of its fcore j 
U, then, affirms, as Y denies. 
This, neither lefs nor more. 

* Indefinito-definites, 

To UI, YO, laft we come ; 
And that affirms, and this denies, 
Oimorey mofty (half plus fgme). 



< €€ 



The rule of the logicians, that the middle term (hould be once at 

" leaft diftributed [or indiftributable,] (i,e. taken univerfally or fingu- 

" larly, = definitely,) is untrue. For it is fufficient, if, in both the 

premifes together, its quantification be more than its quantity as a 

" definite whole. (Ultratotal)" " It is enough for a 

valid fyllogifm, that the two extreme notions fhould (or fhould not), 
ofneceffity, partially coincide in the third or middle notion; and 
this is neceiTarily fhown to be the cafe, if the one extreme coincide 

• Better : « A, it affirms of this, thefe, all: 



( ft 

( €f 



f €€ 



r 

€ €( 
( (f 
€ €f 
€ (S 



Appendix. 329 

with the middle, to the extent of a half, (dimidiate quantification) ; 
and the other, to the extent of aught more than a half, (ultradimi- 

* " diate quantification). 

The firft and higheft quantification of the middle term (. .) is 
fufficient not only in combination with itfelf, but with any of all the 

* *' three inferior. The fecond (. ,) fufiices, in combination with the 
higheft, with itfelf, and with the third, but not with the loweft. 
The third (.) fuffices, in combination with either of the higher, but 

* " not with itfelf, far lefs with the loweft. The fourth and loweft (,) 
**' fufiices only in combination with the higheft." [i. Definite; 
*'*2. Indefinito-definite ; 3. Semi-definite; 4. Indefinite.]"* 

Of the effeft of this new fyftem of quantification in' amplifying the 

* fyllogiftic moods, (which in all the figures remain the fame,) I fay no- 

* thing. It ftiould be noted, however, that the letters A, E, &c. do not 

* mark the quantification [and qualification] of propojitions, (as of old) 

* but oi propojitional terms. The fentences within inverted commas are 

* taken from notes for the '* Eifay towards," &c, 

* Before concluding, I ought to apologife, in the circumflances, for 

* the details, that have infenfibly lengthened out, of a part of my doc- 

* trine, which I have found, to a certain extent, coincident with what 

* appears in your paper. I was anxious, however, that you and others 

* fhould have no grounds for furmifing, that I borrowed any thing from 
*my predeceffors without due acknowledgment. — On fecond thoughts, 

* however, I deem it more proper to make this communication through 

* a third party.* 

The difcufljon between Sir William Hamilton and myfelf called a 
very able third party into the field, who addrefled the following letter 
to the editor of the Atbenaum, in which journal it was publiftied, June 

I9> ^847. 

< Sir, — ^As two great logical innovations — the one due to Sir William 

* Hamilton, the other due to Mr. De Morgan — ufed in conjunftion, have 

* led me to the iimpleft and moft general formulae of fyllogifm that ever 

* have been given (formulae which corredl a ferious miftake into which 

* both Sir William Hamilton and Mr. De Morgan have fellen), I think 

* it will gratify thofe interefted in logical fcience if yoii would give them 

* publicity through your columns. 

* »', »", /r"', &c. are any numbers. When placed before a term, as 

* n^^xsy »" marks the total number of the clafs x ; placed before a pro- 
' pofition, it marks the number of things, of which we mean to Ipeak. 

* Thus, n^, of n^'^xs are of 1?'"^/, means that a number of things »' are 

* alleged to have both the charafteriftics x and y ; and are to the whole 

* clafs of xs 2&n^ to n^^i and to the whole clafs of j^j as »' to /r'" .• fimi- 

* larly with the negative propofition 7^ of r^^xs are not of »"'^/, »' 

* things being here faid to have the charafteriftic x^ and to want the 

* charafteriftic y. It is clear, from the nature of a propofition, that in 
' affirmatives, n^ can never be greater than the leaft extenfive of the 

* terms, and in negatives never greater than the number of the clafs 
< whofe charadleriftic it is faid to have. But within thefe limits the pro- 



330 Appendix. 

' portion »' to /r" may be wholly undetermined ; we then mark it with 

* the word fome, — we call this, with Sir William Hamilton, indefinite 

* quantity. It may be perfe6Uy determined; as of equality when we mark 

* it with a//, ez/ery, or, following Mr. De Morgan, any other arithmcti- 
' cal proportion — as a half. (Sir William Hamilton has erred in calling 
' a half, femi-definite ; it is thoroughly definite). All this we call defi- 
' nite quantity. Lallly, the indefinitude may be reduced within limits 

* — indefinito-definite, as mofi, &c. 

' The firft formula contains all fyllogifms with an affirmative conclu- 

* fion, without any exception. 

' I. »* of n^^xs are o£n^"ys 

»'^ ofn^zs are o£ n^^^ys 
^„i+„iy — „in) ofn'^xs are of n'^zs 

' As Sir William Hamilton's principle takes away all diftinftion of 

* fubjeft and predicate in affirmative propofitions, it will be feen that, by 

* varying the proportions of the fy mbols, »', &c., every poffible affirma- 

* tive logical inference, in whatever mood or figure, emerges. 

* The fyllogifms with negative queftions or conclufions, arc not fo 
*iimple. They fall into two divifions, according as, in the negative 
' premifs, the things fpoken of have the charafteriftic of the extreme, or 
'of the middle; and from each of thefe, two conclufions, not one, are 
' drawn, according as the things to be fpoken of in the conclufion have 

* the charafteriflic of the extreme in the affirmative premifs, or of that 

* in the negative premifs. 

' II. n^ of n xs are of n^ys 

* n^ of rTzs are not of n^ys concludes ; 
* doubly I® (;?' + »"^ — n") of n^xs are not of n^zs 
' 2*^ (/?' + n^ — «") of ft'^zs are not of n^^xs. 

* It is to this formula I referred as correcting a ferious error into which 

* Sir William Hamilton and Mr, De Morgan have fallen — of holding, as 
' a general principle of all inference, that the two quantifications of the 

* middle term fhould exceed it as a whole ; for this fyllogifm proceeds 

* wholly irrefpe6live of the total quantity of the middle, which is excluded 

* from our fymbolic conclufion. 

* III. »* of Ti^xs are of ?i™ys 

^n^ of r^ys are not of if zs concludes ; alfo, 
' doubly V [jT •\'n^ — rF^ of n°xs are not of tfzs 

' 2« (/r"^ + »* + /r^ — »™ — /?") of ffzs are not of ff'xs. 

* Such are the three fymbolical formulae of every poffible logical infe- 

* rence. I have the demonftrations that thefe are in all th^ir extent valid, 

* and are the only poffible forms ; but it is fufficient to give here the re- 

* fults. 

' It will furprife no one who confiders that the negative propofition is 
' not converted in the fame fenfe as the affirmative, that the negative 
-^ fyllogiftic formulae are not reducible to one. For the rule of negative 



•>*.. 



Appendix. 331 

* converlion changes the things fpoken of, and is as follows : n^ of j^^xs 
' are not of n^ys; converts (;/"* '\-n^ — »") of n^ys are not of n^xs. The 
' confequence of a for^n univerfally true, {n^^n") oin^ys are not ofn^^xs, 

* As to the two conclufions, they are but the converfe of each other. 

* It will not be difficult to interpret thefe, by n^ zi /?" as every or n^ : 

* tF- indefinite zzfome, &c. The ufual Ariftotelic forms will be fcen to 

* be derived from them. Thus the mood Cefare, and the correfponding 
' indireft mood (or, if you will, the mood of the fourth figure, call it at 

* another time Celantes or Cadere at will, but let it be Celantes for the 
' nonce), come forth from the third formula. 

* n^ = »*" gives no y'ls z . . ,n^ irf indefinite 
* n zz /?" every z is y ...»*: /r™ indefinite. 

* Hence in Cefare, no ;ir is 2 from our firft, 

* and in Celantes, no 2: is ;f from our fecond conclufion, and fo of all 

* the others. 

* I owe it to Sir William Hamilton and Mr. De Morgan to fay that 

* without their improvements I could not have advanced one ftep. Mr. De 

* Morgan has even attempted a like reduftion to general formulae, and has 

* failed, chiefly through a mifappreheniion of Sir William Hamilton's prin- 

* ciple of quantified predicate. He has introduced a fuperfluous quantity, 

* — one logically ufelefs, or worfe than ufelefs, as the refult has fhown. 

* This confufion explains his errors. Had it not been for this circum- 
' fiance, I fhould not have had the honour of prefenting thefe formulae 

* to logicians. 

* Permit me to add what I think alfo of fome value. I am not of thofe 
' who think with Sir William Hamilton that the fyllogifm always pro- 
' ceeds in the two counter wholes of intenfion and extenfion — that it 
' muft always be an involution or fevolution in refpeft of claffification. 

* This is, no doubt, true in the moft important reafonings of fcience ; but 

* it is not fcientifically accurate to aflert this univerfally. 

* Quality, which is the comprehenfive element, is of three kinds — not 

* two, as heretofore affirmed ; for fince Kant, the divifion of affirmatives 
« into analytic and fynthetic, or (as Sir William Hamilton wiihes) expli- 

* cative and ampliative, has been eftablifhed. James Bernouilli has puz- 
' zled himfelf to reduce thefe two to the fame form, but without fuccefs ; 
< for that contains an immediate relation of part to whole, and only a re- 

* mote one of part to part, while this contains an immediate relation of 

* part to part, and remote of part to whole. Thefe, as diftinft kinds of 

* quality, are erroneoufly elided in language. As the words ampliative 

* and reftriitive are generally oppofed in logic, perhaps we might replace 
' the old divifion of propofitions, according to quality, into affirmative and 

* negative — by one into Explicative^ Ampliative ^ and ReftriSlive, 

'Where, then, both premifes are ampliative, the fyllogifm proceeds 

* purely by force of extenfion. There is neither involution nor evolution 

* — neither induction nor dedu6lion — but a paflage or tranfition from one 

* mark to another, or from clafs to clafs. Of this kind are all Angular, 
'or, as Ramus calls them, proper fyllogifms. Let us call this new 



332 Appendix. 

' clafs of fyllogifms tradu6live, to contrail it with the indu6livc and de- 

* duftive. 

' The ufe of thefe in philofophy as independent modes of inference will 

* eafily appear. When we colleft the fcattered fragments of our know- 
' ledge into unity of fcience, we ufe induSiion and induSiive fyllogifm 5 

* when we apply the principles of fcience to fpecial events of things, we 

* ufe deduct on and deductive fyllogifm s but when, abandoning one fcheme 
' of claffification, we transfer our knowledge direSily to another, we ufe 
' traduBion and traduilive fyllogifm. Thus, in political fcience, what 
' has been predicated by hiftorians of men claffed geographically is tranf- 

* ferred to men claffed according to conflitutions of government by tra- 

* duftion. This lail efcapes Sir William Hamilton's rule, and never 

* concludes through a comprehenfive containing and contained. 

' I fhall not add, at prefent, any attempt to prove a priori the exclufive 

* validity of fyllogiflic inference. 

* I admit that I ought not, without good ground, to diffent from a ma- 

* tured opinion of Sir William Hamilton in any part of philofophy, ftill 

* more in logic ; but I obey the force of demonftration, — and, as Ludo- 
' vicus Vives faid in refpeft to Ariflotle, Verecundi dijjentio, 

* Yours, &c. 

* James Broun. 

' Temple, June 9, 1847.* 

My reply to this confifled in forwarding, on the fame 1 9th of June, 
to the editor of the Athenaum, a fummary of the refults of chapter VII f, 
then written. This fummary appeared on the 26th : I do not infert it, 
becaufe the chapter in queflion is a better anfwer ; and though the pub- 
lication faved my rights, the republication is unnecefTary. Mr. Broun's 
three forms are the firft (without the contranominal), the ninth, and the 
eleventh, of page 161. Mr. Broun was wrong in deducing from the 
two latter forms that the principle of the middle term was erroneous : 
for in thefe very forms the two quantifications exceed the whole : being 
the whole (in premife one) plus fome (in the other). As to the fiiper- 
fluous quantity, it only becomes fuperfluous when fuch quantifications 
are introduced as diflinguifh fpurious from admiffible propofitions : fee 
pages 145, 146, in which it is fhown that the forms are correft. 

Nothing but clofe comparifon, and that after pra6lice, would deteft 
the accordance of the two fymbolic modes of expreifion in pages 145 
and 161. I am not therefore furprifed that Mr. Broun fhould, having 
obtained cafes of that in page 161, pronounce that in page 145 erro- 
neous. 

In the anfwer which I made, I promifed to ftate diilin6Uy how much 
of the chapter was written before Mr. Broun's letter appeared. This 
I now do. With the exception of pages 145, 146, the matter of which 
is moflly from my Cambridge Memoir, the whole of it was then written, 
excepting fuch verbal alterations and occafional introdu6lion of fentences, 
as take place at the prefs, or at the lafl reading of the manufcript. I had 



Appendix. 333 

thoyght that there would be no neceffity to introduce thofe pages, ex- 
cept flightly, and in anfwer to certain obje£lions which Teemed likely to 
occur. The examination which the aflertion that they are erroneous 
made me give my previous forms, pointed out the defirablenefs of intro- 
ducing them as they now ftand. 

September 17, 1847. I had finifhed the preceding appendix, when I 
became aware of the exiftence of the * Commentationes Philofophicae 
Seledliores ' of Godfrey Ploucquet, of Tubingen, Utrecht, 1 78 1, quarto. 
The laft title (p. 561) is 'De Arte Charafteriftica. Subjicitur Methodus 
calculandi in logicis, ab auftore inventa. i jS^ / I find by a catalogue* 
that this methodus calculandi had been previoufly publiihed in 1773, at 
Tubingen, at the end of a work entitled * Principia de Subftantiis et 
Phaenomenis : * alfo that the 'Methodus demonftrandi direfte omnes 
fyllogifmorum fpecies ' of the fame author (which is probably the thing 
I am going to defcribe) was publifhed at Tubingen in 1 763. From the 
title of a work which, I am informed, exifts, namely, ' Sammlung der 
Schriften welche von logifchen Calcul des Prof. Ploucquet betrefien* 
Tubingen, 1773, one would fuppofe that this fyftem had obtained great 
local currency. I give a fhort account of it : premifing that Ploucquet 
appears to have been a well informed mathematician, much given to 
pure fpeculation on mental fubjefts. 

The calculus (a term which Ploucquet ufes in as wide a fenfe as I do 
when I call the contents of Chapter V. a part of the calculus of infe- 
rence) confifts in the invention of a iimple notation, and the mechanical 
fubftitution, in one premife, of an identical equivalent to the middle term 
therein contained, taken from the other premife (this laft being one in 
which the middle term is univerfal). There is neither ufe of contraries, 
nor numerical definition : but there is every variety of quantity of the 
predicate which can be produced by fimple converfion of the ordinary 
forms. A term ufed univerfally is denoted by the capital letter ; par- 
ticularly, by the fmall letter : affirmation by juxtapofition ; negation, by 
interpofing <. Thus X)y is Xy ; X.Y is X> Y 5 XY is xy ; X:Y is 
X > Y. The following is a complete fpecimen : 

Sint prae- Pm 
mifTse s>M 



Calculo : s > mP quoddam s non eft P 

Omnis ducatus eft aureus 
Qusedam moneta non eft aurea. 

m> A 
Calc. m> aD. feu m>- D, qusedam moneta non eft ducatus. 

As Ploucquet feems to think that this aftual application of the calculus 
to concrete inftances, by aid of their initial letters, is a material part of 

* The Jecond edition of Mr. Blakey^s * Eflay on Logic * recently publiihed, contains 
a catalogue of upwards of a thoufand works on logic, briefly titled. 



334 Appendix. 

his fyftem, I have inferted the cafe entire. The rationale of the fyftem 
confifts in that fubftitution of identicals for each other, which I under- 
ftand Sir William Hamilton (with perfedt truth) to employ in every 
cafe. Thus we have in the above * Some of the Ss are not any Ms, 
are not thofe Ms which make up all the Ps, are not therefore any Ps.' 
This demand for identical fubftitutes requires both kinds of quantity for 
every predicate, and Ploucquet ufes them accordingly, as ^ as wanted 
to eftablifh the Ariftotelian fyllogifms. Sir W. Hamilton goes further, 
and invents fyllogifms for all the kinds of quantity. Thus Ploucquet 
ufes mP or * fome Ms are all the Ps* and P > m or ' all Ps are not fome 
of the Ms;' but not MP or p> m. 

At the fame time with the knowledge of Ploucquet I obtained that 
of the work of a follower and extender, M. W. Drobitfch, author of 
* Neue Darftellung der Logik . . . Nebft einen logifch-mathematifchen 
Anhange,' Leipzig, 1836, odavo. As far as the fymbolic part is con- 
cerned, Mr. Drobitfch begins by a convention which would reconcile 
any one to the found, not merely of Barbara and Celarent, but even of 
Baroko and Frejtfon. He makes S and P the fubjeft and predicate of 
the conclufion and M the middle term ; and puts the Ariftotelian vowel 
between them : thus S)P is SAP, and P:S is POS. Hence his pre- 
mifes may be map f am or mop fam ; and one of his fyllogifms is mep- 
famfep. In the algebraical part, he ufes large and fmall letters for the 
univerfal and particular, or for the whole and part extent of a term. 
Hfe alfo introduces the figns rz and <5 to lignify identity and (what I 
call) fubidentity. This ufe of the mathematical figns involves an ex- 
-tenfion, which is made by all thofe who fignify the identity of X and 
Y by X=Y. The mathematician thinks of extent as quantity only : 
the logician includes both quantity and pofition. Thus when the for- 
mer fays that five feet are lefs than feven feet, he means any five feet, 
be they part of the feven feet or not : the latter, when he fays that X 
is a name of lefs extent than Y, means not only that the former can be 
contained in the latter, but that it is. To make negative propofitions, 
Mr. Drobitfch takes a limited univerfe (call it U, as I have done) an 
extent greater than the utmoft extent of all the names, otherwife inde- 
finite. And here he fells into fome confufion: X and Y being the 
names, he fays U muft be of greater extent than X-|-Y: now if we had 
X)Y, U need only be of greater extent than Y. If from the genus Y 
be taken all the fpecies X, the remainder is denoted by Y — X, Ac- 
cordingly, the contrary of X is U — X, 

Mr. Drobitfch then lays down eight forms of predication, of which, 
however, he only ufes the ordinary ones. And I cannot find out that 
the limited univerfe, or the contrary, has any ufe except to fiirnifh means 
of notation. The eight forms are ; — firft, X=:y, or my X)Y ; fecondly, 
X=Y, or X)Y-[-Y)X; thirdly, x=y, or XY; fourthly, u=Y, or 
Y)X; fifthly, X<jU — Y, which tells us that X is all contained in 
what is left of the univerfe after Y is removed, or is X.Y; fiixthly, 
X=z <5Z <JU — Y, a very roundabout way of faying that X Vifubcori" 
trary of Y, or X.Y-|-xy ; feventhly, x=U — Y or X:Y ; eighthly. 



Appendix. 335 

x=X — ^y, which tells us that Y is a fubidentical of X, or Y)X4-X:Y. 

This is in faft a mixture of two fyftcms, both in principle and nota- 
tion. The forms are A|, A', 0| (and O'), E|, I|, D, D| (and D'), and 
Ci . Alfo C is virtually given : but E', I', C, do not appear. The 
ordinary rules under which the mathematicians ufe = and <J, remain 
true in this logical ufe of them : and thus there is an elegant mode or 
exhibiting the inference in fyllogifms. For inftance, in Cameftres we 
have Pzzm, S <U— -M .-. <JU— m .-. <:U— P ; or S <U— P. 

It would have been more confiftent to have made n, <J, and > , (in- 
troducing this laft) ferve all purpofes. But it has happened very often 
that a fyftem of notation, already exhibited, has been extended by a better 
one, and mended only, inftead of being reconftrudled. Ploucquet had 
ufed the large and fnlill letters, and > for denial : the latter fymbol a 
ftrange one, if mathematical analogy were intended, Mr. Drobitfch 
has ingenioufly contrived that < fhould reprefent denial, and has been 
led to what might have ufefully amended all he had to begin with. Tak- 
ing little X to reprefent a part of the extent of X, &c. and U for the ex- 
tent of the univerfe, the following notation might have been adopted : 

Firft when <J and > both include their limit, =. We fhould have 



A| X<YorY>X 

0| x<U— YorU— Y>x 

E, X<U— YorU— Y>X 

Ii x<jY or Y>x 



A' Y<X or X>Y 
O' y<U— XorU— X>y 
E' X>U— Y or U— Y<1X 
I' is inexpreffible. 



To exprefs I', we muft invent a fymbol for a part of U — X, 
Next, when <5 and > do not include their limits, we have 



D, X <Y or Y> X 
D X=Y or Y=X 
D' X>YorY<lX 



C| X<U— YorU— Y>X 
C X=U— Y or U— YziX 
C X>U— Y or U— Y<X 

P is inexpreffible. 



I am inclined to think that the reprefentation of quantity and location 
both under one fymbol is objeftionable, if that fymbol be one already 
appropriated in mathematics to quantity only, I would on no account 
accuftom myfelf to read A < B as A is lefs than (becaufe a part of) B. 
Mr. Drobitfch is much more complete than his predeceiTors in his enu- 
meration of the various kinds of forites, 

OSfober 29, 1 847. While this fheet was paffing through the prefs, 
I became acquainted with ** A fyllabus of logic, in which the views of 
Kant are generally adopted, and the laws of fyllogifm fymbolically ex- 
prefled. By Thomas Solly, Efq." Cambridge, 1839, 8vo. The 
fymbolical expreffion here given is of a peculiar character : the algebraic 
ligns are adopted in a fenfe which preferves the rules of fign, while the 
fymbols reprefent the terms of the fyllogifm, or elfe the notions of par- 
ticular and univerfal. Thus, if / ftand for particular, u for univerfal, 
and m for one of the terms of a fyllogifm, mzzu or m—uzio implies 



336 Appendix. 

that OT is a univerfal term, and («r —«)(»—/)= o implies the alternative 
that either m is univerfal, or » is particular. By means of fuch alter- 
native relations, the conditions of validity of the various figures are 
expreifed. Mr. Solly contends for fix forms in each figure, by intro- 
ducing all forms which have weakened conclufions, and proves a priori, 
from his equations, that fix and no more are pofiible in each figure. If 
I had admitted weakened forms, there would have been fixteen more 
fyllogifms, which might be deduced, either from the eight univerfals, or 
from the fixteen particulars. 



THE END. 