This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 



Fw. \ SOSQ.l 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



Fvv, \ sosq.T 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



r 



~\ 



r*vv. \ 3osq 1 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



3 



LECTURES 



ON 



LOGIC. 

/f 



BY C. E'. MOBERLY,/M.A. 

LATE SCHOLAR OF BALLIOL. 



OXFORD and LONDON, 
JOHN HENRY PARKER. 
1848. u 



H i \%+ mpn i mm mm -1^1 p w pifip i p n ywwmwpp^PPWi 



TWul sp<a^ f 



\vfi. *&«*>• 7 






yhJL'5osJi.7 



v/ 




BAXTER, PBIKTEB, OXFORD. 



PREFACE. 



It seems now to be acknowledged, that the 
Science of Logic is to be divided into two 
branches ; and that in the first of these are to 
be considered the Fonns of Reasoning, while 
the second is to make clear the Method of 
their application to the various departments 
of knowledge. 

The writer of this Volume has endeavoured 
to compose a Manual of the Form of Reason- 
ing ; continually keeping in mind their sub- 
sequent application in methodised and con- 
nected arguments. And as part of the same 
system, he has followed the steps of the Latin 
Logicians, in considering those Properties of* 



m*m**^mmmr'***mmmmimm**—**i9™*r*^' 



IT PREFACE. 

Terms which . make them elements in Pro- 
positions ; and those qualities of Propositions 
which make them capable of entering into 
Arguments. This was not the constant or 
exclusive practice of Aristotle. In composing 
separate .works on Terms or Propositions, he 
was naturally led to treat them in some 
manner independently, and without respect 
to their character as elements of Reasoning. 

The subject of Method has been entered 
upon in Part V; but only as respects the 
general characteristics of Demonstrative Sci- 
ence, and the use of Probable Arguments. It 
is important that the Method of particular 
Sciences should be treated of separately; and 
a work has lately appeared on this wide sub- 
ject, which, although far from complete, gives 
promise that the subject will not be neglected 
any longer. 

In sketching the forms of Reasoning, it has 
been considered important to distinguish, as 
clearly and broadly as possible, the charac- 



WWMW 



PREFACE. V 

teristic uses of each separate form, and to 
omit entirely all the common questions about 
their resolution into some common type. Such 
attempts have, up to the present time, gone 
near to reduce the theory of all argument to 
a Procrustean mutilation and unmeaningness; 
cooperating in this way with the practice of 
citing none but unmeaning examples and 
illustrations. 

Something has been added to the subject of 
Fallacies in Part IV. For unless we admit 
that Evidence may be illogically as well as 
mistakenly assumed, we shut our eyes to some 
of the principal marks of what is commonly 
and justly accounted to be the Logical temper 
or spirit; and guard only against those faults 
in reasoning, which every one is comparatively 
unlikely to fall into. 

Some of the distinctions drawn in Part I. 

and elsewhere, between the meaning of Terms 

in an argument, and that of the same Terms 

when not so employed, may perhaps appear 
a 2 



i^um i n p^pwuw 



I: 



» *¦>; 



Yi PREFACE. | 

useless and unmeaning, Still our whole ex- \ 

perience of valid and connected reasoning u 

would lead us to look for subtilty and con- | 

sequent difficulty in the laws which modify ¦*¦ 

the meaning of Terms as used in argument ; ; 

while we should expect, that the form of 

actual inference from ascertained Evidence 

would be clear and simple. This is enough fa 

to account for the difficulty of the Scholastic y 

doctrines about the Secunda Intentio, the | 

abstraction of individuality from Terms about 

which we reason, and the universality of the 

Subject in a Singular Proposition ; and to 

prove, that the difficulties of the ancient Logic 

occur only just when difficulties could not 

but occur, and cease when we should naturally 

cease to expect them. This is one among 

many reasons which led the writer to hope, 

that the Latin manual may still be retained in 

our University without much actual alteration 

of the Text, but vivified and made practical 

by continual increase of knowledge as to both 






PREFACE. Vll 

the form of Reasonings and their matter. 
However low may be our estimate of the 
moral importance of a Logical temper, we can 
hardly doubt that much precipitate inference 
would have been and may still be guarded 
against, by a more diffused knowledge of the 
commonest requirements of Evidence. 



I 



CONTENTS. 



PART I. 

Chap. I. Logical Training, and its Importance 1 
II. Influence of the Logical Temper on 

Language ... 7 

III. Pra?dicabilia ... 10 

IV. Abstraction . . . 19 
V. Logical Distinctness in Terms . . 23 

VI. Logical Distinctness as to the Nature 
of Things, and the Kinds to which 

they belong ... 25 

VII. Higher and Subaltern Kinds . 32 

VIII. Summum Genus ... 34 

IX* Infiraa Species • . . 38 
X. Distinctness by Logical Division or 

Classification ... 40 

XI. Distinctness by Logical Definition . 45 
XII. Degrees of Distinctness. Accidental 

and Physical Definition . . 48 

PART II. 

Chap. I. Logical Judgments ... 53 

II. General Import of Propositions • 55 



mmmmnfrm^mmmmm 



CONTENTS. 

Page 

III. How affected by their Quality and 

Quantity ... 59 

IV. Singular Propositions . . 62 
V. Indefinite Propositions . • 66 

VI. Import of Propositions affected by their 

Matter or Modality . . 68 

VII. By their Substance or Relation to other 

Propositions . . . 74 

VIII. Quantity of Predicates . . 78 

IX. Direct Inferences of the Understanding 

by Opposition and Conversion 8 1 



PART III. 






Chap. I. Reasonings. Deduction and Induction 


87 


II. Induction. Observation and Experiment 


89 


III. Processes of Induction 


• . 


91 


IV. Syllogisms from Inductive 


Principles . 


95 


V. Canons of the Syllogism 


. 


98 


VI. First Figure . 


. 


99 


VII. Second Figure 


. 


104 


VIII. Third Figure 


. 


109 


IX. Modal Syllogisms 


• 


114 


X. Conditional Syllogisms. 


Reasoning 




from Hypothesis 


. 


119 


XI. Disjunctive Syllogisms 




124 


XII. The Dilemma 


. 


126 


XIII. Analogy 


. . 


127 



PART IV. 
Chap. 1. Arguments not strictly Logical, with 
true Conclusion 



131 



C0NTENT8. XI 

Page 

II. False Conclusion from Evidence Iilo- 

gically assumed • • • 134 

III. False Categorical Conclusions from 

true and Logical Evidence . . 139 

IV. Terms ambiguous in themselves • 143 
V. Logical Fallacies of Quantity in 

Categoricals . • . 146 

VI. Logical Fallacies of Quality in 

Categoricals • , . 149 

VII. Logical Fallacies in Hypotheticals . 151 

PART V. 

ARGUMENTS IN CONNECTION. 

Chap. I. Sorites, or Trains of Reasoning . 157 

II. Demonstration . • • 161 

III. Cumulative Evidence. Ehctra. 'Xrifiua, 

Examples of inference from them . 166 



mm*m*^ 



PART I. 



CHAP. I. 

LOGICAL TRAINING, AND ITS IMPORTANCE. 

1, There are three Powers of the Mind, by In univer- 
the happy employment of which the logical 

mind of one man is mainly distinguished from 
the illogical mind of another. These are the 
powers of Simple Apprehension, Judgment, and 
Reasoning. For it is plain that we should praise see pp. 33. 
a man for his logical mind, if we constantly 
see him apprehending distinctly, judging with 
truthfulness, and reasoning conclusively. 

2. He must have the power of distinct Simple Apprehcn 
Apprehension. That is, he must be able topi ex . 
observe distinctly, and to the point, those things, 
whatever they are, about which he is to reason. 

B 



mw;m**im*mmm 



2 LOGICAL TRAINING, 

But to do this requires a mind either logically 
acute, or trained to acuteness ; for 

«• The objects about which men reason are 
often very remote from ordinary experi- 
ence ; and therefore hard to be observed at 
all. E. g. Gravitation — National wealth— 
The balance of power. 
/3. Even when they are not so* they come 
Complex*, before us in a complex kind of way. The 

points in them which it is to our purpose 
to observe with a view to our intended 
reasoning are mixed up, that is, and en- 
tangled with a number of other points 
which it is not to our purpose to observe, 
because we do not want to reason about 
them. Our Simple Apprehension has then 
a complex object, and may be called a 
Complex Simple Apprehension. 

On the other hand, before we reason 

about any Thing or Species, we must needs 

Ineora- determine which of its particular qualities 

^Append are ^ l0Se on which our reasoning is to be 

Note A.) based. When we have confined for the 

present our notion or apprehension of the 

thing within the limits of these particular 

qualities, it is plain that the object has 

become Incomplex, and the Apprehension 



i; 



PREFACE. V 

teristic uses of each separate form, and to 
omit entirely all the common questions about 
their resolution into some common type. Such 
attempts have, up to the present time, gone 
near to reduce the theory of all argument to 
a Procrustean mutilation and unmeaningnessj 
cooperating in this way with the practice of 
citing none but unmeaning examples and 
illustrations. 

Something has been added to the subject of 
Fallacies in Part IV. For unless we admit 
that Evidence may be illogically as well as 
mistakenly assumed, we shut our eyes to some 
of the principal marks of what is commonly 
and justly accounted to be the Logical temper 
or spirit; and guard only against those faults 
in reasoning, which every one is comparatively 
unlikely to fall into. 

Some of the distinctions drawn in Part I. 

and elsewhere, between the meaning of Terms 

in an argument, and that of the same Terms 

when not so employed, may perhaps appear 
a 2 



4 LOGICAL TRAINING, 

Arsdiri- ft must aim at keeping the mind right; in 

gens men- . 

tenu full possession, that is, of its best natural 

powers, while it enquires or reasons on any 
given subject. It must aim at preserving the 
mind from indistinct apprehension, self-contra- 
dicting judgments, and inconclusive reasonings. 

6. Yet every art or science which we study 
faithfully is seen to answer these purposes in a 
greater or less degree. Geometry, for instance, 
or Astronomy, if so studied, are almost certain 
to improve us in all these respects. The fine 
arts in general, and also many of the mechanical 
arts, require clear observation, and consistent 
judgment, and conclusive reasoning. And if 
we have practised these powers in any one art 
or science, we are likely enough to find them 
avail us in any other which we undertake. Our 
faithful pursuit of one such subject, gives us 
the logical temper as regards many others. 

7. In this way it is that most men become 
good reasoners. It should be remarked, how- 
ever, that while on the one hand it makes them 
firm and practical in their reasonings on any 
subject to which they are perfectly accustomed, 
or on any subject nearly allied to their ordinary 
occupation ; so, on the other hand, the farther 
they recede from the common subject-matter of 



\m \ \ » ¦ " ¦ 



AND ITS IMPORTANCE. 



their reasonings, the more likely they are to 
reason erroneously. The Geometrician has not 
necessarily the best appreciation of the argu- 
ments in the Wealth of Nations ; far less of the 
kind of reasoning which moral science employs. 
And the Moralist or Metaphysician, who learns 
reasoning only by direct practice, would pro- 
bably be found unable to sum up the evidence 
in a criminal case, so as to direct the verdict of 
the jury. 

.8. It is this defect which the logical teacher 
attempts to supply. He endeavours to shew, 
clearly, directly, and explicitly, what the mental 
conditions are on which all clearness in appre- 
hension, all consistency in judgment, and all 
conclusiveness in reasoning, must depend : and 
thus to cultivate in his pupil a power of rea- 
soning, which shall apply to all subjects of 
enquiry, whether moral, metaphysical, or simply 
practical. There being in fact but a very limited 
number of processes applicable to reasonings, 
however various, he endeavours to investigate 
them one by one, and to lay down the laws 
which must always regulate them, whenever 
and to whatever subject they are applied. 

9. Consequently, he has to consider and treat Instru- 
of Reasonings, in so far as they are purely 
b-2 



mentalitt 



j 



6 LOGICAL TRAINING, AND ITS IMPORTANCE. 

mental, and unaffected by the subject-matter 
to which they are applied. The Reasonings of 
Astronomical Science are considered by him, so 
far as they are purely mental processes, inde- 
pendent of the facts of Astronomy. He enquires 
not whether an argument observes or contra- 
dicts the laws of Astronomy, History, or Poli- 
tics ; but whether it observes or contradicts the 
general laws of Reason, and the general con- 
ditions of Knowledge. Such laws of Reason 
are the following: that two contradictories 
cannot be true at once — that if one of them 
is true, the other is false — that if a law or cause 
is ascertained to be existing and uncounteracted, 
all its instances or effects are sure to happen — 
that a law or cause cannot be true if it is un- 
counteracted, and yet some of the effects which 
ought necessarily to follow it do not do so in 
fact. 

10. These and a few others of the kind are 
plainly laws instrumental to all reasonings; 
laws on which the validity of all reasoning on 
whatever subject must depend. Therefore the 
Science of Logic, which enumerates and teaches 
us how to apply these laws, is rightly called an 
Art or Science Instrumental to all natural arts 
or sciences. 





**mmm*l* 



CHAP. II. 

INFLUENCE OF THE LOGICAL TEMPER ON 
LANGUAGE. 



1. All reasonings, so soon (at least) as they Vox sig- 
issue from the mind which conceived them, conceptus. 
must be clothed in words (voces). Therefore 

it is to be expected, that the Logician, who is 
happy and distinct in his apprehensions, will 
also be happy and distinct in the words by 
which he expresses them. 

2. Indeed, the former distinctness depends in Declarat 
great measure upon the latter. We cannot tum. ei> 
have clear and distinct notions of any great 
number of objects, without having clear and 
distinct names for them. Uncultivated minds, 

in particular, are absolutely unable, except in 
objects of sensation, to discern any distinctions 
which are not registered in common language. 
And even the most cultivated of all men must, 
in the first place, for much of their knowledge Supponi- 
accept words and names as registers of the urpror ' 
distinctions which have been drawn by others ; 



¦ill 






8 INFLUENCE OF THE 

and, in the second place, make great use of their 
own accurate names, as trustworthy memorials 
and landmarks of their own experience. 
* Exinsti- 8. When accurate, such names fully repre- 
sent the results of experience. And they tend 
towards this logical accuracy in two ways. In 
(theatr.) the first place, men of accurate and scientific 
knowledge are continually busy in the process 
of assigning to the objects which they investi- 
gate those names which will most distinctly 
denote their fundamental qualities. E. g. 
Conglomerate, Electrotype, Pyroligneous Acid, 
Psilanthropism. These determinations of the 
learned, as respects a language, may be called 
by the general term ' Institutum Theatri,' 
according to the well-known expression of 
Lord Bacon, 
(fori.) In the second place, the common people, with 

a kind of rude felicity, are continually giving 
names to those things which interest them; 
and those names generally express with homely 
force some one or more of the best known 
qualities of these things. E. g. ' Topgallant, 
Puritan, Quaker, Haggling of the Market,' &c. 
(Append. These formations in a language may be called 
the ' Institutum Fori' as regards it. 
4. A Simple Apprehension expressed in words 



LOGICAL TEMPER ON LANGUAGE. 



9 



is called a Term. When we assert or deny one 
term of another, or rather the thing or quality 
implied by one Term of the thing or quality 
implied by another, we are said to make a 
Proposition. And if from one or more pro- 
positions known to us we infer the truth of 
some .other unknown or less known proposition, 
then we have made an Argument. 

5. The old Logicians called a Term, a Vox 
Simplex; a Proposition, a Vox Complexa; and 
an Argument, a Vox Decomplexa. For by 
' Vox,' they understood not a word, but ' an 
expression of thought in language.' 



w^mivmflfi^Fmmmpm*^^* 



Simplex. 



CHAP. III. 

PRiEDICABILIA. 

The conditions under which Terms are Prae- 
dicabilia, able, that is, to become parts of Propo- 
sitions, which Propositions shall again become 
parts of Arguments, are as follows : 

Terminus 1. They must be Termini Simplices*, or 
Voces Categorematicae. Results, that is, of one 
complete and finite Apprehension or act of the 
understanding, but not of more ; and therefore 
possessing just enough of independent meaning 
to be expressed in a Term. E. g. ' Caesar, Nemo, 
Videre, Omnes homines, Canis Venaticus, Bo- 
num, Utile, Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes.' 
2. If they imply only an incomplete act, they 

Vox Syn- are Voces Syncategorematicae. ' Omnis, totus, 
solus,' &c. imply only an incomplete Apprehen- 
sion until they are joined with some subject ; 
e.g. ' Tota Regie' ' Omnis natura rerum.' They 

* The Divisions of Nomina omitted here will be inserted in 
those parts of the Treatise where they become important and 
intelligible. See pp. 21. 43. 



categore- 



— I ) ¦¦< 



PREDICABLES. 



11 



have not meaning enough for a Term, because, 
unlike most adjectives, they express not a 
quality which may be considered apart from the 
things possessing it, but a process of our mind 
reflecting upon things as being all that there 
are of the kind, the only ones which there are, 
&c. These forms of reflection are plainly inse- 
parable from the things on which we reflect. 
Again, Semper, vere, formose, and all adverbs, 
imply only an Incomplete Apprehension, until 
they are joined with some Predicate ; and are 
therefore Syncategorematic. 

3. If they imply more than one complete act 

of Apprehension, they are Voces Mixta?. E. g. Mixta. 
Currit, ridet, and all finite verbs, are Voces Mix- 
ta*, implying too much meaning to be Termini 
Simplicis. They imply the Copula is, and the 
predicates, laughing, mourning, &c. Possibly 
also the subject ' he.' 

4. Secondly, if they are to be Predicables, Sine tern- 
they must not be Logical Individuals b . That is, fc^us? 1 

b The accurate etymological sense of the word Individuum is 
plainly That which has no qualities which we know of— quod 
nihil habet dividui — but is an object of sensation known to 
us only by its occupying a certain space at a given time. In 
this sense, however, it would be absurd to talk of an individual 
man or horse. If we know that a thing is a man or a horse, 
we know some of its qualities, and therefore it is no longer 



'. \ 12 PREDICABLES. 

i t 

\ ; not objects of sensation inward or outward, 

j marked out and distinguished from all other 

: 1 objects of sensation by their occupying a certain 

•;t space at a certain time, which space it is incon- 

ceivable that any other thing should occupy at the 
same time. These two marks, of space and time, 
the tfqv and votb, are the only evidence by which 
we gain our notion of an individual stone or tree ; 
i . and the only outward and material evidence for 

; the individuality of a given man, horse, action, 

. i thought, or even spiritual being. And the two 

Numerus. are summed up in one when we say that ' num- 
ber* is the logical mark of Individuality. For 

' t an individual to us. Nothing can be individual to us of 

. which we know more than that is a Thing possessing a xov 

and tot*. 

The rule in the text declares not only that the Subject and 
Predicate in propositions must express qualities over and 
[ above mere existence in time and space, but that the qualities 

which they do express must be disengaged from Individu- 
ality ;— 6ine tempore — considered not as belonging to this or 
that tiling, but as constituting a class of all possible things 
which possess these qualities. The word Individuum is 
therefore used in the less accurate but more common sense 
of an object of inward or outward Sensation, endued with 
very many qualities, and existing in Time and Space. This 
is what is meant when the Individual is defined to be 
Materia Quantitate signata. The former meaning, on the 
other hand, seems to be implied in the more superficial 
definition, Individuum est Singulare quod non did potest de 
multis. 



t 



m^mmrnm^m 



PBEDICABLES. 13 

when we say of things that they are e. g. two in 
number, we mean either that they occupy neither 
more nor less than two portions of space at the 
same time, or else that they occupy the same 
portion of space at neither more nor less than 
two successive times. 

5. But either Nomina Logica. Names, that is, Nomen 
for certain classes of Things subject to and glcum# 
constituted by some common quality or quali- 
ties. E. g. Coward, Philosopher, Man, Animal, (Append. 

mi i « i tt . i i_ Note C.) 

Action. These are also called Universals, be- 
cause they denote all things which may be 
called Coward, Men, &c. 

6. Or Voces Communes. Names of qualities Vox Com 
predicated of and constituting certain classes of 
Things. E. g. Human, Demonstrative, Equi- 
angular, Rotatory, Familiar, Poetical, &c. These 

are in like manner Universals, because they are 
in all things which are demonstrative, familiar, 
&c. 

7. Sometimes one of the Terms in an infer- 
ence is the name of a particular Thing or Person. 

E. g. This man. My estate. Our country. Cae- Singularis. 
sar. It is therefore called a Singular Term. ' 
But if the Person or Thing denoted by such a 
Term is to be the subject of any inference, it 
must necessarily be because some principle or 
c 



\ 



14 PREDJ CABLES. 

other is found to apply to him. Principles, 
however, will apply to him not certainly from 
his being in a certain place at a certain time, 
(from his *ro5 and wori or Logical Individuality,) 
but from his possessing certain qualities, from 
his Logical Dividuality. But that which has 
nothing to do with the reasoning respecting any 
Subject, can be no part of the meaning of the 
Subject as used in that reasoning. Singular 
Terms therefore, as implying nothing but quali- 
ties in subjecto, are in fact covert Universals, 
or Nomina Logica, although their form is, as 
Aldrich remarks, that of Individual Nouns. 

8. In any case, Predicables must have their 
Univoce. signification Univocally. If they are each to 

be one and not more than one Predicable, they 
must express whenever they are used either 
one and one only Predicate, or else one and 
one only kind of Subject. E. g. Elephant, and 
Sagacious — which are both used Univocally, 
because the quality of sagacity is always the 
same wherever it occurs, and the Things called 
Elephants are always known to be Elephants 
by the same qualities. 

9. For a Predicable, without altering its 
JEquivoce. sound or written form, may express two per- 
fectly unconnected meanings. E. g. Pound, 



L 



PREDICABLES. 15 

which means a weight and an enclosure ; Ball, 

which means a party for dancing and also any 

spherical body. One of these meanings has as 

good a claim as the other to be considered the 

meaning of the word ; and therefore the word j j 

is said to be Equivocal. ! 

10. In like manner a Predicable, without Analogum. 
altering its sound or written form, may express j 
two meanings different though connected. i 
E. g. the word Foot ; which, when it means a j 
measure, expresses part of the entire meaning j 
which lies in the word ' foot' the human limb ; ! 
namely, its length. Again, Review, when it I 
means an examination of soldiers, expresses 

part of the entire meaning of Review when it 

means an examination of a new book. And 

Review in the latter sense also expresses part : 

of its entire meaning in the former. The 

former of these two examples then is of a 

partial meaning, analogous to an entire meaning ; ; 

the latter of a partial meaning analogous to 

another partial meaning. 

11. Every Predicable, whether Subject orSecunda 
Predicate, must be Secundae Intentionis. nis. See 

12. Bp. Sanderson has defined the Secunda p# fi5, 
Intentio to be the Modus Contemplandi For- 
malis, the way of understanding those things 

i 
i 



16 PREDICABLES. 

about which we are going to reason*. Conse- 
quently he would have defined the Prima In ten tio 
to be the Modus Contemplandi Materialise the 
way of noticing those things about which we are 
not going to reason. 

13. If we take any notice of objects of 
Sensation, about which we are not going to 
reason, we notice them, first, as individual un- 

»«w and known objects of Sensation, occupying a certain 

. space at a certain time ; and secondly, as objects 

of Sensation known to us by their Individuality, 

and by a vast number of facts and qualities 

from time to time observed by us. 

14. If, on the other hand, we endeavour to 
observe or understand these objects of the 
Prima Intentio for the purpose of drawing an 
inference about them ; e. g. as when a farmer, 
artist, or naturalist, takes notice of a horse or 
an ox, then we bring them under the Second 
Intention by subjecting them to those degrees 
of Abstraction which make them Subjects or 
Predicates or Propositions. All the reasonings 
of the agriculturist about these Subjects would 
probably end in assigning to them predicates 
connected with their strength. So that when- 

* When we are going to reason— not when we are going to 
write a treatise on Logic. 



PREDICABLES. 



17 



ever the Subject Horse or Ox has occurred to 
him in the course of his reasoning, it has 
suggested to him not an animal possessed of a 
vast number of qualities, but an animal pos- 
sessing in a certain degree the quality of 
strength. He has therefore made abstraction 
from all the qualities which they possess as 
oxen and horses, or as animals, except the one 
quality of strength. In like manner the Sub- 
ject Horse or Ox, as occurring in the reasonings 
of an artist, means an animal possessing a certain 
degree of picturesqueness. And in proportion 
as the naturalist, who classifies all natural ob- 
jects, is absorbed in the reasonings required for 
this purpose, so will he be likely to contract 
his notion of horses and oxen, and consider 
. them only as animals possessing horns, hoofs, or 
teeth, of a certain kind. 

15. The most educated man is he who is 
capable of discerning most Second Intentions (Append, 
in the things which he observes; to discern * ote *' 
most qualities in them on which reasonings 
may fasten. But each of his separate trains of 
reasoning on any subject must depend on 
some one quality, or some few qualities, which 
we conceive it to possess, and therefore each 
train hangs on a separate Second Intention. 
c2 






18 PREDICABLES. 

16. When Terms do not represent objects of 
Sensation at all, but objects of our own inward 
perception, e. g. Utility, Discretion, Wisdom, 
Desire, &c. their common use is mostly so 
definite, and restricted to so few qualities, as 
to differ little, if at all, from their use in the 
Secunda Intentio. 

17. And lastly, if any Subject or Predicate 
is made known to us by the immediate power 
of our own minds, e. g. God, truth, eternity, 
equality, relation, proportion, &c. then in it 
the First and Second Intentions absolutely 
coincide; since we have to abstract neither 
Individuality of the Subject, (vov and *<>«,) nor 
any irrelevant qualities, in order to attain the 
sense in which such Terms are used in any 
reasoning whatever. 



CHAP. IV. 

ABSTRACTION. 

1. Abstraction is the process by which weAbstrac- 
notice some part or parts of the nature of an 
individual thing or object of Sensation*, without 
noticing for the time any other part or condition 

of its nature. Its object as an instrument of 
reasoning is to notice those parts of the nature 
of several things in which they agree with one 
another. In so doing we are said to abstract 
their points of agreement from their points of 
difference b . 

2. Its first degree is the Abstraction from from *oD 
Individuality (ttov and wore) in which it is incon- * : 
ceivable that any two objects of Sensation should 
agree. This gives the Logical Subject, or Nomen 
Logicum ; i. e. a class of things constituted 

• No qualities but those which we derive from objects of 
Sensation afford a complete example of all the processes of 
Abstraction. Subjects or Predicates which come to us from 
any other source can of course undergo no Abstraction from 
mv and irorh* 

b Not their differences from their agreements. 



~y 



20 ABSTRACTION. 

by their possession of very many qualities in 
see p. 57. common, with which qualities any qualities 
henceforward to be observed will coexist. E. g. 
If from any observed Horse or Ox we abstract 
its vov and wore, it becomes to us not a single 
animal but a representative of its Species, a Sub- 
ject made what it is by the possession of certain 
see p. 28. kind qualities. From the individual Caesar in 
like manner we may abstract his vov and xori . 
Then his name becomes a Nomen Logicum, 
implying all persons whatever (if there are any 
such) who possess all the same qualities which 
Caesar possesses, 
from many 3. Its second degree is the Abstraction from 
q toes : this Subject of all qualities except those which 
involve some other quality. E. g. in speaking 
of ' this tyrant,' I abstract not only from his 
Individuality, but from many of his qualities, 
see p. 57. when I say, ' This tyrant is odious.' In fact, 
I think of none of his qualities except those 
which make up his tyrannicalness, and involve 
his being odious, 
from all 4. Its third degree is the Abstraction from 
quality 6 : "H ^^ an< * a ^ qualities which we know of in 
Individuals except one single quality. E. g. 
when I am thinking of a field, I may forbear 
from noticing its vou and woti, its shape, its 



mmm 



ABSTRACTION. 



21 



value, and in fact any consideration whatever 
about it except its being green. This gives 
a Logical Predicate, but not a. distinct one ; 
inasmuch as some fields are more, some less 
green. 

5. The fourth step, therefore, is the Abstrac-from de- 
tion of degrees in a Predicate ; e. g. our noticing 1srees ' 
that many things are green, without noticing 

that one is more so, another less. This gives a 
distinct Predicate. 

6. Lastly, when we assume some invisible 
cause or quality, such as greenness or valour, to Qualities 
account for a thing's being green or resisting 8 tracto. 
danger, we get a quality * in Abstracto e ;' a Predi- 
cate which has become a Subject. This kind of 
assumption is convenient from the difficulty of 
using (especially in English) such expressions 

as to oarofoutTixov fnflavov ear), or Bonum est ju- 
cundum. 

7. The conditions under which Terms can be Prcedica- 
Praedicabilia — able that is to enter into Propo- 
sitions which shall again become parts of infer- 
ences — are now shewn to be, 



c In Concrete ; capable of being attributed to a Subject — 
Sua natura implicitum subjecto. In Abstracto ; not capable 
of this any longer— Jam subjecto exemptum — completely 
abstract. 



22 ABSTRACTION. 

u. For a Subject. That it should be Nomen 
Logicum, Univocum, Secundae Intentio- 
nis. 

fl. For a Predicate. That it should be Vox 
Communis, Univoca, Secundae Intentionis. 



CHAP. V. 

LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS IN TERMS. 

1. The third and fourth chapters have fully 
answered one of the two main questions of the p. 10. 
first part of Logic. We have now to investigate 

the logical means for reducing to Distinctness 
any indistinct term, whatever be the kind of 
meaning which it expresses. 

2. This question is already answered in part ; 
since the two last processes of Abstraction are 
adequate means for reducing indistinct Predi- 
cates to Distinctness. What remains is therefore 
to enquire how indistinct Subjects be reduced 
to Distinctness. 

3. We may be indistinct either as to the 
meaning of the Name which expresses a Subject, 
or as to the nature of the Thing or Subject, or 
as to both at once. Real knowledge of a Sub- 
ject may go along with indistinctness about its 
Name; because we may not know that the 
name applies to this Subject. Ileal ignorance 
of the Subject may go along with distinctness 
about the Name ; because an erroneous applica- 



k 



24 LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS IN TERMS. 

tion of the name may still be distinct. But, for 
the most part, our idea of the Name and of the 
Thing are both indistinct at once and in the 
same degree. 

4. Any clear statement which we believe 
about the Subjects denoted by a Term or the 
qualities which it implies is enough to produce 
Nominal Distinctness as to the Term. Such 

Definitio a statement is called either a Nominal Definition, 
because it marks out a certain number of quali- 
ties which the Term is supposed to imply ; or a 
Nominal Division, because it divides from all 
other existing Subjects a certain Class of Sub- 
jects supposed to be denoted by the Term. 
£• g. Red is the colour which we see on fine 
summer evenings in the sky. 

5. Of course any Definition which makes the 
Nature of the Subject distinct is a Nominal 
Definition also ; for in doing this it necessarily 
explains the Term commonly used to signify 
this Subject. But not all Nominal Definitions 
explain the nature of the Thing or Subject. 
E. g. 

a. Mere synonyms. Valour is bravery. 

0. Some etymological explanations. E. g. 

Valour is that which avails. 
y. Mere descriptive hints. Procrastination 

is the thief of time. 



wpiwwiitw 



•I* 



CHAR VI. 

LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS AS TO THE NATURE 
OF THINGS. 

1. But, secondly, our notion of the Nature Indistinc- 
of the Tiling may be too indistinct for the 
general purposes of reasoning. That is, we may 
not have realized what its most important quali- 
ties are ; those which determine its place in the 
world ; those which lie most at the root of its 
likenesses and unlikenesses with all other things, 
and are therefore seen to give rise to the most • 
numerous and connected reasonings about it. 

2. It is obvious, that to have realized these 
qualities in any Subject or Species, implies that 
we possess complete knowledge about it ; that 
is, that we have compared it with all other 
Subjects or Species whatever. On the other 
hand, it is impossible to do this really : inasmuch 
as we cannot have observed so many things. 
The question is then, first, whether there are 
any Logical marks applicable to all Subjects or 
Species, whereby we may know that we have 

D 



mm** 



26 



LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS 



Definitio virtually compared them with all other Species 
whatever. And secondly, if there are any such 
marks, how are they to be made to distinguish 

(Append, one Subject or Species from all others. 

3. We have virtually compared a Species 
with all others, if we have fully compared it 
with the Species most nearly allied to it. In 
indicating all the agreements and all the differ- 
ences between, e. g. the Species Man and the 
Species Chimpanzee, we shall a fortiori have 
indicated the agreements and differences between 
the Species Man and all the Species which re- 
semble him less than the Chimpanzee does. 
For many of the likenesses and all the unlike- 
nesses between the Species Man and the Species 
Chimpanzee will be unlikenesses between the 
two Species Man and Worm. In like manner 
we shall have distinguished him from all higher 
kinds which in any way resemble him ; e. g. from 
all other living beings, from all other organised 
beings, &c. &c. 

Genus. 4. If the two Species Man and Chimpanzee 

have so many qualities in common as to be not 
easily distinguishable, it is certain that some of 
the fundamental qualities of both kinds will be 
found among their points of resemblance. We 
should sadly mutilate our notion of Mankind if 



r 



; I 

i : 



AS TO THE NATURE OF THINGS. 



27 



:ir 



we left out all those innumerable qualities in 
which they resemble the Chimpanzee, and which 
are summed up in one word when we call them 
both Animals. This quality or sum of qualities, 
in which two related kinds agree with one 
another, is said to constitute their Genus or 
higher kind. 

5. Much more, on the other hand, should we Differen- 
mutilate our notion of Mankind, if we left out* 1 * 

all the innumerable points in which their reason 
excels the Chimpanzee's instinct ; and which we 
sum up in one word when we call him Rational. 
This quality or sum of qualities, in which two 
related kinds differ one from the other, is called 
their Differentia. 

6. When we say that the Differentia sums 
up Propria and the Genus Accidents, it should 
be clearly understood, that the Differential 
quality is the cause of all Propria which are 
summed up under it, but the Generic quality 
is not the cause of all Accidents. Human 
reason is the cause of our being able to adapt 
means to ends, perceiving tilings to be ridiculous, 
and the like. But our animal nature, our 
possession of organised life and motion, cannot 
be said to be the cause of our wanting food, 
feeling desire, &c. &c. The Generic qualities 



:i 



vm—mmmMsmm 






28 LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS 

are therefore said to constitute the material* 

part of the Essence, that which is not the 

subject of Science at all, and seldom the subject 

of Reasoning. The Differential qualities are 

called the formal part of the Essence, because 

they are those in virtue of which the Species 

becomes a subject of Science and of consecutive 

Reasoning. 

Specie*— 7. AU the important qualities of Mankind, 

^J?' all which lie much at the root of their like- 

nesses and unlikenesses with other kinds, and 

are apt to give rise to much reasoning about it 

as compared with other kinds, must, if our 

summary has been correct, be implied when we 

say that Man is a Rational Animal. In other 

words, the qualities of the Genus, and those of 

the Differentia, together make up the whole of 

those which constitute the Species, or lowest 

Kinds. 

Proprium. 8. Any single quality out of the many 

summed up under the Differentia, or any 

quality which we could at once infer to belong 

to a Species, so soon as we know its Differentia, 

» Materia— those qualities which, like the distribution of 
matter in the Universe, cannot be accounted for, and if 
measured will lead to no scientific consequences. Forma — 
those qualities which, like the forces in the Universe, can be 
measured, and afford subjects for scientific reasoning. 



AS TO THE NATURE OP THINGS. 



29 



is called a Proprium to that Species. E. g. The 
power of cooking meat is a Proprium to the 
Species Man ; because the moment that we are 
aware that Man is rational, we are aware that 
he can adapt means to ends, and cooking is 
adapting means to ends. Or rather, the ca- 
pacity of adapting means to ends without limit 
was one of those summed up by us when we 
called him Rational. 

9. All other qualities or facts, by which either Acrid*™, 
the Species or any of the Subjects denoted by 

it are known to us, are Accidents of the Kind or 
of its single members. 

10. Accidents are either Separable or In- 
separable. 

1 1 . Separable Accidents are, 

«. Any of the single qualities summed up Separable, 
under the Genus. E. g. Passionateness, 
Hunger, Desire, &c. which are qualities 
in Man summed up in his animal nature ; 
or again, any of the single qualities in a 
Subject which are unconnected with either 
its Generic or Differential qualities. E. g. 
Acuteness, Poeticalness, Versatility, Know- 
ledge of Grammar, Political Existence, &c. 
These are separable both from the Species 
and from its single members. For the 
d2 






\ 



I Hrt pi m i PH4JHMU4 



T^r*s>mrrf, »% t*ww» .g sp r qyr yr . 



J 



30 LOGICAL DISTINCTNESS 

Species would not become another Species 

by their absence ; nor would any member 

or Subject be excluded from the Species 

for want of them. 

/3. Any of those facts which are happening 

or will happen to this or that member of 

the Species; from whom they are Separable 

because they may be intercepted, so as not 

to happen at all. E. g. Being of this or 

that age, Turning grey, &c. 

Insepara- 12. Inseparable Accidents are those facts 

which have happened in past time to some 

member of the Species. So that they have 

become Inseparable 1 * from him, because they 

cannot now be recalled ; though neither these 

nor any other facts can have any relation at all 

to the Species, from which time and space have 

been abstracted. E. g. The fact of having 

b There are three ways in which a Predicate may be con- 
ceived of as Necessary to its Subject. First, if it is an 
Essential or Formal Quality. This is Formal Necessity. 
Secondly, as being on inseparable deduction from some 
Essential or Formal Quality. This is Natural Necessity. 
Thirdly, as being incapable of boing denied to it hence- 
forward. Tliis is Necessity of Fact. The first Necessity is 
expressed when we say that a Quality is Generic or Specific ; 
the second, when we call it a Proprium ; the third, when we 
say that a Fact has become an Inseparable Accident. For 
this remark the writer is indebted to a friend. 



L 



AS TO THE NATURE OF THINGS. 



31 



been bom at Mantua to Virgil, has no con- 
ceivable relation to him as one of the Species 
Man ; while from him the individual it is 
inseparable, because incapable of being now 
recalled. 



qwwpwtrmpy n w wn 1 1 un» ..^ 



CHAP. VII. 

HIGHER AND SUBALTERN KINDS. 

1. Two Subjects may agree together in beiug 
members of one Kind, but differ from each other 
in being the one a member, and the other not a 
member, of some other Kind. E. g. Two sounds 
may have in common all their various qualities 
which belong to them as sounds ; and yet only 
one of them may have those other various 
qualities which belong to the Kind called 
Musical Sounds. 

2. On the other hand, two Subjects may 
agree together in being members both of a 
higher and a lower Kind. E. g. Two sounds 
may be both of them Musical Sounds ; that is, 
they may each of them belong to the Kind 
which we call Sounds, and also to that lower 
Kind which we call Musical Sounds. If so, 
they belong also to yet higher Kinds, that of 
Vibratory Motions, that of Motions, &c. 

8. The whole series of Kinds, to which any 
Subject belongs are called its Cognate Genera. 
A Kind lower than any other given Kind is 



HIGHER AND 8U BALTIC UN KINDS. 



called Subaltern to that with which it is com- 
pared. 

4. Every higher Kind requires fewer quali- 
ties or Predicates as conditions of membership 
tlian a lower one does ; and therefore is able to 
embrace more Subjects or members in it. E. g. 
for a thing to be a Motion requires fewer 
qualities than for it to be a Vibratory Motion — 
and tliis again fewer qualities than for it to be 
a Sound or Vibratory Motion affecting the ear, 
&c. &c. Consequently, the number of Things 
or Subjects which we call ' motions' is greater 
than the number of those which we call Vi- 
bratory Motions, Sounds, or Musical Sounds. 

5. Hence when the Genus or higher Kind Totum lo 
in said to be a Totum Logicum* as respects fflcu,n# 
its related Species or Subaltern Kinds, the 
meaning is, that it must necessarily denote a 
greater number of Subjects than the Species 

docs. And when the Species or lower Kind 

is said to be a Totum Metaphysicum as re- metaphysi- 

spects its Genus or higher Kind, the meaning 

is, that it must needs imply more qualities than 

the Genus does. 

• MotnphyHicuiu — as respects the material or natural 
quuUticH which it implies. Logicum — as respects the quality 
of extent or number which it derives from the Understanding 
alone. 



j^Jw»M*> V 4 rrg^7 



CHAP. VIII. 

SUMMUM GENUS. 

Summom 1. Unless every Subject may belong to an 
unlimited number of Kinds, there must be some 
Highest Kind to which it belongs. That is, 
some Kind containing so many members, that 
if it contained more, it would contain all things 
which are ; and implying so few qualities, that 
if it implied fewer, it would imply none but 
such as are common to all things which are. 
The example taken in the last chapter was that 
of Musical Sounds, and the Highest Kind to 
which they were there referred was that of 
Motions. If there is any yet higher Kind to 
which Motions may be referred, it is Position \ 
By Position, then, we mean only one quality, 
over and above that of Existence, which all 
Things whatever possess ; and are incapable of 
farther analysis. Any kind of Things which 
had fewer qualities would have no more than 
the quality of Existence, which is common to 
* Since Motion is Position modified in successive Time. 



vil 



SUMMUM GENUS. 35 

all things whatever. Consequently, by referring 
any thing to a higher Kind than Position, we 
should not be remedying Indistinctness about 
its nature; for Things must be distinguished 
by means of some quality, which one has and 
the other has not. 

2. Again, any higher Kind of Things, as 
denoting more Members or Subjects than 
Position denotes, would in like manner denote 
all things which are. The only higher Band 
would be, that which embraces all existing 
Things or Subjects. By including any given 
Subject in the universal body of Entia, we 
could of course throw no light upon its re- 
lations with any other Subject whatever. 

3. The Summa Genera or Categories, enu- Categories, 
merated by Aristotle, are ten in number. j 
Substance, Relation, Quantity, Quality, Place, I 
Time, Order of Parts, State of Being, Action, f 
Passion. Each of these implies one quality, and 
no more. Each quality is incapable of farther 
analysis; and so fundamentally different from 
all the others, that we are not often at a loss 
which of these is the Summum Genus for any j 
given Subject or Species. E. g. if we were 

defining Republic, we should obviously begin | 

by calling it a Relation between man and man. \ 



»» » a m ** n mm \ + if * *tfma * k i k yu , tf.g ^ T . ws^- .anw a; > ^ ss^-^r^i '? ??.z**' 



! 



36 SUMMUM GENUS. 

If we were defining an Injury, we should say 
that is an Action subversive of certain Rights. 

4. The only difficulty arises when two or 
more of these Summa Genera are related to 
one Subject, This may easily be the case, 
inasmuch as one Thing or Subject may often 
be endowed with two or more sets of qualities 
fundamentally distinct one from another. In 
defining Proportion, for instance, we should 
evidently refer it to the two Categories of 
Quantity and Relation ; making one of these 
its Summum Genus, and the other its highest 
Differentia. Paternity again is a Quality 
possessed by one person relatively to another. 
Oppositeness is a Relation in Place between 
two Subjects. Succession is Relation in Time. 
Reciprocation is Relative Action or Passion. 
Motion, as observed above, is Position modified 
in Time. 

5. It very often happens, that distinctness in 
a Definition is quite sufficiently provided for, 
without referring the Subject to be defined to 
such high Genera as the Categories. For in- 
stance, instead of defining a Republic to be a 
Relation, &c. &c. between man and man, we 
should simply say that it is a Political Consti- 
tution, in which all the members have power 



> U 'WW 



SUMMUM GENUS. 37 ;¦ 

I'- 

proportional to their real claims, or the like; i; 

making Political Constitution its Summum |j 

Genus; which it may well be allowed to be, \ 

since the Qualities implied by the term are j 

fully understood and agreed upon by all rea- j 

soners. ! 



i 



i 



^ : • 

* '• ' 

; ;;, 



CHAP. IX. 

INFIMA SPECIES. 

Infima 1. Unless any given Subject may belong to 

peCM *' an unlimited number of Kinds, there must also 
be some lowest Kind, or Infima Species, to 
which it belongs; some Kind implying so many 
qualities, that if it implied more, they would 
not be Kind-qualities any longer; and denoting 
so few Members or Subjects, that if its Subjects 
undergo any farther process of distinction one 
from another, it must be on the ground either 
of their Accidental Qualities, or of their Indi- 
viduality, E. g. If Musical Sounds are sub- 
divided, they must be distinguished as being 
high or low, sharp or fiat, Sounds; or else 
because they occur at different times and in 
different places, and therefore are not indi- 
vidually the same Sound. 

2. Sand-qualities are either Generic or Diffe- 
rential. And we have seen, that the mark of 
a Differential Quality is its causing very many 
Propria, and that of a Generic Quality its 



INFIMA SPECIES. 



39 



¦! 



summing up very many Accidents. Height or 
lowness, sharpness or flatness, if they are Kind- 
qualities at all, must consequently sum up 
either many Propria or many Accidents. It is 
plain, however, that they do neither of these ; 
but are Simple Accidents, looking to and 
expressing nothing beyond themselves. Sub- 
jects then do not differ in Kind, because one 
of them has any one of these Qualities, and 
another has not, Therefore Musical Sounds 
are a Real or Infima Species; distinguished 
from all other Sounds by a Differentia, which 
does involve many Propria, but not admitting 
any new subdivision by means of any fresh 
quality, as pregnant and differential. 



fc„~A 



¦¦¦ i i tmmmmmmmm^mmt^m 



, !¦ 



Logica. 



CHAP. X. 

DISTINCTNESS BY LOGICAL DIVISION OK 
CLASSIFICATION. 

1. Having ascertained these Logical or In- 
tellectual marks by which the most important 
Qualities in any Subject may be recognised, 
we are enabled to use them for the purpose of 
reducing Indistinct Subjects to distinctness by 
Logical Division and Definition, 
piviuo 2. We shall have fully distinguished any 

given Species from the Species most nearly 
related to it, (and consequently from all others,) 
when we have disengaged or divided all the 
Subjects denoted by it from the Subjects of 
the Summum Genus to which it belongs. The 
Species Republic, for instance, is perfectly 
distinguished from all other Governments, 
when we have separated all possible Republics 
from all other possible Relations. 

3. That is, we have gradually to separate 
from the Summum Genus all those members 



DISTINCTNESS BY LOGICAL DIVISION. 



41 



of it which do not enter into the Infima Species 
Republic. And none will enter into that 
Species, unless they have those qualities which 
our political knowledge shews us to be Kind- 
qualities of Republics. Many Relations will 
be put aside as not being human, not between 
man and man ; many human Relations will be 
put aside as not being social; and, finally, 
many Relations of a social kind between man 
and man are not Subjects in the Species Re- 
public, because they are not on terms of strict 
Political equality. After this, all remaining 
Relations will be Republics. And we can 
realise to ourselves the nature and drift of the 
institutions in any popular state, by classifying 
it along with the known Class or Species Re- 
publics. 

4. This process is naturally called Division, 
because it makes successive divisions of the 
Subjects denoted by the name of the Summuin 
Genus. 

5. It is also naturally called Logical Division. 
First; because that which it divides or lessens at 
every step is the Extent, or Logical quality, in see p. 33, 
Subjects. Secondly, because the Division at 

each step is Logically, that is, self-evidently, 
exhaustive. 

Eg 



I 

j 



h ; 

I . | 42 DISTINCTNESS BY LOGICAL 

6. The second step of the Division in §. 3. is 
that in which human Relations are divided into 
those which are social, and those which are not 
social. Taking this for an example, we observe 
that it is self-evidently exhaustive of all human 
Relations. Every one, however ignorant of 
Political Science or any other Science, would 
acknowledge that all human Relations must be 
either social or not social. Consequently, if 
Republics are human Relations at all, it is 
plain that they must be either Social or not 
Social. That is, we have divided human 
Relations into two lower Kinds, one or other 
of which must necessarily include Republics as 
one of its subaltern Kinds. If on the other 
hand the Division had not been exhaustive in 
this way, we might have in fact divided Human 
Relations into two Kinds, neither of which 
would have included Republics as one of its 

: Subaltern Kinds. E. g. into those which are 

Physical, and those which are Moral, Relations. 

7. Other Divisions might be exhaustive in 
fact. Our knowledge of Political Science might 
assure us, that all Human Relations are made 
either for the sake of preserving life, or for the 
sake of increasing the comforts of life. But 
such a Division is not self-evidently exhaustive. 



DIVISION OR CLASSIFICATION. 



43 



There may conceivably be human Relations 
with other objects. But the steps of a Logical 
Division, so accurate as to be a type for all 
accurate subdivision, must be Dichotomies. 
The whole Kind, that is, must be so divided 
into two Lower Kinds, that whatever Subject 
is not included in one of these Lower Kinds, is 
self-evidently included in the other. 

8. Hence, in the clear language of the oldFinitum. 
writers on Logic, a Logical Division was said 

to have on one side a Nomen Finitum; the 
name of an exhaustible Kind, that of Social 
Relations. A Politician of sufficient experience 
and sufficient imagination might possibly register 
all existing Social Relations, and devise all which 
are conceivable. And on the other side a Nomen 
Infinitum, or inexhaustible Kind, that of Re- Infinitum, 
lations not social. For there is no conceivable 
limit to the Relations of Sympathy, Influence, 
Race, Manners, &c. &c. which may exist be- 
tween man and man. 

9. In such a series of Cognate Genera as Append, 
that we have been investigating, it is plain that 

the Subjects denoted by each Subaltern Kind 
are included in the Subjects denoted by the 
Kind immediately above it. Every Republic 
is one among many Social Relations. Each 



r=r-/ 



i\ 



44 DISTINCTNESS BY LOGICAL DIVISION. 

Kind, in fact, contains among its Subjects the 
Subjects of all the Kinds subaltern to it; and 
ever} f one of the higher Kinds may be a Genus 
including the Infima Species. 



CHAP. XI. 

DISTINCTNESS BY LOGICAL DEFINITION. 

1. Since the Infima Species Republic is in-Definitio 
eluded in its Summum Genus, it must possess ***** 
the quality constituting this Summum Genus; tee p. 35. 
that is, it must be a Relation. And since it 
is included in all the Kinds subaltern to that 
Summum Genus, it must also possess the 
Qualities constituting these Kinds; that is, it 
must be human, social, and on Terms of strict 
Political Equality. These Qualities, being 
those in virtue of which the Species Republic see p. *6. 
is compared with all other Kinds of Relations, 
must also be those in virtue of which it is 
compared with the Relations most nearly re- 
sembling itself, such as Monarchy and Timo- 
exacy. Therefore these Qualities constitute its 
Logical Definition ; that which makes its nature 
perfectly distinct as respects the Kinds most 
nearly resembling it. 

d. Logical Definition is therefore the process 
of «ddu\p to the one quality implied by the 



46 



DISTINCTNESS BY 



name of the Summum Genus, all those Kind- 
qualities which are necessary to constitute the 
Infima Species to be defined. We see at once 
that a Republic is a Relation. Adding to this 
in succession the farther Qualities of being 
Human, Social, and Politically Equal, we shall 
have registered the whole body of Qualities 
which go to constitute the Species Republic. 

3. Of these Kind-qualities, those will be 
Generic or Material, which sum up many 
see p. 27. Accidents without causing them. Those will 
be Differential or Formal, which sum up and 
cause many Propria. It is plain, that the whole 
body of scientific or practical inferences about 
Republics will rest on the fact, that Republics 
are on Terms of Political Equality. This is 
the part of their nature which makes them what 
they are to the reasoner; their Differentia as 
compared with the Constitution most nearly 
resembling them, and therefore also as com- 
pared with all Constitutions or all Relations. 
Many Qualities, on the other hand, in Re- 
publics are connected with the fact, that they 
are Human and Social Relations. But none of 
the reasoners about Republics will attempt to 
derive any of the Qualities which they admire 
or reprobate from these considerations about it. 



LOGICAL DEFINITION. 



47 



They are material and negative conditions to 
the existence of a Republic ; and are therefore 
rightly said to be its Generic and Material 
Qualities. 

5. In a series of Cognate Genera, all Qualities Append, 
belonging to any higher Kind belong also to all 
the lower Kinds. Consequently, the Infima 
Species possesses the Qualities constituting all 
its higher Kinds. In other words, these Qualities 
are Predicated of the given Subject or Infima 
Species, either as its Propria or Accidents. 



\ 



J 



CHAP. XII. 

DEGREES OF DISTINCTNESS. 

1. So far as we have yet seen, the processes 
of Logical Division and Logical Definition are 
in fact one and inseparable ; because we cannot 
perform the one without at the same time 
performing the other. We could not dis- 
tinguish those Relations which are to be called 
Republics from all other possible Relations, 
without knowing what the qualities are which 
in fact distinguish Republics from all other 
Relations. We divide or classify Republics by 
means of our complete knowledge of the Species 
Republic, and of the qualities which constitute 
it; those qualities which are in fact essential to 
it, and at the root of all its likenesses and un- 
likenesses with other Species, and therefore 
make up its Essential Definition. 

2. It is however possible to make our notion 
of a Species distinct by Logical Division or 
Classification, in two cases in which Essential 
Definition is impossible. 



DEGREES OF DISTINCTNESS. 



49 



3. We may ourselves be ignorant of the true Deftnitio 
Differentia, although it is capable of being talis, 
known, E. g. we might know of a Republic 

only that it is a social relation between man 
and man, which makes individual pomp un- 
welcome. This last quality is not a Differentia, 
but a Proprium, because it is only one of many 
inferences from the fact of Political equality 
in Republics. This Definition is completely 
adequate, if it is true that all Republics dis- 
courage individual pomp, and that no other 
constitution does. But it is only an Accidental 
Definition ; because it defines per Genus et 
Proprium, and a Proprium is no more than an 
Accident, except as deduced from a known 
Differentia. 

4. We may be ignorant of the true Dif- Dofinitio 
ferentia, because it is beyond human know- 
ledge. This is the case in all physical species. 
We can assign no differential qualities in the 
Rafnia or any other species of plants; none 
which sum up and cause all the differences 
manifest between it and other plants. Of such 
species none but a Physical Definition is possible. 
We can make no summary of the differences 
between the Rafnia and any other species; and 
must therefore content ourselves with enume- 

F 



Physica. 



wwpfKanwpssa 



!•! 

I! 
¦J 



50 DEGREES OF DISTINCTNESS. 

rating them to the best of our experience. 
£. g. The Rafnia is a Genus of the class Dia- 
delphia, order Decandria, natural order Legu- 
minosae — having the calix ringent, superior lip 
two-cleft, inferior lip spreading, three-cleft, 
middle segment narrow, pod lanceolated, com- 
pressed*. 

5. A Physical Definition, like an Accidental 
one, is completely adequate to the species 
defined, if it expresses a sufficient number of 
qualities. It denotes all members of that 
Species, and no members of any other Species. 
But both these Definitions express imperfect 
knowledge only, and therefore cannot answer 
all the requirements of Logical Definition. 
Notior per 6. Neither the one nor the other is " Notior 
per se b ." That is, they do not put all the Kind- 
qualities of the Species defined into a form con- 



* In order to understand what is meant by Physical 
Species and their Definition, the reader should consult 
Aristotle's short chapter, i-cpl rod Qvo-ioyvvjxovuv, at the end 
of the Anal. Pr. For more extended information no source 
is so good as LyelTs Geology, vol. iii. 

b Notior per so is opposed to logice notius, and therefore* 
equivalent to Metaphysice notius — giving us more knowledge 
of the natural qualities of the thing denned, of their real 
connection, dependency, and relative importance, than any 
mere familiarity with the thing could do. 



Re. 



mmmmmm^m^mmmm^mm^Fm 



DEGREES OF DISTINCTNESS. 51 



venient for our knowledge; They leave its .j 

Propria in the condition of Accidents, not [j. 

summed up in any Differentia, and deduced It 
from it. 



upw.in'irnri 



PART II. 



CHAP. I. 

LOGICAL JUDGMENTS. 

1. Assertions or Judgments are made in a 
Logical spirit, when they do not contradict any 
other assertion or judgment which we make or 
are prepared to make while we are under the 
same impression. Logical truth is therefore Lo g i cft i 
neither more nor less than consistency, and all A88ertion * 
rules for it will be rules of consistency'. They 
will aim at giving us so clear an impression as 
to the acts of Understanding expressed or im- 
plied in Propositions, as that we may be very 
unlikely ever to contradict ourselves, directly or 
indirectly, in any two assertions which we make 
without having changed our mind. 

* The cose of mere illogical Assumption will be treated of 
under the head of Fallacies. 

F2 



& -¦¦¦*¦>»¦ j,i^iwi 



j 



54 LOGICAL JUDGMENTS. 

False 2. A statement about some mechanical or 

ments may astronomical subject; such as — The force of 
toted D " gravitation, does not vary as the square of the 
distance: may disagree entirely with the facts 
of the Science to which it belongs. — But no one 
would think of calling this an Illogical State- 
ment, unless the person making it had before 
stated either directly or indirectly, that the 
force of gravitation does so vary: or unless 
such a negative statement is inconsistent with 
facts or principles of which he is aware. 

3. The Logical discussion of Propositions or 
Judgments expressed in words, must conse- 
quently resolve itself into two questions. One, 
as to the direct meaning of Propositions, and 
one as to their indirect meaning. 

«. What acts of the Understanding are ne- 
cessarily implied in the form of Propositions 
as distinct from their matter : and how are 
they modified when Propositions differ in 
form one from another ? 
jS. What farther acts of the Understanding 
are directly and logically involved in the 
form of any given Proposition ? 



PPHHPMnffN 



CHAP. II. 

GENERAL IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS. 

1. When we make an Assertion, we express jj^^jj 

an act of the Understanding over and above theAPP* 6 ? 1611 * 

sione ln- 
two processes of Abstraction, whereby we ob- complex* 

tained the Subject and Predicate. 

2. Farther, we express an act of the Under- 
standing over and above the act of observing the 
Subject and Predicate together. That is, W e comple * a - 
settle some Relation between the Subject and 
Predicate. 

8. This Relation is not that of Identity. JJ^f 
When we say in the course of an argument identit y- 
that, Honesty is good policy ; we by no means 
intend to state that these two things are one 
and the same. And when we say, Patriotism is 
indispensable to the welfare of states ; we assert 
no identity between Patriotism as a subject or 
quality in abstracto, and indispensableness to 
the welfare of states as a Predicate or Quality in 
concreto. 



it 






i 



56 GENERAL IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS. 

4. All Propositions assert either a Logical 
Predicate of a Logical Subject, or one Logical 
Subject of another. 

5. From the former of the two examples in 
Logical* §. 3, it appears that some Propositions assert 
tions/ one Logical Subject of another. So also do the 
Append. - following Propositions. All meteoric stones are 

planetary bodies. Some Revolutions are tu- 
mults. Many philosophers are investigators of 
nature. Each of these is the expression of an 
act of Logical Division ; and imports that the 
Subjects denoted by the word Aerolite, are in- 
cluded among the Subjects denoted by the word 
Planet, and the same as some of them ; — that 
some Revolutions are included in the more 
general class of tumults, &c. 
Meuphy- 6. From the latter example in §. 3, it appears 
positions. ^ at other Propositions assert a Logical Predi- 
cate of a Logical Subject. So also do the 
following Propositions. All zinc is malleable. 
Some Republics are unsafe. Commerce tends 

4 This division of Propositions is most important, if we are 
to distinguish the various processes of Reasoning which are 
implied in our use of the various Figures of the Syllogism — 
as that between those of Coexistence and those of Dependence 
is most important for Induction. See pp. 80, 102, 105, &c. 
The terms Logical and Metaphysical, as applied to Pro- 
positions, are explained in the Appendix, Note C. 



GENERAL IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS. 57 

to liberalism. War is unfavourable to general ' ¦ 

education. Drainage is healthy in towns. Lon- ! 

don is overpopulous. Each of these propositions . i 

is the expression of an act of Logical Definition ; i 

for each ascribes to its Subject some quality, ! 

whether a Proposition or on Accident, by the | 

possession of which it might be distinguished I 

from some other Subject; though not of a j 

complete act of Logical Definition such as to ¦ ! 

distinguish it from all other Subjects. 

7. Some Metaphysical Propositions express 
only Coexistence between all the qualities pos- Of Coexist- 
sessed by the Subject, and the one quality enc *' 
expressed by the Predicate. E. g. Some men are See p. 20. 
passionate. Crcsar is valiant. Others express 
Dependence between some particular quality Of De- 
possessed by the Subject, and that which is 1 * 11 ence# 
implied in the Predicate. E. g. Tyrants are 
odious. True philosophers are contented. Any 
given tyrant is odious, because of his tyranny ; 
but any one's being a man is not the cause of 
his pussionatcness. 

8. Both in Logical and in Metaphysical Pro- 
positions a Term of greater extent is predicated Predicate 
of one of less extent. In those of the former tensive*" 
kind, a Subject really or conceivably more ex- 
tensive, includes one less extensive. In those 



v. 

I 1 .- 



58 GENERAL IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS. 

i of the latter kind, a Quality is predicated of 

j some Subject. But it is more extensive than 

i , its Subject, because other Subjects besides this 

j : one possess, or may be conceived to possess, this 

j | Quality. Hence the Subject in a Proposition 

i ; , is called its Minor Term ; the Predicate its 

\\\ Major Term. 

9. The acts of the Understanding, whereby a 
Predicate is asserted to belong to a Subject, or 
| ' : one Subject is included in another more exten- 

5\ i Copula, sive Subject, are both expressed by the Copula 

]•-.' * is/ In like manner the exclusion of one 

;;; Subject from another, or the denial of a quality 

¦ | ¦ to a Subject, are both expressed by the Copula 

* is not.* In either case the act is called Predi- 
cation ; and its result a Proposition, Logical or 
Metaphysical, as the case may be. 



|f: 




! i 



'.; 



CHAR III. j'j 

IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS AFFBCTBO BT THEIR ¦'¦( 

QUALITY AND QUANTITY. | 

• i ' •¦ 

J-f 

1 • Propositions are Affirmative or Negative. Affirm* 

The Copula ' is' expresses either that the Pre- J 

dicate is a Kind including the Subject, or that \ t 

it is one of its qualities, coexistent or involved. \ 

E. g. All Musical Sounds are Vibrations. Oold > 

is red. Overfreedom is perilous. ' ! 

2. The Copula 'is not' implies either that Negative*. * 
the Predicate is not a Kind including the Sub- » 
ject, or that it is not one of its qualities. £. g. ¦ ¦ f 
Gold is not a vegetable. No useful currency 

is inconvertible. ' | 

3. Being Affirmative or Negative is called Qualitas. V 
the Quality of Propositions. For it is in fact 

their only Differential Quality, the one from 

which all their Propria may be deduced. j 

4. Propositions are Universal, Particular, or 

Singular. ! 

&• Universal Propositions, if Logical, imply Uiiiver- | 

that tho Kind denoted by the Subject is either 



I 



j 60 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS AFFECTED 

J ! all included in the Kind denoted by the Pre- 

f j dicate, or all excluded from it. E. g. All 

Exchequer Bills are government securities. 
! No Land is personal property. If Meta- 

physical, they mean that the Predicate is always 
or is never a Quality of the Subject. E. g. All 
Foreign Trade is advantageous. No Protective 
Duties are efficient. 
Particu- 6. Particular Propositions imply that some 
* members of one Kind are or are not included in 
another. E.g. Some Christians are fanatics. Some 
Jews are not formalists. Or else that some mem- 
bers of a given Kind have or have not a given 
Quality. E. g. Some Proportions are inverse. 
Some Arithmetical Rules are not scientific. 

7. Involved Propositions are those which 
having such signs as Many, Few, Most, &c. 
before the Subject. When, for instance, we 
say that, Most fools are favoured by fortune, 
we mean, first, that some fools are so favoured 
and some not, and secondly, that the former 
class are more numerous than the latter. When 
we say, Few conquerors are humble-minded, 
we mean that some conquerors are and others 
are not humble-minded, and involve the as- 
sertion that they are seldomer humble than 
proud. The Logical force of Involved Pro- 



i. , 






BY THEIR QUALITY AND QUANTITY. 61 

positions is to be found in one of the two 
Particular Propositions which they imply — and 
in the affirmative or negative, according to the 
meaning. They are therefore accounted to be 
Particulars. 



CHAP. IV. 

SINGULAR PROPOSITIONS. 

Singulars. 8. Singular Propositions are those of which 

866 p ' the Subject is a Singular Noun or Universal 

J ': in the form of an individual. E. g. This Tri- 

¦ .< angle is equilateral. This Trade is profitable* 

.] Faraday is learned. 

j 9. As the examples just given would un- 

j questionably be Particulars of the narrowest 

1 possible kind, if not used in an argument, it is 

] necessary to enquire into the nature of that 

*• Univereals Second Intention which makes them Universals 

l in ftrgu- 

j ; : ment in argument — as when we infer that, This Tri- 

, . angle is equilateral, and therefore equiangular ; 

] or that, Faraday is learned, and therefore he is 

I interesting. 

I 10. Every geometrical student will allow, that 

j when we say, This Triangle is equilateral, 

i therefore it is equiangular, we mean, Such 

l triangles as this, triangles whose sides have 

J this relative direction, are equilateral, and 

* ; therefore they are equiangular. For this is the 

\ 



li i 



SINGULAR PROPOSITIONS. 



63 



form in which Universals, the only geometrical 
Conclusions, are invariably proved. The Pro- 
position, therefore, though not Universal, as 
respects the species Triangle, is Universal as 
respects this kind of triangle ; for it ascribes 
equilateralness to all such triangles as this. 

11. It follows, that when we say, This Trade 
is profitable, therefore it is to be pursued ; we 
mean, Such Trade as this is profitable ; therefore 
it is to be pursued. As a matter of fact, no trade 
can possibly agree with this in all the qualities, 
positive and negative, which make it profitable, 
and therefore no other is exactly such a Trade. 
But if there were any such, then, This Trade 
would be a Noraen Logicum including it as 
well. Consequently, though the Proposition, 
This Trade is profitable, therefore, &c. is not 
Universal as respects the species Trade, it is 
Universal and exhaustive as regards Trade of 
this exact sort. 

12. No one in like manner can agree with 
Faraday in all the qualities, positive and ne- 
gative, which go along with his learning. If 
there were any such, his name would be a 
Nomen Logicum including them. Conse- 
quently, though not exhaustive of the species 
Man, the Proposition, Faraday is learned, (and 



r 



I; 



M 



i i 

I 



G4 SINGULAR PROPOSITIONS. 

therefore interesting,) is exhaustive of all who 
profess the peculiar qualities of Faraday. 

13. This difficult subject may be understood 
more clearly, if we consider, that in reasoning, 
the tendency of the mind is to generalise all its 
terms to the utmost limit of which they are 
capable. Our knowledge of every Subject about 
which we reason, becomes a type for fresh con- 
clusions about other Subjects exactly or very 
nearly resembling it. An argument, however 
special its immediate conclusion may be, has 
not done its work, unless it has established some 
principle or generalization capable of directing 
us in parallel reasoning. And in framing its 
separate Propositions, we desire to make each of 
them express a truth which has something 
general in it. Even such a Proposition as, 
Faraday is learned, endeavours to clothe itself 
in the form of a principle. The natural ten- 
dency of our mind is to think of only those 
qualities in Faraday which connect themselves 
with his learning, whether as causes or effects ; 
and to have them in mind when we use his 
name as that of a learned man, or make any 
assertion about his learning '. 

* To this view it may be objected, that Particular Pro- 
positions do not aim at any generalisation, or imply any 




SINGULAR PROPOSITIONS. 65 

14. Hence chiefly arises the importance of 
the Scholastic doctrine about the Second In- p. 15. 

tention. What it ought to teach us is, first, U 

that the Subjects of Propositions in an argument )\ 

imply mostly very much fewer qualities than if 

the same terms would out of argument, when 'j: 

they express mere intuitions from which nothing * j;i 

has been abstracted. And, secondly, that the \\ 
qualities which they come in this way practically j 

to single out and hold up to view, are mostly r 

those which we consider to have the closest ';. 

natural connection with the one quality implied , ' j 

in the Predicate, and to be probably the cause f j 

of its belonging to the Subject. The former of j \ 

these obvious truths is implied, when we are j | 

said in argument to re-form (recudere) the ', j 

natural meaning of our Terms ; the latter when j \ 

we are said to adapt them (moderari) for the j j 

purposes of the argument in which we are .! j 
engaged. f 

thing beyond what they state. Tins of course is the case ; j 

but then the very fact that they are particular and exceptional j •¦ 

Propositions, proves that no dependence can be established '] ; 

betweon the qualities implied by the Subject and the one 
expressed in the Predicate. If I say that, Some philosophers 
are discontented, I imply that there is, as for as I know, no 
dependence between philosophy and content, or between 
philosophy and discontent. But this is not the case when 
I say that Carlyle and Wordsworth are contented. • 
G-2 



... CHAP. V. 

INDEFINITE PROPOSITIONS. 

.!' Indefinite. 15. Propositions are said to be Indefinite in 

Quantity, when there is no sign to inform us 

! whether they are Universal or Particular. E. g. 

Equilateral triangles are equiangular. Republics 

i are given to change. Neither of these Propo- 

j sitions is preceded by any sign of quantity, 

f such as 'all,' or 'some;' and therefore it is 

j uncertain to what extent we may consider them 

I valid; whether as applied to all Triangles, or 

j Republics, or only to some of each Kind. 

ex materia 16. Whether they are one or the other Sub- 
jectively, that is, in the mind of him who makes 
them, must depend on the degree of his know- 
; ledge, and on his intention in making them. 

; If he is ignorant whether all Republics are or 

• are not given to change, or if again he only 

I intends to assert this quality of a certain 

number of Republics, then the Proposition 
which he makes is particular. If he knows 



INDEFINITE PROPOSITIONS. 67 

this fact, and intends to assert it about all 
Republics, then his Proposition is Universal. 

17. Whether they are one or the other Ob- 
jectively, that is, whether human knowledge is 
sufficient to make them Universals — whether 
they ought to be Universals, or can be more 
than Particulars, must depend on the degree of 
knowledge which the best informed of men 
have yet gained about their subjects. If any 
one knows as much about Republics as educated 
men know about Triangles, it is plain that the 
Proposition, Republics are liable to change, 
may be Universal, as well as the Proposition, 
Equilateral Triangles are equiangular. If, on 
the other hand, no one knows enough about 
Republics to declare from their essential 
qualtoesNa 'farther Proprium of changeableness, 
it is plain that the Proposition, Republics are 
changeable, is to the whole human race a 
Particular Proposition in the present state of 
their knowledge; since its Subject does not 
signify all Republics existing or possible. 



i : 



|! 



I 

I! ! 



1 . 
i 

\ '¦ 

! f 

\ i 

V. 



I 



Modals. 



CHAP. VI. 

IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS AFFECTED BY THEIK 
MATTER OR MODALITY. 

1. Propositions may be simply Assertory, 
like most of those which we have examined as 
yet ; or they may be Necessary, or they may be 
Contingent. 
T 2. Necessary; that is, Universally affirmed 

or denied in consequence of some Universal 
law applying to them. So that their Copula 
is in fact ' must be/ or ' cannot be.' E. g. The 
circumference of a circle is thrice its diameter. 
Loricall • *• ^ e y are Necessary Logically, that is, from 
the simple laws of the Reason, if denying 
them would lead to a contradiction in 
terms. E. g. all Republics are govern- 
ments. Any one who denies this, contra- 
dicts the general law of reason, that things 
) cannot at the same time be and not be 

.\ ? another thing. For the only assignable 

i meaning of Republic is, A Government of 

1- _ / men by themselves, &c. 

j 



! i; 



IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 



69 



/3. They ore Necessary from the subject- From 
matter, if our knowledge of the subject-matter, 
matter is so complete, that we can assert 
an universal and invariable relation between 
the Subject and Predicate. This is the case 
in all Subjects which admit of strictly 
Mathematical treatment. For in these 
the originally assumed premisses are self- p- 162. 
evident principle", allowing of no ex- 
ception ; and all subsequent assertions 
are consequences deduced from them by 
processes of strict reasoning, and therefore 
Universal likewise. All the Propositions 
stated in any strictly Mathematical work 
on Geometry, Mechanics, Astronomy, 
Electricity, Optics, or Thermology, are 
therefore Necessary Propositions; because, 
being asserted, they cannot but be asserted 
Universally. Any Proposition distinctly 
inferred from first principles of Meta- 
physics, is also a Necessary Proposition. 
E, g. Every human soul is indiscerp- 
tible. 
3. Negative Propositions which are Necessary, Impossi- 
that is, such as if made at all must be made 
universally, are sometimes called Impossible 
Propositions. They are 



B 



Ji 



n 



n 



H 



i » 



70 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 

«. 'Negative statements of Material Prin- 
ciples, E. g. Voids are unnatural. Anni- 
hilation is not to be expected. These are 
equivalent statements to the positive prin- 
ciples, that the Atmosphere is elastic with- 
out limit: and that Things remain the same 
under every change of form. 
jS. Negative Statements of Propositions Lo- 
gically Necessary. Any one who asserts 
that Tyranny is not on terms of Equality, 
makes a Proposition Negative and neces- 
sarily Universal, since to suppose an ex- 
ception to it, would be to suppose a 
contradiction in terms. 
4. The meaning of the name Impossible may 
be discovered by examining the examples under 
either head. For, Tyranny is not on equal 
terms, means Tyranny cannot be on equal 
terms ; and Annihilation is not to be expected, 
means that it is in our belief impossible for 
things to lose their nature in losing their 



! form*. 

i 

i 

f * • Not negative Material Principles ; for nature, of course, 

has no negatives. 

b The term does not mean, as some writers seem to have 
thought, ' incredible, impossible to believe/ but ' resting on 
considerations of impossibility/ 



avian Hi ..¦» 



IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C 71 

5. Propositions are contingent or Problem- Problem- 
atical, when from our defect of knowledge about 
the subject-matter of our reasoning, they ex- 
press only a possible Coexistence or Dependence 
between the Subject and the Predicate. If 
Affirmative, the Copula is ' may be ;' if Nega- 
tive, the Copula is ' may not be/ or ' may be 
not*' E. g. The solar system may be a gradual 
projection from the sun. All the species in the 
world may be the offspring of few primary 
species. Some bad actions may not be dangerous 
to the state. 

6. The Copula * may be/ has, however, two 
meanings in Problematical Propositions. First, 
it may denote that the Proposition is Sub- 
jectively Modal ; that is, that so far as I know, 
the Predicate may include the Subject, or be one 
of its qualities. £. g. Bermuda may be a penal 
settlement. Poverty may be tolerable to many 
men. 

7. Secondly, it may denote that the Proposi- 
tion is objectively • Modal ; that is, that human 

• Any higher degree of Objectiveness than this, any 
vjuostion as to whether this or that Proposition is Modal in 
itaelf and by the law of r.aturo, is irrelevant to a treatise on 
I a^Io— although it may be important elsewhere. The 
U^loiau has only to take account of the imoSJicmtum </ o*r 



'¦! ,: 



a; 



i t 

i ! 



72 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 

knowledge can at present decide no more than 
that the Predicate may include the Subject, or 
be one of its qualities. E. g. Progress and de- 
cline may be a law of human polities. Virtue 

\ ' may be certainly triumphant over vice, even in 

this world d . 
Materia. 8. Being Assertory, Necessary, or Problem- 

f atical, is called the Matter of Propositions, or, 

more accurately, their Modality, The former 

; term was used by those who considered that 

; j certain subjects of reasoning, known by them to 

\ 7 I admit of demonstration, were in their own na- 

1 ... 

j « ! ture, and in virtue of their own qualities, the 

j only subjects to which it could be conceived to 

j . apply; and that all others were in their own 

j * nature Assertory or Problematical, and no more. 

j : They therefore considered 'necessarily equal,* 

; ; to be a Predicate distinct from the Predicate 

]: ! ' ' equal ;' applicable to the Subjects whose nature 

J- ; it is to be necessarily related to Predicates, but 

J ( to no others. 

Modalitas. 9. The latter term is used by those who 



» t 



existing knowledge as to the connexion of given Predicates 
with given Subjects. 

* Both these meanings again are different from the sense 
in the proposition, All mountains may be measured. Here 
' may be' means ' are capable of being/ and the Proposition 
is Assertory, not Problematical. 



H 



ih 






IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 73 

rightly consider, that necessity in reasoning 
depends upon our knowledge of its subject- 
matter, and our consequent power of treating it 
necessarily: that there is no ascertained limit 
between the things which are subjects of science, 

and tbe things which are not: and that large jji 
classes of subjects are continually becoming 
subjects of accurate knowledge, and rigorous 

deduction in the progress of Science ; and so [ j 

passing over from the region of Contingent or !¦ : * 

Assertory truth, to the region of Necessary truth. j ; 

They therefore rightly consider, that Modality U 

affects the Copula, and not the Predicate; that ;i ( 

'must be/ or is necessarily, and, 'may be,* are j 1 j 

Copulse distinct from * is not/ and ' cannot be* \ \ 

or ' may not be/ Copula) distinct from ' is not.' \ j 

For since the Copula expresses our knowledge \ \ 

of the relation between Subject and Predicate, \ \ 

all the various degrees of our knowledge re- : j 

specting the relation must be expressed by i 

modifications of the Copula. : f 



^ 



J •; CHAP. VII. 

i : * 

j IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS AFFECTED BY THEIR 

j - SUBSTANCE OR RELATION TO OTHER PRO- 

POSITIONS. 



Hypothe- 



1. Lastly, Propositions are Categorical or 

11 » IIUU1C" 

tiads. Hypothetical. Categorical, when they express 
I * j a complete act of the Understanding, whicli 

j . jj ascribes, more or less certainly, a given Pre- 

'{¦ ; dicate to a Subject, without any expressed 

j i ,; condition on affirming or denying which its 

\ \ truth is to depend. Hypothetical, when they 

j | express an incomplete act of the Understanding, 

j | which ascribes a given Predicate to a Subject, 

only under some expressed Conditions. 

2. Conditional Propositions are those which 
ais. treat one possible or Problematical assertion as 

the cause or antecedent because of which we 
make another. E. g. If levelling produces 
jealousy, then democracies are liable to change. 
In this case the two problematical assertions, 
and the notion of their being respectively cause 
and effect, are said to make one Conditional 



Condition- 



*i*m*m 



I ' 



IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 75 

Proposition. They are Problematical, because 
the belief which they separately express is only 
that levelling may produce jealousy, and that 
democracies may be liable to change, 

3. Disjunctive Propositions are those which Disjunc- :!'| 
treat two possible or problematical assertions, nes ' j > 
not logically contradictory, as the only possible !¦• ; 
assertions which can be made as to a given K 
subject E. g. Either vice is hateful, or religion 

is false. >i ! 

4. The belief which these two Propositions 
separately express, is only that vice may be 
hateful, or, on the other hand, that religion 
may be false. Therefore they are both pro- 
blematical, as expressions of our belief'. 

5. Still one of them must in fact be true ; 
inasmuch as some true assertion may be made 
on any given subject. Consequently, the 
other must be false ; inasmuch as in every 
Dichotomy or Logical Division, (which this is 
assumed to be,) one member must be the nega- 
tion of the other. If vice is hateful, religion is 
not false ; if religion be false, vice is not hateful. 

• The two Propositions are still in the condition of Alter- 
natives ; and consequently we have not attained as to either 
of them the degree of belief which an Assertory Proposition 
implies. 



i 






^ J' 76 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C 

I; 

J JPiidt of the two assertions is true, we learn of 

< " course from morals or theology. 
i{ 6. The two Problematical Propositions, toge- 

| * ther with their assumed contradictoriness, are 

I m said to make up one Disjunctive Proposition. 

\ r. Hjpotlie- 7. It is evident that both Conditional 

! reducible, and Disjunctive Propositions express acts of 

< the Understanding quite different from that 
i which is expressed in Categoricals. Making 

an assertion simply, is not the same as making 
f , it only on condition that another assertion is 

affirmed, as in Conditionals, or denied, as 
in Disjunctives. It is therefore impossible 
| to reduce Conditional and Disjunctive Pro- 

t positions to Categoricals, or to one another. 

' Instead of the Conditional Proposition given 

above, we might say, All that makes levelling 
produce jealousy makes democracies liable to ^ 

change. But here the possible antecedent has -5} 

become an actual one* ; we have affirmed, not 
that levelling may produce jealousy, but that 
for some reasons not given, ' it does. 9 Or again, 
The case of levelling producing jealousy is die 

b Moreover, a new canae i* attuned If dem o cracies jrv 
liable to change, the expreased reason has 1 
levelling produce* jealousy, but that < 
produce both these effect*. 



IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C 77 

case of democracies being liable' to change. 
But this reduction preserves the note of pos- 
sibility or Problematicalness by the sacrifice of !; ! 
the causation or antecedence which exists \. 
between the two parts of the Condi tibnal. In • f 
like manner, the attempted reductions of the . { [ 
Disjunctive Proposition to the form of a Con- 
ditional omit the chief mark of this kind of 
Proposition; namely, that its two assertions ( :| 
and no more are considered possible. j j 
8. Being Categorical, Conditional, or Dis- J! 
junctive, is said to be the Substance or Relation Substance. ; ; 
of Propositions. In the first kind the assertion . j 
is absolute (though not always equally certain) « . t 
— in the two latter kinds it is only Problematical, f 
to be granted if something else is granted, or if 
something else is denied. For this reason both 
Conditionals and Disjunctives are called Hypo- 
theticals. 



h2 



).;- 



mQ i j wwf ni^ m i.i <¦ n -»* 



i k " 


'tf 






:'/i 

');; 




3 , 


•'¦' 




1 ' 

1 

i ¦ 


11 




| 


*i 






* 

s 






•v' 




i r 


U; 




i 






! 


1 
{ 




4 X 


i 




j f 


¦J 


Quantity 


j | 


*> 


of Predi- 


i » 


i 


cate, 



CHAR VIII. 

QUANTITY OF PREDICATE. 

1. We have seen that the Quantity, universal 
or particular, of Propositions, is determined by 
the extent ascribed to the Subject. There is 
another less important consideration about 
every Proposition, namely, the Quantity of its 
j Predicate. 

! 2. This differs from the Quantity of the 

J. Subject in not being dependent either on the 

ii will of the speaker, or on his knowledge. It 

is a consequence simply of the Affirmative or 
Negative Quality of his assertion ; and there- 
| fore lies midway between considerations as to 

the Quantity of Propositions, and considerations 
as to their Quality, 
this*** *** ^ Negative Propositions have a Distri- 
buted or Universal Predicate. If Logical, they 
i exclude all or some of the class denoted by the 

i Subject from the whole of the wider class 

f I j denoted by the Predicate. E. g. No good 



4 i 



r 



I! 



QUANTITY OP PREDICATE. 



70 



architecture is a mere mechanical art. Some 
seditions are not riots. If Metaphysical) they 
deny to all or some of the class denoted by the 
Subject all possession of the quality implied 
by the Predicate. E. g. No useful treatise on 
Morals is thoroughly demonstrative. Some 
Philosophers are not practical. 

4. All Affirmative Propositions have an Un-inAffirm- 
distributed or Particular Predicate. If Logical, 

they assert that all or some members of the 
lower Kind denoted by the Subject, are identical 
with some members of the higher Kind denoted 
by the Predicate. E.g. All inflammatory speeches 
are disturbances of the peace. Some maritime 
animals are Mammalia. If Metaphysical, they „ 
assert that all or some members of the Kind 
denoted by the Subject possess the Quality 
implied by the Predicate. But since other 
Subjects really or conceivably possess the same 
quality, the Predicate is not applied to as many 
Subjects as possible, and is therefore undis- 
tributed. E. g. All magnetic phenomena are 
electrical. Some princes are self-denying. 

5. The only cases of an Affirmative Proposition Correla- 
distributing its Predicate, are those Propositions Uves ' 
in which the terms are either logically or acci- 
dentally correlative. 



fi 



•J i 



J 



70 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 

«. 'Negative statements of Material Prin- 
ciples. E. g. Voids are unnatural. Anni- 
hilation is not to be expected. These are 
equivalent statements to the positive prin- 
ciples, that the Atmosphere is elastic with- 
out limit: and that Things remain the same 
under every change of form. 
jS. Negative Statements of Propositions Lo- 
gically Necessary. Any one who asserts 
that Tyranny is not on terms of Equality, 
makes a Proposition Negative and neces- 
sarily Universal, since to suppose an ex- 
ception to it, would be to suppose a 
contradiction in terms. 
4. The meaning of the name Impossible may 
be discovered by examining the examples under 
either head. For, Tyranny is not on equal 
terms, means Tyranny cannot be on equal 
terms ; and Annihilation is not to be expected, 
means that it is in our belief impossible for 
things to lose their nature in losing their 
form*. 

• Not negative Material Principles ; for nature! of course, 
has no negatives. 

b The term does not mean, as some writers seem to have 
thought, ' incredible, impossible to believe/ but ' resting on 
considerations of impossibility/ 



si 



IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C 



69 



/9. They are Necessary from the subject- From 
matter, if our knowledge of the subject-matter, 
matter is so complete, that we can assert 
an universal and invariable relation between 
the Subject and Predicate. This is the case 
in all Subjects which admit of strictly 
Mathematical treatment. For in these 
the originally assumed premisses are self- p. 102. 
evident principle*, allowing of no ex- 
ception ; and all subsequent assertions 
are consequences deduced from them by 
processes of strict reasoning, and therefore 
Universal likewise. All the Propositions 
stated in any strictly Mathematical work 
on Geometry, Mechanics, Astronomy, 
Electricity, Optics, or Thermology, are 
therefore Necessary Propositions; because, 
being asserted, they cannot but be asserted 
Universally. Any Proposition distinctly 
inferred from first principles of Meta- 
physics, is also a Necessary Proposition. 
E. g. Every human soul is indiscerp- 
tible. 
3. Negative Propositions which are Necessary, Impossi- 
that is, such as if made at all must be made 
universally, are sometimes called Impossible 
Propositions. They are 



tt 



i 
if ' 

i 

il 
it 



!! 
i i 



1 1 
"II 

\ t 
» * 



¦II 



I 70 IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS, &C. 

j 

«. 'Negative statements of Material Prin- 
ciples. E. g. Voids are unnatural. Anni- 
\ hilation is not to be expected. These are 

] ': equivalent statements to the positive prin- 

Iciples, that the Atmosphere is elastic with- 
out limit: and that Things remain the same 
| under every change of form, 

i jS. Negative Statements of Propositions Lo- 

»* gically Necessary. Any one who asserts 

\ that Tyranny is not on terms of Equality, 

: t ' makes a Proposition Negative and neces- 

sarily Universal, since to suppose an ex- 
: ception to it, would be to suppose a 

j contradiction in terms. 

j 4. The meaning of the name Impossible may 

! ' be discovered by examining the examples under 

I . either head. For, Tyranny is not on equal 

) terms, means Tyranny cannot be on equal 

;. j terms; and Annihilation is not to be expected, 

means that it is in our belief impossible for 
I | things to lose their nature in losing their 

form*. 

• Not negative Material Principles ; for nature, of course, 
has no negatives. 

b The term does not mean, as some writers seem to have 
thought, ' incredible, impossible to believe/ but ' resting on 
considerations of impossibility.' 



BY OPPOSITION AND CONVERSION. 83 

8. Two Propositions may be opposed in Contrudic- 
Quantity and Quality. Granting that any tory ' 
Proposition whatever (A E I O) is true, we 
know that a Proposition of the same terms 
opposed to any one than in Quantity and 
Qualities (O I E A) must be false. For it 
contradicts it; and it is a Law of the Mind, 
that whatever contradicts truth is false. E. g. 
if all poetry is granted to be corrupting, we 
know without reasoning that no one given 
poetical work can be uncorrupting. 

9. Contradictory Opposition is naturally the Contradic- 
relation between any given Proposition, and the Logical, 
objection urged against it by an opponent. 
The objection to an Universal Affirmative is a 
Particular Negative, and vice versa. Any other 
Opposition would preclude the continuance of 
an argument, If two reasoners made contrary 
statements, (A and E,) neither Proposition 
would be susceptible of clear and easy proof, 
and in many cases neither would be suscepti- 
ble of proof at all. If two reasoners made f 
subcontrary statements, (I and O,) they would | 
not be at issue at all. But if to A or E aie \ 
opposed the counterstatements O or I, then f 
the disagreement is fully expressed, and at 
the same time the counterstatement, being a 



sum. 



84 DIRECT INFERENCES OP THE UNDERSTANDING 

Particular Proposition, is easily proved or dis- 
proved. The only objection by which a Logical 
reasoner would think of arguing against the 
Proposition, All metals are ponderous, is to 
cite some one or more metals which are not 
ponderous. 
Conver- 1 0. Propositions are said to be converted when 
their Terms are transposed, without implying 
any new relation between the Subject and the 
Predicate. 

11. The Predicate is to become a Subject. 
Therefore it must. become either an Universal 
or a Particular Subject. No Predicate of an 
Affirmative Proposition A or I — e. g. All trade 
is useful; Some Africans are civilised — can ever 
become an Universal Subject when transposed. 
To say that all useful pursuits are commercial, 
or that all civilized persons are Africans, would 
express a new relation between the Subject and 
Predicate not expressed in the original Propo- 
sition. 

12. The Predicate of an Universal Negative, 
(E) — e. g. No good education is onesided — may 
become an Universal Subject. For it implies 
no new relation between the Subject and the 
Predicate, to say that nothing onesided can be 
a good education. 



+mm*mm 



\ 



I,... 



: 3 

: .4 

\ 



^L 



BY OPPOSITION AND CONVERSION. 85 



• Per accidens — putting in the place of the Subject the 
Quality, whether Proprium or Accident, which the Predicate 
implies. By the old Logicians, the Proprium is constantly 
called Accidens Proprium. 



I-; 



13. The Predicate of a Particular Negative |.[ 
O, might become an Universal Subject; since if 
we grant such a Proposition as, Some tyrannies *.l. 
are not blameable, then no blameable thing can j \ 
be any of the tyrannies spoken of. But it is I \ 
inconvenient, both grammatically and logically, I [ 
to say, No blameable thing is these tyrannies. fj 
Grammatically, as producing almost a false con- ' h 
cord — Logically, as predicating a. less extensive V 
class of a more extensive, which is unnatural, in U 
any ordinary state of our knowledge. jji 

14. Propositions then may be converted. :| 
a. Without changing Quantity or Quality. Conversio 

Simple Conversion of E, which distributes imp ex * 
both Terms, and I, which distributes neither. 
E. No useful currency is inconvertible, con- 
verted to. Nothing inconvertible is an useful 
currency. 
I I. Some political economists are narrow 

j minded, converted to. Some narrow minded 
men are political economists. 

|3. Changing the Quantity and preserving the Per ac- 
Quality. Conversio per accidens • of A, 



r 



.1 



11 Mi 

! i '•;;! 86 DIRECT INFERENCES, &C. 

i|;H| 

i j }[ , which implies no new relation between the 

terms, although it omits some of them. 
A. All tradewinds depend on heat, converted 
[ to. Some things depending on heat are trade- 

winds. 
tionem 8 ^ ^ # Changing the Quality, preserving the 
Quantity. Conversion by Negation; an 
artifice to get an exact equivalent for the 
Simple Converse of O, and the Univocal 
Converse of A. 
A. All tradewinds depend on heat, is exactly 
equivalent to E — Nothing independent of heat 
is a tradewind. Therefore its Universal Con- 
verse is exactly equivalent to the Simple Con- 
verse of E. Nothing that is a tradewind is inde- 
pendent of heat. 

O. Some tyrannies are not blameable — is 
exactly equivalent to, Some tyrannies are not- 
blameable (unblameable). Therefore its Simple 
Converse is exactly equivalent to 
Some not-blameable things are tyrannies. 






PART III. 



CHAP. I. 

REASONINGS. DEDUCTION AND INDUCTION. 



1. We call a man logical in his Reasonings, 
when all his conclusions are warranted by his 
evidence. That is, when he neither deduces Logical 
incorrect Inferences from any principles or^, 
laws which are known to him, nor infers in- 
correct principles or laws from the instances 

or facts of which he is possessed. 

2. If he avoids the former fault, we should 
say that he is Logical in his Deductive Rea- 
sonings, or in his Syllogisms. If he avoids 
the latter, we say that he is correct in his 
Inductive Reasonings, or in his Inductions. 

3. Reasoning is most philosophically com- Demon- 
plete, when its highest principles are self- 8tratMm - 
evident, or regularly deduced from self-evident 



. r. 

1 i..: 
111 

Wit 



!'! 



nv 



88 REASONINGS. DEDUCTION AND INDUCTION. 



principles. Tliat is, when it is entirely De- 
li J duction, without any mixture of Induction. 
But only a very small part of our knowledge, 
that, namely, which is of the most strictly 
scientific character, admits of being regularly 
demonstrated in this way throughout. Mostly, 
the principles from which we intend to deduce 
future inferences, are themselves inferences 
more or less exact, from the instances or facts 
of which we are already in possession. There- 
fore the natural course in a treatise on Logic 
is to consider first how principles are derived 
from Induction; secondly, how such princi- 
ples are reasoned out Deductively ; and thirdly, 
p. 102. how Deductive Reasonings attain their per- 
fection, when the principles on which they 
depend are not Inductively obtained, but 
either self-evident, or strictly deduced from 
self-evident principles. 



^WF^P 



CHAP. II. 

INDUCTION. OBSERVATION AND EXPERIMENT. 

1. Reasonings not yet philosophically com- 
plete obtain their principles from Observation 
and Experiment, the twofold procedure of 
Induction. 

2. From Observation, when without anyObserva- 
attempt to alter the conditions under which 
effects are produced by nature, we endeavour 

to ascertain their cause or law. E. g. by ob- 
serving the occurrences of lightning, we can- 
not fail to notice that it always occurs along 
with heaviness of the atmosphere, clouds, 
rain, superabundant electricity, &c. Hence 
we obtain, not a proposition of Dependence, 
that these qualities in the atmosphere involve 
lightning, but a proposition of Coexistence, 
that lightning always goes along with them. 

3. From Experiment, when we have it inExperi- 
our power to imitate the conditions under 
which effects are produced by nature, and 
subtract conditions one after the other, until 

12 






ii mv mm,»< i n m w m . i n 






i: 



I 



hi 

it : ' 



5 • 



90 INDUCTION. OBSERVATION AND EXPERIMENT. 



we find out some which cannot be subtracted 
without annihilating the effect. E. g. when 
/ I . subtracting all other conditions we produce 

; an electric spark, attended by noise (which is 

I in fact thunder and lightning) from an over- 

I charged conductor. Hence we obtain, if the 

j conditions of production are fully known to 

| us, a proposition of Dependence, viz. that an 

,i atmosphere surcharged with electricity in- 

volves lightning. 









>, w l J ' '" " '¦ ' I I1 H IIBW »1I W 



I! 

ji 



CHAP. III. 

i 
PROCESSES OF INDUCTION. f 



1. Method of Difference, (Observatio or !.! 
Experimentum Crucis,) when an effect is • jj 
produced under one single condition, and is \l 
not produced without it. E. g. if the fall of Experi- ' \ 
a piece of money is noiseless in an exhausted cruris, 
receiver, and heard the moment the air is 
admitted, we are quite certain that all sound 
must require air for its transmission, there 
being no other conceivable reason for the 
difference. The conclusion, therefore, is a 
perfectly certain proposition of Dependence. 

2. Method of Agreement, (per instantiasPerinstan- 

. _ . tias con- 

convenientes,) when we can observe a certain venientes. 

number of conditions, which always, as far as 
our experience goes, are present when a par- 
ticular effect is produced. From observing, 
e. g. that France, England, and Belgium are 
commercial states, and that they have many 
poor, we may conclude with some probability 



SI' 

VI; 



Rejectio 

natora- 

nim. 



Tabula 
graduum. 



92 



PROCESSES OF INDUCTION. 



that all commercial states have many poor. 
And the more extensively we have observed 
the fact, the more probably true will the 
principle be. But in ordinary cases, such 
observations cannot fully establish a pro- 
position of Dependence ; for 

«. There may be commercial states exist- 
ing, or possible, which do not produce 
poverty. 
j3. The instances of poverty in all those 
which we have observed must have arisen 
from other causes, and not from their 
commercial character. 

3. Their probability is, however, much in- 
creased, if they are coupled with extensive 
observation of cases in which the same effect 
does not occur, (rejectio naturarum,) appa- 
rently because the conditions are unlike. 
E. g. If we can observe that in Switzerland, 
Hungary, &c. there are very few poor, and 
that these are agricultural, not commercial, 
countries. 

4. And still more so, if We can observe, 
that when there is more of the given con- 
dition, there is more of the effect; and when 
there is less of the given condition, there is 
less of the effect. (Tabula Graduum.) E. g. 



ui i p ijiu i mm i 



PROCESSES OF DEDUCTION. 93 . 

that the more a given nation multiplies its 
articles of commerce, the more poor it has; 
and the more it stands aloof from trade, the 
fewer poor it has. Also, that with more of 
agriculture it has fewer poor, and with less of 
agriculture more poor. 

5. By the right use of these three last 
Methods together, we are morally certain of 
arriving at a Proposition of Dependence, or 
real Principle. That is, when we conclude 
that all commercial states have many poor, 
we rightly mean, that they have many poor 
because they are commercial, and not for any 
other reasons. 

6. If any Conclusion, obtained Inductively 
from observed instances, is to be a ground for 
inferring the truth of other instances of the 
same kind, it must claim on grounds of very 
high probability to be a Principle, or Pro- 
position of Dependence. For we should not 
be entitled to infer, without fresh observation, 
any single new instance of the same kind, 
except on evidence which would also prove 
the truth of all new instances whatever. E. g. 
If I conclude beforehand, that in any country 
unknown to me, an increase of commercial 



, 'i 
. f 



i 

i! 



.5 



ii 



94 PROCESSES OF DEDUCTION. 



\ resources is likely to increase the number of 

]. , . poor, it can only be because I am prepared to 

assert as a Principle, that all commercial 

states have many poor. 



CHAP. IV. ;¦[ 

if 

SYLLOGISMS FROM INDUCTIVE PRINCIPLES. y 

•U 

1. Our object in searching for Principles [I 
Inductively, is to have our experience com- ''j, 
bined in the most convenient and powerful \t 
form for fresh applications. We should not ;; 
think of deciding whether or no all observed 
declinations of the compass arise from the 
attraction of the earth, unless we were anxious 
to find a law or scale by which all declina-. 
tions, observed or not observed, past, present, 
or future, may be inferred and measured. 
We desire, that is, to be able to deduce all 
unobserved particulars from our Inductively 
obtained Universal. 

2. The Inferences of the Reason differ from Inferences 
those of the mere Understanding ; inasmuch R ea ^on. \ 
as they infer from the Universal not a parti- j 
cular of which both Terms are the same, but j 
a particular of which one Term is different. \ 
E. g. From the Universal Proposition, All ? 
acids redden vegetable blues, we infer not j 



1 



96 SYLLOGISMS FROM INDUCTIVE PRINCIPLES. 

that Some acids redden vegetable blues, but 
that Lemonjuice reddens vegetable blues. 

3. Such an Inference can be allowed only 
in virtue of a third Proposition, which connects 
or Syllogises the Universal with the required 
Particular ; as in the case just given, the pro- 
position, Lemonjuice is an Acid, does. 
Require 4. The Universal and the connecting Pro- 
positions position together make the evidence in any 
single • Deductive argument, and are called 
the Premisses, Major and Minor. The Pro- 
position inferred is called the Conclusion. 
Hence it follows, that single Deductive argu- 
ments consist of three Propositions, and no 
more. 

5. It is plain too, that these Propositions 
contain Three distinct Tenns, and no more. 
The Subject and Predicate of the Conclusion, 

see p. 57. which are called its Major and Minor Terms, 
from their natural extent as Terms of a Pro- 
position, and the third Term, which is called 
, the Middle Term, fteVov or Mean of Proof. 

6. The connection of the Premisses with 
one another, and with the Conclusion, in 
virtue of which the Conclusion follows, from 

see p. 131. them, is called the Consequence (Conse- 
quential 



Three 
Terms. 



Conse- 
quence 




CHAR V. 

CANONS OF THE SYLLOGISM. 






1. If there are any axioms so general as to 
lie at the root of all Deductive Reasoning, it 
is plain that they will nearly resemble the 
axioms in Geometry, Mechanics, &c. ; which 
sciences arc the most perfect and simple in- 
stances of Deductive Reasoning. In fact, the 
axioms of Mathematics will bo less general 
examples of the more general axioms, from 
which all Deductions or Syllogisms derive 
their validity. 

2. One of the two most general axioms in 
the familiar science of Geometry is, that Two 
things which both agree in quantity with any 
third, agree in quantity with one another. 
This is only self-evident in virtue of the still 
higher and more general axiom, that Two 
things which agree in any thing with the same 
third, agree in the same tiling one with 
another. 

3. Hence we derive a Canon for Cate 
gorical Syllogisms with an Affirmative Con 

K 



Canons the 
ultimate 
grounds of 
Syllogism. 



Like Ax- 
ioms of 
Geometry. 



1st Canon. 






: 



1 


^ 






1 


. 


r 








1 
| 




: 1 


I 


1 


r 


i 


• i 




\ 


: 


: 


;| 


'! 

. 1 



93 



CANONS OF THE SYLLOGISM. 



elusion, viz. If two Things agree with one 
and the same third, they agree with one 
another- All Categorical Syllogisms with an 
Affirmative Conclusion derive their validity 
from the fact, that they are in this form! or 
may be put in it, 
adCanonv 4, The other fundamental axiom of Geo- 
metry is, that if of two Things one agrees in 
quantity with a third, and the other disagrees 
with it, then they disagree in quantity with 
one another. This implies, in like manner, a 
Canon for the validity of Syllogisms with a 
negative Conclusion j viz, If of two Things 
one agrees with a third, and the other differs 
from it, the two Things differ from one 
another. 

* The other four Canons will come in their proper place, 
in the Chapter on Fallacies, They are not Canons for any 
ialid argument, any more than the two here given are 
Canoua whereby the invalidity of any argument may be 
detected See infra, p. 110* 



Sri 



:f 



t 

r 
CHAP. VI. I 

FIRST FIGURE OF THE SYLLOGISM. [ * 

1. Syllogisms are said to be in the First Middle 
Figure, when the Middle Term, or term used m idS e in 
for proof, is less extensive Logically than the extent - 
Major, and more extensive than the Minor 
Term*. E. g. In the Syllogism \ 

All electrical phenomena are measurable : •; ; 

Magnetism is an electrical phenomenon, • t t 



•f 

Therefore it is measurable : ^r 

the Middle Term, Electrical Phenomena, is jf 

less extensive than the quality Measurable, } 

which is predicated of it, and more extensive j 

than the Subject, Magnetism, which is in- See p. 57. .[ 

eluded in it. | 

2. This is still more obvious in the com- 
paratively unimportant case of Syllogisms in ., 
this Figure with a Logical instead of a Meta- See p. 56. || 

• The principle on which Aristotle distinguishes the three ! ¦. 

figures is adopted, as being the one which leads to a know- « - 

ledge of the real and distinct uses of these figures. It of || 

course excludes the Fourth Figure, for reasons which will be [ •' 
found in the Appendix, Note H. 



*m**^^*m*' 



100 FIRST FIGURE OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

physical Proposition for their Major Premiss. 

E.g. 

All aerolites are planetary bodies : 
This stone is an aerolite, 
Therefore it is a planetary body : 

when the Middle Term Aerolite is a Logical 

Subject more extensive than This Stone, but 

less extensive than Planetary Bodies. 

Implies 3 # The use of an argument in this Figure 

complete . . 

knowledge implies that we possess (or conceive ourselves 

andPredi-to possess) all required knowledge, about 

cate - both the Subjects and the Predicate, which 

are the Terms of our reasoning. We must 

be in possession of the known qualities of 

electrical phenomena, which bear upon their 

measurement, before we can assert from our 

own knowledge the Principle or Proposition 

of Dependence, that they are all measurable ; 

and of the known qualities which connect 

Magnetism with Electricity, before we can 

assert from our knowledge that all Magnetism 

is an electrical phenomenon b . The Major 

b It is evident, that in arguing as above, that magnetic 
phenomena are measurable, we have drawn the conclusion 
on the most fundamental grounds of which the subject is 
capable. We have appealed to a Principle, ascertained by 
the widest experience which could bear upon the desired 
Conclusion, and if this appeal is granted, we have put the 



c 



FIRST FIGURE OF THE SYLLOGISM. 101 

Premiss is a Metaphysical Proposition ascrib- 
ing a distinct Predicate, whether Proprium or I \ 
Accident, to a known Genus or higher Kind ; 
the Minor Premiss is a Logical Proposition 
including in this Genus a known Species or 
lower Kind. The former Premiss implies a 
sufficiently complete act of Logical Definition ; 
the latter a sufficiently complete act of Logical 
Division. 

4. Analogous to the two Canons given in Append. 
Ch. V. is the Dictum de Omni et Nullo, from * 
conformity with which Syllogisms in the First j : ; 

Figure derive their validity. If it be true that : I 

any two things which agree with the same j[. 

third agree with one another, it is also true , I 

and clear that a Subject and Predicate agree > \\ 

that is, may be predicated one of another, if \ 

they both agree with another more extensive ; ; 

Subject ; that is, if the one is a Predicate of [ [ 

that Subject, and the other a Subject included : ! 

in it. In other words ; Whatever is a Predi- \ \ 

cate of a whole Subject, Class, or Kind, is Dictum de ;! 

necessarily a Predicate of all Subj ects, whether ' [ \ 



Conclusion most thoroughly beyond the reach of all assaults. 
It is on this fact that the superiority of the First Figure as 
an instrument of scientific knowledge rests, and not on any 
conclusiveness in the Dictum de Omni et Nullo above all 
other grounds of Categorical or Hypothetical Argument. 
See pp. 107, 113, 120, 125. 

K2 



wmm^^mm^mmmtm^ 



102 FIRST FIGURE OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

Singular or lower Classes, which are contained 
in that Subject. 

5. Analogous in like manner with the 
Second Canon, is the Principle, that whatever 

Dictum de is a Predicate denied to the whole of a Sub- 
°* ject, Class, or Kind, is necessarily a Predicate 
denied of all Subjects or lower Classes con- 
tained under that Subject, Class, or Kind. 

Special 6. The Major Premiss of Syllogisms in this 
Figure is a Proposition, Metaphysical or some- 
times Logical, asserting a Principle Affirm- 
ative or Negative. E. g. Mountainous countries 
are thinly peopled. Acts of uncharitableness 
are not for the good of states. But if either 

Major of their Principles are to be a sufficient ground 
mversa . £ or inference, they must be Universal; unless 
we have grounds for knowing that all moun- 
tainous countries must be thinly peopled, we 
could not necessarily infer of any mountain- 
ous country unknown to us that it is thinly 
peopled. And unless we had grounds for 
asserting that no uncharitable acts are good 
for states, we could not necessarily infer that 
any given act of this character is bad for 
states. The Major Premiss in this Figure is 
therefore always Universal; because it must 
state a Principle ; and all Principles are so. 
7. The Minor Premiss must be Affirmative* 






m^9m 



FIRST FIGURE OF THE SYLLOGISM. 103 

For it is a Logical Proposition including the 
lower Subject in the higher, in order to show 
that the Principle applies to the lower, as well 
as to the higher Subject. No inference could 
be drawn from a negative Minor Premiss, for 
this would only assert that the Principle does 
not apply. 

8. The Major Premiss is Inductively ob- Minor 
tained, in all such cases as those which we are ative. 
now considering. E. g. All metals may be re- p* 88. 
duced to gases. It derives its force from the 
evidence of Observation and Experiment, 
and is the Proposition which embodies the 
research, and is the result of the industry, 
bestowed on the Argument. The Minor Pre- 
miss is mostly either a simple Perception, e. g. 
Gold is a metal; or an ascertained result of 
some former reasoning, e. g. Arsenic is a 
metal. 



\i 



:i 



I 



I 



1 



( : 



f i. 



'r 



CHAP. VII. 

SECOND FIGURE. 

Middle 1. Arguments are said to be in the Second 

extensive* Figure, when the Middle Term, or Term used 
for proof, is more extensive than either the 
Major or Minor Term. E. g. in the Argu- 
ment, 

All real wisdom is practical : 

The Philosophy of M. Comte is not practical, 

Therefore it is not real wisdom : 

the Middle Term Practical is a Predicate 
asserted of our Subject and denied of another. 
It is consequently more extensive than either 
of its Subjects; as being the Predicate, or 
Term of greater extent, in both Premisses. 

2. Hence the business of Syllogisms in the 
Second Figure is to distinguish two Subjects. 
For no Affirmative Relation whatever can be 
proved to exist between two Subjects on the 
ground of their having one single Predicate in 
common. £. g. Man and brutes are both 
animals; but this does not inform us either 



SECOND FIGURE. 



105 



that all brutes or that some brutes are men, nor 
yet that all men or some men are brutes. The 
conclusion of any Syllogism in this Figure is 
consequently a Logical Proposition, negative p. 66 
in Quality, and distinguishing two Subjects 
from one another. 

3. The use of an Argument in this form Implies 
implies, that our knowledge respecting the Sub- knowledge 
jects of the Argument is deficient Our having ?f** ub " 
such complete knowledge as our use of the 
First Figure implies about the Subjects 
of reasoning, must make it obvious to us, 
whether one Subject include another or not. 
As soon as we understand the Astronomical 
Principles of the Solar System, we know 
whether Mars, Jupiter, &c. are included in the 
Species Planetary Bodies. But, on the other 
hand, there are Physical Subjects in which we 
do not possess knowledge sufficient for full 
and connected reasoning. We may not know 
whether Shooting Stars, e. g. are fragments 
drawn up from the earth and then returned to 
it, or whether they are small Planetary Bodies 
drawn from their orbits by the earth's attrac- 
tion. In this case we naturally search for 
marks or predicates by which it may be dis- 
tinguished from one or other of these kinds. 



its 

I * : 












: l 



106 SECOND FIGURE. 

Bodies drawn up from the earth would not 
always appear in one part of the sky : 

Shooting Stars do so appear, 

Therefore Shooting Stars are not Bodies drawn 
up from the earth. 

4. In particular, it implies that we have not 
the kind of knowledge which is embodied in 
the Affirmative Minor Premiss of a Syllogism 
in the First Figure. We should not attempt 
to distinguish two Subjects by comparing them 
with the same Predicate, if it were an acknow- 
ledged or obvious fact that they include one 
another, or if it were well known in what higher 
Kinds or Classes each is to be included. An 
Argument in the Second Figure must therefore, 
when it is used in connexion with other Argu- 
ments, be either, 
*. A preliminary inquiry as to the relations 
of Subjects to one another, when our own 
knowledge cannot supply a Minor Pre- 
miss to a Syllogism in the First Figure ; 
or, 
/3. An objection to the assumption of com- 
plete knowledge, which leads an opponent 
to include one Subject in another, as he 
frames the Minor Premiss to some Syllo- 
gism in the First Figure. 



8EC0XD FIGURE. 107 

5. Arguments in this Figure, as they have 
always a negative conclusion, must always 
derive their validity from the Canon of Nega- 
tive Arguments. If it is self-evident that two 
things differ from one another, if one agrees 
with a certain third from which the other 

differs; then it is also self-evident that Two^ctomfor 

2d Figure. 
Subjects differ from one another, as never 

including or sometimes not including one 
another, if there is any Predicate which never 
can be said of one, but always or sometimes 
of the other. Therefore an Argument in the 
Second Figure is as plainly self-evident as one 
in the First Figure ; although, as we have 
shown, it is not equally important in Argu- 
ments. 

6. One Premiss must be Negative ; because Special 
the Predicate or Middle Term must be denied 

of one of the two Subjects which are to be 
distinguished in the Conclusion. One Premiss 
must be Universal ; because two Subjects are 
distinguished wholly or in part from one an- 
other, on the ground that the former altogether 
excludes a Predicate which the latter always 
or sometimes admits; or on the ground that 
the former always admits a Predicate which 
the other always or sometimes excludes. 



108 SECOND FIGURE. 

E. g. Planets axe distinguished from fixed 
stars, because the former change their posi- 
tion relatively to the Sun, the latter do not. 
Or common rock from crystals, on the ground 
that the rock does not always split into frag- 
ments similar to itself as the crystal does. 



m**mrmrn*mmm 



(¦¦ 

I. 

( 



\ 



chap. vin. 

THIRD FIGURE. 

j 

1. Syllogisms axe said to be in the Third Middle / 
Figure, when the Middle Term, or Term used extensive. / 
for proof, is less extensive than either the 
Major or the Minor Term. £. g. in the 
Argument, 

All virtuous men are conscientious: 

All virtuous men are happy, 

Therefore some who are happy are conscientious : 

the Middle Term * virtuous men' is a Subject 
or term of less extent, to which the two Predi- 
cates or more extensive Terms i conscientious' 
and i happy' are ascribed. See p. 57. 

2. The use of Arguments in this Figure Deficient 
implies that we are not fully acquainted with f Predi? 6 
the Predicates about which we are reasoning. cates * 
If we perfectly knew the nature of the two 
qualities of conscientiousness and happiness, 
we should have no need to compare them in 
any given Subject in order to judge of their 
relations one to the other. 

3. In particular does it imply that we arc 

L 



110 THIRD FIGURE. 

deficient in that knowledge of Principles 
which is embodied in the Major Premisses 
or Conclusions of Syllogisms in the first 
Figure. For in knowing accurately what is 
the nature of all the Predicates or Qualities 
which may be asserted of a Subject, we know 
also of what Principles it is the Subject; 
and so far as we are ignorant of the true 
nature of its Qualities or Predicates, we do 
not know of what Principles it may be the 
Subject. It follows, that if we attempt to 
compare or distinguish two Qualities by con- 
sidering them as Predicates of one Subject, 
it must be either because we ourselves are 
ignorant of their nature, and therefore do not 
know whether and in what degree they in- 
clude or exclude one another ; or because the 
person with whom we are arguing is ignorant 
of these points. An argument in the Third 
Figure is therefore, when used in connexion 
with other Arguments, either, 

a. An Instance bearing upon some Principle 
which we desire to ascertain for ourselves, 
or to impress on another person; and 
which if ascertained would become either 
the Major Premiss or Conclusion of a 
Syllogism in the First Figure : or, 



flPVPVWPI 



THIRD FIGURE. Ill 



I! 



Jr.-'., 



¦r 



/3. An Objection to a Principle, positive or 
negative, of whose truth we are not as- 
sured; whether it is conceived by our- 
selves, or expressed by some other person, 
as the Major Premiss or Conclusion of an ) | 

argument in the First Figure. 
4. As an Instance tending to prove a Prin- instances. 

ciple it is of very small value. E. g. If the 

Principle be that Meek tempers win respect, 

it adds little to the evidence for this principle 

to say, that All Quakers are meek, and also |! j 

respected ; or that the Abp. of Canterbury is ji ? 

both. Still we gain, 

a. An absolute assurance that the two Qua- 
lities are not incompatible — as in like 
manner if the Conclusion had been nega- 
tive, we should have gained an absolute 
assurance that the two Qualities are not 
inseparable. If Quakers are meek and 
respected, it is plain that some meek 
persons may be respected. If Mr. Ricardo 
is a political economist without being 
hardhearted, it is certain that political 
economists are not necessarily hard- 
hearted. 
/3. A narrow Induction of instances to prove 
that the two Qualities always coexist, or 



;i 



;i- 



J 112 THIRD FIGURE. 

> 

even involve one another — or in negatives, 
, that they never coexist, or even exclude 

» one another. In Quakers we see the Quality 

i of meekness coexisting with that of pos- 

sessing general respect. Therefore the 
j presumption is, that it may probably do 

l so in all cases — especially as the Subject 

i Quakers, as used in this argument, hn- 

| plies all persons possessing the Qualities 

I connected with meekness and respect in 

see pp. 15, Quakers. The Conclusion is a Problem- 

65 

atical Proposition to the effect, that the 
two Qualities or Predicates may coexist, 
or even involve one another. What the 
probability is, must be determined by the 
laws and practice of Induction. 
5. But as an Objection to any thing stated 
as an Universal Principle positive or negative, 
whether by ourselves or by an adversary, an 
Argument in the Third Figure is quite con- 
clusive. One instance of Qualities coexisting 
completely overthrows the alleged Principle, 
that they always exclude one another; and 
one instance of their not coexisting is de- 
structive of the Principle, that one always 
involves the other. E. g. It cannot be im- 
possible to be weak and brave at once, if 



£t 



1J UI I JIMUHU E U 



THIRD FIGURE. 113 



i 






Socrates or George III. succeeded in being |. 

both; or necessary for great men to be | 

haughty, if Washington was not so. V 

6. The Conclusion of Arguments in the Third f i. 
Figure being either Affirmative or Negative, 
may rest on grounds analogous to either of the 
two Canons of Valid Argument. If it be true see p. 98. 
that two Things which agree with the same 
third agree with one another, it is also true 
that two Predicates of the same Subject are Dictum for 
not incompatible, and may have some real l ^^' 
connection with one another. And if the ;i. 
Canon of Negatives is true, it is also true that • j 
Predicates, of which one is found in a certain ' [ 
Subject and the other not, are not inseparable, : I 
and need not have any real connection one [ 
with the other. Therefore, an Argument in 

the Third Figure is as plainly self-evident as 

one in the First Figure, although, as we have l j 

seen, it is not so important. . j 

7. The Conclusion in the Third Figure is Special \ 

Rules. • ! 

of course particular, since Instances bearing r 

upon Principles, and Objections urged against 

them, always are so. If it is Affirmative, both 

Premisses will be so ; if Negative, one Premiss 

only \ 

• For the Fourth Figure, see Appendix, 
L2 



.•j 
i i 



CHAP. IX. 

MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 

Modals. 1. Modal Syllogisms arc those in which 
the certainty of the Conclusion or Inference 
is affected by the Modality, whether Neces- 
sary or Contingent of one or both Premisses. 

2. Both Premisses may be Necessary, or 
both Problematical. Again, a Necessary 
Premiss may be combined with, one which 
is Assertory, or with one which is Problem- 
atical: and a Problematical with one that is 
Necessary, or one which is Assertory. 
Conclusion 3. The Certainty of the Conclusion cannot 
Principle. 6 ex ceed in any Figure that of the Principle on 
which the Conclusion depends, although it 
may fall short of this, when the application of 
the Principle is doubtful. 

4. In the First Figure, the Principle is 
always contained in the Major Premiss. If 
this is Necessary, the Conclusion is Neces- 
sary ; unless the Minor Premiss is only Pro- 




MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 115 

blematicaJ. A Necessary Principle, that is, 
which necessarily or actually applies to a 
given Conclusion, will prove it necessarily. 
E.g. 

No two straight lines can enclose a space : 
The opposite sides of every square must be 

two straight lines, 
Therefore they cannot enclose a space. 

All oaths must be appeals to God : 
Many words lightly spoken are oaths, 
Therefore they must be appeals to God. 

5. In the Second Figure, the Principle, or 
Cause of Distinction between the two Terms p. 70. note 
of the Conclusion, is contained in the Nega- 
tive Premiss. The Conclusion, consequently, 
cannot be more certain than the Negative 
Premiss ; although it may be less so, if the 
other Premiss is Problematical only. If one 
of the two Subjects must possess some one 
Quality or Predicate which the other does not 
or cannot possess, then the Conclusion is 
necessary. E. g. 

All covetous persons must be immoral : 
No true philosopher can be immoral, 
Therefore no true philosopher can be a 
covetous person. 



116 MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 

No barbarian can fully understand right and 

wrong : 
Mahometans fully understand right and wrong, 
Therefore they cannot be barbarians. 

6. If the Principle in the First or Second 
Figure is not Necessary, it does not lead to a 
Necessary Conclusion ; even when the remain- 
ing Premiss, which applies the Principle, is 
Necessary. E. g. 

All consecutive arguments strengthen the mind : 
All mathematical arguments must be con- 
secutive, 
Therefore they strengthen the mind. 

All good philosophy must take a high view 

of man : 
The doctrine of Hobbes does not do this, 
Therefore it is not a good philosophy. 

Unless one 7. If either Premiss of a Syllogism in the 
Problem- First or Second Figure be Problematical, the 
aticaL Conclusion is Problematical, even if the other 
Premiss is Necessary. E. g. 

All Kepublics must be on terms of equality 

among citizens : 
Government though one chief magistrate may 

be a Republic, 
Therefore it may be on terms of equality, &c. 



MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 117 

All results of earthquakes may spring from 

volcanic agency*: • j !j; 

No fossil remains can spring from volcanic f fj ¦• 

agency, j j[ 

All fossil remains may not be results of I n 

earthquakes. £j 

8. Conclusions in the Third Figure cannot Third * \j .* 
be affected by the Necessary character of the lffnre * 
Premisses. For the Necessary character of 
the Premisses adds nothing to the certainty 
of the Conclusion. E.g. 

All straightforwardness must be right : 

All straightforwardness must tend to worldly 

prosperity, 
What tends to worldly prosperity may be 

right. 

9. The Conclusion remains Problematical, 
if one of the Premisses is so. E. g. 

Vindictiveness must be odious : 
Vindictiveness may be pardonable, 
Therefore that which may be pardonable 
may still be odious. 

* The words ' may be' arc expressive of Modality, Sub- 
jective or Objective, and therefore mean, ' may be so far as I 
know,' or « may be so far as any one knows/ If we only 
know that volcanic agency may be a cause of earthquakes, 
we can only say that the absence of this agency is perhaps a 
mark of the absence of earthquakes. See p. 71. 



.1 



i • i 



118 MODAL SYLLOGISMS. 

10. Or if both Premisses ore so — although 
of course the proof of the Conclusion loses 
much of its force by the double contingency. 
E.g. 

Animal life may imply immortality : 

The action of zoophytes may imply animal 

life, 
Therefore it may imply immortality. 



I 






CHAP. X. '!¦'? 

CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. REASONING FROM ( i , \ 

HYPOTHESES. : }? ' 

1. A Syllogism is Conditional, when its Condi- t g j' 
Principle or Major Premiss is a Conditional {^ 8ms f * \l>[ 
Proposition ; in which one Problematical ')\ 
Assertion is treated as the Cause or Ante- !j I 
cedent, because of which we make the other.* ¦ il 
E. g. If the sixth Commandment is a primary i! | 
duty, then murdering tyrants is a sin. I 

2. The laws of Categorical Syllogisms have Their law i £ 
been shewn to be analogous to the axioms of ni ^ a " 
Geometrical reasoning; because equality is 
one among many possible Categorical Infer- nee p. 07. 
ences, all governed by the same laws. It ; ¦'[ 
follows, that if Conditional Syllogisms treat j | 
two Propositions as respectively Cause and [ 
Effect, the axioms on which they depend will '.'•) 
be analogous to the axioms of that Science, l\i 
which most clearly traces Causes into their |J{ 
Effects; namely, the Science of Mechanics. \\] 

3. The most elementary law of Mechanics \{i 
is, that any Cause of Motion will go on pro- l;f 



i.'l 






Hi 






1 1 :¦ 



120 



CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 



Canon for 
Construc- 
tive Condi 
tionals. 



Canon for 
Destruc- 
tive Condi 
tionals. 



Authority 
of these 
Canons. 



ducing its effects for ever, if uncounteracted. 
But this axiom depends for its validity upon 
the more general principle, that it is the 
nature of Causes or Laws to produce their 
whole effect, if uncounteracted. 

4. From this general principle it follows, 

«. That if a Problematical Antecedent or 
Cause is granted really to exist without 
counteraction, all its deducible instances 
or effects arc sure to follow. E. g. if 
I grant that the sixth Commandment is a 
primary duty, then murdering tyrants (or 
any one else) is a crime. 

j3. That a Problematical Antecedent or 
Cause is proved either not to exist, or 
to be counteracted, if any one of its 
deducible instances or effects is not pro- 
duced. E. g. If cruelty to brutes is right, 
they cannot be creatures like ourselves. 
But they are so: therefore cruelty is not 
right. 

5. These two Canons are Laws, as ele- 
mentary and as plainly self-evident as those 
on which Categorical Syllogisms rest. And . 
they are so different from these, that. Con- 
ditional Syllogisms cannot be resolved into 
Categorical Syllogisms, any more than Me- 



"i I 



REASONING FROM HYPOTHESIS. 121 

chanical Reasoning can into Geometry. This 
may be seen with clearness, by referring to 
Part II. C. VII. where it was shewn, that Con- 
ditional Propositions cannot be reduced to 
Categorical Propositions, without losing either 
the Problematical character of their Ante- 
cedent and Consequent, or the Dependence 
between them. 

6. And, secondly, by examining the relation 
of the two Premisses in the Conditional Syllo- 
gism as compared with those in the Categorical 
Syllogism. Those in the latter contain asser-v 
tions entirely different, but both equally certain. 
The Minor Premiss in Conditionals, on the 
other hand, is the antecedent of their Major 
Premiss repeated over again with more cer- 
tainty. The Major Premiss assumes only that 
the Antecedent is possible, the Minor Premiss 
assumes it as actual. These two Premisses 
then cannot be like those of the Categorical 
Syllogism, the assumption of the same person 
at the same time. They must be either 
assumptions by the same person at different 
times, or by different persons at the same time. 

7. When the two assumptions are our own Usoof Con- 
at different times, we adopt this form of Argu- Uona s ' 
ment in order to know whether a certain pos- 

M 



t' ^ 






122 



CONDITIONAL SYLLOGISMS. 



sible cause will account for the effects which 
we wish to investigate before we undergo the 
labour of ascertaining that it is a really exist- 
ing cause. E. g. If the axis of the earth varies 
in its direction towards the Sun, this will ac- 
count for the seasons of the year. But it is 
constantly varying: therefore its directions 
account for the seasons of the year. The 
reason why we put an Argument in this form 
is, that when we desire to account for the sea- 
sons of the year, it is not to our purpose to 
observe constantly the directions of the earth's 
axis with regard to the Sun, until we know 
that the changes of the seasons will be thus 
accounted for. 

8. When the Cause or Antecedent is as- 
sumed as real by ourselves, but only as pro- 
blematical by another person, we wish to 
convince him first that, if real, it will produce 
the effect. This is simply a process of Rea- 
soning, of which he is as capable as ourselves. 
And secondly, that it is real. This implies 
knowledge, which, by the hypothesis, we pos- 
sess, and he does not So that either he will 
accept our authority, or be convinced by our 
proof, that the Cause or Antecedent which he 
allows to be possible, is also real. 



i i 



REASONING FROM HYPOTHESIS. 128 

9. Conditional Syllogisms are therefore the 
only natural form for reasoning, or inducing 
other persons to reason on an Hypothesis, of 
whose truth we or they are not yet assured. 



in 



it 

;( 

:'l 
J 

. i 

¦it 

1.1- 



a 
'<) 

i! 



a 



¦ i 
i'! 

.'i 



u 



rfc 



CHAP. XI. 

DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 



Disjunc- 
tives. 



Their law. 



1. Syllogisms are said to be Disjunctive, 
when their Principle is a Disjunctive Proposi- 
tion, or Proposition in which two Problematical 
Assertions not Logically contradictory are 
assumed to be the only possible assertions 
which can be made as to the subject of Infer- 
ence, and therefore as Contradictories. E. g. 

Either Brutus was a patriot, or Ccesar was 

murdered : 
But Cresar was murdered, 
Therefore Brutus was not a patriot. 

2. Consequently the Principle on which 
they depend is that, of two Contradictories, 
one must necessarily be true and the other 
false. So that one of these two assertions 
must needs be admitted, and the other denied. 
This ground is therefore as plainly self-evi- 
dent as that of any Conditional or Categorical 
Syllogism. 




' DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 125 

3. Any attempt to reduce a Disjunctive Disjunc- 
Syllogism to four Conditionals*, omits the^f b }" e " 
condition implied in all Disjunctive Proposi- 
tions, that these two possible assertions are 
the only assertions possible about the Subject 
of Inference. Far less could a Disjunctive 
be reduced to a Categorical Syllogism. For 
Problematical Propositions which are to be- 
come actual only by denying some other, 
cannotbe reduced into Propositions expressing 
absolute knowledge. 

4. The reason why we endeavour sometimes Their use. 
to bring Arguments into this form is, that 
whenever we possess knowledge enough of a 

"l subject to reason about it at all, one of two Con- 
'¦{ tradictories respecting it must either be within 
our experience, or easily inferrible from it. 
E. g. in the instance given in §. 1, we under- 
stand too little for the purposes of reasoning 
about the claims of our country and the sixth 
Commandment, if one or other of the two 
Propositions, Caesar was murdered, or, Brutus 
was a patriot, does not come within the range 

"i'j * These Reductions hove never been seriously attempted 
in the common works on Logic. Yet they must needs be 
familiar and constant operations of the mind, except on the 
supposition that Categorical and Hypothetical Propositions 
are fundamentally different. 

M2 



* 



S. 



r, 



I 

ill: 



#• ».: 




126 DISJUNCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 

of our principles and knowledge. And in like 
manner, any person with whom we are reason- 
ing cannot possess the knowledge through 
which he might be convinced, if one of two 
Contradictory Propositions about the question 
in hand is not within the reach of his under- 
standing. 

5. Disjunctive Syllogisms are therefore the 
form of reasoning by which we bring a desired 
Conclusion within reach of the smallest pos- 
sible degree of knowledge, in ourselves or in 
another person. 



¦F^W^^W MI |, m i m m 



CHAP. XII. 

THE DILEMMA. 

The Dilemma is a Conditional Syllogism, Dilemma, 
with a Disjunctive Antecedent or Consequent, 
or both. E. g. 

i. If either virtue is honoured, or vice repressed, 

a community will prosper : 
It cannot be denied, that in England eitlier 

virtue is honoured or vice repressed, 
Therefore England will prosper. 

ii. If Attraction exists, either the planets must 
fall into the Sun, or move in Ellipses 
round it : 
But it does exist. Therefore, &c. 

iii. If either virtue be duly honoured, or vice 
duly repressed, in a country, then one of 
two consequences must follow — Revolu- 
tion on the one hand, or prosperity on 
the other. But in England we must 
confess, that either virtue is duly ho- 
noured or vice duly repressed. There- 
fore England is either likely to prosper, 
or on the verge of revolution. 



chap. xm. 

ANALOGY. 

Analogous 1. From the definition given of Analogous 
sitions. Terms in Part I., it follows, that Analogous 
Propositions must be so related, that either 
one expresses part of the whole meaning 
contained in the other, or else the two reci- 
procally express part of each other's meaning. 
2. More particularly, they are Propositions 
of which one asserts a Principle manifesting 
itself in a given set of circumstances ; while 
the other asserts the same Principle as mani- 
fested in all circumstances, or, more com- 
monly, in a different set of circumstances. 
Arguments And an Argument from Analogy is a direct 
AnSogy. an ^ unconditional inference of one of these 
two latter Propositions from the first. E. g. 
from the Principle expressed in the Pro- 
position, By speaking ill men learn to speak 
ill, may be inferred by Analogy the two 
following Propositions. 

By speaking, men learn to be able to speak. 
By speaking well, men learn to speak well. 






ANALOGY. 129 I J 

3. The Canon of Analogy is the same as Canon of \ \< 



t- 

v 



f 



that of Conditional Arguments ; that it is the 

nature of Causes to produce their whole effect. 

Hence, 
a. Whatever produces any effect under given As a posi 
circumstances, will produce the same raent . 
effect under circumstances which may 
be proved to be neither dissimilar, nor 
combined with counteracting circum- 
stances. Competition in cotton goods is 
apt to lower wages. Therefore competi- i 3 ; 

tion in iron will do the same, if it can be ' ] 

proved that in the iron trade there is no ] j ; 

circumstance counteracting the natural • 1 ! 

results of competition ; e. g. the small ; J ( 

number of workmen, or the necessity for \\[ 

conciliating them. i . «• 

/3. It is not incredible, that whatever pro-Asanega- 
duces an effect under given circum- ment^ 
stances, will produce the same effect under 
changed circumstances, unless they can 
be shewn to be dissimilar, or combined 
with counteracting circumstances. E. g. 
The Divine Government punishes bad 
actions by natural consequences. There- 
fore it may possibly punish them by 
supernatural consequences, unless there 



i 



J »¦ 



130 ANALOGY. 

is some quality in supernatural occurrences 

which unfit them for punishing bad actions. 

Implying 4, Our use of either of these arguments 

Defective ¦ 

Know- implies, that we do not possess the direct 
e * e# evidence for the desired conclusion. If we 
were sufficiently acquainted with the iron 
trade, we should be aware from our mere 
knowledge of it, whether or no competition in 
it will lower wages. And in like manner he 
who understands the real nature and law of 
supernatural punishments, would have no need 
to infer any thing about them from the analogy 
of natural punishments. 
Force of 5. The former does little to remedy this 

theposi- . _ . 

tive arga- want of evidence. For the new circumstances 
menL under which the principle acts being, ex hypo- 
thesi, unknown or less known to us, we can 
hardly ever be sure that they are neither dis- 
similar, nor combined with counteracting cir- 
cumstances. 
Of the 6. The latter is conclusive until overthrown 

argument, by some real evidence against it. It is neces- 
sary for a Moralist to allege some real coun- 
teractive difference between natural and super- 
natural punishments, before Bp. Butler's 
Analogical argument respecting them can be 
overthrown. 



PART IV. 



CHAP. I. 

ARGUMENTS NOT STRICTLY LOGICAL WITH A 
TRUE CONCLUSION. 

1. Arguments cannot be called strictly 
Logical, if they do not prove their Conclusions 
from the Evidence expressed in their Pre- 
misses ; whether the Conclusion in fact agrees 
with our experience or no. 

2. Consequences or Conclusions may be 
true in fact, — that is, as agreeing with our 
experience, — without being concluded from 
the evidence from which they profess to be 
derived. 

3. First, as being Material Consequences : Material 
when the real Evidence on which they rest is, q Uen ce.s. 
from some peculiarity in the Subject-matter, 



132 ARGUMENTS NOT STRICTLY LOGICAL 

immediately implied, though not expressed, 
| ?. . in the Premisses. E. g. 

All voluntary deformities are self-imposed : 
This lameness is self-imposed, 
Therefore it is voluntary. 

The real Premiss on which this Conclusion 
rests is, that all self-imposed deformities are 

p. 80. voluntary. But we have seen in Part II. that 
this Proposition is in fact immediately implied 
in the given Major Premiss, though not ex- 
pressed ; although our Reason, unaided by 
ethical knowledge or experience, could not 
have made us aware that such is the case. 

Antidpa 4. Secondly, as Anticipations of better 
evidence; when the real evidence on which 
they rest i6 neither expressed nor implied in 
the Premisses given. For a Conclusion may 
agree with our experience when 
: i a. The Principle on which it is supposed to 

rest is true, but the application false. 
E.g. 



i 



* \ 



l\ 



toon*. 



! Keen-sighted and logical persons are good 

\ counsellors in moral matters: 

Women are generally such persons, 
Therefore they are generally good counsellors 
in moral matters. 




tmmgnmm 



WITH A TRUE CONCLUSION. 133 ( 

i 

j3. When both the Principle and its applica- *! 

tion are false. E. g. [' 

Theology is an intruding into things unseen : |> 

Magic and astrology are integral parts of 1" 

tlieology, J! 

Therefore they intrude into things unseen. j!j 

ii l 

. ii 



CHAR II. 

FALSE CONCLUSIONS FROM EVIDENCE 
ILLOGICALLY ASSUMED. 

illogical 1* Consequences or Conclusions are sure 
inferences. tQ | )e fjjg^ jf ^y are p r0 perly derived from 

Evidence which is itself false, and from no 
other. But they are not, therefore, Illogical 
Conclusions, unless the assumed Premisses, 
or one of them, is such as no person of Logical 
mind would assume. In other words, the false 
Assumption must spring not from the absence 
of particular knowledge of facts or principles 
in any one department of Reasoning, but from 
certain general tendencies of the Understand- 
ing to frame Principles amiss in all possible 
departments of Reasoning. If a Proposition 
or Principle is assumed because of any such 
tendency, it is Illogically Assumed. And the 
operation of any such tendency is a Logical 
mark of probable Falsehood in Principles. . 

2. The Understanding may be unduly in- 
fluenced, either by certain judgments or prin- 



um i nip i nnfti 



FALSE CONCLUSIONS, &C. 135 I 

y 
ciples of other persons, or by certain judg- 
ments or principles of its own. If so, we Jj: 
reason Illogically; because it is a mark of ~C 
the Logical mind to know what amount of j 
Evidence or Principle is required to sustain jj 
a given Conclusion. jl; 
3. The undue influence of other men's Judgments ]; 
judgments may be briefly summed up under " |j 
a few principal heads. We should consider ;/, 
any Reasoner to be Illogical, who relied un- | 
duly on the authority of wise men in points' jj 
where they had fewer sources of knowledge 
than ourselves; or on that of a number of 
witnesses, when he knows that they arc not 
independent witnesses; or on that of the f 
ancients, when the question is one of criticism \ 
or accurate observation, and he is aware of ; 
the difference between the ancients and the 
moderns in this respect ; or on that of the \ 
modems, when the question is one on which j 
simple meditation or feeling may pronounce '; 
ex cathedra; or on that of the popular voice, 
or of his Mends, or teachers ; or on that of 
formulae, canons of taste, proverbs, &c. Any 
one likely to be misled by such arguments 
from authority, would naturally and rightly 
be said to have an Illogical mind. 



136 FALSE CONCLUSIONS FROM 

Judgments 4. The undue influence of our own judg- 
i 'merits leads to Dogmatism, if we maintain 

| and enforce them without connecting or en- 

! deavouring to connect them witli any Prin- 

f ciple. E. g. as when an instinctive dislike 

; for educated servants is made a reason for 

[ , opposing general education. 

' 5. Or to Fallacies of Induction, if we main- 

i tain and enforce them as leading to Principles 

| which they do not warrant. E. g. it is Illo- 

j gical to reason that states must needs have 

a youth, manhood, and decay; because some 
; states, which we remember, have passed 

! through these stages. 

; • 6. Or, lastly, to Fallacies of Application, 

1 if we maintain and enforce them as leading 

to Principles warranted in themselves, but 

: fundamentally inapplicable to the arguments 

which we are framing. 

7. It would be Illogical, for instance, in 
a person possessing any information about 
Chemistry and Mechanics, to argue without 
examination that oxygen and hydrogen, when 
mixed together, must produce a joint effect 
just equal to the sum of their separate effects. 
This would be an Illogical application to 
Chemical bodies of a Principle which is , 

i : I S 



EVIDENCE ILLOGICALLY ASSUMED. 137 

familiarized to us only by the action of 
Mechanical forces. A Logical temper would 
have induced the Reasoner to examine be- 
forehand whether this Principle applies to 
Chemistry, or not*. 

8. Again, Diodotus, in the well-known 
speech, accuses Gleon of Illogical Reasoning 
as to the treatment of the Mytilenian pri- 
soners. If Principles applicable to one re- 
lation between two parties are transferred 
to another, without any examination as to 
their applicability to these new circum- 
stances, the argument violates the common 
laws of the reason, which dictate that general 
laws should be applied only to those subjects 
which they include. 

9. Lastly, it is Illogical in the highest 
degree, and a surrender of our better Reason, 
to make Principles of taste an evidence for 
Physical or Moral facts. E. g. Fire is the 
noblest element in the universe : therefore 

* The Logical temper would not have hindered him from 
mistaking the action of forces after examination; but it 
would have hindered his assuming it without examination. 
The common use of the terms Fallacy and Fallacious, as 
applied to such assumptions, shows that he who makes 
them is popularly considered to be violating some law of 
his own Reason. 

N 2 



r f 



\>. 



i XV- 



138 



FALSE CONCLUSIONS, &C. 



it must needs occupy its centre. Bene- 
volence is more pleasing than justice : there- 
fore it is a more essential attribute of good 
men. 



w*mr****mmm"*mm 






(a; if 

:r. :: 



CHAP. III. 

FALSE CATEGORICAL CONCLUSIONS FROM TRUE 
AND LOGICAL EVIDENCE. 



1. On the other hand, we may reason so ill Logical 
as to get false Conclusions from Evidence 
truly and logically assumed. The Evidence 
may be neither false nor irrelevant ; and yet. 
we may draw from it a Conclusion to which j jj !; 
we are not entitled. False Reasoning there- 
fore is grounded upon a false assumption, 
that a given Conclusion follows from given 
Premisses. 

2. Canons of Invalid Argument. Canoiw of 

Fallacy, 
a. If two things are not proved to agree 

with the same third, they are not proved 

to agree with one another. This is a 

deduction from the higher Axiom*, that 

* This and the Axiom from which the second Canon is 
derived, are incapable of being laws to establish any argu- 
ment, or detect any fallacy. For no two Tilings differ so 
much as not to have a single quality in common with one 
another, and therefore with any third Thing possessing the 
same quality. And no two Things agree so entirely as that 
no one single quality shall be possessed by the one and not 






1 



140 FALSE CATEGORICAL CONCLUSIONS 



i 



ill 



Imply 



if two things do not agree with any one 
and the same third thing, they do not 
agree with one another. 
/S. If of two things one is not proved to 
agree with any third thing from which 
the other differs, they are not proved to 
differ from one another. A deduction 
from the higher Canon, that two Things 
cannot be different from one another, if 
neither agrees with any Thing from 
which the other differs. 

3. Any case to which these Canons apply 
must be one in which more than two Terms 
are compared with the Middle Tenn ; or one 
in which the Major and Minor Terms are 
compared with two different Middle Terms; 
or one in which the kind of Agreement as- 
serted in the Conclusion is not the same as 
that asserted in the Premisses. 

4. They have therefore no application to 
Arguments which are free from confusion or 
ambiguity in the Terms. For any argument 



by the other. Unless this is the case, any third Thing 
possessing this quality will be a Thing with which one 
agrees, and from winch the other differs. The third and 
fourth Canons of Aldrich are therefore useful only as proving 
the fifth and sixth. 



Hi 



FROM TRUE AND LOGICAL EVIDENCE. 141 

in which two Terms are obviously substituted 
for the one Middle Term, or in which the 
Minor or Major Tenn in the Conclusion is 
obviously different from the Major or Minor 
Term in the Premisses, cannot even appear to 
draw its Conclusion from the given Premisses. 
E.g. 

Virtuous actions tend to happiness : 

This action is lucrative, 

Therefore it tends to happiness. 

All equal governments are desirable : 

Republics are equal, 

Therefore Universal-Suffrage is desirable. 

4. The only application of these Canons is 
therefore to cases of Confusion or Ambiguity, 
either in the Terms of the Syllogism or its 
Copulac. 

5. If the Fallacy lies in the Terms, it must in the 

• .-i Terms* : 

arise either 

a. From Confusion in the material Qualities 
implied by them as Terms. If this is the 
case, the Terms are said to be Ambiguous 
in themselves. 

/3. From Confusion as to the Logical Quan- 
tity which the Terms possess, not in 
themselves, but as parts of a Proposition. Append. 
The Fallacy is then entirely Logical ; 4 j 



Hi 



*ji 



in the 
Copul*. 




142 FALSE CATEGORICAL CONCLUSIONS, &C. 

and is either the Non-distribution of the 
Middle Term, or Illicit Process with the 
Major or Minor Term, or Inference from 
Particular Premisses. 

6. If the Fallacy lies in the Copula, it must 
spring either 

*. From Confusion as to the Logical Quality 
of the Premisses. Such Fallacies are 
also simply Logical, and are either that 
of drawing inferences from Negative Pre* 
misses, or of drawing an Affirmative in- 
ference from Premisses of which one is 
Negative. 

/S. From Confusion as to the degree of 
certainty implied in some Proposition of 
an argument. Fallacies of Modality. 



*T 



CHAP. IV. j i; '- 

TERMS AMBIGUOUS IN THEMSELVES. j 

j 

1. No Logical rule can be given for dis- Ambiguity j 
covering whether this or that Term is usedgi ca i. 
Ambiguously, that is, in Analogous senses, 
and not always Univocally, throughout an 
Argument. Nothing but knowledge of the 
Subject-matter can infonn us of this. All J'| 
that can be done is, to lay down Logical marks 
of the Terms in which Ambiguity is likely to 
occur. 

2. Terms are likely to be used Ambiguously 
in Argument, when they represent elementary 
intellectual notions. E. g. Cause, Substance, 
Individual, Necessity, Nature, Possibility, Idea, 
Law, Principle, Chance, Value, &c. Or when 
they represent little besides these notions. 
E. g. One Virtue, the Same Habit, Relative 
Truth, &c. For these Terms, as being simply 
or mainly intellectual, can only be used 
definitely by the cultivated mind; while, at 
the same time, they must constantly be used 






i ¦: 









144 TERMS AMBIGUOUS IN THEMSELVES. 

by every one, as expressing the commonest 
acts of the Understanding. Fallacies there- 
fore are apt to arise when they are transferred 
from the Institutum Fori, or common use, to 
the Institutum Theatri, or speculative use ; 
and vice versa. Such notions are expressed 
more frequently in the Major or Middle Tenn 
than in the Minor ; and consequently the two 
former are those which are most likely to be 
Ambiguous for this cause. But, 

2. Tenns are likely to be used Ambiguously 
when they represent single things or effects, 
as we perceive them occurring in nature, or 
their first and most obvious generalizations. 
For then the qualities which they imply are 
so manifold, and so hard to arrange in order 
of importance, that the meaning is indefinitely 
altered by the different experience of this or 
that person. Such are, 

«. The names of common phenomena, as 
heat, hardness, beauty, &c. 

0. Names of complex historical events, e. g. 
Reform, Revolution, Decline of a State. 

y. Words expressive of religious states. 
E. g. Election, Perseverance, and the 
like. 

8. Tenns of empirical science. E. g. Rent, 



TERMS AMBIGUOUS IN THEMSELVES. 145 



Punishment, Rights of Labour, Organiza- 
tion, Constitutional Freedom. 

3. The Terms most frequently made Am- 
biguous from this second cause, are the Minor 
and Middle Terms. For the words just enu- 
merated are mostly the Subjects of our Con- 
clusions, as expressing the Things about 
which we reason. 

4. The Middle Term is therefore of all the 
Terms the most likely to be Ambiguous, since 
it may be so from either of the two principal 
causes first given. The Major Term is of all 
the least likely, because it seldom expresses 
either a complex Subject, or a merely intel- 
lectual quality. Examples of fallacy for either 
kind of Ambiguity may readily be found in 
Abp. Whately's Logic, and elsewhere. 



CHAP. V. 

LOGICAL FALLACIES OF QUANTITY IN 
CATEGORICALS. 



Quantity. 



1. A reasoner may be perfectly clear as 
to the material Qualities which the Terms of 
his Syllogism really imply; and yet confused 

Fallacies of as to the Logical Quantity which they possess 
as included in some one of its Propositions. 
This is the case if he expresses in his Con- 
clusion a relation between its Major and 
Minor Term which the Premisses did not 
imply, or implied less generally. 

2. Drawing any Inference from Particular 
Premisses expresses a relation between these 
Terms which the Premisses did not imply at 
all E.g. 

Some imitations of war ore useful : 
Some hunting is on image of war, 
Therefore some hunting is useful, 

All hunting may, without contradicting the 
Premisses, be asserted to be one of those 
images of war which are not useful. Such an 



Particular 
Premisses. 



¦Ml 



II 



LOGICAL FALLACIES OF QUANTITY, &C. 147 

argument then implies a deficient Induction 
in the Major Premiss. 

3. No Inference can be drawn from any Undistri- 
Premisses in which the Middle Term is not Middle, 
distributed or taken Universally. E. g. 

Some influxes of gold bring prosperity with 

them: 
The repayment of profitable investments is ' 

an influx of gold, 
Therefore it must bring prosperity. 

This Inference is only justified by the Major 
Premiss, that all influx of gold is favourable 
to trade; which in this Syllogism was not 
assumed. Such an argument is therefore a 
Fallacy, because of the insufficient Induction 
in the Major Premiss. 

4. An Illicit Process of the Minor Term illicit Pro- 
expresses in the Conclusion an Universal and^inor: 
constant relation of the Minor Term to the 
Major Term; when only a particular and 
exceptional one was asserted in the Minor 
Premiss, as existing between the Minor and 
Middle Term. E. g. 

All independent persons deserve the elective 

suffrage : 
Englishmen are independent persons, 
Therefore they deserve the elective suffrage. 



ii 



Mi 



!•- 






? 



i 



H: 



148 LOGICAL FALLACIES OF QUANTITY, &C. 

If this Conclusion is proved, the Minor Pre- 
miss must imply, that All Englishmen are 
independent. But this was not the case; 
and therefore the Argument is fallacious from 
the insufficient Induction in the Minor Pre- 
miss. 
ofM^or. 5. An Illicit Process of the Major Term; 
when by drawing a Negative Conclusion, we 
decide that the Major Term in the Conclusion 
altogether excludes the Minor; there being in 
the Premisses no evidence that it excludes 
the Minor Term at all. E. g. 

All primary motives lead to good actions : 
Compassion is not a primary motive, 
Therefore it does not lead to good actions. 

The Conclusion is proved only on the sup- 
position, that All motives which lead to good 
actions must be primary; and therefore the 
Argument is fallacious, from assuming with- 
out any Induction the simple converse of the 
Major Premiss. 



if/ 

7 I 



CHAP. VI. 






LOGICAL FALLACIES OF QUALITY IN 
CATEGORICALS. 



1. Inference from two Negative Pre- Negative 
misses; which affords no ground for a Con- 
clusion, either Affirmative or Negative. E. g. 

No good philosopher denies innate ideas : 
M. Comte does not deny innate ideas, 
Therefore he is a good philosopher. 

This Conclusion requires the Affirmative Major 
Premiss, that all who do not deny innate 
ideas are good philosophers, which is con- 
fusedly supposed to be alleged in the given 
Major Premiss. 

2. Inference of an Affirmative from Pre- 
misses, of which one is Negative \ E. g. 

Political crimes do not invite our sympathy : 
Stirring up rebellion is a political crime, 
Therefore I sympathise with it. 

* This Fallacy, it appears, is one which the feelings alone 
can possibly fall into. 

o2 



• ;[ 



in 






:h 






P4»*VM*«^M* 



IS 



I, 






H 



i 



i 



i ¦ 






150 



LOGICAL FALLACIES, &C. 



XocUd 
Fallacies. 



3. Fallacies of Modality are violations of 
any of the rules for Modal Syllogisms given 
above, by ascribing to the Conclusion more 
certainty than the Premisses involve. E. g. 

All arts are humanising : 

All field labour may be an art, 

Therefore it is humanising. 

All consecutive arguments strengthen the 

mind: 
All mathematical arguments are consecutive, 
Therefore they must strengthen the mind. 

The former of these Conclusions ought only 
to be Problematical, the latter only Assertory. 



« : <• 



r 



CHAP. VII. 

LOGICAL FALLACIES IN HYPOTHETICALS. 

1. Canons for the Detection of Fallacy in : || y 
Conditionals. ' '| ?, 

a. Unless all possible effects of a Cause Conse- ; :i ;i; 

are produced, the Cause is not proved to p0 sito ', Ij: 

subsist. Hence it follows, that in assert- "^^ : : j ' It 

ing any given Effect or Consequent to ;> 

have been produced, we do not assert {¦}). 

that any single Cause or Antecedent • i r 

which might produce it is really ex- ; ; ;': 

istent. i ; j! 

/3. Unless all possible Causes of an effect Sublato :;, 

are denied, the existence of the effect is^ente ' :j,- 

not disproved. Hence it follows, that in nihi1, ! : : 

denying the existence of any single . \\\\ 

Cause or Antecedent, we do not deny •!(; 

the existence of that which might have j 

been one of its effects. : ; 

2. We do not, e. g. establish the fact of Ij . 
gravitation by observing that one apple falls 



¦ il 



I 



! ! 



152 



LOGICAL FALLACIES 






; \ 



Fallacy in 
Disjunc- 
tives: 



from a tree; but by observing, that all the 
phenomena within xhe reach of observation or 
experiment are in complete accordance with 
this Hypothesis. And the principle that the 
magnetic needle lies parallel with the axis of 
the earth, is established not by a single 
observed declination, but by a complete 
series registered in all parts of the globe, and 
therefore Inductively complete. Asserting 
one Consequent, that is, does not establish 
the Cause or Antecedent. 

3. On the other hand, we do not deny the 
existence of the Zodiacal light, because one 
of its supposable Causes, the reflection of the 
Sun's rays, is proved to be out of the question. 
Nor yet the usefulness of Rhetorical study, 
because we deny the account of its use given 
by some of its advocates, who say, 

If it is desirable to persuade others to injustice, 
then Rhetoric should be studied. 

Denying our Cause or Antecedent does not 
therefore make the Effect or Consequent im- 
possible or false. 

4. Since Disjunctive Syllogisms assume 
only that two assertions and no more are pos- 
sible in respect of a given Conclusion, it follows 



V 



i ! 



IN HYPOTHETICALS. 158 



*: 






•II 

that they can only be overthrown by denying ( jj 

the accuracy of the Disjunction, and proposing 
a new alternative. E. g. when it is argued that 

Either innate ideas must be admitted, or the 

ideas of right or wrong must be considered 

impossible : 
But innate ideas are not to be admitted, 
Therefore ideas of right and wrong are to be 

considered impossible : 



'ill; 



! f. 

i-5 f 



it behoves any one who would refute this 
Argument to prove the existence of some :| j[ii 

source for the idea of right and wrong besides 
that of innate ideas. This being of course 
impossible, the Argument cannot be over- 
thrown on any merely logical grounds. 

5. If, on the other hand, it is argued, that 
either the English constitution must retrograde, 
or an extension of the suffrage ought to be 
decreed; and that therefore the latter alter- 
native ought to be adopted, because the former 
cannot; we may evidently allege the farther 
possibility of leaving the suffrage in its pre- 
sent state of limitation. The Disjunctive 
Argument is then overthrown, until it is proved 
that this new alternative is impossible. 

6. The Dilemma, being a Disjunctive Syllo- 



L 



H 



154 



LOGICAL FALLACIES 



in the Di- gism, can be overthrown only by denying the 
emma. ex h aus tiveness of the Disjunction. E. g. 

If the Navigation Laws are repealed, we shall 
either extend our maritime pursuits, or 
become agricultural : 

But the Navigation Laws are in process of 
repeal, 

Therefore, &c. 

This Argument is overthrown if any third 
course is alleged to which the repeal of the 
Navigation Laws may lead — e. g. the exten- 
sion of our manufactories exclusively. 
Again, in the Dilemma, 

If either the manufacturers rebel, or the 
agriculturists are ruined, our prosperity is 
at an end : 

But either the manufacturers must rebel, or 
the agriculturists must be ruined, 
Therefore, &c. 

we must imagine some fresh alternative, some 
means of contenting the manufacturers, with- 
out ruining the agriculturists, if the Argument 
is to be overthrown. 
Retorts. 7. Dilemmas with a Disjunctive Antecedent 
may sometimes be retorted. That is, we may 
take the two Antecedents, and derive from 



¦ 



***** 



IN HYPOTHETICALS. 155 






each a probable Conclusion contrary* to the 
probable Conclusion derived from the other. 
E.g. 

If the manufacturers rebel, our agricultural 
prosperity will make us stronger than at 
present: 

If the agriculturists are ruined, our manu- 
facturers will multiply : ; * 

Therefore, if either the one rebel, or the : jf j: 

other are ruined, our prosperity will be . ! Jlj; 

in fact increased. ' fjjj 

8. The Retort is, therefore, no more than ]!|j- 

an arraying of probability against probability, 

and not an overthrow of the original argument. 

In this case, in particular, the probability 

contained in the Retort is much less than 

that which the Dilemma embodied. The 

latter was, therefore, a strong argument; 

which it would not have been, if an equally 

strong counteractive probability could have 

been obtained out of its Antecedents. If the 

new Consequents had been of exactly equal \\: 

probability with the old, and contrary to them, [ ; ' 

the Dilemma would have been completely V 

retorted, though not fully overthrown. 1 

• The new Consequents must be Contrary, not merely ] i 

Contradictory, to the former. 






1 


n ¦ 


• ¦ 

4 ! 


W 


v • 


':'¦} 




'¦; 

ii: 



PART V. J; 

ARGUMENTS IN CONNECTION. '{>[ 

CHAP. I. jjl 

SORITES, OR TRAINS OF REASONING. { \t 

1. Trains of Reasoning are necessary when, Sorites. P< 

without being able to prove by a single Syl- . ;j 

logism in the First Figure that a given Sub- \ : \ 

ject has always or sometimes a given Predicate, ; • * 

we yet are able to prove that it has a Predicate 1 j! 

which involves that Predicate. For instance, jj 
we may desire to prove that the national debt 

fosters immorality in the labouring classes, j.j 

from our knowledge that it draws on the J.' 

capital of the country unproductively. ! ' 

•2. The steps of this Argument will pro- ;i 

bably be, that whatever draws on the capital I 

of the country unproductively is unfavour- | 

P : f " 



158 SORITES, OR TRAINS OF REASONING. 

able to cheap production ; that if we cannot 
produce cheaply, we cannot compete with 
countries whose wages are low; that this 
difficulty induces employers to attempt level- 
ling the wages of English workmen as much 
as possible with those of foreign workmen; 
that this puts English labourers at a dis- 
advantage, and brings to undeserved poverty, 
and consequent deterioration of morals. 

3. It is important to remark, that every 
step of this Train of Argument is in fact a 
Syllogism, with the Conclusion of the Syl- 
logism immediately preceding it for its Minor 
Premiss. E. g. the fourth step, 

Whatever tends to level wages puts English 

labourers at a disadvantage : 
The national debt tends to level wages, 
Therefore it puts English labourers at a 
disadvantage. 

4. If this Syllogism, or any other of those 
which compose the Train of Reasoning, could 
be shewn to be invalid for any of the reasons 
exhibited in Part IV, it would of course have 
overthrown along with it all the lower steps 
of the argument. For these only stand on the 
assumption of its conclusiveness. 



•****!iimmr** 



, Figiuv. 



tionals. 



SORITES, OB TRAINS OF REASONING. 150 «' \ 

5. The Minor Term is of course the same ' 
in every Syllogism throughout the Train of ^ 
Reasoning. For the object proposed was to 1} 
prove, that a given Subject possesses certain J if 
qualities through our knowledge of certain 
others which it possesses. J- l « 

6. In Trains of Reasoning, each separate 
Syllogism* must be in the First Figure, and no Only in 1st 
other. Syllogisms in the Second Figure could 
not be connected into Trains of Reasoning ; 
because we cannot prove that one Subject \<\ 
differs from another, because the former differs 
from a third Subject, which differs from the 






!i 
; l 

latter. Nor could Syllogisms in the Third ;.!{. 

Figure, because one Predicate is not proved ,'!]¦ 

rjf 



S 



to be compatible with another, because the 
former is compatible with a third Predicate 
with which the latter is also compatible. 
Syllogisms in these two Figures are therefore 
only preliminary to Trains of Reasoning. 

7. Conditional Syllogisms admit of being In Condi- 
connected into Trains of Reasoning, inasmuch * 
as Hypotheses, like admitted facts, may be 

* If Trains of Reasoning are undertaken for the purpose 
of ultimately distinguishing two Subjects from one another, 
then of course the last Syllogism in the Sorites will be one 
in the Second Figure. In like manner, the last might be in 
the Third Figure. j 



l 



!¦' 



I, 



'i : !l'f: 
i 



; I 



1 i ; 



! I ¦ 



H 



.!! 



i ; 

i i i 



160 SORITES, OR TRAINS OF REASONING. 

reasoned out into extensive Trains of conse- 
quences. In the example above given, every 
step of the argument might equally have been 
deduced, if the influence of the national debt 
upon cheap production, or its own unpro- 
ductive character, had been Hypotheses as- 
sumed for the purposes of reasoning, instead 
of facts which we have had means of observing 
and verifying for ourselves. 



CHAP. II. 

DEMONSTRATION. 

1. Trains of Argument, as remarked above, p. 87. 
ire most philosophically complete when they^ 
tegin from an Universal Assertion or Prin- 
ciple, which is established not by Induction, 

3ut by its own self-evidency. Such are the 
•easonings of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 
md of any system of simply deductive Meta- 
physics or Natural Theology. A train of 
Reasoning depending on a Necessary Prin- 
jiple or Law, and capable of accounting for 
ill phenomena of a given kind, is called a 
Demonstrative Science. 

2. In Mathematical subjects, or subjects Axioms, 
nathematically treated throughout, the primary 

aws are either Geometrical or Mechanical. In 
dther case they are called Axioms. 

3. It has been much debated among philo- 
sophers, whether the Axioms of Geometry and 
Mechanics are merely verbal truths or no. 
riiat is, whether it is exactly the same thing 

p2 



s 



' li 
i 



¦i| 






I 
i 1 



162 DEMONSTRATION. 



to say, that two things are equal to the same, 

as it is to say, that they are equal to another. 

Those who, like Bentham, maintain this view, 

» ! * seem to do so from a confused view of what 

the question means. Objectively, and in the 

j •. nature of things, it is precisely the same 

I j. \ quality which makes things equal to the same 

and equal to one another. Subjectively, and 

j 1 1 | | as representing our knowledge, these two 

assertions are by no means the same. We 

; | \ may be perfectly aware, that two things are 

equal to the same third, and yet we may never 

have been induced to consider whether they 

are equal to one another or not. And on the 

other hand, we may know that they are equal 

to another, without having ever thought of 

any third thing to which both are equal. 

4. This is seen still more plainly in the 
case of other Axioms. Two straight lines 
cannot enclose a space ; but it is not the 
same thing to say that they are straight lines, 
and to say that they do not enclose a space. 
Lines which are not parallel must meet. But 
saying that they are not parallel is not the 
same thing as saying that they will sometime 
meet. We should not be able to get the 
latter conclusion from the former, without the 



DEMONSTRATION. 163 









power which we possess of imagining infinite ; ,lj: 

space, and these lines produced into it. [•;[ 

5. These Axioms, and others resembling 

them, give the Form or Law to Demonstra- ji : 

tions in Geometry and Mechanics. The acts (}¦ 

of Reason whereby we perceive and acknow- ;; } , 

ledge the cogency of the remotest mathema- v ' : 

tical deductions, are no more than certain 
extensions of the acts of Reason implied in 
assuming the Axioms on which the science j ;-jj? 

ultimately rests. 'M 

6. The Matter of mathematical reasoning Detini- 'l 
consists of certain lines, figures, quantities, * " 
and forces, assumed to exist and to be capable 
of entirely accurate measurement or definition. 
Geometry treats of lines assumed to be entirely 
straight; of figures assumed to be exact tri- 
angles, squares, circles*, &c. and so to answer 
exactly to the Definition of these figures. 
This assumption, though not rigorously true, 
is sufficiently so for the purposes of mathe- 
matical reasoning. 

7. Some writers have maintained, that the 
law or form of mathematical reasoning is to 
be found in the Definitions; not in the 
Axioms. They did not perceive that it is 

* This assumption is contained in the Postulates. 



¦I 

\i 

!l 

w 

¦ I i 
If 



l\ 



164 DEMONSTRATION. 

impossible to demonstrate any new truth 
about, e. g. a triangle, from possessing a mere 
description of it. We do not demonstrate 
from the Definition of a triangle that its three 
angles are equal to two right angles; but 
from observing that its three angles are equal 
to two other angles, which are undoubtedly 
equal to two right angles. So that the de- 
monstration rests on the first Axiom; and 
not on the Definition or description of a 
triangle. 

8. Every step of a Demonstration contains 
a Syllogism in the First Figure, and all its 
Conclusions must be Affirmative. For in 
Demonstrations we are always acquiring from ' 
the completest possible knowledge, and putting 
our Conclusion entirely beyond question : 
which only the First Figure can do. And the 
Conclusion which we draw are facts of the out- 
ward world, as well as facts of our own con- 
sciousness: and therefore necessarily Affirm- 
ative. 
Reductio 9. An apparent exception to this remark is 
sibile. found in the process of Reductio ad Absur- 
dum, or ad Impossibile. This is a kind of 
indirect proof to be used when we know of no 
Predicates of a given Subject, which in any 



PHP"**" 






DEMONSTRATION. 165 >,i1 



u 



';•* 



way involve the Predicate which we desire to 
see proved of it. E. g. If two angles of a 

triangle are equal to one another, we desire to i I 

know what is the relation between the sides \.\\ 

subtending the equal angles. An indirect [ } .; 

process must therefore be used, inasmuch as ;' } 

when we read Euclid i. 8. we have not become ! ! ]f - ¦ 

acquainted with any Qualities or Predicates of L' 

a triangle involved in the fact of its having j ; 't 

two equal angles. t:| 

10. If any Proposition leads by direct rea- 
soning to an impossibility, it must be false, 
and its Contradictory must be true. We there- 
fore take a Proposition the Contradictory of the 

desired Conclusion, namely, that the two sides -h 

subtending equal angles are unequal. And rf ij 

finding that this leads to an Impossibility or \ 

Absurdity, we conclude the Affirmative Propo- \ / 

sition that its Contradictory must be true. f 

Hence the rule given by Aldrich, to put in jj 

place of one of the original Premisses the if 

Contradictory of the Conclusion, and thence >li 

to infer a Conclusion which shall contradict ;; ! 

one of the original Premisses. >: 






j 



i| 



| I 



Jl 



CHAP. III. 

CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE OF PROBABILITY. 

1. All Arguments which make the truth of 
a given fact or proposition probable, allege 
either some existing Antecedent, of which the 
proposition or fact is probably a Consequent ; 
or some existing Consequent, of which the 
proposition or fact is the necessary or pro- 
bable Antecedent. An Argument which alleges 
some Antecedent, is called by Aristotle an 
elxog; and that which alleges some Consequent, 
a oyiiulov*. If it alleges a Consequent which 
could not have been produced by any other 
Cause but the supposed one, the Argument is 
a Texfwjgiov, or positive proof. For instance, if 
it is to be proved that A murdered B, any 
former grudge of A*s against B would be 

• It is more accurate to say, that he calls them Enthy- 
memes, !£ tucSruv <cai <rr)fi*U*r. But nothing is gained by 
reducing to Syllogistic form such arguments as gain their 
force only from Cumulation. 



mm*^**m immmmm~mxm 



; :l. 



! '"J : . 
*¦'. i 



CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE OF PROBABILITY. 167 ®\ 

an eixif, or predisposing cause which might :*;•' 

have produced the act; and any sudden en- :,i 

richment of B just about the time of the •:!? 

murder, would be a rwelov, or probable effect i:! \- 

of the action. A rexpjg/ov, or entirely con- i 

elusive sign, can hardly ever be found. If 
the accused person had a defonned foot, and 
the only foot-prints near were his, this would 
probably be considered conclusive — supposing 
the ground to be in such a condition, as that 
every footstep must leave a print upon it. 

2. EJxoVa b have considerable force in direct- eMto. 
ing suspicion, but for the most part very little 
in proving that any one has committed a given 
act. For that a man had many influences 
predisposing him to do this or that, is next to 
no proof that he actually did it. Men con- 
stantly act both for evil and for good against 
innumerable predispositions. It would be 
little evidence against AB, a murderer on 
his trial, that the person murdered was one 
whom it was much his interest to be rid of; 
and that the state of his banker's account 
proves that he would have had much difficulty 

b Ehctra are sometimes called Presumptions, as distinct 
from Evidence; which latter name is then confined to 



t'S 



pi 

I 



lii 



ill 



! 



168 



CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE 



in continuing an allowance made to him. If, 
indeed, a former attempt of the same kind 
is proved against him, this will be an i\xh$ of 
much force. But to all others it is easy to 
allege counter tlxira; e. g. his habitual bene- 
volence. 
Sii/mm. 3. If many oij/teia, or apparent consequences, 

first, of having resolved to do the act, and 
secondly, of having done it, can be discovered 
in the conduct of an accused person, then our 
belief that he has done it is increased by each 
additional sign which can be alleged. A B's 
presence on the spot at the very time of the 
murder, his having purchased poison the day 
before, and having (by his own account) none 
the day after, the agitation and uncertainty 
of his manner , his false statements when 
questioned, together with the proof that death 
was effected by the same kind of poison which 
he purchased, are a set of consequences 
which cannot collectively have sprung from 
any other Antecedent than his actually having 

e In defence it maybe alleged, that his agitation is a sign 
not of present crime, but of disturbance on account of a 
crime long passed — that the signs supposed to indicate the 
presence of prussic acid are illusory — and that the existence 
' of prussic acid in the stomach is no certain sign of having 
been poisoned. 



OF PROBABILITY. 169 ;! 

!i 

i: 

committed the murder. It is impossible to ; 

say at what point of the evidence we first \\ 

arrive at moral certainty. Probably, however, j, 

the two first points and the last would be con- ,1 

sidered to have established the fact, if they » 

had been above alleged. No one of them !' 

singly amounts to a Tcxpjg/ov. !< 

4. It is probable, that every human action 
of any magnitude leaves so many marks or 
(DjjttsTa behind it, that any person as interested 
in discovering it as a police officer is in 
detecting a murder, and possessed of a similar 
amount of experience, would be able to detect 
it. When we have interest in discovering 
any thing, we lay bare, so far as one event is 
concerned, the natural links and connections i| 

which unite one event with another through- }\ 



u ( 



out the whole mass of human actions. Thus j j 

a culprit may be traced from place to place, j f 

traditions of forgotten events may be re- jj 

covered, and lost documents may be tracked ij 

to their place of concealment, if the searcher j I 

has the skill necessary for remarking signs. i [ 

5. Eixora, or predisposing causes, have, as ['; 

applied to some subjects of investigation, a ii 

force at least equal to that of <njju,e7a. They do !) 

not prove human actions to have occurred, '.; 

Q ; : 



-^ 



I!l 



¦ 









i 



1 



170 



CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE 



because freewill may at anytime have counter- 
acted them. But in deciding on, e. g. the mean- 
ing of a word* asused in some ancient author, we 
are influenced as much by the observation of 
meanings from which that which we adopt might 
be derived, as by the observation of reasonings 
which might be derived from it. Buttmann, 
for instance, argues that 2«gSjve$ ahvot) means, 
' the loud-voiced Sirens,* because all the more 
literal meanings are connected with the sense 
of alqhj i solid, crowded, heavy, deep-sound- 
ing, 9 and the like. The inference is obvious, 
that oSiyof, as applied to the Sirens, means 
clear and loud-voiced. On the other hand, 
he argues, that ^/ujSorJ* is contracted for qX*o- 
/Saro;, because all the meanings attributed to 
the word in Homer, and elsewhere, may be 
derived from the sense of ' slippery and 
dangerous, 9 whereas many of them could not 

d The accurate use of words is of course a result of human 
will. But the will does not decide on the meaning of each 
word as it uses it, and is so strongly determined by custom 
and precedent, as hardly to have any freedom left as regards 
the use of familiar words. This is what makes the pecu- 
liarities of language such an important element in ascertain- 
ing the genuineness of any work. A man may guard against 
historical mistakes in a forged work, but he can hardly clothe 
his thoughts in a language which is not that of his age or 
country, without running innumerable risks of detection. - 



OF PROBABILITY. 171 



ft 



possibly be deduced from the common etymo- ,1 j 

logy of the word. j! \ 

6. The force of ilxoVa and cyfjutia has never ;, j 
perhaps been so completely illustrated, as p : [ 
the great and triumphant arguments of men of ' [ 
learning respecting the genuineness and con- Pj 
sequent authenticity of works asserted to be ijjf 
ancient. Such are the arguments of Bentley 
against the Epistles of Phalaris, and that of 
Bp. Pearson in favour of the seven Epistles 
of St. Ignatius. 

7. Only one antecedent cause is alleged by 
Bentley, why these Letters should not have 
been written by Phalaris . This is, that I J 
Phalaris died at latest in B. C. 549 ; whereas h 
there is a tradition, that Atossa the wife of il 
Xerxes was the first who ever made and '}\ 
published collections of Epistles. Still the < 
person who made this assertion might be jj 
mistaken, and therefore an enquirer has next i \ 
to search for the positive marks, or o-ijfwTa, of \\ 
falsehood in the Letters themselves. These If 

is 

e The practice usual among the Sophists of writing de- , t ! 

clamations under the name of distinguished persons, is an j j 

antecedent cause for the Epistles having been written by j ; 

one. And the constant magnifying of the literary character j , 

which is evident in them (see inf. §. 12.) is an almost con- i . 

elusive ffrifUtoy t.» the same effect. j '< 

l ; 
i: 



J) 



p 
1 1 



;!! 



1! 

i 



, 5 ii 



; »' 



• . I. 

! »!¦ 



172 CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE 

may be arranged according to the theoretical 
analysis of such proofs given by Bentham in 
his Treatise on Evidence. 

8. Testimony of witnesses to the spurious- 
ness of documents alleged to be genuine. The 
Epistles of Phalaris are mostly unknown to 
the ancients. If mentioned, they are attri- 
buted with more or less probability to other 
writers, such as Lucian. Those who consider 
them genuine, seem not to have read them ; 
for they assert details contradictory to those 
in the Epistles. 

9. Mention of posterior facts or discoveries. 
The Epistles mention the cities of Phintia 
and Alsesia, which were not founded, the one 
till B.C. 362, the other till B.C. 426. Zancle 
and Messana are spoken of as two distinct 
towns. Whereas Messana was a name given 
to Zancle itself, at least sixty years after the 
death of Phalaris. The Epistles use proverbs, 
of which the later origin is known; e. g. vItvos 
8/xijv ixr^tyfjv, which was invented either by 
Croesus or by Herodotus; and Xo'yo* egyou o-xU, 
which belongs to Democritus. Above all, 
they imply the existence of tragedies and 
comedies, written in iambic metre. Neither 
were written until long after; and even then, 



OF PROBABILITY. 173 

the iambic metre was a late substitute for the 
ancient tetrameter. ' , 

10. Words, grammar, or orthography* poste- 
rior. This is plain, both in the diffused cha- 
racter of the style, which cannot be alleged 
as evidence; and also in particular expres- 
sions, which can. E. g. the words Qikwofl* 
and x&yto? are used as familiar; which they 
could not have been, until after the time of 
Pythagoras, who first used them. TlgJvout, in 
the sense of Providence, and oroix§ia, to mean 
the elements of the world, are inventions of 
Plato. The dialect too is Attic, and not the 
Doric, which Phalaris must certainly have 
used. Moreover, it is new Attic, and not 
even the Attic of Phalaris's time. In early 
Greek, nqoTfaw would not have been used 
with the dative in the sense of i accusing, 1 &c. 
This, as remarked above, is the most decisive 
evidence possible for or against a work 
alleged to be genuine. 

11. Falsehoods where the author must have 
been well informed, and unlikely to deceive. 
Ep. li. asserts the death of Phalaris's wife ; 

f The argument from posterior orthography is used 
decisively by Bentley against the supposed Fragments of 
Thespis. 

Q2 



li 



k i im i nn r 



174 



CUM0LATIVE EVIDENCE 



!i';; 



whereas hi Ep, lxi* she is mentioned as being 
alive. Other internal evidence shews, that 
this is not an accidental transposition of two 
Epistles. 

12. Higher or fower morals or intellect in 
the writer than the alleged author could have 
had. This is a most important element in 
the argument. The writer of the Epistles is 
* a dreaming pedant with his head upon his 
hand/ most unlike the rule of a million sub- 
jects in early Greece, He is busied about the 
most trivial subjects; intreating odes (and 
failing to obtain them) from Stesichoms, whose 
price for odes must have been well known ; 
rewarding his physician with immense wealth, 
in days when the best physicians were hired 
for the use of a city at two talents a year ; 
and giving us none of the lively details, which 
we invariably derive from the familial* letters 
of a man of action. 

18, If the alleged writer had not lived in 
such ancient times, and the Epistles had been 
in Manuscript alleged to have been written by 
his hand, then other heads of argument, laid 
down by Bentham would have applied to this 
controversy. We might have been called upon 
to judge whether the character, the paper, the 



OF PROBABILITY. 175- 

ink, were such as those used in Phalaris's 
time ; whether there were appearances of in- 
terpolation, erasures, or the like. If any 
other Manuscripts of the alleged author re- 
mained, we should have had to compare them 
with the one before us, as to the points of 
orthography, grammar, handwriting, &c. 

14. Many of these ingredients of controversy 
now seem likely to occur in the Ignatian con- 
troversy. In the hands of Bishop Pearson its 
arguments were step by step the same as those 
afterwards used by Bentley, with the additional 
difficulty, however, that positive signs of truth 
are harder to discover than signs of falsehood. 
The burthen of proof therefore lay not with 
the Bishop, but with his opponents. His 
positive proofs therefore generally consist in 
shewing, that the opinions and expressions 
objected to as strange and improbable, as 
coming from St. Ignatius, were in fact such as 
the Theology of the first century was likely 
to produce. 

15. Mr. Cure ton's discovery of an early 
Syriac MS. of some Epistles of St. Ignatius, 
has imposed upon him the task of determining ;j 
the date of the MS., and establishing its supe- ( 
rior claim to genuineness over tjie earliest i 



!.!• 



176 CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE 

Greek copies now existing. His main argu- 
• >l ments yet published as to the latter point 

| ; ; i seem to be, that the Syriac MS. omits many 

I I . I expressions which are in the Greek; and that 






»! ! 



these are such as would not have been omitted 
either by a heretic 8 corrupting St. Ignatius, or 
[\';\ by an orthodox Christian abridging him; 

; •;:• while on the other hand, there seem to be 

¦¦ ,!• plain and obvious hypotheses which might 

\ *•! account for the introduction of all of them. He 

, } also argues, that in omitting these passages, 

1 ; we are so far from injuring the sense of these 

i ' * • Epistles, that difficulties of connected inter- 

\ I V pretation are actually solved by their omis- 

( . r sion; and again, that when difficulties in the 



1 



Greek text are avoided in any of the Latin 
Versions which we possess, the reading or 
interpretation which these adopt is precisely 
that which the Syriac Version contains. He 
l\ j: adduces no evidence to the effect that St. Ig- 

* ' : * ' natius wrote only the three Epistles which his 

Version contains; and does not deny the 
possibility of farther Syriac Versions occurring, 
which shall contain more of the Epistles. 



!i|. I: 



?! s! 

\' \ l f It is true, that same of the well-known dogmatic passages 

: : * , . of St. Ignatius are among those omitted. But then a heretic 

\ { . • I : would have cancelled all. 

f 



ill 



!!•'!" 



SILI 



OF PROBABILITY. 177 

15. These then are specimens of the most 
complex Arguments which exist from ilxora 
and nuptT*. Judicial arguments are for the 
most part confined to searching out the traces 
of some fact, whereas the scope of these argu- j 

merits is to ascertain all the marks impressed j 

upon a work by the moral and intellectual | 

character, mode of thought and expression, | 

association and language of its author, real | 

or alleged. We discern from these consider- 
ations how overpowering a weight of evidence 
we are entitled to expect, before we consider 
the genuineness and consequent authenticity 
of a standard work to be disproved. In pro- 
portion to the number of individual characters 
which an author impresses upon his work, 
will be the chances of detecting a false claim 
of authorship, or the interpolation of passages 
in a genuine work. 

16. In pp. 167 and 170, it has been shewn, 
that elKOTu gain in force, in proportion as the 
Conclusion to be proved is less likely to be 
affected by individual exercises of human 
will. This is the reason why elxora are as 
conclusive in Political Economy as they are 
in considerations of Language. Taking a 
nation or the human race as a whole, we 






hi 



liJl 



178 CUMULATIVE EVIDENCE OF PROBABILITY. 



!:1 

U j- may be quite certain that they will attempt 

to gratify their natural desire, not for neces- 
saries only, but for luxuries; although each 
, !.{'!"¦ individual may, if he chooses, refrain from the 

' I use of all luxuries, and no one will use except 

:'• t J; by a voluntary action. Human will, when 

'l *,? taken in the gross in this way, becomes a 

•;; physical agent, which the producer may 

; f* : reckon upon with perfect safety. He need 

¦\.\ ¦['¦ not doubt that it will answer to anywell- 

j \ chosen excitement which he may place before 

I: it ; unless indeed there exist some other 

5 ( V inducements, strongly counteractive of that 

, « \ which he has to offer. In like manner we 

! , may predict with certainty, that any article of 

extensive produce which now affords much 
more than the common profit on the capital 
! ; employed in it, will presently come to afford 

rather less. The will of capitalists is sure to 
be determined towards embarking more capi- 
tal in its production; and then competition 
will quickly make it impossible for all to get 
the common profit on the capital invested. 



m^mmummm 



NOTES. 



Note A, page 2. 

Aldrich, like the Logicians whom he followed, 
has chosen to consider Simple Apprehension as 
applying not to Things, but to the Terms ex- 
pressing them. He therefore considers, that by 
Incomplex Simple Apprehension we take notice 
of one Term apart from other Terms, and that in 
Complex Simple Apprehension we take notice of 
a Term along with other Terms — cum ordine 
quodam et respectu. It is not evident from 
which kind of Simple Apprehension he derives 
the Terms used in Argument. If we follow the 
natural course, and consider that our Appre- 
hension has respect to the Things about which 
we reason, then it plainly becomes Incomplex by 
considering the Things or Qualities about which 
we are reasoning as distinct from all other Things 
or Qualities. This is the ground of the explana- 
tion in the text. 



J 






¦!!¦ 



;l 

I 

¦ • t 
• » : 



t 
I • ¦ 






180 NOTES. 



I Note B, page 8. 

j . Wc are not to consider that Aldrich means to 

express any opinion about the origin of language, 
when he states that it is Vicarium ex Instituto. 
The Logical quality in language is distinctness; 
and so far as this quality is produced by any 
operations of the Understanding or Keason, so 
far is language affected by Logic, and a subject 
for the Logician to consider. 



{[¦: Note C, page 13. ' 

' .:. / Nomina Logica. Names for many Subjects ; 

i 5. j for Subjects Logically extensive. The sense of 

{! \ Logicum here is the same as that which is im- 

plied when the Genus is said to be a Totum 
Logicum, or Term denoting more Subjects than 
the Species. Hence also at p. 56, the name 
Logical Proposition has been assigned to those 
propositions which simply include a Subject less 

extensive in one more extensive, 
i 
r 

fi' : 

|j , # Note "D.page 17. 

f; : 

¦ It is not to be denied, that some Aristotelian 

', Logicians use the word Secunda Intentio in 

i, another sense; although Aldrich does not seem 



NOTES. 181 

to do bo. When a Term was said to be used in 
the Second Intention, the meaning seems origi- 
nally to have been, that it was registered under 
Logical Ideas or Secuiidt© Notiones; that is, 
that it was classed with other similar Terms, 
under some technical head; such as Subject, 
Predicate, Generic Quality, Accident, or the like. 
Still we do not class Terms under technical heads 
every time we use them in reasoning; although 
we do when we are writing a treatise on Logic. 
The later explanation given in the text is therefore 
more in agreement with the brief definitions of 
the term Secunda Intentio which are given by 
Aldrich and Bp. Sanderson. And it is incom- 
parably more important. The words ' recudit et 
moderate' can hardly imply any thing else but 
the modification of the meaning of Terms. See 
p. 65. 

Note E, page 20. 

The Subject of Real Definition has been 
treated here, in order to avoid departing from the 
ordinary arrangement of Logical Manuals. The 
teacher of Logic should however remember, that 
it only becomes fully intelligible when treated, as 
it is by Aristotle, in connection with the Subject 
of Demonstration. Wc must have gained the 
fullest scientific knowledge attainable about a 
» 



| M » | i i i ¦¦¦¦¦¦¦ ii .¦ -i «¦¦. ¦nun i mi ^ m ¦ ¦ l y 



! 






i. 



« 












v 



i: 






182 



NOTES. 



Subject, before we can be sure that we have com- 
pared it with the Subject most nearly resembling 
it, and so with all other Subjects. See Arist 
Anal. Post ii. 9 sqq. 

Note F, page 43. 

In Part I. Chap. x. §. 9. compared with Chap. xi. 
§. 5. we leam how it is, that when we have reduced 
a Term to Distinctness, we have attained both to 
some Propositions and to some Arguments about 
it This illustrates the connection of the Dictum 
de Omni et Nullo with Aristotle's scheme of ovofa*, 
and explains Categ. ii. §. 3. 



Note Gtpage 101. 

Much difficulty has sometimes been felt in 
admitting the Canons and the Dictum de Omni 
et Nullo together, as concurrent laws of valid 
Seasoning. Any one who examines this question, 
will see that they are two parallel forms of the 
Principle of Contradiction, that a thing cannot at 
the same time be and not be another thing, possess 
or not possess a given quality. Nor will he doubt 
that the Dictum, with the parallel principles in 
the other two figures, are the best exposition of 
the laws of sound Reasoning ; whereas the Canons 



wmmm 



NOTES. 183 

tiro more convenient for the purpose of detecting 
simply Logical fallacy. 



Note H, page 99. 

The three figures admitted by Aristotle havo 
been distinguished from one another in the text, 
because each implies a different amount of know- 
ledge respecting the matter of its reasonings. 
The fourth Figure was not thought of by Aristotle, 
because it implies no difference of knowledge from 
that which is implied in the first Figure. It is 
true that a navigator, landing upon an unknown 
island, would very probably argue in this way ; 

All the plants in this island are cruciform plants : 

No cruciform plants are poisonous, 

Therefore no poisonous plants grow in this island. 

And that there is na absurdity or unnaturalness 
in thus settling the question^ of fact, before the 
Principle is applied or even thought of. Still the 
argument itself, when made, in no respect differs 
from one in the first Figure ; 

No cruciform plants are poisonous : 

All the plants in this island are cruciform, 

Therefore none of them are poisonous* 



* ! 

4 *.: 

¦ ! M; 

hi: 



184 NOTES. 



'jil Note K t page 141. 

i 

f '! In order to refer, so for as is necessary, the 

j. Aristotelian Fallacies in Aldrich to the heads of 

\ v Illogical Reasoning in this work, it must be 

* : j remarked, that 

L The first five are cases of the Middle Term 
: Ambiguous in various ways. 

: « ii. The seventh and eighth contain Ambiguous 

Terms. 
; iii. The sixth and twelfth are Illogical As- 

/ • * sumptions. (Supra, p. 135.) 

| ; iv. The tenth, a Fallacy of Application. (Ibid.) 

v. The eleventh, a Fallacy of Induction. (Ibid.) 
vi. The thirteenth contains no argument, and 
therefore can be reduced to no head of 
I Logical Fallacy. 

• , vii. The ninth is explained by the remarks on 
j* Contradiction. (P. 83.) 

1 

i 

t 

! \ THE END. 



jbaxteb, rjauTER, oxroiu). 



I 

c. ,;,'\ .1 AuG 1971 





3 2044 019 &< 



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 

Harvard College Widener Library 