Logic of Facts 



TC G/ J.'' H O L T O A m E. 



[lOUBTH laODSiHD.] 

LOUDON: F. FAEEAH, 282. STBAND, W.a 
1SS6. 






CONTENTS 



Introdaction. 
Chap. I. School Logic. Chap. IX. Syllogisms* 

X. Indaction. 



n. Locke-Logic, 
m. Truth. 
IV. Its Biscovery. 

V. Facts. 
VI. Science. 
XIT. Propositioiis. 

VJJUL. Definitions. 



XI. Fallacies. 

Xn. Scepticism. 
XTH; Daring. 
XIV. Idols. 

XV. Exercises 

XVL Technical Terms. 



^V 









5- 11^ 44- 



INTEODUCnON OP 1848. 



Thk Logic of the Schools, howeyer indispeniable in kt 
place, fails to meet half the common want in daily life. The 
Logic of the Schools begins with the management of the pre- 
mises of an argument; there is, however, a more practical 
lesson to be learned in beginning with the premises them- 
•elTCs. A thousand errors arise Uirough the assumption of 
premises for one arising in the misplacement of terms. The 
Logic of the Schools is an elaborate attack upon the lesser 
evil. 

Sir James Mackintosh has remarked that ' Popular reason 
can alone correct popular sophistry ' — and it is in vain that 
we expect amendment in the reasoning of the multitude, 
unless we make reasoning intelligible to the multitude. As 
to my object, could I, like Gridiron-Cobbett, adopt a symbol 
of it, 1 would have engraved ^sop's ' Old Man and his Ass,* 
who, in a vain attempt to please everybody, failed (like his 
disciples — for even he has disciples) to please anybody. The 
folly of that superfluously philanthropic old gentleman 
should teach us proportion of purpose. To be of real service 
to some is in the compass of individual capacity, and, conse- 
quently, the true way of serving, if not of pleasing aU. The 
republic of literature, like society, has its aristocratic, its 
middle, and its lower classes. No one has combined, in one 
performance, the refinement applauded in the universities, 
with the practical purpose, popular among those who toil to 
live, and live to toil. The populace are my choice— of them 
I am one, and, like a recent premier, E^rl Grey, am disposed 
'to stand by my order.' I write for this class both from 



It INTRODUCTIONt 

affection and taste. If I can benefit any, I can them. I 
know their difficulties, for I have encountered them— their 
wants, for they have been mine. This will account for 
the liberties taken with the subjects upon which I treat. 
There is more than one kind of hunger that will break 
through barriers, and I have taken with an unlicensed hand, 
wherever it was to be found, what I wanted for myself, and 
what I know to be wanted by those who stand at the anvil 
and the loom, and who never had the benefits of scholastic 
education, and who never will. 

Many of the arts and sciences, which formerly resided ex- 
clusively in the eoUeges, and ministered only to the sons of 
opulence and leisure, have escaped from their retreat, and 
have become the hand-maids of the populace. But as re- 
spects logic, there still remains between the learned and the 
illiterate an itnpassable gulf. The uninformed look on the 
recondite structure of logic, and they are repelled by the 
difficulty of comprehending it, and Wrap themselves up in 
absolute and obstinate ignorance, which they belieVe to be 
their destiny. The populace, in ou^' Manufactories, have to 
ehoose between subsistence and intelligence. For study, afler 
protracted toil, they have not the strength — and to abridge 
their labour is to abridge their sUbsistenre, and this they 
eannot afford. But because they are precluded by the des- 
tiny of civilisation from knowing much, they need not remain 
utterly unskilled in reasoning. Their natural good sense 
may be systematised, their natural logic may be reduced to 
some rule and orderT-though it may not be refined it may 
be practical, it may give power, and develop capacity now 
dormant. 

The hints, general rules, and elementary remarks dispersed 
throughout this work, will probably be of selrice to the un- 
initiated, perhaps put them on the road to higher acquirements, 
give them a confidence in their own powers, perhaps inspire 
them with a love of these essential studies, and impart a 
taste for the refinements which lie beyond. My hope is 
that many will be induced to consult scholastic treatises, 
and acquire that accurate knowledge which makes the 
society of e^^cated people so interesting. Impfulse has 
been given to knowledge, and the populade have begun to 
think, and both to speak and write their thinkings — and why 
should thejf not be enabled to do it free from obvious mis- 



ijmLODUcnox. v 

takei, mmd widi m hnmd propriety eomncnnnfee with tin 
Aitm eaptMaty they ponen? Why thoold they, like m cer^ 
tini learned polhiciaB on m public ocaaaum, propose, «a a 
KBtiiiieDt. 'The three R's, Reading, 'Ritins, •^ "Rithaie. 
tie? '* Why, in writiiig, ihoidd they not cxpreai themaelTei 
with itroBg grammatieal eoherenee, and a certaia hold pera- 
picoity, if not ahle to readi refiaeaMot and elegaaee ? Why* 
in prownnriatioD, ahonld they not apeak with a eeitaia man^ 
i^enneaa of roirel aonnd and a dudnet articalation, if not 
with an docntionaiy modnlation f Why ihoiild not their 
diacoone he expreated in brief, dear aenteneea? If their 
punctuation went no faither than pbesng capital lettera at 
tiie commeneement of aenteneea and of proper namei, and 
peri<»da at the eondnsion of lentences, it would render their 
writinga more intelligible than are half the oommiinieationa 
they now aend to the preaa. If they mastered only brerity and 
abrnpt directnets, and learned to omit tedious prolixitT, they 
wonld command a hearing in many caaea where now tiiey 
are denied one. If in logic they miude a shrewd mastery of 
plain facts — being as sure as they could, when once set on 
sorety, eschewing conjecture and pernicious supposition — if 
th> followed the methods af nsture and good sense, where 
th^ elaborate methods of art are hidden from them, who will 
not admit that they would be more intelligible than now, ex- 
ercise a power they never yet poaaessed* and extort the 
attention and esteem of the public where now they excite 
only its pity, or contempt, or outrage what just taste it has? 
The people would be enabled to do theae things, but that ao 
many who prepare treatttes for their guidance alarm them 
by the display of abstruse dissertation above their powers* 
their means, their time, and their wanta. That a little learn* 
iftg is a dangerous thing is not a msxim alone bdiev^d in by 
the race of country squires steeped in port and prejudice, but 
by schoolmen who cannot bring themselTcs to give a little 

Sroportion of sound knowledge, but must give all, the recon* 
ite as well. The statesman decries the ignorance and want 
of wisdom displayed by embryo politicians who will accept 

* This case is dted by S. G. Goodrich, the ori^al Peter 
Parley, in his pre£ftoe to * Fireside Bdacation.' Sir William 
Curtis, to whom, probably, 'Mx, Goodrich refers, gave also * iha 
three K'8<— Sang^ Church, and Constitution.' 



VI INTRODUCTION. 

no instalment of liberty, but insist on the concession of all 
their claims — but the scholar does the same thing when he 
will impart none but the completest information to the 
people. 

In quoting, I have been a borrower, but not a plagiarist. 
In no case am I conscious of having taken from others with- 
out at the same time making the fairest acknowledgment in 
my power. 

If the references to the highest authorities are sometimes 
through others, it is because the highest authorities have not 
always been accessible. Those who have had ordinary ex- 
perience estimate highly the value of minute integrity in this 
respect. Fruitless hours are spent in tracing false and care- 
less references, and to one whose time is his means, no little 
injury is done when it is thus wasted. 

Unbounded gratitude is due to those authors, old and new, 
who, with learning and grace, with care and patience, have 
put the world in possession of thoughts which are real addi- 
tions to its knowledge— and corresponding should be the con- 
tempt of those whose high-sounding and pretending books 
seduce readers to wade through them only to find in them 
the millioneth echo of some commonplace idea. 

The ' Spectator ' was pleased to say that I wrote " Practi- 
cal Grammar ' in the spirit of an * ultra- radical, setting the 
world to rights.' Yet I have always declared, with Butler — 

Reforming schemes are none of mine. 
To mend the world's a vast design j 
Like those who toil in little boat 
To drag to them the ship afloat. 

Utopianism is not my idiosyncracy. But I have confidence in 
endeavour. Continuity of ameliorative efi^ort is the sole en- 
thusiasm that can serve the cause of improvement. It is 
useful to do what seems to be useful, whether little or much 
— a moderate rule, but one that will take those who carry it 
out, a long way. 

My illustrations, I need scarcely say, are neutral in politics 
and theology. In the grammar of J. A. D. D*Orsey, pub- 
lished in ' Chambers' Educational Course,' there are disputa- 
tions, Biblicisms, and bits of intense theology. Professor 
John Radford Yeung, in his treatise on Algebra, has intro- 
duced a reply to Hume's controverted theory of miracles — 



IMTRODUCTION. TU 

and Dr. Whately makes his ' Logic ' an ayowedly theological 
auxiliary, showing that much passes for good taste in thia 
country which is only an 'irrelevant propitiation of powerful 
opinion. I have not, however, been seduced by this species 
of example. There are distinct provinces in intellect as 
well as in industry — and what political economy justifies in 
one case, good sense dictates in the other. No man has a 
right to intrude theology into every question, and agitate 
points of faith when he pretends to instruct the under- 
atanding. 

There is less occasion to speak of the utility of logic, than 
to show it to be easy of acquisition. Mr. Stuart Mill, in 
confirmation of this view, observes : We need not seek far 
for a solution of the question so often agitated, respecting 
the utility of Logic. If a science of logic exists, or is 
capable of existing, it must be useful. If there be rules to 
which every mind conforms, in every instance in which it 
judges rightly, there seems little necessity for discussing 
whether a person is more likely to observe those rules when 
he knows the rules, than when he isunacquainted with them.* 
Certainly people are not so much prejudiced against logic 
on account of its supposed uselessness as on account of its 
supposed difficulties. Deserved or net, logic has always had 
a good reputation. Well or ill founded, the popular 
impression has uniformly been in its fiiyour. It has been 
valued like the diamond — but considered, like that precious 
stone, of very uncertain access. 

The high popularity of common sense — ' the exercise of 
the judgment unaided by rule'^has been interpreted into a 
virtual rejection of logic by the multitude. But it ought 
not to be overlooked, that the credit in which mere common 
sense is held, is a matter of necessity aa well as choice. It 
being the best sense the untutored have, they wisely use it, 
and no wonder that they are inclined to laud what they are 
constrained to employ. Doubtless they always perceived 
that common sense would be the better for being made 
orderly, as a spirited horse is the fitter for use after being 
'broken.' Logical sense* among the masses, is secretly 
supposed to be disciplined sense, and to have all the advan- 
tage of the trained soldier over the raw recruit. 

It is quite true, as Abram Tucker puts it, that * The science 

• * System of Logic,* p. 12. Second Editionj 



VUl INTRODUCTION. 

of abstruse learning, when completely attained, is like 
Achilles' spear, that healed the wounds it had made before ; 
so this knowledge serves to repair the damage itself had 
occasioned, it casts no additional light upon the paths of life/ 
But few persons sensible of the value of exact knowledge will 
complain of the necessary elaboration to which it sometimes 
leads. Nor will those who have felt the thrill of pleasure 
which complete analysis imparts, regret the patience which 
put them in possession of a secret of science, or made them 
master of a new field of knowledge. 

Common sense is the substratum of all logic. Common 
sense is the natural sense of mankind. It is founded on 
common observation and experience. It is modest and 
plain and unsophisticated. It sees with everybody's eyes 
and hears with everybody's ears. It has no capricious 
distinctions, no partialities, and no mysteries. It never 
equivocates and never trifles. Its language is always the 
same, and is always intelligible. It is known by its per- 
spicuity of speech and singleness of purpose. The most 
prudent of all the children of fact, it never forsakes nature or 
reason. Some outline laws for its employment, if they 
' can be indicated, must be better than its popular aimless and 
[desultory use. ^ 



PREFACE OF 1866. 



One bas no right to make a literary subject political 
— that is, to make it partisan ; but to give a political 
motive which concerns all equally, for promoting a 
literary study, is allowable, and does not partake of 
the nature of party politics. One may, like Cobbett, 
look on literature with political eyes, without, like 
him, making it a vehicle of party attacks. 

In this country, where the political genius of the 
people lies in self-government — where the public 
growth of the people and their internal liberty depend 
upon their capacity to manage their own affairs — the 
art of public speaking has political importance to eyerj 
side in politics. 

To be able to take a subject well in hand, like a 
stage-coach driver does his horses — to hold the reins 
of your arguments firmly — to direct and drive well 
home the burden of your meaning, is a power which 
every man ought to study to attain, who rises to 
address a council, or stands up on a platform to 
oonvince a meeting. 



A LOGIC OF FACTS. 



''"f'V'»~ M ^f'ir'>r'>rw '>rM>r» of>/T i n i r i r^r\o < » 



CHAP. I. 



VBB lOOIC OF THB ICH00L8. 



It is a taumiliating reflection that mankind never reatoned so ill ns when 
fhey most professed to cultivate the art of reasoning.— Lt/e of Galileo, p. 1. 
Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. 

G)MMON sense — the foundation of logic — first received (to a 
limited extent) the regularity of an art and the certainty of a 
science, from the master hand of Aristotle. Impartial scholars, 
familiar with his writings on logic, allow them to have not only 
ingenuity but real merit ; and his admirers contend that he has 
heen misunderstood by some and abused by others. This is highly 
probable, as we are certain that when his works were interpreted 
by the schools, and his logic proclaimed the great text-book of 
'Imowledge and the only weapon of truth, < men's minds, instead 
of studying nature, were in an endless ferment about occult 
qualities and imaginary essences ; little was talked of but inten- 
tion and remission, proportion and degree, infinity, formality, 
quiddity and individuaKty.'* Logic then was jargon, contro.- 
versy chicane, and truth a shuttiecock, with which the dispu- 
tants respectively played, or the object which they mutually dis- 
guised. Logic was a labyrinth in which the subtlest lost their 
Way — a bourne firom which the traveller after truth seldom re- 
turned. 

A striking illustration of this has been furnished by a candid and 
distinguished writet — Dr. Reid* < Of the analytics and of the tO' 
pics of Aristotle, ingenuousness requires me to confess, that though 
I have often purposed to read the whole with care, and to under- 

* Account of Lord Bieon't Notubi Orgt&on SdentiAnun, Lib. of Usefu* 
Knowledge, p, 4, 



2 COOIC or TBB SCHOOLS. 

stand whai it inieUigible, yet my courage and patience always failed 
me before I had done. Why should I throw away so mach time 
and painful attention upon a thing of so little real use ? If I 
had lived in those ages when the knowledge of Aristotle's Or- 
ganon entitled a man to the highest rank in philosophy ^^ ambition 
might have induced me to employ upon it some yedrs of painful 
study ; and, less, I conceive, would not be sufficient. Such re- 
flections as these always got the better of my resolution.'* 

Dr. Whately, who has for many years occupied the throne of 
Logic and whose work maybe taken, from its currency in our 
colleges and academies, as the representative of the logic of the 
schools, seems to obviate all objections to- the abstruseness of this 
subject by a counter charge, to the effect that logic is now under* 
rated only because it has been overrated. But it is not the com* 
plexity found in it, but i];ie laudations bestowed upon it which 
have brought it into neglect. Dr. Whately contends that certain 
writers, < by representing logic as furnishing the sqIc instrument 
for the discovery of truth in all subjects, and as teaching the use 
of the intellectual faculties in general, raised expectations which 
could not be realised, and which naturally led to a reaction— to 
logic being regarded as utterly Intile and empty .'f Deeply de- 
ploring this kind of injury, from which many important arts have 
suffered, I am neither disposed to defend sudi a course, nor toimi* 
tate it. But I demur to the truth of this representation, with 
regard to logic. If logic be not the 'aviie instrument for the 
discovery of truth in all subjects,' it is certainly the prmcipal 
one. Instead of charging scholastic logicians with having un- 
duly 'raised/ it would be. nearer the trutii, in my opinion, to 
say that they have confused 'eiq^tations' by intricate mao 
cMnery and extreme elaborations. 

Intricacy and minuteness of detail might be a trifling disqijiali* 
fication did they lead to something immediately practicaL But 
Dr. Whately contends that logic, in the most extensive sense 
which the name can, with propriety, be made to bear, is that of 
the science, and also the art of reasoning.^ * Inasmuch as logic 
institutes an analysis of the process of the mind in reasoning, it 
is strictiy a itjence, while considered in reference to the practical 

• Lord K«mM*» Skatchcsa ?«!• s, ch»p» 8. Aiirtotle** Logic. 

t Dr. Whately t Elcmeato of Logic, preface, p. vii. Secood edition* 



^ 



lOOIO OF TBB 8CH00X8* 3 

ralei It fnrBkhei it ii an art.** He confinet the pfoiHnee 
of logic, as an art, to < employing language properly for the 
purpose of reasoning/f and restricts the logician to the use 
of the syllogism as the sole test of argument. Mr. Augustus 
de Morgan thus exhibits the spirit of Whately's restriction :— 
Logic has nothing to do with the truth of the facts, opinions, or 
presumptions, from which an inference is derived $ but simply 
takes care that the inference shall certainly be true if the pre- 
mises be true.' 

It has been, and t» to be, objected, that logic, thus confined, 
* leaves untouched the greatest diflBculties, and those which are 
the sources of the greatest errors in reasoning.' To this powerful 
objection Dr. Whately thinks it sufficient to reply, that < no art 
is to be censured for not .teaching more than falls within its pro- 
vince, and, indeed, more than can be taught by any concdvable 
art. Such a system of universal knowledge as should instruct us 
in the full meaning or meanings of every term, and the truth or 
Calaty, certainty or uncertainty of every proposition, thus super- 
seding all other studies, it is most nnphUosophical to expeet, or 
even to imagine. And to find fault with logic for not performing 
this, is as if one should object to optics for not giving sight to 
the blind — or complain of a reading glass for being of no service 
to a person who had never learnt to read.^ This would be a 
most conclusive answer if confident assertion could be acceptf>d 
in lien of proof. The objection still remains to be removed. We 
may still demand, does it not fall within the legitimate province 
of logic to provide means of encountering the < greatest difficul- 
ties' with which it is confessed logic is beset? True, there is no 
art can teach everything, but is that a reason why logic should 
teach nothing, or next to nothing, compared with what seems 
essentially necessary f 

Dr. W Lately contends that the 'difficulties' and * errors' in 
the objection adduced, * axe in the mtQect matter about which 
logic is employed, and not in the process of reasoning — which 
alone is the appropriate province of logic. But it seems to mo 
that Dr. Whately has found it impossible to keep within the 
bounds of the restriction he thus endeavours to establish. 

* Intro., p. I. 

t Klem. of Loffic, Synthetietl Compesdiumi ehapt S, part !» Me* S. 

X £lein. of Logic, Intro., pp. IS, 18. 



4 LOGIC OF THE SCHOOLS. 

In treating npon ' apprehension/ he introdueee, as indeed ha 
was obliged to do, from the department of metaphysics, several 
speculations on 'generalisation' and ^abstractions,' and from 
ontology (the science which explains the most general concep- 
tions respecting the phenomena of nature) he borrows the leading 
principles of definition. Because he thus goes so far, it is not to 
be contended that therefore he should have gone further ; but 
when he found he must depart from his rule and borrow from 
other branches of knowledge (no matter for what end), why did 
he not depart from it to some purpose, and borrow from natural 
philosophy such rules as would have guarded the logician from 
the * chief errors ' Into which he may fall ? 

Dr. VVhately informs us, indeed, that logic furnishes certain 
syllogistic forms to which all sound arguments may be reduced, 
and thus establishes universal tests for the detection of fallaoy— 
but it is to be observed that it is only sucfi fallacy as may creep 
in betweBn the premises and the conclusion of an argument. It 
is to this narrow and Aristotelian object that logic is restricted. 
< The process of reasoning itself is alone the appropriate province 
of logic* This process will have been correctly conducted if it 
have conformed to the logical rules, which preclude the possibility 
of any error creeping in between the principles from which we are 
arguing, and the conclusions we deduce from them.'* We learn 
from our authority, that as arithmetic does not profess to intro- 
duce any notice of the things^ whether coins, persons, or di* 
mensions, respecting which calculations are made ; neither does 
logic undertake * the ascertainment of facts, or the degree of 
evidence of doubtful propositions.' And just as an arithmetical 
result will be useless if the data of the calculation be incorrect, so 
a logical conclusion is liable to be false if the premises are so* 
Neither does the logic, now under consideration, concern itself 
with the *¦ discovery of truth,' excepting so far as that may be 
said to be implied by the detection of error in a false infer- 
ence.f Logic thu» confined to the actual process of reason- 
ing, however important its functions there, evidently leaves 
us in the dark as to the value of what we reason about. For 
the information thus missing, this logic refers us to knowledge 

* Intro., p. 13. 

t For the grounds of these repreientations, lee Dittertation on the Fkn 
vince of Reatoning, chap. 2, sec. 4 Ur. Wl^tely's l/0|pc« 



LOGIC or THE SCHOOLS. 5 

In general^ to grammaT and compontion for the art of ex- 
pressing, with correctness and perspicnity, the terms of propo- 
sitions — ^to natural, moral, political, or other philosophy, for 
the facts which alone can establish the truth of the premises 
reasoned from. 

The exclusion from logic of all consideration of the facts on 
which propositions are founded, is thus endeavoured to be justi- 
fied by the Archbishop of Dublin : — ' No arithmetical skill will 
secure a correct result, unless the data are correct from which 
we calculate: nor does any one on that account undervalue 
arithmetic ; and yet the objection against logic rests on no better 
foundation.' This is trud, but is it true that arithmetic is on tkU 
account to be imitated ? If the arithmetician must take his data 
for granted, it is what the searcher after truth must never do— 
he must use his eyes and examine for himself, in all cases, as far 
as possible, unless he intends to be deceived. And for want of 
such precaution as this, the arithmetician is at sea the moment he 
steps out of the narrow path of mechanical routine. Who is not 
aware of the failures of calculation when applied to the general 
business of life— to statistics, moral and political ? Every day, 
facts have to be called in to correct the egregious blunders of 
figures.* The calculations are conducted in most approved form, 
but are of no use. Does not this demonstrate that when arith* 
metic, like logic, is applied to the business of Hfe, general rules 
for securing the' accuracy of data would be of essential service? 
Supposing, however, that tirithmetic could do very well ^thout 
them, does it follow that logic should, when it would be safer and 
more eflBcient with them ? 

Since our author's canons are held absolute in the schools, it 
may be useful to consider this last cited argument in another 
light. A stronger objection may be urged, one which particularly 
addresses itself to those who mistake mere pertinence for genelral 
relevance, and suppose that a single analogy decides a case. 

• * In Art, in Practice, imnunerablfl critics will demonstrate that most 
thinn are impossible. It was proyed by fluxionary calculus, that steam-sbips 
could never get across from the farthest point of Ireland to the nearest 
of Newfoundland ; impelling force, resisting foree, maximum here, minimum 
Uiere ; bylaw of Nature, and geometric demonstration — what could be done 7 
The Oreat Western could weigh anchor from Bristol Port; that could be done. 
The Oreat Western, bounding safe through the grullets of the Hudson, threw 
her cable out on the capstan of New York, and left our still moist paper- 
4eiaonstratioB todr^ itoelt at leisore.'^TAomas Car/yto, Chartism, pp. 96-7* 

B 



6 I.OGIO or THB fiCHOOLt. 

His Grace reasons, that, because arithmetic does not oonoerm 
itself about its data, logic should follow the same example. 
But why OTorlooks he pure mathematics — a much higher science 
than arithmetic? Surely geometry, which through all time has 
been the model of the sciences, was better worthy than arith* 
metic to be the model of logic ! Was it classical in the principal 
of St. Alban's College to abandon Euclid and cleave unto G>cker 
or Walkingame ? 

Arithmetic is meehanical — geometry is reasoning; surely it 
was more befitting to compare reason with reason, when endea- 
vouring to discover the true way of perfecting reason. Geometry 
is, of all sciences, reputed the most conclusive in its arguments— 
and we know it is distinguished above all sciences for carefulness 
in its data. It begins with axioms, the most indubitable of all 
data, and its subsequent conclusions are founded onlv on eitab- 
Ushed facts— and to be sure that they are established facts, the 
geometer, before he employs them, establishes them himself. If 
an analogy is to decide the province of logic, here is an analogy 
whose pretensions over those of arithmetic are eminent. 

So conclusive did Dr. Whately deem the argument just 
examined, that he many times, in various forms, reproduced it. 
One of the last instances is under the head of ' Fallacies.' ' It 
has been made a subject of bitter complaint against logic, that it 
presupposes the most difficult point to be already accomplished 5 
viz., the sense of the terms to be ascertained. A similar ob- 
jection might be urged against every other art in existence 
tf. ^.,* against agriculture, that all the precepts for the culti« 
?ation of land presuppose the possession of a farm.'* Al* 
ready -has been pointed out what may reasonably induce a 
suspicion of the soundness of these analogies ; viz., that their 
author found it necessary to disregard them and introduce, from 
other branches of knowledge, certain disquisitions on the 
* sense of terms.' With regard to this particular instance, it 
may be observed, that though treatises on agriculture do pre- 
suppose the possession of a farm, they do not presuppose the 
knowledge requisite for cultivating it, but inform visfuUy of soil, 
and seed, and crops. So logic may be allowed to presuppose the 
esustenee of the universe, whence truth ii drawn, or the ftKistenoe 

Logic, ehsp. 8. VSUtdes, sec. I« 



lOOIC €f9 tttfi 8CH00IX 7 

Cf hngnage, wliereby it is wptwMA \ but it is snwly not to pre- 
9uppote the knowledge of facts and tonns, the great instraments 
for the cultivation of truth. Agricultural treatises hardly 
warrant this inforence. Theis are the repiesentatioas that in- 
duced the cenfession thut ' Logic is not so much an instrument of 
acquirement as of defence. It is a good armour to buckle on 
when compelled to battle for our heritage, but a poor implement 
for its cultivation.'* 

All practieal arts include a knowledge of materials as well as 
implements. Platers, ignorant of the nature of metals, cabinet- 
makers, of the different spedes of wood, make but sorry artisans ; 
and in like manner, reasoners, unacquainted, at least in a general 
way, with the accuracy of what is reasoned about, make but 
sorry logicians.! 

It will readily be expected that in the modem progress of 
knowledge, the Aristo^lian province of logic would be enlarged. 
The far-seeing intellect of Lord Verulam heralded the innova- 
tion—' Our glorious Bacon led phflosophy forth from the jargon 
of schools and the fopperies of sects* He made her to be— the 
handmaid of nature, friendly to ker creatures, and faithful to 
her laws.' X- 

The general object of Lord Bacon's philosophy, writes Bruce, an 
Edinbtirgh professor of logic of the last century, is to connect the 
reasoning powers of man with ezperimente for the improvement of 
natural knowledge. 

To create a just taste for phSlosophicalinvestigation, required— 
1. A display of the true, that they may be distinguished from the 
false subjects of inquiry. 2. Scientific rules to direct the dis- 
covery of the laws «f nature. 

But to * dispUiy the true,' is to display the fatU on which 
the truth rests. The * discovery of the laws of nature' implies 
€bservQiion of the operations of nature. The philosophy of 
Bacon, says Macaulay, bctgan in observation and ehded in 
arts. 

• W. J. Fox, Mon. ttep., p. 45 : 1885. 

t The reftder will ind that logician !¦ and in the Mnae of ^mfai^Mi^ in 
elidtiBK and eihibiting reality. By that which I call loffical u meant that 
which it truthful. I presume that ia the aenie to which this high word 
Aotild be eonfined. it it llie lax applScadon of thia term to man dez- 
Uri^ in evading the truth aoeording to rale, that haa ao incrMted the iui« 
¦atiafaetory race of piofesaedtceptica.— See SeepHeitm, ehap. XII. 

t Lsaghomea* PnfMO to the livea of Flviaich. 

b2 



8 LOGIC OF THB iCHOOUt. 

It 18 roost obTioiu, as fhe reader will gatiher from what has bees 
advanced, that for guarding, to the greatest possible extent^ 
against error in condasions, it is necessary ,to take into considera- 
tion the character of the data from which we reason^and to do 
this, we must draw from the general sources oi knowledge to 
which the Logic of the Schooils refers ns. If we happen not to 
possess an accurate acquaintance with these branches, we must 
draw upon the best notions we have of them, or apply such natu- 
ral sagacity as we happen to possess. But whether the informa- 
tion we happen to possess be complete or partial, it is not well 
that we are left to apply it at random, without any definite mode 
of procedure; and if lo^^c pefusea to assist us, and gives only a 
vague reference dsewhere, we must endeavour to assist ourselves. 
The datum of all arguments is a proposition, an assertion, or denial ; 
and* to ascertain its truth, (upon which the value of the whole 
reasoning depends) we have to do with the facts upon which it 
rests, and the terms in which it is expressed. For it may be here 
observed, that the truth or falsity of every proposition depends 
upon facts. To ascertain the general accuracy of facts, we have 
to appeal to received standards of certainty ; and to fix the mean- 
ing of terms, we have recourse to a plain principle o£ definition. 
In the task of recognising truth, so nejcessaa-y in examining the 
premises. of an argument, one is wonderfully asidsted by being 
familiarised with the sources of truth, and the mode of its dis- 
covery. In these operations the tutored and untutored may 
alike be assisted by simple general rules. If these rules prove 
not infallible in every case^ they will prove successful in the ma- 
jority of cases. 

Since general rules are the only, rules that the vast field of 
facts admits of, they are not to be rejected on light grounds. 
They e&abto us to set forth intelligibly the reasons of our own 
conviction, and to detect and expose the fundamental fallacies o£ 
apparent arguments. . Sinoe they direct us where the Logic of the 
Schools leaves us without a guide, their value is apparent. 

The logical management of the syllogism invdves much ab- 
struseoess respecting * genus* and * species,' the < quantity' and 

* quality' of propositions, * contraries,* * sub-contraries,' * contra, 
dictions,' and < subalterns.' Stepping by * illative conversion,? 

* six rules to be Observed with respect to categorical syllogism* 
next demand attention,. followed hard by eleven moods which.can 



LOa^C OF THB SCHOOLS. 9 

be used in a legitimate syllogism, viz.— < A, A, A, A, A, I, A> E, 
E, A, E, O, A, I, I, A, O, O, E, A, B, E, A, O, E, I, O, I, A, I, 

O, A, O.' In the middle of this abstract train march the ' un- 
distributed middle' and the illicit process,' attended by four 
figures represented by the following * mnemonic lines, which 
must be carefully committed to memory :' — 

Fig. 1 . bArbArA, cEl ArEnt, dArll, fErlOque prioris. 

Fig. 2. cEsArE, cAmEstrEs, fEstInO, bArOkO,* secundsB. 

p. 9 f tertia, dArAptI, dIsAmIs, dAtlsI, fElAptOn, 
* \ bOkArdO,t fErlsO, habet^ quarta insuper addit. 

Fig. 4. brAmAntIp, cAmEnEs, dImArls, fEsApo, frEsIsOn. 
A motley group, too numerous to be particularised, bring up the 
complex rear of ' Modals,' ' Hypotheticals,' ' Conditionals,' and 
< Disjunctives.' This is certainly not the portal through which 
the populace can at present pass to logic, even if such logic helped 
them to all truth, and saved them from all fallacy. 

Bttt this species of logic is not without interest. Symbolic 
letters and mnemonic lines are not without attractions to 
those who understand them. There is poetry in an algebraic 
fign, when it is the emblem of a difliculty solved, and a wonderful 
result simply arrived at. To try the whole power of words, and 
discover every form of language in which a legitimate deduction 
can be expressed, is no ignoble task. It is a high discipline, but 
it belongs rather to the age of leisure than this of ' copperas- 
fames, cotton-fuz, gin-riot, wrath, and toil' — to the luxuries rather 
than the utilities of learning. 

There is the inefficiency of the syllogism, and also the vitiation 
produced by its employment. 1. It corrupts the taste for phi- 
losophical invention by placing philosophy in abstractions, and 
nitSdrawing it from the observation of nature. 

2. It creates a reliance on principles, which originate in the 
hypothetet of philosophers, not in the laws of nature. 

3. It makes truth the result of the/oriMof alrgument, not of 
sdentific evidence. | 

Lord Kames cites from the father of logic the following syllo- 
gism, which will bear repetition as an extraordinary instance of 

r These references to Fakoro mnd Dokamo are Wh«tely*St 
e Off Fakoro. 3 aa indeed all the partiwUara hi thit place recited, and an 
t Or, Dokamo. ^ but a brief mimmtxj of the aubjects compiiied in his 

Ci<^e in reference to the lyllogiani. 
t Bmce. 



r f 



10 LOGIC OF THB BOBOOZiS 

that assnmption for which the Logic of the Schoob proridet no 
remedy :<^ 

Heavy bodies naturally tend to the centre of the Tmiyene. 

We know, by experience, that be^yy bodies tend to the centre 
of the earth. 

Therefore the centre of the earth is the centre of the aniTerse. 

Bat by what experience did Aristotle discover the centre of the 
universe, so as to become aware that heavy bodies naturally tend 
there? On what facts rest the measurement of the radii bom 
oar earth to the boundless circumference of space ? How did he 
ascertain the limits of that which has no limits ? Tet, strange 
to say, the Logic of the Schools prides itself in leaving as where 
the Stagyrite left us. 

*¦ When mankind began to reason on the phonomefta of n&torey 
they were solicitous to abstract^ and they formed general pro- 
positions from a Umiled observation. Though these propositioiis 
were assumed, they were admitted as true. They were not 
examined by appeals to nature^ but by comparison with ether 
propositions.'* 

In this syllogism from Aristotle, there is thensual eonplianoe 
with accredited rules, and the same defiance of common eense* 
Such examples are deemed perfect reasoning and l^itimate BYg«» 
ment ; but is it not a mockery to encourage the belief that we 
can have reason and argument, 'mthout the truth? Only this 
shallow consolation remains to us. if the logician of the schoele 
does not enlighten the understanding, he is at least reputed not td 
offend the taste, and he wins tlie equivocal praise of Betler t-- 

Be'U ran In debt bj; dinatatuu^ 
And pay with ratiocination ; 
All toil by tTllog^sm, tnie 
In nwod andflgnze, he wUl do«^ 

Syllogismf axe to troth what rhyme is to poetry. ' It is a well 
known fact that verse, faultless in form, may be utterly destitttte 
ef poetic fire or fseling.'f 

Aoeording to the Logic of the Schools^ ' the question respeot. 
ing the validity of an argument is not wl^ther the condosion be 
tme^ bat whether it fottoun from the premises addnced.' Xt was 

* Bruce. 

t A. J. D. SyOtmft Kng. Gnun., part % article Proaody, 



LOOSB-LOOIO. . 11 

the bitter esperieiic of Bardon of tKe deluBiyeness of saeh partial 
logic that induced him to exclaim, * one fact is worth fifty orgw 
menit.* With loch authorities, *a yalid argument is that which ia 
80 stated that its conclnsiTeness is evident from the mere /orm of 
the expression.' Bat since it is admitted that if the data reasoned 
upon be incorrect, no logical skill can secnre a correct resnlt ; it 
is evident that however faultless the formy the inquirer after truth 
is in no way nearer his object, unless he be instructed how to lay 
a foundation of faultless facts. He then, who is in love with 
truth rather than logomachy, will admit, in spite of the most in- 
genious analogies, that there is some room for a logic of faets^ as 
well as a logic of words* 



CHAP. n. 



LOCKB-LOeiC. 



Looic is a general guide to the discovery of truth, and teaches ut 
its systematic communication to others. This definition is in- 
tended to combine logic and rhetoric into one system. According 
to a quotation in Finnock's Guide to Knowledge, Locke defined 
logic as * that art by which we rightly use our mental faculties in 
the discovery and communication of truth,' a definition, called by 
the writer, the definition of nature echoed by genius. There 
exists a natural connection between logic and rhetoric. The dis- 
covery of truth could avail us little if we were without the means 
of oommunicating it ; and it is easy to see that it would be i|i 
vain to possess the means of communicating truth, unless we had 
the truth to communicate. Therefore, ingenuity is but ill em- 
ployed in separating these mutual departments of learning 
wMch nature has connected together. Besides^ the skill of the 
logician if as serviceable in the statement of a case, as in arguing 
it. Arrangement is as much a matter of logic as ratiocination ; 
and to impress this neglected truth upon the young inquirer, is 
one reason for proposing a combined definition. 

The mutual connection of logic and rhetoxic la illnstrated by 
the fact, that the Logic of the Schools is purely « branch of 



r 



12 LOaiOAL TSOTIC' 

rhetoric. It consists in putting an argament into ' the most per- 
spicuous form in which it can be exhibited^*— t. «., in communicai* 
ing it in the most efficient way to others. 

Indeed, Dr. Whately (who makes logic to consist in reasoning) 
defines reasoning as discourse, and discourse is rhetoric. ' Grant' 
mar/ says Doherty, * represents the mechanism of letters in form- 
ing words — jRhenuwy the mechanism of words in forming sen- 
tences. We have Grammar iot letters, JR/iemar for words, Logie 
for argwnenis, and BJietoric for discourse.' Locke-logic, therefore 
— u e.y logic in the sense in which Locke treated it — seems to come 
nearer the truth, as well as nearer the common requirement, than 
the restricted definition of it by others insisted on. 



CHAP« IIL 



LOGICAL TRUTK. 



All men know eomething of truth. Happily it is the first 
impulse of childhood, and nature teaches us its pleasure before 
reason instructs us In its truth. In infancy we own its beauty, 
in manhood its power. There is nothing, says Cicero, sweeter to 
man than the Ught of truth. Truth, observes Godwin, is the 
native element of an intellectual nature. It has been wisely re* 
marked, said Lord Kames, that truth is to the understanding 
what beauty is to the eye, or music to the ear. 

Philosophy sanctions what unsophisticated feelings suggested. 
He that has made but a little progress beyond ignorance and pri- 
vilege, cannot be edified by anything but truth-f Truth, like a 
mathematical point, has had various descriptions ; and it may be 
useful to select those which graduate to its logical definition. 
Bulwer tells us, that ' the agitation of thought is the beginning 
of truth.' Locke, Lord Kames, Mill, and others, agree that 
truth, or falsehood, is an affair of language. An assertion which 
represents things as they really are, is a truth— an assertion that 
represents things what in reality they are not, is a falsehood. 

* Dr. Whate:ly ; Anal. Oat., ekmp* 1, tee. 6, p. 4S. 

t Mr. fiobbottse t Mots IS. to 4tli Gsafio of Qbilde Hsvold* 



DX8C0TBRT OF TRUTH. 13 

Truth, in sculpture, means an exact similitude of some Urlng torm, 
ehiselled in stone or marble. Truth, in painting, is a natural 
representation on canvass of some person, or object. In the same 
manner, moral * truth is an exact image of things set forth in 
speech, or writing.' The logical definition of truth is given in 
these words : — * Truth is that which admits of proof,'* that is, an 
ajisertion or denial which can be substantiated by facts. 

A fact is connBonly called a truth, but this practice leads to 
great confusion in reasoning. A fact is only an element in truth, 
A logical truth is a proposition supported by facts. Facts com- 
pose the premises of an argument — a truth is the inference from 
the facts. Unless this distinction is observed, recourse must be had 
to the expedient of calling a fact a particular truth, and an induc- 
tion from facts a general truth. Or we must adopt this distinc- 
tion, that a mcral truth, that is, the truth of parlance, is the 
coincidence of language with reality ; and a logical truth, a propo* 
sition which admits of demonstration. 

A lady, who has given intellectual laws to many whom I 
address, has said — * A truth I consider to be an ascertained fact, 
which truth would be changed into an error the moment the fact 
on whiqh it rested was disproved.' But that which can be dis- 
proved cannot be an < ascertained fact.' Allowing, however, the 
relevancy of this definition of ar truth, it would, in a treatise on 
logic, be considered as a definition only of a particular truth. 
Many such truths are required to make a logical truth. 



CHAP. IV. 



DZSCOTBRT Of TRUTH. 



The great treature-house of natare is open to all, and the only fae ds* 
manded for intpection ia attention. — Dsteosibk. 

OssBRVATioNf of naturo is the only source of truth. Discursive 
observation is the art of noticing circumstances evident to the 

* Chambera* InformatioB. 

t The term obserration it used here In the imte in which It !¦ epmmonlF 
understood, siitnifying cognisance in geneinl. It includes whatever informa- 
tion we acquire by the means of oont^ouiness, or ezperiencci or through 
the agency of the tenses. 



14 DISOOTBRT OF TRUTH. 

senses. Men who do this intentionally and carefully, with a view 
of acquiriag a knowledge of phsnomeoA and their causes, are 
distinguished for their varied knowledge and often for their great 
discoveries. Shakspere must have owed the varied facts inter- 
woven into his delineations of human character to this source* 
The clever personations of Garrick were suggested by his curious 
observations of men and manners. Sir Walter Scott is known to 
have been a careful observer. It is said, ' no expression escaped 
him if it bore on the illustration of character.' 

* Claude Lorraine, with a passionate sympathy Snr the beautiful, 
sate in the fields from sun-rise to dewy eve, watching, catching, 
and saturating his very soul, as it were, with all the evanescent 
beauties of a summer's day, as they chased each other over the face 
of the fair scene ; fixing on canvass, taking captive and imprison* 
ing in our cabinets, the wanton daughters of nature, that before 
his time never were caught, but flitted before the fascinated eye 
only long enough to make the heart afterwards feel more achingly 
the void of their vanishing. And the artist who has done all 
this, do we not justly call him an imaginaiive painter, to distin* 
gnish him from those meaner geniuses who were, in painting, very 
like Crabbe in poetry, merely faithful delineators of the vulgarer 
objects of social life, bunches of carrots, drunken boors, chamber 
maids and chimney comers. 

' Has the reader ever seen Mr. Macready in the character of 
Macbeth ? If he have, he can never forget the stupified mur- 
derer withdrawing from the chamber in which he has just done 
the dread act, with fascinated gaase retreatingly regarding his 
royal victim, and awaking with a guilty start as he runs uncon- 
sciously against his hard-souled partner in guilt, who in vain 
tries to infuse into the weaker spirit of her paralysed husband her 
own metaphysical superiority. In this scene we know that Mr. 
Macready's acting was perfect, for the pressure at our heart, the 
suspension of our breathing, and the creeping of our hair, made 
uafeel that it was so. We see him nvw, as stealthily he placet 
his foot over the threshold of the chamber of death to re-appear 
on the stage ; the intensely staring eye, that cannot remove from 
what 'tis horror to look upon ; the awfully natural absorption of 
his soul by that ^* sorry sight," which one little minute has brought 
about ) his starting and awaking from his entranced state, as he 
runs against his wife in his retreat, and his full passionate bnrsi 



DIBOOTXBT or T&UW. 15 

of blended xemone, terror, and fiiperstitioD, ae tefotiba^ coQned, 
legardletB <^ remoDstrance, lieedlesi of probable detection, ha 
pours forth his ** brain-sickly " convictions, of having in one little 
moment cnt the cable that had held him to the rest of the great 
human family. All this we can see in oox mind's eye, for the 
actor gave ns a pictnre of passkm that time can never obliteratOb 
But how wonld it have been with a cloddish unimaginative fellow> 
whom nature never intended diould understand Shakspere? 
Wonld he not, consdons that he was among shoals and quickp 
fiands of feelings, too nioe for his appreciation, seek to tear over 
an by a tempest of rant, which would be a more ruthless murder 
on Shakspere than Macbeth's on the king ? And why should we 
be delighted with Mr. Macready's delineation, and disgusted with 
the ranter ? Simply because the former has obterved, treasured 
up, and felt every genmne exhibition of human feeling that came 
in his way, and applied it appropriately to all the situations to 
which it was related in nature. A single instance will make this 
clear. Mr. Kean one night, in the concluding part of the combat 
scene of Bicfaard III., when supposed to be wounded to the 
death, before falling, steadily regarded his foe, and painfully 
raising his right arm in act to strike, the relaxed and dying limb^ 
unable to second the spirit, fell heavily and harmlessly to his side, 
indicating merely the fierce bravery of the usurper living in all 
He strength, when the body which it would move, was all but a 
senseless clod. Pit, gallery, and boxes arose with an enthudasm 
beyond description, and by tiieir repeated plaudits bore testimony 
the intense natwalness of the struggle. The actor being after^ 
wards complimented upon the Atir, said, that he had taken the 
Action from Jack Painter, the prize-fighter, when the latter was 
t>eaten In some one of his contests, and it immediately struck the 
tragedian that the very same thing would come in beautifully in 
the dying scene of Richard III. What was this, if not imagtna^ 
tlon ? Keaa saw Painter's action to be the natund effects of und}^ 
fng valour in vain endeavouring to contend agnnst overwhelming 
power. Bemembering and associating it with his previous coneep* 
tiott of the character of Richard III., the actor saw it could be 
most strikingly incorporated with that picture of passion the 
usurper's death should present to our view. Seeing this, necom* 
tdned it with his previous delineation, and thereby did precisely 
the same thing as the poet in using a fine simile, or the painter in 



16 9MO0TERT OF TSDTB. 

latrodndog snn-liglit over a part of ids picture. It wtfft a portion 
of nature carried away by the actor, to be reproduced on a future 
and fitting occasion.'* 

The beginning of all knowledge is observation. It has been 
shown by Mr. Mill that * axioms/ which lie at the foundation of 
all reasoning and all science, < are experimental truths— generali- 
sations /rom observation. The proposition that Two straight lines 
cannot inclose a space — or, in other words, Two straight lines 
which have once met do not meet again, but continue to diverge 
— is an induction from the evidence of ottr senses.' \ * Axioms. are 
but a class of inductions from experience: the simplest and easiest 
cases of generalisation,* from the facts furnished to, us by our 
senses or by our internal consciousness.'^ 

Autobiography, or the metaphysical revelation of a man to 
himself, is a source of valuable psychological and moral truths* 
From this centre frequently radiate new lights upon human nature* 
But this is resolvable into a species of mental observation. It is 
self-inspection. 

We have lately been told that < Poetry Is called upon to work 
in the discovery of truth. The imagination has always been 
the great discovering power. Discoveries are the poetry of sci- 
ence. The case is rare indeed in which, by merely advancing 
step by step in the exercise of the logical faculty, any new truth 
has been arrived at. Logic comes afterwards, to verify that 
which imagination sees with its far-darting glanoe.tl 

This seems to call upon us to recegoise the . imagination as 9^ 
fresh source of truth. But the definition of imagination, as given 
t>y Emerson, reveals to us its origin in observation;^' The 
imagination may be defined to be the use which reason makei 
of the material world. Shakspere's imperial muse tosses the 
creation like a bauble from hand to hand, to- embody any ca^ 
pricious shade of thought that is uppermost in his mind.' Hence, 
though we agree with Gilfillan thattmagination is thought on fire, 
we must confess that the ignition Is material. 

We will, however, hear a poet's defence of his fraternity :-* 

* Poets are vulgarly considered deficient in the reasoning faculty | 

• * Phrenology Tttted, by A. M., of the Middle Temple, pp. U3-5. 

t Logic, vol 1, p. 305. X Jtum, pp. 328-9. 

n W. J. Fox'a Lectures to the Working ChtiMs ; Oeniua and Poetry of Cuwa 
bbH, p. S6« 



BtUWYBftT or TBDTB. If 

vhaTCM no nun wu btbi b great poet withoat baring it in ex- 
cess, And >[l«i a centory or two, men liecome convinced of it. 
Tbej jamp tiie middle termi of tbeir ayUogisms, it U true, end 
¦•same preaUi«g la which the worH has not jet arriiad ; but time 
•tunpi their deductions as iavincible.'* 

bnaginitioii is based on obEeivation, and bears the same lela- 
tiontotbe ' material irorid'thattbe magician bears to tbeappti- 
•nces of bis art. Imagination ii tba dexterous and astonialiing us« 
of realities. It is a species of mental experiment, whereby, with- 
cot permission of the iine-snd.rule men, we join strange things 
together, and to the sarprise of erer; bodj, the junction is a 
happ; one. ' Angelo's greatness laj in searching for nntried 
eiiEteace.'-t But observation primaiilj suggeaU the combi- 
nation. If, as in the case of Angelo, imagination essays the 
highest flights of genius, and goes in search of nntried existence, 
it is not existence ont of nature, but founded upon nature— >it* 
success is a rereiation of some hidden reality; 

Some of the most praised conceptions of Shakspere have been 
traced by critics to ttia triteM observation. Instance Hamlet's 



Critics tell ns, that Sliakspere here fell Into the conventional 
cant of a mechanic making ekewers. But it is no detraction to 
cull the best phrases from the molt common sources. Knight 
remarks :—' Philosophy, as profound as it is beautiful ! says the 
nninitiat^ reader ofShakspere. But he that is endued with the 
wisdom of the commentators,' will learn how easy it is to mistake 
for philosophy and poetry wbat reaUy only proceeded from the 
Tery vnlgar recollection of an ignorant mind. Dr. Farmer informs 
me, says Steevens, that these words are merely technical. A 
woodman, botcher, and dealer in skewers, lately observed to him. 
that bis nephew (an idle lad), could only assist in making them-, 
he could rough-hew them, but I was obliged to shape their ends, 
, To shape the ends of wood skewers, t. «., to point tbem, rec^nim 
a degree of skill : any one can iongh<hew them. Wlioever teenU 
lecte the profeSnon of Shakspete's father, will admit that bii mu 

• Loirdl'a ConnnXiODi cm (h( Old Poitt. 



18 SISCOTEBT OF TRVTB; 

might be no stranger to sucli terms. I have frequently teen pncli* 
ages of wool pinned np with skewers.' * To admit the likelihood 
of all this, notwithstanding Mr. Knight's jeer at the *¦ wisdom of 
the commentators,' is rather to exalt them degrade the genius of 
Shakspere, who could derive exalted figures from humble sources. 
The 'Athenaeum,'! far more wisely than Mr. Knight, in this 
instance, observes :~< This is the test of a truly great man; 
that his thoughts should be things, and become things in in* 
etantaneous act, and not for a moment mere speculations and ab* 
etractions.' 

As the theories of the schoolmen subside, and men no longer 
ignore nature, it will become recognised as the source rather 
than the tool of intellect. We shall have less occasion to contend 
that all lofty and sublime ideas derive their value and beauty 
from their coherence with the instincts of sensation, * Poetry, 
we grant, creates a world of its own ; but it creates it out of exist* 
tng materials.' * Imagination' may be but ' thought on fire,' but 
the spark, which ignites it, is material. Is there any other dis- 
tinction between the flights of the rhapsodist and those of geniuS| 
Ihan that genius illumines reality and rhapsody obscures it ? < W» 
lEnow of no great generalisation that has ever been made by a 
man unacquainted with the details on which it rests.'( 

Experiment is invented observation. It is putting into opera* 
tion certain supposed causes in order to observe their effects. An 
experiment may be defined as an observation, which we are at some 
trouble to make. Experiment is usually set down as being a pro- 
cess of discovering truth different from observation. It is evi- 
dently included under observation, and there is no practical 
advantage in separating it. Discursive, general, ordinary, or 
common observation is the observation of the phenomena yrefincU 
Experiment 'is observation of the phenomena we bring togetherm 
Experimental observation has been the great agent of modern 
discovery. Newton ranked it as the most valuable knowledge* 
Whatever is not founded on phenomena is hypothesis, and has no 
place in experimental philosophy. It is the principal source of 
accurate facts. When Jenner first communicated to John Huaii 
tex, what he thought respecting the prevention of small pox— 

* Philosophy and Religion of Shakipere, pp. I78«4t 

t No 940. p. 1193. 

i AtfaMCMua, No. 040, p. ]191f 



DISCOTBST OF TSUTB. 19 

' Don't think, but try ; be patient, be accurate,' was Hunter's 
characteristie reply. Locke remarks s—< While the philosophy 
of Aristotle prerailed in the ichools, which dealt often in words 
without meaning, the knowledge of nature was at a stand ; men 
argued concerning things (f which they had no idea; in this 
enlightened age, we keep to trial and experiment, as the only 
certain foundation of philosophy.' 

* Hypotheds may be noticed here as being a species of embryo 
experiment. Hypothesis is guessing at the truth. It is a conjec- 
ture or supposition relating to the cause of an effect. It imagines 
that where certain conditions exist, the desired result will ensue. 
But all these conjectnres must be founded on observation. For* 
in the wildest conjecture, unless made by a madman, there is 
some reason. Hypothesis is incipient truth founded on a few facts 
which make it probable, but not on sufficient to make it certain. 
Hypothesis does not directly discover truth, but it is a guide to 
experiment, which does. The hypotheses of Columbus respecting 
an unknown continent, did not of itself discover America — ^but it 
directed the experiment of his voyage there, which did. * To hy 
pothesise alone is the error of the visionary and the dreamer. 
Practical wisdom, as fiir as posnble, tests hypothesis by experi* 
SMnt. Sir C. Bell conjectitred that the nervous fluid of the hu* 
man body was analogous to galvanic fluid, and then, by oxperi- 
menfcs on various animals, he endeavoured to test his hypothesis. 
However, great thinkers arise who are best employed in contriv- 
ing plans for others to execute— in telling others what they are to 
do. Great poets belong to this class. They are often incapable 
of the concentrated labour of furnishing proofs of their hypothe* 
lis. Gladly should we recognise the mission of such men. They 
work for humanity by thinking for humanity. * All who think,' 
•ays Lytton, *• are co>operative with all who work.' Labour 
supplies our wants, thought teaches us dominion over nature. 
Labour is but the means of subsistence, it is thought that makes 
It the source of wealth by multiplying its powers. 

To the value of hypothesis Mr. Mill bears this testimony, that 
by suggesting observations and experiments, it puts us upon 
the road to, independent evidence, if it be really attainable, and 
till it be attained, the hypothesis ought not to count for more 
than a suspicion. The function of hypothesis is one which must 
be reckoned absolutely indispensable in science. Without luch 



20 DISCOVBKT or TRUTH. 

assmnptioii, science would xM>t have attained its present state. 
Nearly eveiything which is now theory was once hypothesis.* 

Induction is systematic observation of a given class of 
phenomena. It consists in bringing together a variety of 
facts and instances, carefully and patiently viewing them in all 
possible lights to discover from a comparison of the whole 
what, if any, new principle is elicitable. Induction is an ex- 
periment with a number of facts, to see if any general result 
can be arrived at. Thus observation is of three kinds — discur- 
sive, experimental, and inductive. For brevity of speech, we 
-use respectively the terms observation, experiment, and indue* 
tion, as the names of the three recognised modes of investigation. 
Bat it facilitates a clear view of this subject, to note that experi 
ment and induction are but phases of observation — and that 
observation is the great source of the discovery of truth. 

Discursive observation and experiment ar^ the sources of facts 
or particular truths. Nature, poetically says Dr. Reid, is put to 
the question by a thousand observations and experiments, and 
forced lo confess her secrets. Out of these secrets induction ga- 
thers its general truths, which become the premises of argu- 
ment. Facts, like stones, are of little service while scattered- 
it is in the edifice raised by them that their value is apparent. 
They have been compared to blocks, upon <me of which, if a person 
stand, he has but a partially increased view ; but when many 
are piled up, a person from their summit commands the prospect 
round. Particular truth seldom proves anything but itself. 
Argument is proving something else, and we have seen that that 
which is proved must be contained in something which proves it* 
In other words, an argument is an assertion or denial of some- 
thing substantiated by other things— by facts. 

Gall Bbserved the peculiar formation of a certain liead, but the 
one fact proved nothing, except that the head had a certain form. 
It was a barren observation, except that it suggested to his ima- 
gination the hypothesis that the peculiar form of the head might 
be caused by peculiarity of mind. This set him upon the experi- 
"^mt of observing the habits and disp6sitidns of the individual in 
lorder to test his hypothesis. But the 'one fact of finding a pecu- 
liarity proved nothing new of any value. The two facts, thougli 
ndlncident, were hardly convincing. They proved only that a 

• Logic, Vol. II, p. 18. 



DISCOVERT OF TRUTH. 21 

^nliar head was accompaiiied in one case by pecnliar habit»— 
but whether one was the eause of the other, ot whether the phe- 
nomena were in any way connected, still remained unknown. 
When, however. Gall, Spurzheim, and others, had travelled 
through Europe, making observations and experiments, and at last 
putting all the facts and instances together, and carefully and 
patiently viewing them in all possible lights, and finding that they 
shadowed forth that the brain was the organ, the map and mea- 
sure of intelligence, they inducted a general truth, which enters 
the lists of argument and takes its place as an addition to out 
metaphysical and moral treasures. 

Mr. Macaulay, who, perhaps, might be aocnsed of underrating 
both Bacon and Induction, with a view of exalting Aristotle, re- 
marks that ' The vulgar notion about Bacon we take to be this, that 
he invented a new method of arriving at truth, which method is 
called induction, and that he detected some fallacy in the syllogis- 
tic reasoning which had been in vogue before his time. This notion 
is about as well founded as that of the people who, in the middle 
ages, imagined that Virgil was a great conjurer. Many who are 
far too well informed to talk such extravagant nonsense, entertain 
what we think incorrect notions as to what Bacon really effected 
in this matter. The inductive method has been practised ever 
since the beginning of the world by every human being. It is 
constantly practised by the most ignorant clown, by the most 
thoughtless schoolboy, by the very child &t the breast. That me- 
thod leads the clown to the conclusion^ that if he sows barley he 
shall not reap wheat. By that method, the schoolboy learns that 
a cloudy day is the best for catching trout. The very infant we 
imagine is led by induction to expect milk from his mother or 
nurse, and none from his father* Not only is it not true that 
Bacon invented the inductive method, but it is not true that he ( 
was the first person who correctly analysed that method and ex- [ 
plained its uses. Aristotle had long before pointed out the absur* < 
dity of supposing that syllogistic reasoning could ever conduct 
men to the discovery of any new principle, had shown that such 
discoveries must be made by induction and by induction alone, 
and had given the history of the inductive process concisely, in- 
deed, but with great perspicuity an4 precision. We are not in* 
clined to ascribe much practical value to that analysis of the 
inductive method which Bacon has given in the second book of 

C 



22 BIBOOTSKT OP TEUTS. 

the Norum Organon. It it, indeed, an elaborate and correct 
analysis. But it is an analysis of that which ^e are all doing 
from morning to night,* and which we continue to do even in our 
dreamF.'* 

It is not 'some fallacy in the syllogistic reasoning' wluch 
Bacon is supposed to have detected, it is rather the partial protec* 
tion against error afforded by syllogisms, which he exposed and 
provided against, for which he is estimated. Certainly Aristotle 
must have had a very different opinion of the value of inductive 
philosophy from that entertained by Bacon, or he would have 
indoctrinated his disciples with it. Few will doubt that had 
Baoon's Novum Organon appeared in the place of Aristotle's 
logic, and Aristotle's work in the place of Bacon's, that the ad- 
vancement of learning in the world would now be in a very dif- 
ferent state. Could Bacon have arrested the attention of the 
ancient sagei with his nethods of discovering new principles, 
ancient philosophy, instead of being a treadmill, would have been 
a path, and we should not have had a contempt for all learning 
which was useful. When Fosidonius said that we owed to philo- 
sophy the principles of the arch and the introduction of metals, 
we should not have had Seneca repudiating such insulting com* 
pliments, nor Archimedes considering that geometry was degraded 
by being employed in anyUiing useful. 

But these observations of Macanlay have the merit of showing 
us that induction has its foundation in nature, and afford a 
fozther confirmation of our views, that observation is t^e source 
of our knowledge, and that it is the province of logic to teach us 
to f yatematise our thoughts. Observation, experiment, hypothesis 
and induction, are bat different names for the operation — ^varying 
in degree, in method, in expedient, and elaboration— whereby we 
discover truth. Nature is the treasure-house of truth, and the 
sole fee of appropriation is attention. 

Much discussion has taken place upon the nature of necessary 
truths. Mr. Mill, however, after an elaborate analycds of Dr. 
Whewell's theory, pronounces that * nothing is necessary ex- 
cept the connection between a conclusion and the premises.' A 
SAcessary truth is commonly defined as a proposition, the nega- 
Ibn of which is not only false, but inconceivable. Mr. Mill con- 
tests this doctrine in words embodying suggeslions of great value. 

* Macaulay*! Hiit. Essays, vol. 2, p. 407. 



J>IBO>TXBT oy TEUTB. 23 

' Nowl cumoC but wonder that m araeh itww ihooldlM laid 
upon the drcmutaiioe of iaconceivahlnneM, whea theie is sach 
ample ezpeiienoe to ihow that our capacity or iacapacity of coa* 
ceiving a thing has very UtUe to do with a potability of the thing 
in itielf ; bat ia in tmth very much an affair of accident, and de- 
penda upon the past history and habits of our own minds. There 
is no more generally acknowledged fact in homan nature, than 
the extreme difficulty at first €^ in conoeiYing aaything as po»- 
sible, which is in contradiction to long established and familiar 
experience ; or eren to old and familiar habits of thought. And 
this difficulty is a necessary result of the fundamental laws of the 
human mind. When we have often seen and thought of two 
things together, and have never in any one instance either seen 
or thought of them separately, there is by the primary law of asso- 
ciation an increasing difficulty, which in the end becomes insu* 
perable, of conoeiTing the two things apart. This is most of all 
conspicuous in uneducated persons, who are in general uttvly 
unable to separate any two ideas which have once become firmly 
associated in their minds ; and if persons of cultiFated intelleot 
have any advantage on the point, it is only because, having seen 
and heard and read more, and been more accustomed to exerdae 
their imagination, they have experienced their sensations and 
thoughts in more varied combinations, and have been prevented 
from forming these inseparable associations. But this advantage 
has necessarily its limits. The man of the most practised intel* 
lect is not exempt from the universal laws of our conceptive 
faculty. If daily habit presents to him for a long period two facta 
in combination, and if he is not led during that period either by 
acddent or intention to think of them apart, he will in time be- 
come incapable of doing so even by the strongest eflTortj and the 
supposition that the two facts can be separated ia nature, will at 
last present Itself to his mind with all the characters of an ineon* 
ceivable phenomenon. There are remarkable instances of this ia 
thehistory of science: instances, in which the wisest men rejected 
as imposable, because inconceivable, things which their posterity, 
by earlier practice and longer perseverance in the attempt, found 
it quite easy to conceivei and which everybody knows to be true.* 
* If, then, it be so natural to the human mind, even in its higl^ 
est state of culture, to be incapable of conceiving, and on that 
ground to believe impossible, what is afterwasds not only found 

c2 



24 BI8C0VSBT OP TSUTS* 

to be conceivable bat prored to be tnie ; wbat 'wonder if lb cases 
where the association is still older, more confirmed, and more fa* 
miliar, and in which nothing erer occurs to shake oar conviction, 
or even suggest to us any conception at variance with the associ- 
ation, the acquired incapacity should continue, and be mistaken 
for a natural incapacity ? It is true our experience of the varieties 
in nature enables us, within certain limits, to conceive other 
varieties analogous to them. We can conceive the sun or moon 
falling ; for although we never saw them faXt, nor ever perhaps^ 
imagined them falling, we have seen so many other things fall, that 
we have innumerable familiaif liinalogies to assist the conception ^ 
which after all, we should probably have some dtflSculty in fram- 
ing, were we not well accustomed to see the sun and moon move^ 
(or appear to move,) so that we are only called upon to conceive 
a slight change in the direction of motion, a circumstance fami* 
liar to our experience. But when experience affords no model on 
which to shape the new conception, how is it possible for us to 
form it? How, for example, can we imagine an end to space or 
time? We never saw any object without something beyond it^ 
nor experienced any feeling without something following it* 
When, therefore, we attempt to conceive the last point of space^ 
we have the idea irresistibly raised of ether points beyond it. 
When we try to imagine the last instant of time, we cannot help 
conceiving another instant after it Nor Ib there any necessity 
to assume, as is done by a modern school of metaphysicians, a 
peculiar fundamental law of the mind to account for the feeling of 
infinity inherent in our conceptions of space and time 5 that appa- 
rent infinity is sufficiently accoanted for by simpler and univer* 
sally acknowledged laws.'* 

Thus we stand on the verge of boundless posnbility. What 
truths may yet be discovered in that great and untrodden field, 
which lies without our experience, no man can tell. All we have 
yet brought between assertion and proof, is all we have yet con- 
quered, is all that we as yet know, is all that we can yet rely 
upon. The search after the untried is the highest and apparently 
the inherent aspiration of man. The revelation of new worlds 
continually rewards his noble ambition. At once arrested and 
allured by the magnificence of nature— we wonder, we work, we 
wait. 

e flfUl^i Logic, Yol. 1, pp. 319-17. 



CHAP. ?• 



V ACTS. 



We mwt newer fvgct thak 
flhi only eybiUBti*! hum off ackoM.— P. 



As dear fonntuas send farA pdhicid ttmawy lo do deu tretin 
grire aocvr&te soences. The more definite tlie fiuts, Uw more 
perfect the adeaoe ; it Is therefore of impottuoe that all focts 
ahoald be capable of being tested by the rtandard of physical cer- 
tainty. Dr. Bod says, that * the inquirer after tnith most take 
only facts for lus ginde.' It is then of moment that he takes tme 
and not false gmdes. A writer in the * Monthly •Repository' 
obeerresy that * the basis of all knowledge is sack an extensiTe 
induction from particnlar focts, as leads to general condn- 
dotts and fondamental asioms'— «nd if the laots are erroneous^ 
evidently the eandusions will be also erroneoos. He also re- 
marks, that < in reasoning, all sdenoes are the same, being 
founded on an examination of facts— HXHnpailsen of ideas.' But 
if the examination is incomplete, or the facts admitted incorrect, 
Che comparison will be aUke defectiYO and the reasoning vitiated. 
If SQppodtions or conjectnres are mixed np with facts, the in- 
ductions from them wUl be snppontions, and the oondnsions bat 
conjectures. 

There are three words — consciousness, consdence, and con- 
sdentiousness — rery much alike to the ear but Tery different in 
signification. Consciousness, is feding — consdence, the sense of 
right and wrong*— conscientiousness, the practice of what is be- 
lieved to be right Consdence and consdentiousness are often 
confounded. We say, lawyers have no consdence, we mean no 
consdentiousness. They know right from wrong as men, but not 
professionally. It is with consdousness that the logician has to 
'4eaL Consdousness Lb the primary source of knowledge. Con- 
sdousness and the * Evidences of the Senses ' are synonymous 
terms. Facts referable to consciousness are said to be physically 
certain. The evidence of the senses is the highest standard of 
certainty. 

The intuitive principles of belief are—lst. A conviction of wig 
own existence. 2nd. A confidence in the evidences of our senses. 
Sid« la our mental operations. 4ih. laovr mental ide&ti^« 



f$ VA0T8. 

5tb. In the conformity of tlie operationB of nature. These truths 
of intuition or consciousness are the foundation of all knowledge. 
Truths which we know, by way of inference, are occurrences 
which took place while we were absent— the events of history 
and the theorems of mathematics. But the truths known by 
intuition are the originid premises from which all others are 
inferfed. Our assent to the conclusion being grounded upon 
the truth of the premises, we could never arrive at any knowledge 
by reasoning, unlets something oould be known antecedently to 
all reasoning. 

* Whatever is known to us by consciousness, is known beyond 
possibility of question. What one sees, or feels, whether bodily 
or mentally, one cannot but be sure that one sees or feels. No 
science is required for the purpose of establishing such truths ; no 
rules of art can render our knowledge of them more certain than 
it is in itself* There is no logic for this portion of our know* 
ledge.** 

All discussions pertaining to the nature and limits of intuitica 
•r consciousness are referred to the higher or transcendental meta- 
physics, but all the facts that compose evidence and become the 
grounds of inference are, according to the view taken heri^ 
necessarily subjects of examination. 

'CogUot ^go «»m— I think, therefore I am, argued Des Carter 
We learn by this that consciousness of the operations of the mind 
is the strongest evidence of our existence. It cannot be proved so 
forcibly by any other means ; and although Des Cartes' language 
may appear to involve a logical fallacy, yet the proof of our per- 
sonal existence which we have from thinkings is the fullest and 
best we are acquainted vrith.'f 

There is a numerous class of facts from which all men draw 
conclusions, which facts are not referable (o the evidence of the 
senses. There are the facts of testimony. Testimony is founded on 
laws almost as fixed and certain as those of nature. All our know- 
ledge, sclentlBc, literary, historical— all except what arises from 
our experience and consciousness — depends on it. In the ad^ 
ministration of justice it is the sole guardian of property and 
life. If a man of known integrity and veracity state a factp 
without any possible motive of self-interest, and evidently subject 

• J. 8, M.ll: Lojric, vol. 1, p. 7» 
t BflnBobortAiiMUs. 



FACTS. S7 

to no deliuioiii $ and If others of like character, wbo conld baTe 
no understandiag or ooUosioa with him, state the same, men ase 
nearly as certain of it as of any tmth in mathematics. I beliere 
in the existence of Rome and the facts of astronomy on thia 
evidence, although I never saw the dty or examined the stars 
through a telescope. 

The conclusiveness of testimony is designated moral certainty. 
The value of testimony depends on three things. 1. On the 
nature of the subject. Some subjects are capable of more ac- 
curate observation than others. 2. On the powers and character 
of the observer—- his ability to understand or note that of which 
he testifies— and his honesty in common matters. 3. On the 
number of our informers. Several persons are less likely to be 
Imposed upon than one. 

Testimony or moral certainty is inferior to physical certainty. 
A physical certainty bears uniformly the name of o^tainty, while 
» moral certainty is characterised as a probability. Great, very 
great may be the probability, still it is less in reliableness than a 
physical certainty. The evidence of Cato or Aristides would be 
very eondasive^-yet somewhat less certain than that which onr 
own senses have proved. 

The condttsions from moral certainties are obtained like other 

eondnsions, by induction. The induction from moral facts is 

like the induction from phyncal facts, with this difference— that 

the conclusions from mord facts are probabilities, like the facts 

on which they are founded. Whatever has physical certdnty in 

its favour is considered demonstrable, and when sufficient probable 

evidence is adduced in favour of a proposition, it is considered to 

be fdrly proved. Some persons, biased by the strictness' of 

mathematicd proof, insiflt upon the same accuracy in mord 

investigations. I have elsewhere pointed out the juvenility and 

infatuation of this error. Insist upon demonstration where the 

nature of the questions admits it. Less should not, in such case, 

suffice. Accept probability where probability is the ide evidence 

attainable. Never ask more than reason can grant. We must 

admit gradations of validity. What we are consdous of, wo 

know. All we recdve on testimony, we believe* Physicd oet* 

tainty is knowledge: mord certdnty, belief. 

Hume remarks, in his ' Essay on ProbabiUties,' that < Mr. Locke 



88 FACTS. 

divides all argnmerifs into demmstrative and probable. In tbis 
?few', we must say, that it is only probable all men must die, or 
that the sun will rise to-morrow. But to conform our language 
more to common as^» we ought to divide arguments into demoff 
ttroHoMf proofs, and probabiliHet, By proofs, meaning such 
arguments from experience as leave no room for doubt or oppo- 
sition.'* 

Conjecture is probable truth. Some subjects only furnish a 
sufiRcient number of facts to make them probable in the lowest 
degree — not to decide them as positively true. The propo* 
sitions expressing results pertaining to such subjects are called 
conjectures. 

A conjecture founded on no fact or upon too few to make it 
likely, is called a vagary. 

It will be seen that probability is a thing of degree. A proba- 
bility may vary in weight from a moral certainty, where it ranks 
next to a physical certainty, down to a conjocture, and descend 
lower in likelihood till it is lost in conjecture. 

Lord Kames remarks, in his preface to his ' Sketches'-^' Moat of 
the subjects handled in the following sheets, admit but of pro* 
bable reasoning i and, with respect to such reasoning, it is often 
difficult to say, what degree of conviction they ought to produce. 
It is easy to form plausible arguments; but to form such as can 
stand the test of time, is not always easy. I could amuse the 
reader with numerous examples of conjectural arguments, which, 
fair at a distant view, vanish like a cloud on a near approach ' 
Did all authors so judiciously apprise their readers of the pro* 
bable logical value of their speculations, fewer would be misled 
than now. 

To numerous questions of undoubted interest, which have been 
agitated in all ages, only a moderate degree of certainiy attaches 
—these are termed speculative. Such subjects may afford but 
few facts and instances, and the chances of conclusiveness may 
seem remote — ^yet ultimate results are not to be despaired of: the 
new comparison of conjectures and the arrangement of facts 
daily throws new light on age-contested points. Systems of 
conduct should not be founded on conjectures in opposition to 
evident moral utility; but if speculatioo is kept within th9 

^ Hnaoe'i Eassyiy vol. S, pr 69» 



TACTS. S9 

q^hoitt of speculations it maj be prosecuted with lafety and 
prospect of success. 

There are problems in metaphysics as there are in mithematlcsy 
which may be demonstrated to be insolvable. To describe the 
limit of human power vrith respect to contested questions will 
yet result from speculatiye controversy.' The capacities of our 
understanding will be one day well considered, the extent of our 
knowledge discovered, and the horizon found which sets bounds 
between the enHghtened and the dark part of things — between 
what is and what is not comprehensible by us. But this will 
only be when the untried has been universally attempted in all 
directions. Bailey, I think, has defined truth as being that 
which is universally accepted after having been universally 
examined. Little of this truth is yet extant. When every man 
shall be a thinker, when the. autobiography of intellect shall be 
more freely furnished than it ever yet has been, unanimity of 
opinion not yet. dreamed of will prevail. Harmony of opinion 
is the sign of intellectual conquest — ^the standard-bearer of truth * 
no advocacy is victorious while dissent occupies the field. 

What we know to be true, is knowledge \ what we have only 
reason to believe true, is opmion. All human information is 
made up of knowledge and opinion. The primary importance of 
knowledge is evident from the fact that knowledge is the umpire 
of all opinion. We believe in the existence of the ruins of Pal- 
myra and Thebes, and in certain discoveries of algebraists and 
astronomers. It is our opinion that these things are true, although 
we may never have visited Palmyra or Thebes, nor made the cal- 
culations of the algebraist, nor the observations of the astronomer. 
In these cases our belief is founded on our experience and know- 
ledge of mankind. It is qo^te true that travellers exaggerate, 
and scientific men are sometimes mistaken ; but we know that 
there is always some truth at the bottom of what is communicated 
by well-n^eaning writers. More or less, every man's exverience 
assures him of this; and it is the cause of our reliance 
on the records of history, and the reports of science. There- 
fore, since all information is made up of knowledge and 
opinion, plainly knowledge is the one thing which comprises 
all intelligence. 

* Questions of fact,* observes Pascal, in his.celebrated * Provincial 
I/etters,' * are only to be determined by the senses. II what yoa 



80 FACTS* 

assert be true, prove it to be so ; if it be aot, yoQ labour in Tela 
to induce belief. All the authority in the world cannot enforce 
or alter belief as to facts ; nothing can possibly have power to 
cause that not to be which actually it,** 

A remarkable instance of the verification of what wa* asBnmed 
to be is related of Pascal by (Goodrich. * Pascal was a philosopher 
even in childhood. At a very early age he was taught the ten 
commandments. For several days after, he was observed to be 
measuring the growth of a blade of grass. When asked the 
meaning of this, he replied, <*The fourth commandment says, 
* Six days shalt thou labour, but the seventh is the Sabbath in 
which thou shalt do no work.' Now I wished to ascertain if na- 
ture obeyed this great law, and therefore measured the grass, to 
see if it grew as much on Sunday as on other days." 'f 

* We are informed,' says Beattie, < by Father Malebranche, that 
the senses were at first as honest faculties as one could desire to 
be endued with, till after they were debauched by original nn ; 
an adventure from which they contracted such an invincible pro- 
pensity to cheating, that they are now continually lying in wait to 
deceive us. But there is in man, it seems, a certain clear-sighted, 
stout, old faculty, called reaton, which, without being deceived by 
appearances, keeps an eye upon the rogues, and often proves too 
cunning for them.*} 

Though it is so abundantly obvious that the evidences of our 
senses, internal and external, are, in effect, the sources of all 
certainty, yet we are. not warranted in rejecting, as mere hypo- 
thesis, every theory which we cannot at once corroborate. When 
Euler remarked of his new law of arches, < This will be found 
true, though contrary to all experience'— when Gall exclaimed of 
his new philosophy of the sensorium, * This is true, though opposed 
to the philosophy of ages '—they expressed demonstrable truths 
ludden from the multitude. They announced new generalisations 
to man. New truths are commonly found to be old unnoted 
experiences, for the first time subjected to classification, and pre- 
sented in a scientific form. 

To me it seems almost in vain to urge men to notice facts who 
have never noticed themselves. The tmest standards of certain^ 

* Letter zviii. 

t Fireside Education, p. 89* 
t £*M7 OB Truth, p. 1M« 



PACTS. SI 

Rffse tttfOL individuality of retrospfeCton. A& Intelligent man is, 
liimself to himself, the measare of all things in the universe. 

In appealing to the young on the aspiration after improvement, 
one cannot say * Consult your aptitudes — ^foIWw year bias.' This 
is the sole appeal-injunctive to which aU natures can respond. 
But in this half-natured, half-trained, doubtfully-conditioned 
state of society, though the generous woiild be incited to noble 
deeds, the sordid would lay their vulture claws on the world, and 
the unprincipled victimise their fsUows. Tou have, therefore, to 
say, * Man, do what thou listest, provided it be compatible with 
the welfare of thy fellow men.' Men are not well-natmred, and w» 
have thus to guard individuality, and qualify the appeal, and so we 
miss the sdl of great enterprise. Great is tiie disadvantage. For 
the fulcrum which is to raise men is without their natures— r^ 
aote in the wide world. 

Man should begin with himself. He loves Truth— 4t is the first 
impulse of his nature. He leivei Justice— the bandit on ths 
throne, as well as the bandit in the forest, respects justice is 
•ome form or other. Man loves Cheerfulness— it is the attribute 
of innocence and courage. He loves Fraternity— it knits society 
together in brotherhood. ThoM are standards. His codes of life 
and judgment arise from these aspirations. That which accords 
with these principles is reatonable. Whatever develops these 
principles m conduct is moral. These sentiments are to be con- 
firmed by his own observations. His experience in connection 
with these rules is the Hght with which he may examine religions, 
creeds, books, systems, opinions. 

The right understanding of physical and moral fhets greatly 
depends upon intelleotual character— and there enters largely 
into the recondite and ultimate inquiries of intelligent m^ 
another class of facts, called mental facts. There is no chance of 
identifying these without the power of self-analysis, which is one 
reason why metaphysic ability belongs to so fsw, and why ques> 
tions involving metaphysical considerations are such profound 
enigmas to the majority of the people^ The illiterate in these 
things are easily led or misled by words. They who will not bow 
before a throne fall prostrate before a sound. 

The first principles of things are few. The axioms from which 
men date their reasoning are chiefly personal. They are expressed 
in an infinite variety of ways, occasioned by the various concept 



82 FACTS, 

tioxis of those who concave them^ snd by the different capacities 
to which they are adapted when offered for the instruction and 
gnidance of others. Bat this mnst not mislead ns as to the 
nnmber, and overwhelm na with a sense of complexity, where in 
fact simplicity reigns. Those who have the power of self-analysis 
make for themselves rules of conduct, and the best are originated 
in this way — for when a man recasts his acquirements o^ sense 
and education, in order to see on what all rests, and what are 
essential standards of actioi;i and judgment, he resolves all intp 
few, and those the clear and strong. Rob Ko) 's self-examination 
paper is presented to us in those lines which Sir Walter Scott, 
with grace and justice, characterised as the < higli-toned poetry o£ 
his gifted friend Wordsworth.' 

Btij, tbea* thiit Iw wm wIm m bnm, 

Aa wise in thonarht u boid in deed | 
For in the principles of thing* 

fr« tooghllus moTfl aw>d« 

Said generona Rob, 'What need of Booka f 

Bum all the atotutes and their ahelvea I 
They atir ua up against our kind« 

And worae, againat ourselTea. 

We have a passion, make a law, 

Too false to guide «'s or controlf 
And for the law itself we fight 

In bittemeaa of aoul. 

And poBled, blinded, then we lose 

Distinctions that are plain and fewf 
These find I graven on mj neait, 

TAa< telle me what to do.- 

Sir Walter Scott himself has enforced the same views t— 
^ How much do I need socli a monitor/ said Waverley to ElDra* 
* A better one by far Mr. Waverlty will always find in his oiite 
bosom, when he ?dll give its still small voice leisue to be heard* 

All that hath been majestical 

In life or death, since time bMftn, ' 
la native in the simple heart of all/— 

The angel heart of mta.^LotoelL 

To awaken the senses and instmot them and direct them aright 
in the art of observation^ is a great and essential nndertalong. 
All scattered aids need oollecting together^ I>e la Beche in 
* Geology,' and Miss Martineaa have written boolu, entitled 
,How to Observe.' This quality is the distinction between the 
.natural and artificial man— the natural man observes what 41 



PAOTSt 33 

im aatnre^tlid urtifidid solei wluit lie find! in books^f^e one 
depends on himflelf— the other on an etteyclopaedia; We want 
contKast, in oxder to know ai well «& to explain. Foreigners 
observe ns better thao we obserre onrflelves. The common 
escapes onr atteatkm. To know a fact faUy we seek its opposite 
to compare it with. 

Were men reared with the powers of men without the genius 
of the child being impaired, the ability to observe would be more 
general and perfect among ns. Children stop at everything to 
question its nature, at every word to ask its import. It was the 
aim of Pestalozzi to cultivate by his system of tuition this in- 
cessant questioi^ng. Bnt parents among the poor know not the 
value of the habit, or knowing it have not time to gratify it, and 
thus this happiest aptitude of childhood is repressed. 

With regard to the analysis of groups of facts, Mr. J. S. Mill 
remarks — * The observer Is not he who merely sees the thing 
before his eyes, but he who sees what parts that thing is composed 
of. To do this well is a rare talent. One person from inatten- 
tion, or attending only in the wrong-place, overlookis half of what 
he sees ; another sets down much more than he sees, confounding 
it with what he imagines, or with what he infers $ another takes 
note of the kind of all the circumstances, but being inexpert in 
estimating their degree, leaves the quantity of each vague and 
vnoertain ; another jwes indeed the whole, bnt makes such an 
awkward division of it into parts, throwing things into one mass 
which require to be separated, and separating others which 
might more conveniently be considered as one, that the result is 
much the same, sometimes even worse, than if no analysis had 
been attempted- at all.'* 

In the case of the Leigh Peerage there was a number of 
witnesses examined in the House of Lords, as to the existence of a 
certain monument in Stonely Church — ^ The first witness described 
the monument as being. black ; the second spoke of it as a kind of 
dove-colour ; the third said it was black and white ; the fourth 
said it was originally white, but dirty, when he saw it ; the fifth 
dififering from the others, said it was blue ; the next witness 
described it as a light marble, but said it had a dark appearance 
as if it had been bronsed, and the last witness spoke of it as 
Mng of a light grey colour. Then, as to the form of the menu* 

e Logte, ToU 1, p. 438. 



S4 VABTt. 

ment, the fixtt witnees raid H was oMmg ; tike neit said !t l»a» 
square at the top, and came down naraoirar to tlie bottom, and 
there rested on a single truss $ the thbd witness dtts^bed it a» 
being sqnare at the bottom^ ffeeting upon t«rd trusses^ and went 
up narrower and narrower tc^a point at the top v^he^ fourth wit- 
ness said it was angular at the top ; the next said it wue squate 
at the bottom^ was brought t» a point in the* niddlev and was 
then cnrred into a sort of festoon ^ the sixth witness stated that 
it was square at the top and bottoniy and had a cnwe ; and the 
last said it was squace «t the top< and bottom. Asto thelai^^uage 
of the inscriptions, the first witness stated that the names of 
Tkomat and Ckrittopker Leigh weve in English ; the next said 
the inscription was not in English ; the tfaivd said tiiere was a 
great deal in English; the fturth witness sud the whole, (with 
the esoep^on of the na»e Chmtopker Lse)^ was in a language, 
which he did not understand ; th» next witness stated' that the 
inscription was all in Englirii, except the words Anno Domini; 
and the last witness said it was not in English.** 

All these witnesses agree as to the faot in dispute, but th^ 
variances in testimony iUustraite the common inattention of ob- 
servation — and Ipus case further admonishes us that if such 
differences may exist as to a question of fact, where the senses 
are the same, little wonder tiiat difiSwences exist as to matter* 
of opinion, where iufteUectiial capacity and information are so 
various. 

We know from experience that the sportsman sees a pdnt 
whidb is hidden from the unpractised aimM*— the pninter sees 
traits of oharaoter of light and shade in an object which the 
untaught limner never observes; the musician distinguishes 
harmonies and discerds thatfkll unnoted on the uneducated ear. 
Thus we learn that by' cultivation we can increase natural sus^ 
ceptibility to observe. 

The extent is surprising to widch the unanalyttc are in igno- 
rance of the real nature of phenomena. < There is nothing 
which we appear to ourselves more directly conscious ^f, than the 
distance of an object f^Ktta us. Yet it has leng been ascertained, 
that what is perceived by the eye^ is at most nothing more than 
a variously coloured surface $ that when we fancy we see distancei 

* Timcfl^ Uvj 10, 1828. 



all W8 really tefrit certaiii variaitton^of i^paient dze, and more 
or leaf fiuntneta of cdoar.*^ 

In preparing to support an ai^ament on anyqaeation, we must 
&nt detennine the aotrces whence this facta are to be collected. 
Instance 1^ The objeeta of moaicipAl laws are rights and crimes. 

TheevideiiQ6«fs^ht»ar»i'-^L PobUc consent. 2. Testimony, 
tk Records. 

The evideaod e£ crimes aws>— U Confession. 2. Previona 
Hialice. 3. Testimoi^. 

Xhif outline of the investigation pcosecnted, the inquirer next 
consults the authors who treat of the mks which are applied for 
deternoining the faotaol pabllo conaent, testimony, records, con- 
fessions t he la then- able to support his own argument in a 
?alid manner,- or prepared to examine the facts offered by an 
opponent in support of an opposite view. 

The opinion may be^h^sarded that it it not so mudi from want 
of capacity to observe that error arises, as from the want of con* 
viction that wd dieuld observe well before we attempt to infer. 
Nature ia inventive, and desire, once awakened, will, without 
formal ruleS) 6nd oat a thousand modea of gratification. The 
foundation for a solidei logic than now prevails will be laid when 
the people are impressed witii the great importance of looking well 
to facts as the data of all inferential truth. 

There ia a noted aphorism of GMidillac, to the effect that the 
eae aufficient rule for discovering the nature and properties of 
objects is to name them properly, aa if, observea Mr. J. S. Mill, 
* tiie reverse waa not the trutJi^ that it is impossible to name 
them properly eatcept in proportion as we are already acquainted 
vnth their nature and propertiea.' Need it be added that this 
knowledge ia only to be had by patient observation ? 

To assist this habit, Dr. Watts recommends the thinker to 
ascertain if a given idea ia clear and distinct, obscure and con- 
fused, learned or vulgar, perfect or imperfect, adequate or in- 
adequate^-true or false. View a subject, says he, as through a 
telescope, so as to command a dear view of it; examine its 
whole bearingB*as you look over a globe ; consider it in its several 
pn^^ties— anatomise it as with a scalpel. Take cognizance of 
its various aspects as tiiough inspecting it through a prismatic 
glass. Whenever ^re contemplate a smgle object In nature ia 

' •Mm* Log^?tl.i,p.7« 



86 PACTS. 

obvions it mnst have dmation, lise, tf«ig]it, form, coikmr, inch 
qualities being essentially present in all adequate conoeptiona of 
physical phenomena. 

It was objected to the ^Grieke(f of Mr. Diokeas, that his delltoear 
tion of Bertha was wanting in tmthfnlness. The teachers of the 
blind who knew their natare conld detect the departure from the 
reality of their habits in the sketch of Bertha. The study of the 
blind was necessary to insure sncoess. We may not be able in 
any one book to give rules for the study of all subjects, but we 
may indicate that we ought not to speak of what we do not 
know, and that if we mean to introduce oertain facts into our 
speech or writing, we should consult the records- and ezperieneo 
pf those persons who are known to have written upon the subject| 
and follow the best directiona they give, and we shall generally 
attain accuracy. ' 

Mr. Combe observes, in fdM introduotton to his notes on the 
United States of North America, p. si.— <I was told that a 
certain perton boasts of having given Miss Martineau erroneous 
information for the purpose of leading her into mistakes 5 and 
another in Philadelphia assures his friends that he ** crammed" 
Capt. Marryatt with old « Joe Ifiillers,*^ which the Gapt. em* 
bodied into his books as £acts illustrative of American manners. 
This seems to be a case in which some uncertainty must ever eiist 
as to the value of the facts collected by travellers. They cannot 
observe all, or test half that tiiey do observe. They must rely on 
testimony. But they might do this— They might tell us pre- 
cisely the kind of authority they followed, and then the reader 
could form some opinion of the value of what was communicated. 
Had Miss Martlneau and Captain Marryatt given the name and 
addresses of their informants, the latter would now be puaiished by 
being infamously known throughout Europe^ and all future 
travellers warned from them— and all future informants warned 
by their example. Where informants cannot be mentioned by 
name and address, the chances are, they cannot be trusted. When 
first connected with public proceedings, I found myself made the 
depository of innumerable bits of scandal, and ominous reports 
of public characters. To all who told me anything, if I at* 
tached importance to it, I made it a rule to ask— < May I mention 
it to the party with your name?* ' O, np, I would ra^r not,' 
was the comnwa reply. To all written communications I 



FACfS. 37 

ftuBwer^d— ^Pl^sAe add your name and addrem^^and may I pub- 
lish them if occasion ireqUires?' 'O, no^ donV would be the 
general injunction. ' Thus I found that huge reports, inflated as 
balloons, shrunk Uke ihem when pricked by the pin of a question 
— * Will you answer for it ?* Thus I saved myself from being 
imposed upon by, or being the retailer of, reports for which the 
originator or relator would not or could not vouch. 

* Upwards of twenty years ago,' says George Combe, * I accom- 
panied a member of the bar of Paris, a philosopher and a man of 
letters, on a visit to the Highlands of Scotland. At Gallendar a 
boy of twelve or.thiftefen years of age attended as a guide to 
some interesting spot, and in external appearance he seemed to 
be in every respect one of the common lads of the village. My 
Parisian friend entered into conversation with him; asked him 
if he had been at sehool, and soon discovered that to a tolerable 
acquaintance with the Greek and Latin languages, he added a 
pretty extensive- knowledge of arithmetic and geography, and 
WBs then engaged ia thb study of mathematics. My friend con 
ceived that the boy was an average specimen of the peasantry 
of the countty; and greatly admired the educational attainments 
of the Scotch people, which he had previously heard highly 
extolled. But,' adds Mr. Oombe, ' the boy was the natural son of 
an English olBeer, who had resided in the neighbourhood, and 
who, while he ordered him to be reared in the hardy habits of 
the Scottiih ' BKghkmderSy had provided ample funds for his 
mental education.'* 

It is difficult to believe in this Frenchman being a * philosophftTy 
making, as he did, a national indnrtionfrom a singleinstance. Had 
he previously inquired, as he ought to have done, the particulars of 
that lad*s life and rearing, before coming to so large a conclusion, 
he would at once have discovered .the error he was foUing into. 

In the Registrar General's Report of 1840, the mean of mar- 
ried persons unable to write is presented. The conclusion is 
based upon the statistics of mine counties. But when it was found 
that only three per ceut. of tl^e persons marriageable, did marry, 
the datum was found insufficient to afford sure results. This feet: 
is given by Mr. Combe in the same book. Then how many boys 
ought our * philosopher' to have questioned before making Us 
vast inference? 

* Xatio. to notat on United States of Korth Amtiiet, p. If., votU ' 



38 tOIBHOI. 

Anothet Instance «f the value of a qnetfion I eKtraet ircMn tin 
same work. Mr. Combe sayss— 'Afewyeanago, when travel- 
ling in Somersetshire, I saw foor horses, attended by two nten, 
drawing a light plough in a light soiL ** What a waste of labour 
is here," said I to an intelligent former } ** in Scotland, two 
horses and one man will accomplish tins work." ** We rear and 
train yonng horses for the London market," said he ^ " two of 
the four which you see are serring an a^rentioeehip to labour."* 
Had Mr. Combe asked a few •qnestions as 4o the cerrectneas of 
his assumed inference, he would banre been eared from his 
erroneona conclusion. We shonld be frary of unquestioned 
data. 

When Murray's Grammar was first placed in my "bands, I 
fonnd in it certain references to the Canons of Ijusguage in the 
larger edition. I questioned my teacher as to what it meant. 
< It is a trick of tha printer/ he answered, ^to induce you to buy 
the larger volume.' I do 4iot beUere this now. I beHeve that it 
was a necessary reference. Jai. author ^o has written upon a 
given subject, naturally finds hisown ideas eoinddentiUustrationB 
of his views, and honestly refers to them* In this book I have 
made a few references to .previous wor)u of cnine, and it has 
struck me that nine out of ten of the readera will set this down 
to artifice or egotism. Yet it 4s iieither. I have refenod only ts 
avoid the full quotation of some ascessary illustration of the 
argument* Xet few will penetrsite to the foot, asd owst Irill be 
4pt to infer a trick from appearances. 



CSAP. VL 



«CjnM€«« 

Whateyw: ipe fcaownt t rtbe fai thenmntber of flu pTimltl?e dits, or eC fb$ 
toiwliiaioiis wkiek«m b« drapn Ihentoaw-iK* 8* Mttft. 

To have reached, in the study of observed pbenjpiueua, the poiit 

of perception indicated in this motto, and to feel tilie full foroo 

the remark, is %9 have imbibed the ijpljrit of iKienod-^whose 



•CXXVOX. 39 

tndts are dear dMiiotions, aeearate c3ai8lfieatioii, and' stticl) 
xelerenee to piimitive data. Tile bascnof aU flcience are methodica) 
faets. Tiie fint itep to the perfection and enlargement of • 
leience is the resolution of its propoMtsoas into axioms, and into 
pM^SK^ons "wihicfa are to "be pve?ed. Dr. Reid observes — < This 
has been done in matimaatitfaf rom thebe^uning, and has tended 
gieatly to the emolomeat of thert science. It has lately been done 
im natural philosophy, and by tinsmeans that science has adyanced 
more in 160 years than It had done before -in 2,000. Every 
fidence 18 in an mfonned state until its finrt principles are ascer- 
taiafld $ after thia it advances t^gvlarly, and seenresthe gronnd 
it has gained*' 

Oblsifieailioals one nf t|e first-steps =te sdenee. The maxim 
in government, divide and cenq[ner, retains, vhen applied to 
scienoe^ all its srisdom withbnt its nachiavellifUHsm. The young 
grammarian lednoes tiie nass €i ^wei^, tiia% se threaten to con- 
found his powerB^^ a fevr satwral olttses, and he eonquers them 
sepazatoly iMt ease. 

* 'She single pe^rec by wUeh we disotft^ retfeteblance or relation 
in gmexal, is a eaffioient aid to «s ki t%e per^xlty and confusion 
of o«r first attea^ti at ^urvangittient. > It begins by converting 
thousands, and more than tiieiisMas, into one; and, reducing in 
the same manaer lihe numbeirs thus feiteed, it arrirea at last at 
the few distinetlve efaavactmrii of thesegreat eemprehensiTe tribes » 
on whidi it eeasii to opemto, 'beeanse there is nothing left to 
oppress thememoiy>er ihe uadbrstanding.'*^ 

MereU has apeken mew oomparehenrively en ^s subject — 
^That hmaan knowledge dees not consist in the ba^e collection 
and enumeration of facts ; this alone would be of little service 
wtite we net to atten^t the elaslAfieatioa t»f them, and to educe 
fi»eaendh chmnfiealSon general lawseAd pritfCi|Ae{f. The know- 
ledge^ which odnsfsts in indtvidetal truths, coeSd nev«^ be either 
extensive ex definile^^fov the multiplidty of cfb}eet8 which then 
cnuat eiDwd in npen tiie mind only tends to ticnfiNmd and perplex 
ii,.w^ tl^e m^mory^ ovet^utdenedHrlth pmiijiilait, is not able 
to retain a hundredth part of the materials which are 'collected. 
To<proecB^ithis» ilie powet ef geawelisalS<m eomei^ to our aid, by 
which the Individ^ facts a^e eo classifiei undw their proper 
coaceptionsy that they may at the same time be nose easily 
• Broim^ Mtnl Philowpl^, Iisot. ziit 



40 SCIXKOX. 

retafaied, and tlidr aeyeral relations' to all other bTameher of 
knowledge accurately defined. The colligation and dasafication 
of facts, then, we may rogard as the two first steps, which ar^-'tir 
he taken in the attainment of truth.** 

Aristotle, says Morell, classified the maUWy Kant the fermg* 
Aristotle was the first man who undertook the gigantic task of 
redaciog the multiplicity of aU the objects of hnman knowledge 
to a few general heads — 1. Substance* 2. Quality. 3. Quantity. 
4. Relation. 5. Action. 6» Passion. 9. Places 8. Time. 9. 
Posture. 10. Habit. Aristotle's philosophy was a6^6cltbe, Kant's 
stdQcctwe, Kant's categoriesf were twelve.' 1. Unity. 2. Plnzality. 
3. Totality. 4. Affirmation. 5. Negation. 6. limitation. 7. 
Substance. 8. GasuaUty. 9. Bedfrodty. 10» Poestbili^ U. 
.Actuality. 12. Necessity^ 

' It is a fundamental principle Ia legic, that the power of 
framing classes is unUmited» as long as then Is any (even the 
smallest) difference to found a distinction npan;'t' 

What Geoffrey Saint Hilaire has said.itf naJtuTal-histovy is 
applicable to aU science t—^Ti»e fiHt- prbbimn to bfr. solved by 
him who wishes to penetrate deeply into thiSiSlndy, consists evi> 
dentiy in the formation o£ dear and precise distlnotisns hereon 
the varions brings. This ^tiu»most eleinentazy problem, in 80> 
far as it precedes all the others $ but it isinieiUityy inmost cases,. 
complicated and full of difficnlties* Its 'accurate solution re- 
quires—first, QbsetvcUionf which makes k»ow& the facts $ next, 
Detcripiion, which fixes them per manently*^ .then CAaracteritaiiaih 
which selects apd displays prominently tiie most important of 
them— and lastiy, Clamfcatum, which arranges them in sys* 
tematic order.'l 

Of the value of classification, Inmartine has.gisren a fine illns- 
tration i-^* Montesquienhad sovnded the inStitalionBand analysed 
the laws of all people. By ckanng goventtnents he had compared 
them, by comparing them be passed judgment on then $ and this 
judgment brought out» in its bold xdief and contrast^ cn» every 
page, right and force, privilege and equality » tyranny and 
liberty.'! , 

Familiarly with iihe characteristics of sdenca imparls const- 

• Mordl's Ifist. #f JBpacidAlite niU.^ p. MV vol. U 

t Mill, p. 165,.tq1, 1. J , 

t T* W. Utornton : Reasoner No. 7S» p* 504. 
I Lamartine't Bitt. Giioadiiti, pp. 14.1S, toL !• 



8CISNCB* 41 

€erftb1e pow«r for t!he <fetectf6n of fallacy. A logfdan fa imper* 
feet without BcienUfic tastes and habits. The man of science has 
•n his knowledge systebiatlsed and arranged. What other 
people have in confusion, he has in order. The elements of know* 
ledge are, more or less, as has hefin observed, known to all men— , 
bat in their perfect, communicable, and usable state, they ar& 
known only to the educated and scientifib man. What training 
IS to the soldier, science is to the thinker. It enables him to 
eontrol all his resources and employ his natural powers to the 
best advantage. It is this which constitutes the superiority of 
the educated over the 'ignorant. Astronomy, navigatbn, archi- 
tectwe, geometry, political economy, morals, all rest, or should 
rest, and dd rest, if they hare- attained to the perfection of science, 
•n primary facts and first principles. Every step can be measured 
by an. axiom— every result can be traced to a first principle.* 
To detect error, then, in any province of investigation, or any 
donydn of argument, the logician first looks to the primary prin- 
ciples on whiclft it is based, and thus tests the legitimacy of its 
aofidusionSa 

As respects thosO who deal fai- things professedly above reason. 
It was well said by an anonymous writer of the old school of 
sturdy thinkers, — ^ Of such men as these I usually demand,, 
whether their own assent to tldngs they would* have us believe, 
be grounded upon some raiumai argtaneiU, If they say 'tis not, 
they are fools to beUei^e it themselves $ and I shoidd add to the 
number of fools, if, after this teknowledgment, I should believe 
fhem t bat if they say it is, I desire them to produce their argu- 
ment ; fer rinoe'tis framed by a human understanding, the foree 
of it may also be comprehended and judged of 1^ a human under* 
standing t and 'tis to no purpose to say that the subject surpasses 
human reason r for il it do <so indeed, it will surpass iheirt as well 
as miney and so leave us both upon even terms. And let the thing 
assented to be what it will, the assent itself must be founded 
upon ft iuffMcMi reason, and consequently upon one that is m- 
$MgM0 te the hilotan intellect that is wrought on by iff 

^<^ What is it ?*"-<< TIs iiK^possible the same thing should be,, 
and not be at the same time^*' are maxims of such universal 
vsefdlness, that without them we could neither judge , cktoouno^ 

* 6m Bcanties and XJt» of Euelifl, cbap. tI., ttogle of Eudid4 
t A Ditooune on Things abote ReMon, iMl* 



42 'SOimOB. 

nor a€i. Tlifife priiioii^«iimy not al«ftyBiii«ke ili^ tepfmnayct 
ia formal propositioss, but rtill they gnida all our thonglits ia 
the same fanner as when a miiticiaii plays a careless volimtary 
upon a harpsichord— he is giu46d by rule»of music 'he long since 
-became familiar with, though now aoacoely sensible <of them. 

< A batcher loses his kniie, snd looks all «boat for it, and re- 
marks as the motive of his search, '^ I am sore it must be some- 
where or other." By whiolucmdei s^^ng lit is evident he u gnided 
by the axiom last mentioned. Had he not the knowledge of 
this axiom beforehand, did he think vit possible that <faie knife 
could be no where or ia no f^aetyha would never take pains >to 
look for it We may observe many sndi acioms as this ,gaiding 
the actions of the vnlgar, and it is no unworthy iq^eenUtion to 
observe th^ behaviour and words, which prooeed fsom uncor- 
rapted nature, and retiMwe the axioms from which theijr oonduct 
proceeds.** 

The outUnen of the -fcienoe ef ramraHty-aise th«s^«omp^[eiMD- 
tfively sketched by Sir ^mes Maokintoeh.: the origin, ?<alse, and 
application of first principles are indicated with his uanal leUoity* 
^The usages and laws -^f nations, 'the events ••£ history, the 
^pinione Df ph^fli^liers, the sentiments of oradeif aiid. poets, as 
well as .4he observiatisiis -of «emnMn \SifOi are in truth, tiie 
materials ^nt ^f wineh ^e soienne of morality in lorssed; atnd 
4ho8e who negleot themiSHRe just^^ohurgMhle with^a mn •attenupt 
4o philosophise "wltliofit ^egnrd to laoit and evperieaoe-^tbo nele 
foqndation of -aU tcue^hUosephy. 

< The natsupid order ^mdovbtedty dictates that we^shouU first 
r«earch for the mffmaifmtua^9 of the seienoe in hunijm natve; 

then apply then to the «egnlaUon ^f tiie conduct of indi^dnais, 
and lastly «mpIoy them for the Hecision of those difficult and 
ooroplicated queetiofl* 4hat JMdsa 4vitb>Mq^t tf the4nteveou»e 
-of nations.' 

To search lor ultimsite pslnoiplet Sa^to dlsoover ata glanoe the 
whole beanngs of a grant question* .Through what oloude K>f 
politico had the histonan of Eeme^peMfeiMed whem he^annnonevd 
th^ tfaeprinolples of a firee conatltntienicre Irreepfei abliy lAit >when 
4he legislative power is nominated by the eiceentive. 

This habit-4t osmtoi be too oftomiaBistod oii^H«idi!.notr<(»nly ^ 



• Solid 



PhilQiqphj^ uterted agaiaat tbs Fancies •! the Ideaitta* (Loskt's 
tdinffiatbework^atnnrestadj. ^J,Ji, :I.oBd«i« IQ?^. -^ 



vBoroflincom; 43 

wo^ptUtBm of Imowledgey tet alio Its retoi/6m* ^Afouid those 
Ikst priadpkoy as ftronnd a standard, the thoughts naturally 
•asociate. Toaoh bnt a remote chord of any question, and it 
will Tibrate to the central principle to which it has once been 
well attadied. Brery relatiye impression owns a kindred oon- 
oe^tion, and the moment one is attacked, it, like a faithful 
4M!itinel, aronses a whole troop, which, marshalled and disciplined, 
bear down and challenge the enemy.'* 

What Bogers has so exquisitely snng of the fitsftrifttiftnt of 
^ihfldhood, is true of the associations of sdenoe. 

(%Udhood*s loved group reruito everjr jceM,— 
The tangled tvood-walk and the tufted gveea. 
The MhQol'a loae porcb, with rerereod mossea grey^ 
Just telU the pensiTe pHgrim where it lej. 
Mate is the beU wfaieh nog at peep of dawot 
Qttick'^ing 017 truant stepa across the lawn : 
Unheard the ehout that rent the noontide air. 
When the slow dialKanre a pause to«are. 
Up springs at every step, to claim a tear. 
Some little friendship formed and efaeriahed hevif 
Aad aot the li^teet Imi but tveBabliagtMsw 
With golden neiopa and romantic dreiuoi. 



'•»«"-^**"i*»" 



CHAP. VU. 



) vno90fm!iQV8. 

AH truth and all error He la FropositieDa.— J« 8. Miia. 

In accordanee with that AT^wnwoA B:biclL diEfiCtfl JIS to the pro* 
fonndest books for the simplest statements, we turn to Mill's Logio 
for the philosophy of pro^^tU>ns. The answer to every question 
which it is possible to frame is contained in a proposition or 
assertion. Whatever can "be an object of belief or even of 
disbelief, must, when put into words, Assume the form of a propo- 
»iition. * * What ;ij»e call a truth is simply «tJ(uepr(908itlon; 
and errors are filse propositions. To knew the. import of all 
i^osiible proppsitiQi^s ffoM be to know ,al), questions which can 
im ^taisscU nil nafcters winch are siifc^tible of being either 

* Beauties and Usee ef Euelid, pp. 47-ti 



44 OBPnilTIOllS. 

Mlered or disMievecl. * * Knee iheii the obfeets of all 
belief and all inquiry express themsdTes in prepositions, a solB- 
cient tcratiny of propontions and of their varieties will apprise 
ns what questions mankind have asked themselves, and what is 

I the nature of the answers to those questions they have actually 

' thought they had grounds to believe. 

* Now the first glance at a proposition shows that it is formed 
by putting together two names. A proposition, aooording to the 
Ciommon simple definition, which is sufficient for our purpose, is, 
dueourte m tohkh iomethmg tM affirmed or denied of tomeddng* 
Thus, in the proposition, gold is yellow, the quality yeUow is 
affirmed of the substance gold. !» the proposition, Franklin was 
not bom in England, the fact expressed by the words ftomm 
England is denied of the man Franklin. 

'Every propodtion consists of three parts: the subject, the 
predicate, and the copula. The predicate is the name denoting 
that which is affirmed or denied. The subject is the name de- 
noting the person or thing which something is affirmed or denied 
of. The copula is the rign denoting that there is an affirmatioQ 
or denial; and thereby enabling the hearer or reader to dis- 
tinguish a proposition from any other kind of discourse. Thus, 
in the proposition, the earth is round, the predicate is the word 
rounds which denotes the quality affirmed, or (as the phrase is) 
predicated : the earth, words denoting the object which that 
quality is affirmed of, compose the snbject ; the word it, which 
serves as the connecting mark between the subject and predicats^ 
to show that one of them isnffinned of the other, is called the 
copula.'. 



CHAP. vm. 



DsvmiTionf. 



No dilBealfy !¦ QnramovBtablfl^ if words be enovsd to put wiflMi 
aKsaing*— Lobs Kambs. 

As every proposition oonidsts of two names, and as every 
proposition affirms or denies one of these names of the otiier, the 
value of definition, which fixes the import of names, is apparent 



1 



BKTINITIOICS. 45 

' A ntxme ii a wof d taken at pleasure to serre for a mark, which 
may raise in oar mind a thought like to some thought we bad 
before, and which being pronounced to others, may be to them a 
sign of what thought the speaker had before in his mind [Hobbes] . 
This simple definition of a name, as a word (or set of words) 
serving the double purpose of a mark to recall to ourselves the 
likeness of a former thought, and a Ugn to make it known to 
others, appears unexceptionable.'* 

Definition originates in accurate and comprehensive observa- 
tion. 'There cannot be,' says Mill, 'agreement about the definition 
of a thing, until there is agreement about the thing itself. To 
define a thing' is to select from among the whole of its properties 
those which shall be understood to be designated and declared by its 
name; and the properties must be very well known to us before 
we can be competent to determine which of them are fittest to be 
chosen for this purpose.'! 

* The simplest and most correct notion of a definition is, a pro- 
position declaratory of the meaning of a word ; namely, dther 
th& meaning which it bears in common acceptation, or that which 
the speaker or writer, for the particular purposes of his discourse, 
intends to annex to it.t 

But with most persons the object of a definition is merely to 
guide them to the correct use of a term as a protection against 
applying it in a manner inconsistent with custom and conven* 
tion. Anything, therefore, is to them a sufficient definition of m 
term which will serve as a correct index to what the term denotes ; 
although not embracing the whole^ and sometimes perhaps not 
even any. part of what it connotes. 

Definitions are sometimes explained as being of two kindt«-K>f 
things and words. 

The definition of words Is the explanation of the sense in which 
they are used. 

The definition of things is an explanation of the specific proper- 
ties by which they differ from all other things. 

To define a thing, says Dr. Watts, we must ascertain with 
what it agrees, then note the most remarkable attribute of 
difference, and join the two together, 

* J. Stuurt Mni ; System of Logic, Snd ed., chap. 11, Mti I, p. S7« 
t Introduction to I^c, p. U 

t Mill's Logic, p. 183, vol. 1* 



4C vYTtvmovn. 

Plfobity— the disponticm to acknowledge the rights of manktndl 

Jastice~the disposition to maintain the rights of mankind. 

Benevolence — thd disposition to inJprove the rights of mankinds 

Deceit— the concealed violation of the rights of mankind. 

Injustice— the open violation of the rights of mankind. 

Malevolence — ^hatred of {he rights of mankind. 

In defining a word we seek some class to whichrtO' refer i^ 
that we may identify it, and fix attention upon that pecnUarity^ 
by which we can distinguish it from all other things^ ' Ph>Tyity 
and 'justice' are referred to 'disposition,' with reference- to tiie- 
'rights of mankind' as their sphere of existence : and achnowledg' 
ment, and mairUenanee, are mentioned as- the dfstingnisMng 
features. 

Distinctions must not he made withont differences^ The 
definition should be plainer than the thing defined. Aristotle's 
definition of motion is considered defective in this respect :— 
^Motion— an act of a being in power, so far forth as it is in 
power.' Tautologieed definitions cause more to- be supposed than 
is true — ^the too terse explanation leaves some necessary thing 
unmentioned. A perfect definition requires the union of the 
concise, the clear, and the adequate. Some persons are so un* 
skilful in the analysis of terms as to occasion the advice Nil 
explicare — never expUdn yourself if yoa wish to be under- 
stood. 

Double meanings should be avoided. The writer may himself 
alternate in their use, and the reader may take the word in the 
mnintended meaning. All men have not the strong sense of 
Johnson. When Caleb Whiteford inquired seriously of the 
Doctor, whether he really considered that a man ought ixy be 
transported, like Barrington, the pickpocket, for being guilty of 
a double meaning, '^r,' scud Johnson, 'if a man means well, 
the more he means the better '—which, whether real or fictilions, 
is one of the happiest answers that ever crushed a quibble.^ 

I. have frequently put the question — What is consciousness ? 
to persons who have been conscious for twenty or liiirty years, 
but who were yet unable to reply. Had any one deprived these 
persons of consciousness,, a judge would have hanged him fbr 
the offence^ yet, could they themselves have been interro- 
gated as to what harm they had suffered, they could not have tdd 

• Hood's Own. 



Mimvivioni*- 49 

ivfitttf titey IMflmt AtA «pMFlbe pited|^0, thit fte not taiowiag 
what he has lost, i« noloeer, then peMNHi8> thoagb nmriered) had^ 
ntffbred lio ham. 

The yaiimis deStiftidm of tike aume grti j ec l nMeh pfevail^ origi- 
nate in the eaptiioe, or partial, or profoatid teon^edge the defiuer 
may hare of his sabjeet ' It aeems to be' admitted hf logidaiity 
that an author has aright to gl70'irhate^e» prcMMloiial definitioii' 
he pleases of his terms. But having once given them, perspicolty 
requires that he shoold adhere to-them. Any new sense in which 
» term is employed shonld he specially defined. In discoursing 
on an ordinary subject, as the right of pubfie asseflrt)ly,.sach word» 
as perception, conception, apprehenrion, n^ht beuMd recipro- 
eally, but in a dissertation <m metaphysicseaeh requires restrictioa 
ia use and precision in purport. 

Often genius strikes out new relations of werdw Inrecent poll* 
tical debates^ Mr. Cobden resorted with new fotc9 bnd point io> 
a churge of rashness against ministers : he showed tliat rashnesa 
eon^stod more frequently in inaction than acMoo. He is rashi- 

who stands sarrounded by the elements of danger without taking; 
any precaution against the contingencies of peril ; he is rash who- 
does not take advantage of the caloL to repair his shattered rig^ 
gitig; he is rash wh» looks not out for a proper supply of water 
until the conflagration is raging around him j and more rash than 
ail is he who exercises no provident care for supplying a nation 
with food„but waitafor tfaa pressure of famine and the perils of 
itarvatiea. 

At the last soiree of the Leeds Mechanics' Institution, Mr. 
DidcettB referred to ignorance, eemmenly considered as a passive 
negation, and placed it in the light of a power. ' Look where we 
will, do we not find Ignorance powerful for every kind of wrong 
and evil? Powerful to take its enemies to its heart and strike its 
best friends down—powerful to fill the prisons^ the hospitals, and 
the graves — powerful for blind violence, prejudice, and error in 
all their destructive shapes.', 

The variations which not only common but technical terma 
undergo, is a conriderable source of perplexity in reasoning. 
Mr. Mill cites the instance of the term felony. No lawyer wiU 
undertake to tell what a felony is otherwise than by enumerating^ 
the various kinds of offences which are so called. Originally^ 
felony denoted all offences, the penalty of which included forfei- 



tore of goodi $ Imt, nbiegueai Aete «f Pm^ment hvrp 4^clared 
various offences to be felonies without eiyoiiuiig that peoaltyi 
and have taken away the penalty from others which continua 
still to be called felmiiesy iasomoch tiiat the acts so called have 
BOW no property whatever in common^ save that of being unlaw* 
fnl and punishable. This inattention to precision in terms has 
arisen not among the yulgar, but among educated English 
lawyers. 

* Language,' says Hr. Mill, borrowing a political slmilie 
from Sir James Machintosh, < " is not made, but grows." * * 
A name not unfrequently passes by successive links of resem- 
blance from one object to another, until it becomes applied to 
thipgs having nothing in common with the first things to which 
the name was given ; which, however, do not, for that reason, 
drop the name ; so that it at last denotes a confused huddle of 
objects, having nothing whatever in common $ and connotes no* 
thing, not even a vague and general resemblance. When a name 
has fallen Into this state, in which by predicating it of any object 
we assert literally nothing about the object, it has become unfit 
for the purposes either of thought oi' of the communication of 
thought ; and can only be made «ervxbeable by stripping it of 
some part of its . multiforious denotation, and confining it to ob» 
jects possessed of some attributes in common, which it may be made 
to connote. Such are the inconveniencesof a language which " il 
not made, but grows.'' like a road which is not made, but haf 
made itself, it requires continual mending in order to be passable.'* 

It is well observed, that the spontaneous growth of language is 
of the utmost importance to the thinker. There seems to be so 
palpable a substratum of right sense, in the rude clasrifications of j 
the multitude, that the logician has little else to do, in many 
cases, than to retouch them and gjlve them precision. Guizot ob- 
serves, there is frequently more truth in common acceptations of 
general terms than in the more precise definitions of science* 
Common sense gives to words their ordinary signification. The 
leading terms of philosophy are clothed in innumerable shades of 
meaning acquired in their transitional use, and immense is il.% 
knowledge of thingi requirite to enable a man to affirm that any 
given argument turns wholly on ivordi. The study of terms, for 
which logicians have provided multiplied means, is one of tiie 

* Logic, p. S07« 



ASflNITIORfi. 



49 



most interesting and profitable upon wbich men can enters If it 
be worth while to speak at all, it is worth while to know certainly 
what we speak about. 

Pl^laDtbropic genius has pointed out a perversion of power, 
arising through definitional incapacity, which makes it a moral 
duty to study analysis of terms, and exaotitude of expression. 

'All battle,' says Garlyle, ^is muundentandmg^^id the 
parties know one another, the battle woold cease. No man at 
bottom means injustice ; he contends for. some distorted image of 
right. Clear, undeniable rlgh^^cUar, undeniable might— ^ther 
of these, once ascertained, puts an end to battle. Battle is a con 
fused experiment to ascertain these.' 

Of the power of names to impose on the multitude, history 
furnishes too many examples. Strength to f orefend us against theU 
delnsion- ability to see that the meaning gorems the term, and 
not the term the meaning— -are species of intellectBal self-defence. 
< Augustus,' says Gibbon, ' was sensible that mankind is governed 
by names ; nor was he deceived in his expectation that the senate 
and people would submit to slavery provided that they were 
respectably assured that they still enjoyed their andent freedom.' 
* Never,' adjures W. J. Fox, ' be deceived by words. Always try 
to penetrate to realities. Have your wits sharpened, your senses 
exercised to discern good and evil. Be not imposed upon by 
pompous manners. Many a solemnly-Uttered sentence is often 
a sheer inanity, which will not bear the scrutiny of an observant 
intellect. Be not frightened by denunciations; by being told 
that you are not a good subject or a good Christian, if you do not 
believe, or say that yon believe this or that. Be not led astray 
by iteration— mistake not the familiar for the intelligible. As- 
certain what words are meant to convey, and what they 
actually do convey. Go to the substance and soul of whatever 
is propounded. Be on your guard against bold assumptions, nor 
let them bear you away against the dictates of your own under- 
standing. Look at phrases as counters, or paper money, that may 
pass for much or little according to circumstances. Endeavour 
to arrive at truth, and make that your treasure. Be ever wide 
awake to see through any veil of sophistry and cant ; nor by the 
agency of words be made the dupe of critic or lawyer, of priest or 
politician.'* 

* Lectnni to khs Working CUmes, p* TO* vol' ^ 



50 fitLLoeisMff. 

CHAP. IX. 

¦ TLLOQISMi. 

Propositions being assertions — as soon as suflicfeni reasons are 
adduced to make the proposition credible, it becomes a truth pro- 
bable or certain, as the case may be. 

Reasoning is a simple bntiness. To reason is to state facts In 
support of a preposition. A conclusiye fact so advanced is called 
a reason. All the reasons offered in proof of a proposition are 
called premises. The Pythagorean, who lays down the proposition 
that fruits and grain are the proper food of man, and cites facts 
to prove his assertion— reasona. A proposition and its reasons are 
<SalledAn argument. 

Reason is the faculty ef perceiving coherences. Effective 
reasoning is* stating them so that others cannot but see them 
too. * Reasoning en the abstrusest questions is nothing more 
than arriving at a remote truth by discovering its coherence with 
the preceding facts in tho same chain.'* 

A syllogism is a pecuHar form of expression, in which every 
argument may be stated. It consists of three propositions. 

1. Whoever have their heads cut off* ought to be allowed to 
ask the reason why. 

2. Women have their heads cut off. 

3. Therefore women ought to be allowed to ask (politically) the 
reason why. 

This is an argument of Mad. de Stael, in allusion to the beheading 
of women in France, without allowing them any voice in making 
the laws which determine the offences for which they suffered. 

A syllogism is constructed upon the principle (known as the 
Dictum of Aristotle) that whatever is affirmed or denied univer- 
sally of a whole class of things, may be affirmed or denied of any> 
thing comprehended in that class. Thus the first proposition 
introduces the class of persons who have their heads cut off. Of 
this class it is affirmed that they ottght to be allowed to ask the 
reason why. But women are included in the class of persons who 
have their heads cut off, and consequentiy that may be affirmed of 
them which is affirmed of the whole class— that they ahouli b* 
allowed to ask the reason why. 

* Utei and Beauties of fiueUd, p* h%t 



8TIL0OISM8. 51 

* To pTore an affirmative/ says Mr. Bfill, * fha argument mutt 
9&adt of being stated in this form : — 



All animals are mortal } 

AH men 1 

Some men > are animals ; 

Socrates J 

therefore 

All men 1 

Some men V are mortal. 

Socrates I 



'To prove a negative^ the argument must be capable of being 
expressed in this form :— 

*No one who is capable of self-control is necessarily 

vidons; 

AH negroes 

Some negroes S are capable of self-control { 



Mr. A.'8 negro 



} 



therefore 



No negroes are 

Some negroes are not ^ necessarily vicious^ 

Mr. A.'s negro is not 



} 



'Although all ratiocination admits of being thrown into one or 
the other of these forms, and sometimes gains considerably by 
the transformation, both in clearness and in the obviousness of its 
consequence ; there are, no doubt, cases in which the argument 
falls more naturally into one of the other three figures, and 
in which its conclusiveness is more apparent at the first glance in 
those figures, than when reduced into the first. Thus, if the pro- 
position were that pagans may be virtuous, and the evidence to 
prove it were the example of Aristides i a syllogism in the third 
figure, 

Aristides was virtuous, 

Aristides was a pagan, 

therefore 

• Some pagan was virtuous, 

* 

t^viuld be a more natural mode of stating the argument, anci 
would carry conviction more instantly home, than the same ratio* 
cinatlon strained into the first figure, thns^ 



CTLLOeiSMS. 

Aiistides was ?irtuoos. 
Some pagan was AristideSy 

therefore 
Some pagan was yirtnous.'* 

The best thing that can be said in favour of the lyllogiim, aa 
an instrument of reasoning, is that it is a regular form to which 
erery valid argument can be reduced ; and may be accompanied 
by a rule, showing the validity of every argument in that (otm^ 
and consequently the unsoundness of any apparent argument 
which cannot be reduced to it. This would be high praise if 
every ' valid argument ' was a trusty one. But unfortunately ' the 
question respecting the validity of an argument is not whether 
the conclusion be true, but whether it foUowi from the premises 
adduced.'! Even this small advantage is purchased at a greater 
expense of tedium and trouble than the bulk of mankind are 
willing to pay, or able to pay if they were willing. 

There is some reason to brieve that the syllogistic form, as a 
test of valid arguments, may be entirely dispensed with, if we 
can secure accuracy of data, and intelligibility in terms. 

It is not contended now that we discover new truths by the 
syllogism. The syllogism is allowed to be only a form of ttattng a 
truth. Example : — 

No predacious animals are ruminant. 
The lion is predacious^ 

therefore 
The lion is not ruminant. 

Of course, if we know that no animal that lives by prey chews 
the cud, and know, also, that the lion lives by prey, we know that 
the lion does not chew the cud. This conclusion, as Lord Kamesi 
contends, and Dr. Whately admits, is n(it%t3tui^ inferred from the 
fundamental premises, but inclttded in it Smart, whom Mr. J. 
S. Mill calls acute and often profound, remarks—' Every one, as to 
the mere act of reasoning,' reamms rightly .* Ve may reason from 
wrong premises, or mistake right ones; we may be unable 
to infer from proper ones; but from such premises as we do 
reason from, we reason correctly : for aU premises contain their 
conclusion ; and in knowing the premises, we therefore know the 

* Logic, vol. 1, pp. 233.3. 

t Whately's Logic, Anal. Out., cbap. 1, sec. •• 



8TXX06I8M8* . 93 

MDciiiiioK. The art wanted is one that will enable ns to use lan- 
guage perfpicnonsly in expressing our premises :' and he might 
haye added — direct ut m tde^mg proper materialt of which to 
make prenmee. 

The strength and weakness of the syllogism as an instra- 
ment oi reasoning will now be understood. Whately remarks, 
that * lince all reasoning may be resolred into syllogisms, 
and since in a syllogism the premises do virtnaUy assert the con- 
eloiion, it follows at once that no new truth can be elicited by 
any process of reasoning.'* We therefore no longer look to the 
syllogism to diacover tmth, its ralne is in stating it. In this 
sense it is worthy of all attention. It is the form of nature. 

Of such a syllogism as the one qnoted — 

No predacious animals are ruminant. 
The Hon is predacious, 

therefore 
The Hon is not ruminant, 
it has been insisted by seme logicians that the genius required 
fof its constinetion was invention. Haying made a general pro- 
position Hke the first, we then have to invent or find out a middle 
term as the seconil— but if we bear in mind that the general 
affirmation of the first proposition relates to a class of (predacious 
animals in this case) objects which include the middle term, 
the necessity of invention is consequently dispensed with. We 
need only look well to what we have there. Simplicity will be pro- 
moted by returning to our previous remark^ viz. — that reasoning is 
asserting a proposition, and then showing why it is true—in other 
words, adducing the fact or facts, on which the assertion rests. 

In the Logic given in < Chambers' Information,' it is said — ' In 
choosing yonr middle terms, or arguments to prove any question, 
always take such topics as are purest and least fallible, and 
which carry the greatest evidence and strength with them,' But 
it rather appears that we have not to invent a middle term, but 
only to look to the major premises, and find it included there. 

By methodical questioning any argument may be tested. 
Thus, on any assertion being made, ask — ^Why is the assertion 
true ? In this manner, if an argument has truth in it, it may be 
eHdted. In this manner yon dig through assertions down to 
psemisesy and discover whether any ore of truth lies there. 

• liOgie, p. S3S. 

JB 



64 8TLLOOI8K8. 

4 

9 

The ralne of the argument depends upon the final answer 
which reveals the premises or data of facts, npon which the con- 
clusion rests. Forms of speech, classifici^tion of propositions^ 
figures of syllogisms, are of minor importance when you have 
once elicited the rough truth. The best test of an argument is 
the soundness of its data, and the simplest formnla for drawing 
out and exhibiting such data, is of the greatest service in enabling 
us to judge of the validity thereof. 

Tyranny, says Cobbett, has no enemy so formidable as the pen. 
Why ? ' Because the pen pursues tyranny both in life and beyond 
the grave.' How is this proved to be the most formidable enemy 
of tyranny? 'From the fact that tyranny has no enemy so 
formidable as that which assails not only its existence, but its 
reputation, which pursues it in life and beyond the grave.' Such 
interrogatories and replies generate the expository syllogism. 

1. Tyranny has no enemy so formidable as that which assails 
not only its existence, but its reputation, which pursues it in life 
and beyond the grave. 

2. The pen pursues tyranny in life and beyond the grave. 

3. Therefore, tyranny has no enemy so formidable as the pen. 
A syllogism is made up of collective and single facts. It is the 

process of reasoning, whereby we show that a single truth is 
proved by a collective one which contains it, or a less quantity 
is proved by a greater, or that an assertion is proved by an induc- 
tion from a class of facts. From the class of the enemies of 
tyranny the pen is selected, and is proved, by passing in inductive 
review the whole class, to be the most formidable. 

The usual manner in which an argument is presented is calied 
i^e enthymeme. Thus : — 

He is an industrious man, 

therefore ^ 

He will acquire wealth. 
The first or major proposition is in this form suppressed. The 
syllogistic form would be this : — 

Ev4ry industrious man acquires wealthj. 
He is an industrious man, 

therefore 
He will acquire wealth. 
But if we ask for the proof that every industrious man acquires 
wealth, we find the facts wanting—for the idle are often rich. 



8YIX0OISM4. 55 

and tlie diligent poor. The indastriooB may acquire wealth, the 
chances are in th<dr fayonr. 

Again. We must cherish self-respect, 

Becaase self-respect is the stay of virtue. 

The suppressed proposition ia^' We must cherish whateyer ia 
the stay of virtue.' 

The whole syllogism then stands thus :— 

We must cherish whatever is the stay of virtue. 
Self-respect is the stay of virtue, 

therefore 
We must cherish self-respect. 

Dilemma is derived from a Greek word, and signifies twice an 
argument. It is an argument divided into several members, and 
infers of each part what is to be inferred of the wholtf. Thus : 
Either we shall live or die. If we live, we can only live happily 
by being virtuous ; and if we die, we can only die happy by being 
virtuous; therefore, we ought always to be virtuous. In the 
dilemma, question one argument at a time, as in preceding cases. 

The Sorites uses several middle terms by which the predicate 
of the last proposition is connected with the first subject. Of 
this argument the well-known speech of Themistodes is a speci- 
men. ' My son,' said that eminent person, ' governs his mother, 
his mother governs me, I govern the Athenians, the Athenians 
govern Greece, Greece governs Europe, and Europe governs the 
world; therefore, my son governs the world.' In these instances, 
question each assertion, as there are as many acts of reasoning 
as intermediate propositions. 

The Onus Probandi, or Burden of Proof, is said to rest with 
him who would dispute any point in £avour of a presumptive, or 
generally allowed truth. But manly logic holds no qalbbling 
about who shall prove. Whatever he asserts, the honest reasoner 
should be prompt to prove. 

CShalmers, it is said, made MoreU known — but Morell has 
written a synopsis of metaphysical philosophy that only needed 
to be known to be appreciated. If Chalmers gave Morell dis- 
tinction, Morell had previously earned it. From his work I ex- 
tract the following passage, which passes in review the steps taken, 
marks the analytic pdnt reached, and outlines the ground before 
us: — * Different as were the minds of those two great men [Bacon 
and Descartes] in themselves, different as were their respective 

S2 



56 iKDucTioir. 

laboara, and oppotita as irete, in many respecti^ tiie resolta at 
which they arrived, yet the writings of both were marked by one 
and the same great characteristic, namely, by the ijphit of methocU 
The most important works of Bacon, it wUl be remembered, were 
the ** Instanratio Magna," and the ** Novnm Organnm $'- those 
of Descartes were his << Dissertatio de Methodo," and his ** Medi* 
tationes de Vnmk FhilosophilL" The frnitleisness of the ancient 
logic, as an inttrament of discovery, had been abundantly proved 
by past experience, and the watchword which these two great 
thinkers of their age both uttered, and which has been ever since 
the gniding principle of all ptaUosophy, wa»— akaltsis. Bacon, 
who gave his attention chiefly to the cUrection and improvement 
of phyrical science, tanght to analyse nature, while Dsaeartes, 
who aimed rather at grounding all human knowledge upon its 
ultimate principles, instructed how to analyse thought. All 
modem philosophy, therefore, whether it arise from the Baconian 
or the Cartesian point of view, bears upon it the broad outline of 
the analytic method. It matters not whether it be the outer or 
the inner world to which its investigations apply, in each case it 
teaches us to observe and analyse /crc/«, to induce instances, and 
upon such observation and induction to ground our knowledge of 
laws and principles. In this alone consists the Unity of modem 
science, and f^m this arises its broad distinction from that of 
the ancient world. Every natural philosopher since Bacon has 
grounded his success upon an induction of the facts of the out- 
ward world, and every metaphysician, since Descartes, has pro- 
gressed onwards in his department of knowledge by analysing the 
facts of our Inward oonsdousness.'* 



CHAP. X. 

INDUCTION* 

Induction is an inference from many facts. Induction is verifies^ 
tlon. Just as in a syllogism we show that a part is contained in the 
whole, so in induction we show that a part is illustrated by the 
whole. It seems that every single fact eontains many truths, but 
• If oMU : Modem FUlowpby, pp. 70^ 



IHSUCTION. S7 

Indnetieii establiriies thdr umvenaUhf* A diigle brain coBtains 
all tlte truths of phrenology, a single stone inclndes the pheno- 
mena of gra7itation« the temperance of a dngle individaal 
exhibits the whole law of moderation, bnt we learn the nniversality 
of these tmths by indnction 

E7ery legal statute, says Dr. Johnson, Is founded on induction. 
* Law is the science in which the greatest powers of understanding 
are applied to the greatest number of facts.' The /bant of cdl 
science is such an extensiye induction of particulars as leads to 
general definitions and fimdamental axioms, and furnishes the 
premises from which inferences may be deduced. 

InductiYe observation is the great instrument of discovering 
important truths. < What are called the principles of human 
nature are learned from individual instances. It is the only 
possible way of learning them. * * When we reason from a 
general law or principle, we are in truth reasoning from a number 
of instances represented by it.'* 

A general election is an induction of the intelligence of the 
country represented by the members of Parliament. The dif- 
ference between democracy and monarchy is in one sense an 
ailkir of logic. Where electors are limited in franchise, and 
candidates restricted by property qualification, the indnction Is 
partial, but where all can vote and many can be chosen from, the 
premises are more capacious and the inference sounder. 

Dr. Whately says, that < in Natural Philosophy a ringU mtianc§ 
Is often accounted a tuffldent induction ; e.^^., having once ascer* 
tained that an individual magnet will attract iron, we are 
authorised to conclude that this property is universal.' , 

< The Edinburgh Reviewer of Whewell's <« History of the 
Inductive Sciences," observes that, '< by the aecidenied placing 
of a rhomb of calcareous spar, upon a book or Une, Bartholinus 
discovered the property of the double refraction of light. By 
acddeniatty combining two rhombs in diiferent positions, Huy- 
gens discovered the polarisation of light. By aeetdentaUy look* 
ing through a prism of the same substance, and turning it round, 
llklua discovered the polarisation of light by reflection ; and 
by plaofaig thin chrystalline films between two similar prisms 
or rhombs, M. Arago discovered the phenomena of polarised 
tints." 

* Bationale of Political RepreientatioQ, p* S4« 



S8 HTDCOTIOM. 

' T9 Uiii Vb. WlMwdl, in hi» '< Fhilonphy of the IndncUTe 
ScieDceg," makea the following reply : — " But ButholInuB could 
liave lean no tnch coaseqaenca in tba accident, if he had net 
pterioiialy bad a clear conception of single tefraction. A ladf , 
in deETiibing an optical eiperlment which had been ihewn her, 
Eoid of her teacher, ' be told me to increase and dicDinish the angle 
of refraetiira : and, at lait, I found that he only meant me to 
more my head up and down.' At any tate, till the lady had ae- 
qnired a knowledge of the meaning which the technical termi 
convey, she could not have made BaithcUnns'i diKoveiy by meant 
of tbig accident. Suppoie that Huygeni made the eipetiment 
•llnded to, withoat deogn, what he really oDaerTed wu that the 
images appeared and dieappeared alternately ai he turned the 
ihcmb round. His sncceu depended on hia cleameu of thought, 
which enabled him to perform the Intellectual analyua which 
would never have occurred to most men, however often they had 
combined two rhomba in diBerent poutioni. IiUlu« law that in 
•ome pontioni the l^hC reSectad from the windows of the Loavre 
became dim. Another person would hare attribated this to acci* 
dent { he, howerer, oonsidared the poiltion of the priim, and the 
window ; repealed the experiment often ; and by virtue of the 
eminently distinct oonceptiona of space wMch he posMMed, re- 
¦oWed the phenwnenoD into Iti geometrical oanditiont."* " If it 
were tme, that the fall of an apple was the occasion of New- 
ton'i pursuing that train of thonght which led to the doctrine of 
nniverial gravits^on, the habits and eonttitntiaD of Newton^ 
intelleqt were the real soorce of this great et ent in the progreM 
of knowledge."! " In whatever manner facts may be presented 
to the notice of a discoverer, they can never become the mateiiali 
of exact knowledge, except they Bad his mind already provided 
witb piedie attd cuitable conceptions, by which tliey may be 
analysed and connected." '{ 

These kdmisuona seem to me to prove that whenever a casual 
fhct proves to us a new truth, it does so by Its c^ncidance with 
previously known facta, and that the novelty of the occasion 
attraots aU credit to itself, and we lose sight of the generalisation 
below— the frnitfnl toil of experience on which the new fact, like 

• Whnelli PhD. IndiKt. SelencM, ml. 1, pp. Ipt>l> 

t Ibid, Tdl. t, p. Itg. 

I Sm J. M. Bsllei'i Bwyi, pp. tj-a-t- 



INDUCTIOir. 99 

a seed, falls. We only xecognisd difference by comparison, and ' 
the comparison is an induction, however slender. 

Monsieur de Montmorine was recaptured and brought to the 
scaffold, through the trifling circumstance of some chicken bones 
being found near the door of his landlady — a woman too poor to 
indulge in ^uch dainties.* The discovery of de Montmorine was 
not, as at first sight appears, an inference ftom a single fact, but 
from an adjacent induction. It was a general truth, (known to 
the party who observed the bones) a truth inducted from a num* 
ber of facts that poor people could not afford to luxuriate on chick- 
ens. It was, therefore, from this induction, inferred that some 
one of superior fortune must be living in that particular place. 

The judicious care which the great fathers of science have 
exhibited in making their inferences, incontestibly establishes 
tiieir conviction of the danger of any other reasoning than that 
from inductions. Lord Brougham informs us, that what New 
ton's Frincipla is to science, Locke's essay to metaphysics, 
Demosthenes in oratory, and Homer in poetry, Cuvier's re- 
searcnes to our fossil osteology. But Guvier never attempted 
to draw any inferences until he had examined the w/u^ osteology 
of the living species. 

Lord Brougham remarks, that ' from examining a tmffle frag* 
ment of bone we infer that, in the wilds where we found it, there 
lived and ranged, some thousands of years ago, an animal of a 
peculiar kind.' This is a case in which the inference i^oken of 
is arrived at in a way different from that apparently stated. We 
recognise in the 'fragment of bone' a link in a chain of facts 
constituting the basis of a well-known induction, which compara^ 
tive anatomy has many times verified. It is important to di»- 
tinguish well the grounds from which accurate Inferences, such 
as these in the cases before us, have really been adduced, in ordex 
to ascertain the grounds from which we should reason generally. 
It will be found that solid reasoning can only proceed from 
general rules— t.^., inductions from facts. It will be found that 
the prime source of fallacy lies in reasoning from isolated facts. 
It is not to be denied that such reasoning is sometimes right, but 
it is to be remembered that it is right by accident, not by design. 
There is no science or certainty in it. It is hazard, not logic. 

* Gbiunben* Miscellany of Utefttl and Entertaining TneU, No. Ol i the 
8toiy of LaTaiette, p. 27* 



60 ikdvctior; 

TUs liaUt liowever, is f«ry eommmu Mr. Mill aays, tlun 
* Not only may we leatOE from patticiilars to particidarB, without 
pMsing tiirough genenU, bat we perpetually do to reason. All 
our earliest inferences are of this nature. From the first dawn of 
intelligence we draw inferences, bat years elapse before we learn 
the ase of general language. The child, who, having burnt his 
lingers, avoids to thrust them again into the fire, has reasoned 
or inferred, though he has never thought of the general maxim — 
fire bums. He knows from memory that he has been burnt, and 
en this evidence believes, when he sees a candle, that if he puts 
his fingers into the flame of it, he will be burnt agmn. He b^ 
lieves this in every case which happens to arise; but without 
looking, in each instance, beyond the present case. He is not 
generalising $ he is inferring a particular from particulars. la 
the same way, also, brutes reason. There is little or no ground, 
for attributing to any of the lower animals the use of conven- 
tional signs, withoat whieh general propositions are impossible* 
But those animals profit by experience, and avoid what they have 
found to cause them pain, in the same manner, though not 
always with the same skill, as a human creature. Not only the 
burnt child, but the burnt dog, dreads the fire. 

* I believe that, in point of fact, when drawing inferences from 
oar personal experience, and not from maxims handed down to 
OS by books or tradition, we much oftener conclude from 
particulars to particulars directly, than through the intermediate 
agency of any general proposition. We are constantly reasoning 
from ourselves to other people, or from one person to another, 
without giving ourselves the trouble to erect our obsevations into 
general maxims of human or external nature. When we con* 
dude that some peisoa will, on some given occasion, feel or act so 
and so, we sometisMS judge from an enlarged consideration of the 
manner in which man in general, or men of some particular cluk 
raoter, are accustomed to feel and act ; but much oftener from 
' having known the feelings and conduct of the same man in some 
previous instance, or from considering how we should feel or act 
ourselves. It is not only the village matron who, when called to 
a consultation upon the case of a neighbour's child, pronounces 
on the evil and its remedy simply on the recollection and autho- 
rity of what she accounts the similar case of her hucy. We all, 
whare we have no definite maxims to bteer by, guide ourselves ia 



UTDUCTION. (}1 

the BtLToe way; and if we have an extensive experience, and 
retain its impressions strongly, we may acquire, in this manner, a 
very considerable power of accurate judgment, which we may be 
utterly incapable of justifying or of communicating to others. 
Among the higher order of practical intellects, there have been 
many of whom it was remarked how admiiably they suited tbdr 
means to their ends, without being able to give any suflBcient 
reasons for what they did $ and appUed, or seemed to apply, re- 
condite principles which tiiey were wholly unable to state. This 
is a natural consequence of having a mind stored with appropriate 
particulars, and having been long accustomed to reason at once 
from these to fresh particulars, without practising the habit of 
stating to oneself or to others the corresponding general pro- 
positions. An old warrior, on a rapid glance at the outlines of the 
ground, is able at once to give the necessary orders for a skilful 
arrangement of his troops; though if he has received little 
theoretical instruction, and has seldom been called upon to answer 
to other people for his conduct, he may never have had in his 
mind a single general theorem respecting the relation between 
ground and army. But his experience of encampments, under 
circumstances more or less similar, has left a number of vivid, un« 
expressed, ungeneralised analogies in his mind, the most appro* 
priate of which, instantly suggesting itself, determines him to a 
judicious arrangement. 

* The skill of an uneducated person in the use of weapons, or of 
tools, is of a precisely similar nature. The savage who executes 
unerringly the exact throw which brings down his game, or his 
enemy, in the manner most suited to his purpose, under the 
operation of all the conditions necessarily involved, the weight 
and form of tiie weapon, the direction and distance of the object, 
the action of the wind, &c., owes this power to a long series 
of previous experiments, the results of which he certainly never 
framed into any verbal theorems or rules. It is the same in all ex- 
traordinary mnnual dexterity. Not long ago a Scotch manufacturer 
procured from England, at a high rate of wages, a working dyer, 
famous for producing very fine colours, with a view of teaching to 
his other workmen the same skill* The workman came ; but his 
mode of proportioning the ingrcdientB, in which lay the secret of 
the eflfeots he produced, was by taking them up in handfuls while 
the common method was to weigh them* The manufacturer 



OSI XIOIVOTIOV. 

sought to make him ton his handling system into an eqaivalent 
weighing system, that the general principle of his peculiar mode 
of proceeding might be ascertained. Tips, however, the man 
found himself quite unable to do, and therefore could impart his 
skill to nobody. He had, from the individual cases of his 
own experience, established a connection in his mind between 
fine effects of colour, and tactual perceptions in handling his 
dyeing materials; and from these perceptions he could, in 
any particular cases, infer the means to be employed, and the 
effect which would be produced, but could not put others in pos- 
session of the grounds on which he proceeded, from having never 
generalised them in his own mind, or expressed them in language. 

* Almost every one knows Lord Mansfield's advice to a man of 
practical good sense, who, being appointed governor of a colony, 
had to preside in its court of justice, without previous judicial 
practice or legal education. The advice was to give ,his decision 
boldly, for it would probably be right $ but never to venture on 
assigning reasons, for they would almost infedlibly be wrong. In 
^ases like this, which are of no uncommon occurrence, it would 
be absurd to suppose that the bad reason was the source of 
the good decision. Lord Mansfield knew that if any reason were 
assigned it would be necessarily an afterthought, the judge being 
tn fad guided by impressions from past experience, without the 
circuitous process of framing general principles from them, and 
that if he attempted to frame any such he would assuredly fail. 
Lord Mansfield, however, would not have doubted that 9, man of 
equal experience, who had also a mind stored with general propo- 
sitions derived by legitimate induction from that experience, 
would have been greatly prefisrable as a judge, to one, however 
sagacious, who could not be trusted with the explanation and jus- 
tification of his own judgments. The cases of able men perform* 
ing wonderful things they know not how, are examples of the less 
civilised and most spontaneous form of the operations of superior 
minds It is a aUfeci in them, and pflen a totirce nf errors, not 
to have generalised as they went on ; but generalisation is a help, 
the most important indeed of all helps, yet^ot an essential.'* 

In illustration of generafidng from single instances. Miss Mav- 
tineau gives this example : — * A raw Chinese traveller in England 
was landed by a Thames waterman who had a wooden leg* Tho 

•MUl*sLogie,pp.S6US. 



ilTDUvflOK. IB 

fltranger saw that the wooden leg was used to stand In the watei 

with, while the other yras high and dry. The apparent economy 

of the fact struck the Chinese ; he saw in it strong evidence of 

design, and wrote home that in England one-legged men are kept 

for watermen, to the saving of all injury to health, shoe^ and 

stocking, Irom standing in the river.'* 

Reasoning on insufficient data — 

FUls like tn inrerted eone, 
Wanting ita proper bMe to ituid npon. 

Samuel Bailey has furnished, in one passage, both a clear illus- 
tration of the process, and the validity of an induction : — ' Who* 
ever had witnessed the acts of a landlord to his tenants, of a 
schoolmaster to his pupils, of artizans towards their apprentices, 
of husbands towards their wives, on points where the power of 
the superior could not be contested, and where his personal grati* 
fication was incompatible with just conduct to the subordinate^ 
would necessarily have formed in his own mind a species of gene» 
ral rule ; and from this rule he might safely draw an inference as 
to what would be the conduct of a despot, seated on a throne, in 
the possession of unchecked authority ; assisted toe, as the in- 
quit 49r would be, by that indupensaMe and inettimable guide to 
the Unowledge of mankind, an appeal to hit own feeUnge, in a 
variety of ancdogaus instances. 

* We conclude, that a ruler with uncontrolled power will act 
the tyrant, not merely from the fact that Caligula, or Nero, or 
Bonaparte did, but from a thousand facts attesting that men, in, 
every situation, use uncontrolled power in this way— just as we 
infer' that all bodies tend to the centre of the earth, not merely 
from the drcumstanee of an apple dropping from a treey BVTfrom 
teeing the tendency in ttonety water , animalsy and all things toithin 
our obtervatim. The use of uncontrolled power, for the gratifica* 
tion of the possessor, without an equitable respect to ethers, is no 
more peculiar to monarchs, than a tendency to the earth is pecii> 
liar to apples. It may be useful to know that nwnareht act in thia 
way, as it may be useful to know that apples drop to the ground % 
but it is much more useful to know that men act in this manner* 
An inference it tafer when gathered from the widett induetion.*\ 

* How to Obierre, p. 6. 

t Rationale of Politieal Representation. Introduction, pp. S5-8. The last 
sentence of thia extract ia abridged— but, aa the reader mil find upon refei 
Knee, the lenie of the author is fiaithfolly rendned* 



64 XKDtTCTtOV* 

It may be luML to obt0*«« that, though a few fgft^iiwi aft 
i&fiufficient to estabUsh a theory, one may be guflSdent to overturs 
a theory, faaoifuUy or hypothetieally supported, Gibbcm o^er* 
turns the entertaining theory of Rndbeck, an antiquarian of 
Upsal, of profound learning and easy faith, who, by the dim 
light of legends and traditions, of conjectures and etymologies, 
Bought to establish the antiquity of Sweden over half the earth. 
Gibbon annihilated this well laboured system of German antiqui* 
ties, by a single fact too well attested to admit of any doubt, and 
of too decisive a nature to leave room for any Mply—the fact 
that the Germans, of the age of Tacitus, were unacquainted with 
the use of letters. A circumstance fatal to their literary claims, 
urged by Olaus Rndbeck. 

In the chapter on < Facts' I have cautioned the reader against 
unquestioned data. This seems the place to temark that 
the unsuspected sources of error and unfriendliness have their 
rise in the criminal implicitness with which we listen to reports, 
and infer from rumours as from facts. These are the * very little 
handles which mOve men and women to strange' performances.'* 
All the plots of dramas and romances are founded on misunder- 
standings, which a little sagacity of action (snch as a wise reso* 
Itttaon not to be imposed upon would lead to) would commonly 
suffice to arrest the error at its birth. With regard to cha* 
tacter we constantly infer from data, partial, limited, and 
doubtfiiL If most quarrellers were called into a court of Inquiry 
to confess the real grounds from which they have arrived at 
certain conclusions with regard to their neighbours, and often 
with regard to their friends, they would be at once overwhelmed 
with a conviction of the weakness of which they have been f 
guilty. Upon analysing the miserable sources of opinions of 
which scandal and calumny are bom, I have found it impossible 
to restrain astonishment at the imbedlity of logical power 
men will sometimes be content to exhibit, where meahness pre- 
vails, malice incites, and passion governs. Well might Bacon 
exclaim—* Doth any man doubt, that if there were taken out 
of men's minds, vain opinions, flatteiing hopes, false valuations, 
imaginations, and the like, but it would leave the minds of a 
number of men poor shrunken things ?'t The wise rule ie. never 

* Cricket mt the Hearthi 
t £8stqr on TruUu 



^ tvoocviov. 65 

« 

Judge ffom appearancei when foots cfin be IraS-^A^lfer receive a 
report mthout challenging lis fotindatien(,'nor adopt it without 
permissioii to give the authority. 

In all cases, in whicjii you must judge irom appearances and 
reason from conjectures, ]|dopt the/otretf/ interpretation possible. 
On this pdnciple, credit iviU Sonetfanes- be giVen where none la 
due— but in nine eases out of ten, justice will be done, for I am 
satisfied that there is more worth among, men than wisdom, and 
that we do well much oftener than we reason well. We seldom 
need judge charitably, did we always endeavour to judge justly. 
But we make a virtuA of .oof .orwii ertors, and we often affect to 
condescend to prononnoe aft opinion'^ wbleh it would be criminal 
to withhold. If ever I go to the Herald*s,.office, the motto I will 
have emblazoned shall be this— Justicb ts sufpicxbnt. ,CouId 
we only get justice i9'the world, we. could ^^ord, to excuse it all 
its * charity ' of judgement, and its benevolenee even of aet 

Where should a man^reputatioiibetofelromsuspicionif not in 
the hands of his friend? It ought to be 'a pritt:ciple of action 
with all men, never to jud^e a friend ex<iep^ out of his own mouth. 
' There was a generous friend of mine once, who never would 
have judged me or any other man unheard//* With the sublime 
intensity of one who felt the in^nite valus of private justice, has 
Schiller delineated this spirit in the interview between Octavio 
and his son Max Piccolominf. After a violent and visible struggle 
with his feelings— wrought upon by his father's endeavours to 
sow suspicions in his mind, and detach him from the service of 
his friend, WaUenstein— Max exclaims t— 

I will procure me light a shorter way* . 

Farewell. .^ 

Octavio, Where now? 

Max, To the Duke. 
If thou hast believed that I shall aot 
A part in this thy ]^ay-~<^ ' • > 

Thou hast miscalculated on me grievously* 
My way must be straight on. True with the tongue^ 
False with the heart — I may not, cannot be : 
Nor can I suffer that a man should trust me^ 
As his friend trust me— and then lull my conscience 
With such low pleas as these :— '* I ask him not-* 
He did it aU %t his own hazard-««nd 

* £dward to llr« PseryhiagiMk * 



>f. 



66 xmiucnov 

MV mouik haM nerer lied to him.''— No, no r 

what a friend takes me for, that I matt be. 

—ni to the Duke; ere yet this day is ended 

Will I demand of him tmit he do saye 

His good name from the world, and with one stride 

Break through and rend this fine-spun web of yours* 

He can^ he will!— I still am his believer. 

Yet I'll not pledfte myself, but that those letters 

May furnish you, perchance, with proofs against him* 

How far may not this Tertsky have proceeded— 

What may not he himself too have permitted 

Himself to do, to snare the enemy. 

The laws of war excusing ? Nothing, save 

Bit own mouik shall conTict hlss^nothing less I 

And face to face will I go question him. 

Ay— this state-policy? O how 1 curse it ! 

You will some time, witb your state-policy, 

Compel him to the measure ; It may happen 

Because ye are deitrmined that he is guilty. 

Guilty ye'U make him. All retreat cut off. 

You close up avery outlet, hem him in 

Narrower and narrower, till at length ye force him^— 

Yes, ye, — ye force him in his desperation, 

Toset fire to his prison. Father I father ! 

That never can end well— it cannot — will not I 

Deem of it what then wilt ; but pardon me, 

That I must bear me on in my own way. 

All must remain pure betwixt him and me ; 

And, ere the daylight dawns, it must be known 

Which I must lose— my father, or my friend.* 

Had Othello been thus honourable to Desdemona, he would nevet 
hare murdered her. Incalculable is the evil we bring on our- 
selves and society, by supposing and surmising facts we ought 
resolutely to question. The motto of the garter- 
Evil be to him who evil thinks, 

ought to be, 
Evil u to him who evil thinks. 
Every man will be his own Lawytr and his own Doctor, and such 
is the perversity of human nature, he will also be his own lago, 
and feed himself with suspicions. Nearly all tragedies hinge on 
chis error. 

To avoid being the cause of misunderstanding to others, it is a 
good rule never to speak critically of others, except in their pre* 

• Ssyikr*sPlseoloaAi^,«cttNeMSb 



•eAce, or in pfctat Wheli I Mn obliged to do fUs io eoBTenntioii, 
with penoDt of imlnowik or doabtlal exactitndei I take care to 
keep mock bdow the tnifh In matlece of cenrare, as anything of 
that kind may gain ten or twenty per cent, in carriage. When 
with men of jntt habits of interpretation, I pay them the highest 
cofflpHment of friendship, and speak to them of others, without . 
reserve. f 

Notorione ate thocobtanielies p«t npon the cases of grievance ' 
preeented from the people in the Hoose of Commons. Nor is it 
altogether causeless. So prone are the ignorant to mistake their 
preindioes Ibr (iwts» and ascribe to others as crimes what exists 
only in tfafl&r bwn imrmises, that most popolar cases may be 
stripped of half their preteudons without injaring theb trnth. 
Exaggeration is the vice of ignorance. Half the speeches ad- 
dressed to 'King Mob* are hyperbolic. The sentiments of 
pohlic meetings minister too often to the prevalent inflation. 
The people wili be powetfnl when they learn to be exact~*and 
not till thea. 

The only mode of oorreeting this evil is to instil into the people 
the wise ruts of Bnrlamiqiii. To reason, (that is, inductively) 
says this writer, is to calculate, and as it wete draw up an ac* 
oottn^ after bdandng all arguments, in order to see on which 
Bide the advantage lies. Burlamiqui had law chiefly in view in 
his remark, bftt the rule is of immense application. A logician is 
a secretary or basher's clerk, who keeps an account between truth 
and error. When a lady once consulted Dr. Johnson on the degree 
of turpitude to be attached to her son's robbing an orchard — 

< Madam,* said Johnson, ^ it all depends upon the weight of the 
boy. I remember my schoolli^ow, Davy Garriok, who was 
always a little follow, robbing a dosen ori^ards with impunity, 
but the very first time I climbed up an apple tree, for I was , 
idways a heavy boy, the bough broke with me, and it was called 

a judgment. I suppose that is why Justice is represented with a 
pair of scates.' This may not be the precise reason why Justice 
has a pair of scales, but the point goes to the root of the matter. 
Without weighing there can be neither justice nor fkir induction. 
In illustration of these views Mr. fifiU has some able remarks : — 

< In proportion to any person's defidenoy of knowledge and mental 
cultivation, is generally his inability to discriminate between his ' 
inferences and the perceptioui on which they were grouaded« 



n 



68 immffHotu* 

Many a TBaTvelleas^ tfle^' inany a sedbdalo^ adtddote^ owes it* 
origin to thai incapaoiity. The oanratai nlates^not ndiat h^ law 
or heatd^ bot the impve8iio& which heidevived ^ from i^hat he yaw- 
or heard, and of wtdtk perfaape tUe ^reofler part consisted of 
inference, thongh tiie whole is relatod «ot as Infwence bat'^av 
nattoT'Of-fact The difficalty of indvcioff witaesseato refldrain, 
within any moderate Umits, the intermixture of their inferenoes- 
with the narratiTe of tiicir pencepifiona,* is >well -known to to- 
perienced cross-exaaainere $ and'stiU mom fai^ tUi ttteease when 
ignorant persons attempt tO' describe any- natat al phenomenon* 
<<Tfae amplest narratlTey" says Dngald Stevntet,: ^^f-tiiemost. 
illiterate obesrver inyohres mofa or .less of 'hypotheibV nay* in 
general, it will be found that, in propoftioii tO'lUs'lgiioitanbe^ th^ 
greater is the nnmbd^ of eonjectnrai priaeipl^i hivoired ta. faiS' 
statements. A yillage apdtheoary^ <«nd|- if psflnhle^ 'in aatill 
greater degtee, iem experienced nur^e) is seldom iri)ltf to desdribei 
the plainest case, mi^hont employing a phfasdblogf -of; whleU' 
every word is a theory ; whereas a simple and gennimr spediSdat*: 
tion of the phenomena which mairk a psfticiiiar 'diieM&^-« speiS- 
fication nnsophisticated by fanoy^ or by preoodocitfed opi&ions, may' 
be regarded as nnequivocal aridenoe ofa'knindtntiiiedbyloiig 
aed suoeeasful study to the most difiicuU of aUrairts, timtof the 
faithful mterprektiiun of nature.^* *? 

It is in Jiidgments formed, in reprehensible imdiffetrence tothe- 
actual facts of the eaae» that patty ^iraiiooiirsMl^he pvoterbial 
injustioe of popular political opinion, itakei thsir. risbf. A ateful 
caution on this head is prononitced by:Lotd fiHroogHm in his 
sketch of the life of Lord Welteslfiytr^^.How'fftbhdoi w^see,'' 
voserves hi9 lordahip^ *yehemeaC:.and tinoeasiii^.'atteeki^ made 
upon a mimstBv or a statesman^ pethaps notia the public senriee, 
for something which kp does n^t eboMe -to defisbd'or. explaia»- 
resting .his claims to the coniideAo^ of hia icooatrymen upon his 
past exertions and his known cbturadtar* Yek these asMalts arei 
unremittingly made upon him» And: tha|>eoplobeleTfti that so ttueh 
noise could not be stiiced up withciUI^ someibing to - authorise it. 
Sometimes the object* of the calama^ Are ailemt from disdam $ 
sometimes from knowing that the baseprepagntArs a^ itwiU only 
return to th^ slander the more eagerly alter theif e mvictinii 4i 
falsehood } but sometimes^ also, Utie Alenev may be owing to 

^ LogiCi pp. 408^9, Vol. Jl. i '- ' 



1 

officffd; ceserre, of -vlddh 'we 90b m mort Mouurkabld instance in 
the case of. X<»td Welleiky^' 

Not onlji are enemien of <thfr people afioHied a jnsdfication for 
their opposition by wfongftil judgment prooonnoed ¦ upon them, 
bn( the friends of the people often pass over to the other side 
throilgk ifae same oause^ When a leader of the people first comes 
in- pecBonal contact ^ith the opposite party, and becomes ac- 
qsainted tvitli merits of feeling and judgment which he had as it 
were pledged himseil to deny^ and indeed achieved himself a 
po^on.by disbelievl«g in^ he ^becomes ashamed of the injustice 
exacted f rem him by iiis inexo^a)^ adherents, and forsakes his 
party when he should only forsake its errors. Hie case of 
Barnaye, in thefir^t Frfenoh Revolution, is a memorable instance 
of this. On lesser' tfaeatree I .have seen many instances of this 
kind of ooarrsrcion; Su<^ changes have always been ascribed 
to venality, yel they are men oC- generous Instincts who are thus 
eYereoiiie**T«^but they want lo'gioai strength, >and cannot correct 
themseiv^' without falling. 

-. It is & wise <r(il» In* conversation,' never to guess at meanings. 
When, an observation is made, oiq^bleof affording two inferences, 
at once ppi the <jae(|tio^ wbidi shall elicit the meaning intended* 
Oonversatioii:isliiBld tone purpose unless explicitness comes out 
of iU . Innumevable aceilhe enmrtthat arise through letting 
lemavks pass, -of. .which we only . si^ppose we know the purport* 
Thie is a f mitf uL source • of misunderstanding. When in Scotland 
I was muidhiikfetmoted by! the intellectual characteristics of th« 
people* Tl)e Scotok ave essentially a reflective people. Th^ 
Englishrconoeive dttulMi, but the SCotoh put them into queries* 
Befores'l had beenln ^e country many hours I was struck by the 
inductee habits of the pebplei. A very old and illiterate woman ^ 
to whom I put an ivdefiiiite question', eyed me deliberately from 
head to- foot before* she ffave me an answer. Not in rudeness did 
she gazoy so maett as ih Inquiry as to what could be my object. 
lepentmere <thaii>Week in inquiring at places, where apart^ 
fi>ents hereto be let,'by which I acquired profitable acqiiaintance 
with the people. ' Upon asking the terms of apartments, I was 
metjin^all oases, by iev^ai preliminary questions, as for whom? 
wete they ? -what number of persons ? what station, ' habits, and 
probable stay ? Then J received the precise' answeir required. 
Jt-d&d a»t teen to jne that they -wn*^ answering one question \if 



^0 UIDITCTIOIi; 

asking another, ai if mmetSnm §M of Am Scoteli— 4mt by a 
happy and wise presence of mind th^ aeked, ai all thoold do, a0 
many qneetionf as were required to conpleto the data of the 
speci6o answer they were called upon to give* 

A wise practice is followed in courts of law. No judgO pro* 
nounoei an opinion on a hypothetical case. What he would do? 
or what would be the judgment of the law, su^on a certain 
case should arise ?'-are qnestionB he never oondeioends to answer* 
' Bring the plaintiff into court, let the eyidence be taken, and 
then we will decide. We ait here to judge actual, not snppositioui 
cases.' Such would be the reply. People out of oonrt night 
profit by the example. 

I remember one striking instaaee of tho pemicioaa effects of 
f urmise. Some years ago I took part Ia a Fraternal Demonstra* 
tion at Highbury Barn. The aasembly was nnmerons, and com- 
posed of persons of all nations and aU parties. The oelebratioii 
was avowedly one of fraternity. The tone of the meeting xo> 
iiei'ted its object. Pacific words were on erery tongue, and har* 
iDony reigned up till eleven o'clock. At that hour Monsienr 
Chillman asked me if some ateps could not be taken to annnalise 
the meeting, and he requeited mo to yropaio and propose a 
resolution to that effect. Monstenr CUlknail, tUaking the resolu* 
tion ought to come from an Englishnwn, strongly urged me to 
move it. I, thinking it too important to emanate from a young 
man, looked about tor a person of experience and known diaor^ 
tion to introduce it. After aeveral had declined, Mr. Hetiioriagi. 
ton undertook it. The English poUtidaas ware compaeed ci two 
parties, the friends of Mr. O'Connor, and the members of tho 
National Hall. At that time thoy were pleased to be the anil, 
podes of each other. No sooner had Mr. Hetherington spokoDt 
he being the friend of Mr. Lovett, than his motion waa supposed 
to come from Mr. Lovett's party, though they. were atterly ignorant 
of its origination. Clamour'a hundred tonguos were loosened* 
Slumbering differences were awakened. Suspicion q^iead Hkd 
an infection. Fraternity perished of the contagion. Twenty 
amendmenta were proposed, and it was not till midnight, and- 
then in a storm indescribably contra4iotory of the meeting's whole 
purport, that a common understanding waa cone to. Had the 
least inquiry been made by the objecting party, previously to die* 
siting, they would have found that the suspidona piopoiitioa 



orig^Mitod iMi 9m ^ thtm9Atm4 B«t aaiMD!iigpi«iiil0eB, they 
iafenad from coBJeotata iiutead of iaot, and laiMd disastroui 
doabts M to Iho ability of that aMemUj for donertie or interna- 
tional fratexniaatiott. 

The use and abaee of anthority la a fabjeet worthy of the 
young logician^i aerione attention. Many great writers like 
Bacon, throagh polioy^-Bariie throogh potitiont or Shakspere 
through yeraatitity of geaine, have written oa both aides of im- 
portent questions, 8aeh meni taken pieoe*ineal, may be quoted 
by the most opposite par^ea ia iavonr of the moat opposite 
opinionai Unless there is tiate to make a broad iadaction from 
their writings, showing, by wdghty, qnantitiTe evideaoe, the 
aide to which they leaned, better not qnote them aa auCAordtet 
at all, but give what expresses your own views on your own 
responslbiUty^-indeed, in all caieif the quoter ought to stand pre* 
pared, if possible, to justify all he citas from another in argument. 
* There ia perhapa aomething weak and aetrile i& oar wiahing to 
rely on, or draw aaaiatanoa from, ancient opiniona. Beaaon ought 
not, like vanity, to adorn heraelf with old parchmeata, and the 
diaplay of a genealogical tree) more dignified in her proceed- 
ings, she ought to derive everything^ from heraelf; aha ahonld 
diaregard paat timea, and be, if I may nae the phraae, the contem- 
porary of all agea.'* Quote othera aa Grotiua did : not aa judgea 
from whoae deciaion there i» no appeal, bat aa witaeaaea whose 
conspiring teatimony confirms the view takeu. 

Analogy has frequently been confounded with iaduetien. Ana- 
logy signifies reasoning from reaemblaaoei aabaiating between 
phenomena^inductioD, veaaoniiig from the aaaaeneaa of pheno* 
mena. 

The phenomena affording an indoetioa of a law of aatttie must 
be obvious, uniform, and nniveraal. 

The rulea to be obaerved in deducing general principlea are, 
that the caae be true and the facts universal. 

On this subject, as exhibiting the clearest leaulta arrived at, 
I transcribe a paasage frow Mill t— * There is no word which is 
used more loosely, or in a greater variety of senses, than analogy. 
It sometimes stands for arguments which may be examples of the 
most rigid induction. Archbishop Whately, for instance, follow- 
ing Fergttsoa and other writers, definea analogy conformably to 

• NmUt. 
r 2 



72 vn>vc9ioni 

its pnnittfv tLecmg/Mm^tlkt whicb was )slterto1t liy viAlhtM' 
ticiaas, roMffiblance of telatioiis. In tbii ieiuei irk&a a country 
which has sent oat odonios ia tennod tho- methM conntiyyffad 
expression is analogical, signifying that the eoloiilea of 'a country 
stand in the same rdation to her in which elffldteftatand to their 
parents. And'if any inferenee bo drawn hoim tids resemUance 
of relations, as^ for iBitance, tiiht the tame obedience or afRictidn 
is duo from coloaise to the mother country which 'is dne from 
children to n parent, fthis is catted' reasoning by analogy. Or if 
it be argued that a nation is nost beneficially i^ovemed by an 
assembly elected by the people,' frott the admitted fact that other 
associations for acommoti ptirpose, such «s joint stock companies, 
are best managed by a ceMnittee choeen by the parties inte- 
rested $ this^'too, is an argument from analogy in the preceding 
sense, be<»u8e its fonnd^on is, not that a iratSon is like a joint 
stock company, or Parliament like n board of directors, but that 
Parliament stands in the sam& reltttiwt to the nation in which a 
board of directors stands to a joint Mock company. ' NoW, in an 
argulMentof tUs nature, there is no inherent inftrionty of con- 
clusiveness. Like other argnmeiits f^ott tesemblanfce, ' it may 
amount to nothing, or- it may be a perfect and bo^teltisilve induc- 
tion. The oironmitafiice in which the twb-efltfek resemble, may 
be capable of : being i^own to be the Ma/md/ circumMande sf 
to be that on whieh all t^ coiisequences, Aecessary to be taken 
into account in the pairtiealar discussion, depend/ ' In the case in 
question^ the reiemblanoe is one of relation ; the ftmdamentum 
relaiionU being the manageinentj by a few persoiis, of affairs in 
which .a much g«ealer liuttiber are interested along with them. 
Now, some may contend that this circumstance which is commotif 
to the two oaies; and dn vatfens consequences WMch follow from 
it, have the chief share in determining all'thbee effects which 
make np what we term good or bad administration. ' If they can 
establish this, their argument has the force of a rigid induction : 
if they cannot, they are eatd to have failed in proving the analogy 
between the two eases, a mbde of speech which implied that when 
the analogy can be proved^ the argument founded upon it cannot 
be resisted,'* • 

'Many of Ae BMst splendid and important discoveries in thSt 
idence were the result of analogical ^e^onings. It was from 

* Logic, pp. 97'^t vol. 8. 



SlTKOnoa W9 VAXXJACIJBft 9k 



.fltfft-fMfrdft.tlUt Dr« Brieillt^ pioted tHe eompoona nutnre of 
•tiiio^«rio«ir i aid it it nlatad tiiat it wtii ia cdoMquenie of 
Unto which h«had givan, trlieii da a Tint to Parity to LavoMei', 
iHUided oatirely upon aaalogioal ooajeotarai, that the lattet 
philosopher was induct to comaieaoe oxperimeats, with th& 
view of proviag tha oompooad natara of water, and of reducing it 
to its eonstitoeDt olemonti. ladeod tiie whole history of this yery 
important aad asefal departmeat of haaian knowlodge exhibits 
?ery striking and inoontestible proofii how «ach of the art owed 
its ezittoiice to mere Idnts and coajectares, foonded, in man^ 
cases, npoa Tory slight resemUaacet or analogies.* 
/ The ohief prorineo of analogy is confined to that of soggestibn. 
Analogies are the great Untors of esperimeats. They illnstrat6 
an argament, bat do aot establish it. They are probabilities, not 
proofii. Henoe Lord Brongham in oaa place exclainis :--' I have 
a dread, at least a saspieion, of all analogies, and never more 
than when on the slippery heights of an obseare sabjeet ; when 
we are, as it wera^ tator opiwA of a meta^sical argament, and 
feeling, perhaps groping, our way itt the dark, of among* tha 
clouds. I then regard analogy aa a dangerovalight, a tieaeh* 
areas igmtfaiumf^ 

A stdkiag iastaace of the fallacy of analogy is aShrded in tho 
experiments qf Professor Mattenoci, which seem to prove that 
though the analogies between electricity and pewoos sabstinba 
are nearly perfect, yet they are two distinct agenclea.} 



CHAP. XL 

UBTBCTION OF FALLACiaS* 

Wa hope to be able to save students from the fate of Diodorns, (a 
great logician, who died in his school through shame at beingi 
naable to resolve a quibble propounded by Stilpo)— not by bar* 
dening, but by enlightening them. Though we bring neither 
mood nor figure wharewith to test the presence of error, we ara 
not without the hope of qualifying the stodent for its discoveiy^ 

^ BlslMS'i Xiogls, pp.^gfl«7« 

t Pal* IIliu.. ToL 9. , a 

t See Zoiii No. ao, p. 363, • 



:74 BsnoTiMi ov faxxacii& 

It hat been eoahmd htm the tiraM of logie that, • Alter all, 
in the praotieal daCactkui of oaeh iiidMdinl &Uaoy, mtteh mtiM 
depend on nafund tmd enqnind aeutemeee: not eta any rales bo 
given, the .mere karaing «f whfch wiU enable so to e^fpif them 
vith mechanical eevtaintjr and TeadtDOM.' 

Bnlwer, in rcnarkinft that error is a ykiw of mme ffMfs in* 
stead of a sarrey of ailf indicated the key to logical ftillacy* 
Error lies principally in delsetive preiaisei. Sophistry in acieoen 
is refeiable to inoomplela analysis of natvre, of systems-— to arti* 
ficial arrangements— to ntppimng qnalities, to auummg prin* 
ciples, to false indactions fwok imperfect demonstratioB. 

Dickens, in ^Nidiolas Nickleby ,' gives the caae of a certain lady, 
who, becance she hnenr o»w yomig milliner, who retained red 
cheMu and did not die of<consnmption« was immovably of opinion 
that all representations of the injurious eflfect of such sedentary 
occupation were false. It is ever so with the vulgar. Some one 
case has come under their notice, and it is in vain that you appeal 
to a chain of facts. They know nothing of inductioo'^they know 
one case to the contrary, and that is enough. This error Is the 
source of vulgar prejudioa. Once te^ch men that truth does not 
lie in a single instance, but in a calculation in a balance of pr^ 
babiUties, and yen rationalise them. * The chapter of aoeidenti 
[or nngle instances] is the Bible of the fM>l— it supplies him with 
a text against everything great, or good, or wise.'* 

Wbcre oA«n toil with philoMphic force. 
Their nimble Donaenee takes a shorter coane, 
Fliage at your head eomricticns in the lump. 
And gains remote condiuiens with a jumpw— CSMtpen 

The first source of erron if defective induction. We eaidl. 
arrive at this pdnt of examination by the questions we have pro* 
posed for use in the test of syllogipm. Formerly, one i7l1ogi8m 
was required to be defeated by another— we now attack a fallacy 
by induction. No false syllogifm, nysBiennan, can resist the 
Inductive prbcew of sifttng' particulars. 

¦ 

. I do not lifca thee. Dr. Fell, 
The reaion why,' I cannot tell— 
B«t this I know, snd know fall wiO, - 
I do not like thee. Dr. Fell. 

This kind of thing wHl not do. Induction pursues the naiontt 

* TIaiee. 



mrrBTorox or fatxactrs*, 7^ ^ 

with an eternal ivAy. • A olear beeanee io • elaar whj, it a dt* . 
mand that If never, tinttitted in sound logic. ' 

Lord Melbourne, in giiving liit reaaon for his religion in theHonte 
of Lords, said it was the religion 4>f .his forefathers and that 
of liis country, therefore, ha would support the church. (Cheers 
from the opposition benches.) The Brahmin and Mussulman give 
the same reason for theirs. A logician in facts would hare 
fald, I hold 4nd support my religion because it is frue. What 
the standard of physical certainty is to facts, what axioms are to 
science, such is iiiduction to syllogisms^it is the test of their 
correctness. 

Dr. Whately exhibits the following instance of a regularly 
expressed syllogism :— 

Every dispensation of Providence is beneficial i 
AiOictions are dispessatiouf of ProviJence, 
Therefinre, they are benefidaL 

Crery applicable rnle of Dr; Whately'i logic iS| of course, 
applied here— it is true in uH^od and figure, and yet the argument 
is fallacious. A fallacy is defined as * an ingenious mixture of 
truth and falsehood, so entangled as tabe intimately blended— 4hat 
thefolsehood is, in chemical phrase, ketd m «o/tif^ .*. one drop 
of sound logic is that test which immediately disunites them, 

• makes the fordgn substance visiUe, and predpita^ it to 
the bottom.'* But whence is to.come * this drop ol sound logic? ' 
Not from tha Doctor's * EtemeHU,* they have sent forth the 
fUlaoy. But touch it with the taliamaa of iaotsmid the error 
will appear. , 

What facts support the asse'rlion tbat * Afflictions are dispensa* 
tions of Providence V The simple question is fatal to the argn* 

' ment. On such a proposition have facts for its support? 
Ignorance, cfofigregating in narrow courts, and lazinesl, acoumu* 
lating filth, generate sickness and aflliction. Are these the 
di^ensations ojf Providence, or the dispensaUons of folly and 
crime? To ascribe \liem to Providence is virtfii^lT to allow 
Ignonnoa and lazinest Io step into the throne of God, and call 

. Qpon men to believe in Iheir beneficent dispensations. 

Dr» W«tt8, auother writer on logic, set the Christian congro 

. gftUous of idigland to sing the same species of fallacy t-«> 

. * Whstely't bogie, Anal. Out., chap. 1» ¦•€• 4» 



if WTXGTIOir or FAtLAOHai 

They.coma ftt tihj eonini»pd} 
VU not attempt t muitnlrinf iratflt 
AgidMttby 6liMt'Bnig kMi4* 



According to this lyrical toglcian, wbeneter wiw preeantioiis 
arrest tbe progress of pestilence^ or tie physician's skill subdue 
disease, Jehovah is robbed of a serVant. By snch an argument, 
haipanity is made to be In r^bellfon against heait en, afid onr 
medical colleges are in antagonism with Deity, and the recent 
appointmentit bv the Russell government, of a Sanatory Cbmmis- 
tion, was high blasphemy. It is the degradation of language to 
.emp^y it jto su<;h a puipose, and logic needs revising to ' save us 
from publishing such puerility in the name of learning and of 
reason. It must have been logic of this kind that indm^•d a 
strong- tHonghted woman tohatard tbe bold but tenable conjecture, 
that * If an argument has truth ia it, less than, a philosopher will 
see it^and if it has not, less than a logieiad will lelvtci it.'* 
' R. Q: Latham, WDLi in his * first 0«tUnes of Logic appl^ to 
Graitimar and Etynology/ has introduced the particular instance 
-of the syllogtism on P^ovideaee here cited frpm Whately. ' It 
woidd be no diffioult task I9 present /other instances pf the sape 
epecies of polemical fiOiacy from Dti Whate]^ and.other vrrit^ 
•on logic, ^d it comport with the rule I have ^dio^en fpr obser- 
vance.- I give these cases chiefly to ahow how extensively sj^^ 
obstrusivelythey.ate introduced. ' < - ; ** 

<We have,' says Mr. Mill, <five distinguUhable. clwnes. of 
'ftHaOyy which may "be egpwasad in the foUowtog jynoptic table :— 

;^SUnpl«|n9pection^ •• •• •• Udpiiort, 



JhOMim 



from «vldtnee jT Induetlva f 9'. ObieiViftlon.' 
diatfaMtlj > faJUdes! \ S. .G«kien^U«»tk^, 
coj^red 1 VwJuctire > . 



liafiaiiiwitiillli 



I' '¦ ' 'I " .: ' 1 • ¦ .J 
ftomctideiice^. . * •• ¦ 
iodUtinttiy I •• ' •;' 5. 04iiftttl<A<*> 

It was the boast of Archimedes, that^ any one wOiM find hiia 
» fulcrum, on which to rest a prop, he i^otild rais6 'the world. 
But tliis was mere assertion unsupported Vf fa^ts, for U the ful* 
ernm had been found him, Archimedes eod^ not have peiforaftd 

*' * A Few Day* in Atheni; by liintss Wl^hU 



Ills proiblse^ " ttSB iki been prdr^' by IPergason, who lias ddmon- 
fttrated that £f Afchhtiddes duM. hare motred with the swiftness 
of tt canooin 1)831-^460^ thiibs ^very hotti— it would have taken him 
just ^4,9^,540,000,000 of yeailBit/^ hatred raised the vrorU orre 
inch. BnlwiBr remajks* ' Gritica hare said, what a fine idea of 
Archimedes ! But how much finer is the fact that refutos it. Ou€ 
qf the iubUmett thmgi in the,worl4 i* piain truth.* 
All motion generaies' warmth, 
Shaking (with cold) is motion, 
Ergo, shakhig with hcAd gen'efates warmth. 
We look, in this case^ to the fhass 'otr '^hl6h the first propdsition 
vests, and find the assertion too geuevfUff ... 
^ To one who said that none w«ri»' happy iirhb wer^ not abovd 
opinion, a Spartan replied, * Then none are happy but knaves and 

lfr.-6ooerHbh, the original «"Pfcter Far1ey,'^ves, In his * Pite- 
ride Bdhcation,' an in^nce ^o tMs e£^ of tvtrb bo^'argning on 
the division of ' their beds. Williani ^daimis, < You 'take more 
than ^eUr shalre of the bed, Jani^ft.* ittmeU answers, * I' only take 
kalf the bed;' ' William repUesJ ^Trtie, but you take jrour half 
out <tf the tniddte; and I am obtiited to lie oil AoM tidet to get my 

" Innitmetftble bopliisms are suffferM to pass iii Consequence of 
iome brilUa&Oy of position Whlchi dazzles us and prevenfts our see- 
ing that tbdy^ are wide of thef' marif k)f reason^. 'An instance 
•ccurs in Bhlwer^wfao says, * Helvi^tlns ert^' upon education 
—but his dogmb has ' been benefidUl.^ Probably lio^btit n6t so 
beiiefielal as the truth wotfld hat^ bedn^ Many persons have 
argued fiKom such an in8tahci,tfattttteror is usefid*. IXckens, in 
those incidental obs^hratioifs of stiKMtig good SeitM 'stteire^v^ 
ted dbwtt Ms Wfitiiigs^ says,fn tft^;''Onckettm«h<i'H^aitlh'i'-^' 
* These remarks (of Mrs. FiMJ{ti^)''were' ^te tmanswerable/ 
IrBch'is th^ happy pto^rty of 'k!V reibtirkli'tbat itttiiufieienil^ 
itide itfthe purpose,* Of thd' r^fiitatikm^of stich' rematfki^he haf 
presenteid «tt able instance in *^attiA'<3huz2lewii ^^^- ' ' '' . 

* Bless my soul; Westlock^' saysKuch, <is it fiOtfaihgt6 M^ 
t^ekflot^ff moved to t&at' extent 'aikci know oike'S MIT to be the 
cause? And did you not hear him s¥]^Mt^ath6 could have shed 
Ids Wood for me.? »• ' - - ' • 

* Do yoa want any blood shed for you ?* mtmi^i Westloek trith' 



78 flCBmcxsiCr 

coDsMnable irritation. < Does he ahed anytUof fbr yo^ (hal yom 
efe want ? Does he abed empleyment for you, isftrvction for yoa 
pocket money for you? Doea he eren ihdd legs of mutton fof 
you in any decent proport&oa to potatoep and garden it^ff ? ' 



CHAP. XIT. 



•CnPTIOISH. 



Mtn bu b«en Mllad th« plt.n|i«g of cbtnc^, bvt thci«i« no logW aMito 
dose and infleziblt than thtt of bmnaii life: all it entwined together; and 
for him who it able to dlMDtaaif la tba pnmwta and patiently await tiia cotf* 
elusion, it ii tha JDott aonaef of. a|]jagiaiii«.*^QLSi Sakobau : i*tople*§ 
JotmuU, No. 87* 

* To quote authors,' says Harris, in his preface to his * Hermee/ 

* who have Uved in variovs ages, and in distant oonntriea i soma 
in the full maturity of Grecian and Roman literature ; some in ita 
declension; and others in periods still more barl>arouB and de^ 
prayed ; may afford, perhaps, no nnpleasing speculation, to see 
how the SAMB nnASON has at all times preyailed j how there isoMS 
TRUTH like one sun, that has enlightened human intelligence 
through every age, and saved it from the darkness both of sophistfj' 
and error.' This is the assurance which right reason will ever 
impart. Underneath all the change after which we pant, amid 
all the variety which snrronnds us, and seems the very aliment of 
our naturOt lies the instinct after the permanent. It ia the 
province of sound logic to guarantee this in conclnsiott. 

The novelty, change, flnetnation, which scicDtifio discoTery has 
brought, and will yet bring, into the formeriy settled worlds of 
Ojl^ion and social condition, will nnsetUe men's minds, aii0 pavv 
the way to an age of scepticism. Sound logic ia necessary to pro* 
vide that this doubt is transitional and not ultimate. 

Scepticism is of two kinds, that of Pyrrho, and that of examioa^ 
^pi}. The. followers of Pyrrho, it is said, made doubting a pro^ 
feesion, untilAt last they doubted whether they did doubt, Ihit 
ii th^ soep^ieism of the scomer and trifler. 
. He did not know that he did not know it, and if he c^di know it 
it was mpre than!. be knew. This is as for as the philoBophes, 
of this school can go. Dickmii has drawn the portrait of thes^ 
l9gi9rti»toM^^Tiggi-.. . . ^ 



SeBPTIOIBll. 79 

' WImb a man like Slynie/ laiA ICr. Tig;, Mi deiainea for inch 
a tldag aa a Ull^ I rejeel the foperetition of ages, and believe 
oothiBg. I don't eren belie? e that I dbn'f beUere, enrse me if I 
do/ 

If ood if Ironical on tto praffMwta ef vftentainty* * On a 
certain day of a certain year, certain oflloen went, on certain in* 
formation, to a certain court, fn a certain dty, to take up a oeftain 
Italian for a certain crime. Wkat grow foolt are tkey who lay 
there it nothing certain in thia world.* 

But eoepttdsm Is not capable of dl ilurb l u g the ^veH-gronnded' 
xepoee of the wife $ for when the toeptic thiakc he has inTolred 
everything in donbt, everything if itUl left in at mnch certainty 
at his scepticism. 

In the great mase of conflletlttg epinlen, it matters little that 
we are cavtioned tliat reason it nof all-snlBcient^it ie the best 
sufficiency we have. If reason will not serve ns well, will any^ 
thing serve ns better ? Bishop Berkeley may demonstrate that wo 
are not sore of matter's existence b nt are we more sure of any 
thing else t We are not thus to be cajoled. But It Is right to say 
that Mr. J. 8. Mill contends that Berkeley has been miaunderstood 
. —but If he did argue, as popularly believed, to such argument^ the 
answer of Byron is sufficient— 

When Berkeley Mid tlwre was no nattsr* 
Ik wae no matter what he lakl. 

If all It delusion, the deluilen it very orderly-— it observet 
regular lawt, and we proceed in logical method to inform each 
other^ how the delusion of things appears to out uadezstandiDga 
or affectt our fortunet. 

Wbart nothing la, and all Ikiafi eaao^ 
And wa the thadowa of a diaaat, 

we dlscntt the teemings with the same gravity as realitlet*' 
If a man seems to do wrong, and I teem to prevent him, and th9 
wrong, timrefore, seems not to be done, I am satisfied. 

The * wise considerate scepticism' of Inquiry has been well 
expressed by Emerson, in his recent lecture on Montaigne* 
«^ Who shaU forbid a wise soeptldsm, seeing that there is no 
practical question on which anything more than a proxfantte- 
solution It to be had? Marriage itrelf It an open question s 
those « out" wish to be « in{ '* those «in " to be "out" 






80t fiffBfitipiflfi 

Th« 8jtqt9, vath all iti 'obvlont adrttitages, nobody lores fi. 
U i%: otherwise wit^, the Gbmnoh t 8kaU ihf young ooyui entei. 
trafte ora pcofioailM. viaithoii1» IwiBg vi^vM? SliaP he stay 
on ghore or put out to lea? There ia mach to be laid on 
l^Hif eidea^ Jkm tinem) id CMVVtf twi| and tin i^ltnictioni of 
th« oOfOfeMtire ayakeai» Th^ Ubmureic haa a poor ,^^ U ivitboat 
Voewledge^ Tiitae, eivUiaatioBr If.veaajr, '' I^ ^a.have cul- 
tairer the exprasiioii ajvrakaaa • Bvw ipduvoflitio* 4 ' for cvl^e 
destroys spontaneous and hearty vneacwnhnred acUoiu Let us 
hate a robtiaty manly Ufe; let 4|8 iMure to do with vaalitiies, not 
^rilh shadowy ghosts* . Mow this preoiaeliy 4s the sight groond of 
the piQeptio$ not oC unbelief 1 .denying ov d«|htiog*^ea8t of all of 
•coffing and profligate jeering at what is stable and good. He is 
C^ contidertr. He hlui «teD iBany esMf mlea uonad . hiw ta wish to 
^ his own. The poi&tion d the %^ptio is one taken np for de» 
fenoe 3 as we build a house m%. too high er too low f under tho 
wind, but out of the dust* JPer him thp Spartan Tigeux la too 
vistere. St John too thiu and MriaU The wise aortic .«yoid» 
to be- fooled h$ any extrentA^ha wishes to, see the ganas. Ho 
frUhw to see aU things^ but ^a^ly. men. ]piaally out life In this 
irorl^ j^lt, not of so ea^ inte^preta^QU as preachers and schi9ol>boofca 
tre accustomed to describe it.' These have not so efficiently 
aolved the problem, that the sceptic should yield himself con> 
tentedly to their interpretation. True, he does not wish to speak 
harshly of what is best in us,— to turn himself into a *< devil's 
attorney:" But he points dut the room' there is for doubt;— tte 
power of moods ; — ^the power 6f complexion, and so forth. Shall 
we, then, because good-nature'fncHnes us to tktue's side, smoothly 
cry : « There are no doubts P—and lie for the right ? We ask 
whether life is to be led in' li brave of * cowardly "way : whether 
the satisfaction of our doubts be not essentfal to all manliness t 
whether . the aane of irirtue is to be a barrier to that .which it 
virtue ?^ The sceptic wtanta ttfuth, wants to have things nadsr 
plain to him, and has a rig)tt to be oonvinoedin his own wiay* If 
itadi seeptidsm there aa no malignity \ it is honest, an^ does i|ot 
hinder his being ooafviaced % and this hiird«headed man, enoe con* 
vinced^ will prove a giant in defence of h\§ faith. The true and. 
final answer in which all scepticism iftlost is the moral sentiment i; 
that nev^r forfeits thelsuprertiacy. It Is the drop that bal 
Iheuniverae.* '.¦"•.,< j. •• 



aosPTxoUdib 41 

fideaca and logic have so lu adTOAcM w to sMdgo tbtt MA 
of doabtful qnestions. When fyllogum auwerad syllogiflBi» 
imcertainty reigned alMolate— but now that the appeal u to faotib 
we can, wherever facts can be had| weigh or munber theiii» aad 
dedde on one side or the other* 

When Ali Facha was at Janina, the case of a poor womaiii 
who accnsed a man of the theft of all her property, was brought 
before him ; but the plaintiff haying no witnesses, the case was 
discharged, as the other asserted his innocence, and insisted ae 
a proof, that he had not a farthing in the world. On their leaf* 
ing his presence, Ali ordered both to be weighed, and then 
released them without further notice* A fortnight afterwaxds, 
he commanded both into his presence, aad again weighed them | 
the accuser had lost as much as the defendant had gained in 
weight. The thing spoke for itself, and Ali decided that the 
accusation was just. Ali Pacha was the Burlamiqui of justice. 
Induction, too, has its scales, and seldom leaTes us in doubt when 
it gets truth and falsehood in them. Scepticism is now happily 
restricted to those questions resting on conjectures, and which do 
not pertain to the practical affairs of this Hfe. On matter-of-faot 
questions, only the weak are perplexed. After men have been in de* 
fiberation till the time of action approach, if it be not then manifest 
what is best to be done, it is a sign the difference of motives the 
ene way and the other is not great; therefore, not to resolre then 
is to lose the occasion by weighing of trifles, whiefa is puallanimity. 

<}uaint old Bunyan tells us, that when he had completed 
hb ' Pilgrim's Progress' he took the opinions of yarious friends on 
the propriety of publishing it« Some said 'John, do;* others 
* John, don't.' But solid old John was not to be thus confounded. 
*Then I will print it,' said he, < and thus the case decide.' To 
tins good sense the public owe that immortal dream* 

In the great field of physical inyeitigation, science has con- 
^oered doubt. ' Contingency and versimilitude are the offspring 
of human Ignorance, and, vrith an intelleet of the highest order, 
cannot be supposed to have any existence.'* 

' Probability,' says Laplace, < has referenoe partly to our Igno- 
taace, and partly to our knowledge.' 

* Chance,' obseryes Mr. Mill, < is usually spoken of in direct 
antithesis to law ; whateyer (it is supposed) cannot be ascribed 

• Edinburgh Bensw, September 18 1 4, trticle ProbabiUtfcu. 



81^ mtTVlOtBitt 

to law, fi attrfbuted to eli«ncd. It is, howeref, certain, tliat 
iHiatever happent ii the result of some law ; is an effect of causes, 
and could have 1)een predicted from a knowledge of the existence 
of those cantoes, and from their laws. If I turn np a particular 
card, that is a consequence of its place in the pack. Its place in 
Uie pack was a consequence of the manner in which the cards 
were shuffled, or of the order in*which they were played in the 
last game ; which, again, were the eflfects of prior causes. At 
eivery stage, if we had possessed an accurate knowledge of the 
causes in existence, it would have been abstractedly possible to 
foretel the effect.'* 

*In the domain of morals, too, a certainty, not dreamed of in past 
times, now prevails. However much man, as an individual, may 
be an enigma, in the aggregate he is a mathematical problem.'! 

In the great world of opinion it is the duty of honest reasoners 
to endeavour to find out the truth, and take s^des, undeterred by 
the philosophical frivolity now growing fashionable. If men are 
silent concerning objects and principles, it is said they have none, 
smd it is impatiently asked ' where is their bond of union ?' And 
no sooner is it explained than they are told 'it is very unphiloso* 
phical to think of setting up a creed.' Where the alternatives 
are thus put against them they should take their own course. 
Creeds are the necessary exponents of conviction. The creedless 
philosopher is out on the sea of opinion, without compass or chart. 
To bind yourself for the future to present opinions is doubtless 
unwise, but he who has inquired to any purpose has come to some 
conclusion, affirmative, negative, or neutral; and it is the pro* 
vince of a creed to avow the actual result, and the consequeni 
conduct intended to be followed. It is the vice of free thinking 
that it spreads universal uncertainty, and assumes right and 
wrong to be so protean that no man can tell one hour what 
opinion he shall hold the next. Logic should correct this unsatis- 
factory extreme, and extirpate the tireaome raca whom Shelley 
described in Peter Bell :-» 

To Peter'* view, all aeemt one hue j 

He ii no Whig, he it no Torj § 
No Deiit and no Christian he-* 
But in so subtle, that to be 

Nothing is all his glory* 

* Legie, pp. 57-8, toL li 
t Vcitig«s« 



3KTELLECTUAL BABINCk 83 

CHAP. XIII. 



IHTBLLBCTUAL DARIN (;• 

Freadom has been bunted through the world, and is ever exposed to 
Insult and injury. It is crushed by conquest ; frowned from courts ; expelled 
trom colleges ; scorned out ot society ; Hogged in schools ; and anathematised 
in churches. Mind is her last asylum ; and if freedom quail there, what be- 
comes of the hope of the world, or the worth of human nature ?— W. J. Foz't 
Lectures to the Working Classes, part 12, p. 65. 

Wb should be prepared to dare all things for truth. If the ' very 
hopes of man, the thoughts of his heart, the religion of nations, 
the manners and morals of mankind, are all at the mercy of a new 
generalisation/ we should be prepared to risk them. If we must 
choose between truth and repose, we ought not to hesitate. Thert 
is danger in having the truth—philosophers are obliged to 
conceal it. Mankind vaunt their love of truth, but they are not 
to be trusted. From interest or ignorance they always persecntt, 
and often kill, the discoverer. Still the pursuit of truth is a duty, 
and we must find consolation in the heroic reflection of Burke, that 
m all exertions of duty there is something to be haxarded. But 
Intellectual daring will never be common while it is so generally 
believed to be criminal. We will, therefore, quote some con* 
liderations touching the rightfulness of inquiry. 

Without INQUIRY it is impossible for us to know whether our 
opinions are true or false, and various are the pretences employed 
for declining investigation; frequently they are masked under 
vague and metaphorical phrases : " inquiry implies the weighing 
of evidence, and might lead to doubt and perplexity" — << to search 
Into a subject might shake the settled convictions of the under* 
standing" — to examine opposite arguments, and contradictory 
opinions, might contaminate the mind with false views. 

' Every one who alleges pretexts like these for declining m- 
quiryy must obviously begin by assuming (hat his own opinion! 
are unerringly in the right. Nothing could justify a man for do* 
dining the investigation of a subject involving important opinions, 
but the possession of an understanding free from liability of 
error. Not gifted vrith infallibility, in what way, except by dill* 
gent inquiry, can he obtain any assurance that he is not pursuing 
• coarse of injurious action? If he holds any opinion, he mvst 
kaTo acquired it either by examination, by instillation, rote^ etf 



M 2XTBU.SCTTTAL OABIMA. 

gome other process. On the supposition that he has acquired It 
hy proper examination, the duty on which I am now insisting hat 
been discharged, and the matter is at an end— but if he has ac- 
quired it in any other manner, the mere plea, that his mind might 
become unsettled, can be no argument against the duty of inyei^ 
tigation. For anything he can allege to the contrary, his present 
opinions are wrong — and, in that case, the disturbance of his 
blind convictions, instead of being an evil, is an essential step 
towards arriving at the truth. 

* It may possibly be assigned, as a fiirther reason for his declin- 
ing inquiry, that he may come to some fallacy which he cannot 
surmount, although convinced of its character. If he is con- 
vinced of its character, he must either have grounds for that con- 
viction or not. If he has grounds, let him examine them, draw 
them out, try if they are valid, and then the fetllacy will stand 
exposed. If he has no grounds for suspecting a fallacy, what an 
irrational coBchuion he confesses himself to have arrived at! 
But perhaps he will reply — he may be unable to solve the diE^ 
culty ; his mind may become perplexed, and the issue may prove, 
after all, that it would have been much better had he remained 
in his iermer strong, though unenlightened, conviction. Why 
better ? If he is in peplexity let him read, think, consult the 
learned and the wise, and in the end he -will probably reach a 
deSnite opinion on one side or the other. But if he should still 
remain in doubt, where is the harm ? or rather, why is it not to be 
considered a good ? The subject is evidently one which admits 
strong probabihties on opposite sides. Doubt is therefore the 
proper sentiment for the occasion — it is the resnlt of the best 
exercise of the faculties — and either positively to believe, or p08i> 
tivdy to disbelieve, would imply an erroneous appreciation of 
evidence. 

< In die minds of some people a strong prejudice appears to 
exist against that state of the understanding which is termed 
doubt. A little reflection, however, will convince any one that 
on certain subjects '* doubt" is as appropriate a state of the rea* 
¦ming faculties as belief or disbelief on others. There are doc* 
trines, propositions, facts, supported and opposed by every degree 
of evidence, and amongst them by that degree of evidence of 
which the proper effect is to leave the understandag in an eqiili 
Ijoise between two conclusions. In these cam **4ioubt** U the 



nrrSLLEOTUAL DABIMO. ti 

Appropriate retalt, which there can be no reaion to shrink from 
tit lament. Bat it may be further nrged, that inquiry migiit 
foathminate the understanding with false views — and, therefore^ 
it is wise and laudable to abstain from it. 

' We can comprehend what is meant by contaminating a 
aian's habits or disposition, or even imagination. But there 
is no analogy on these points in reference to the understand* 
Ing. There is contamination, there is evil, in preposterous 
and obscene images crowding before the intellectual vision, not- 
withstanding a full and distinct perception of their character— 
bat there is no contamination, no evil, in a thousand false argu- 
ments coming before the understanding, if their quality is clearly 
discerned. The only possible evil in this case is mistaking false 
for true— but the man who shrinks from investigation lest he 
should mistake false for true, can have no reason for supposing 
himself free from that delusion in his actual opinions. Besides 
these objections to INQUIRY, there are other prejudices of a similar 
character, forming serious impediments to the attainment of truth. 

' One of these is a fear thai we may search too far, and beconu 
chargeable with pretumption in prying into things u>e ought not to 
know. A few words will suffice to prove that nothing can be 
more irrational and absurd. We have already sbo>?n that true 
opinions are conducive to the welfare of mankind — and the prose- 
cution of inquiry is therefore a process from which we have 
everything to hope and nothing to fear, and to which there are 
no Uroits but such as the nature of our own faculties pre 
scribes. 

'A second prejudice— that we may eotitract guilt, if, in the 
course of our researches, we miss the right conclusion, and had 
therefore better let inquiry alone^is still more influential in pre- 
venting those investigations which it is our duty to make. As 
oar opinions on any subject are not voluntary acts, but involuntary 
effects, in whatever conclusions oar researches terminate they can 
involve us in no culpability. All that we have to take care of is, 
to bestow on every subject an adequate and impartial attention. 
Having done this, we have discharged our duty ; and it would be 
irrational and unmanly to entertain any apprehension for the 
malt. 

' In fact, there is the grossest inconsistency in the prejudice now 
under consideration. If we may contract guilt by searching after 



W INTELLECTUAL DABINO. 

truth, WO may equally do so by remaining in oar present 'tta to 
The reason alleged in the prejudice itself, and the only reason 
which can be assignee^ with any plausibility, why we may commit 
an offence by embarking in any inquiry, is that we may, by so 
doing, miss the right conclusion, or, in other words, fall into error 
—for no one would seriously contend that we incur any moral 
culpability by an investigation which conducts us to the truth* 
But it is obvious that we may equally miss the right condn* 
sion by- remaining in our actual opinions. It is, then, incum- 
bent on us to ascertain whether we are committing an offence 
by remaining in them — in other words, it is necessary to exo' 
nUne whether those opinions are true. Thus the reasons 
assigned for not inquiring, lead to the conclusion that it is 
necessary to inquire. • 

' The third prejudice is that acquiescence in received opinions, 
or forbearing to think for ourselves, shows a degree of humility 
liighly proper and commendable— if closely examined will be 
found usually to evince nothing but a great degree of indolent 
presumption, or intellectual cowardice. There is often, in truth, 
as great a measure of presumption in this species of acquiescence 
as in the boldest hypothesis which human invention can start. 
That received and established opinions are true, is one of those 
sweeping conclusions which would require very strong reasons, 
and often elaborate research, to justify. On what grounds are they 
considered to be true by one who declines investigation ? Be- 
cause (on the most favonrable supposition) they have been handed 
down to us by our predecessors, and have been held with unhesi- 
tating faith by a multitude of illustrious men. But what com- 
prehensive reasons are these ? What investigation would it re • 
quire to shew that they were valid ? As the whole history of man* 
kind teems with instances of the transmission of the grossest 
errors from one generation to another, and of their having beea 
countenanced by the concurrence of the most eminent of our race 
—how, without examination, can we show that Mil partimlar in- 
f tance is an exception from the general lot ? 

' From the necessity of using our own judgment, or, in other 
words, of arriving at a conclusion for ourselves, we cannot be ab- 
solved. Far from being a virtue, blind acquiescence in the 
opinions of others is, in most cases, a positive vice, tending to stop 
«U advancement in knowledge, and all improvement in pracUoib 



IMTELLEOtlJAL DABINO. tt} 

From the preceding it is evident that the inquirer may enter 
on his task with full confidence that he is embarking in no 
criminal, or forbidden, or presumptuous enterprise, but is, on 
the contrary, engaging in the discharge of a duty. Let hia 
be as circumspect as he pleases in collecting his facts and do 
ducing his conclusions, cautions in the process, but fearleu 
in the result. Let him be fully aware of his liability to error, 
of the thousand sources of illusions, of the limited powers 
of the individual, of the paramount importanire of truth — but 
Jet him dismiss aU apprefiemions of the issue of an investi- 
gation conducted with due application of mind and rectitude 
of purpose.'* 

Marcus Antoninus, indeed, said < I seek aQ«r truth, by which no 
«tan yet was ever injured.' But there is a great practical mistake 
here. There it danger in truth-— and the admission should be 
plainly made. Men, where forewarned, make the choice more 
manfully. We have been wisely told by Emerson, that tho 
cherished thoughts and inetitutions of mankind are at the mercy 
of a new generalisation— rest, commodity, reputation. Inconve- 
nience, and suspense, are the consequences of the partisanship of 
truth. Certain political truths annihilate the interests of whole 
classes. Certain social truths war with life-cherished prejudices. 
Certain sanitary truths reduce the value of all city property. 
Certain scientific truths ruin the working classes by thousands. 
In a wiser state of society this could be prevented, but our pre 
sent business is with what m. It is therefore idle to conceal the 
truth — that there is danger in truth. Pope's dictum, that party 
is the madness of many for the gain of a few, is inversely true of 
truth. Truth is the ultimate benefit of many, but the immediate 
ruin of the few. Here, however, comes to our aid the wise and 
far-seeing aphorism of Burke~< In all exertions of duty there is 
something to be hazarded'— -and the brave man and wise friend of 
mankind will risk the fate which surely awaits him— the fate of 
Galileo, Newton, Salomon de Cans, Volta, Fulton, Winser, Ark- 
wright, Gall, and all who present themselves, with truth in their 
hands, at the door of this great bedlam called the world— the fate 
of b^ng received with stones and hisses. 

* fiztracts of Sommu/, by Aliquiaj of trgumenti on the Duty of In^iryy 
trom the * Pursuit of l^rutb, ana other Essays,' by S. Bailey, mIU9i9Mf 
•Jo. W. 

2 a 



IBOlft 

GHAP. XlVi 

IDOLg. 

Tbb term Idol is employed by Bacon to designate those prejndioei 
which men prefer to truth. A prejudice is a bias without a 
reason for it, an opinion without a foundation, a judgment formed 
of persons and things without sufficient examination, an assent 
given to a proposition without sufficient evidence. The bias may 
be honourable, the opinion correct, the assent in the right direotioB| 
but. still of the nature of prejudice, because, if right, it is right 
by accident rather than design. 

Ignorance hides from us facts, and we decide partially rather 
than confess our deficiency. Ill-directed education gives us pr^ 
^onessions, which are obstacles in the way of truth, and we con* 
tinue to cherish what, having become a part of our nature, it 
^ns us to discard. The senses will occasionally mislead us 
and although we are conscious that appearances are not to be 
wholly trusted, we reluctantly doubt our own infallibility. 
From early, and therefore unquestioned, associations, we have 
acquired certain habits, and from fashion certain sentiments, 
and we continue old customs, and fall into the current opinion 
unconsciously. Of these sources of prejudice, logic warns us 
to beware. Of so much importance did Bacon regard these 
hindrances to truth, that he considered the pursuit of new 
truth hopeless while they were cherished. In a mixed vein of 
poetry and philosophy, he divided prejudices into four classes, 
irhich he called' Idols of the Tribe, the Den, the Market 
and the Theatre. Idols of the Tribe are prejudices men imbibe 
from early training, and love of hypothesis. They are so called 
because common to the whole race or tribe of manUnd. Idob of 
the Den are those which relate to a man's particular character. 
Idols of the Market are those which are accommodated to common 
notions. Idols of the Theatre denote such as pertain to hypQ» 
thetical systems of philosophy. 

Remembering the declarations of Euler and Gall, and the daily 
discoveries of science, we should stand, as it were, on the verge 
of fhi- old world of experience, and look out on the new world of 
truth. A young thinker should make for himself a chart of pro- 
poied refoimsi iystems, and changet^ agitated in his day— plact 



IXAVSTBATITE BXEBOIfBS. 8t 

is selatiye potitiona in the loalA of importance snch as he deenf 
of value, if true — and then analyse his experience to see what It 
sonndly opposed thereto. Sach a practice would go far to rid 
men of idol-prejndicet, which retard private improvement and 
paUic progress. 



CHAP. XV. 



tltUSTBATIVB BXBRCISBS. 

1. All men possessed of an uncontrolled discretionary power» 
leading to the aggrandisement and profit of their own body, have 
always abused it.' — Burke^s Thoughti on the Present Discontentt, 

The student will find the proof of this proposition exhibited in 
the example of Induction, quoted from Mr. Bailey, p. 63. 

2. Prosperity could never be reached and maintained in this 
country, without some provision for the regular employment of 
the poor.— -Jldrr. Beckett's Speech m the Some 9f Commons, Feb. 
3, 1842. 

The demonstration, to universal conviction, of this proposition, 
would lead to an entire and beneficial change of the social con 
dition of this country. 

3. The pen is the tongue of the world.— Potne. Put this in the 
•yllogistic form. 

4. A good instance of a metaphorical argument drawn out ii 
given by Mr. Mill : — < For instance, when Mr. Carlyle, rebuking 
the Byronic vein, says that << strength does not manifest itself in 
spasms, but in stout bearing of burdens ; ** the metaphor proves 
nothing, it is no argument, only an allusion to an argument; in 
no other way however could so much of argument be so com- 
pletely suggested in so few words. The expression suggests • 
whole train of reasoning, which it would take many sentences to 
write out at length. As thuss Motions which are violent but 
brief, which lead to no end, and are not under the control of tiit 
trill, are, in the physical body, more incident to a weak than to n 
Itrong constitution. If this be owing to a cause ^hich equally 
operates in what relates to the mind, the same conclusion will 
Ittld there likewise. Bat inch is really the fact. Fox the body^ 



90 ILLUSTRATITS BXSK0I8S1. 

UaUIIty to thMe indden and uncontrollable motions arliei from 
irritability, that is, nnnsaal sasceptlbility of being moved oat of 
its oi^dinary coarse by transient inflaences t which may equally be 
said of the mind* And this sasceptibiUty, whether of mind or 
body, must arise from a weakness of the forces which maintain 
and carry on the ordinary action of the system. All this is con- 
veyed in one short sentence. And since the causes are alike in 
the body and in the mind, the analogy is a ju&t one, and the 
marim holds of the one as much as of the other.'* 

6. A youth, named Evathlus, engaged with Protagoras to learn 
dialectics, and promised his tutor a large sum of money, in case 
he gained the first cause he pleaded, Evathlus, when fully in- 
structed, refused to pay his instructor. Protagoras brought his 
action thus—' You must pay the money however the cause go, 
for if I gain you must pay in consequence of the sentence, as 
being cast in the cause \ and if you gain it, you must pay in pur- 
suance of our covenant.' ' Nay,' Evathlus retorts, ' which way 
soever the cause be decided, you will have nothing, for if I pre- 
vail, the sentence gives it that nothing is due : and if I lose, then 
there is nothing due by the covenant' What should be the 
decision in this case ? 

j6. The first case, says Oervantes, requiring Sancho's attention 
was a question put by a stranger, in presence of the stewards and 
rest of the attendants. < My Lord,' said he, < a certain manor if 
divided by a large river. I beg your honour will be attentive, for 
the case is of great consequence and of some difficulty. I say 
then, upon this river is a bridge, and at one end of it the gibbet, 
together with a sort of court hall, in which four judges usually dt 
to execute the law enacted by the lord of the river, bridge, and 
manor, which runs to this effect t Whoever shall pass this bridge^ 
must first swear whence he comes and whither he goes ; if he 
swear the truth he shall be allowed to pass, but if he forswear 
liimself he shall die upon the gallows without mercy or respite. 
This law, together with the rigorous penalty, being knowni 
numbers passed, and as it appeared they swore nothing but the 
truth, the judges permitted them to pass freely and without con* 
trol. It happened, however, that one man's oath being taken, ha 
affirmed and swore by his deposition that he was going to be 
hanged on that gibbet, and had no other errand or intention. Tha 

Logic, pp. 43S-4, vol. % 



TECHKICAL TERMS. 91 

judges, having considered this oath, observed : if we allow this 
man to pass freely, he swore to a lie, and, therefore, ought to 
be hanged according to -law ; and if we ordered him to be 
hanged after he hath sworn he was going to be suspended on 
that gibbet, he will have sworn the truth, and by the same law 
he ought to be acquitted. I beg, therefore, to know, my lord 
governor [and student], what the judges must do with this 
manT 



CHAP. XVL 



TECHNICAL TERMS. 



Abstract names— the names of attributes. — «/*. S, MUl, 
Abstraction— fixing thought on the point of resemblance 
in one body. 

— drawing off and contemplating separately any part of an 
an object. 

Action— -a volition followed by an effect. — J. S, Mill, 
Analoqy — resemblance of relation. — WTuitely, 
Analysis — the resolution of a complex whole into its com- 
ponent elements.-^*/". S. Mill. 

ARGUMENT'— an expression in which, from something laid 
down as granted, something else is deduced — WTuitely, 

Argumentum ad hominbm— appealing to an opponent's 
professed views. 
A PRIORI— reasoning from cause to effect. 
A POSTERIORI— arguing from effects to cause. 
Body — the unknown cause of our sensations— tTl 8. Mill, 
Cause— the invariable antecedent, or thing going before. 

— the stimulus of an effect. 

Conclusion — a proposition proved by argument. 

CoNNOTATiVB TERMS— denote a subject, and imply an at- 
tribute.— j: S, Mill. 

Consciousness— sensation of existences. 

D efinition— the separation of a thing, as by a boundary, 
£rom everything else. 



92 TSCHNICAL TKBMB. 

DiscovEBY —finding out something already existing. 

Effect —the immediate, inyariable consequent, or tlte 
ehange produced by power. 

EKTHTMEHE-An argument with one premiss suppressed 
being understood. 

ExPEBiBNCE— events which have taken place within a per- 
son's own knowledge. — Whately^ 

Fallacy — an apparent argument. 

Genebal Tebms— express the notion of partial similarity. 

Genebalisation -tracing certain points of resemblance. 

— naming one respect in which many things agree. 
Induction— universalisation of truth by inference from 

imiform facts. 

Intuition— imaginary looking. — Whewell, 

Logic— a scientific use of facts. 

Logical Tbuth — that which admits of proof. — Chamber$, 

Mind — the unknown percipient of sensation.— «/". S. Mill, 

Necessaby Tbuths — are those in which we not only learn 
that the proposition u true, but see that it must he true ; in 
which the negative of the truth is not only false, but impos- 
sible ; in which we cannot, even by an effort of the imagination, 
or in a supposition, conceive the reverse of that which is as- 
serted.— jDt. Whemell: PhiL Inductive Sciences, pp. 54-5, 
vol. !.? 

NoN-coNNOTATiVE Tebjis— denote a subject only and 
an attribute only. — J. S. Mill, 

Philosophy — the science of realities in opposition to that 
of mere appearances— the attempt to comprehend things as 
they a/re, rather than as they ieem, — Morell. 

Point at issue ~ the real question to be decided. 

PowEB -in logic, is the relation of circumstances to each 
other in time. 

Pbemises the propositions which precede a " conclusion." 

— the name of the propositions from which a conclusion is 
deduced. 

* As * necessary truths ' are much talked of I have introduced 
here, from Whewell, the completest definition with which 1 am 
acquainted. For myself, 1 coincide on this question with J. S. 
Mill, as quoted pp. 22-8. 



TECHNICAL TBBMS. 98 

Pbinciplb— an invariable rule. 

Proof— sufficient evidence; the balance of probability in 
favour of a proposition. 

Proposition — a sentence which affirms or denies some' 
thing.— WTuitely, 

— An expression in words of a judgment.— J^ 8, MiU, 
BEA30N— the recognition of facts. 

— the classification of facts. 

— following in the pathway of facts. 

— the power of discerning coherences. 
<— a premiss placed after its conclusion. 

— the minor premiss— in the sense of Reason for asserting 
something. 

Beasoning — argumentation. 
• — process, the same always. 
Subject— first term of a proposition* 
Syllogism - 1. A general rule. 2. A fact contained under 
that rule. 3. A conclusion that the fact is so contained. 

— an argument stated regularly and at full length. 

— a valid argument so stated that its conclusiveness is evi- 
dent from the mere form of the expression. 

Technical Terms— the tools of art.— Whately. 

Technical Lanouaoe— regularly formed, defined, and 
agreed on set of expressions. 

Testimony — second-hand experience. Direct evidence is 
that which is professedly given. Incidental, is corroboration 
casually introduced on one subject in the course of an evi- 
dence delivered on another. 

Theory — is a system of rules intended to explain a class 
of facts. The rules should be precise, and rest on a rigorous 
induction of facts or probabilities. 

Tradition— the relation of a circumstance, not committed 
k> writing by any person who observed it, but communicated 
orally from one to another for a long period of time. 