AN ESSAY 



ON 



LOGICAL METHOD. 



BY 



CHARLES P. CHRETIEN, MA 



FBX.LOW AND tU'TOil OW ORIEL COLLBOE. 



OXFORD, 

JOHN HENBY PABKEB; 
AND 377, STBAND, LONDON. 

1848. 



I 



- r 




/ 





BAXTBIi, PKINTEB, OXFORD. 



VI PREFACE. 



The very simple division of Sciences which I have 
adopted will excite a smile in some who have 
approached the same subject from another quarter. 
But it is perfectly defensible, if the principles of 
this work be in other respects true. Without 
being the best or the only scheme, it may yet be 
valid and Logical. 

To confess myself conscious of many faults in 
this Essay, is a poor apology for leaving them un- 
corrected. They would have been more numerous, 
but for a reason which I have great pleasure in 
being permitted to mention. Both the Essay and 
its Author are under more obligations than can be 
particularised, to his dear friends and brother-feUows, 
the Reverend George Buckle, and Mr. John 
William Burgon. 



Oriel, 
June \1, 1848. 



TXTTu (^r»i Tr"rmM 



INTRODUCTION. 



weapon may be wielded to advantage; not how 
the whole armoury may be employed in concert 
with good effect. 

And without any disparagement to later labourers 
in this fields it may be said, that such other 
guides to the knowledge of method as are not 
palpably superficial, start from first premises too 
unlike those which we semi-scholastics of Oxford 
still retain to be naturally adopted as instructors 
in our school. Instead of extending the old line 
of enquiry, they turn to one which is altogether 
new, and, where yre are expecting explanation, 
give us contrast. Or their turn is physical rather 
than logical : they insist more on the facts which 
method embodies, than on the formal process of 
their embodiment. 

It would be wide of oiu* purpose to discuss any 
schemes of method, which are built on other than 
a logical groundwork. However true and ex- 
cellent they may be. Logic is not the porch through 
which to approach them. And yet it is most 
unlikely that no entrance lies to method through 
this vestibule. When we owe to the schoolmen and 
their successors so much of our scientific phrase- 
ology, so many of the terms which hang loose 
between exact and popular usage, and serve to 
bridge over (for good or for evil, as the causeway 
so formed is employed) the gap which separates 
sciolism and science ; when we take so commonly 
as our material the fragments of their mosaic-work. 



INTRODUCTION. 



it seems unnatural and unwise, not to say ungrate- 
ful, to pay no attention to the plan according to 
which they arranged them. Doubtless they were 
fitted for their original use; and we may learn 
much jfrom considering the nature of this use, 
although we may not think proper to adopt it. 

Possibly, then, the domain of logical speculation 
is not so fiilly occupied, as to leave no room for 
the following Essay. Our object is, to view Logic 
at once by the light of the past and the present ; 
to enquire, in the first place, what ideas respecting 
its nature were formerly entertained, and what 
questions originated fi-om their adoption : how one 
race of thinkers profited both by the knowledge 
and the mistakes of those preceding them, and 
handed down the results of their labours to their 
successors, not without a still abiding mixture of 
error; — ^and, this done, to show, how truths ad- 
vancing fi-om different quarters meet at last, and 
unite peaceably, where we might have feared a 
collision ; how, as Logic has always of her own 
firee will testified to the truth of Science, Science 
in her turn bears unintentional but not involuntary 
witness to the truth and utility of Logic. 

The former part of this Essay, therefore, is 
mainly historical; the latter regards rather the 
present state of knowledge, and aims at illustrating 
the close connection between logical and scientific 
method. The general fact of their connection 
one consideration alone would serve to establish. 

b2 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

It cannot be by a mere accidental coincidence that 
Logic and Science both point to a deductive system 
as the perfect type of method. This they do on 
grounds perfectly distinct. The logician asserts 
the supremacy of Deduction, because it exhibits 
most naturally the powers of his favourite instru- 
ment, the syUogism ; because it assigns with the 
greatest deflniteness and precision to the pro- 
position and the term their respective places and 
importance. The man of science also takes Deduc- 
tion as the type of excellence, because he finds that, 
as matter of fact, the deductive sciences are the most 
perfect. It would not at first strike the logician 
that Mathematics exhibited the fiill power of the 
syllogism, or the mathematician, that his pursuits 
illustrated the chief exercise of Logic. But a little 
thought shows either party that there is a real 
conformity, not only in the results, but in the 
process by which they attain them. Each is 
attracted by the same feature in a deductive system, 
that is, as we shall see hereafter, the perfect 
manner in which it imites in itself subordination 
and consequentiality. 

Where then there is on the whole such general 
agreement, we should expect to find it pervading 
the details also. Here, however, it does not at 
first appear. Science says httle of universals and 
particulars, of distribution and non-distribution, of 
judgment and discourse. While on the peculiar 
features and arrangements of each particular 



INTRODUCTION. 



science Logic is of course equally silent. But, on 
reflection, another class of terms occur, which 
Logic and Science use in common. Such are, 
conception and idea, genus and species, analysis 
and synthesis. The vague use of words like these 
is an evil which we ought not unnecessarily to 
tolerate. Metaphorical in some sense they must 
be; but the nature and extent of the metaphor 
deserves to be considered. And the further ques- 
tion naturally arises, not only from what they have 
been transferred, but to whom. Their use in- 
differently by logicians and men of science suggests 
the supposition, that Science has taken them 
improperly from Logic, or Logic from Science. But 
it is satisfactory to discover, that some knowledge 
of the nature of method renders either hypothesis 
unnecessary ; that it is with regard to method that 
the terms have gained their meaning, and pre- 
serving that meaning, are derived, with equal 
propriety, to Science on the one hand, and Logic 
on the other. 

The idea of method, indeed, is prior to that of 
either Science or Logic. It is simpler, where they 
are more complex. It enters into every thing 
which admits of arrangement and order. There 
is method in placing in a row a number of mine- 
ralogical specimens according to their external 
resemblance : though this is not a science. There 
is method in grouping together a number of apho- 
risms, or proverbs, or practical maxims, which refer 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

to the same subject: though this falls short of 
Logic. There may be order, and therefore method, 
where there is Uttle knowledge and no conse- 
quentiality. Crabbe, with his usual truth and 
usual bitterness, has observed of misers, heralds, 
flower-fanciers, and one or two other respectable 
rather than usefiil classes of men, that. 

Order to these is armour and defence. 
And love of method serves in lack of sense •. 

To be methodical, is useful both to the professor 
of knowledge, and to him who would acquire it ; 
but it is perfectly compatible both with ignorance 
in the one, and apathy in the other. 

Before, then, entering directly on our subject, a 
few words may be said both on the use and abuse 
of methodology. Some degree of method is ne- 
cessary in every stage above the merest empiricism. 
Without it, we could only observe detached facts ; 
we could not couple them by any mental asso- 
ciation, unite them indissolubly, and extract a 
principle from them. We use an inartificial 
method in the ordinary process of gaining know- 
ledge by observation, and retaining it. As this 
process becomes more elaborate, we require a 
more elaborate apparatus for our aid. Our system 
must expand together with that which we sys- 
tematize. 

But this, it may be said, proves only the im- 
portance of method, not of studying it. An 

The Learned Boy." 



» tt 



INTRODUCTION. 



eminent naturalist once insisted on the utility of 
Chemistry, because sulphur, for instance, was a 
constituent substance of the body, and Chemistry 
taught the nature and properties of sulphur. The 
answer was obvious; — that however important 
the element might be, it was not therefore of 
equal importance to be aware of its existence. 
Though the sulphur was usefiil, it did not follow 
that the knowledge of its utility was useful know- 
ledge* In hke manner it may be argued : method 
is indispensable ; but not therefore the study of 
method. 

And further, it is a common remark, that ordi- 
nary systems of procedure are despised by those 
minds which bear the impress of genius. They 
travel a way of their own ; and '' their justification 
lies in their success.** If they exhibit the perfec- 
tion of method, it is unconsciously. Conformity 
to rule would only have cramped them. Their 
greatness depended on their perfect freedom from 
restraint. 

Allowing this to be true, which it is not in the 
sense in which it is often taken, the study of 
method may yet be abundantly usefiil. Granting 
that it is not of service to the greatest of men, it 
will quite suflSce if it profits all below them. The 
result of their spontaneous and almost unconscious 
energies we must be content to attain by the aid 
of rule. Others on system aim at that which they 
attain unsystematically. Their very superiority 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

makes their instinct, our model. With the earnest- 
minded, to admire, is to imitate. And surely it is 
better to attain the height of excellence which we 
admire, though by a different road, than, in a vain 
mimicry of the process, to fail of the result alto- 
gether. 

The study of method then has its use : it is also 
liable to abuse. Its office is, to enable us to 
arrange and combine facts, not to enable us to 
dispense with them. Yet it may be, and has been, 
thus perverted. If knowledge, and observation, 
and experiment, are observed to go forther with 
method than without them, men may fall into the 
misconception, that it can supersede them to so 
great a degree, as to render them comparatively 
unimportant. When possessed with this idea, 
they endeavour to employ form as the staple of 
their enquiries, to the neglect of matter. Such, it 
will be presently seen, was the great error of the 
schoolmen. They saw a possibility, which they 
vainly endeavoured to realize. It may be possible, 
that, from the perfect analysis of a truth, all other 
truths may be inferred : it is highly impossible that 
any one will ever be able to perfect the analysis, 
and effect the inference. 

But it would be premature to dwell at present 
on the scholastic abuse of method. It will be 
more to our purpose to mention some of its evil 
results in a form with which we are more familiar. 
For in an undue exaltation of methodology lies 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

the intellectual error of those, with whom specula- 
tion and '^ agitation of wit" stand in the place of 
learning; who are content with nothing short of 
system, and desire nothing more ; who make con- 
sistency the one test of truth, or, if they avoid the 
mistake of confoimding what is with what might 
have been, neglect the actual in the vain quest of 
the ideal ; who devote themselves, in short, to '' that 
idle and not very innocent employment of forming" 
in philosophy, and religion, and civil govern- 
ment, '' imaginary models of a world, and schemes 
of governing it." 

There is, then, great danger in the exclusive 
study of method. The mere collector of facts, 
which he cannot arrange, and has no real notion 
of using, cannot do much harm to himself or 
others. If his labours are on a great scale, he 
becomes a helot of literature, toiling that others 
may enjoy. In a smaller field, he terminates, for 
the most part, as a dealer in ill-sorted anecdotes 
and ill-digested propositions; while, in matters of 
importance, he follows passively in the wake of 
others, who govern him by the possession of a 
little more tact and judgment. He has knowledge, 
in some sense, without information. 

But he who, unprovided with facts, and without 
the intention of acquiring them, enters on the 
study of methodology, has no such immunity from 
danger. From a small foundation he hopes to 
proceed to great and extensive knowledge. Re- 



10 INTRODUCTION. 

search is not his occupation^ but the exercise of his 
ingenuity. On some few first principles, which 
recommend themselves to his own mind, or are 
taken on trust from those whom he admires, or, it 
may be, have real external evidence in their 
favour, he' fastens hid belief. But these lie far 
apart from this common-life world and the domain 
of ordinary practice. For the connection between 
them he depends on certain slender intellectual 
threads, spun out, spider-like, from within. That 
which he thus invents, he believes : but this beUef 
rests, not on objective truth, or on the evidence of 
his fellow-creatures, or on God, but on himself. 
Unbelief sits at the right hand of such a faith. A 
self-made Damocles, he sees the sword of scep- 
ticism suspended over him by a hair. If events 
do not fall out as he expects, if phenomena will 
not harmonize with his system, if truth in some 
painfiil and oppressive form thrusts itself upon 
him, he becomes convinced, though against his 
will, that things are not as they seemed to him. 
He deserts his system; and what has he left? 
Nothing but the ruins of a building which had no 
foundation, the material of those thin walls built 
upon the sand which one blast of God's breath could 
overthrow. Mere love of method is self-worship, 
and nothing more. The overthrow of the idol is 
the best fate which we can wish to the idolater. 

The true student of method is in an entirely 
different intellectual position. He will labour 



INTRODUCTION. 1 1 

to preserve the analogy of truth — ^to keep the 
world within in harmony with the world with- 
out. Method itself will not be his ultimate object^ 
but some other branch of enquiry, to which he 
applies his method, and which it is meant to 
further. 

Those who have really forwarded formal 
science have been men of general science also. 
Plato, that greatest of merely human names, was 
no unpractical dreamer on abstractions, but did 
every thing well that he attempted, from writing 
Greek to wrestling. Aristotle was the most learned 
of men. The best of the schoolmen were familiar 
with Courts, and toiled in Councils, while they 
methodized. Lord Bacon had an eye for facts of 
almost preternatural acuteness. Descartes not 
only wrote de methodo, and wandered at large in 
metaphysics, but was a mathematician, an anatomist, 
and almost, in his way, a divine. 

The dry metaphysician is the most useless of all 
beings ; he handles truths of which he does not 
know the preciousness. When he has once map- 
ped out the country, he would be unconcerned if it 
should sink under water. " A reasoning self- 
sufficing thing," he suffices for nothing but himself. 
He is the usiu'er of intellect, and the miser. 

Method is, as the name indicates, a way in 
quest of something. It is intended to forward re- 
search, not to be itself an object. He is sure to fall 
short of his mark, who erects a means into an end. 



12 INTRODUCTION. 

Let US now proceed, before insisting on the true 
relation of Logic to Science, to consider the views 
which have been previously entertained on the 
subject; and to show how the thinkers of ancient 
and raediaeval times handed on the torch to their 
successors. 



¦ ^a I II P- 



CHAP. I. 

THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE RELATION OF LOGIC 

TO SCIENCE. 

In considering the relation which, according to 
the ancient and mediaeval philosophies respectively. 
Logic bore to Science, it would be unwise to take 
any very restricted notion of Logic itself, by which 
to limit our enquiries, and test the opinions of 
those who have preceded us. We must not look 
for greater accuracy in the use of our terms than 
was possible in the time of their early application. 
We shall see more fiilly the bearings of our 
subject, by taking Logic in its widest sense ; not 
enforcing our distinctions on those who could 
never have heard of them, but content, as is often 
best at the opening of an investigation, to follow 
the guidance of a name, and see whither it will 
lead us. So we may be sure, that wherever we 
find the word Logic, we are on our proper ground, 
in whatever sense our authorities used it ; whether 
they meant by it an art or a science, whether they 
assigned to it as its province, language, or in- 
ference, or thought in general. 

And if, as can scarcely be doubted. Logic is to 



14 THE ANCIENT VIEW OP THE 

be considered rather an art than a science^ this 
alone would justify us in using the term somewhat 
vaguely. Science is, as we shall hereafter see, the 
development of an idea; and the definiteness of 
this idea is a condition of the progress of the 
science. Not so with art, which deals rather with 
phoenomena than with ideas, which aims at effecting 
an end, not at exploring a certain sphere of know- 
ledge. Arts contract and expand almost inde- 
finitely. The bold projector widens their field 
in theory, the skilfiil artificer enlarges them in 
practice. On the other hand, the division of 
labour often splits one art into several, and limits 
to a part the application of a name which once 
extended to the whole ; or the advance of know- 
ledge shows perhaps that it has attempted more 
than it could well fulfil, and leads it to modify its 
pretensions ; or some change in the circumstances 
of social life causes it to fall into neglect and 
desuetude. So that the history of an art, like that 
of a kingdom, is to a great extent the history of its 
boundaries. The capital remains unchanged, but 
the extent of territory around it varies. We all 
know what is meant by the art of Medicine ; yet 
how little remains fixed in it when examined. At 
first we have a scanty knowledge of simples, and 
some empirical rules as to diet. Then the mineral 
kingdom comes in to lend its aid to the vegetable. 
Afterwards we find the art taking another turn, 
and, not content with bare observation, deducing 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 15 

rules from guesses as to the nature of remedies in 
general, some fanciful doctrine of signatures, for 
instance, or a premature theory of vital action. 
Then a better acquaintance with the laws of 
Physiology and Chemistry comes to its aid. We 
must not forget its shifting and uncertain sym- 
pathies with other real or pretended systems — with 
Alchemy, or Astrology, or Magnetism. Yet how 
small a part of this array of subjects comes under 
the notice of the ordinary practitioner ! To enquire 
into the history of Medicine, confining ourselves to 
our own views of its nature and province, would 
lead us to rob the ancients without enriching the 
modems, and make one of the oldest of the arts 
comparatively a creature of the day. 

What place then did Logic, taken in its broadest 
sense, occupy in the systems of the philosophers of 
Greece ? 

Philosophy was in 'existence some time, before 
Logic arose by her side. The Ionian and Pytha- 
gorean Schools had no Logic. It is not hard to see 
the reason of this. The two Schools have this point 
of resemblance, that the teaching of each was 
homogeneous. They attempted no division of Phi- 
losophy. The systems of the one were based 
wholly on physical considerations, of the other 
wholly on metaphysical. And they had the whole 
world before them: their enquiries assumed the 
form of curiosity ; they speculated without doubt, 
and concluded without hesitation. Men do not 



16 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

seek a canon of truth till they feel the danger of 
falling into error. Thales and Pythagoras had no 
such misgiving ; they argued and dogmatized with- 
out fear of contradiction, and were received with 
an applause that bore witness to their success. 
They were too sanguine to need a Logic. 

The Eleatics, who were the first doubters, first 
showed symptoms of a logical turn. They wit- 
nessed the failure of the Ionian and Pythagorean 
systems. When Xenophanes lived and philoso- 
phized, water and chaos had each been advocated 
as the principle of all things. By the time of Em- 
pedocles, fire and air had each hkewise aspired to 
universal rule, and failed. The Pythagorean theory 
of numbers had met with no better success. The 
Eleatics, only half discouraged by these repeated 
misadventures of others, formed a new scheme of 
their own. We owe to them one of the funda- 
mental antitheses of Philosophy, that of sense and 
reason. Unhappily, they made this nice distinction 
the occasion of an error, and, in distinguishing, 
opposed them. They taught, not that reason and 
sense were conversant with the different poles of 
truth, but that the one was the source of truth, the 
other of falsehood. Thus they introduced a vicious 
dualism into their philosophy, in the form of an 
antithesis between the cognizable and the sensible, 
the ideal and the actual world. 

These opinions of theirs introduced a new division 
into Philosophy. To Physic (taken in its widest 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCF. 17 

sense as including Metaphysic) they added Logic. 
The new feature developed itself by degrees. Em- 
pedocles had a leaning towards Dialectic, which is 
indicated by his inventing Rhetoric — an honour 
which Aristotle ascribes to him. Nor was Par- 
menides ignorant of this branch of thought. Zeno 
enjoys the distinction of being styled the inventor 
of Logic by Aristotle himself'. And now Philo- 
sophy displayed clearly the two divisions of Logic 
and Physic. 

Ethic had hitherto held quite a subordinate 
place. It came in as a corollary attached to other 
conclusions, and had no distinct principles of its 
own. The ethical opinions of those old philoso- 
phers followed naturally from their physical. Thus 
Clemens Alexandrinus informs us, that Heraclitus, 
the tendency of whose whole philosophy was to 
annihilate the individual, very consistently made 
the chief good consist in content, which is the 
submission of the individual mind to the universal; 
while Pythagoras, (mathematical to the last,) placed 
happiness in *' the knowledge of the perfection of 
the numbers of the soul ;" and Anaxagoras, who 

* Scxtus Empiricus adversus Mathematicos, b. vii. ch. 1 . 'EfAve^- 
doKkta luv yhp S^ApurrortXrfs ffnjal irpSyrop ptfropuci^v KtKunfK€vai. fjs 
dvTlaTpo(f>ov thtu t^p duiXcieriK^y, r€VTt<rrtVt l<r6arpo<lH»f, dih t6 irc/il 
rriv avTTfV vXiyp arp€<lx<rBai. ms icai awriBtov 6 woufrijs t<^i} rhv 'Odvo-o-c cr* 
&ntp Jjv, 1(t4B€Ov, TlapfA€vidris d< ovk bv b6$ai rrjs diaKtieruajs oircc/wr 
^X^iv, entlirtp ir<iXiv 'ApurroTtkrjs r6v yv&pifiov avrov Zffvmpa dutkeicriKrjg 
apxny^v {fK^CKri<l>w, The whole chapter, though not to be implicitly 
followed in all its statements, will repay an attentive perusal. 

C 



18 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

held, as his physical theory, that the primitiye 
Chaos had been informed and shaped by intellect, 
found the end of life in ** contemplation, and the 
freedom resulting therefrom V' Detached opinions, 
such as these, are all we can expect to find. 
Scarcely a ray of moral light descends from the 
abstract and metaphysical theology of Xenophanes. 
Empedocles cannot claim the title of an ethical 
teacher ; we must seek in his physical philosophy 
the reasons of such tenets as the unlawfulness of 
depriving animals of life. Love and Hate, so 
naturally principles of action, are with him Hat 
elements of a physical theory, where they are seen, 
not movmg men, but forming a world. There was 
no independent ethical teaching, before the time 
of Socrates. 

The glorious mind of Plato, so sympathetic with 
the thoughts of all he loved and honoured, 9xA yet 
so compreh^isive of all truth, while it attached all 
due importance to the Socratic doctrines, did not 
venture to neglect the labours of the past. The 

^ StTomata^ lib. ii. p. 416. OdKoup hii tovhhs dpKoviUvois Kara- 
wav<rT€<nrf (^tkortiufriov bty &s hi ftdKwTa^ ml Wk wp6g^ rdv ^iviruimif 
boyiujertii&yxva irepi rov irpoKHfuvov vapaBitrBat, *Aim$ay6ptat /wry yA^ 
T&v ikaCofUyiov T^v B(0pla» iffdinu rov filav rikos c&cu, mu ripf &if^ 
TavTrf£ ikevBtplaVj Xeyovaur 'Hpib^Mrdy t€ r6y*'Etl>9irunfri^t\Kip€imia'm, 
UvBaydpav dc 6 Uovruths 'HpoKkei^s Urmptl rifif inurr^iup^rijt rfXcuSriTrof 
T&v dptSiJMV Ttjs ^fnfjfis wlkufjLopiap fhm irapaM»K€paty K. r. X. I hare 
ventured, it will be s^en, to introduee in the text, dptBfi&v for dper&v, 
the conjectural reading of Potter, who quotes Theodoret to the same 
effect. 'O dc noKvBpvkkiiTos nvAt/t^pac rrji^ rcXcioninp t£p apt§^Ait 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 19 

Ethic of Socrates was retained by him, but not in 
its isolation. Endeavoiuring to transfer to his 
master the praise which was justly his own, he put 
him forward as the discoverer of the triple aspect 
of Philosophy*. And Socrates undoubtedly had 
considerable pretensions as a logician ; his view of 
method, so far as we can trace it, was admirable ; 
and he so systematized definition and induction, as 
to have been deemed their inventor \ But his occa- 
sional speculations on the nature of the world and 
the soul will not entitle him to the name of a 
physical philosopher. Nor, granting their fullest 
value to his researches, can we therefore fairly 
assume his acquaintance with the scheme which 
under his pupil's hands they illustrated. It is to 
the systematic Plato that we really owe the division 
of Philosophy, since so widely accepted, into Ethic, 
Physic, and Logic *. 

No ground-plan of Philosophy among the 
ancients gained so wide a ciurency as this. Aris- 
totle, though he did not employ it as his scientific 



• Sext. Empir. adv. Math. viL 1. 'O fih yhp nXarcov ttavros 
fUpovs ^iXocro^Miff avT^ /irradtdcocn,^ tov fjtiv Xoyi«eov, Trap' oaov irtpX 
o/Mov K€Li buup€a'€<ov Koi €TVfio\oyias 7rap€iaijier(u [ryrav, 3artp eori Xoyuca* 
toh bk ifiuthv, oTi TTcpl dperrjs Koi iroXtrciaff kcli v6fiov btaa-Keirrerm tov 
bt tftva-ucov, oTi Koi n€p\ K6a'fiov t\ kqI irepl [tooyovias koi ^xV^ 7rc<^tXo- 
<r6<f)rjK€V, tvB€V KoX 6 Tifiov alriarai t6v ItKarciva eVl rf ovrto koXXo- 
TtiCtiv r6v 2<oKparf7i/ iroXkoU fiadrifuunv. 

^ Metaphys. xii. 4. Avo ydp iariv^ & rtr hv dmobt^ii ttoKparti 
biKaiaSi rovs r inaKTiKovs \6yovs, koi t6 6pi(€a-Bai kcBoKov. 

• See Diog.- Laert. Prooem. Segm. 18. 

c2 



20 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

division^ yet in practice adopts it'. Epicurus 
recognised it also, though he gave to the logical 
section the name of ''canonic'." The Stoics 
accepted it without any such alteration of termi- 
nology. So generally admitted was it, that it was 
forced in some sense, by popular opinion, on those 
who would not otherwise acknowledge it. Sects, 
which denied its validity, or were ignorant of its 
existence, were tried by its standard. Thus we 
are informed, (of which more hereafter) that the 
Cynics confined their attention to Ethic, and 
neglected Physic and Logic '. 

It is to our purpose to see, what prominence, 
what place and office, the different schools assigned 
to the logical limb of this division. A few pre- 
paratory remarks will enable us the better to see 
the real nature of the question on which they 

' Top. i. 12. §. 6. 

8 Diog. Laert. lib. x. Seg. 29, 30. 

** Diog. Laert. vii. 40. 

' Piog. Laert. vi. 103. Far more out of place^ and for that 
very reason more strikingly illustrative of the prevalence of this 
division, is the statement of Philo JudsBus, (Quod omnis probus 
liber) that ihe Essenes cultivated Ethic to the exclusion of Logic 
and far the greater portion of Physic. It is startling to find 
St. Jerome applying it to Holy Scripture in the following passage. 
" Quomodo Philosophi solent disputationes suas in Physicam, 
Ethicam, Logicamque partiri, ita et eloquia divina aut de natura 
disputare, ut in Genesi et in Ecclesiaste : aut de moribus, ut in 
Proverbiis et in omnibus sparsim libris : aut de Logica, pro qu& 
nostri theoricen sibi vindicant, ut in Cantico Cauticorum, et 
Evangeliis." Epist. ad Paulum Urbicura de interpretatione Al- 
phabeti Hebraici, ad init. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 21 

parted company, and the reasons which rendered 
it incapable of a satisfactory solution. 

The ancients used the term Logic in a much 
wider sense than we do. As physical Philosophy 
included all the phenomena of the. outward world, 
and, if we can allow a soul to brutes, those of the 
" irrational soul" also ; as Ethic considered all 
questions of directly practical import, so the whole 
world of mind came under Logic. It dealt with 
mental laws, whether these laws were considered 
as the means of investigation, or its object. If 
the application of reasoning could solve a ques- 
tion without appeal to observation or experiment, 
its solution belonged to this branch of Philosophy. 
If the nature of the rational soul was considered. 
Logic claimed it as its province. If a system of 
rules was to be constructed, fitted to aid in the 
ordinary investigation of truth, here too Logic was 
at home. 

The word then was taken in too broad a sense 
to be distinct in its meaning. Metaphysic, or the 
science of thought as belonging to the rational 
soul, in the first place fell within it. Then it 
included Logic proper, or the system of rules for 
reasoning grounded on the laws of thought. Lastly, 
it included Logic applied — the concrete of these 
rules, and the matter of any particular question 
which they enabled the enquirer to determine. 

The clear mind of Aristotle did not fail to 
discern this equivocation. He saw the difference 



22 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

between the metaphysical truths on which the 
rules of- reasoning are grounded, and the rules of 
reasoning themselves. His usage of language on 
this point is not however that to which we are now 
accustomed. Logic is with him the more general 
term ; Analytic, the more restricted ^. Our Logic 
corresponds to the latter rather than to the former. 
Thus, on the one hand, he calls it a logical ques- 
tion, whether there be one science of contraries, 
or not ; on the other hand, he describes Rhetoric, 
which we should characterize as the union * of the 
science of human nature, and Logic, as a com- 
bination of Politic and Analytic ". The opposition 
therefore between logical and analytical, in his 
mind, would answer to that between metaphysical 
and logical, in ours. There is of course nothing 
implied in this antithesis, which could hinder him 
from viewing Logic generical, including Analytic 
and much more, as one great section of Philosophy, 
in contrast both with Ethic and Physic. 

Plato, on the other hand, it is well known, 
courted of set purpose the fusion of these two 
ideas — of the law, and the rule, of thought ; of the 
basis on which Logic is built, and the logical 
building itself. Though a variety of authorities 
attribute to him the threefold division of Philosophy, 
he does not himself explicitly state it. And Dia- 
lectic, rather than Logic, is the name by which he 

^ Post. Anal. T. xxii. 21, 2. * Top. I. xii. 5. 

" Rhet. I. iv. 



RELATION OP LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 23 

distinguishes the third number of the division. We 
know too, that his making those universals^ which 
were generally regarded as the creatures of Logic, 
real existences, and identifying them with his 
ideas, led him to include mider one name the 
formal and the real science ^ His Dialectic was 
not a mere intellectual discipline, or a bare organon 
of truth, but a summary of the highest, and, in 
some sense, the only real knowledge. 

It will be seen, then, that these two great 
authorities, however much they differ on other 
points, agree in one. They both exalt Logic 
above Physic and Ethic Plato's reason was 
obvious: Dialectic was the one great science to 
which, in his opinion, other sciences owed not 
only their apparatus, but their very aim and 
purpose* And Aristotle, taking, as we have seen. 
Logic in its broadest sense, made it include far too 
much, to be at all tempted to underrate it. 

The two great schools which succeeded in Greek 
philosophy asdgned Logic a far lower importance. 
The Canonic of the Epicureans was restricted 
within very narrow bounds, and sometimes con- 
fused with their Physic **. And the Stoics, who 
also subordinated it to Phydc, introduced also 
Rhetoric and other extraneous matters into the 
province which it seemed of itself no longer equal 
tofillP. 

" Metaphys. xii. 4. *' Diog. Laert. x. 30. 

. ' Diog. Laert. vii. 4K 



24 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

But, as two schools of Philosophy arose before 
Logic had its origin, so also two, which were 
almost contemporaneous with its most flourishing 
4ays, shut their eyes and refused to acknowledge 
it. One of these was that of the Cynics. We 
have seen above "^^ that the rejection of Logic was 
formerly laid to their charge. The accusation 
which is so directly made might have been inferred 
from their known opinions. Antisthenes and his 
disciples denied the possibility of definition' and 
of contradiction \ The one position is incon- 
sistent with a belief in the accuracy of knowledge ; 
the other even denies that it is attainable. For, 
if there be no contradiction, there can be no 
antithesis between truth and falsehood ; if there 
be no definition, truth may exist indeed, but with 
such indistinctness and uncertainty of outline as 
to defy a sure recognition. In each opinion the 
same tone of mind appears. To regard Truth as 
something which the mind cannot really grasp, is 
a long stage on the road towards disbelieving its 
existence. 

The Cynics indeed seem to have been a pitiable 
sect of philosophers — ^pitiable too, perhaps, in the 
sense of deserving our pity. First of all, they turned 
their thoughts to virtue, which they thought both 
attainable and necessary. On the ethical branch of 
Philosophy they therefore cast no slight. But this 
absorbed their whole attention. On the cold un- 

^ P W. ' Metaphys. vii. 3. . • Top. I. ix. 6. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 25 

impassioned countenance of their ideal Virtue they 
fixed their eyes, and forgot all besides. The laws 
of the souls, and the phenomena of nature, they 
alike despised. Beyond Virtue, all seemed un- 
certain ; the sophists had overthrown their faith 
iti human knowledge, and Herachtus had sapped 
their trust in the outer world. Plato invented his 
theory of ideas, that, by reposing all that was 
precious upon them, he might preserve the con- 
fidence of men both in knowledge and goodness. 
The Cynics thought that their doctrine of im- 
passibihty saved Virtue from the general crash, and 
calmly allowed the sea of doubt to sweep all else 
away. 

Very unlike paths lead different men to the same 
conclusions. The Cyrenaics also were said to 
resolve all Philosophy into Ethic ^ Aristotle him- 
self tells us of the contempt with which Aristippus 
regarded Mathematics as teaching us nothing of 
the good and the beautifiil. Morals were at any 
rate the principal study of the Cyrenaics, whether 
they entirely neglected the other branches of Philo- 
sophy, or, as is more Ukely froni their treatises on 
'* causes" aiid '* proofs," only placed them in com- 
plete subordination. Perhaps indeed there was 
little in their whole system td claim the title of 
philosophy- They were bound no more to any 
severity of thought than ojf conduct. No strict 

' Diog. Laert. ii. 92. " Metaphys. ii. 2. 



26 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

theory was needed to justify ease and self-indulgence 
to those who loved them. 

As time passed on^ the Schools, which at first 
occupied independent ground^ came into contact 
Questions, originated by each separately, were 
discussed in common. And we find, at a period 
long after the inventors of the respective systems 
had ceased to write and live, their descendants 
once more discussing points which seemed to have 
been settled, and ruling them anew. 

In the time of Ammonius%the Stoics, Peripatetics, 
and Platonists had long, he tells us, held their 
distinct view as to the relation of Logic to Philo- 
sophy. The Stoics, true to their old position, 
made it a part of Philosophy. One of theur argur« 
ments is sufficiently terse and concise to deserve 
mention. No Art, they said, made its own instru- 
ment; Logic therefore, which is the creation of 
Philosophy, is not its instrument, but a part of it. 
The title of Aristotle's logical works was the watch- 
word of the Peripatetics, who held Logic to be only 
an instrument. The argument which Ammonius 
puts in their mouth, has certainly a tinge of a phi- 
losophy foreign to that of their master. They 
argued, he tells us, that every part must have the 
same matter, and the same end, with the whole ; 
but there was no such identity of subject and pur- 
pose in Logic and Philosophy. For Philosophy, 

' The sou of Hermeas, who flourished circ. A.D. 470. See 
his Treatise on the Categories, pp. 6 — S. Ed. Venet. 1595, 



«= >» 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. S7 

they proceeded, had things for its matter, and 
assimilation to God for its end; while the subject 
of Logic was Language, and its aid. Demonstration. 
The conclusion at which they arrived was true ; 
the way of attaining it, if it was really theirs, proves 
how the school of Aristotle had degenerated in 
those bad times. 

The Platonic view, we are informed by the same 
authority, was, that Logic was both a part and an 
instrument of Philosophy. These Piatonists, too, 
argued rather childishly. A hand, they urged by 
way o'f example, is an instrument of giving and 
taking, a part of the whole body. Of course there 
is nothing wonderful in the same thing's being 
a part of one thing and an instrument of another. 
There is something more philosophical in a dis- 
tinction which they drew, with a like object, between 
Logic when viewed as an independent system of 
rules, and when actually applied to some particular 
subject. Regarded abstractedly, as in the former 
case, it seemed to them an instrument of Philo- 
sophy ; taken in the concrete, as in the latter case, 
it became a part. Thus, while they sided theo- 
retically with the Stoics, their mode of expression 
tended practically to that concision of Logic and 
Science, which afterwards prevailed among the 
Schoolmen. 

Thus much of the views which the principal 
schools of ancient Philosophy held regarding 
Logic. Their want of distinctness and consistency 



28 THE ANCIENT VIEW OF THE 

is obvious. The reason of this deficiency has been 
hinted at more, than once. Falling short of a 
definite conception of Logic itself, they could 
attain no distinct statement of its relation to other 
subjects. Human reason at large, and reasoning, 
or the exercise of the inferential faculty par- 
ticularly, and language, in which reason finds its 
expression, may all be investigated like any other 
subject, and therefore brought under one or more 
sciences. Such science or sciences would of course 
be a part of Philosophy. And the Greeks, employ- 
ing a single word to express at once thought and 
language, would naturally call such a science. 

This combination then of Metaphysic and uni- 
versal Grammar, though scarcely deserving to give 
a name to the most important division of Philo- 
sophy, would nevertheless rank under it. Aristotle 
and Plato were right in insisting on its claim to 
this honour; the Stoics and Epicureans trod on 
the verge of error, when they lowered the laws of 
thought in their esteem to the level of the rules 
which are grounded on them, and the Cynics and 
Cyrenaics were undoubtedly wrong when they 
despised this branch of knowledge altogether. 

But Logic, in the sense which we give to the 
term, is not a Science, but an Art. Not directly 
adding to our stock of abstract truths, but serving 
to extend in all directions the domain of general 
knowledge, it is not a part of Philosophy, but the 



rin 



RELATION OF LOCTlC TO SCIENCE. 29 

organon of Philosophy at large. And it was to 
Logic proper^ as an art^ that the enquiries of the 
later Schools which have been mentioned above 
referred. The Peripatetic position^ that it is an 
instrument, is in this way perfectly correct. It 
was an anticipation of the modem idea of the 
subject, and was only too early to bear fruit. The 
Platonic statement has the air of a verbal com- 
promise, but agrees essentially with the Peri- 
patetic. The Stoical opinion is indefensible. That 
School held fast to its ancient dogma without 
understanding it. Though it might be rash to 
assert with Hooker, that they " accounted stupidity 
the highest top of wisdom y," they certainly showed 
for the most part more obstinacy in retaining a 
position than skill in defending it. 

The view of the later Peripatetics, we have said, 
was alone correct. But it was planted among the 
fragments of a ruined philosophy, and failed to 
take root. The ancients, on the whole, sub- 
scribed to the formula, that Logic is a part of 
Philosophy. Turn we now to the Schoolmen, 
and see, how through their researches we have 
journeyed by a tortuous road to Truth. 

' Eccl. Pol. VI. vi. §.6. 



CHAP. 11. 

THE MEDIEVAL VIEW OF THE RELATION OF LOGIC 

TO SCIENCE. 

The stream of knowledge, though it always 
flows, never flows evenly for long together. It 
often seems to divide, and its portions to take dif- 
ferent courses. But the separation is seldom final. 
The severed streamlets form an island, beyond 
which they unite. The smaller body of water 
flows perhaps straight onward, through a confined 
and artificial channel. The main stream makes a 
longer circuit, but both join at last. 

We may apply our metaphor, and say, that 
ancient Philosophy ran in a comparatively narrow 
course after Aristotle. The late Peripatetics, we 
have seen, kept and carried on, with regard to 
Logic, the true doctrine of their master. But 
Thilosophy in general took a different turn. Ari- 
stotle himself, and not the opinions of his school 
after him, formed the text which exercised the 
commentatorial spirit of the middle ages. The 
Schoolmen set a very different value on Logic from 
the Peripatetics. It was fated to rise to a still 



THE RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 31 

greater height in the world's estimation, b^ore it 
sunk to its proper level. Aristotle and Plato had 



32 THE MEDIiEVAL VIEW OF THE 

creative Mind. Whatever is first in nature, is first 
also to him. 

And the mental act which this Wisdom implies 
is of the most perfect kind. All is calm contem- 
plation. The turmoil of inference is over, and pure 
intuition has succeeded. The mind's eye does not 
wander here and there in quest of some worthy' 
object, but is fixed for ever in intellectual serenity 
on the face of Truth. 

Viewed only as a habit of the mind, it rose so 
high in dignity and perfection. Nor were the 
subjects with which it dealt unworthy of its own 
eilevated nature. It is depicted in a threefold 
aspect, answering to the division of that which it 
contemplates. Its highest phase is Theology, — 
which dwells on the thought of the self-existing 
Substance, a pure intellectual Being, ever active ; 
the first Cause; itself luimoved, yet the source of 
all motion ; eternal, indivisible, omnipresent ; in a 
word, the Aristotelian God. . 

Its two other divisions are Mathematic and Physic. 
These words, to a great degree, explain themselves. 
Of the latter, however, we should observe, that it 
took a much wider range with Aristotle than with 
us, including, to a great extent, the laws of mind 
as well as of matter, — the laws of all phenomena, in 
short, which are not reducible to the formulae of 
space and number. Under this broad sense of 
Physic falls the Philosophy both of Morals and Art. 
The wise man does not indeed descend firom his 



i 



»? 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 3S 

theoretic elevation to give rules for guiding con- 
duct, and forming taste^ To the lower parts of 
Philosophy it belongs to train men to the love of 
goodness and the perception of beauty. But when 
art and education have not only brought forth 
fruit in practice, but have also developed character, 
and elicited Ideas which had else lain dormant in 
the mind. Wisdom can then, without loss of caste, 
regard them. She adds to her contemplation of 
Absolute Being, and, in subordination to this, of 
the laws which move the framework of the Uni- 
verse, a knowledge of those principles also, on which 
depend the Good and the Beautifril. 

Such was Aristotle's wisdom, perfect in its 
subject, which is co-extensive with law and order ; 
perfect in its method, which is that of the cre- 
ative Mind, starting with the simple idea of Being, 
and descending thence in regular sequence through 
the whole array of including and included universals ; 
perfect in the nature of its contemplation, which 
sums up in a single term the whole series of 
causation, and grasps by a simple intellectual act 
what has been called " the Mundane Idea," or the 
^'^Summary Law of Nature'." 

The author of this mighty plan did not, of 

' References in detail are impossible, where so abstruse and 
wide a subject is treated so summarily. But a fuller expansion 
would have been out of* place here. The following Chapters 
of the Metaphysics contain many of the mo^^t important passages. 
Lib. I. 1.2. V. l.XI. 7— 10. 

D 



84 THE MEDIAEVAL VIEW OF THE 

<;ourse, witness its completion. It cannot be fairly 
said that he ever really attempted to carry it out. 
We have indeed laborious collections of facts, 
difficult problems, subtle theories, handed down to 
us in abundance from Aristotle. But thotigh he 
investigated almost every branch of knowledge, 
there was no great system to which he endeavoured 
to harmonize the whole. His separate treatises 
have their own perfection, and generally need no 
definite place in a more extensive arrangement. 
Having put before the world a scheme for the 
consistent organization of all knowledge, and col- 
lected large materials for the work, he left them as 
a legacy to posterity, to be arranged and con- 
solidated, if it so might be, by others. 

Nor did the idea fail to bear fruit in its season. 
The Schoolmen found the design, and thought it 
too striking to be neglected. Their theological 
stores were a large addition to the material be- 
queathed by Aristotle. So, with full confidence 
in their resources, and a perpetual reference to the 
original sketch before them, they attempted to 
rear the temple of Universal Knowledge. Where 
Aristotle had laid the foundation, they built ; his 
facts, ready hewn to their hands, they incorporated 
with the building : his Metaphysic supplied them 
with the plan; and they took his Logic for their 
scaffold. 

To mention the Schoolmen seems at once to 
trespass on the province of the unintelligible. The 



m ¦ «.i ii j . . J . »¦»¦! 



qP 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 35 

term is vague enough ; can it be otherwise, when 
we sum up under the title of scholastic philosophy 
the whole mass of thought, vast in its extent if not 
in its value, which occupied the minds of the 
learned in its elaboration between the tenth and 
the sixteenth centuries ? If it brings up any image 
at all before most minds, it is a very incongruous 
one, in which John Scotus and Dun Scotus are in 
danger of losing their individuality, Roscelin and 
Ockham, the nominalists early and late, blend 
confiisedly together, and Anselm and Lanfranc 
come into contact with Albertus Magnus and 
Thomas Aquinas. We are apt to think, that during 
the long period of scholastic dominion there was 
no true growth and progress ; that books increased 
beyond number, and writer superseded writer, with- 
out any corresponding, not to say proportionate, 
increase of knowledge, or revolution of opinion ; 
but that Aristotle was a nucleus round which hard 
words innumerable attached themselves by accre- 
tion like so much inorganic matter. But such a 
tone of thought is an unnecessary wrong to an 
extinct philosophy. Its unity of form, though 
by no means so great as is generally supposed, 
serves nevertheless to disguise from the care- 
less observer very wide differences in substance. 
The opinion that the thinkers of those days 
must have been all very much Uke each other, 
is too rapid an inference from the undoubted 
fact, that they were all ver}' unlike ourselves. If 

d2 



36 THE MEDIAEVAL VIEW OF THE 

we identify, as is usual, the Scholastic and Me- 
diaeval Philosophy, we must not forget, that 
there were as truly within it subordinate schools, 
as there had been in ancient, and are in modem 
times, in spite, of the greater resemblance of form 
which they acquired, as, treating all subjects in a 
single view and in a conventional language, they 
expanded with difficulty, and often with danger 
to their advocates, under the watchful eye and 
stern admonition of Church-authority. 

The great point of similarity among the School- 
men is indeed that feature of their writings with 
which we are most concerned — the uniform pre- 
sence of a dialectical spirit. Some of the traits 
which we should be most apt at first to select as 
characteristic are by no means universally present. 
Their devotion to Aristotle, for instance, is not 
invariable. The master of sentences himself, Peter 
Lombard, has been observed never to quote him ; 
and with several of the early Schoolmen, the Neo- 
platonic element preponderates over the Peripa- 
tetic. The commentatorial spirit, again, prevailed 
not so generally among them as it is said to do 
now among the literati of China. It does not 
distinguish, for instance, the scholastic works of 
St. Anselm; and the master-pieces of school- 
labour, the Book of Sentences, and the Sums of 
Theology, are in the form of questions and distinc- 
tions, not of comment. Some would make realistic 
opinions a test of the Schoolmen; yet Roscelin 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE, 37 

and Abelard are often reckoned in their number. 



38 THE MKDliEVAL TIEW OF THE 

a single important question — the relation of Logic 
to Science, Though, were we attempting a portrait 
of the perfect Schoolman, we should still do best 
to refer to him. He is, in many ways, the best 
specimen of his class* He wrote at the time when 
the School-philosophy seemed to have completely 
recovered from the attack which threatened it with 
destruction in its infancy, and which Ockham 
afterwards renewed to its ultimate downfal. He 
unites in himself to a remarkable degree the theo- 
logical and philosophical traditions of former days ; 
Augustine was his acknowledged authority in 
matters of religion, and Averroes, to an extent of 
which he was not himself aware, his leader in the 
interpretation of Aristotle. The earlier Schoolmen 
wrote in fear, often well-grounded, of the inter- 
ference of the Church ; the later are thought to 
have pressed the system to its utmost boundaries, 
and to have seen glimpses of the coming reform- 
ation. Aquinas, more than any of his fellow- 
labourers, was fortunate in the reception of his 
speculations : they were never deemed of unlawful 
tendency, and gained for him the rare praise of 
uniting orthodoxy and philosophical acuteness. 
We may add, that his writings, at the present day, 
are still spoken of, if not consulted, and referred 
to, if not read; and alone, of all the scholastic 
volumes, show traces of a dubious vitality. 

It will then be worth while, keeping Thomas 
Aquinas steadily before us as the type of the 



RKLATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 39 

scholastic Philosophy, to show briefly from his 
writings the place which logical method held in 
his system. Our position, be it remembered, is 
this — that the Schoolmen took their ideal of 



40 THE MEDIiEVAL VIEW OF THE 

leave a point of this nature undetermined. Ac- 
cordingly, he meets the question, and ansv^rers it in 
the affirmative. At the very opening of his great 
work he declares, that the Sacred Doctrine is " one 
single science,** "speculative rather than practi- 
cal," ** transcending all other sciences whatsoever," 
in a word, ^ absolutely and simply wisdom V 

The Christian Theology then would, according 
to Aquinas, approach very nearly in the terms of 
its definition to that of the heathen philosopher. 
This would indeed still leave room for a very wide 
distinction between them. But it would lead us 
to expect at least thus much, that the Schoolmen 
would be very careful in drawing a line of de- 
marcation between the Divine Wisdom and Aris- 
totle's crowning Virtue. This, however, is not the 
case. Thus in his comment on Aristotle's Meta- 
physics, he begins by assigning to his author's first 
science the very' title by which he distinguishes 
his own, It bears, he tells us, the three names of 
the Divine Science, or Theology ; Metaphysic; and 
the First Philosophy \ And how thoroughly he 
blends in his method of treatment the human and 
the Divine Wisdom, how he considers them to con- 

¦ See Prima PrimaB, Art. I. Qq. 2 — 6. where he predicates of 
** Doctrina sacra" successively that it is " scientia," " una scientia," 
" magis speculativa quum practica/' " omnes alias scientias traii- 
scendens turn speculativas quum practicas/' " maxim^ sapientia 
inter omnes sapientias humanas, non quiJem in aliquo genere 
tan turn, sed simpliciter." 

* Co^iment. in Metaphys. ad init.. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 41 

nect themselves with the same subjects in the 
same manner, may be seen in the following very 
characteristic passage ". " Those arts," he ob- 



42 THK MEDIiEVAL VIEW OF THB 

manifest the Truth, saying, ' To this end was 
I born, and for this cause came I into the world, 
that I should bear witness unto the Truth V And 
so the Philosopher « determines, that the First 
Philosophy is the Science of Truth, not however 
of any Truth, but of that which is the origin of ajl 
Truth." 

Further proof cannot be necessary of the close 
connection, not to say identity, which Thomas 
Aquinas held to exist between Aristotle's First 
Philosophy and the Christian Theology. We 
must next show the importance he attached to 
the principles of the Aristotelian Metaphysic. 

Though Aristotle and the Schoolmen each 
founded their great science on the same idea, that * 
of Being, it by no means necessarily followed that 
their respective sciences should be identical. They 
need not ever have been to any great extent 
similar. The conceptions which they employed 
to express and bring out at length the meaning 
and force of that idea, might have been entirely 
different. They might have endeavoured to por- 
tion out the world of thought on some novel 
principle, and have spent their chief labouir in 
discovering a range of metaphysical abstractions, 
which should give their speculation an individual 
and original air. In a word, as Aristotle had 
divided being in one way, they might have divided 
it in another. Had they undertaken to do so, the 

' John xviii. 37. * Metaphys. ii. 1. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 43 

most characteristic feature of their Dhilosoohv 



44 THE MEDIAEVAL VIEW OF THE 

among the ancients. Others preferred an inter- 
mediate view, and considered them as referring to 
the conception, which lies midway between the 
name and the thing. Ammonius^ who records 
these different opinions, himself subscribes to a 
misty formula, probably of Neo-platonic origin, 
which blends them all, and asserts, that " the 
Categories have to do with words, which signify 
things, through the medium of conceptions." 

The Schoolmen would have adopted this view, 
had they exclusively followed tradition. It is 
contained in their principal authority on the 
subject, a commentary on the ten Predicaments, 
erroneously attributed by them to St. Augustine '\ 
But they rejected as superficial and insufficient 
the belief, that the Categories were mainly a 
scheme for the division of words. It pleased them 
rather to hold, that they met with their counter- 
parts in the outward world. On them they would 
willingly have constructed, if they could, the 
classification of an universal science. So Aquinas 

*• De Categ. p. 14, 15. 

* That Alcain had do doubt either of the authenticity of this 
work, or of the value of its contents, appears from the following 
verses, in which he recommended it to the perusal of Charlemagne. 

Continet iste decem naturae verba libellus 
Quae jam verba tenent rerum, ratione stupendi 
Omne quod in nostrum poterit decurrere sensum. 



Huiic Augustino placuit transferre magistro 
Dc veterum gazis Grsecorum clave Lalin^. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE, 45 

tells US, that " perfect Being is that which exists, 
external to the mind, through the ten Predica- 
ments '¦ ;" and again, that " Being must be portioned 
out into different kinds according to the different 
modes of predication ; for different modes of pre- 



46 THE MEDL«VAL VIEW OF THE 

It is clear, that were the Categories thus state- 
ments of the real classes of things, a universal 
science would be at once possible. Under such 
a classification every thing might be duly ranked 
and ordered, and a natural system, so to speak, of 
the whole universe be constructed. And this was 
the work which the Schoolmen thought they had 
the power to accomplish. The Categories them- 
selves indeed do not hold a very prominent place 
in their general writings. Like other abstract 
principles, when once enunciated and clearly laid 
down as true, they are traceable mainly in their 
consequences. They stand like so many land- 
marks, seen from a distance indeed, but of most 
continual use in guiding the mind to its decision on 
questions which are very remotely and indirectly 
connected with them. The bearings of truths 
derived firom very different sources, from Holy 
Writ and the writings of the Fathers, were deter- 
mined by them. This was a great misfortune to 
the Schoolmen, that they never suspected the 
existence of any discrepancy in their heterogeneous 
material, or at least, if the suspicion unavoidably 
occurred, never Ventured to entertain it. Theo- 
logians at the first, they began in the school of 
faith, and carried their belief too far. Inspiration 
itself could not receive more reverence than Aris- 
totle. Where he evidently contradicts the revealed 
Word, they shut their eyes to the real state of things, 
and look about for some other explanation. Thus 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 47 

Aquinas wishes to persuade himself, that the Philo- 
sopher did not actually hold the world to be eternal, 
but was rather, like a subtle disputant of his own 
times, urging in a dialectical spirit plausible argu- 
ments against the position of an adversary^. The 
Schoolmen had never heard of destroying, with a 
view to re-construct. Unhappy in the absence of 
doubt, they fell short of the philosophic mind in 
one respect at least — that they never learned to 
reject. 

Logic then, as the Schoolmen thought, had a 
noble task before it. With so much inherited from 
their predecessors, all new appeal to the world of 
observation seemed on their part superfluous. 
From certain given truths they hoped by a long 
circumduction to infer all truth. For this purpose, 
logical instruments were to suffice. But the in- 
struments of Logic differ from those of most other 
arts in a very marked manner. There is, in Art, 
generally little similarity between the tool and that 
on which it operates. And further, most arts 
confine themselves in practice strictly to singulars. 
The sculptor applies an individual tool to an indi- 
vidual block of marble : it is a given portion of a 
compound substance which a chemist analyses, and 
that by means of tests themselves of a limited and 
definite quantity. It is not so with the Logician. 
His subject, and his manner of dealing with it, are 

^ Prima Suuimae Qu. xlvi. Art. 1. De Pot. Dei. Qu. iii. 
Art. xvii. 



48 THE MEDIAEVAL VIEW OF THE 

alike general. He applies universals as the criterion 
of other universals. This is his work — to test, 
arrange, and, it may be, infer, general truths by 
means of general formulae. 

So thought the Schoolmen— and to a great 
measure rightly. How then were they to discri- 
minate, where there seemed so much risk of con- 
fusion, between their method, and that on which 
they employed it ? The conceptions, whether of 
things or classes, which their enquiries presupposed, 
and the apparatus of Logic itself, were alike modes 
of intellect Without some especial provision, 
error and perplexity must ensue from their running 
into each other. This danger was obviated by 
drawing a distinction between First and Second 
Intentions. '^ A first intention V' they taught, '^ was 
the likeness of something existing external to the 
mind; as, for instance, the conception which follows 
on hearing the word man — a conception which is 
founded immediately on the thing." Whereas a 
second intention is ''not a likeness of any thing 
existing external to the mind, but a conception 
following on our mode of understanding such 
things. These are invented by the intellect itself ; 
as, for instance, the conception which is signified by 
the word genus. Intentions of this kind have their 
immediate foundation not in the things but in the 
understanding : though the remote foundation is in 
the thing itself." So that, to express the same 

' Aquinas on i". Lib. Sent. Dist. ii. Qu. i. Art. iii. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 49 

truth still more clearly in the form of a distinction 
not of things but of words, *' nouns of the first 
intention axe those which are imposed upon things 
as such, that conception alone intervening, by 
which the mind is carried immediately to the thing 
itself. Such are many and %tone. But nouns of the 
second intention are those which are imposed upon 
things, not in virtue of what they are in themselves, 
but in virtue of their being subject to the intention 
which the mind makes concerning them : as when 
we say that man is a species, and animal a genu^^T 
The scholastic apparatus was now complete. 
They had, as they thought, a primary classification, 
external to the mind, in the ten Predicaments; 
they had first intentions, or conceptions drawn 
directly firom things, to range under them; they 
had, among other second intentions, the Pre- 
dicates, which enabled them to show, how, under 
the light of the natural classification, the first 
intentions were related to each other. In other 
words, they had, or supposed they had, both the 
objective and subjective requisites of a perfect 
system — a valid division of existing things, and a 
method according to which to group all notions 
imder this division. So, without any fiirther 
delay, they betook themselves to syllogizing ; to 
determining, that is, by means of their supposed 
knowledge of the nature and force of terms, the 
various relations which they might be supposed to 

' Opusc. xlii. Art. xii. ad init. 

E 



60 THE MEDIAEVAL VIEW OF THE 

occupy to each other in propositions. Here they 
were not likely soon to come to a stand: the 
possible permutations of words are endless ; and 
they did not think that they were dealing only 
with words, and falhng far short of things. Each 
distinction which they drew brought forward new 
questions ; and the solution of each question 
elicited fresh distinctions. Philosophy separated 
from a central trunk into numerous branches, 
which again divided and subdivided till their ulti- 
mate sections were as fine as hairs, or finer — 
invisible even to the eyes of those who spun them 
out. And, through the whole of the prolonged 
system. Logic every where extended itself; drew 
each distinction, stated each objection, answered 
it when stated, summed up when it gave its de- 
cision, crushed each enquiry into the same uni- 
form shape, appealed over and over again to the 
same universal premises, employed unnumbered 
artifices to extract from these premises conclusions 
they were never meant to give, cut into shreds the 
scanty sheet of knowledge, as Dido did the hide, 
that it might encircle the province which it could 
not cover, governed absolutely all Philosophy, and 
as in despotic governments there is no distinction 
between the monarch and the constitution, was all 
Philosophy itself. 

No wonder then that the highest praises were 
heaped upon it; that though it was confessedly 
only '' reductively" or '^ indkectly" a part of specu- 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 51 

lative Science, as supplying it with syllogisms, 
definitions, and other instruments of like kind*, it 
was yet allowed to bear in common parlance the 
title of '^ the Rational Science V' that as directing 
the act of reason, from which all arts proceed, it 
was called " the Art of Arts " ;" and that it was 
held*, '^ all learning must begin from Logic, not as 
being more easy than other sciences, (for having to 
deal with second intentions it involves the greatest 
difficulty) but because it teaches the method of 
procedure in all sciences, and therefore all other 
sciences depend upon it y/' 

^ Super BoeU de Trin. Qu. V. Art, 1. 

"In Post. Aoalyt. ad init. 

« Super Boet. de Trin. Qu. VI. Art. 1. 

^ Old John of Salisbury gives an account of the proceedings in 
a certain Dialectical school with which he was acquainted, which 
will apply> in a less degree, to the scholastic use of Logic in 
general. At any rate, we may better see the tendency of the evil, 
by contemplating its more aggravated form. ''It was the fashion 
to talk of nothing but consistency (convenientia) and reason. 
Argument was ringing in every one's mouth. To name an ass, or 
a man, or any other work of nature, counted as a crime; at least 
was out of place, and unpolished, and unworthy a philosopher. It 
was thought impossible to act or speak consistemly and reasonably, 
unless express mention were made of consistency and reason. 
Argument was quite out of the question, without the use of the 
word argument. No distinction was made, between proceeding 
according to an art, and treating of it. ( Ex arte, et de arte agere, 
idem erat.)*' Metalogicus, Lib. I. Oh. iii. 



£ 2 



CHAP. III. 

NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

Before taking our farewell of the scholastic view 
of Logic^ it is natural to make some remarks on the 
great question as to the nature of Universals, which 
connected itself so closely with it. Though the 
battle has long been fought, there is a great 
historical charm, and even some living interest, 
associated with the once-prominent party-names of 
Nominalist and Realist. 

We may easily see the reason of the importance 
attached to this question, and the zeal with which 
it was contested. Logic, we have said, was in fact 
the sum of scholastic Science. And this great 
Science professed to deal with Universals. On these 
depended the whole array of questions and ob- 
jections, consequences and conclusions. Their 
modality, so to speak, determined that of the 
whole system. And those who were not too 
busily engaged in adding to it and elaborating it, 
to find time for looking back, and seeing what had 
been accomplished, and on what foundation it 
rested, naturally came at last to the enquiry, what 
these Universals were. 



NOMINALISM AND BEALISM. 53 

Of course, the originators of this question among 
the Schoolmen were neither the first to ask it, nor 
the last Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, not to 
mention other authorities, had each their distinctive 
theory of Universals. None of these were entirely 
satisfactory : and modern Philosophy feels the old 
difficulty to be still unsolved, to be lying at the 
basis pf ahnost every important doubt, and to 
present the great check to its rapid and confident 
progress. In all probability, indeed, a compa- 
ratively ancient source suggested the enquiry to 
the Schoolmen. Porphyry, in his treatise on the 
Predicables, states the problem, though he decUnes 
attempting to solve it *. '' Whether,'* he says, 
*' genus and species are substances, or exist in 
bare thought alone; or, supposing them to be 
substances, whether they are material or im- 
material; and again, whether they exist separately, 
or in composition with sensible objects, I must 
decline discussing. The subject is profound, and 
needs a separate and more detailed enquiry." Its 
due quantity of enquiry, at least, in after-times it 
gained. 

It is well known that Europe derived its know- 
ledge of Aristotle from the Arabians; and that, 
among these, their principal authority Averroes 
tinctured the Peripatetic philosophy with a strong 
spice of a spurious Neo-platonism. Under his 
hands, the doctrine of Universals assumed a form 

* Isagoge, chap. i. 



54 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

« 

something like that of Ideas. Genus and species 
were held to be substances^ not mere attributes, 
much less words. Whether they existed abstract- 
edly from matter, or were rather to be described 
as always present in the concrete, was a subject 
left for after-discussion. The theory of Averroes 
himself was in fact an ill-disguised Pantheism; 
which, when applied to certain subjects, led to 
results which so displeased the Schoolmen, as to 
prevent, even when such objections did not occur, 
its formal and exphcit reception. Here their 
theology came in as a safeguard to their philo- 
sophy; they shrank as Christians from the view 
which he held, that one common human intellect 
existed, of which each individual intellect was 
a part^ But they followed him so far as to 
conceive, that the Universal was an actual thing; 
and thus, before Nominalism was heard of. Realism, 
or a beUef in the existence of Universals as sub- 
stances, and not merely as attributes of the mind 
of man, was the current belief of the early School- 
men and their immediate predecessors. It suited 
the feelings of those, who, like Scotus Erigena, 

** '' A view," Thomas Aquinas argued justly, (Opusc. xvi. conlra 
Averroistas,) " which is repugnant to the truth of the Christian 
Faith. For intellect appears to be alone, of all the parts of the 
soul, incorruptible and immortal. Now supposing diversity of 
intellect to be removed from all men, it follows, that, after death, 
nothing of human souls would remain except their intellectual 
unity, and thus all retribution of reward and punishment would be 
removed." 



NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 55 

were mystically inclined; it could not be dis- 
agreeable to those argumentative spirits, who were 
anxious to maintain the honour of Dialectic. But, 
though thus in possession of the scholastic mind at 
the first, it did not establish its supremacy without 
a struggle. The Nominalist attack showed at 
once its strength and its weakness. It called forth 
the hidden strength of Realism, by proving that it 
was entwined with the very roots of the School- 
philosophy, which could not ultimately but stand 
or fall with it : it also betrayed its weakness, by 
showing that it lacked the distinctness of a true 
and consistent theory, and assumed very different 
shapes in the minds of its different supporters. 

The history of Nominalism divides itself into 
two very marked periods. During the former of 
these, it was forcing by its attacks the scholastic 
philosophy to assume a more definite form than it 
had hitherto taken, and was so hurrying on its own 
temporary defeat; during the latter, it was sapping 
the strength of that mighty system, by introducing 
into its inmost heart an element of doubt. In 
both periods, it connected itself with theological 
questions, in feeling and tendency, if not by the 
links of strict consequence. Nominalism has often 
been called, and justly, the precursor of the 
Reformation. And as those who first afmed unsuc- 
cessftiUy at a reformation were more violent in 
their opinions than those who took up the work 
afterwards, and succeeded; so the earlier Nomi- 



56 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

nalists, doomed from the first to fail, were more 
extravagant and far less philosophical in their 
teaching, than the happier band whom Ockham 
led on to victory. 

RosceUn of Compeigne was confessedly the 
founder of the sect of the Nominalists. The term 
at first was meant to indicate that its adherents 
bestowed their attention on language, and held 
Universals to consist in names. Though it was 
natural that the Realists should endeavour to give 
it still fiuther force, in applying it as an allusion to 
what they thought the merely verbal knowledge of 
their antagonists. And so Aventinus, even when 
looking back upon the past, explains it. '' Roscelin/* 
he says, '' the founder of the new Lyceum, first 
cultivated the science of words and phrases, and 
discovered a new way of philosophizing. To him 
we owe it, that the Peripatetics, or followers of 
Aristotle, divided mto two classes — ^the older, rich 
in invention, and claiming for itself the science of 
things, and therefore called the Real school ; and 
the later, disturbers of this science, and called 
Nominalists, because, niggardly of things, but 
prodigal of names and notions, they appear to be 
the partisans of words*." This is neither a very 

^ Annales Boiorum, lib. vi. p, 406. ed. Basil. 1580. Aventinus 
died about 1533. A reproach grounded on a name is of course 
little to be trusted. " Who can confute a sneer ?" And praise on 
like grounds is equally deceptive. Luther commends the later 
Nominalists^ on the strength of another name they bore^ with 



NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 57 

profound nor a very fair account of Nominalism 
in general. But it serves to show the feelings 
with which its advocates were regarded down to a 
comparatively late date, as sceptics who would 
lower the dignity of Dialectic, curtail the region of 
Science, and siick out the very marrow of Philo- 
sophy. 

Roscelin himself, indeed, appears to have de- 
served the name of Nominalist in its fullest and 
most unfavourable signification. He advocated 
the position that Universals were nothing but 
names — a position which, as we shall see here- 
after, has little to be said in its fevour, and if 
consistently maintained, is fatal to all true phUo- 
sophy. The error did not remain unrebuked : for 
he drew upon himself the powerfiil opposition of 
St. Anselm. This distinguished theologian and 
dialectician had another hold upon his adversary. 
Roscelin had been also guilty of heretical doctrine 
concerning the Holy Trinity*. St. Anselm in- 

aboQt as much reason as Aventinus condemns the earlier. " The 
Terminists, among whom I was, are sectaries in the high schools ; 
they oppose the Thomists, the Scotists, and the Albertists ; they 
are also called Occamists^ from Ockham their founder. They are 

of the newest sect, and are now strongest in Paris They are 

called Terminists, because they speak of a thing in its own proper 

words, and do not apply them after a strange sort Ockham 

was an able and sensible man." Table Talk, pp. ^0 — 2. 

' Roscelin taught, " tres personas esse tres realitates difTerentes." 
Anselm 's remarks are indignant enough. '' All," he says, '' should 
be warned to touch most cautiously on questions of Holy Writ. 
But these dialecticians of our time, and heietics even in their 



# 



58 NOMINALISM AND BRALISM. 

geniously couples the two mistakes together as 
cause and effect. The bad dialectic accounts for 
the false theology : and the false theology is proof 
certain of the badness of the dialectic. The issue 
of the contest was not long doubtful : Roscelin 
was forced to retract his errors at the Council of 
Soissons^ The victorious Anselm became next 
year Archbishop of Canterbury. The defeated 
mnovator was banished both from England 
and France*. In a •few years, John of Salis- 
bury informs us, his opinions were almost ex- 
tinct'. 

Another ill-starred name, that of Abelard, follows 
Roscelin in the history of dialectical innovation. 
Whether Roscelin was his instructor in their com- 
mon art is doubtful. On the one hand, there is 
old authority for such a supposition ; on the other, 
Abelard is silent on the point in his account of his 
own life, in which he displays no disposition to 
reserve. But perhaps a reason for the omission 
may be found in his circumstances. He had 

dialeciic, men who take universal substances to be nothing but 

word of mouthy should be altogether excluded from disputing 

on spiritual things He who does understand in what way 

several men are yet in species hut one man^ can such a one com- 
prehend how, in the secret depths of the Divine Nature^ of seveial 
persons each shall be perfect God, yet all he one God ?" De 
Incarnatione Verbi, (otherwise, De Fide,) ch. ii. 

* A. D. 1092. 

* Abelard, Epist. xxi. 

' His words are, " alius consistit in vocibns ; licet h«c opinio 
cum Roscelino suo fere omnino jam evanuerit." Metalogicus, ii. 17. 



i^mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmtmm^mm 



NOMINALISM AND RBALU^. 59 

himself to bear the imputation of heterodoxy, and 
would naturally shrink from the weight of obloquy 
which attached to another. Indeed he goes out 
of his way to condemn in strong terms both the 
logic and the theology of Roscelin*. There was 
the more need for caution here, because thdir 
opinions might by the careless or unskilful be 
confounded. For Abelard, though not in the 
strictest sense of the word a Nominalist, was at 
least an Anti-reahst. John of Salisbury thus 
records the distinction between them\ '^ The one 
(meaning Roscelin) takes bis stand on words ; the 
other on propositions :" and he expressly ascribes 
the latter view to Abelard. 

It is hard to affix a very definite meaning to 
this statement. The most probable interpretation 
is that of Degerando \ that he believed Universals, 
without having a strict independent and objective 
reality, to be conceptions — conceptions, however, 
which, to be formed and retained in the mind, 
must rest upon the signs of language ; and that 



* Epist. 21. "Hie sicut pseudo-Dialecticus^ iia et pseudo- 
Christianus, cum in Dialectic^ suk nullum rem partes habere 
sestimat, ita divinam paginam impudenter pervertit^ ut eo loco^ 
quo dicitur Dominus partem piscis assi comedisse^ partem hujus 
vocis, quae est piscis assi, non partem rei intelligere cogatur." 
Fairness in dispute was no characteristic of those days. 

¦* Metalogictts, ii. 17. I have Englished " sermones" by " pro- 
positions/' believing John of Salisbury to have had the Greek 
A^yavs in his mind. 

* Hist. Comp. de Philosophic. Vol. iv. p. 403. 



60 NOMINALISM AND BEALISM. 

therefore he made them tum^ not^ like RosceUn^ 
on the simple term, but on the proposition, which 
expresses the relation of subject and attribute, 
as they are apprehended by the understanding. 
Scarcely any other position indeed in the scale of 
thought upon this subject remains for him to 
occupy; for while he dissented from the pure 
Nominalism of Roscelin, he fell short of pure Con- 
ceptualism; those who placed Universals among 
the creatures of the understanding, as the Con- 
ceptualists do, being mentioned by John of Salis- 
bury as a distinct sect : and his own writings 
would prove, even in the absence of external 
authority, his decided aversion to Realism \ But 
Abelard, with all his niceness of distinction, did 
not escape from the dialectical field unwounded. 
Like Roscelin, he had the honour of being defeated 



^ He relates with great gusto his contests with his old instructor^ 
WOliam of Compeigne^ and . their successful termination. " I 
forced him by most conclusive arguments to modify, or rather to 
sunrender^ his old opinion concerning Universals. He had been of 
that mind with regard to their general nature^ that he asserted the 
same nature to be present at the same time essentially in each of 
the individuals. It followed that among these individuals there 
was no diversity of essence^ but only a variety in the multitude of 
their accidents. But afterwards he so reformed his opinion as to 
say, that the same nature was present in them not essentiaUy but 
indifferently." (i. e. as much in one individual, as in another.) 
Abelardi Vita, cap. ii. A decision which leaves the question open 
after all. Though the distinction meant to be drawn would seem 
to be like that made afterwards in the disputes between Scotists 
and Thomists between real and formal presence. 



wmmKmmmmtmmmmmmmmm 



NOMINALISM AND IDEALISM. 61 

by a great antagonist. In this their lot differed^ 
that Roscelin fell by the hands of one who wielded 
weapons like his own : while the brand of theo- 
logical unsoundness was fixed upon Abelard by 
one, whose mind, occupied by its own beautiful 
mysticism^ hated the philosophizing spirit of the 
day. It is more an honour to him in our eyes, 
than it was a consolation in his own, that he owed 
his overthrow to St. Bernard. 

But tf in those days the imputation of Nominalism 
was fatal. Realism was not always a protection from 
error. A contemporary of Abelard, Gilbert de la 
Poree, is an example of this. He was a Realist, 
but a bold one. The extent of his boldness in 
Dialectic has indeed been much overstated. His 
treatise on the Six Principles has been described as 
ah endeavour to cut down Aristotle's Categories 
to six. But he was guilty of no such presumption. 
He only endeavoured to expand the six later 
Predicaments, which Aristotle had passed cursorily 
over, after the plan on which the Philosopher had 
treated the first four. In introducing these in 
their new shape, he goes so far as to hazard a 
definition of form. "Form," he says, " is con- 
tingent on matter, consisting of simple and in- 
variable essence V and flatters himself that thjB 

^ Forma est compositioui contingens^ simplici et invariabili 
essentia consistens. — Erit itaque lerminus formae dicta definition 
Deque enim superflua neque diminuta, si quis subtiliter iDvesti- 
gaverit, reperietur." 



62 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

formiola will endure a searching criticism. It 
would have been happy for him if he had confined 
himself to such harmless innovations. But the 
same spirit led him wrong elsewhere ; he too was 
condemned for departing from the doctrine of the 
Trinity. 

It was reserved for a pupil of Abelard to eflfect 
what his master in common with others had so 
unsuccessfully attempted — the union of Philosophy 
and Theolcgy. Peter Lombard effected this end, 
by reversing the procedure of previous scholastics. 
They had first formed their dialectical notions, and 
then applied them to things divine. He, taking 
his ground on the received Theology of the time, 
accommodated Dialectic to it, and so freed it from 
suspicion. His cautious Book of Sentences became 
in after times the basis of comments much bolder 
than the text on which they were founded. Or- 
thodox in faith and philosophy, he completed for 
the time the victory of Realism. And, like all other 
principles that are not sound at heart, though a 
good watchword in a battle, it becomes un- 
interesting and unprofitable, immediately on its 
success. We will proceed at once to some con- 
siderations, which will bear upon the history of its 
fell. 

Realism, though now, as it seemed, firmly and 
finally established, was not really safe. There 
were enemies within the camp from the first. 
John of Salisbury, who died as early as A. D. 1182, 



NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 63 

recognises no less than six different sects of Realists. 
These may be, however, fairly reduced to four ; — 
those who adopted the Platonic doctrine of ideas, 
and held that the names of genera and species 
belonged properly only to those objectively ex- 
isting Universals ; — those who considered that the 
individual contained the whole essence of the class, 
and was in fact, when viewed from a certain point, 
itself the Universal, as when it is said that Plato 
is, as to his manhood, a species;— those who 
asserted that the whole aggregate of individuals 
was identical with the Universal ; — and those who 
regarded the Universal as a substance in some 
way existing in the singular. These sects, it will 
be seen, agree in nothing, except in all calling 
Universals, things. 

The three former views, however, ultimately 
gave way to the last^ of which Aquinas was the 
great advocate. It became a received doctrine, 
that the one Universal existed in the many indi- 
viduals. But this basis of agreement did not shut 
out all dispute; the meaning of the formula was 
not so clear, but that enquirers would ask, how the 
Universal existed in the individuals ? 

On this point, there was an ominous schism of 
the Schoolmen. Dominican and Franciscan could 
not agree even on the abstract questions of Phi- 
losophy. Their differences extended from ques- 
tions of free will and predestination to Logic. The 
school of Scotists arose^ and called into existence 



64 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

the rival school of Thomists as defenders of the 
great Dominican authority. The followers of 
Aquinas held^ that the Universal existed really 
in the individuals; the disciples of Duns Scotus 
maintained that it existed only formally'^. The 
latter went so far^ as to abandon the old title of 
ReaUsts, and assume that of Formalists : in order 
that their very title might protest against the 
doctrine of their antagonists. And, without endear 
vouring to explain the subtle distinction between 
Realism and Formalism, we may assume that the 
innovators, in rejecting the old watchword, vir- 
tually, though unconsciously, relinquished the cause 
which it had S3mfibolized so long. 

The Scotists themselves were, or thought they 
were, still opposed to NominaUsm. But the next 
generation of thought showed the actual tendency 
of their views. Out of their school rose Ockham, 
and with him the opposition to Realism revived 
once more. In impugning the doctrine of the ex- 
istence of Universals as substances, he directed his 
attacks especially against Scotus, under whom he 
had studied. We must not confound his opinions 
with those of Roscelin and his disciples. Ockham, 



"* It should be observed, that the two doctors did not themselves 
come into contact Thomas Aquinas died A. D. 1274. The 
chronology of Duns Scotus is doubtful; but taking the most 
probable date of his death A. D. 1308^ and following the account 
which gives him the short life of 34 years, we should fix his 
birth in the very year in which Aquinas died. 



NOMINAUSM AND R^LISM. 65 

in asserting that Universals existed, but existed 
only in the mind, answers exactly to a modem 
Conceptualist. His teaching was on this point 
clear, distinct, and sound, though expressed and 
defended with a quaint and technical minuteness of 
accuracy, which proves him every way a match for 
any of his scholastic brotherhood. 

'^ "^ Every Universal," he taught, " is really a Sin- 
gular in itself, and therefore is only a Universal in 
virtue of its signification, which is a sign of many 
things. This is the doctrine of Avicenna, who 
teaches, that a single form in the understanding is 
related to a multitude of things, and is therefore a 
Universal, because it is an intention in the intel- 
lect whose operation does not vary to whatsoever 
you apply it. It follows that this form, though in 
relation to the individuals it is a Universal, yet in 
relation to the mind on which it is impressed is 
itself only an Individual, for it is one of the forms 
which are in the understanding." This is a spe- 
cimen of his positive reasoning : his negative goes 
to prove generally that '' no Universal is any thing 
external to the mind." It may be worth while to 
show how he fought his adversaries with their 
own weapons. " *• No Universal," he urges, " is a 
singular substance, for, this granted, it would 
follow that Socrates is a Universal: for there is no 
more reason why one singular substance should 

" Summa totius Logicae, ch. xiv. " lb. ch. xv. 

F 



60 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

be a Universal than another." This is rather an 
endeavour to throw the weight of the proof upon 
the adversary : the following is a more direct and 
at the same time more complete argument. '^ If 
any substance be, as is supposed, more things than 
one, it must be either several Singulars or several 
Universals. If the former be allowed, it follows 
that a certain substance will be, e. g. several men ; 
and then although the Universal will be distinct 
from any one particular man, it will necessarily be 
the same with all the particulars together. But if 
we take the other alternative, that one substance 
is several Universals, we must then ask the ques- 
tion — ^is this Universal several things, or only one t 
If the answer be that it is only one, it follows that 
it is really a Singular ; if the answer be that it is 
several things, I enquire again whether it is several 
Universals or several Singulars; and so on to 
infinity." Theology too was brought to bear on 
the point at issue. *' If the Realist opinion were 
true, God could not annihilate one individual with* 
out destroying all ; for to annihilate any individual 
He must destroy all that is of its essenca Con- 
sequently, He must destroy the Universal which 
exists both in it and in other individuals ; and these 
could not continue to exist, when deprived of 
a part of their substance, such as the Universal is 
supposed to be." We will not endeavour to foDow 
him, where, in discussing the Scotist opinion of 



NOMINALISM ANP REALISM. 67 

the formal presence of the Universal in the in- 
dividual> he refines on a refinement ^. 

Opinions like these, not long after the opening of 
the fourteenth century, were published by Ockham 
firom the Theological chair of Paris. • They pro- 
duced as much excitement as either fiiend or 
enemy could have desired. And argument was 
not the only means of discussing them employed. 
Ockham himself, for the ready support which 
he gave Philip the Fair against the Pope, by 
vindicating the rights of the temporal power, and 
other like acts of insubordination, was rewarded 
with the pontifical anathema. In more than one 
University the new doctrines were contested with 
blows and bloodshed. When we remember that 
the opinions both of Scotus and Ockham were 
probably formed within the walls of Merton, we 
should be surprised if Oxford had been backward 
in the dispute. Direct persecution was brought to 
bear in Ockham's other University of Paris, and 

P Another specimen of his theological reasoning, though curious 
and characteristic, may he better thrown into a note, and preserved 
In the Latin. '* Item sequitur quod aliqnid de essefatii Cfaristi 
erit misemtn et d^mnatum: quia ilia natnra commtinis existens 
realiter in Christo et in damnato erit damnata, quia in Jud&. Hoc 
autem est ahsurdum." Ockham here uses just the same kind of 
argument against the Thomist supposition of a common human 
nature, as Aqninas himself bad <!inp)oyed againsft the Arerroistic 
tenetof a common human intellect. How hardily, and apparently 
without any sense of their hardihood, did these men venture to 
bring objective truths, and subjective convictions, into the most 
direct collision. 

p2 



¦^^¦¦^mBvaiW 



68 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

elsewhere. Louis the Eleventh, by an edict which 
did not prove ultimately successftil, condemned the. 
Nominalist teaching, and forbade the study of the 
works of Ockham and his most famous disciples. 
So the University of Leipsic owes its origin to the 
expulsion of the Nominalists from Prague, It is 
said that the Universities of Vienna and Heidel- 
berg^ were Nominalist from their foundation. 
Aventinus, who flourished at the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, mentions that the schools of 
Paris, Erdfart, Ingoldstat, and Vienna, were then 
in Nominalist hands. The opinions of Ockham,. 
when for the time silenced in France, had thus,- 
after taking root deeply in their native home of 
England, extended themselves to Germany. 
Luther, Melancthon, and other reformers, pro- 
fessed their allegiance to them. It would seem 
the old Theology could scarcely have been assailed^ 
except with Nominalist arms. It would have stood 
impregnable against any foes but such as were 
acquainted with its form and devices, while they 
had detached themselves from its spirit. 

Enough has now been said on the history of this 
great question of the mediaeval philosophy. We 
have seen how Realism triumphed in the first great 
contest of opinion ; and how, in the security which 
followed on this triumph, diversities once more 
crept in, till Nominalism at last revived. Revive it 

** The University of Vienna was founded A.D. 1365; that of 
Heidelberg A.D. 1346. 



NOMINALISM AND KRALISM. 60 

needs must, after the speculations of Duns Scotus. 
The belief had not strength and foundation enough 
to exist without the symbol. When the Scotists 
took the name of formalists, they virtually gave 
up the cause to which they professed to adhere. 
Ockham's claim to distinction lies in the skill and 
perseverance with which he urged his opinions. 
The course of things must have led many men 
simultaneously with him to entertain them. 

And now it may be asked — who were in the 
right. Nominalists or Realists ? The query deserves 
an answer, for the question about the nature of 
TJniversals is not merely one of words. More 
importance, indeed, was attached to it in the 
middle ages than it deserved. But men were 
wrong in this matter, only because they were con- 
sistent. They considered the question as a logical 
one, and their Logic identified itself with their 
Philosophy, and their Philosophy ran up into 
Theology; and Theology was in those days a 
subject of very direct and personal import. We 
are indifferent to Universals now, because the 
ruling of the point either way would not im- 
mediately affect daily life, or the opinions of prac- 
tical men. It- is this, and not any superiority to 
the difficulty, or successful solution of it, which 
has allowed the cries of Nominalist and Realist to 
die away. 

We will endeavour therefore to bring the dis- 
pute to an issue ; and, that we may the better do 
so, will first define our terms. Here Etymology 



»¦ _» li» I* 



70 NOMINALISM AND BBALISM. 

Come{Si to our aid. Nominalism^ in its strict sense^ 
indicates a belief^ that Universals are only names. 
Realism asserts that they are things. Convenience 
suggests that we should adopt a third term of later 
origin^ Conceptualism, as expressing the opinion 
of those, who hold Universals to be conceptions. 

Nominalism then, in its strict sense of a beUef 
that Universals are only names^ is indefensible. 
Roscelin, who held it, deserved the censures which 
were heaped upon him as the virtual destroyer of 
Philosophy. More will be said upon this point, 
when we come to the logicians of the verbal 
school, the legitimate successors of the Nominalists. 
SufiKce it for the present to say, that they make, of 
necessity, the operation of thought merely mecha- 
nical, and invert the obvious facts of the case by 
making reason a function of language, instead of 
seeing in language a consequence of reasoning. 
Formal argument against them is unnecessary. 
Their own speculations sufficiently confiite them, 
which they would refuse to admit to have no other 
subject than words. Like the dogmatical sceptics 
who asserted positively that nothing could be 
known, they are silenced, or should be, by their 
own protestations. 

It must be remembered, however, that other 
opinions beside those of Roscelin bore the title of 
Nominalism. It would be unjust to fix it in its 
original meaning, in spite of his protest against 
the doctrine, on Abelard. It became indeed syno- 
nymous with anti-Realist, and descended to Ockham 



mm 



NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 7 1 

and his school as their natural heritage. But Ock- 
ham was really what we should call a Conceptual- 
alist. We have seen that he held Universals to 
exists and that really^ in the mind ; to be, in &ct, 
mental forms, singular in themselves, but universal 
in their application. Thus every common term 
would represent some individual conception in the 
mind of the conceiver, which should be applicable 
indifferently, and without variation, to many exist- 
ing things. This opinion, if it be not all the truth, 
is true as far as it goes, and was, at the time, anta- 
gonist to a mischievous error. For Ockham taught 
also, as we have seen, negatively, that a Universal 
is not a substance existing external to the mind. 
This was the opinion of the Realists of his day. 
Though realism in some of its modified forms had 
not always necessarily implied so much. . At first 
it was merely a protest against those who assigned 
to Universals only a nominal existence. It was con- 
cluded that they existed really y-^whether in the 
mind or external to it, by themselves or in composi- 
tion, was left as yet undecided. So if we refer to 
the sects of Realists mentioned by John of Salisbury, 
we find one division holding that the whole aggre- 
gate of individuals was the Universal. There is 
nothing extravagant, fanciful, mystical, or irrational 
in this view ; it has been held very commonly by 
hard-headed men in our own day ; it differs from 
that of Ockham only by the omission of a step 
which may easily be supplied. The two opinions 



72 NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 

meet in the following formula — the common noun 
represents an individual conception which is derived 
from some known individuals of the class^ and is 
applicable to them all, known and unknown. 
Against this form of Realism, Ockham did not put 
in a protest. 

Neither do his arguments apply directly to the 
second class of Realists mentioned by John of 
Salisbury, who held, as he informs us, that- the 
Individual, as containing the whole essence of the 
clas^ was, in a certain point of view, itself the 
Universal. This opinion was declared to be obsolete 
by the authority who has recorded it. It was very 
probably the teaching of William of Compeigne, 
whom Abelard prided himself on having subdued. 
We cannot assign it any definite value, when 
detached frouk the other opinions of those who 
entertained it. Thus much only we can be sure of, 
that it destroyed the strong and natural antithesis 
between Individual and Universal, by a form of 
speech in which they were represented as nearly, 
if not quite, identical. The tendency of the error 
would depend on circumstances. More than one 
authority has endeavoured to connect with the 
scholastic Realism the doctrine of Spinosa, that 
God is the one substance of which all things are 
modes. This is probably a mistake, but it suggests 
an example to our present purpose. That doctrine, 
always mischievous to the last degree, becomes 
practically either Atheism or Pantheism, according 



NOMINALISM AND BBALISM. 73 

as he who adopts it^ taking his notion of substance 
from the world around him^ degrades his conception, 
of God to suit it : or, on the other hand, starting 
with some high theory of the First Being, interprets 
all else by it, and raises all forms of existence which 
meet his eye to a leivel which is inconsistent with 
sense and reason. In like manner, he who should 
assert that Individuals and Universals are the same, 
would be a most unintelligible mystic, if he took 
the conunon view of a Universal; an equally 
unintelligible sensualist, if he adopted the ordinary 
notion of an Individual. 

The dominant Realism of the Schools was, as we 
have seen, of another kind, and regarded the Uni- 
versal as a substance in some way existing in the 
Individual. The manner of its existence therein 
was, it will be remembered, the point of dispute 
between the Thomists and Scotists. Against 
either shape of the doctrine Ockham has left us 
little to urge. His arguments are to the point, 
and conclusive; and have moreover this great 
advantage, that he from education and familiarity 
most likely understood, to a degree impossible to 
us, the meaning of the position he aimed at over- 
throwing. 

The remaining kind of ReaUsm is that to which 
nobler minds are natiu^ally prone, and which owes its 
origin to the divine Plato. That method of stating 
his doctrine of Ideas, in which they are regarded as 
existing in the mind of God, seems to admit of 



74 NOMINALISM AND BBALI8M. 

an easy defence. Surely, it may be argued, if the 
creation was, as we know it was, orderly and 
regular; if the clash of circumstances did not 
develope the different gradations of Being out of 
a primitive chaos, but class after class came into 
existence at the bidding of the Divine Word; 
there can be no error in looking to that Eternal 
Word as the seat of Universals. These are not 
merely the aggregate of individuals, much less the 
conceptions which we have derived from them, 
still less that language which so imperfectly ex^ 
presses thoughts imperfect in themselves ; but abide 
rather in that unchangeable Word, from whom 
things, and conceptions, and language, alike pro- 
ceed. 

A few words on this view of the subject may be 
said by way of conclusion. 

We may observe, in the first place, that a state- 
ment like this, however pious and true, does not 
amount to Realism, unless coupled with some 
further hypothesis. Realism requires that the 
Universal shall exist as a substance, in the highest 
category, and not merely as an attribute. So that 
according to the Scholastic method of treating 
such subjects, we .must enter into the question 
how Ideas exist in the Divine Mind, and determine 
that they inhere as substances in a higher Sub- 
stance, before we can be Realists indeed. And 
this was the opinion of most authorities, from 
Boethius downward. But at present we shall 



NOiaNAIiISM AND REALISM. 75 

probably be of opinion^ that such a question 
caimot be answered one way or the other, without 
considerable danger of canTing speculation beyond 
the legitimate sphere of reason. 

But, waiving this objection, a further caution is 
necessary to those who think Realism thus con-* 
genial with their Theology. Granting that all true 
and genuine Universals have their seat in the 
Divine Mind, a further question arises — ^what are 
true and genuine Universals? Surely we cannot 
boldly assume, that every common term, in the 
present state of language, is true to its original 
purpose. With all our ignorance of the nature of 
things, all our mistaken speculations, all our con- 
ventionalities of thought and language, can we 
venture to think, that we have always exercised 
the powers of abstraction and generalization aright ? 
And, in default of such rightful exercise, who can 
answer that the Universals on which we have 
fixed are true ? Who shall say, that the classes 
which we have formed are in all cases grounded on 
the nature of things, and correspond to the in- 
tention of the Divine Author of the gradations of 
the universe ? 

We take for granted, and justly, the correctness 
of our own involuntary and spontaneous clas- 
sificaticm* What we do insensibly, we generally 
do rightly. We need not fear that we are wrong, 
in classing all men, or all animals, or all virtues, or 
all colours, or all sounds together. But when, by 



76 * NOMINALISM AND R£ALISM. 

a laborious effort of the niind^ we endeavour to 
arrange these classes, which we gamed without 
such effort^ in subordination to each other; when^ 
for instance^ we would ascertain the precise relation 
in which the class man stands to the class animal^ 
we cannot answer for our success. Viewed as a 
statement of abstract truths ^f the zoological ar- 
rangement of Linnaeus was rights that of Cuvier is 
wrong. Only when we are assured on the best 
evidence^ that we have attained to the real order 
of things^ and understand their relative position in 
the scale of creation^ can we assert positively that 
our class terms are valid^ and represent any natural 
Universal. To make the assumption at an earlier 
stage^ would be^ in all probability^ to fix ourselves 
irrevocably in error. 

We should begin, therefore, at any rate, in our 
enquiries by adopting the Conceptualist, or, as we 
might fairly call it, the Occamist hjrpothesis. We 
should first of all ascertain that our terms are 
definite, as representing some distinct mental 
image, and if they be so, thus far be content with 
them. But, this point ascertained, we come, if we 
prosecute our enquiry, to another doubt. How 
far do these conceptions, definite though they be, 
find their correlatives in the nature of things ? 
What proof is there, that, when we arrange these 
under some wider conception, or, on the other 
hand, group lower classes and individuals under 
them, our arrangement can claim the title of 



NOMINALTSBI AND REALISM. 77 

natural? Unless we can claim this dignity for it, 
we cannot set a high value on our class-terms. 
They will stand at best as symbols of a provisional 
classification, which greater research, or more skil- 
ful analysis, may at any moment supersede. 

To begin therefore by assuming that even the^ 
most modified form of Realism is true on the exist- 
ing state of things would be to begin with a mistake. 
It stands in this respect on ^ par with the scho- 
lastic system as a whole ; it is a great aspiration 
which has never yet been verified. We may 
cherish it as an ideal, but as nothing more. Our ^ 
knowledge is. far too imperfect to allow us to assert 
that we class the phenomena of the world at large 
uniformly according to their natural classes. In 
some provinces of science, the work has been 
readily and satisfactorily accomplished. We have 
no hesitation in affirming that, in Mathematics, the 
divisions of figures according to the number of their 
dimensions, of lines into curved and straight, of 
angles into right, acute, and obtuse, of quantities in 
general into equal and unequal, are really natural, 
and give us the knowledge of natmral kinds. On 
other subjects, as in Botany, we seem to have 
approximated to a true classification, though the 
line of demarcation between the several classes is 
far from being, in all cases, accurately drawn at 
present. Sometimes, as in the case with Zoology, 
it seems doubtful if the problem has been solved ; 
sometimes, as with Mineralogy, the work still re- 



78 NOMINALISM AND RBALISM. 

mains to be accompKshed ; if the chry stallograpbic 
Idea be tnie^ the arrangement of conceptions mider 
it is quite incomplete. On the whole, we must be 
content to allow that the Conceptualistic yiew of 
Universals is true at present : the Realistic view, 
with some limitations and cautions, may be true 
hereafter. 



CHAP. IV. 

THE MODERN VIEW OF THE RELATION OF LOGIC 

TO SCIENCE. 

The deductive method of investigation, though 
theoretically the most perfect, has, when applied 
to most subjects, important practical defects. Its 
very ideal perfection destroys its actual utility. 
That it may be valid, there must be perfect 
coherence among its parts, perfect dependence on 
first premises. One probability, admitted, destroys 
the certainty of the whole ; one falsehood anni- 
hilates its value. No compensating apparatus can 
make up for the presence of a doubt, or remedy 
the consequences of a i^ngle error. Even omissions, 
which are not positive errors, are equally fatal to 
its pretensions : an element of calculation, left out 
at the beginning, cannot be introduced afterwards. 
There is no provision for accommodating fresh 
principles when the reasoning has once begun. 
There may be no doubt, no retraction ; all must 
be imhesitating progress onwards. 

The scholastic system, then, might naturally be 
expected to fail. It was a mould far too fine and 
exquisite for the material to be shaped in it. Had 
all its premises been necessary truths, the scheme 



80 THE MODERN VIEW OF THE 

would have been unexceptionable. Proof might 
have hung on proof in continual succession. But 
neither Aristotle nor the Fathers were infallible, 
either in principles or facts. Nor can the words 
of Scripture be taken always as expressing the 
literal truth on subjects not religious. We allow, 
for instance, the fallaciousness of the argument 
from Holy Writ against Galileo. The Schoolmen 
would have asserted its validity, as their admirers 
did. They over-rated in fact altogether the mo- 
daUty of their premises. They argued from data, 
which were general rules at the best, and often 
only probable in a low degree, and sometimes 
capable of being proved false by very little enquiry, 
as if they were absolutely true, and immutable laws 
of the universe. We know how rapidly the value 
of probabilities decreases when they are combined 
deductively. One fraction multiplies into another, 
and the thread of Ukelihood spreads out into the 
merest possibility. We soon become incapable 
of affixing to conclusions thus gained any practical 
value. The argument may serve as a clue to 
guide us, but not as a chain on which we can 
depend. If they relate to matters of experience, 
we call in observation or experiment to confirm 
them ; if they cannot be so verified, we corroborate 
them by analogy, or example, or some other such 
compendious aid to proof. If these fail us, we 
must leave them without assigning them any im- 
portance, till they are proved or disproved by some 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIBINCE. 81 

process of reasoning less high in its character than 
the deductive, but better suited to the msttter in 
hand. 

The fate of the scholastic Philosophy may serve 
to illustrate these remarks. Boldly did it proceed 
at first, ramifying in all directions in dependence 
on its central trunk. Descending by degrees from 
broad Universals and elevated speculations, it 
calme at length to the region of practical truth. 
And here the great mental defect of the Schoolmen 
betrayed itself. Their perceptive powers were 
quite sacrificed to the reflective. They neither 
used observation on the creatures of the world 
without, nor employed imagination in creating a 
new world within. Therefore they seem to have 
reasoned and written mechanically, and ^without 
any object external to the process of reasoning or 
writing itself. It would be hard, to say at what 
their Philosophy aims, except its own complete- 
ness. When consequently in their course they 
came to the line which marked the sphere of 
actual life and conduct, no instinct bade them stop. 
They traversed the level of ordinary thought 
without heed or remark, only to descend below it. 
A few steps sufficed for the passage from a question 
as to the natiu'e of the Divine understanding, or 
the laws which Umit the operations of God, to a 
discussion of some minute metaphysical question, or 
the discovery in some ordinary word of some half 
dozen senses, which noue but a master-schoolman 

G 



82 THE MODERN VIEW OP THE 

could then devise, and which now, without some 
pupillage, it is very difficult to follow. 

Accordingly, the predominant feeling of the 
Schoolmen turned them away from the region of 
Physic, which leaves least room for mere dwelling 
upon terms, without affixing to them a meaning. 
Aristotle's works on this subject as on others met 
indeed vnth their share of comment. But deduc- 
tions from his principles would have been apt to 
bring a speculator fiill tilt against some obvious 
and opposing fact, which would have pierced his 
thin and airy system, and caused it in a moment 
to collapse. Hence arose the necessity of avoiding 
this delicate ground, and either neglecting Physic 
altogether, or running it up into metaphysical 
questions about the nature, for instance, of the 
principles of motion or causation, or the distinction 
of matter and form. Those Schoolmen who had 
the strongest physical turn seem aliens from their 
brethren. Roger Bacon ranks with them in little 
beside date. And the vast learning of Albertus 
Magnus has had small influence on the world, 
when compared with the acute and systematic 
deductions of his great pupil Aquinas. 

Thus the ultimate fortune of scholasticism 
differed according to its subject. It naturally 
failed first, when the independent observation of 
facts caused its truth to be tested. Such dis- 
coveries as those of Galileo with regard to the 
falsity of the once-received laws of motion involved 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO »CIfiN€B. 83 

the system in disgrace. Consequences could not 
be trusted where premises were so false ; and when 
one set of premises had signally given way, little 
confidence could be placed on any other which 
rested on Uke authority. 

Botany again, which, as connected with Medicine, 
was all along of great practical importance, and 
which, to be cultivated with any reasonable hope 
of success, evidently demands the attention of the 
student not only to descriptions of plants but to the 
plants themselves, was one of the first subjects on 
which enquirers, laying aside useless comments 
on Theophrastus and other authorities, betook 
themselves, first of all, to the study of facts, and 
those gained^ to their classification and arrange* 
ment. 

So on a third and more important topic ; the 
Schoolmen had fashioned Theology after their own 
mind, and incorporated with it their own views of 
Church authority, and a characteristic doctrine of 
the Sacraments* These were something more than 
speculative opinions; and these too received a 
heavy blow at the Reformation. 

But, in Morals and Metaphysic, and Method in 
general, as distinct from its application, their 
system long lasted on, to a great degree unques- 
tionable. Ultimately it sank into neglect only on 
account of its evident unprofitableness. It e^« 
patiated at its own pleasure, and sufficiently widely 
to prove itself nugatory. Or, like a force expend- 

g2 



84 ' THE MODERN VIEW OY THE 

ing itself in a vacuum, it met with nothing on 
vsrhich to act, and was therefore of no calculable 
value. The walls and bulwarks stood entire, but 
they were also undefended ; the city was deserted 
by its old inhabitants, and the enemy thought 
demolition unnecessary laboiu**. 

The endeavour then to work out the Aristotelian 
idea of Wisdom had failed. Philosophy had made 
the effort, and, now that its ill success was evident, 
seemed dispirited and remiss, imable to be satisfied 
with the result of its labours, and yet with no 
heart to begin them anew. She needed some 
novel Idea to stimulate her exertions, to give a 
fresh interest to her old field of speculation, and 
serve as a clue in her resumed researches. Such 
an Idea was given by the virtual father of modern 
philosophy. Lord Bacon. 

His work was in many respects closely like that 
of Aristotle. Neither the author of the old or of 



* It is curious to see, how, in many cases, the old form remained 
when the substance was departed — ^how, for instance, Sanderson, 
having treated at length of the Predicaments in the earlier parts of 
his Logic, gives, towards its close, as examples of a popular 
arrangement of common -places, the distribution of facts under 
either the len Categories, or the ten Commandments. (Append. 
Post. ch. iii. §. 6.): how Gwillim, heraldically faithful to the 
past, portions out his " charges" according to the division of the 
category of substance which he found in the Logic of his school- 
days, (Sec. iii. ad init.); and Divines, as late as the Savoy Con- 
ference, thought it worth while to throw arguments in actual dis- 
putation, and not in mere school exercises, into the strict dialectic 
form. (Cardwell, Hist, of Conferences, p. 364.) 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 85 

the new Organon elaborated the system of which 
he was to bear the honours hereafter. Each pro- 
posed an Idea, which was left for others to adopt 
and perfect The collections of each in the way 
of facts and materials were comparatively worth- 
less. They were great generals, the labour of 
whose hands was of little importance when com- 
pared to the weight of their commands. Each 
displayed that boldness which is one of the surest 
auguries of success; and, in his day, called the 
attention of all, with a confidence which created 
confidence in its turn, to his own Idea of Perfect 
Science. 

Nor was the form which this Idea assumed on 
the respective minds of these great thinkers so 
different as we are apt at first to imagine. Lord 
Bacon does not seem to have thought less highly 
of the possible results of scientific research than 
Aristotle. They both looked to the absolute unity 
of all knowledge as its state of ideal perfection, 
without declaring positively whether they thought 
such state attainable or not. They both thought 
that Philosophy would find its fulfilment in the 
subordination and arrangement of many truths 
under one. They differed mainly in the method 
by which they thought this subordination and 
arrangement was to be attained. They adopted 
each his own mode and order of investigation, 
while they looked to the end of investigation as 
one and the same. 



86 . THE MOD6&N VIEW OF tfiK 

The Aristotelians (perhaps it is safer and fairer 
here to speak of the pupils than of the n^aster) 
made^ as we have seen^ the Many depend upon the 
One, They took that order of Science, which, 
though it be that of the Divine Mind, is one which 
requires more perfect discernment and accuracy 
in its application to general subjects than we can 
command. One metaphor seems to have been con^ 
tinually before their minds, most suitable to the 
whole aspect of their system, and recommended to 
Christians still more by its use in Holy Writ — that 
of the Tree of Knowledge. All the ramifications of 
Truth were supported actually by its single trunk, 
as they had been contained virtually in the idea 
of Being, its seed. Descartes (a man of such genius 
that we the more regret the accusations of plagiarism 
from the Schoolmen, and from every other acces- 
sible source, which are continually brought against 
him) draws out the figure rather happily. '' The 
whole of Philosophy," he tells us, ''is as a tree whose 
roots are Metaphysic, whose trunk is Physic, whose 
boughs shooting forth therefrom are all the other 
sciences^ which reduce on the whole to the three 
principal heads of Medicine, Mechanic, and Ethic — 
I mean that most exalted and perfect Discipline of 
Manners, which presupposes the perfect knowledge 
of other sciences^andis therefore the last and highest 
grade of Wisdom. Just then as fruits are gathered 
neither from the roots of trees nor from the trunk, 
but only from the end of the boughs ; so the chief 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIKNCB. 87 

use of Philosophy lies in those parts of it which are 
necessarily the last to be learned'*." 

Appropriate as this figure is, expressing not only 
the form and configuration, but the natural deve- 
lopment and inward growth of a philosophical 
system, the fact could not at last be denied, that 
the scholastic tree was withered, if not dead; 
stretching forth bare boughs through the heavens, 
and fixed, not by roots, but by its sheer bulk and 
ponderosity. 

Lord Bacon at once inverted the method, and 
supplanted the metaphor. Just as Copernicus, 
when he perceived the endless complexity in- 
volved in the supposition that the sun moved 
round the earth, tried, and successfully, to attain 
a simpler expression of the facts of Astronomy 
by supposing the earth to move round the sun : 
just as, in later times, and with far more doubtful 
success, Kant, acting on this earlier example, 
endeavoured to reduce Metaphysic to a simi- 
lar basis, by making our conceptions determine 
phenomena, and not, as had been previously 
assumed, phenomena determine our concep- 
tions; so Lord Bacon, standing between the 
two thinkers both in time and in intellectual 
position, with a keen perception of either kind of 
truth, curious both in facts and laws, in Physic 
and in Metaphysic, ventured on the experiment, 
from which so much good has resulted, of in- 

** PraefiEit. ad Principia Philosophiae. 



88 THE MODERN VIEW OF THE 

verting, while he preserved, the old Idea of 
Science; still holding a belief in its possible 
ultimate reduction to a single head, insisting on 
the necessity of its unity and order, but building 
up the unity on the plurality, not deducing the 
plurality as a consequence from the unity. 

Accordingly, the figure by which he represented 
the whole sum of Science was not a tree, but a 
Pyramid. On this he insists in the well-known 
passage which occurs both in the Advancement of 
I^earning and in the corresponding part of his great 
Latin work. " It is the duty," he reminds us, 
''and virtue of all knowledge to abridge the 
infinity of individual experience, as much as. the 
conception of truth will permit; and to remedy 
the complaint of vita brevis, ars longa: which is 
performed by uniting the notions and conceptions 
of Sciences ; for knowledges are as pyramids 
whereof history is the basis. So, of Natural 
Philosophy, the basis is Natural History, the stage 
next the basis is Physic, the stage next the 
vertical point is Metaphysic. As for the vertical 
point, opus quod operatur Dem a principio usqtie 
adjinem, we know not whether man's agency can 
attain unto it. But these three be the true 
stages of knowledge, and are to them that are 
depraved, no better than the giants' hills, 

* Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio Ossam 
Scilicet, atque Ossae frondosum involvere Olympum.' 

But to those which refer all things to the Glory of 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 89 

God, they are as the three acclamations^ ' Sancte^ 
Sancte, Sancte ;' holy in the description or dilata- 
tion of His works, holy in the connection or con- 
catenation of them, and holy in the miion of them 
in a perpetual and uniform law." 

According to this view, also, it will be seen, the 
culminating point of Science is Theology. The 
difference is not in position, but in order ; though 
first in nature, it is last arrived at. So in another 
passage, highly illustrative of the manner in which 
he makes the fables of the ancients speak more 
than their inventors meant, he expressly teaches. 
''Horns," he tells us, ''are attributed by the 
ancients to Pan, or the Universe, broad at the 
base, but tapering to a point. For the whole 
nature of things is pointed like a Pyramid. The 
individuals, over which the base of nature extends, 
are infinite ; these are collected into species, them- 
selves also numerous ; the species again rise into 
genera ; and these too again contract into classes 
still more general, till all nature at last seems to 
unite in one : which is indicated by the pyramidal 
figure of the horns of Pan. And no wonder that 
his horns strike the very heavens. For the lofty 
things of nature, or universal forms, in some sense 
touch on Divinity. And therefore that famous 
chain of Homer (the chain, that is, of natural 
causes) was said to be fixed to the foot of Jupiter's 
throne. And no one (as may be seen) has treated 
of Metaphysic and the eternal and immutable 



90 THE MODBBN VIEW OF THE 

truths of nature^ withdrawing his mind for a time 
from the flux of things^ without at the same time 
touching on Natural Theology i so ready and 
natural is the passage from the vertex of the 
pyramid to things divine V* 

This was the new turn which Lord Bacon gave 
to Philosophy. Science appeared to him more 
material^ and less formal^ than it had seemed to 
his predecessors. They had regarded their method 
as something like a principle- of life^ which super- 
seded the ordinary conditions of inanimate nature^ 
and enabled them to vriden out their knowledge^ 
as it were^ from the basis upwards. Just as 
organization brings about results which cannot 
chemically be accounted for; just as the law of 
crystallization seems for a time to suspend the 
operation of the laws of gravity ; so it appeared 
to them that the conditions of thought could 
control and regulate the conditions of Being. 
Reasoning was something more than the scaffold 
by means of which the building was erected : it 
was part of the building itself. 

The fabric of knowledge presented itself to 
Lord Bacon in a different light. He thought that 
the tendency of former times had been to over- 
rate the powers of reasbn. His apprehension was, 
that the lawful construction of a Science might be 
sacrificed to the love of method and consistency. 
He r^ninds his reader that '^ it is natural for the 

* De Augm, Scientiaruni^ lib. ii. ad. init. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIfiNCB. 91 

mind of man readily to imagine greater order and 
equality in nature than it finds there ^;" that it 
" needs not the addition of wings, but rather a 
burden as of lead, to bar all leaping and flying''.'* 
He allowed no power to the intellect of antici*- 
pating observation and experiment. The instru^ 
ments of Science, he thought, had hitherto cor- 
rupted Science itself. Plato had spoiled it with 
Theology, Aristotle with Lo^c, Proclus with 
Mathematics'. So he proposed to make know- 
ledge a congeries of facts, which like a pyramid 
would hold together by the natural force of 
cohesion. None of the apparatus employed in 
raising it was ultimately to be incorporated with 
it. Induction was to become a great engine, 
which all could work, and aU with equal success. 
His method of investigation was to equalize all 
intellects «, and this on every subject : for, he tells 
us, " as vulgar Logic, which governs its subjects 
by syllogism, pertains to all Sciences, and not to 
physical Science only ; so likewise our Logic, 
which proceeds by induction, embraces allV 

There is always a danger of riding a metaphor 
to death, especially when it is so natural and true, 
as to combine itself with the direct argumtent, and 
become undistinguishable from it. Perhaps Lord 
Bacon has been guilty of this mistake, not an 
uncommon one with rapid and powerfol nnnds, to 

* Nov. Org. lib. i. §. 45. • lb. §. 104. ' lb. §. 96. 

« lb. §. 122. * lb. §. 127. 



92 . THE MODERN VIEW OF THE 

whom it does not occur that their own energy of 
thought may have found but an insufficient ex- 
ponent, and that the tired Pegasus may cease to 
answer to the spur. The thorough adoption of 
this pyramidal theory of knowledge implies a 
great assumption— nothing less than this, that 
while the order and arrangement, which the facts 
of Science fall into, is really essential ; that de- 
pendence and consequence, that necessary con- 
nection among them, which the mind can in some 
cases trace, and is eager to trace in all^ is not 
essential. It implies, what, to say the least, has 
never yet been established, that the Idea of a 
Science, the nucleus around which all its facts 
cluster, the principle of that unity which Lord 
Bacon himself insisted upon, is itself merely a 
generalized fact, true in no other and in no higher 
sense than the phenomena which fall under it. 
Thus reason is lowered unnecessarily, and deposed 
from the throne which observation is unfit to 
occupy. The Schoolmen had thought to move 
the world without a fulcrum for their intellectual 
lever: Lord Bacon doubted the lever's strength, 
even were the fiilcrum given. 

We need scarcely remark, that neither idea of 
Science has prevailed exclusively since his time. 
Men have not been every where l^^bouring like 
Egyptian slaves at perfecting the pjrramid of Truth 
by the mechanical application of the engine called 
Induction. Deduction is still extant in the world. 



RELATION OF LOGIC TO SCIENCE. 93 

and shows signs of vigorous life. Intellect, iu 
spite of all its idols, is still in request. There is 
no immediate probability that any organon will 
succeed in obliterating the practical distinction 
between ordinary and extraordinary minds. Mo- 
dem Science is content to aim at that unity which 
both the Schoolmen and Lord Bacon sought, by 
the method of either indifferently. The subject 
on which it is engaged determines whether it 
shall follow out the idea to its consequences, or 
arrange phenomena under an idea. In one 
respect, we are less hopeful now, than the sage of 
Verulam was. We do not hesitate to pronounce 
the absolute unity of all knowledge impossible to 
the human mind. Far less is it thought, that the 
formal unity of Logic is at all equivalent to a real 
unity of Science. Logic, as we shall presently 
see, is held indeed to stand in a slightly different 
relation to induction and deduction ; but in neither 
case is it supposed to give both matter and form, 
or so to extend form, as to enable us to dispense 
with matter. Its monarchy is now more sure, 
because limited. From being, in turn, a part of 
Philosophy, and the whole, it has descended to 
the level of an instrument. 



CHAP. V. 

ON THE DIFF£E£NT MODERN SCHOOLS OP LOGIC. 

Logic, then, it is now generally allowed, is only 
an instrument of Philosophy — ^an instrument as 
contrasted with a part; not involved in the idea, 
or necessarily boimd up in its existence ; not even 
an universal preliminary of Science, though it may 
be indispensable to some minds, and highly useful 
to all. Enough will be granted to show its im- 
portance, if it be admitted, that scientific research, 
and scientific statement, become more easy by its 
means; enough also to attach interest to the 
question, which we will now proceed to discuss — 
how does Logic prove itself to be thus instrumental 
to Philosophy ? 

The correct answer to this enquiry is also the 
obvious one. Philosophy, it is answered, is elabo* 
rated by the mind of man; and correctness of 
process is an ordinary though not an invariable 
condition of correctness of result. It is by regu- 
lating thought, or the act of the rational mind, 
that Logic is instrumental to its end. It gives 
neither facts, nor ideas under which to combine 
them; but by its analysis of the mental operations. 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 95 

it enables us to test the correctness of the com- 
binations of phenomena^ the conclusiveness of the 
consequences from an idea. 

There is however more than one school of 
thinkers^ who regard Metaphysic (using that word 
in the sense of a science of thought) as impossible ; 
or at least as doubtful^ and deceptive^ and a fair 
object of suspicion. These, while they allow 
the utility of Logic, prefer accounting for it in 
another way than that mentioned above. Un- 
willing to s^eak of it as conversant with thought, 
or conceptions, or inference, or mental operations 
in general, they assert broadly that Logic deals 
either with words, or with things. 

Thus Logicians, at the very entry of their sub- 
ject, begin to differ. They cannot agree in stating 
with what they have to deal The difference 
among them is sometimes real, sometimes only 
verbal ; but, even where it is verbal, it is sufficient 
to prove a broad separation of tone in the contend- 
ing parties. The point at controversy needs some 
explanation; and, for convenience sake, a name 
which involves no reproach may be given to the 
advocates of the several opinions. We will then 
divide Logicians into three schools, according as 
they hold words, things, or conceptions, to be the 
subject of Logic; and entitle them respectively, 
. the verbal, the phenomenal, and the conceptional. 

These divisions find no exact counterpart in 
ancient or medieval Logic The connection of 



96 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

thing, conception, and word, was at first much 
more dwelt on than their antithesis. The disputes 
as to the origin of language did not materially 
affect the question. Even those who, like Aristotle, 
derived it from convention, admitted this funda- 
mental parallelism. They assumed, as perhaps 
it were wiser for us to assume, that our mental 
impressions adequately represent- the outward 
world ; that our language does sufficient justice to 
these mental impressions. To decide in which 
the province of Logic properly lay, was not a 
point of practical importance. The regulation of 
either portion of the realm would involve also the 
• proportionate adjustment of the other. 

Neither again Can the question slide hack, a$ it 
sometimes seems inclined to do, with that of 
Nominalism, Realism, arid Conceptualism. Though 
some of the verbal school are, as we shall see, the 
legitimate successors of the ancient Nominalists, 
they should not be confounded with them. Mem- 
bers of the three schools may be perfectly agreed 
in their view of Uriiversals. Besides, the dispute 
is not, like that of old, really extra-logical. How 
Logic furthers Science, is a question which may 
be entertained without trenching on Metaphysic ; 
not so the other query — what it is that common 
nouns signify. 

Proceed we then to consider the respective 
claims of these rival views to our regard. That 
the conceptional opinion is on the whole correct. 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OP LOGIC. 97 

will be best shown by our notice of the errors with 
which it is contrasted. Our first remarks shall be 
devoted to the verbal School, 

Those who assert, that the regulation of Language 
is the province of Logic, may be guilty only of an 
awkward method of stating a truth. They may 
not intend more than to insist on the intimate 
connection between Language and Thought. Every 
act of thought, they urge, and truly, is accompanied, 
and figured to the mind, by some word, external or 
internal. Thinking, as naturally seeks its expression 
in language, as feeling does in inarticulate sound. 
The relation of the sign to the thing signified is in 
each case the same ; though the one is the expo- 
nent of the act of the rational soul, the other of 
the irrational. Just as brutes express pain spon- 
taneously, by uneasy motion, or their natural 
cries, so men spontaneously invest their con- 
ceptions with an outward clothing. That the 
word is not always articulated, matters not; 
enough, if it be imderstood. In all probabihty, 
however, were nature left to run wild, we should 
think aloud for the most part, and make no more 
secret of our thoughts, than children, before the 
time of definite reflection, do of their feelings. It 
is different in society : an instinct, easily developed, 
'^ teaches us, that to utter all that is conceived would 

be unwise, as to give vent to all that is felt, would 
be unmanly. 

All this is true : but it does not nearly amount 

H 



98 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

to a proof that Logic must subserve to Science only 
by regulating language^ Such regulation is the 
work not of Logic, but of Grammar. Grammar 
looks to clearness of expression, as Logic to clear- 
ness of conception. We may have logical accuracy 
without grammatical. This is often the case with 
reflective persons who have lived much alone* 
They think methodically and correctly, but fail 
in the attempt to communicate their meaning. 
And if the endeavour to express one's thoughts 
often shows their indistinctness, it does not follow 
that the means which expose the defect, will also 
serve as the remedy. 

But, it may be urged in reply, though accuracy 
of thought be really the aim of Logic, this is 
practically identical with accuracy of language. 
For it is only through language that thoughts 
t;an be transmitted from one mind to another. 
Thus, it is argued, the necessary medium becomes, 
for ordinary uses, identical with that which it 
conveys. 

Here, however, there is twofold fallacy. In the 
first place, though language be essential to thought, 
it does not follow that accuracy of thought will 
always be attended with grammatical accuracy of 
language. In fact, it is not found to be so : an 
idea may be, and often is, expressed in a calculus 
far less elevated than itself. Mind overtasks its 
machinery of words, and in so doing, injures it. 
The servant suffers in the endeavour to do justice 



ON tHE DI^FEREN'r MODETlN SCHOOtS OF LOGIC. 99 

to his master. Thus strict thought is found un- 
favourable to the perfection of speech ; it wears 
away a language^ just as intense mental action 
wears away the body ; it decomposes it> so to 
speak> breaking off its inflections> and substituting 
particles in their stead ; its expressions often only 
escape from being positively ungrammatical, by 
declaring their independence of the rules of Gram- 
mar altogether. So Mathematics have their owti 
Verb of eqaality> their ovirn substantives of number, 
nullity, and infinity, thdr own prepositions of ad- 
dition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, the 
use of which they regulate on principles of their own. 
So again all professional idioms and vocabularies 
are by common consent pronounced inelegant and 
awkward. Even the process of stating an argu- 
ment syllogistically, or of converting a proposition, 
involves the necessity, for the most part, of verbal 
anomalies. Who can blame the Schoolmen for 
inexactness in the details of thought? Yet who 
like them ever frittered away> even to utter an- 
nihilation, the expression, and genius, and, in 
a great measure> the grammatical structure of a 
language ? 

Secondly, it should be observed, that Logic, to 
be usefiil, does nat necessarily imply the contact 
of one mind with another. It may be, and 
often has been, used as an instrument of self- 
education. Two disputants need an elaboration of 
vocabulary, which the solitary thinker may dis- 

h2 



100 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

pense with. Dialectic is not synonymous with 
Analytic, nor Eristic with Logic* 

In fine : when we speak of Logic as teaching the 
accurate use of Language, two different things may 
be meant. It may be asserted, either that Logic 
arranges the parts of speech accurately with 
regard to one another, or that it so orders them, 
as that they shall correspond duly with the process 
of thought. The former of these positions would 
have few supporters, amounting as it does to an 
absolute fusion of Logic and Grammar, The latter, 
while it asserts the separate existence of thought 
and language, allows also, that the language is 
subservient to the thought ; that the conception is 
final, where the word is instrumental. Is it not 
then better to fix on thought as the subject of 
Logic, than on that which only comes under 
consideration as its vehicle and exponent ? . 

It is much to be regretted,, that so many 
sjrmptoms of an adhe^on to the opinions of this 
moderate section of the verbal School are to be 
found in the able treatise of Archbishop Whately, 
His definition of Logic, as '' the Art of employing 
Language properly for the purpose of Reasoning," 
is conceived quite in this spirit. To trace this evil 
tendency in detail through his work would be 
quite foreign to our present purpose. Two of its 
more general features may however be mentioned 
here, as illustrative of the turn of mind with which 
this logical theory is associated. * In the first 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 101 

place, he is led to attach far too much importance 
to the mere arrangement of words, and to measure 
the elasticity and pliability of thought by that of 
the raw material out of which its finished repre- 
sentations are fabricated* The most striking in- 
stance of this defect is found in his way of treating 
hypothetical and inductive arguments. He com- 
pels methods of reasoning, which, when viewed 
in the thinking mind, are clearly distinct IGrom the 
deductive process and fi-om each other, to bow to 
an artifice of language, and submit to the one 
unvarying formula of syllogism* And, secondly, 
he shows a continual disposition to underrate the 
number of real questions at issue among mankind, 
and to increase in proportion the number of 
merely verbal differences. His common way of 
dealing with contending disputants is to accuse 
them of an equivocation ; to assure them, that 
they either mean the same thing by different 
words, or use the same word to signify distinct 
things. Or, if this plan will not succeed, he 
looks for some formal error in the argument of 
one of the parties; and is ready to assign the 
discrepancy to any cause except that which is 
probably the real one — some broad difference of 
principle underl3ring the whole discussion, and 
forcing, as it were, the superficial strata of thought 
fi:om what would be else their level and unbroken 
direction. This is in fact to assume that men can 



102 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

with equal ease be made to be of one mind and of 
one vocabulary. 

The truth is, that the minds of men differ in 
natural constitution as widely as their bodies. As 
we do not all spontaneously move our limbs in the 
same manner, so neither do we think alike. When 
discipline makes men uniform and simultaneous 
in their motions, it only suspends their natural 
peculiarities,^ and does not destroy them. Though 
the effect of the drilUsergeant^s labours may be 
observable when the soldier is off parade, they 
no longer produce an exact uniformity. Those 
differences of gait and bearing then display them-* 
selves once more, which at th« time seemed 
obliterated. 

So it is with Thought. The clever arguer drills, 
so to speak, the mind of those who follow him.. 
By a sympathy, voluntary or involuntary, as the 
case may be, they throw themselves into the same 
mental posture with their coryphaeus. Slowly, 
with reluctance perhaps, and difficulty, minds from 
different regions of thought tend to the same 
point, under the guidance, and by the attraction, 
of a more powerful mind, and acquiesce in a 
formula. It seems for the moment as if they were 
really agreed. They cease to quarrel, while they 
stand side by side in formal precision on the 
platform of definition and syllogism. Yet, remove 
the restraints of isystem, and they relapse into 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 103 

individuality. They return to their own points of 
view again, and choose their own classifications and 
divisions. This implies as real a distinction be- 
tween their opinions, as a difference on matters of 
fact. Indeed their conflicting impressions as to 
facts are more easily removable by testimony, 
and evidence, and renewed observation, than their 
diversities of theory. Here idiosyncrasies come 
into play ; and Nature, which has been expelled for 
the time by a logical bifurcation, returns. 

It is therefore at best a short-sighted wisdom, to 
exaggerate the power of Language in producing 
agreement and correctness of Thought. We cannot 
narrow the interval between the act of the mind 
and its symbol. The clever logician indeed, who 
has formed his own opinions, may state them in a 
definite form of words, and find this form very 
generally, though not very willingly, accepted. 

m 

He may thence argue, that others for the most part 
differ from him only in consequence of the absence 
of formal statement, and that, were their views as 
distinctly stated as his own, the very shadow of 
dispute would vanish. The delusion might last, 
till men, from stating their opinions, came to act 
upon them. It would then be seen, that those who 
adopt a formula on intellectual compulsion, reserve 
to themselves the liberty of interpreting it. The 
history of nations and of philosophies shows this 
truth more clearly than that of individual minds. 
What nice forms of words can apprehend and per^ 



104 ON TBE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC, 

petuate the leading idea of a school, or the consti- 
tution of a polity ? The nomenclature and outward 
form of a system or a state may remain compara- 
tively unchanged^ when its inner life is completely 
altered. 

We have hitherto dwelt on what seems rather a 
tendency to error than a positive violation of the 
truth. But there is no reason for holding back the 
most decisive condemnation of the extreme party 
of the same school^ who deny altogether the anti- 
thesis between language and thought, and thus 
make every question purely verbal. 

The three best known supporters of this doctrine 
are Hobbes, Home Tooke, and Condillac. Of 
these, Hobbes seems to have struck out the opinion 
for himself in the wanton exercise of his usual 
perverse ingenuity. But Home Tooke and Con- 
dillac, though later in point of time, were not 
directly indebted to his teaching. Their con- 
clusions were, as they thought, perhaps rightly, a 
fair inference from the doctrines of Locke. This 
is one of many instances, in which opinions have, 
so to speak, filtered through a system without being 
incorporated with it : for Locke, though a student 
of Hobbes, never himself adopted those opinions 
from him, which he unintentionally communicated 
to others. It was his lot to transmit the infection, 
without suffering from it himself. 

This erring triad, while they agree in theory, 
differ somewhat in the subject to which they apply 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 105 

it. Hobbes throws his remarks into a form directly 
bearing on our purpose. Logic is with him " the 
Art of Computation*' — simply a peculiar kind of 
mental arithmetic. " Logicians," he would have us 
think, *' add together two names, to make an af- 
firmation, and two affirmations to make a syllogism, 
and many syllogisms to make a demonstration; 
and from the sum, or conclusion, of a syllogism, 
they subtract one proposition to find the other V 
And this is not meant to describe an accident of 
the ratiocinative process, but its very substance. 
For '' Reason," he fiirther tells us, '' is nothing but 
reckoning (that is, adding and subtracting) of the 
consequences of general names agreed upon, 
for the marking and signifying of our thoughts*." 
Home Tooke takes the grammatical turn, and 
speaks principally of the nature of terms. It is 
these, he says^ which are simple or complex, general 
or abstract, and not the ideas which they signify. 
While Condillac makes his view more a part of a 
metaphysical system, and in connection with it 
goes into the wide question of the origin of human 
knowledge. We are familiar with his pointed 
saying, that *^ Science is only a well-assorted lan- 
guage." 

The difficulty of coping with this error on grounds 
of pure theory, Kes mainly in the impossibility 
of really grasping its meaning. While at first 
sight it appears an intelligible though paradoxical 

* Leviathan, ch. v. ^ Div. of Purley, p. i. ch. 2. 



106 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

proposition to assert that language and thought are 
identical, yet, on the endeavour to apprehend and 
handle it, it degenerates into simple nonsense. The 
quotation, for instance, from the " Merry Wives of 
Windsor*," which Home Tooke approves and 
adopts, that "the lip is parcel of the mind," is 
most expressive as a metaphor, but absolutely 
unmeaning as a philosophical statement. We 
should be ill-employed in the endeavom: to give it 
a sense which does not belong to it. It would be 
a mischievous if not a vain attempt thus to make 
error substantive. It will be better to devote some 
space to the consideration, not of itself, but of 
its results, and of the principles with which it is 
associated. 

This verbal philosophy, then, has a close, and 
sometimes an avowed, connection with materialism. 
Its founder, Hobbes, denied altogether the dis- 
tinction between mind and matter ; and the sen- 
sualism of Locke has been usually supposed to 
tend in the same direction. Thus to confuse word 
and thought leads of course to the theoretical 
annihilation of the latter. It becomes a con- 
sequence of our bodily organization, the laws of 
which it must necessarily follow. 

Thus it leads from the lowest view of human 
knowledge, to the lowest view of human nature in 
general also. If thought be only a function of 
language, man is better characterized as a speaking 

" Act. i. sc. iv. 



i-»tf ¦'¦' !-• ¦ • ^i^^^^^^m^m^^^^^^ m ^, 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 107 

than as a reasoning being. For it is more natural 
and more scientific to define by the cause than 
the effect. And then, to draw any such inference 
fi*om man's possessing reason, as that his atftions 
are therefore probably fi-ee, or his thinking nature 
immortal, becomes at once absurd. For none will 
assert such liberty or immortality to be a con- 
sequence of speech, of which reason itself is on 
this theory a consequence. Lips and tongue obey 
universally physical laws, and are subject to phy- 
sical decay. But how can the thought be perma- 
nent, when that fi-om which all thought originates,, 
and of which it is a form, is no more ? 

Indeed, the opinions on general subjects, to 
which the verbal school of Logic natiu-ally leads, 
are equally narrow and absurd. Built upon a 
fimdamental proposition which is in the strict 
sense of the word insignificant, they resemble one 
of those perspectives, which are distorted and 
irregular to the eye of the beholder, who regards 
them from any but one given position. To under- 
stand them at all, the connection of thought with 
language, which is part of the truth, must be 
accepted as a whole. Thus a wrong-headed con- 
sistency, a fallacious unity of idea, marks the 
whole system, and the writings of those who sup- 
port it. It is liable to nearly all the objections 
which tell against the Schoolmen, and to many 
more. It is as exclusive, as dogmatic, as con- 
sequential, and, from the insecurity of its basis, as 



108 ON THS DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

unsound. We are apt to overlook the connection 
between the scholastic and the verbal method^ 
because they are employed for purposes so very 
different, because the advocates of the latter vehe- 
mently opposed the supporters of the former, and 
were as ready to destroy as those had been to 
construct. Both however agree in asserting the 
practical control of language over truth* The 
Schoolmen erred in supposing that Science could 
be attained by a judicious use of their vocabulary 
in the processes of defining and deducing. They 
expected too much from their instruments, which 
they exalted to the level of that of which they 
treated; the verbal philosophers, esteeming their 
great tool less highly, have another way of making 
it equal to its work. Instead of making language 
wide as truth, they pare down and narrow the 
truth that it may be containable within the limits 
of language. The one argued, '' this follows from 
the force of terms ; therefore it is true ;" the others, 
'' this does not follow from the laws of language, 
therefore it is not true :" the former mode of 
thought is right in itself, though not necessarily in 
its application ; the latter is false as a proposition, 
and dangerous as a premise. The formula, how- 
ever, does not unfairly represent the verbal school, 
who are ever involved, if in nothing worse, in that 
mean and odious form of error which arises from an 
unwillingness to apprehend first truths, who meet 
their adversaries' attempts at proof, only by de- 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 109 

daring that which they would prove impossible, 
and while the rest of the world is resolutely bent 
on asserting, glory in the obstinacy of denial. 

Enough has been now said of these arch-heretics 
in the first Philosophy, who hold the same place 
with regard to Logic that atheists do to Religion, 
assuming the identity of cause and effect to escape 
the difficulty of tracing their connection, and 
obtaining great clearness, it may be, though not 
depth, in their speculations, at the expense of posit- 
ing an overwhelmingly absurd paradox as the basis 
of them all. We will now pass to the phenomenal 
school of Logicians, premising some remarks, which 
may cast light on its tendencies and sympathies. 

Authors of formal systems, and especially 
those who exemplify them by applying them to 
particular subjects, may be divided into two 
classes, which we may be allowed to call the 
Historical, and the Prophetical. They either trace 
the part which a given Idea has played in some 
great work already accomplished, or feel that they 
themselves have a great work to do. They employ 
some truth, which they consider to be eternal, 
either in the explanation of what is already past, 
or the development of what is y^t to be. 

The second of these classes, for many reasons, 
exercises the greater influence over the mass of 
men. They unite in their writings two elements, 
which are often separated — the gratification both 
of practical, and of speculative curiosity. The very 



110 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

form of their speculations is for the most part 
pleasing; it throws itself into the ideal world, 
and gives us pictures of an imaginary state of 
Social Life, or Science, or Art. Hence we have 
the Republic of Plato, the new Atlantis of Bacon, 
the Wilhehn Meister of Gothe. And this ima- 
ginative impulse implies a bold confidence on the 
part of the speculators in their own powers, which 
excites a corresponding confidence in those who 
follow them. 

On the other hand, there is a comparative lack 
of interest about the procedure of those, who dwell 
mainly on the causes of the past. It is a lower office 
to discover the reason of a known fact, than to 
deduce independently a fact bpfore unknown from 
k priori considerations of its reasons. The mass of 
men are so apt to gain their conclusions first, and 
their premises afterwards, that they suspect any like 
conduct on the part of those who should be their 
guides, as proceeding from the same false con- 
fidence in their actions and wishes, and the same 
want of confidence in their motives, which they 
cannot help detecting in themselves. So we find 
practically less results firom the labours of these 
historical thinkers. Aristotle has only proved so 
great in his power over mankind by having his 
system impregnated with a spirit most alien to his 
own ; while the soul of Plato has at least thrice 
since his own time lighted up the pile of his 
glorious philosophy. For a similar reason apolo- 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. Ill 

getic treatises weigh not so much with men as 
those which act on the offensive. The positive 
views which they imply are for the most part 
their real attraction. It is when Hooker most 
charms, that we least think of Cartwright. So 
again physical researches are to most minds 
more pleasing and attractive than moral, because 
they render the discovery of other phenomena 
probable, as well as account for those already 
known* A discussion of the theory of Virtue could 
only re-arrange old facts; whereas a theory of 
Light not only attempts this problem, but serves 
as a guide in fresh experiments which are meant 
to issue in new disco verier One reason why 
Casuistry has been despised as well as hated is, 
because it sometimes attempts to state, as deduc- 
tions of reason, propositions which a healthy mind 
rules by an intuitive decision. In like manner the 
endeavour which some logicians have made to 
prove by reasoning truths which we know without 
reasoning, such as the laws of Opposition, has 
re-acted to their own discredit. 

It will be found that the more successful school 
of theorists flourishes most in times which seem 
disastrous to other learning. Philosophical anarchy 
affords them the greatest scope, if they have 
genius equal to the emergency. Like patriots, who 
rise to save their country, the miserable posture of 
things around them kindles their hopes and their 
enthusiasm. There can be no doubt what is to be 



112 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

done ; how, is the only question. Popular support 
too they can make more easily their own; the 
prospect of change is more agreeable, when ex- 
isting circumstances have so little to encourage- 
Thus Plato rose when the errors of the sophists 
had spread to their widest extent, and were now 
beating themselves into foam upon the shores of 
thought; L6rd Bacon constructed his Inductive 
scheme when men were becoming sensible of the 
absence of all sound philosophy ; Locke wrote the 
more confidently, because he felt he was dealing 
the death-blow to an already dying system of 
Metaphysic ; and Berkeley, seeing the feeble cha- 
racter of the scepticism which had originated from 
materialist views, aimed his attack against the very 
existence of matter. An error, which has been 
nearly universal, and is showing general symptoms 
of decay, affords the readiest opening for the 
advancement of Truth. 

On the other hand, general theories traverse a 
more restricted circle, and in a more cautious 
manner, when particular branches of knowledge 
are expanding, readily, rapidly, and certainly. 
There seems less occasion for novel speculations, 
however ingenious and acute, when all is going 
on well without them. Original considerations of 
method, it appears, may be safely neglected, when 
the old plan is working effectually. At any rate. 
Logic and other formal systems come in this case 
less prominently forward, and adopt a self-depre- 



f 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 113 

ciating tone, do not attempt to innovate, but are 
content to follow ; assume the historical, not the 
prophetical aspect, and, like humble panegyrists, 
identify themselves, as much as is possible without 
pretending to equal them, with the different 
courses of investigation oif which they commemorate 
the triumph. 

Perhaps we may thus account foi* some of the 
least desirable peculiarities of Mr. Mill's able " Sys- 
tem of Logic." It implies a submission and con- 
cession on the part of formal science ; a surrender 
at will, so to speak, of Metaphysic to Physic. The 
favourite notions of Logic are transferred from the 
inner to the outward world ; sequence, causation, 
and the like, are held to be derived from pheno- 
mena, and not to be conditions of our perceiving 
them. The same temper of mind extends ftirther, 
and influences the view taken, not only of the 
manner in which Logic regards its subjects ; but 
of the subject with which Logic is really conversant. 
To represent it as dealing with conceptions, would 
seem, in this view, to invest it with too much 
metaphysical dignity; to make it sovereign, not 
subsidiary ; and independent in a province of its 
own. Accordingly, it is considered more safe and 
practical to regard it, and, with it, other sciences, 
as having to do with things. So words are con- 
sidered as signs, rather of things, than of our con- 
ceptions of them^; and in the same spirit it is urged, 

^ Vol. i. p. 28. 
I 



114 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

that the theory which regards a proposition as the 
union of two ideas or conceptions, and not of two 
things^ is, when taken by itself, most meagre and 
unsatisfactory®. 

This view of Logic recommends itself to practical 
persons who are not logicians, and have no wish to 
become so, if for no other reason, at least for this, 
that it lowers her pretensions in the greatest possible 
degree, and leaves her the merest shadow of im- 
portance. If we adopt it. Logic at once appearf^ 
to have no peculiar principles, no proper work of 
her own. She is the slave, rather than the minister, 
of Science, with just enough independent reason to 
do as she is bidden, but with by no means enough 
to assert any collateral authority. Being in her 
nature wholly k posteriori, and dependent on phe- 
nomena, it is they which really give her laws, not 
she which fixes their value. 

In the mind of more abstract thinkers, the same 
view connects itself closely with a doubt, if not 
disbelief, in the possiljj^^ty of Metaphysic, or the 
Science of Mind, It enables them to throw Logic 
into a more external and objective form; to put 
out of sight, for the time, all the difficulties which 
arise from the consideration of our thinking natiu'e, 
and to make the student lean in confidence on the 
facts of the outward world. 

The difference, however, between this and the 
conceptional theory is but verbal ; and the relief 

• Vol. i. p. 117. 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 115 

which it gives to the student is the result of an 
artifice of language^ and can therefore be of but 
temporary avail. Logic cannot deal with things 
as contrasted with conceptions, though it can with 
things as confused with them. In its most objective 
aspect it is conversant with phenomena^ that is, 
with things as they appear to us, not as they are 
in themselves. This is quite enough to admit the 
whole sea of doubts which are associated with such 
questions as that of the existence of matter and 
the nature of our perceptions. So, to say that in 
a proposition we mentally unite two things, (and of 
course a mental union only is possible) is to say by 
implication that we unite our conceptions of them. 
With due qualifications, the two opposed state- 
ments melt into one. 

The phenomenal School of Thought, though 
liable to grave objections, holds a higher place in 
intellectual dignity than the verbal. The latter, 
without any real devotion to Physic, is, as we 
have seen, of a materialistic cast ; the former need 
not incline to MateriaUsm, while its tendency to 
fiirther physical knowledge is undeniable. To 
assert Truth to lie merely in language, is a step 
toward denying its existence. But to the reality 
of the truths of the outward world, the phenomenal 
School begins by pledging itself. On these it 
fixes its attention, observes their laws, and ex- 
tracts its system from them. And in dwelling on 
them it may steer clear of all Materialism, because 

i2 



1 Hi on the different modern schools of logic* 

it regards them as lying, so to speak, at the in- 
osculation of man and the Universe ; as being facts 
of our perception, into the nature of which per- 
ception it does not profess to enter. This is so 
far a merit ; but from the same source with this 
merit flow great defects also. If its canon of 
investigation were adopted, it would enlarge our 
knowledge in one direction only. The facts of 
consciousness it declines analysing, though it does 
not object to combining them ; and the absence of 
such analysis renders it, however at home it may 
be in Inductive Science, a most incompetent and 
misafe guide in Deduction, or in the border- 
territories of Morals and Art. For in treating of 
each of these, there is a subjective element which 
demands consideration. The fundamental Ideas 
of Deductive Science are something more than 
mere abstractions from the phenomena which are 
grouped under them, and none of which in them- 
selves adequately embody them. So again Moral 
truth, if it is to stand in contrast with Physical, 
implies the positing of an Idea which does not 
conform to the laws of external experience — that 
of the free will. And that theory of Art, which 
would banish its intellectual aspect, and place its 
perfection in imitation and execution only, is far 
too imperfect and unsatisfactory, to recommend 
itself either to the artist or the philosopher. 

Religion, too, it is to be feared, is a subject 
necessarily undreamt of in this Philosophy. Theo- 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 117 

logy rests, if not on the notion of a Mediator, at 
least on that of mediation — a connection between 
ourselves and God. Mere contemplation of the 
highest form of excellence avails- not, except it be 
accompanied by a fashioning, which with man 
must always be a conscious fashioning, of the 
contemplator, to the model of that which he con- 
templates. An entire resting on the outward 
would be only good, were it possible, where the 
inward is perfect. And any continuous habit of 
thought which turns an imperfect mind wholly 
away from itself, prevents its progress towards per- 
fection. The highest excellency which could 
result from it would resemble that of Aristotle's 
Wise Man. The merely '' positive" philosopher 
may be deeply cognisant of the physical world, 
familiar with the sphere and power of Mathematics, 
with a deep-seated enthusiasm as to the extension 
of knowledge, and the possibility of new and more 
perfect combinations in that wonderful social system 
of which man is the monad ; but the existence of 
God, as a first Cause, is not essential to his specu- 
lations — far less, of God, as a moral Governor. 
His temptation is, to regard the deeper instincts of 
the heart as so many facts which would be usefiil 
in an inductive Psychology ; not as principles of 
action or feeling, with a final cause of their own — 
no less than the forming of man after the model 
of his Creator. 

The Conceptional School, though it has the 



tk > 



118 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC 

truth on its side^ is not without its dangers. Its 
tendency is^ by passing from the formal to the pure 
Science of Thought, to blend Logic with Meta* 
physic. Thus it is apt to neglect facts, to which 
it should legitimately apply itself, and, betaking 
itself to general theories, work out the world of 
thought without sufficient data, or any real guide 
beside the very imperfect test of its own intel- 
lectual consistency. This defect is however a 
perversion, and not a natural consequence of its 
leading tenet. And such antecedent systematisa- 
tion is a less evil than has been imagined ; being 
often assumed only for the time by honest and 
candid minds, as a clue by means of which to 
conduct hypothetical enquiries. It is adopted at 
first as best tallying with the known facts : and 
further research may either corroborate, modify, 
or overthrow it. 

In quitting, the subject of the different logical 
schools, it may be usefiil to give an illustration of 
the practical differences among them, in the various 
senses in which they have employed the term 
Category; much to the bewilderment of those, 
who have expected, wherever it occurred, to 
recognise in it a common meaning. 

We naturally look to Aristotle in the first place 
for the meaning of the word. A Category, if we 
regard his u^e of the term as well as its derivation, 
signifies a Predication; and is therefore primarily 
connected with language. Accordingly, as has 



f>N THE DIFFEBENT MODERN SCHOOLS OP LOGIC. 119 

been already hinted, the ten Predicaments are 
gained by an analysis which is mainly grammatical; 
and answer to the leading parts of speech, and 
certain modifications of them. The scheme may 
be stated as follows. The Category of Substance is 
appropriated to nouns substantive, which express 
existence independently of time, or, as it may be 
otherwise put, do not imply motion. To these 
nouns adjective attach themselves, which, being 
loosely and generally divided, give the three Cate- 
gories of Quantity y Quality, and Relation. The verb, 
on the other hand, as contrasted with the noun, 
indicates existence which is in time, and connected 
with motion. If the time which it implies is past, 
our attention is called to a certain state which 
results from some motion which has preceded; 
thus the past tenses of verbs come under the 
Category of Habit. The remaining parts of the 
verb are portioned out according to the nature 
of the motion or change implied in the verb itself: 
as this is active, passive, or neuter, they fall into 
the Categories of Action, Passion, or Position. Ad- 
verbs, which, so to speak, coalesce with verbs, 
supply the two remaining Categories of Space and 
Time. 

This division, it is easy to see, is essentially 
grammatical : far from being the only one possible, 
probably not the best ; yet recognising the classes 
of words generally acknowledged, and, if confined 
to the province of language, substantially true and 



120 ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

correct. If therefore it has not been received, it 
has not been vigorously opposed by the verbal 
school. Home Tooke grounds his theory of 
language on the same fundamental division with 
Aristotle; and Hobbes, asserting, as in con- 
sistency he is bound to do, that the Categories are 
distinctions of words, and not of things, and ac- 
knowledging that they are not a true or exact 
ordination of names, passes them by (a rare cir- 
cumstance with him) without any more positive 
censure. 

Such are the Categories of Aristotle — in their 
natiure and use, as in the method of attaining 
them, essentially verbal. We have seen, however, 
that they have been used also as expressing a 
division of things. For this purpose, they are 
undoubtedly unfitted. They are a cross-division, 
according to Aristotle's own admission ; Quality and 
Relation, for instance, running in to each other in 
the case of Habit, and Position taY^ng under Relation 
as a species under a genus. Again, although in 
a fundamental division we do not require equal 
importance and extent in all the several members, 
yet there is something unphilosophical in the dis- 
proportion of the method, which lays so much 
stress on the four leading Categories, and passes 
so summarily over the other six, Gilbert de la 
Poree met with little success in the endeavour 
to raise these inferior castes to the level of their 
more fortunate conquerors ; nor could we expect 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 121 

great results for this or any other attempt at 
altering so greatly the system as it was left by its 
founder, without entirely overthrowing it. Further, 
allowing the Categories for the time to be an 
exhaustive division, they need not therefore be 
a natural one ; like merely artificial classes, they 
have the smallest possible nimiber of distinguishing 
attributes, as may be seen by Aristotle's weak 
attempt at marking out the four principal of them 
by their properties. These objections lie against 
the Categories on Aristotle's own hypothesis, with- 
out any introduction of the distinctive teaching 
of other metaphysical schools. When these are 
brought to bear upon them, their position and 
claim to notice are yet ftirther altered. 

It is on'fe of the most usual and natural, perhaps 
one of the most pardonable, errors of great thinkers, 
to believe a far greater identity of aim and purpose 
than really exists between former laboiurers in the 
field which they are cultivating, and themselves. 
Incidental traces of agreement gain imdue im- 
portance from their faith in the sympathy of soul 
with soul, the unity of knowledge, and the pro- 
gressiveness of truth. They explain the unknown 
by the known ; and whatever is clear to them, is 
taken to illustrate what appears obscure in others. 
Writers who are devising original systems, and 
touch only incidentally upon the opinions of others, 
are remarkably given to this error. And even 
among those whose peculiar province it is to weigh 



122 ON THE DIFFEKENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

and compare facts, the historian of Philosophy, as 
of any other branch of knowledge, viewing as he 
does the past by the light of the present, is apt to 
over-rate the degree of excellency attained in 
times gone by. An unintentional hint or uncon- 
scious anticipation of a truth as yet latent is very 
frequently mistaken for a discovery. Most men 
whose inventions have benefitted mankind have 
been robbed of some of their glory by some obscure 
forerunner, from whom they are unjustly supposed 
to have taken an idea which he had half seen, but 
never clearly apprehended. And this over-esti- 
mation of former enquirers sometimes reacts to 
their discredit, when they are wrongly supposed to 
have taken the same view with om-selves, and are 
accordingly censured for imperfections which they 
could not have discerned, and for the omission 
of points which were really unessential to their 
system. 

We may thus account for the mistaken view 
which Kant took of the Aristotehan Categories. 
His metaphysical labours took a very different 
turn from those of most of his predecessors. His 
aim was to turn our thoughts mainly on ourselves, 
and, leaving the nature of the external world 
unexamined, to transform Metaphysic, from being 
the science of the laws of Being, into the science 
of Mind. He was anxious to discover how the 
conceptions naturally inherent in our minds 
affect phenomena, or things as they appear to 



OK THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 123 

US. That he might be the better able to ascertain 
this point, he attempted an enumeration of these 
conceptions. He erroneously supposed, however, 
that Aristotle had already made the attempt in his 
Categories, and, being sensible of the imperfection 
of the scheme, had endeavoured to make it more 
complete by the addition of the post-predicaments, 
or five supplementary Categories, But this mistaken 
position, independently of its want of external 
evidence, is confuted by internal. Inspection 
sufficed to show, that the post-predicaments are 
merely terms of wide and general application, 
but having several distinctions of meaning, which 
Aristotle thought deserving enumeration. The last 
of the five, for instance, is Habit, which, far from 
being supplementary to the Categories, is in fact a 
Category itself. 

Supposing that we cauld think with Kant, that 
Aristotle in his Categories had the design of inves- 
tigating those conceptions, which dwell in the 
pure understanding, his scheme would be indeed 
imperfect, and abundantly liable to objection. 
The arguments which Kant brings against them 
would be on this ground quite conclusive ; namely, 
that our idea oi Motion (one of the five post-predica- 
ments, which are Opposition, Priority, SimultaTte^ 
ousness. Motion, and Habit) is empirical, and not 
derived firom the understanding ; and that Action 
and Passion are deduced, and not primary concep- 
tions. Time and Spcice too, with the post-predica- 



124 ON THE DIFFERENT MODBRT^ SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 

ments of Priority and Simultaneoumess, must (by 
those who admit Kant's very questionable view 
of Time and Space) be regarded as not belonging 
to the class of conceptions at all, but as being 
modes or conditions of our sensibility. Kant ac- 
cordingly substituted for the old array of predica^ 
ments. and post-predicaments, a new list, devised by 
himself, of Categories, or, as he and his followers 
define them, *' subjective conditions of thinking," 
^* rules which the understanding, by means of its 
own essential laws, lays at the foundation of nature, 
foregoing all the given diversity of consciousness ;" 
or, as we may less technically describe them, 
conceptions under which alone we can conceive it 
possible that two terms shall be united into a 
proposition. And the result is the following list 
of twelve Categories; Unity, Plurality, Totality, 
Affirmation, Negation, Limitation, Independence, 
Dependence, Interdependence, Actuality, Possibility, 
and Necessity. 

Mr. Mill takes another view of the Aristotelian 
Categories, which makes it necessary for him also 
to devise a new set of his own. According to him, 
Aristotle, as well as the Schoolmen, intended the 
Categories to be an enumeration of all things 
capable of being named — an enumeration by the 
summa genera, i. e. the most extensive classes into 
which things could be distributed. This position 
we have seen to be true with regard to the School- 
men, but probably false with regard to Aristotle. 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 125 

Granting its truth, however, there is no difficulty 
in proving that the Categories, though perhaps 
valid as a division of namesy are obviously invalid 
when taken as a division of things. Mr. Mill easily 
establishes this, by appealing to the fact which 
has been admitted and illustrated, that they are, in 
this light, a cross-division. And, this done, he 
proceeds to give us his own Categories, which are 
four in number. All nameable things, he tells us, 
are either, I. Feelings or states of consciousness ; 
11. Minds which experience these feelings; III. 
Bodies or external objects which excite certain of 
these feelings, together with the powers or pro- 
perties whereby they excite them; and, IV. The 
successions and coexistences, the likenesses and 
unlikenesses, between feelings and states of con- 
sciousness. 

Without pretending to discuss this scheme at 
length, we may observe, that it should, at least, 
be received with extreme caution. In the first 
place, it does not seem to be exhaustive, seeing 
that no Spiritual Existence, save hiunan minds^^ 
finds a place in it. Secondly, it appears to deny 
the fact, and indeed the possibility, of spiritual 
infiuences; since, according to its obvious tenor, 
all feelings or states of consciousness come either 
from the mind itself, or from bodies external to it. 
Thirdly, even were it an exhaustive division, this, 
though it would imply its truth, would not establish 
its importance. It need not be the natural division 



126 ON THE DIF1?ERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OP LOGIC. 

which lies at the base of all sciences. Its genera- 
lisations are of that kind which cannot fairly be 
aissumed^ on Mr. Mill's own principles^ to be scien- 
tific/ till Inductive Science has worked its way 
almost up to the apex of Knowledge. In a word, 
as Logical, it is out of place: as Metaphysical, its 
correctness and usefulness are doubtful. 

Lists of Categories, in point of fact, are foreign 
to the nature of Logic altogether. Those of Ari- 
stotle properly belong, to Grammar ; those of Kant, 
to Metaphysic in the modem sense of the term ; 
those of Mr. Mill, to Metaphysic in its older sense, 
or, in Aristotelian phraseology, to general Physic. 
So we find Categories quite independent of Logic, 
as belonging to the apparatus of each Philosophical 
School. Traces of similar schemes are found in 
the Indian Philosophy, though there, it must be 
confessed, in close union with Logic. The Pytha- 
gorean, Platonic, and Stoic Schools among the 
Greeks had each its corresponding tables. And 
thus the word has come to mean the distinctive 
.classification of each Metaphysician, whatsoever his 
system leads him to discuss, or howsoever he divides 
it. Thus Reid tells us', that the Categories of 
Locke are three — Substance, Modes, and Relations ; 
and those of Hume two — Ideas and Impressions. 
And he adds, amusingly enough, that an excellent 
Mathematician of his day desired to substitute for 

' Aristotle's Logic^ ch. ii. see. ii. p. 688. Ed. Sir W. Hamilton. 



ON THE DIFFERENT MODERN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 127 

the Peripatetic predicaments two only — viz. Data 
and Qucesita, 

And now we bid farewell to the Historical view 
of Logic. Henceforth the labours of past thinkers 
will come before us, only as bearing fruit at present, 
in the consequences which have been traced from 
them and from the ideas which they have involun- 
tarily suggested. 



CHAP. VI. 

ON LOGICAL METHOD IN GENERAL. 

We now proceed to the direct consideration of 
the nature and office of Logical Method. In doing 
so, it will be prudent to recapitulate those as- 
sumptions regarding it, which have been implied, 
if not stated, in the previous pages. 

Logic, then, is no part of Philosophy; or, in 
other words, it is not a Science. The student of 
pure Logic has, as such, no more speculative know- 
ledge on any particular subject of investigation when 
he concludes his course than when he began it. The 
basis of Logic may show through indeed, and so 
some insight into Metaphysic be gained; or its 
application by way of example may inform him of 
physical truths before unknown, or extend his 
knowledge, as the case may be, in Art, or Morals, or 
Theology. But this does not really affect its proper 
nature as a system of rules implying previous 
knowledge, and ministering to its further attain- 
ment; but of little value in themselves as the- 
oretic truths, and even assuming an Imperative 
form more naturally than that of a Proposition. 

This then is our main point of difference with 
the Ancients. In another respect, we have seen. 



ON LOGICAL METHOD IN GENERAL. 129 

we differ from the mediaeval teaching. For our 
Logic, though co-extensive with Philosophy, is 
not practically identical with it. It exercises no 
supremacy over matter ; rather, the subject to 
which we apply it greatly modifies its nature. 
It is not like a glass through which we look, and 
which gives its own colouring to every thing seen 
through it'; rather, like a mirror, it copies to the 
mind's eye that which exists external to itself, and 
its praise is to be faithful, not to be original. As 
that which is presented to it varies, it, while it 
preserves its identity and truthfiilness, nevertheless 
varies, or seems to vary also* 

This we allow to be the case with Logic in 
general. Abstraction, Division, Definition, for in- 
stance, are not purely formal processes ; they can 
only be considered with reference to a definite 
subject, and cannot be applied to all subjects ; nor 
will they adapt themselves to all which they include 
with equal accuracy and perfection. Considerations 
of Modality, again, have been introduced into the 
second part of Logic ; they are generally, though 
not universally, allowed to bear directly or in- 
directly on the divisions of Propositions. In the 
third part, again, it now seems nearly established, 
that the Deductive and Inductive Syllogism are 
two essentially distinct kinds of argument ; and that 
the nature of the subject under consideration deter- 
mines which is the more suitably employed. It 
then the nature of the subject exercises such an 



¦i ^¦^'^^^^^^^¦^^^¦¦"'^''^^^""¦^¦^^^^¦i^lHaBHiHSMev^ 



1$0 ON LOGICAL METHOD IN GENERAL. 

influence, in the several parts of Logic, over Terms, 
Propositions, and Syllogisms, it is only reasonable 
to suppose that it extends to the whole conjointly, 
and may be traced in the consideration of Method 
also, which is their available combination. 

If then, in considering the subjects to which 
Method applies, and the manner in which it applies 
to them, we see certain broad divisiofts, distinct 
not merely in their accidents but in principle, and 
observe that its nature is greatly modified as one 
or another of these is brought under it ; the same 
law, which justifies us in considering Inductive 
Syllogism as distinct firom Deductive, because the 
one leads us from singular to universal, the other 
in the reverse direction, will justify also our dividing 
Method into several distinct portions. And such 
division appears, accordingly, to be both desirable 
and necessary. 

For though all Logic, and therefore all Logical 
Method, deals with conceptions, it does not deal 
with them always in the same manner. Concep- 
tions may be connected together on a large scale, 
but with very different objects and on very dif- 
ferent principles. Take, for instance, any Science, 
whether deductive or inductive. Here we have a 
multitude of conceptions grouped under one lead- 
ing conception, which we call an Idea, on some 
received principle of classification ; and possessing 
among each other, in a greater or less degree, 
subordination and consequent iality. And the ob- 



ON LOGICAL METHOD IN GENERAL. 131 

ject of this complicated intellectual structure is 
not, directly, practical use, but Knowledge. It is 
natural that the method here employed should 
differ widely from that which is suitable to a case of 
Practical Evidence, in which certain conceptions 
and combinations of them in the form of proposi* 
tions, being posited, we go on to investigate some 
particular fact, or some principle viewed as a fact, 
as dependent on them; the question being, not 
how the whole fabric hangs together, though such 
continuity is really indispensable, but whether 
from these data such a fact does follow, the 
ultimate law of consequence possibly remaining 
unknown. And between Science and Practical 
Evidence there lies another field, that of Art, in 
which we do not bestow our attention exclusively 
either on the fact, or on principles of subordination 
and consequentiahty ; but endeavour, with a view 
to practice, so to combine our conceptions, that 
the principles may bear directly on the facts, and 
facilitate our cognisance of them* 

Method then, divides itself into these three 
branches — the Method of Science, of Art, and of 
Practical Evidence. Of these, the first will here- 
after especially claim our attention, both as most 
fully illustrating the laws of Logic, and as being 
the Tjrpe towards which the inferior divisions tend, 
and to which in proportion as they approximate, 
they claim dignity and precedence. 



K 2 



CHAP. VII. 

ON THE METHOD OF SCIENCE. 

In all Science, then, when perfectly formed, we 
have, as has been said above, a certain unity of 
structure. We find a multitude of conceptions 
grouped together under one leading Conception, 
which we call an Idea, on some received principle 
of classification; these conceptions possessing 
among each other, in a greater or less degree, sub- 
ordination, and consequentiality. And the object 
of this combination of conceptions is not directly 
practical use, but Knowledge. This may be 
illustrated from sciences of diflferent kinds, the 
distinctions between which shall be given here- 
after ; the points of resemblance are those which 
claim our ^^ttention at present. 

To take in the first place the science of Geometry, 
which will serve as our type of the Pure Sciences. 
Here we have the idea suflficiently definite, namely. 
Space, or Extension. Under this, conceptions of 
very different kinds are grouped together, such as 
triangle, square, circle ; equal, unequal ; contained, 
containing ; similar, proportional. Those which 
have a more direct reference to the Idea of Space 



ON THE METHOD OF SCIENCE. 133 

fall at once under certain elementary and received 
principles of classification suitable to the science : 
thus space itself divides according as it is simply 
linear, or bounded by lines or surfaces: and 
geometrical figures in general divide according to 
the nature of these lines and surfaces, as they 
are straight or curved ; or again, according to the 
uniformity or relative proportions of their parts, 
as when we speak of certain triangles as equilateral, 
and certain solids as regular. Further, when these 
conceptions are arranged in order o^ formal proof, 
there is of course a consequentiality existing 
among them ; this dependence of part upon part, 
and of the whole upon the Idea, being one of the 
most remarkable features of Geometry. And this 
consequentiality implies a certain subordination; 
for the different propositions do not depend for 
proof directly on the Idea, but admit among them- 
selves of greater and less degrees of generality. 
Thus the Axioms, Postulates, and Definitions cover 
very frequently a wider ground than the particular 
Theorems and Problems ; and of these, some are 
evidently wider in extent than others. Whatever 
is proved true of triangles in general, for instance, 
applies to equilateral triangles ; while the converse 
does not hold. 

In the next place. Botany may stand as a 
specimen of the Classificatory Sciences. Here the 
Idea may be differently stated, as being in the 
abstract. Vegetable Life; or in the concrete, the 



134 ON THE METHOD OF SCIENCE. 

Vegetable Kingdom. The spontaneous observation 
of mankind^ even prior to scientific enquiry, had 
supplied a vast number of conceptions to be 
grouped under this Idea. The names of individual 
trees, and shrubs, of different portions and organs 
of the plant, exist prior to scientific arrangement. 
These are duly grouped under the Idea, by means 
of certain intermediate conceptions, which belong 
properly to the science of Botany, and may or 
may not be distinctive of the different botanical 
systems. And in this arrangement a Principle of 
Classification is involved — the difference of this 
principle, and not any diversity in the detailed 
view of species, for instance, distinguishing a 
natural froni an artificial arrangement. And to 
show that the principle adopted enables us to 
arrange the conceptions in due relation and sub- 
ordination to the Idea, is the task which each 
advocate of a peculiar system undertakes. 

Of another class of sciences, the applied sciences, 
we may take Mechanics as an example. Here we 
have one Idea, viz. that of force. There are certain 
princq)les, fiirther, according to which we can 
subdivide this idea. Thus the Idea of force com- 
bined with the conception of Rest or Counterpoise 
limits itself to Statics, when combined with that of 
motion, limits itself to Dynamics. In each of these 
divisions there are other conceptions which enable 
us to subdivide them ; such are implied, in Statics, 
in the laws of solid and fluid equilibrium, and. 



ON THE METHOD OF SCIENCE. 135 

in Dynamics, in the three great laws of motion. 
These, when traced into their consequences, give 
us certain combinations of conceptions, which are 
subordinated to the main Idea, and connected with 
it through them by a necessary dependence. 

Lastly, a perplexed and complicated science, 
like that of Astronomy, in which Deduction and 
Observation find place together: where different 
parts of the results are gained by different pro- 
cesses, and in the vast array of laws, and inferences, 
and general facts, and details, the unity seems 
almost broken; forms no real exception to the 
notion of a science which we have adopted. The 
only uncertainty is, in which of two ways it shall 
be made to conform to our requisitions. In one 
point of view, it must surrender its claims to the 
dignity of a distinct science ; and rank only as the 
application, on an enlarged scale, of an independ- 
ent science to the explanation, or, it may be, pre- 
diction, of a vast mass of previously arranged and 
classified phenomena. Astronomy thus becomes 
the Mechanics of the Heavens. And this is the 
explanation of its nature which a Mathematician 
would be likely to give. Or, again, the Physical 
Philosopher might ask — what is it which enables 
us to associate so readily in our minds phenomena 
so different as an eclipse, and the course of the 
planets, and the nature of nebulae, and the form of 
the earth, and the distance and density of the sun, 
but the presence of one Idea — that of the Universe, 



136 ON THE MErHOD OF SCIENCl^. 

or, in other words, of the interdependence of all 
material Nature ? May not Astronomy be regarded 
as the science of the Universe, using, for different 
purposes, the apparatus both of the classificatory 
and applied sciences; and so aiming at the re- 
duction to order and imity, under this Idea, of a 
multitude af conceptions drawn from phenomena, 
which seem at first likely to perplex as much from 
their unlikeness as their multiplicity ? 

If the foregoing be, as far as it goes, a true 
account of the nature of Science, it is evident that 
any view of Scientific Method will be in the highest 
degree imperfect, which does not treat of Scientific 
Ideas, of the conceptions which range under 
them, and of the laws which regulate this ar^ 
rangement. To the first of these subjects we now 
proceed. 



CHAP. VIII. 

ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

A SCIENCE then, however much more it may be, 
is at least thus much ; the union and grouping of 
conceptions under an Idea. Hence arises a ques- 
tion evidently deserving our considlsration — what 
the nature of such Scientific Ideas may be. 

The difference between an Idea and a Conception 
has often been ~ drawn, by those who insist on the 
distinction, with great xare and deliberation. A 
Conception, it has been said, is something derived 
from observation ; not so Ideas, which meet with 
nothing exactly answering to them within the 
range of our experience. Thus Ideas are k priori. 
Conceptions a posteriori ; and it is only by means 
of the former that the latter are really possible. 
For the bare fact, taken by itself, falls short of the 
Conception, which may be described as the syn- 
thesis of the fact and the Idea. Thus we have an 
Idea of the Universe, under which its different 
phenomena fall into place, and from which they 
take their meaning ; we have an Idea of Gop as a 
Creator, from which we derive the power of con- 



138 ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

ceiving that' the impressions produced upon our 
minds through the senses result from really exist- 
ing things ; we have an Idea of the Soul, which 
enables us to realize our own personal identity, by 
suggesting that a feeling, conceiving, thinking 
subject exists as the substratum of every sensation, 
conception, and thought. Others go further in 
the same direction, and argue, that Space and Time, 
which they call conceptions, shadow forth dimly 
the ruling Ideas of Infinity and Eternity ; that the 
Divine Attributes are Ideas, under which fall even 
the highest conceptions ; that from Omnipotence 
comes the conception of Power, from Omniscience 
that of Knowledge, from the independent Essence 
of God that of dependent Being, and so on. And 
this brings us to another grade of opinion, adopted 
by some ; namely, that Equality, for instance, and 
Similarity, must be Ideas, the pre-existence of 
which enables the mind to recognise things as like 
and equal ; these too, it is said, having no exact 
counterpart in experience, for we have never met 
with phenomena which are absolutely like or abso- 
lutely equal. And now we are evidently trembling 
on the verge of the Platonic doctrine, according 
to which each visible and perishable Phenomenon 
corresponds to some intellectual and eternal Idea. 
Although there may be much truth in the general 
impression which these views convey, they cannot, 
with any distinctness, all be held together. In- 
deed, however true any, or, were it possible, all of 



ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 139 

them might be, they would nevertheless not be to 
our purpose. For we are seeking a practical 
rather than a metaphysical distinction; and are 
investigating the nature, not of Ideas in general, 
but of Scientific Ideas only. Sometimes, indeed, 
that which a metaphysician would recognise as an 
Idea, lies at the basis of a science ; thus Psycho- 
logy (if that be at present a real science) refers 
itself to the Idea of the Soul, and Theology to that 
of God. In other cases, however, what is called 
on the above theories a Conception, is really a 
Scientijfic Idea. It is, for instance, on the Concep- 
tion of Space, not on the Idea of Infinity, that the 
science of Geometry has been raised. 

It will be better, for our present purpose, to take 
a different course from that which speculations 
like those above suggest ; and passing by all such 
questions as concern the abstract nature of Scien- 
tific Ideas, the manner in which they are attained, 
their necessary connection with the human mind, 
and the like, to regard them simply as a species of 
conceptions — that is, definitely, as conceptions on 
which sciences can be founded. Our question 
then assumes a more practical shape, and may be 
stated as follows — what attributes fit a Conception 
to become the foundation of a Science ? 

We shall escape one great danger by throwing 
our enquiry into this form. The human mind is, 
as we have before observed, naturally disposed to 
trust too much to method, to venture on this 



140 ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

presumption beyond the bounds of experience and 
lawfiil proof, and, not content with ascertaining 
what is, to determine, as it thinks, what must be. 
There have been k priori enumerations on almost 
every subject from the planets downward; reasons 
have been given why they, and the senses, and the 
Categories, and the main divisions of the world, 
and the primitive substances of Chemistry, should 
be neither more nor less numerous than they were 
supposed to be; till fiirther research has proved 
the falsity of the suppositions for which these 
reasonings were to account, in some cases ; and has 
rendered their truth uncertain in others. It is 
well to avoid, any risk of falling into this delusive 
and untrustworthy mode of enquiry : and this end 
will be effected by keeping the above question 
steadily before us — ^by the presence of what at- 
tributes do we distinguish Scientific Ideas from 
other Conceptions ? 

There is the more reason for taking this view of 
the question, because there seems to be, on the 
face of things, an absolute impossibility of con- 
fining these Ideas, in our present state of know- 
ledge, to any definite number. Sometimes con- 
ceptions, which have been fated to become the 
basis of sciences, have been long altogether un- 
known, as was the case with the Ideas of Galvanism, 
Electricity, and Magnetism. Sometimes fresh dis- 
coveries with regard to a Conception, which has 
been long familiar, elevate it to the dignity of an 



OK SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 141 

Idea. Thus the conception of Heat long preceded 
the dawn of a science of Thermotics* Sometimes 
the Idea, though it retains the same name, becomes, 
from the association of new phenomena with it, 
practically so far different, that it may be fairly 
doubted whether it be really the same Idea as 
before. Thus Optics assumed a new form when 
the ray of colourless light was discovered to be com- 
pound ; and Harmonics underwent a still greater 
metamorphosis, when the properties of musical 
notes came to be considered as dependent not 
on the. length of string, but on the number of 
vibrations. 

Indeed it would seem, that Science follows as 
surely upon Practice in matter of fact as it pre- 
cedes it in theory. Let any set of phenomena 
once be shewn to be of practical importance to 
a large part of society ; and human industry com- 
bines with curiosity in the endeavour to show their 
relation to each other. Science will soon be at 
work to discover the principle which shall reduce 
the mass of perceptions to order. Thus Medicine, 
and Theology, which appeal directly to the strong- 
est and deepest cravings of human nature, have 
been again and again systematized. On the other 
hand, where the importance of a subject is of late 
discovery, the corresponding science is of late 
origin also. The science of Catallactic has only 
arisen since the world has been comparatively 
peacefiil, and whole nations and continents have 



142 ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

felt their permanent welfare to depend on the 
principles which regulate exchange. 

As the world then grows wiser and busier, as 
men expand the sphere of their operations. Sciences 
will increase in number, and, with them. Scientific 
Ideas, It does not follow, however, that, though 
this be true in the long run, each advance of 
human Science involves a corresponding increase 
in the number of Ideas. On the contrary, their 
number may diminish, when two or three ap- 
parently distinct branches of knowledge are traced 
back to a common stock, and are henceforth 
treated as one. So a point of union has been dis- 
covered in Galvanism, Electricity, and Magnetism. 
And Cuvier has given some hints towards a Zoo- 
logy, or Science of Life, of which Botany and 
animal Zoology may prove ultimately to be mere 
subdivisions. And attempts have been made to ac- 
count for vital action in a manner, which, were it 
correct, would bring it, according to the different 
theories, under either (phemistry or Electricity.* 

Least of all, however, can we hope to have all 
Sciences reduced to that unity, which is implied in 
the Scholastic type of Deduction, or the Baconian 
type of Induction. The thought of one vast 
Science grounded on the Idea of Being, furnished 
with its due array of subordinate principles, whether 
we call them Categories, or by some other name, 
including in itself all possible knowledge, assigning 
its place to every producible phenomenon, may 



ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 143 

stand before us as a great Ideal^ but one which we 
must confess is unattainable. Though some con- 
nected Sciences may show a disposition to fall into 
each other, yet the lines of scientific enquiry must 
in general be treated as parallel and independent. 
If there be, as there seems to be in the Divine 
Mind, a perfect pyramid of knowledge, yet the 
apex is • so far distant from us, that not only is it 
itself invisible, but the sides of the pyramid have 
no sensible inclination towards it. Like the vast 
majority of the fix^d stars, it has no ascertainable 
parallax. 

What attributes, then, we proceed to enquire, 
fit a Conception to become an Idea, and be re- 
garded as the basis of a Science ? 

It is evident that every Scientific Idea must be 
distinct, and that this distinctness should, if pos- 
sible, be put beyond doubt by definition. But, 
for reasons which shall be given hereafter. Scientific 
Ideas can very rarely be defined. 

Distinctness, however, though requisite to Sci- 
entific Ideas, is by no means confined to them. 
It is necessary in every Conception which we 
employ, for whatever purpose, in Science, or Art, 
or the conduct of life. Indistinctness is that defect 
of conceptions in general, which Logic professes to 
remedy. If it remain uncured, there can be no 
trusting the second and third operations of the 
mind, while there is such imperfection in the 
first. 



144 ON SCIENTIFIC tDEAS. 

Obviousness is another feature, which, though 
essential to Scientific Ideas, is by no means con- 
fined to them. But it is not, like distinctness, to 
be sought in all Conceptions. We have a right to 
expect it only in the Idea, and in those lowest 
scientific Conceptions, which, in the classificatory 
sciences (which perhaps exhibit this principle most 
clearly) coincide with the phenomenon. Common- 
sense, though not equal to forming Sciences, 
exercises over them a kind of dominion when 
formed. Thus the Deductive Method of investi- 
gation requires that some obvious Idea, with its 
attendant principles, whether gained intuitively or 
empirically it matters not, should be assumed first, 
and then traced into its consequences. During 
this process, it may be allowed to disappear ifrom 
the siuface of the speculation, to become abstruse 
and complicated in the forms which it assumes, 
so as to escape the ken of every mind but that 
which is truly scientific; but it must issue again 
at last into the light of day, and show the result 
of its proceedings. Not the most abstruse Sciences 
are exempt ifrom this law ; they must be capable 
of being made popular at either extreme. In 
Geometry, for instance, the Idea of Space, the 
Axioms and Definitions, on the one hand, and the 
enunciations of the particular propositions, on the 
other, are at once intelligible to many who find 
the greatest difficulty in perceiving how these pro- 
positions depend for proof on their ultimate data. 



ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 145 

The Idea of that most comphcated of all Sciences, 
Astronomy, is perhaps the most obvious of all ; ^nd 
the results to which it leads are the most generally 
interesting. And how many persons have just the 
general Idea of Botany and Zoology, and a keen 
sense of the beauty and wondrousness of individual 
instances of animal and vegetable life, who on 
these subjects find exceedihg difficulty in passing 
the bounds of the merest empiricism, and entering 
into the spirit even of the outlines of a really 
natural system. 

It was said above, again, that the practical 
importance of a Conception is necessary in order 
that it may become an Idea. This, however, 
seems not quite the kind of test to suit our present 
purpose. In this practical importance, indeed*, the 
reason lies, which leads the mind of the investigator 
to dwell more upon the Conception, and found a 
Science upon it. Still, it does not indicate a feature 
which belongs to the Idea as such, but rather an 
antecedent fitness in the Conception for its after- 
wards becoming an Idea. 

A more important mark of Scientific Ideas, and 
one which belongs to them more properly as such, 
may be found in what we may call their generality. 
Every Science professes a certain breadth of range. 
As there cannot be a Science of an individual, so 
neither can there be of a narrow class. This is 
evidently natural. We attribute such importance 
to the unity of Science, simply because it enables 

¦ 

L 



146 ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

US to collect together .much which would other- 
wise be separate. Were its field so narrow, that 
observation could thoroughly cover it, or memory 
exhaust its details, or common sense decide upon 
all its questions by the process of weighing each 
particular case, we could much more easily dis^ 
pense with it. So we are always disposed to adopt 
as an Idea that conception which gives the greatest 
Generality, the widest possible Unity. So, as we 
have seen, the early endeavours after systematic 
Truth hit on the magnificent vision of a single 
all-embracing Science. And, as knowledge pro- 
ceeds, men are, as we observed, very ready to 
diminish the number of Sciences by melting several 
into one. Conjecture on this as on other points 
even outstrips enquiry : as at present some enter- 
tain the hope of discovering a single science of 
all " imponderables." The union of Statics and 
Dynamics under the common name of Mechanics 
illustrates the same tendency. And perhaps it is 
to the same cause that we must refer the very 
common, and, it must be allowed, justifiable 
inclination for viewing. Astronomy as a single 
Science. 

This generality, however, by itself does not 
satisfy our requisitions; we must also have in a 
Scientific Idea a quality which we may be allowed, 
by way of contrast, to call particularity. Or, to 
use a phrase more usual and striking, though 
perhaps for our present purpose less correct. Unity 



ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 147 

in Science is not enough, unless there is also 
Plurality. 

Science^ we have said, must have a certain 
breadth : but in that breadth it must not be too 
uniform. No Universals will serve its purpose, 
however wide they may be, unless they are capable 
of division and subdivision, and so can descend to 
details. Any system, which is deficient either in 
Generality or Particularity, can only half satisfy 
our preconceived notion of scientific perfection. 
A-priori principles of Physics, like those which Kant 
has given, illustrate generally the former of these 
defects. They are true enough, but, when ad- 
mitted, they are too indefinite in their application 
to be useful, and cannot be so combined as, by 
linuting each other, to descend to particulars. 
The Idea of Being is thus shut out from the 
number of Scientific Ideas. For we can invent 
few propositions of which this can be the subject. 
Scholastic ingenuity could not discover more than 
three predicates which were suitable to it — Unity, 
Goodness, and Truth. And, after its first division 
into Substance and Attribute, the distinctions be- 
came either empirical or arbitrary. Causality is 
another conception, which has abundant breadth 
for a Scientific Idea, but which yet is not the 
foundation of a Science. Why is this? because 
the number of propositions as to the relation of 
cause to effect is exceedingly limited ; neither 
does the Idea naturally subdivide, and so descend 

l2 



148 ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. 

to lower conceptions, which the mind can readily 
embrace, and in which we feel a practical interest. 

But a Conception may have both Generality 
and Particularity, may associate itself with broad 
Universals, and allow a multitude of Singulars to 
be combined under it, and yet be unfitted for a 
Scientific Idea, if it be incapable of consequenr- 
tiality. Unless it be such, that the subordinate 
conceptions and propositions seem somehow to 
be connected with it as Effect with Cause, unless 
it be a kind of nucleus of which the whole Science 
is a development, we cannot allow it to be really 
an Idea. Hence, it would seem, certain Ideas 
have been supposed to be necessarily intuitive; 
because, when they are once fully understood, 
the main principles of the Sciences over which 
they preside, though gained at first empirically, 
assmne the appearance of consequences from 
them. Be this as it may ; thus much seems clear, 
that every Science, and therefore every Scientific 
Idea, implies some consequentiality. 

This is evident in the pure deductive Science of 
Geometry, which would fall to the ground, were it 
not for the Definitions, Axioms, and Postulates flow- 
ing naturally from the Idea of Space ; and the several 
propositions which follow being only the legitimate 
consequences of these data. The truth is least 
obvious in the purely classificatory Sciences. 
Botany, for instance, or Geology, appears at first 
sight to be only the arrangement of phenomena 



ON SCIENTIFIC IDEAS. l49 

known by observation, according to a fixed plan, 
and not to involve any notion of consequence. 
It might be thought that any introduction here of 
Antecedent and Consequent, Cause and Effect, was 
quite out of place. Yet it is not really so, A 
purely artificial arrangement, in which the phe- 
nomena are grouped according to an arbitrary 
principle, has no claim to the name of a Science : 
and we shall see hereafter, that in proportion as a 
classificatory Science becomes natural, it approxi- 
mates to the consequential Type, 

All the Conceptions, then, of Science, the highest, 
or Idea, as well as the intermediate and lowest, must 
be distinct. The highest and lowest must both 
possess a certain Obviousness which is not required 
in the intermediate conceptions which are employed 
to connect them. And further, the Idea, which will 
always be a Conception of practical importance, 
must possess the attributes of Generahty, Parti- 
cularity, and Consequentiality. And under this 
the other Conceptions must fall according to a 
certain system of classification. Into the nature 
of that system we may now proceed to enquire ; 
and this consideration will naturally lead us to 
speak of Definition, which, besides being, as was 
remarked above, highly conducive to Distinctness, 
is of the greatest importance in connection with 
several aspects of Science. 



CHAP. IX. 

ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

In considering the subject of Classification^ it 
will be of importance to keep constantly in view 
the distinction between the principles on which we 
classify, and the method which we ^nploy in the 
pr<«I. The most prominent pomt Jdiffe^nce 
is^ that the Principles are material^ while the 
Method is formal ; the former vary with the dif-« 
ferent Sciences, being the main Conceptions which 
come to our aid in establishing a connection be- 
tween the lowest Ccmceptions and the Idea ; the 
latter, when these principles are given, enables us 
to estimate, and as it were to measure, the relation 
of the various Conceptions included in the Science, 
to the Idea and to each other. Thus the absence, 
presence, and number of cotyledons point to the 
principles of Classification in a natural system of 
Botany; and absorption, assimilation, exhalation, 
growth, and generation, occupy a corresponding 
place in Zoology. The Method of Classification, 
on the other hand, is the same for all the Sciences. 
And of this we now proceed to treat. 

The scheme of Predicables contains the Method 
of Classification which Aristotle in part invented, in 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 151 

part found ready to his hand^ and which has 
descended to us through the Schoolmen with 
alterations which affect its form more than its 
substance. Its most received terms have, how- 
ever, escaped from the Schools, and become the 
property of the world. Every one who pretends 
to knowledge talks of Genus and Species, Property 
and Accident, if not with logical accuracy, at least 
in a sense of his own. And. this renders it the 
more desirable that we should retain its termi- 
nology, and adopt its spirit, so far as we properly 
can. The objections against innovations on received 
systems apply here with more than usual force. 
And it will appear, that, with some cautions and 
modifications, we need not seek a new method of 
Classification, but may let the Predicables stand. 

It has been customary to attain the five heads 
of Predicables in one of two ways — the one, more 
generally known in consequence of its adoption 
by modern logicians, according to which Species 
expresses the whole essence, while Genus indicates 
the common. Differentia the distinguishing part of 
the same Essence ; and Property, something joined 
necessarily. Accident, something joined contingently 
to it ; — the other, more agreeable to Aristotle, and 
more commonly employed by the Schoolmen, 
which begins by separating Genus and Species, as 
coming under the predicament of Substance, from 
the other Predicables, which are predicated in 
Quality. 



152 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

' Now perhaps it would be unfair to object to the 
term Essence^ when taken barely and without ex- 
planation^ that it implies of necessity, as it certainly 
does by association, an assent to the realistic 
doctrine of inherent forms. At any rate, the 
formula, which leads us to . describe Genus by its 
being predicated of things diifering in species, as 
Species is in its turn of things diflFerent in number, 
is free from this imputation. But they are both 
liable to another objection, which lies deeper — 
namely, that they assume our possession of the 
power to decide generally what attributes are really 
part of the Essence or Substance of any given thing, 
and what are not. 

In other words, they assume, perhaps unwittingly 
on the part of those who adopt them, the possibility 
of a science of Being. If we could, for instance, 
satisfactorily answer the question, — what is the 
essence of Man ; we should in so doing enumerate 
fully all those attributes, in virtue of which the 
name of Man is applied to him. Granting that 
he is according to his essence a rational animal, 
all other attributes, beside those of animality and 
rationality, must fall under one of the lower predi* 
cables. We could not raise above the level of 
Property or Accident his outward form, his position 
in the animal and in the intellectual world, his 
Condition as a moral being, his capability of govern* 
ment or other social relations. 

The erroneous consequences which flow from 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 153 

this view are obvious. If we follow it, we must 
allow, that, his definition once attained, no re- 
searches, metaphysical, moral, religious, social, 
physiological, of which Man is the subject, can 
have a valid claim to the name of Science. They 
are the investigations, not of the real nature of 
Man, but only of certain secondary qualities belong- 
ing to him. They misplace Man for the time, 
throw him out of his proper rank in the scale of 
things, and raise those features of his being which 
are subordinate or collateral, to the place of the 
highest dignity. Thus the unity of knowledge 
would seem to be disturbed, and the natural arrange- 
ment of Truth broken into, by a misplaced and 
importunate ingenuity. 

Such inferences of course cannot be correct. It 
is impossible that any one view of Man's nature can 
have such right to exclude every other. His phy- 
sical organization is not to be neglected, because 
we attach importance to his reason : his individual 
being has no right to overpower his social ; and so 
on. If the system of the Predicables is to stand, it 
must be placed in a light which will admit of its 
application to Sciences in general. If we show by 
their aid the relation of a Conception to a given 
Idea, this must not disparage our investigating, as 
a separate question, its relation to another also. 

In order then that the Predicables may occupy 
their right position, we must be content to regard 
the whole question as one of relation ; and to 



154 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DBFINITiON. 

admits that any given individual cannot, on logical 
grounds, be ascribed absolutely to any species ; but 
in order to fix its species, and by consequence to 
assign to its other attributes their proper place as 
properties or accidents, we must view it in reference 
to some Scientific Idea. 

Our old example will not be the worse for being 
the most obvious and most common. Suppose an 
individual human being put before us, and the 
demand made that we should fix ' his species, 
genus, difierentia, and so on. The problem is one, 
which, with the individual alone given, even sup- 
posing our knowledge of all the circumstances 
concerning him to be most accurate and perfect, 
will defy all attempts at solution. Let, for instance, 
the given man be Nicholas, the Emperor of all the 
Russias. The difficulty will be to ascertain his 
species : if this is accomplished, all that follows 
will be easy enough. But how is this first step to 
be taken ? Of course, if we are considering Zoology, 
or are content to assume, that the class to which 
our first natural impulse would lead us to refer 
him is really his species, there will be no difiiculty 
in answering at once, Nicholas is by species a Man. 
But supposing that we are dwelling rather on some 
Idea which does not extend beyond the human 
race ; that, to take a particular case, we are con- 
structing a Science of Civil Government. We shall 
then divide men, it may be, according as they are 
governed or governors: and subdivide the latter 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. l&d 

according as they govern in common with others, 
or are governors sole ; and this subdivision may be 
fiirther subdivided, as they rule absolutely, or under 
certain limits of law or constitution. In a scheme 
of this kind, Nicholas will belong to the species 
Despot, or sole governor without limitation of law. 
So, under the Catallactic science, his species will 
be Capitalist. And the moralist must investigate 
the affiiir of the Nuns of Minsk, and other dealings 
of the father of his people, before he decides under 
which of his two exhaustive species, the good and 
the bad, he must place the Czar of Russia. 

A popular instance like this will serve our im- 
mediate purpose, which is, as we have said, not to 
construct a new theory of the predicables, but to 
show, under what provisos we may acquiesce in 
the old one. And, it now appears, that we are at 
liberty to retain both the received scheme, and the 
method of attaining it ; on the condition, however, 
either of rejecting the word Essence, or interpreting 
it as the union of those attributes which are con- 
sidered to constitute a Class in relation to a given 
Idea. 

Adopting, then, this manner of regarding Essence, 
our view of the Predicables follows as a matter of 
couri^. Species will evidently be the expression 
of all those attributes, which are considered as 
constituting the Class relatively to the given Idea. 
And the notion of Classification implies that of 
order and arrangement. A Class necessarily 



156 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

suggests to the mind the existence of collateral 
Classes — standing by its side^ that is, as members 
of the same division. With these, it will have 
certain attributes in common. These will be re- 
presented by the Genus, which may be defined, as 
the Expression of those attributes which a Class 
has in common with its collateral Classes. The 
expression of those attributes in which the Class 
differs from its collateral Classes will, in like 
manner, be the Differentia. 

But, supposing certain attributes to be con- 
sidered as constituting a Class relatively to a given 
Idea, it is evident that certain other attributes 
might possibly be considered to constitute the 
same Class, when viewed in relation to another 
Idea. Thus the word Man indicates the same 
Class, whether it comes from the lips of the 
zoologist or the psychologist; though the one 
looks to the form which animal life assumes in his 
fellow-creatures, the other regards the peculiarity 
of their intellectual constitution. A question 
might indeed be raised, whether the Class was in 
either case strictly speaking the same, or whether 
we should not rather speak of two different Classes 
including exactly the same individuals. But this 
doubt is quite foreign to our present enquiry ; and 
the two Classes, if they are theoretically distinct, 
must be allowed to be practically the same. And 
the point which we have to decide is, in what 
light we are to regard those attributes which are 



On classification and definition. 157 

observed uniformly to accompany a Class ; although^ 
when it was formed in reference to a given Idea^ 
they were quite foreign to that Idea, and therefore 
were not taken into account in forming it. The 
answer of the Logician here corresponds with the 
common phraseology of educated men : both 
would agree in calling them Properties ; and the 
predicable '^ propiium" may accordingly be defined, 
as the Expression of those attributes which are 
observed uniformly to accompany a Class, though 
they were not taken into consideration in form- 
ing it. 

Of the remaining predicable. Accident, little 
need be said. Certain attributes are observed to 
be associated with the Individual. The question 
naturally arises, — are they also associated with the 
Class? If this be determined in the affirmative, 
further questions remain. Do they by themselves 
constitute the Class ? If so, they find their ex- 
pression in the Species. Should this not be so — 
do they go to constitute the Class ? If so, they are 
either shared by the collateral Classes, and so fall 
under the 6r^;^^^, or^iistinguish the Class in question 
from the collateral Classes, and are therefore ex- 
pressed by the Differentia. If, though associated 
with the Class, they neither in whole nor in part 
constitute it, we have already seen that their ex- 
pression is the predicable Property. If, on the 
other hand, they neither, in whole or in part, con- 
stitute the Class, nor are observed uniformly to 



158 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

accompany it^ they fall under the head of Accident : 
and that predicable may be defined, as the Expres- 
sion of such attributes as neither are taken into 
consideration in forming the Class, nor are observed 
uniformly to accompany it. 

We are now in a position to enter on the subject 
of Logical Definition. For, in common phrase, we 
define the Species, by means of its Genus and 
Difierentia. On an accurate use of these terms 
must depend the distinctness of our notion of 
Definition. And, by a natural and common re- 
action, we shall gain a clearer view of the nature 
and importance of the Predicables, by viewing 
them in this connection. They are part of the 
apparatus and instruments of Logic, and cannot 
be appreciated, unless we consider their use. We 
shall learn much of them, by seeing them em- 
ployed. 

In the first place, then, a Corollary with refer- 
ence to Definition naturally follows firom the above 
remarks. It is, that all Definition is necessarily 
relative; and therefore that all attempts at absolute 
Definition are firom their very nature failures, and 
may be rejected without individual examination. 
To any one w^ho assents to the previous theory of 
the predicables, this is an evident consequence. 
For if all correct Definition be, as it is commonly 
granted to be, by means of Genus and Differentia, 
and the predicables be in their very nature relative, 
it will follow of course that Definition is entirely 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 159 

relative also. But we may attain the same con- 
clusion by a less technical method, and one better 
adapted to convince the general reader. 

What is Definition ? Most authorities would agree 
in answering, that it is the statement in its ftilness 
of the meaning of a conception, or, as some would 
prefer, of a term. Were then absolute Definition 
possible, it would exhaust the meaning of the 
thing defined. To take our old example, Man. 
If he were capable of absolute Definition, every 
conception that is necessarily associated with the 
conception of Man, in the mind of the most 
enlightened thinker and most extended enquirer, 
must enter into it. He could not be defined 
under a folio volume. Those attributes which 
are observed in him by the Physician and the 
Moralist have as good a primd facie right to enter 
into his Definition, as those observed by the Meta* 
physician and the Naturalist. If one insists on his 
possession of reason, another may dwell on his 
possession of two hands, or his place in the scale 
of moral beings, or the length of his intestinal 
canal. So the Definition would needs prove in this 
case an assemblage of most promiscuous and ill- 
assorted matter. Or, to take another example, 
that of atmospheric Air; how shall this be defined ? 
By the proportions of oxygen and azote which 
enter into its composition? or by its relation to 
animal life ? or by its elasticity viewed as a fluid ? or 
by its properties of refiraction as an optical medium ? 



160 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

Those who hold that Definition is absolute, must 
say, — By all of these. All of these conceptions, 
and many more, enter into the notion which an 
educated man entertains of Air. And to enumerate 
any thing short of the whole, would be, on this 
hypothesis, to define imperfectly. 

An absolute Definition therefore is impossible, on 
account of the prolixity and confiision of ideas 
which it necessarily involves. It would resolve 
itself at best into a long string of unconnected 
epithets. However complete it might be as a 
general summary of our knowledge on the subject, 
it would be utterly wanting in clearness, and would 
prove no remedy for indistinctness. 

This being granted, an important consequence 
follows. We must be content with relative De- 
finition; and therefore, a Conception will be^ 
capable of ^t least as many Definitions as there 
are Sciences, or, which is the same. Scientific Ideas, 
under which it falls. 

This, again, the Logician who has followed the 
previous reasoning will not be slow to admit. If 
all the Predicables imply a reference to a certain 
Scientific Idea, the Definition, which is composed 
of two of them, will imply such reference also ; and 
as the Ideas multiply, the Predicables increase, 
and, with them^ the Definitions also. But this 
position, like the former, admits of being put 
into a more practical form ; into which we proceed 
to throw it. 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 161 

All Definition implies Classification. In defining 
a Class-conception, (and Class-conceptions alone are 
definable,) we undertake to show the boundaries 
which separate it from other Classes, with which 
it might possibly be confused* But as each Science 
has its own peculiar Classification, it necessitates 
also a peculiar Definition, by which the Class in 
question may be separated firom all other Classes 
which the said Science recognises. The same 
formula which answers the purpose of distinction 
in one case, will not serve in another. To keep to 
our old example, — can any form of words, suf- 
ficiently concise to be recognised by common- 
sense as a Definition, be devised, which shall at 
once show how Man is to be distinguished fironi 
Spirits, good and bad, and from other incorporeal 
agencies; and the point at which he parts com- 
pany with the brute creation ? or, regarding that 
physical structure which he has in common with 
brutes, will sum up the features of resemblance 
and those of difference, which he exhibits when 
compared with such collateral Classes as the lion 
and the hare ; and his relation to such more distant 
Classes as the eagle and the ostrich; or, further 
still, to the oyster and the crab ? What an entire 
confiision would necessarily result firom the at- 
tempt to bring bef6re the mind at once all these 
various points of contrast! By one course only 
can we avoid it. Man must be defined in one 
way, if we would see his place in the Spiritual 

M 



162 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

world ; in another, if we would regard him in his 
relation to Good and Evil ; in a third, if he is viewed 
relatively to the Idea of Life. In many other cases 
a like difficulty is evident, which must be met in 
the same manner. We should feel a misgiving if 
called upon suddenly to define feldspar, for in- 
stance, or the diamond. The reason probably is, 
that we should be doubting how to attempt the 
Definition; whether we should view them as 
Minerals, or bring them under Chemistry — consult 
their crystallography, or their analysis* And the 
mind seems quite at a loss, and set afloat on a wide 
sea of speculation, when called on to define some 
Conception which does not fall naturally under 
any formed Science. In the absence of a true 
Science of ^Esthetics, we feel that it is vain to 
attempt a true Definition of the Sublime, or the 
Beautifiil. 

One remark remains to be made on this part 
of the subject. It has been said above, that a 
Conception may have as many Definitions as there 
are Ideas under which it falls. We will now 
observe, that it may have more. The same Idea 
may be developed by means of difierent subordinate 
Conceptions, which will lead of course to dif- 
ferent Classifications, and therefore to different 
Definitions. Linnaeiis and (Suvier both bring 
Man under the genus Mammalia; though the 
one finds his Differentia in the number of his 
incisor and molar teeth, the other in his possession 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 168 

of hands. Aristotle, who makes his genus Biped, 
completes the Definition by distinguishing him 
from birds either by the absence of wings, or, 
which comes to nearly the same thing, the restric* 
tion of his motions to this vile earth we tread on. 
If each of these accoimts of Man distinguishes 
him with sufiicient accuracy from other animals, 
none of them can well be called an incorrect 
Definition. Yet one of them will of course be 
superior to the others. This superiority depends 
on the respective merits of the Classification 
employed. And that Classification is to be pre-^ 
ferred, in which the Idea, and the lowest Con- 
ceptions, are connected by the most appropriate 
intermediate generalisations. What constitutes 
such appropriateness, it is not hard, in a general 
manner, to see. Those have the advantage, which, 
while they apply with sufiicient obviousness to the 
lowest Conceptions,' flow at the same time most 
naturally from the Idea. By their flowing natu- 
rally from the Idea is meant, that either reason 
shows a priori their connection with it, or observa- 
tion and experiment abundantly establish the same 
fact k posteriori. Thus in Geometry the division 
of geometrical magnitudes into those of one, two, 
and three dimensions is natural on the former 
account: finite space implying possible measure- 
ment; and length, breadth, and thickness being 
obviously the three aspects of space which 
admit of measurements And Cuvier's arrange- 

m2 



164 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

ment of animals according to the nature of their 
respiratory and circulating apparatus is an ex- 
ample of the latter kind; it being amply proved 
by observation, that according to the perfection of 
the organs of respiration and circulation, the 
various functions of animal life are more or less 
perfectly performed. 

It is evident that a Definition may in this man- 
ner be reduced to those dimensions which custom 
and reason have allowed it, and very frequently 
to its ideal perfection of form, in which it consists 
only of two words, one of which is the Genus, and 
the other the Differentia. For, supposing a Class 
to be viewed thus relatively to an Idea, it is not 
necessary, in order to distinguish it from other 
Classes which refer to the same Idea, to enumerate 
all the attributes with which we know it is invested. 
We only need to draw the line of demarcation 
clearly between it and those other Classes. And 
this will be done, if we show, first of all, how it is 
related to them in the way of resemblance ; which 
is expressed by Genus: and then, how it is dis- 
tinguished from them by certain peculiarities ; 
which is expressed by Differentia. All its other 
constant attributes come in as Properties; its 
inconstant as Accidents; and those only, which 
are prominent in the scheme of Classification, 
enter into the Definition. If, for instance, to the 
received Definition of Man as a bimanous mammal, 
it be objected, that many other attributes. 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEJ^INITION. lt)5 

besides those of being viviparous and possessing 
hands^ are necessary to our Conception of Man, 
such as reason, imagination, the erect posture, the 
face divine ; the answer is simply, that, so far as 
the functions of Kfe are concerned, these attributes 
are not essential, and that the Zoologist views 
Man with regard to life, and to no other Idea 
whatsoever. Linnaeus once went so far as to 
describe the ourang-outang as Homo Simius ; and 
the practical inconvenience of such a Definition 
would not have been sufficient to overthrow it, 
if the physical structure of the brute had borne 
out, as it did not, the correctness of the Classifica- 
tion. Indeed, at present it may be doubted with 
some plausibility, whether the word Man, as 
employed in different Sciences, always indicates 
precisely the same individuals. Thus an Idiot is 
to the moralist no Man ; and one theory of capital 
punishment assumes, that the culprit by the com- 
mission of atrocious crime ceases to possess social 
rights, in other words, to be a Man in the sense of 
the Political Science. If this be true, the body of 
the criminal who has been executed would never- 
theless be that of a Man for every purpose of the 
Naturalist. 

But there is still room for objection left. It 
may be argued, that, supposing the Definition to be 
restricted to one Idea, it may still be a very long 
aflFair indeed. The above Definition of Man, for 
instance, does not express all his attributes which 



166 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

have reference to life. Why should his prehensile 
organs be held to have such reference, if those of 
locomotion are excluded ? The fact of his having 
two hands either has no connection with the Idea 
of Life^ or, if it has, must impart a share of that 
honour to the fact of his having feet also. 

In spite of this objection, our definition of Man 
may stand. It is valid> if it marks him off from 
every other class of animal whatsoever ; if we are 
prepared to say, as we are, that every animal 
which is viviparous, and has two hands and two 
only, is entitled to the name of Man« 

This seems .the place to consider another ob- 
jection to which this plan of concise Definition is 
liable. It has been argued, that a Definition, which 
does not enumerate all the attributes of a Class, 
but only such as are assumed to be distinctive, 
though long accepted and approved, may fail at 
last, and be convicted of falsehood. A bimanous 
mammal, it is urged, may hereafter be discovered, 
which shall be formed, in some respects, on quite 
a different type fi:om Man, and to which we should 
refuse the name, though consistency would urge 
us to grant it Neither is it sufficient, taking 
another point of view, to define him as a Rational 
animal ; because, it is said, we should not grant the 
name of a man to a fish or a quadruped, which 
was found to possess reason. 

We might reply to such instances as these, that 
Definition is grounded on Classification, which con- 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 167 

templates only existing things ; and that it is hard 
therefore to object to it, that it neglects the 
creatures of imagination, and makes no grave 
provision for non-entities. But this would be 
only to evade the difficulty. Cases something 
like the imaginary examples given above, actually 
occur. Existing systems of Classification are occa- 
sionally broken into by apparent anomalies, which 
are stubborn facts nevertheless, and must, ulti- 
mately, have a place found them. The answer 
which fairly meets the case, will also bring for- 
ward another view of our subject. 

Definition does not, with whatever it deals, 
actually give Knowledge, It provides for the dis- 
tinctness, not the discovery, of Truth. It has no 
alchemical power of turning dross into gold ; but 
serves as a touch-stone, by applying which to the 
individual, we may ascertain the extent of our 
general information on the matter in hand. We 
shall soon discover this, if we make a few attempts, 
which are by no means unprofitable as intellectual 
exercises, at defining. We shall find, that, if we 
fail, it is often not so much fi:om ignorance of the 
Conception we wish to define, as from our insuf- 
ficient acquaintance with the Classes from which 
we would distinguish it A man possessing the 
most thorough acquaintance with the ingredients, 
and properties, and uses of Coal, could not there- 
fore define it. He might describe it at length, but 
this, we have seen, would be no logical Definition. 



166 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

If he attempted to select one or two distinguishing 
attributes^ he would most likely fail in the attempt ; 
because he was ignorant^ not of the substance 
itself, but of the other substances from which it is to 
be distinguished. To be successfiil, he must know, 
not only the mineral in question, but other mine- 
rals also, and a science of Mineralogy as well. 

As then we can only classify phenomena which 
we know, so we can only define on the supposition 
that such Classification is correct, and based on a 
sufiicient observation of phenomena. The Defini- 
tion of Man can only distinguish him from all 
other known animals, or all other known rational 
beings. According to the probability that other 
rational beings, or other animals, in many respects 
resembling him, have, or have not, escaped our 
observation, will be the probability that a Defini- 
tion, which is certainly valid in the existing state 
of our knowledge, will, or will not, continue valid 
hereafter. 

We are now close upon the great point of 
difference between the ancient and modem views 
of Definition. We have seen that it is a conse- 
quence of regarding Definition as relative to an 
Idea, to hold that, though it imphes knowledge, it 
does not give it. He who can define well must be 
master of his subject : and to one who had not at 
least a» general acquaintance with it, his words 
would convey no meaning. Only the proficient 
can give a Definition ; only the advanced pupil 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 169 

can follow it. Suppose, for instance, a hearer to 
have no system of Classification under which the 
diamond falls, or a diflFerent one from that employed 
by him who defines it. The Definition will be 
unmeaning to him in the former case ; it will seem 
inelegant, irregular, or possibly even wrong, in the 
latter. 

This would not be the case, if Definition were, 
as it was supposed to be, absolute. To define a 
Conception, would not be in that case to assign it 
a place in relation to a particular Science, but to 
state its gradation in the great scale of things. 
Definition would not appeal to a Classification with 
which students only were supposed to be acquainted ; 
but would regard all things by the common light 
of human nature. On this hypothesis, it would be 
intelligible to one who had no antecedent ac- 
quaintance with the subject. Thus Definition was 
formerly considered as one actual source of know- 
ledge. Fresh information was to be extracted 
from it by means of the syllogistic apparatus. By 
its aid, the imperfections of sense were to be 
remedied, and Science carried beyond the sphere 
of observation. And hence the importance formerly 
attached to the rule, which commanded that every 
Definition should be composed of two parts, each 
in itself '' better known than the thing defined.*' 

There was a very intelligible sense attached to 
the phrase in question. Those things were better 
known in themselves, though probably less known 



170 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

to US, which were more universal. They held a 
higher place in the deductive scheme, and ap- 
proached nearer to those summary laws of Nature, 
on which lower laws were foimded. Thus they 
were more cognisable by reason, just as things less 
universal were more cognisable by sense. And 
therefore the rule above given might be put in 
other words as follows — the Genus and Differentia 
must each of them be more Universal than the 
Species to be defined. 

This rule is evidently binding in the case of 
Genus, if, as we have said above, it expresses the 
attributes common to the group of collateral 
Classes, of which the Species is one. Nor is it hard 
to see the reason of Aristotle a^d the School- 
men after him, for making the same demand with 
regard to Differentia. They intended, as it has 
been observed, that the Definition should give 
knowledge. This it was to do, by enabling the 
mind to combine two Conceptions, which it had 
entertained previously, into a new Conception ; just 
as in syllogism from the two premises we draw a 
conclusion, which while it requires both, is distinct 
from either. It would not be difficult to shew, 
that this view assigns a power to the hiunan mind 
which it does not really possess, of combining its 
Conceptions according to some certain and in- 
variable law. Two Conceptions may indeed be 
added mechanically one to another; but we can 
no more predict, in Metaphysic, what will result 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 171 

from their intimate union, than we can feretel, in 
Chemistry, how the appearance and properties of 
a protoxide will be altered, by its combination 
with another volimie of oxygen. In either case 
we may make happy guesses, but we have no guide 
to which we can trust implicitly ; nothing beyond 
that tact in perceiving analogies and so anticipating 
consequences, which experience developes if it 
does not give, and the conclusions of which, in 
their most perfect form, cannot, if unsupported 
from without, rank very high m the scale of pro- 
babihty. 

But, putting considerations of this kind aside^ it 
is clear, that if a Definition is, in accordance witii 
this hjrpothesis, to give knowledge, it must be 
made up of Conceptions, each wider than the 
Class to be defined. For, if either of its parts be 
only co-extensive with the Class, no new range 
will be gained by the mind, which must still be 
fettered by the limits of observation. On this 
theory, for instance, it would be unsatisfactory to 
define Man by his having two hands. Whence, it 
may be asked, has the mind derived this Concep- 
tion of bimanous ? Since nothing except man is 
two-handed, it can only be from man himself. So 
the Definition is not really exphcative, because, in 
order to understand it, we must be acquainted 
with man, who is its subject We may define him 
as an animal with two feet and without plumage, 
and escape this objection. For though no other 



1 



17d ON tSLASSlFICATION AND DEFINITION; 

animal be both two-footed and destitute of plumage^ 
we may derive each of these notions^ animal^ biped, 
and featherless, from other sources than Man. 

In modem enquiries, where Definition stands 
not as the soxrrce but as the registry of our 
knowledge, no such restriction is required. We 
are content that the Genus shall be often co^ 
extensive with the Species. Unambitious of exer- 
cising the dangerous privilege of combining Con- 
ceptions independently of experience, we only 
claim that the Differentia be as clear and as 
universal as the Class defined, and seek neither 
greater clearness, nor a wider universality. 

We have confined our considerations, hitherto, to 
purely Logical Definition. We have seen, that, in 
order to sustain its pretensions at all, it must allow 
them to be considerably narrowed. In no suflScient 
sense does it state the natiure of the thing defined. 
It implies no attempt at exhausting the attributes 
of its subject. This it views, not as it is in itself, 
but only in its relation to a certain Idea. Neither 
do all the attributes which can be shown to refer 
to the Idea enter into the Definition. Those only 
are there admitted, on which the place of the 
Conception with reference to the Idea turns — 
those only, in other words, which enter into the 
scheme of Classification. Thus it is not quite 
correct to say, that a Logical Division expresses the 
analysis of a Conception. It is grounded on such 
an analysis, but does not wholly express it. We 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 173 

take an individual, and reject those attributes 
which belong to it as such. Being thus rid of 
the Accidents, we have gained the Conception of 
the Species. Of this, the Attributes divide into 
those which have direct reference to the Idea 
under which it falls, as entering into the scheme 
of Classification, and those which have not. Of 
these, the former, portioned out into Genus and 
DiflFerentia, compose the Definition ; the latter 
take their place under the stricter or looser senses 
of Property. 

It would be foreign to our present purpose to 
speak of Definitions other than Logical. Sufiice 
it to say, that from Logical Definition they derive 
their name, in virtue of a likeness and analogy 
more or less cogent. But they are wholly un- 
scientific, and are useful only as suggestive, or as 
affording raw material, so to speak, for further 
speculation. Thus Physical Definition is a con- 
junction of words which has almost, if not quite, 
disappeared from our ordinary phraseology. It 
signifies only an enumeration of all the attributes 
of the Class defined so far as they are known; 
without any selection, or scientific arrangement, 
or grouping under an Idea. It is therefore prior 
to Classification, as Logical Definition is posterior 
to it ; and from its indiscriminate mass the Natu- 
ralist selects what is fitted for his purpose. To 
use a distinction of Lord Bacon's, it belongs, not 
to Physic, but to Natural History. Thus it 



174 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

follows the analogy of Logical Definition^ in being 
grounded on an analysis ; but here it is the thing 
which we analyse^ and not the ,Conception. 

Nominal Definition has held its place^ but by 
a very doubtful title. Its exact nature^ Logical 
writers find it hard to state. The most consistent 
view of it is also the. simplest^ and that which rests 
on the most ancient authorities. We define a 
thing nominally^ when we show, or rather attempt 
to show, its nature, by examining the etymological 
formation of the word by which we commonly 
express it. This also is evidently named from the 
analogy of Logical Definition, being founded on an 
analysis, not, however, of the Conception, but of 
the Word. Though often highly suggestive, it can 
seldom be trusted, unless we are prepared to allow, 
that, in forming compoimd words, men have always 
regarded the most fundamental and permanent 
features of the objects to which they applied them, 
to the exclusion of those which are fleeting and 
superficial. 

Of all the spurious species of Definition, that 
which is called Accidental, or, in one word. De- 
scription, is at once of most common use, and least 
nearly related to its Logical prototjrpe. Without 
any attempt at analysis, it merely takes those 
attributes of the Class which appear most salient 
and characteristic, and calls attention to them as 
marks by which it may be recognised, quite inde- 
pendently of its relation to other Classes. 



ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION; 175 

These few remarks on the secondary kinds of 
Definition are a digression from our main subject : 
but they may be usefrd in showing, that one 
Species only is recognised by Science ; that of this, 
all others are, more or less, imitations ; and that, 
in every case. Scientific and Logical Definition 
coincide. 

One possible diflSculty attendant on the previous 
views, still remains to be obviated. It may be 
objected to the practical working of this scheme 
of Relative Definition, that it reduces all Sciences 
to a dead level, and destroys their real distinctions 
as to dignity and importance. Has Man, as such> 
it may be asked, no Definition ? Is it of no 
consequence, whether we view him as mortal or 
immortal, in his relation to the animal kingdom, 
or to the spiritual world? Logic will do little 
service, if it thus violates Common-sense, and 
overleaps a diflFerence which we observe in every- 
day life. 

A little care in drawing a necessary distinction 
will serve to meet this diflSculty. Suppose the 
same thing to be defined in reference to several 
Ideas. It follows, that each Definition may be 
equally correct, but not, of course, equally im- 
portant. As the Ideas themselves rise and fall in 
dignity, so will the Classifications and Definitions 
which are founded on them. Thus the value to be 
attached to the several Definitions will depend, not 
on the degree of their correctness, (for all may be 



176 ON CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION. 

equally correct) but on the comparative promi- 
nence of the Ideas — a subject which shall be 
mentioned^ though not discussed^ at the conclusion 
of this Essay. 



CHAP. X. 

ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 

We will now once more recapitulate the com- 
mon features which are possessed by all the 
Sciences. In the first place, each of them is 
grounded on an Idea. Next, under this Idea is 
ranked a multitude of Conceptions. Thirdly, 
these Conceptions have, amongst each other, an 
Order and Arrangement, in which constant re- 
ference is had to the Idea. Foiu'thly, beside this 
Order and Arrangement, which either tends to, or 
amounts to. Classification, there is some aim at, and 
appearance of, Deductiveness, and consequentiality, 
wherever formal Deduction, and strict Conse^ 
quence, are, firom the nature of the case, impossible. 

Thus much for the common features of Sciences 
in general. They will be indirectly illustrated yet 
further in the following remarks, which are in- 
tended, however, to answer directly a different 
purpose, and to mark, not the Similarity, but the 
Distinction of Sciences ; not their Uniformity, but 
their Gradations. 

The highest place in the scale is of coiu'se as- 
signed to Pure Science. Of this we take Geometry 

N 



178 ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 

as the type. Its peculiar and characteristic excel- 
lency is, its entire dependence on its Idea. 

The Idea, in this case, once given, all the 
Science necessarily follows. It is the nucleus 
round which all that is homogeneous with it 
clusters by a natural law. When once Space is 
conceived by the mind, mere cogitation, without 
the aid of experience, would be able to draw from 
this Idea the Conceptions of Lines, Surfaces, and 
Solids, and all the various species of these which 
the Science of Geometry recognises. The prin* 
ciples of Classification^ also, are here exemplified. 
They only escape attracting our attention, by 
appearing in so natural and obvious a form. It 
has been said above, that on Classification follows 
Definition. Here, accordingly, a good Classifica- 
tion lies at the very base of the Science, and a 
corresponding series of accurate Definitions follows 
it. We begin Pure Science by defining. In other 
words, we commence by positing our Species, and 
stating their Genus and Difference. That result, 
at which, as we shall see presently, lower forms of 
Science aim, is attained before the main labour of 
pure Science begins. 

Being thus furnished with an Idea, and the 
subordinate Conceptions, and the system of Clas- 
sification, we apply ourselves to our new work, 
that of drawing Consequences. And the con- 
sequentiality is here as perfect as all that has 
preceded it. There is ilo gap between our Data 



ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 179 

and our ultimate conclusions. The necessary 
laws of inference, when applied to the Definitions, 
Axioms, and Postulates, enable us to invest our 
Species with Properties before unknown. Squares, 
Triangles, Circles, become no clearer as we ad- 
vance ; for they were accurately defined before we 
began our researches. But they do become fuller 
Conceptions, as they are associated in our minds 
with fresh Atlributes, And all these Attributes are 
Properties: they are proved to be inseparably 
connected with the several Classes, though not 
taken into consideration in forming them. In 
this most perfect sphere of speculation. Accidents 
have no place. 

Such then are the distinctive excellencies of 
Pure Science. It possesses the highest Unity, 
being simply the development of a single Idea. 
It begins with a perfect Classification, and following 
on this, with accurate and perfect Definitions. 
But these merits are comparatively eclipsed by its 
most distinguishing excellency, an exact isind per- 
fect Consequentiality. From first to last, it flows 
in one direction, from the Idea downwards. There 
13 no appeal to Experience,— no desire of confirm- 
ation from without, — no endeavour, when the feict 
has been derived from one quarter, to find the 
reason in another. Every Unk of the chain of 
knowledge holds : and, wherever the process stops 
short, it is, as far as it goes, perfect; having perhaps 
an unfinished air, but still enduring even in this 

n2 



180 ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 

intermediate form, and capable of addition without 
alteration. 

Next in place of dignity to Pure Science come 
the Applied Sciences* Of these, we have before 
taken Mechanics as an example. Here, too, we 
have an Idea, and a number of conclusions flowing 
from certain data according to a necessary con- 
' sequence. But the Applied Sciences are in- 
ferior to the preceding Class in one important 
particular. They have not the same absolute 
Unity. Their main Principles, though closely 
connected with the Idea, need not be deductions 
from it, mere phases and aspects in which it 
exhibits itself anew. They often need independ- 
ent proof, and rest upon the testimony of Ex- 
perience. Thought alone could not have extracted 
them from the Idea. No one, by only pondering 
the nature of Force, could arrive at the knowledge 
of the laws of Motion. Thus there is an interval, 
so to speak, in the Applied Sciences, between the 
Idea and the subordinate Principles, which ex- 
cludes them from perfect Unity, lowers the student 
from the sphere of pure Abstraction, brings him to 
the border-land of the Intellectual and Sensible, 
and introduces the contrast, though not in its 
hardest outline, between Form and Matter. Thus 
the province of Reason is somewhat narrowed, 
and that of Experience expands. 

Jn this respect their practical application answers 
to their theory. Though, the further they are 



ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 



i8i 



pressed; the more power they display ; though they 
admit; in practice, of a minute elaboration to an 
extent which beforehand would be simply in- 
credible; though they transcend the limits of 
observation, and become prophetic at the time, to 
derive afterwards fresh credit from the verification 
of their predictions; yet one important part of 
their office is to account for the past. This is 
seldom the case with Pure Science. That, for the 
most part, gives at once the fact and the reason. 
It does not usually derive the knowledge of a truth 
from some extraneous sorurce, and then account 
for it in virtue of certain known laws; but, from 
these laws, reaches out to new propositions, which, 
but for it, would have remained unknown. Not 
so the Applied Sciences, which have generally, in 
all their provinces, to account for facts which are 
known from Observation and other independent 
sources, before they are trusted in the field where 
Reason supersedes Sense, and takes a free flight 
beyond the regions of Experiment. 

But if the Applied Sciences be thus deficient in 
Unity, a more serious objection lies against the 
next Class of Sciences, which we call Classificatory. 
Of these, we may take Botany as an example. 
They have indeed a sufficiently perfect Unity of 
Idea. Every fact of Botany, for instance, bears 
naturally on the Idea of Vegetable Life. The mind 
is never in suspense, never seems wandering from 
its subject. All the Conceptions group themselves. 



182 ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 

whether readily or not, at lea^st with obvious 
reference to a single purpose. And therefore the 
Classificatory Sciences exhibit, in thdr fullest 
perfection, the system of Classification, and the 
practical use of the Predicables. Accidents are 
not excluded from their cognisance, as in the 
hi^er forms of Science* Varieties, for instance, 
or those modifications of the species which are not 
necessarily permanent, though they se^B prac- 
tically to be so; the habitat of a plant, or its 
oeconomic uses, though confessedly Accidents, find 
their place in a Botanical treatke. Definition 
also is perfectly exhibited, though its position here 
is very different from that which it occupies in 
Pure Science* There, as we have seen, the Species 
are first defined, and then certain Attributes, which 
we ai once recognise as Properties^, either in 
the stricter or looser sense of the term, are afiBLsed 
to them by the process of inference* In tiie 
Classificatory Sdences we b^n at the other 
extreme. A mass of Attributes is placed before 
us ; we have to arrange them in such a manner, 
as to determine what constitute the Class (in other 
words, enter into its Definition), and what do not. 
And those Attributes which fall under the latter 
head, according as they are permanent or not, 
are distributed into the remaining classes of 
Property and Accident. 

But the great deficiency of these Sciences, in 
spite of their combining correct Classification and 



ON THE aRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 183 

Diyision with a sufficient Unity, lies in their lac^ of 
Consequentiality. Let the facts be arranged in 
the best possible manner ; the principle of cohesion 
is still wanted. The facts must be tg,ken on trust ; 
they bear little or no evidence to their own truth ; 
they resemble, when icornbined, some piece of 
Mosaic work, which must be held together by a 
frame, or it would fall to pieces; they require 
the check of evidence, and the support of observa- 
tion. In Geometry, no position of Euclid can be 
ignored or doubted by one who has paid due 
attention to the treatise, without his exposing him- 
self to the charge of folly or wilfulness. In the 
Applied Sciences, when certain premises are granted, 
all doubt as to the sequel is put out of the question, 
Bujt in Mineralogy or Botany, each separate asser- 
tion admits of dispute ; the proof of any one will 
not serve to establish any other : all the internal 
evidence of the truth of a system lies in the 
natural air of its details, and the consistency of it$ 
general features. 

Is there then, it may be aske;<Jji no Consequent 
tiajiity in ,the Classificatory Sciences? May we 
iK>t say here, as well as in Mathematics, that the 
Properties are traceable to the nature of the Species, 
as eifect to cause ? When, fojr instance, monocoty- 
ledonous plants are found to be endogens, while 
dicotyledonous plants are expgens, may we not 
say that these modes of growth are consequences, 
respectively, of the siiqgle and double cotyledon ? 



184 ON TH£ GRADATIONS OF SCI£NCK. 

We answer, in the first place, that while it would 
be rash to deny all consequentiality to the Classifi- 
catory Sciences, we may safely assert, that, when 
compared to the previous kinds of Sciences, they 
prove in this respect greatly deficient. It is certain 
that we have here no such knowledge of the laws 
of consequence as to enable us to predict results. 
No one could have told a priori, that mono- 
cotyledonous plants are endogens; no one can 
venture safely on like predictions hereafter. All 
attempts at anticipation on such subjects must 
depend on Analogies, which often fail, and can 
never be more than probable evidence. So that, 
at best, Consequentiality shows itself here in its 
lowest form. We must be abimdantly content, if, 
having traced our facts first, we can discover the 
reasons afterwards. 

We should further observe, that it is by no 
means the same thing to be sure that consequence 
exists, that two phenomena are connected as cause 
and effect : and to be able to investigate the stages 
of the consequence, to have the history, so to 
speak, of the causality. One phenomenon may 
invariably, so far as om* observation goes, follow 
and attend upon another ; and yet we may perceive 
such a gap in the nature of things between them> 
as may serve to convince us that there must be 
some remote law, as yet perhaps undiscovered, on 
which their connection depends. To take our 
former example: thus much seems clear, that 



ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. I85 

endogenous growth is the consequence of the pre- 
sence of but one cotyledon : but the fact of the 
consequence does not explain its mystery; its law 
is still unknown. Admitting that the phenomena 
do accompany each other, we enquire why ; and at 
present, in vain. 

We may now briefly state the sum of the previous 
remarks on the gradations of Science. Pure 
Science, we have seen, is the type which unites 
perfections elsewhere separate, and in which Unity 
of structure and complete Classification meet with 
perfect Consequence. In the Applied Sciences, the 
Consequence, when the premises are once given, 
may be as perfect, but the Unity is of a lower kind, 
and depends less entirely on the Idea. The Clas- 
sificatory Sciences have a Unity nearly as perfect 
as that of Pure Science, vnth a Classification as 
perfect, and of yet wider range. But here the. 
parts are bound together by a loose tie, and the 
scientific mind regrets the absence of Consequen- 
tiality. 

One observation remains to be made at this part 
of our subject. Sciences are sometimes compli- 
cated. Observation and Reason go together to 
make up the whole. An inductive process, which 
is mainly one of Classification, is to be gone through 
before the premises are gained fi"om which the 
deduction begins. And this process is not always, 
in the less exact Sciences, considered as antecedent 
to the Science, but sometimes as a part of it. Thus in 



186 ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 

Harmonics the relation of the number of vibrations to 
sound, though a matter of experiment, is recognised 
as part of the Science ; though it serves mainly as 
the preliminary to other parts, which deduce hence 
the laws of harmony and discord as dependent on 
number. 

Sciences like these take their place according to 
their predomiiumt element. We must analyse 
them, and rank them higher or lower, as the £m^ 
pirical or the Rational preponderates. 

There is another Class of Compound Sciences^ 
such as Geology, and, especially of late. Astronomy, 
which assume another form. First of all, a certain 
set of phenomena are collected and arranged : a 
number of truths are gained by inference, observ* 
atipn, or both. So far the ordinary procedure of 
Science is observed. We state, after due consider- 
ation, what is true at present But another Class 
of questions soon comes in. We ask, what condi- 
tions of tlungs in past time these present truths 
presuppose. These are some of the most intereiSt- 
ing problems connected with Science. Who is not 
anxious to know, what we can lawfully infer as to 
the jstate of the earth in past ages, fi:om the present 
^ts of its stratification an4 organic remains ; — how 
-£ax celestial phenomena make the nebular hypo- 
thesis probable ; — and whether the optical properties 
of the diamond oblige us to assign it a vege^table 
origin ? 

In cases of this kind, it is with the present phe- 



ON THE GRADATIONS OF SCIENCE. 187 

nomena that Science, in the strict sense, deals« In 
attaining or arranging these, it occupies itself* The 
further queries resulting henee, in deciding which 
we must infer what has been formerly from what 
is now, do not belong properly to Scientific Method, 
There is here no subordination and arrangement, 
but only a question, as to the practical connection 
of fact with fact. We can only ask — does the 
existing state of thi^s necessitate the belief, that 
another economy^ difiering in certain given respeetSj, 
existed at a certain given time ? Our (a.cts are as 
so many witnesses in a court of justice. To decide 
whether they prove their point, appertains not to 
Scientific Method, but to the ordinary laws of 
Evidence. 



CHAP. XL 

ON METHOD IN ART. 

We should wander far from the direct line of 
our enquiry, were we to allow ourselves to enter 
fiilly on the place of Method in Art. It would be 
no trifling undertaking to attempt an Analysis 
of the rapid glance of Invention, or the cooler 
exertion of the critical faculty. The comparative 
inexactness of Method in this province gives a 
wider scope for speculation concerning it. The 
two great divisions of Art, the mechanical and the 
sesthetical, might put in separate claims for dis- 
cussion. We should have to assign due place and 
proportion to the skill which adapts means to ends, 
the fine taste which discriminates results, the 
broad general theories of beauty and fitness, which 
the Artist is supposed, often unconsciously, to obey. 
We might wander freely on the enchanted ground : 
but should soon find ourselves far" from the do- 
minion of Logic. 

Our task, with regard both to Art, and to 
Morality, which in this point of view is closely 
connected with it, is of a much simpler nature. 
We are to avoid entering unnecessarily on their 



ON METHOD IN ART, 189 

peculiarities^ and content ourselves with consider* 
ing those features in which their procedure is 
identical with, or stands in intimate relation to, the 
Logical Method of Science. 

Art, then, like Science, has to consider the 
relations of certain Conceptions to an Idea, There 
can be no true Art when an Idea is altogether 
absent. There may be much empirical skill, great 
accuracy in imitation, close observation of detail, 
but no genius, invention, or originality. 

Yet, on the other hand, there seems to be truth 
in the position, that Art does not deal with Ideas. 
Its work is the production of actual individual 
Things. It seems to wander beyond iti^ province, 
and confound itself as the case may be, with 
Mechanics, or iBsthetics, or some narrower Science, 
when it quits individuals, and meddles with prin- 
ciples at all. 

These two sides of truth may thus be reconciled. 
Art has, indeed, to do with individual things. But 
each of these will fall not under one Idea only, 
but under several, will bear a definite relation to 
them, and be capable of receiving illustration from 
them. In other words, the subject of a single 
Art lies within the sphere of several Sciences. 
And it cannot be expedient to neglect the light 
which methodized knowledge may thus cast upon 
it. These Sciences can be made practically useful, 
if knowledge is really power. And how are they 
to be brought to bear ? Not surely in an irregular 



IPO ON METHOD IN ART. 

and desultory manner. This would be a con- 
tradiction of their nature. The several Sciences, 
which claim so much order and arrangement in 
their respective provinces, cannot be in a state of 
anarchy among themselves. One Science will be 
dominant above the rest; and the Idea of that 
Science will be the Idea of the Art. 

Must, then, the Idea on which an Art is founded 
be necessarily a Scientific Idea? It would seem 
not. After all the attention that has been devoted 
to the Philosophy of Fine Arts, a real Science of 
iBsthetic has never been attained. We have not 
been able to state satisfactorily in a deductive form 
the nature of the Beautiful. But, though the 
Science has been absent, the Art has gone on. It 
is sufficient that there is no antecedent impossibility 
of such an expansion of the iEsthetical Idea. Mean- 
while, Art has lost little of its dignity and nothing 
of its unity ; though it has continued deficient in 
certainty. Comparatively little faith has been 
shown in general rules, and more reliance neces- 
sarily placed in the individual sense of the Beauti- 
ful. 

Art, then, being like Science, conversant both 
with Conceptions and Ideas, it is natural to enquire, 
to what kind of Science it is most closely analogous. 
In its perfect form it approaches closely to the 
Applied Sciences. To the type of Pure Science it 
cannot at all approximate. Its constant appeal t6 
the outward world and experience, its endeavours 



ON METHOD IN ART. l9l 

to meet particular wants and gratify particular 
senses^ separate it clearly from the range of k 
priori truth. The empirical element, though not 
always equally prominent, must be always present. 
And if we can trace in Art, as we can in Applied 
Science, not only the subordination of the Con- 
ceptions to the Idea, but the reason of that sub- 
ordination, our approximation to scientific con- 
sistency is so much the closer. Yet such syste- 
matic completeness is quite unnecessary for prac- 
tical purposes. And it is only when we can bring 
the laws of number to bear on our subject, that it 
can be really obtained. In other cases, we may 
well rest content with the same comparatively 
vague notions of consequence which we have 
observed to exist in the Classificatory Sciences. It 
will suffice us to infer from the unity of sequence 
that it takes place in virtue of a law of causation, 
without pretending to discover how that law 
operates. 

We shall soon have occasion, in treating of 
Analysis and Synthesis> to mention some points in 
which Art and Science are differently related to 
Logic, Meanwhile, there seems a necessity for a 
few remarks on the relation, with regard to Method, 
of Morality to Science. . 



CHAP. XI I. 

ON METHOD IN MORALITY. 

Morality may stand to Method in two different 
relations^ between which it is important for our 
present purpose to distinguish. In the first place, 
it may be viewed as a Science — ^that great Science 
of Human Conduct in general, which enters into 
the springs of action, and the intellect and feelings 
so far as they concern action. In this sense, it 
forms the basis of Politics and Rhetoric, and to some 
extent even of Poetry and the Fine Arts, as well as 
of Morality in that second sense, which shall be 
mentioned presently. But, important though it 
be, it needs no separate discussion of its Method, 
being in fact a Classificatory Science; more ele- 
vated in its character indeed than any other of its 
Class, and, as it deals with* internal rather than 
external phenomena, proportionably more difiicult 
of attainment ; but still, conforming to the same 
laws, and arriving at its results by a similar 
process. Morality, in its second and lower aspect, 
is subject to the same conditions of Logical Method 
as Art. It might indeed be defined as the Art 
of Right Action, did not common usage restrict Art 



ON MKTHOD IN MORALITY. 193 

to a narrower range^ and assign to it some definite 
end, short of the perfection of human conduct in 
general. Assuming then that its Method is broadly 
the same as that of other Arts, we will mention a 
few peculiarities, which are intimately connected 
with its nature. 

It is, then, closely allied to those Arts, which are 
grounded on some elevated Idea, not as yet made 
the subject of a perfect Science. There is no 
commonly recognised and admitted Science of 
Goodness ; no system of arranging those phe- 
nomena of human conduct which we call Good, 
on which Philosophers in general agree. At such 
a system we have seen many elaborate attempts, 
but none successful. Thus the Art of Morality is 
dignified rather than perfect ; and, where it most 
succeeds in accuracy of detail and practical co- 
gency, is deficient in theoretic dependence on its 
first principles. We allow the connection of the 
phenomena in fact, rather than perceive the 
reason. In this respect it is closely analogous 
to the Fine Arts. Nor can we be surprised at any 
extent to which the parallelism runs, when we 
remember the close connection between the Ideas 
of Goodness and Beauty. But this Art, however 
complete, could scarcely be of great practical 
utility to those who would become good. Its 
advantageous exercise implies the full recognition 
of the Idea of Goodness. And, in such recognition. 
Moral Excellence is presupposed. Again, we are 

o 



194 ON MEtHOD IN MORALitV. 

incapable of using an Art aright, unless we are? 
familiar^ not only with its rules, but with the 
purposes for which it is employed. But the Art 
of Morality aims at producing good action; and 
good action, philosophically viewed, is an internal 
phenomenon, which can be known only by our own 
experience, and not by observation of others. 
Therefore to apply the Moral Art advantageously, 
we must be good already. 

This seems a paradox, but it is not far from the 
truth. The Art of Morality is practically identical 
with that of Education. He who is acquainted 
with it applies it not to his own case, but to that 
of others* They are, if possible, to benefit by his 
experience; and attain the same end, but by a 
shorter and more direct process- 
There is the more occasion for this remark, 
because the misapplication of the Art in question 
involves considerable danger. The object, of its 
rules is to enable those, for whose benefit they are 
meant> to realise more vividly the Moral Idea in 
general^ and to attain clearer Moral perceptions in 
detail. But the knowledge of a rule which they 
think they can obey without hesitation and doubt, 
may lead them to neglect the exercise of those 
perceptive and reflective powers, by which alone 
they can really apprehend the Moral Conceptions, 
and combine them under the Idea. In a case of 
this nature, the endeavour after systematic culti- 
vation may thwart the very tendencies which it 



¦^ 



bN METttOD IN MORALITY. iftS 

seemed likely to forward. Thus a loose and 
imperfect casuistry, or any casuistry out of its 
place, does harm. In the former case> it degrades 
the Moral sense which adapts itself to its standard ; 
in the latter case, it hinders its operation by seem- 
ing to render it unnecessary* We should have 
little hope of excellence in a painter, who followed 
some general law of Beauty which he thought he 
had discovered, in spite of the evidence of his eye 
given to the contrary side^ In like manner we 
cannot hold him to be really good, who sacrifices 
to some formula of Right and Wrong which he 
thinks to contain the truth, the unbiassed verdict 
of a reflective and uncorrupted Conscience* 

What, then, are the points of resemblance and 
difference, with regard to Method, between Art 
and Morality on the one hand, and Science on the 
other ? We have, it has been seen, in each an 
Idea, and Conceptions ranged under it* We have 
in each as much Subordination and Consequent' 
tiality as the nature of the subject admits* But 
in purpose and practical application^ as well as in 
form> there is a strong contrast between them* 
All Science, as such, aims mainly at the illustration 
or expansion of its original Idea* In this. De- 
ductive and Inductive Sciences agree* Thus far, 
the same impression is made by the successive 
Deductions which follow in Geometry from the 
Idea of Space, and the multiplied phenomena 

o 2 



196 ON METHOD IN MORALITY. 

which we group under the Idea of Life in Botany 
or Zoology. The central unity is brought more 
vividly before the mind by being traced and followed 
through the plurality of detail. 

Not so with Art. Its every-day work of pro- 
duction keeps it from this continual tendency 
towards an ideal centre. When the Idea can be 
traced in the lower mechanical arts, it seems often 
to be merely instrumental, and to discharge the 
oflSce, so to speak, of an intellectual fulcrum, 
which may enable us to bring our Conceptions to 
bear the better upon practice. The Critic may 
trace the Idea in the Conception ; the Artist is 
only careful to illustrate the Conception by the 
Idea. This seems to be true even in the Fine 
Arts and in Morals. How little need the Artist 
be conscious of that theory of Beauty, which, were 
he a philosopher, he would in strict consistency 
adopt. And how wholly ignorant are many who 
act in the spirit of the institutions under which 
they live, or are pledged to the moral precepts of 
the school in which they are educated, of the 
really distinctive features of the system, which 
they every day exhibit with sufficient success in 
practice ! 

One other point of diflference, and that not un- 
important, between the Method of Art and Science, 
remains to be mentioned. It will find its place in 
the following remarks on the nature and applica- 
tion of Analysis and Synthesis. 



CHAP. XIII. 

ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 

We have hitherto considered Science and Art 
from one point of view only. The question before 
US has been, what form they assume, when they 
have attained comparative perfection. The shape 
which they take in earlier stages, the process they 
go through on their way to a fiiUer development, 
we have scarcely touched upon. Some remarks 
on this point will bring us well nigh to the close 
of our subject. 

The method of attainment is indeed far from 
prominent in Science. The reason of this is found 
in the very meaning of the term. We cannot at- 
tach the name of Science to any knowledge which 
is confessedly very imperfect both in form and 
matter, deficient in its parts, and unshapely in its 
proportions. The task of elaborating it is in- 
cumbent on a very few. Most men receive it from 
some higher mind, which, in constructing it, 
registered only its successes and results ; not its 
doubts, much less its failures. We see only the 



198 ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 

? 

finished work, not the rough side of the tapestry. 
And thus, though Science of course implies a 
previous process, it does not suggest it to the 
common observer, or call his attention to it. 

It is very different with Art, which, as we have 
i^en„ seldom, if ever, attains this pitch of systematic 
perfection. At bestj^ it is struggling towards the 
type, itself not the highest, of Applied Science. 
Here we are obliged to contemplate tendencies as 
well as results, the nature and direction of mental 
effort, as distinct from that which it effects. The 
more soJ^ because Art cannot, like Science, afford 
(0 wait, in order to gain system. It is needed as 
bearing directly on the actual work of Life, It is 
p, tool for certain purposes, which must be used when 
its purposes require. If it be not perfect, we must 
take it as we find it^ We gladly use the indifferent 
Physician who is at hand, while we dispatch the 
messenger to simunon some more skilfril leech 
from a distance. In Art then, the Method of 
discovery is almost always as prominent as that of 
perfect statement ; and often much more so. 

It is this vfhich is commonly expressed by the 
formula, that Science is Synthetical and Art 
Analytical^! — a formula which, in its bearings on 
our subject, will require some explanation. And 
the first step towa^-d this is, to assign to the terms. 
Analysis and Synthesis, a definite and accurate 
gleaning. 

One ordinary manner of explaining them. 



*j ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 199 

though true on the whole, is not satisfactory. 
According to this view, all reasoning from part to 
whole, is Synthesis; all reasoning from whole to 
part, is Analysis, And this explanation talUes 
sufficiently well with the common use of the terms. 
Its imperfection is, that, practically, it is apt to 
become indefinite. Our notions of Whole and 
Part are liable to vary ; Genus is a whole in one 
received sense, and Species in another. Thus 
the distinction between Analysis and Synthesis is 
made to rest on the uncertain foundation of a 
ghifting meaning. But it seems unwise to leave 
the force of words so commonly received, liable to 
a sudden inversion, and to oblige them to share 
the ambiguity of other terms, with which they 
Jiave not any obvious connection. 

Perhaps we shall find here our best guide to the 
strict truth in following a Metaphor, For Me- 
taphors we must use, in describing intellectual 
operations, Our only choice lies between using them 
in an ignorant and unguarded, and a conscious and 
careftil, manner. What then is the source of the 
figure by which Analysis and Synthesis are applied 
to acts of the mind ? If we regarded the Present 
only, we should be apt to answer, from the Science 
of Chemistry. But the history of the terms obliges 
us to look for their origin further back, in the 
language of the Ancient Mathematics, 

Analysis, according to the old Mathematicians, 



200 ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 

was the exact reverse of Synthesis, to which it 
was meant to minister. It was the indirect Method 
by which a knowledge of the direct process of 
proof was gained. Supposing our object to be, 
to establish the truth of a certain theorem, or 
to discover the manner of solving a problem ; we 
begin according to the Analytical Method, by 
assuming that the theorem is true, or the problem 
possible of solution. Without this primary as- 
sumption, the Analysis could not proceed. But, 
this being granted, the question follows — ^what 
other suppositions are involved in supposing this 
theorem to be true, or this problem to be possible ? 
In the answer to this question the Analytical 
process lies. We regard the assumption we have 
made as implying certain prior assumptions. These 
are again perceived to depend on certain more 
elementary positions. And so we trace the chain 
of consequence backward, till we arrive at those 
data which the Science with which we are at 
present concerned presupposes as its foundation. 
The Analysis is then complete, and the Synthesis 
forthwith begins. 

We have here supposed the Analytical process 
to terminate in success. This of course need not 
happen. Our original assumption may have been 
wrong. Or, if not absolutely and certainly false, 
it may be wholly incapable of being established by 
the aid of the Science which we have endeavoured 



ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 201 

to bring to bear upon it. In the former case, if 
we proceed far enough, the Analysis will suddenly 
be brought to a stand. We shall find ourselves 
involved in the contradiction of some axiom or 
other fundamental position of the Science we have 
been employing. In the latter case, the process 
may be continued, till we arrive at certain posi- 
tions, of which a further Analysis is impossible; 
and these will prove not to be data of the Science 
with which we are dealing. They may be very 
possibly Propositions the truth or falsehood of 
which we may not be able to ascertain ; and our 
investigation will then have arrived at no satis- 
factory termination. 

But, supposing the Analysis to be successful, 
the Synthesis follows as a matter of course. The 
connection between our assumption and the data 
of the Science holds; but it is viewed from the 
contrary extreme. The same truth is now built 
on a sure foundation, which before was poised for 
the time, so to speak, in a vacmun. The same 
steps are taken forward in certainty, which were 
taken backward in doubt. And thus the whole 
field which we have traversed in enquiry, we 
traverse again in proof. 

We can now see the especial propriety of taking 
our explanation of Analysis from this ancient 
source, rather than from more modem quarters. 
For it enables us to regard pure Science as 
supplying the perfect type of Analysis, as well as 



302 ON ANALYSIS ANi/ SYNTHESIS, 

of Synthesis. Its h)rpothetical character, more- 
over, is thus most strongly brought before us. 
Whenever we are prepared ultimately to rest the 
proof of our position on pure Deduction, it appears 
that no Induction is necessary before making the 
assumption which the Analysis presupposes. Facts 
may suggest this assumption, but we do not expect 
them to prove it. If it be based at last on any 
other evidence than that of the Deductive process 
itself, it can only be in a secondary sense a De^ 
ductive conclusion. It is not pure Science; but 
Science in a lower form, which accounts for facts 
which are known to be true already on evidence 
other than its own. 

Thus we are led . to observe, that the Analytical 
process is hypothetical, exactly in the same pro^^ 
portion as the corresponding Synthetical process 
is certain and complete in itself. It was in all 
probability at first an unproved assumption on the 
part of Pythagoras, that the square of the hypo-^ 
thenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to the 
square of the two remaining sides. He had seen 
this equality, we may imagine, in a single instance 
of a right-angled triangle, and supposed that it 
applied to all. When the Analysis consequent on 
this assumption was attempted, the truth of the 
Proposition remained doubtful, till every link 
between the first principles of Geometry and the 
wished-for result was obtained. Bijt, this chain 
once formed, the case was altered. Each step 



ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. SOS 

was certain in itself, and a sure basis for what 
followed. Every intermediate position betweei^ 
the data and the conclusion, as well as the con-s 
elusion itself, assumed, so to speak, a new Modality ; 
and from being doubtful and contingent, became a 
necessary truth. 

In the Applied Sciences, as we descend lower, 
the Analytical process becomes less perfect. Here 
we demand greater evidence before we make our 
necessary assumption. For the most part indeedj5 
though not always, we require proof of it as a 
matter of fact. The occurrence of any apparently 
exceptional phenomenon does not at once set us 
speculating as a matter of course about its causes. 
We rather distrust appearances, and, if experiment 
can give us information on the subject, have re- 
course to it that we may learn whether the 
seeming exception is only a mistake of our own. 
Or, if it lie beyond the province of experiment. We 
generally wait till time gives fresh opportunities of 
observation, and so enables us to form a more 
perfect judgment. The many new phenomena of 
light, for instance, which were discovered by 
chance, were carefully tested before philosophers 
endeavoured to account for them. Here then, as 
the Synthesis is of a less scientific character, the 
corresponding Analysis is of a lower order also. 
It is no longer the procedure from an uncertainty 
to a certainty, but the procedure from one certainty, 
through a series of uncertainties, to another and a 



204 ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 

prior certainty. While the Synthesis, in like 
manner, only gives us, for the most part, the con- 
nection between known laws and certain previously 
known facts, without so often enabling us to pre- 
dict facts in virtue of their dependence on laws. 

It was before observed, that the Consequentiality, 
which in some sense is present in all Sciences, 
appears in mere Classificatory Science in a very 
imperfect degree, being traceable, indeed, only by 
the aid of probabilities and general analogy. We 
will further remark, that they exhibit Analysis in 
a like shadowy manner. Their object is, to arrange 
certain phenomena under an Idea. This is effected 
by means of intermediate generalisations, which we 
interpose in order between the Idea and the phe- 
nomena according to their degree of Universality. 
But these generalisations are lawftd, only so far as 
they tally with the actual facts of Nature. Our 
Classes must be such as she, by the regular dis- 
tribution of their Attributes, shows that she re- 
cognises. There is in their connection with each 
other no definite Consequentiality, which warrants 
us in leaving any step for the time unverified, in 
the confidence that it will receive at last sufiicient 
confirmation by being referred to some higher 
truth as its authority. Each separate step must 
be established by a separate observation. Thus 
our Analysis becomes the faintest image of the 
true Analytical process. We do not doubt the 
certainty, either of the Idea, or of the facts, or of 



ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 205 

the intermediate generalisations. All that we can " 
doubt^ is their admitting of arrangement in a com- 
plete and orderly series : and it is this only, that 
the Analysis enables us to ascertain. Within this 
comparatively narrow province, it still continues 
highly useful. We have much more facility iti 
beginning from facts, and widening our Classes as 
we ascend, than in thinking according to the 
Synthetical Method, and narrowing our Classes in 
regular gradation from the Idea. 

It remains to niention the manner in which Art 
avails itself of Analysis. The Method of Art, it will 
be remembered, approximates to the type of Applied 
Science. Analysis, then, will hold, theoretically, 
a similar position in each ; though the practical 
nature of Art has some effect upon its prominence 
and importance. 

Conscious Analysis, indeed, does not seem very 
common in the Fine Arts. The Critic by his 
researches often shows that principles are really 
involved in the works of an artist, which the artist 
himself has probably never realised in their ab- 
stract form. He exemplifies the laws of Science, 
not in consequence of any intentional study of 
them, but in virtue of that taste, that perception 
of beauty in the concrete, which is developed by 
increased observation, and the careful scrutiny of 
particulars. 

Perhaps in this field the most common use of 
Analysis is in investigating the cause of defects. 



•206 ON ANALYSIS AND SVNTHBSIS. 

Something offends, we know not why. In the 
endeavour to refer it back to first principles, we 
shall discover that some rule has been transgressed^ 
some harmony violated, some canon of consistency 
broken. Thus very early attempts at Art often 
fail at the first touch of Analysis ; they are de- 
fective in consistency ; though the parts may be 
right in themselves, on no possible hypothesis 
could the whole be true. The same reason is 
fatal to the attempt of a Chinese artist to depict 
all six sides of an interior at once ; and to the 
tonventional Egyptian representation of a man, 
in which the head, body, and lower members are 
depicted in three incompatible positions ; and 
to the head of Minerva on the archaic coins of 
Athens, in which the full eye, which figures ap- 
propriately in the fi'ont-face, is transferred without 
modification to the profile* 

In the earlier stages of the Fine Arts, this seems 
to be the only use of Analysis. Even in their most 

« 

flourishing state there seems little of that doubt 
and indecision which the Analytical process im- 
plies. Great works are owing to the magic of 
Genius, and not to any formal process of thought. 
But when invention waxes cold, and thought turns 
less readily to the aspirations of the present than 
to the glories of the past, then Analysis steps in. 
It gives rules according to which Art has uncon- 
sciously produced certain effects, with a view to 
their reproduction ; and these rules vdll fall under 



bN ANALYSIS AND SYNTHfeSlS. 20? 

the IdeEi so far as the nature of the case admits^ 
according to the ordinary Method of Science. 

It has been before observed, that the Fine Arts^ 
in the absence of a Science of ^Jisthetics, do not 
admit of a near approach to. the Scientific Method, 
This is not the case with many Mechanical Arts, 
Some of these afford an opportunity for strict con- 
sequence in the formation of the rules, which can 
be deduced iBrom certain empirical principles by 
means of the laws of Space and Number. Of this 
nature are many practical applications of the laws 
of Hydraulics, and Pneumatics, and Projectiles, 
Here the Synthetical arrangement is more than a 
form: and the Method of Art, by coinciding ' with 
its type, loses its individuality, and melts into that 
of Applied Science. 

Our mention of Analysis has hitherto been con- 
fined to cases, in which it is usual, when the 
tentative process is complete, to adopt the Syn- 
thetical Method of statement, as more scientific 
and formal. Analysis, however, is not always thus 
subordinate, as may be shown by any simple instance 
fi-om the Analytical Mathematics. In a common 
Algebraic Equation, one or more unknown quanti- 
ties are posited, and the consequences are traced 
backward, till those quantities become known. It 
is not considered necessary to reverse the process, 
and so to show that the results attained actually 
fulfil the conditions, which the unknown quantities 
were assumed to fulfil in the original formula. 



208 ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 

Another instance in which Analysis* is perfect 
without any corresponding Synthesis is found in 
the ordinary process of Deliberation^ which has 
sometimes gained^ in consequence^ the name of 
practical Analysis. Those who deliberately desire 
any object which they have reason to suppose is 
within their reach^ begin, as the first step towards 
attaining it, to posit it as an end of action. This 
is, of course, in most cases, a mere assumption. 
Observation may have shown that the object is 
attainable by some: but they cannot be sure, 
without previous consideration of particulars, that 
it is attainable by them. Nevertheless, they take 
for the time this doubtful point for granted : and 
thus make that venture, which all Analysis, in a 
greater or less degree, requires. The question now 
becomes, through what means their end is to be 
attained. Here the Analytical procedure comes 
in. They consider, what antecedent conditions on 
their part the attainment of this object requires, 
and to what conditions these in their turn are 
subject. Thus they proceed, precisely as in Ma- 
thematical Analysis, until they arrive at certain 
elementary conditions which their own conscious- 
ness tells them are within their powers — certain 
acts of their individual will, and the natural expres- 
sions of it in word or deed. The Analysis is perfect 
when the agent can say — If I will and do this, as 
I can will and do it, all that I desire will follow. 
Then Deliberation ceases, and Choice begins. It 



ON ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 209 

seems better to regard the Analytical process in 
this case as complete in itself, because the subse- 
quent act, although reversing the order of the 
thought, can scarcely be regarded as answering to 
it as its Synthesis. It is too different in kind, to 
take its place in the same Method. Though the 
desires flow to their end through the channel which 
Intellect has shaped for them, this does not oblite- 
rate the broad differences, which distinguish them 
from the Intellect itself. 



CHAP. XIV. 

ON THE CONNECTION OF METHOD WITH FORMAL LOGIC. 

Particular Logical questions have found a 
place only accidentally in the foregoing pages. 
We could scarcely descend to detail, in considering 
the general relation in which, at different times. 
Logic and Science have been thought to stand to 
each other. When this disputed point had been 
discussed in its various phases, it was natural to 
weigh the subordinate questions which arose from 
the different views concerning it. And, after 
having determined what opinions, both on the 
main subject and on the dependent queries, seemed 
to have truth on their side, we proceeded to point 
to Method as a ground of union for Logic and 
Science; and to Pure Science especially as the 
common type in which Logical and Scientific 
Method are each most perfectly exhibited. 

Meanwhile, the introduction of even well-known 
Logical terms, when they were not absolutely 
necessary, has been purposely avoided. Our object 
was to show the natural tendency of knowledge to 



ON THE CONNECTION OF METHOD WITH FORMAL LOGIC. 21 1 

fall into a Logical form, and not the power of the 
human mind to press it by violence into the mould 
of its technicalities. But, now that our main pur- 
pose is fulfilled, it may further, rather than impede, 
the general impression of these pages, to observe, 
that the apparatus of Logic not only shows a fit- 
ness for exhibiting particular arguments, but dis- 
closes differences in its various portions, which 
indicate a connection with systematic thought and 
methodical knowledge, when considered not as split 
up into a multitude of separated arguments, but as 
consistent wholes. On this subject we will dwell 
a little in detail. 

It is generally allowed by Logicians, that Syllo- 
gism, as the formal exhibition of the act of the 
mind in reasoning, divides itself into three principal 
heads, namely, the Inductive, the Deductive, and 
the Hjrpothetical. Whether these three forms of 
argument are really collateral Species of a single 
Genus, or whether the two latter can be reduced, 
without loss of their dignity or derogation firom 
their utility, to the type of Deductive Syllogism, is 
a question of considerable interest, but not bearing 
directly on our present subject. It suffices us, 
that, for the ordinary purpose of inference, the 
three modes of arguing are certainly distinct. 

And further, it is commonly observed with regard 
to them, that Deductive Syllogism proceeds from 
the law downwards, from higher Universals to lower; 
that Induction, on the other hand, argues from the 



312 ON THE CONNECTION OF METHOD 

fact to the law, from lower Universals to higher ; 
while the Hypothetical Syllogism, ignoring this 
distinction of law and fact, only implies, that two 
positions are connected as antecedent and con- 
sequent, so that, under the sanction of its own 
peculiar rules, the denial or assertion of one in- 
volves the denial or assertion of the other, without 
any regard to their relative extent or degree of 
Universality. And, of these three forms of in- 
ference, it is generally allowed, that the Deductive 
Syllogism, if it be not the most powerful instru- 
ment, is at least the most perfect. 

It should then surely not pass unobserved, that 
there is a real correspondence between Deductive 
Syllogism, wRich is the type of Logical Inference, 
and Pure Science, which is the type of Methodical 
Knowledge. It is well known that Pure Science, 
if logically analysed, resolves itself into a series 
of Categorical Syllogisms of the simplest and most 
perfect form. But taking the subjects of our 
comparison independently of each other, we trace 
in them several points of similarity. The highest 
form of Science, it was before remarked, exhibits 
both the most complete subordination and the 
strictest consequence. So it is also in the highest 
form of inference, the Syllogism in Barbara. Here 
subordination is most fiiUy displayed, for the terras 
fall at once into their natural order, the major 
including the middle, and the middle including the 
minor. Thus the terms observe the same grada- 



WITH FORMAL LOGIC. 213 

tion in extent, and in their place in the argument. 
And here also we have the most complete con- 
sequentiality ; since the conclusion follows, as a 
necessary and obvious consequence, from the law 
on which, since the time of Aristotle, the validity 
of the Syllogism has been held to depend ; with- 
out any need of alteration in its form, or the check 
of any derived rule whatsoever. 

Again, there is a close practical connection 
between the Inductive Syllogism and Classificatory 
Science. They afford, too, their points of theo- 
retical resemblance. Each of them recognises 
and requires complete subordination. This is 
implied in the very conception of Classification, 
and scarcely less so in that of Induction, which 
depends on the arrangement of facts under a law. 
This feature it has in conmion with Deduction, 
from which however it differs, by inverting the 
natural order of consequence, and arguing upward 
instead of downward. Again, it is well known 
that an Induction, which shall enumerate all the 
individuals of the Class, is seldom possible, and, 
when possible, always useless ; that we should be 
content, under certam checks, with a limited 
number of instances, and, when we are materially 
right, be willing to confess ourselves formally 
wrong. Induction then, while it does fiill justice 
to subordination, is for two reasons (its formal 
inversion, and its material imperfection), deficient 
in Consequentiality ; and thus it exhibits just the 



214 ON THE CONNECTION OF METHOD 

same excellency^ and the same defect^ which cha- 
racterize the Classificatory Sciences^ of which it is 
the recognised organ. 

Lastly, we observed that Analysis in its higher 
form began with an unproved hypothesis, and 
then, by a retrogressive course, it felt its way 
through doubt to certainty. Each step is sure in 
one sense, uncertain in another. The connection 
between the several propositions is clear ; they all 
stand firm together, if a basis in fact can be found 
for that one with which the Analysis concludes. 
There is, therefore, a strict Consequentiality among 
them. But, in this merely tentative process, no 
regard is had to subordination. If we are only 
assured that one link binds with another, we are 
careless of the law in virtue of which it binds. 
This will be brought out in the Synthesis, if we 
follow up our research with a formal statement. 
Or, if this theoretically correct shape be unne- 
cessary, the Analysis will stand valid and complete 
for practical purposes without it. And what is 
true in this respect of Analysis, is true also of its 
instrument, the Hypothetical Syllogism. This too 
has a pra6tical validity, without any reference to 
the bearing of laws upon facts, or the gradation of 
Universals, and without reduction to a higher Logical 
form. In other words, its Consequentiality is valid, 
though it makes no pretence to Subordination. 

The three principal forms of Syllogism, therefore, 
bear their testimony to the existence of corre- 



WITH FORMAL LOGIC. 216 

spending divisions in Method, and show a peculiar 
fitness to be its organs. Similar coincidences are 
traceable in other and minor parts of the Logical 
apparatus. These, however, it is not now neces- 
sary to mention. They will occur naturally to the 
Student of Logic, though they could not be 
exhibited in this work without entering on minute 
technicalities to a degree quite foreign to its 
purpose. 



i 



conclusion: 



We have now concluded, so far as the plan of 
these pages allows, our consideration of Logical 
Method. Had they been far more perfect in their 
design and more exact in their execution, this 
would not have hindered that unsatisfied feeling, 
that craving after fiirther Truth, which strengthens 
with the accession of Knowledge, and is one of the 
strongest though not of the most pleasant motives 
for pursuing it. 

It has been well said, that the quest, and not 
the possession, of Knowledge, is the entertainment 
of the mind. Truth indeed is the one object of 
our search; but the pleasures of seeking it are 
present and real ; the pleasures of finding it lie in 
the future, and prove too often imaginary. Even 
when no failure intervenes between us and our 
end, the road is almost always longer and more 
difficult than we expected. We think ourselves 
near the top of the mountain ; and, as we make a 
vigorous effort to scale what seems its highest 
crag, perceive that we are but just making our 



CONCLUSION. 217 

way over its first shoulder, and that its misty 
ridges still rise before us in uncertain grandeur, 
and retreat as we gaze on them. 

The reader of these pages cannot be more 
painfully sensible than their writer, that, after all 
which has been said of Method, its culminating 
point is not reached. That highest Unity which 
would give a meaning to the whole is wanting. 
Granting that all Knowledge which deserves the 
name of Science naturally arranges itself, accord- 
ing to certain rules, under definite Ideas, the 
question yet remains — ^how are these Ideas them- 
selves arranged? Have not they too their due 
disposition and gradation? Can we suppose that 
there is no standard by which we can decide their 
relative dignity and importance ? Centres of unity 
and sources of order as they are, are they in 
disorder among themselves ? 

It is hard to suppose that they are wanting in 
this arrangement and subordination. And yet 
how can we discover it ? We have surrendered as 
a vain imagination that Science of Being, of which 
the Ancients loved to speak. It seems that power- 
ful minds were permitted by Providence to rest on 
the thought of the absolute Unity of Knowledge, 
till some parts of Science were so elaborated, that 
they could bear, in contemplating their separate 
perfection, to dispense with the thorough con- 
solidation of the whole. We are almost reminded 
of Alexander's attempt at universal empire, which, 

Q 



•218 CONCLUSION. 

as such^ failed ; but left, nevertheless, real and per- 
manent power in the hands of his Generals, to be 
exercised over their fragmentary Kingdoms. Many 
Sciences we know there can be: we now know, 
almost with equal certainty, that, while the human 
mind retains its present constitution, they can 
never all meet in one. 

May there not however be, in the absence of 
this Ideal Unity, some one Science, to direct the 
rest, though it does not combine them ? As, in 
Practice, Prudence, which is not an Art, much less 
the union of all, applies and regulates all those 
arts which tend, when rightly used, to our common 
well-being; may there not be in Theory also, 
some great Science, or something above a Science, 
to assign our speculations their place, their im- 
portance, their proportion, their relative bearing; 
and make them, if not in fact, at least in tendency, 
a Whole ? 

One branch of Study there is, which, in virtue 
of its very name, points to the Highest of all 
subjects, which yet, in its application, reaches to 
the most delicate thoughts and finest sympathies 
of the heart of man ; which tells of Infinity and 
Eternity, and yet exhibits truths of Infinite and 
Eternal moment under forms which have reference 
to Space and Time ; which distinguishes between 
the Permanent and the Fleeting, — the Principle, 
and the Economies or dispensations which are 
founded on it; which teaches the importance of 



CONCLUSION. 219 

all truths, the supreme necessity of some ; to which 
a Heathen paid involuntary homage, when he 
gave its name to what he deemed the highest 
reach of human thought; and which Christians 
have delighted to honour with the title of the 
Mother of Sciences. 

Much she can teach us directly^ of the relative 
importance of truths ; much more by the temper of 
mind and frame of thought she inculcates. She 
rules over Knowledge, if by no other right, by that 
of conquest: she subdued it first, to protect it 
ever after. 

And how far is this fair Mother of Sciences 
like her children ? Do the same formal conditions, 
which bind them, bind her also ? If they do not — 
has she another Method of her own ; her own laws 
of investigation, and standards of truth and false- 
dood ? If they do — how does the nature of the 
high and mysterious subjects with which she deals 
affect and modify their application ? If, again, she 
neither conforms to the ordinary rules of specula- 
tion, nor has extraordinary canons of her own, 
how can the body of truth which she presents be 
fairly studied at all ? How can the human mind, 
prone, not by its perverseness and obliquity, but by 
a right instinct and a deep principle of nature, to 
seek for order and system, find its highest occupa- 
tion in resting on details which may not be com- 
bined, statements which may not be compared, 
examples from which no principles maybe extracted. 



•2*20 CONCLUSION. 

iiicts wliich refuse to incorporate themselves with 

¦ 

doctrines ? 

He will do a good service to Truth, and Chris- 
tianity, and the Church, who shall face these 
questions fairly; and, in grave earnest, and after 
all due preparation, venture, in a strength not 
his own, to treat of a subject which I have not 
ventured to handle — the application of Method 
to Theology. ^ 



THE END. 



BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 



BOOKS PUBLISHED 

BY JOHN HENRY PARKER, 

OXFORD; and 877, STEAND, LONDON. 



By the Rev. T. W. ALLIES, M.A., 
Rector of Launton, Oxon. 

The Church of England Cleared from the 

Charge of Schism, 

By the Decrees of the Seven Ecumenical Councils, and the I'radition c the Fathers.. 
Second edition, much enlarged, with a notice in answer to Mr. Thompson's hook on 
the Episcopate. 8vo. 12«. 

N.B. This edition is so much enlarged as to amount to a new work. 

By the Rev. E. B. PUSEY, D.D. 

SERMONS 

DURING THE SEASON FROM ADVENT TO WHITSUNTIDE. 8w. 10*. 6d, 

By the Rev. FREDERICK W. MANT. 

Regmald Vere, a Tale of the Civil Wars, in Verse. 

ITmo. 6s, 

By JOHN DAVID MACBRIDE, D.C.L., 
Principal of Magdalen Hall. 

Lectm*es Explanatory of the IHatessaron. 

Third edition, much enlarged, Svo. price I5s, . 
Also, Second Edition, Svo. 2s. 6d. 

Diatessaron : 

OR THE LIFE OF CHRIST. 

In the words of the authorized version, with various readings from the most esteemed 
Paraphrases, and Dr. Blayney's Marginal References. 

By the Rev. CHARLES MARRIOTT^ M. A. 

Analecta Christiana 

In naam tuonnm. Part 2, completing the work, 8vo. 5*, 

By JOHN LOCKHART ROSS, M.A., 
Late Vice-Prinoipal of the Diocesan College, Chichester. 

Reciprocal ,Ob%ations of the Church and the 

Civil Power. 

Inagrihed (by permtsaion) to the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.F. for the University 

of Oxford. 8vo. 12*. 

IN THE PRESS, 
By the Rev. EDWARD BURTON, D.D. 

The Greek Testament, with English Notes. 

sbcoud EDmoK, bbti8bi>. 
Apbil, 1^48. 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN HENRY PARKER, 



Eii^rarfi of tj^e dFatj^ertf* 

VOLUMES PUBLISHED. 

S. AUGUSTINE. 

CONFESSIONS. Svo. Third Editumf price 9s, ; to Subscribers 7s. 
HOMILIES on the NEW TESTAMENT. Two voU. Svo. Price 2Ss. ; 

to Subscribers 20s. 
SHORT TREATISES. Price IBs. ; to Subscribers \2s. 
ON THE PSALMS. YoL I. Price \Qs. 6d. ; to Subscnber* Ss. 

Vol. II. in the Press. 

S. ATHANASIUS. 

SELECT TREATISES AGAINST THE ARIANS. Two vols. Svo. Price 19*. 6d. ; 

to Subscribers I5s. 
HISTORICAL TRACTS. Price 10*. 6d. ; to Subscribers Ss. 

S. CHRYSOSTOM. 

HOMILIES ON ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES. Vols. I to 6, Svo. Price 31. 9*. 6d. ; to 

Subscribers 2L 12s. 6d. VoL VII, on 2 Corinthians, is in the press. 
— — — THE STATUES. Price 12*/ to Subscribers 9s. 

ST. MATTHEW. Fols. 1 and 2. Price U. 4*. ; to Subscribers 18*. 

ST. JOHN. . In the Press. 

S. CYPRIAN'S WORKS. Two vols. Svo. Price ll. 2s. Sd.; to Subscribers 17s. 

S. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM. 

CATECHETICAt LECTURES. Third Edition. Price I0s.6d.: to Subscribers Ss. 

S. GREGORY THE GREAT. 

HOMILIES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. Fols. 1 and 2, Price 80*. ; to Subscribers 22*. 

Vol. IIL Part I. Price 10*. Sd.; 

to Subscribers Ss. Vol. III. Part 2. completing the Work, in the press. 

TERTULLIAN'S WORKS. Vol. I. Price 15*. ; to Subscribers lis. 



Persons sending their names as Suhscrihers to this Work are entitled to the Volumes 
as they are published at one fourth less than the Publication price, payment to be 
made on the delivery of the books, but no annual subscription required. Twelve months' 
notice is expected previous to the withdrawal of a name. 

Persons desirous of becoming Subscribers are requested to transmit their names and 
the name of their Bookseller to the Publisher, and the Volumes will be forwarded as 
soon as published. 

It is feared that some Subscribers, either through change of residence or other causes, 
may not have received the whole of their volimies regularly ; should such be the case, it 
is requested that the Publisher may be informed, in order that the volumes required to 
complete the set may be forwarded. 

*•* A few complete sets may now be had by new Subscribers at the original 

Subscription prices. 



SELECT WORKS OF S. EPHREM THE SYRIAN. 

Translated out of the Original Syriac. With Notes and Indices. 
Svo. 14*.; to Subscribers to the Library rfthe Fathers, it^*. 6d. 



OXFORD ; and 377, STRAND, LONDON. 
BIBLIOTHECA PATEUM EOCLESI^ CATHOLIC.E. 

S. AUGUSTINI CONFESSIONES. 8vo. Price 9*.; to Subscribers Is. 

3 Vols. 8vo. Price 2/. 2s. ; to Subscribers \l\\s. 6d. 
S. JOANNIS CHRYSOSTOMI HOMILI^ IN MATTHEUM. 
Edidit F. FIELD, A.M., Coll. S.S. Trin. apud Cant nuper Socius. 

CHRYSOSTOMI HOMILIiE in S. PAULI Epistolam /irimam ad 

Corintbios. Price 14>«.; to Subscribers 10s, 6d, 

S. CHkYSOSTOMI HOMILI^ IN D. PAULI EPIST. IL AD 
CORINTHIOS. Pnce lOs. 6d. ; to Subscribers 8«. 

The remainder of the Text of S. Chrysostom's Homilies on S. Paul's Epistles will follow 
in due course ; Collations having heen obtained for the whole at considerable expense. 



A COMMENTARY ON THE FOUR GOSPELS, 
COLLECTED OUT OF THE WORKS OF THE FATHERS. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE CATENA AUREA OF THOMAS AQUINAS. 

Four Volumes in Eight Parts, 3/. 17«. 



DEVOTIONAL WORKS, 

ADAPTED TO THE USE OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH, 

FROM THB WORKS OF FOREIGN DIVINES, 

Edited by the REV. E. B. PUSEY, D.D. 



A Guide for Passing Lent Holily. 

By AvriUon. Second Edition. With Frontispiece. *Is, 

Paradise for the Christian Sonl. 

By Horst 2 vols. 6«. 6<^ 

The Life of Jesus Christ, in Glory. 

Daily Meditations from Easter Day to the Wednesday after Trinity Sunday. 

By Nouet. 8s. 

The Spiritual Combat, and the Supplement : with the Path of 
Paradise ; or. The Peace of the Soul. 

By Scupoli. (From the Italian.) With Frontispiece. Zs. 6d, 

The Tear of Affections. 

Or Sentiments on the Love of Ood, drawn from the Canticles, for every day 

in the year. By Ayrillon. 6s. 6d. 

The Foundations of the Spiritual Life. 

(A Commentary on Thomas h Kem j^g.) By Surin. 4a. 6d. 

A Guide for Passing AS^nt Holily. 

By Avrillon. With Frontispiece. 6s. 



SOME MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS 

Selected from the "Via Vitae ^ternae," to illustrate and explain the Pictures hy 
BoETius A BoLSWERT. Translated from the Latin, and adapted to the use of the 
English Church. By the Rev. ISAAC WILLIAMS, B.D. With the curious 
aUegorical engravings. 8vo. lOs, 6<i 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN HENRY PARKER^ 

^ Ifirats of EnsIo-Cad^Ilt ^j^eofargg. 

volumes publish§d 1841 to 1840. 
BISHOP ANDREWES' SERMONS, 5 toIs. 2Ll^. 
BISHOP ANDREWES' Pattern of Cateehistieal Doctziae^ 8(6. I0«. 
BISHOP BEVERIDGE'S WORKS. Vol. I. to VIII. 4t 8t. 
ARCHBISHOP BRAMHALL'S WORKS. 5 toIb. 3L St. 
BISHOP BULL'S HARMONY OF THE APOSTLES' 

ST. PAUL AND ST. JAMES ON JUSTIFICATION. 2- vols. 18«. 
BISHOP COSIN'S WORKS. Vols. L and II. U 1«. ^ 
BISHOP GUNNING on the Paschal, or Lcmt Fast. 9». 
HAMMOND'S PRACTICAL CATECHISM. l(h.6d. 
HICKES'S TWO TREATISES, On. the ClinatiaBFKicaikQMU 

and On the Dignity of the Episcopal Order. Vol. I. 9«. 
JOHN JOHNSON'S WORKS. Vol L 12$, 
ARCHBISHOP LAUD'S WORKS. Vol. L St. 
L'ESTRANGE'S ALLIANCE OF DIVINE OFFICES. I2s. 
MARSHALL'S Penitential Discipline of the Primitiye Church. 6s, 
BISHOP NICHOLSON ON THE CATECHISM. 6*. 
BISHOP OVERALL'S CONVOCATION BOOK. 8yo. Sm. 
THORNDIKE'S WORKS. Vols. L and II., 4 Farts. 22. 

Vohmesjor 1847. 
BISHOP BEVERIDGE'S WORKS. Vol. IX. 10s. 6d. 
CRAKANTHORP, DBFENSIO EOCLESI^ ANGLICANiE. 14^ 
HICKES'S TWO TREATISES. Vol. IL 9#. 
JOHN JOHNSON'S WORKS. Vol. IL 9*. 
BISHOP WILSON'S WORKS. Vol. IL lOs^Sd, 

Vol. III. 10*. 6d. 

*«* Vol. I. containing Life, fire, will he published last 

Should any Subscriber aot have received all the Volumes due for 1847, he is requested 
to write to the Publisher. 

Works in eourss qfpmblicaHon, 

ARCHBISHOP LAUD'S WORKS. Vol. IL Conference with Fisher. 

BISHOP COSIN'S WORKS. VoL IIL A Scholastical History of the 

Canon of Holy Scripture. 
BISHOP BEVERIDGE'S WORKS. Vol. X. Thesaur. Theol. VoL XL 

Codex Canonum EccL Prim. Vindicatus, &c. 
BISHOP WILSON'S WORKS. VoL IV. 
BISHOP BULL. Defensio Fidei Nicaenae. TransUUion. 
BISHOP PEARSON. Vindiciae Ignatianas. 
HAMMOND. Of Schism, &c. 

THORNDIKE'S WORKS. Vol. IIL Of the Covenant of Graca. 
HICKES'S TWO TREATISES. VoL IIL Appendices. 
JOHN JOHNSON'S WORK& VoL IIL A Colleation of Ecclesiastical 

Laws, Canons, &c. 
FRANK'S SERMO. 




Subscribers paying two guineas annually in advance are entitled to all the pub- 
lications without further payment. It is proposed to publish six volumes (of 400 
pages on the average) for each year. 

Persons wishing to become Subscriben are requested to send their names, and 
those of their booksellers, to the Secretary and Treasurer^ Ohableb Cbaw uby, £»q.y 
under cover, to the Publisher, Mr. Parkeb, Bookseller, Oxford. 

%* New Subscribers can select volumes to com^^lete sets* 

THE VALIBITY ©F ENGLISH ORDINATIONS. 
By P. F. Li CouRAYER. J new Edition, 8w., 10*. 6rf.; io Subscribers 7s, 



OXFORD ; aot) 377* STRAND, LONDON. 
ACADEMICAI, AND OCCASIONAL SEEMONS, with a 

Preface on the Present Position of the English Church. By the Rer. 
JOHN KfiBLB, M.A. Second edition, 8to. 128. 

SERMONS 8Bd ESSAYS on the APOSTOLICAL AGE. 

-By the IUt. A. PENKHTN STANLEY, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of 
XJww«it; CoUei^^ 8yo, 128. 

SEEMONS PBEACHED BEEOEE the UNIVERSITY of 

OXFORD. By EDWARD HENRY MANNING, M.A., Archdeacon of 
Chichester, and late Fellow of MerUn Coikge. Second Edition. 8yo. 6s, 

SERMONS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS AND 

OTHERS. By the Rev. T. W. ALLIES, M.A. Svo. 10«. 6d. 

SERMONS PBEACHED BEFORE the UNIVERSITY of 

OXFORD, and in OTHER PLACES. By the Rev. C. MARRIOTT, M.A. 
12mo. 6*. 



SERMONS ON THE FESTIVALS. By the Rev. J. 

ARM1STR0NG, MA. 12iao. 6f. 

The TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT OE SIN, and other 

SEHMONS. By the Hev. G. H. MONSELI^ M.A. 12mo. 6«. 

PAROCHIAL SERMONS. By the Rev. W. JACOBSON, 

M.A., Vice-Principal of Magdalen Hall. Second Edition. 12mo. 6t, 



SERMONS, chiefly Expository, by R. E. TYRWHITT, M.A. 

With Notes. In Two Volumes 8vo. £1. 4*. 



A COURSE OP SERMONS on SOLEMN SUBJECTS chiefly 

bearing on Repentance and Amendment of X'ifc* preached in St Saviour's 
. Church, Leeds. Second edition, 8vo. 7b.. 6d« 



FOUR SERMONS preached at the General Ordinations of the 

Lord Bishop of Oxford: 

Deeenber, 1845^ ^^M^ber, 1846. 

Trini^, 184«. ^^^K^W. 

By the Ven. C. G. CLERKE|miPRcon of Oxford, 
The Rev. R. C. TRENCH, Rector of Itchenstoke, 
The Rev. JAMES RANDALL, Rector of Binfield, 
^e R«w E. M. OOULBURN, Viear of Hc^ywell, 
Clkaptuiia t» the Lord Bishop. 



LECTURES ON THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OP 

THE THREE FIRST CENTURIES. By the l^te EDWARD BURTON, 
D.D. Third Edition^ conq^lete in one vduma 8vo. 15<b 



B00K8 PUBLISHED BY JOHN HENRY PARKER, 



WORKS BY THE EEV. WILLIAM SEWELL, B.D., 

TBLLOW AHI> TUTOR OF BXETBB GOLLBOB, OXFORD. 

A JOURNAL OF A RESIDENCE AT THE COLLEGE OF ST. 
COLUMBA, IN IRELAND. With a Preface. Second Edit. 12mo. 4». 

THE DANGER AND SAFEGUARD OF THE YOUNG IN THE 
PRESENT STATE OF CONTROVERSY. A Sermon preached be- 
fore the Uniyenity of Oxford. 8vo. la. 

Alio by the tame Author. 

CHRISTIAN POLITICS. 12mo. 68. 

CHRISTIAN MORALS. I2mo. Third edition. 5b. 

THE FIRST VOYAGE OF RODOLPH THE VOYAGER. 12mo. 48. 6d. 

THE SECOND VOYAGE. 12mo. 68. 



A SYSTEMATIC ANALYSIS OF BUTLER'S ANALOGY, 
On the plan of Dr. Mill's Analysis of Pearson on the Creed. 

By JOHN WILKINSON, B.A, 

Of Merton College, Oxford, and Curate of Exmouth, 

in the Diocese of Exeter. 8vo. S#. 



WORKS OP THE LATE ARCHBISHOP LAURENCE. 

Third Edition, 8yo. 10«. Qd, 

AN ATTEMPT TO ILLUSTRATE THOSE ARTICLES 
Of the Church of England which the Calvinists improperly consider as CAL- 
VINISTICAL ; in Eight Sermons, preached hefore the University of Oxford 
in the year 1804, at the Lecture founded hy J. Bampton, M.A. 

8vo. 7*. 6rf. 

LIBRI ENOCH PROPHETS VERSIO ^THIOPICA, 
Qua seculi suh fine novissimi ex Ahyssinia Britanniam advecta vix tandem 
litterato orhi innotuit 

8to. TMrd Edition, Is, 6d, 

THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET, 
Now first translated from an Ethiopic MS. in the Bodleian Lihraiy. 

8vo. ds. 

PRIMI EZR^ LIBRI, 
Qui apud Vulgatum appellatur quintus, versio Ethiopica; nunc primum in me- 
dium prolata et L^tine Angliceque reddita. 



8yo. 6«. 6d, 

ASCENSIO ISAI^ VATIS, 
Opusculum pseudepigraphum, multis ahhinc seculis, ut videtur, deperditum, 
nunc autem apud ^thiopas compertum, et cum Versione Latina Anglicana- 
que puhlici juris factum. 

Part I. Second Edition, Price 5s. And Part II. Price 5s. 

The Doctrine of the Church of England upon the EFFICACY OF 
BAPTISM, Vindicated from Misrepresentation. 



OXFORD ; and 377, STRAND, LONDON. 
DISCOURSES ON PROPHECY, in which are considered its 

Structure, Use, and Inspiration. By the Rev. J. DAVISON, B.D., late Fellow of 
Oriel CoUege, Oxford. Fourth Edition, Svo. 12s. 

REMARKS ON BAPTISMAL REGENERATION. 

By the same Author. Svo. cloth, 2«. 6d. 

EEMAINS AOT) CXXiASIONAL PUBLICATIONS. 

By the same Author.. Svo. 158. 

THE ENGLISH THEOLOGICAL WOEKS OF G. BULL, D.D., 

sometime Lord Bishop of St David's. A new Edition, Svo. 10«. 6d. 

THE DEFINITIONS OF FAITH, and Canons of Disciphne of 

the Six CEcumenical Councils, with the remaining Canons of the Code of the Uni- 
versal Church. Translated, with Notes. To which are added, THE APOSTOLICAL 
CANONS. By the late W. A. HAMMOND, MA. Svo. 7*. 6d. 

THE GREEK TEXTS OF THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS. 

With the English Translation, and Notes, by JOHN JOHNSON, M.A. Svo. 2s. 

PRJBLECTIONES ACADEMICS OXONH HABITS, a J.KEBLE, 

A.M., Poeticte Publico Prtelectore. 2 vols. Svo. 21«. 

LETTERS FROM A TUTOR TO HIS PUPILS. By W. JONES, 

of Nayland. A New EdiHon, edited by the Rev. E. COLERIDGE, M.A., Eton 
College. ISmo. 2s. 6d. ; morocco, 5s, 

THE PASTOR IN HIS CLOSET; 

Or, a Help to the Devotions of the Clergy. By the Rev. JOHN ARMSTRONG, 
Vicar of Tidenham, Author of "Sermons on the Festivals." ISmo. 28. 6d. 

PRATERS AND OTHER DEVOTIONS FOR PENITENTS, 

Compiled by the Rev. J. LEY, B.D., Fellow of Exeter CoUege, Oxford. ISmo. Is. 6d. 

THE CHRISTIAN' TEAR. Thoughts in Verse for the Sundays and 

Holydays throughout the Year. 

T?u Thirty-first Edition, ISmo., 6s.; morocco, %s. 6d. 

Also Foolscap Svo. 7s. 6d. ; morocco, 10s. 6d. 

And S2mo. morocco, 5s. ; cloth, Zs. 6d. 

LTRA INNOCENTIUM, or Thoughts in Verse on the Ways 

of Providence towards Little Children. By the Author of the Christian Year. 

Fourth Edition, 32mo. 3s. 6d. ; morocco, 5s. 
Also foolscap Svo. cloth, 7s. 6d. ; morocco, lOs. 6d. 

THE BAPTISTERT, OR THE WAT OF ETERNAL LIFE. 

By the Author of the Cathedral. Third Edition, Svo. I5s. cloths II. Is. morocco. 
Also 32mo. 6s. morocco, 

HYMNS FOR THE WEEK AND THE SEASONS. 

Translated from the Latin. 12mo. 48. 

SOME OP THE 500 POINTS OE GOOD HUSBANDET AND 

HUSWIFERT. By Tbomas Tusser, Gentleman. 12mo. 2a. 6d. 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN HENRY PARKER. 



THE PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN'S UBRART; 

A SERIES OF CHEAP PUBLICATIONS, FOR GENERAL CIRCULATKJN. 

Learn to Die. — [Sutton.J 
Private Devotions. — [Spincke«.] 
The Imitation of Christ. — [A Kempis.] 
Manual of Prater for the Young. — [Ken.] 
The Golden Grove. — [Tatlob.] 
Dailt Exercises. — [Horneck.] 
Life of Ambrose Bonwicke 
JaFB OF Bishop Bull. — [Nelson.] 
Companion to the Prayer Book 
Selections from Hooker. — [Keblb.] 
Advice to a Fribnd.-.[Patrick.] 
Repent ANCB and Fasting.-^Patriok.] 
On Prater. — [Patrick.] . 
Practical Christian, Part I. — [Sherlock.] 
¦ _— — Part II* — [She&IiOok*] 
Meditations on the Eucharist. — [Sutton.] 
Learn to Live. — [Sutton.] ' . ' . 

The Heart's Ease. — [Patrick.] . 
Doctrine of the English Church. — [Hetlin.] 
Holt Living^ — [Bf. Taylor.] 
Holt Dying. — [Bp. Taylor.] 
Confessions of St.- Augustine 



CHEAP BOOKS FOE PAROCHIAL USE. 

Berens* History of the Prayer Book - . - - - 

Beveridge's Sermons on the Church . • . . • 

Beveric^ on the Catechism - - - 

Cotton's Explanation of Obsolete Words in the Bible - . - . 

Hsmmond's Paraenesia, with a Discourse of Heresy In Defence •f oar Church 
against the Romanist ------- 

Henshaw's Meditations, Miscellaneous, Holy^ and Humane . - - 

Laud's Speeches on the Liturgy, &c. . - - . . 

Le Mesurier's Prayers for the Sick ------ 

Scandret's Sacrifice the Divine Service - - » - - 

Sherlock on the Catechism ------- 

Sparrow's Rationale on the Book of CominoB Prayer . . - 

Spelman's Rights of Churches ..-•-- 

The Seven Penitential Psalms - - - - - 

Vincent of Lerins against Heresy ------ 

Wilson's Sacra Privata (entire) ------ 

Wilson on the Lord's Supper (ungarbled edition) . - . - 

¦ ' boundf unih gUt edges - - - -* 

Winslow's Remains, or the Catholic Churchman in his Life and Death 
Wither*s Hymns of the Church ------