AN ESSAY 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



a. 



¦¦/t^ri-ic^- 



AN" ESSAY 



NEW AMLYTIC OF LOGICAL FOEMS, 



BEING THAT WHICH GAINED THE PRIZE PROPOSED BY SIR WILLIAM 

HAMILTON, IN THE YEAR 1846, FOR THE BEST EXPOSITION OF 

THE NEW DOCTRINE PROPOUNDED IN HIS LECTURES ; 



AN HISTORICAL APPENDIX. 



BY THOMAS SPENCER BAYNES. 

TaANSLATOR OF THR PORT-ROYAL I.OOIC. 



'^^ OF THB 

UHIVBESIIT] 
^^^^ 

EDINBURGH: SUTHERLAND AND KNOX. 
LONDON : SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO. 



MDCCCL. 






J/$'3S / 



ED.NBOKGH: T.CONSTABtR, PR.NTRR TO HEH MAJESTY. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Preface, vii 

Sir William Hamilton's Requirements for Essay, ... xi 

Essay on New Analytic op Logical Forms, .... 1 

Appendix : — 

I. Historical Notice touching tlie Explicit Quantification of the 

Predicate, 81 

II. On the Catholic Doctrine touching the Implicit Quantification 

of the Predicate, 137 

III. Of Figure, 147 

IV. Of Notation, 160 

Note by Sir W. Hamilton, 153 



PREFACE. 

The following Essay was written exclusively from 
the notes which I took while attending Sir William 
Hamilton's class in 1845-6, that being the only ses- 
sion during which I ever attended his logical course 
as a student. 

It has thus a certain value, though this be but 
shght,'''' as evidence that Sm W. Hamilton then 
taught his new doctrine so clearly, that it might 
be readily apprehended in all its essential points 
by an ordinary student. In order, therefore, that 
it may not lose any accidental value which it pos- 
sesses on this account, the Essay is pubhshed as it 
was originally written. I should not, indeed, have 
felt myself at libert}^ even on other grounds, to have 
altered it. Accordingly, with the single excep- 

¦^ Were it necessary, abundant evidence might be at once ob- 
tained to prove that Sir W. Hamilton taught his new doctrine five 
years earlier than the above date. 



viii PREFACE. 

tion of a somewhat fuller statement of the three 
canons of figure, (pages 67, 68,) it is printed with- 
out alteration, as at first given in for competition. 
A few foot-notes have been added while it was 
going through the press. These are distinguished 
from the original notes of the Essay by being placed 
within brackets. Some historical details, too, touch- 
ing the doctrine which the Essay expounds, have 
been given in the form of an Appendix. These de- 
tails, though presenting little attraction to those 
who have only a general acquaintance with logical 
science, will, I hope, be found of some interest to 
its more advanced students. 

The few definitions and canons which occur 
through the Essay, and which are marked with 
inverted commas, are given from my notes of the 
lectures. They are, I believe, substantially correct ; 
but as the notes are in many places brief and im- 
perfect, I cannot vouch for their verbal accuracy. 
The requirements originally prescribed for the Essay 
are reprinted with it, as they to some extent explain 
the form which it assumed. 

Although at the time when the prize was awarded 
Sir William Hamilton had suggested to me that 



FEEFACE. IX 

the Essay was of sufficient general interest for pub- 
lication, still I naturally felt that, in the event of 
being printed, it would be more satisfactory, both to 
the public and to myself, to receive some formal con- 
firmation of this. Indeed, as the Essay is mainly de- 
voted to the exposition of Sir W. Hamilton's new 
doctrine, I should not, for a moment, have enter- 
tained the idea of publishing it at all without his ex- 
press sanction. Accordingly, when I first thought 
of doing so, I applied to Sir W. Hamilton for this 
purpose, and received from him the following note, 
for the kindness of which, I need scarcely say, I feel 
personally indebted : — 

« Edinburgh, 9th March, 1860. 

" My Dear Mr. Baynes, — So far from having any 
objection to the publication of your Logical Essay, 
the intention has my fullest approval. When I first 
perused that Essay, it seemed to me, not only pre- 
eminently entitled to the annual prize for which it 
was written, but well deserving of the attention of 
logical readers in general. This I probably ex- 
pressed to you at the time. And having now ob- 
tained all the highest honours in Philosophy proper 
which our University offers to her Alumni, I am 
happy to learn that you propose printing that Essay, 
in its original form, with the addition of relative 



X PREFACE. 

matters furnished by your subsequent thought and 
reading. I am acquainted with no one who has 
more zealously — more unexclusively followed out his 
philosophical and, in particular, his logical researches ; 
your supplement cannot, therefore, fail to be at once 
curious and important. I would say, that any infor- 
mation from me is at your service, were I not aware 
that you are laudably desirous to limit your addi- 
tions to your own resources. I shall only request 
the annexation of a note, principally for the purpose 
of showing in what respect my present views may 
differ from those of mine stated by you in the Essay.'"' 
— Beheve me," &c. 

I have only further to return my best thanks to 
Sir W. Hamilton for his constant kindness in facili- 
tating my inquiries, giving me free access to his 
library for works which I could not otherwise have 
obtained, and in various other ways affording me 
the benefit of his invaluable counsel and assistance. 

THQs- S. BAYNES. 
Edinburgh, May 23, 1850. 

* See Note by Sir William Hamilton, p. 153. 



REQUIREMENTS 

FOR 

ESSAY ON THE NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



Without wishing to prescribe any definite order, it is required 
that there should be stated in the Essays : — 

1° What hogic postulates as a condition of its applicability? 

2° The reasons why common language makes an ellipsis of 
the expressed quantity^ frequently of the subject, and more fre- 
quently of the predicate, though both have always their quanti- 
ties in thought. 

3° Conversion of propositions on the common doctrine. 

4° Defects of this. 

5° Figure and Mood of Categorical Syllogism and Reduction, — 
on common doctrine. (General Statement.) 

6° Defects of this. (General Statement.) 

7° The one Supreme Canon of Categorical syllogisms. 

8° The evolution from this canon of all the Species of Syllo- 
gism. 

9° The evolution from this canon of all the General Laws of 
Categorical Syllogisms. 

10° The error of the Special Laws for the several Figures of 
Categorical Syllogisms. 

11° How Many Figures are there ? 

12° What are the Canons of the several Figures? 

13° How many Moods are there in all the Figures ; showing, 
in concrete examples, through all the Moods, the unessential va- 
riation which Figure makes in a Syllogism ? 

14° What relation do the figures hold to Extension and Com- 
prehension f 

15° Why have the second and third Figures no determinate 
mapr and minor premises, and two indifferent conclusions ; while 
the first Figure has a determinate major and minor premise, and a 
single proximate conclusion ? 

16° What relation do the Figures hold to Deduction and In- 
duction ? 

April 15, 1846. 



>>' OF THR 

NEW AMLYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



The main principle on which the new Analytic of 
Logical Forms proceeds is that of a thorough-going 
quantification of the predicate. This principle in its 
full scientific significance has been totally overlooked 
by logicians ; and when noticed at all, has for the 
most part been referred to only to be discarded as 
useless, if not to be condemned as false * In conse- 

* Dico, signum esse addendum subjecto, nunquam prsedicato. Si 
enim in propositione universali affirmativa signura universale addas 
praedicato, falsa erit propositio : ut " omnis homo est omne animal." 
Si vero in universali negativa signum universale, itemque particulari, 
sive affirmativa fuerit sive negativa, signum particulare addideris 
praedicatis, propositiones non quidem falsae fient, sed tamen efficies 
redundantiam et ravrcXoylav. Doctrina Propositionum Disputa- 
tionibus, xii. comprehensa . a M. Daniele Stahlio. Oxon. 1663. (Dis- 
putatio vi. § 16.) 

[This is the tradition touching the express quantification of the pre- 
dicate almost universally prevalent in the Aristotelic schools and 
commentaries, as will be more fully shown in the Appendix. The 
Regulce Philosophicce of Stahl, however, from which it is taken, is an 
acute and valuable work, faithful to its title, and containing more 
learning and philosophy than could readily, even in the works of his 

A 



2 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

quence of this omission, logic as a formal science has 
received only a one-sided development — has been 
deprived of much that is scientifically true — encum- 
bered with much that is scientifically false ; and 

time, be found within the same compass. It long maintained a very 
high reputation, and was often reprinted, both on the continent and 
in this country. The first edition was published in 1635, the second 
in 1641, another in 1653. Several others followed, which were re- 
printed at London and Oxford ; and finally a revised edition appeared 
in 1676, with notes by the elder Thomasius, who was the master of 
Leibnitz. From having thus ascertained more accurately the dates of 
the earlier editions of this work, I can now state with confidence 
what I had before surmised, viz., that it contains at least a partial 
anticipation of the distinction which was for the first time fully taken 
and established in modern philosophy by the Port-Royal logicians, — 
the distinction, to wit, in notions of the two wholes or quantities, 
the comprehensive and the extensive. In answer to the question, how 
the wider predicate comes to be in its narrower subject ; or, what is 
the same thing, how the whole essence of the genus comes to be in 
the species ; the author says, " Esse praedicatum in aliquo subject© 
totum seu universaliter potest dupliciter accipi : primo, inteTisive seu 
ratione essentice, et sic animal totum inest homini, et sic quodvis prae- 
dicatum superius inest inferiori : secundo, extensive, seu ratione la- 
titudinis ut hie accipitur, et sic animal non inest totum seu univer- 
saliter in homine, quia animal non totum comprehenditur ab ipso, 
ita ut extra ipsum non sit." {Reg. Phil., p. 687.) The contrasted 
character of these counter quantities, the intensive, as the quantity 
of essence, the extensive, as the quantity of extent, is here given with 
even scientific precision. Many of the older logicians say in general, 
(after Aristotle,) that in one sense the species is in the genus, and 
in another the genus in the species ; but I have not found any state- 
ment of this distinction before the time of the Port-Royalists at all 
so precise and explicit as that given in the above passage. Daniel 
Stahl, beside the Regulce, was the author of a number of other works 
on Logic, Metaphysics, and Ethics. He was professor of Philosophy 
in the University of Jena, and died in the year 1654, after having 
occupied the chair thirty-one years. {Witteni Memorice, p. 166.)] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 3 

throughout its entire history exhibited in a per- 
verted and erroneous form. On the principle of 
a quantified predicate, however, past evils are cor- 
rected, past omissions supplied; and logic receives 
its highest development in the perfection and sim- 
phcity of its form. To exhibit some of the more 
immediate improvements thus effected by the appH- 
cation of this principle is the design of the following 
essay. In seeking to accomplish this there will be ; — 

I. A statement and application of the fundamental 
postulate of logic, from which application there arises 
the principle of an expressed quantification of the 
predicate. 

II. The application of this principle (of a quan- 
tified predicate) to propositions ; and in particular 
to the doctrine of their conversion, in which the 
complexity and incompleteness of the old doctrine 
will be contrasted with the simplicity and perfection 
of the new. 

III. The influence of this principle on the doc- 
trine of categorical syllogisms, in contributing to 
effect specially ; the reduction of their general laws 
to one ; the abolition of their special laws ; and from 
this new simplicity the amplification of the valid 
forms of reasoning. 

[It may, perhaps, be well to state at the outset 
that in the following essay, when not otherwise stated, 
we proceed in the whole commonly recognised by 
logicians — the whole of Extension ; understanding, 



4 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

however, that by changing the copula in propositions, 
and accompanying this change by a transposition of 
the propositions in syllogisms, what is said of the 
one whole of Extension is equally applicable to the 
counter w^hole of Comprehension.] 
We proceed then — 

I. To state and apply the fundamental pos- 
tulate of logic. This postulate is, — " That we be 
allowed to state in language what is contained in 
thought." 

The application of this postulate to the subject of a 
proposition is not denied. Logicians now universally 
allow that the subject has a determinate quantity in 
thought, and this is accordingly expressed in lan- 
guage. With the subject of a proposition we have 
here, therefore, nothing to do. It is to the predicate 
that we have to vindicate an interest in the postulate 
co-equal with that of the subject. 

In order to determine this, we must inquire whether 
a notion holding the place of predicate in a proposi- 
tion always has a determinate'"' quantity in thought. 

* In order to obviate mistake, we may say that we use the word 
*' determinate" in relation to quantity, generically, as including 
under it definite (universal or individual) and indefinite (particular). 
In this sense it is simply opposed to that absence of all expressed 
quantity which logicians have generally represented by the term 
indefinite. We do not know whether such usage be strictly correct, 
but adopt it for the sake of convenience. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 5 

If it have, then the postulate has an immediate ap- 
pKcation, and this quantity must be expressed. 

In answering this question we shall show — 

i. That the predicate always has a determinate 
quantity in thought : and ii., Explain the reason why 
this quantity is not generally expressed in common 
language. 

We proceed to show then — 

i. That a notion holding the place of predicate 
in a proposition always has a determinate quantity 
in thought. 

That this is the case will appear from a little con- 
sideration of what a notion is. " A notion or con- 
cept"'"' is defined to be "the cognition or idea of the 

* [As this term has fallen out of use, it may be necessary to say a 
word or two in explanation of its recall. It is employed by Sir W. 
Hamilton to discriminate in conception the product from the process. 
The meaning of the term conception, as commonly used, is ambi- 
guous, since it is employed to denote both the act of conceiving and 
the product of that act. The correlative term concept removes this 
ambiguity, since it designates exclusively the product, while the term 
conception is restricted to denote the act of conceiving. It need 
scarcely be added that these terms are here employed according to 
their true etymological and scientific meaning, to denote the acts and 
products of the comparative, and not those of the representative 
faculty. 

We said advisedly that this term had " fallen out of use," inasmuch 
as it was commonly employed by the older English writers on Logic 
in its precise scientific significance, to express those generalisations 
represented by common terms, which are the ultimate elements of 
logical analysis, and with which the first part of logic has mainly to 
do. Thus Coke, speaking of first and second notions, says — " Those 
that primarily imposed names intended to name first the things 



f) NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

general attribute or attributes in which a pluraUty of 
objects coincide." This obviously involves the per- 
ception of a number of objects — their comparison — 
the recognition of their points of similarity — and their 
subjective union by this common attribute. The 

themselves, as the word 7nan is to express primarily the conceit which 
we form of human nature." Again, " Now the second notions do 
not directly and by themselves shadow out unto us the things them- 
selves, nor anything accidental or appendant unto them, but point 
out certain intellectual rules whereby we do with all distinctness 
and regularity form things, that is the conceits of things." {Art of 
Logick, p. 11.) And again, speaking of the various relations of words, 
he says quite explicitly — " The formal is the signification of the word, 
and by consequence the relation to the conceit of the mind which it 
giveth knowledge of." (P. J 5.) Fraunce also uses the term con- 
tinually. Thus, to take a single example in defining an axiom, he 
says, " It here signifieth any sentence or proposition whatsoever 
wherein one argument, reason, conceipt, thing, is so conjoined with, 
or severed from another, as that thereby we judge the one eyther to bee 
or not to bee, the cause, efiect ; whole, part ; generall, speciall ; subject, 
adjunct : divers, disparate ; relative, repugnant ; like, unlike; equall 
more or less to the other." {Lawyer's Logick, fol. 87.) See another 
instance of this use from Fraunce in the quotation given at p. 2.3 
(note). The term is also used by Granger in his " Divine Logick ;" 
and, if I remember aright, by Wilson in his " Rule of Reason." It is 
to be found, too, employed in the same sense out of logical works, and 
is used in this way by writers of authority ; we may sj)ecify as exam- 
ples among others Dr. Henry More, and Sir W. Raleigh. All that 
now remains to us of this old use is the restricted sense in which the 
word conceit is employed — a sense at once so restricted and so esta- 
blished as to unfit it for scientific use. Concept, as strictly analo- 
gical in form and precise in meaning, is exactly the term we need to 
express the simplest products of the comparative faculty ; and, as 
we have shown, it already exists in the language. What is necessary, 
therefore, in employing it, is not an apology for its introduction, but 
simply a vindication of its recall.] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 7 

possibility of this process determines the possibility 
of knowledge to man. Had he no power of classi- 
fying in intellect the confused multitude of objects 
presented in sense, he must remain for ever destitute 
of anything worthy of the name of knowledge. With 
no clear recognition even of the individual, since com- 
parison and discrimination would be impossible, he 
must for ever abide amidst the obscurity and vague- 
ness in which knowledge commences — helpless amidst 
a multiplicity of objects which he could not compre- 
hend — bewildered by a confusion which there was no 
possibility of recalling to order. The earliest effort 
of the mind is accordingly directed to extricate itself 
from this confusion ; and this determines the exercise 
of the comparative faculty, and the formation of con- 
cepts or notions. 

Amidst the multitude of confused objects presented 
to the mind in perception, some are found to affect 
us similarly in certain respects. These objects the 
mind considers ; by comparison it recognises their 
resembling qualities ; by attention these are exclu- 
sively considered, since the concentration of the mind 
on those qualities in which objects coincide involves 
of necessity its abstraction from those in which 
they are severally dissimilar. These various objects, 
since the resembling attributes which they possess 
in common cannot, when considered alone, be discri- 
minated, are, in this restricted point of view, consi- 
dered as one. In other words, the mind grasps into 



^ NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

unity a multitude of objects severally distinct by a 
common point of identity. On this unity thus formed 
it sets the seal of a name, that it may be enabled ever 
afterwards at once to discriminate the various ob- 
jects of its knowledge, commodiously refer each to 
its own class, and thus be saved the endless labour 
of enumerating all the particulars by which objects 
are individually discriminated. A notion is thus a 
purely ideal or subjective whole, which the mind 
from the limitation of its powers is necessitated to 
form, in order to classify in thought and discriminate 
in language the various objects of its knowledge. 

This being the case, it is obvious that a concept or 
notion can afford only a partial knowledge, and has 
only a relative existence. It can afford only a par- 
tial knowledge, since it embraces some only of the 
many marks by which an object is known. It has 
only a relative existence, since this knowledge is not 
given absolutely, but only in connexion with some 
one of the objects to which the concept is related. 
For a notion, though potentially applicable to all the 
objects which it contains, can only be truly known 
on occasion of its being actually applied to some one 
of these objects. This is at once the test and the 
evidence of its relative character. And this being 
its character, it is obviously altogether dependent on 
the objects from which it is formed. A notion has 
thus, in its totality, a purely subjective existence, 
destitute of an}^ objective reality. Being what it is 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 9 

— an ideal whole only by relation to the objects 
whose resembling part it embraces — it is obvious, as 
we have said, that it can pretend to no independent 
existence, much less to any independent knowledge. 
Its existence entirely depends on that of the objects 
from whence it is derived, and to each of which it is 
linked by the common resembling attribute w^hich it 
embraces. Destroy the objects, you destroy the re- 
sembling attributes in each ; and destroying the re- 
sembling parts, you annihilate the whole which they 
together constituted. As, however, a concept has 
only a subjective being, existence and knowledge 
are here identical. If no qualities be discriminated 
in objects as similar, we have no knowledge of a 
concept — no concept exists. If we cannot assign an 
object to any class — cannot say it does or does not 
belong to any notion, we do not comprehend it. We 
think an object (recognise to be what it is) only as 
we think it under some notion or concept. 

This being premised with regard to notions in 
general, it will be seen, that when we bring an ob- 
ject under a notion, i.e., wdien we predicate of it that 
it belongs to such a class, we must know that it oc- 
cupies a certain place in that class. For if we w^ere 
uncertain what place the individual object occupied 
in the class, or whether it occupied any place at all, 
we should not know the class, and could not, there- 
fore, bring any object under it ; — e.g., If I do not 
know whether rose comes under the concept flovjer 




1 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

— whether it is equal to some part, or the whole, or 
superior to it — I do not know the class flower^ and 
cannot, of course, predicate flower of rose ; in other 
words, I cannot bring rose under the concept flower^ 
since I do not know w^hat the concept means, what 
it contains, and what it does not. This is clear ; 
for as we have just explained — since a notion, as a 
factitious unity in thought, is absolutely worthless, 
and, indeed, not cognisable, out of relation to the in- 
dividual objects, the aggregate of whose resembling 
qualities it constitutes ; and since an object is truly 
known only as it is thought through or under a 
notion, it follows, that comprehension, in such a case, 
would be impossible. If, therefore, we understand 
the object at all, we must fix, in thought, the sphere 
which it occupies under the class to which, in predi- 
cation, we have assigned it. In other words — if we 
comprehend what we utter, every notion holding the 
"place of predicate in a proposition must have a deter- 
minate quantity in thought. 

This, indeed, is always involved in predication. 
For predication is nothing more or less than the 
expression of the relation of quantity in which a 
notion stands to an individual, or two notions to 
each other. If this relation were indeterminate — 
if we were uncertain whether it was of part, or 
whole, or none — there could be no predication. The 
very fact of predication is thus always evidence that 
the predicate notion holds a relation of determinate 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



11 



quantity to the subject. In other words, we think 
only as we think under some determinate quantity ; 
for all thought is comparison of less and more, of 
part and whole. All predication is but the utterance 
of thought. All predication must, therefore, have a 
determinate quantity. 

Since, therefore, the quantity always exists in 
thought^ the postulate applies; that is, in logic the 
quantity must be expressed, on demand, in language. 

It only remains to remark here, that this quantity 
of the predicate notion, always determinate, will be 
definite, (universal or individual,) or indefinite, (par- 
ticular,) as the subject notion is greater, equal to, or 
less than the predicate. If the subject notion be 
less, we attribute to it a part only of the predicate — 
say it is some part, but not the whole, which that 
notion comprises, e.g., " all man is some mortal." If 
the subject be equal to the predicate, we attribute 
the whole notion to it, e.g., " all man is all rational'^ 
If the subject be greater, we attribute the whole pre- 
dicate to it, as a part only of its extension, e.g., 
" some mortal is all man." 

Logicians who have occasionally touched upon the 
quantification of the predicate, seem for the most 
part to have conceived the possibility of its express 
quantification only universally ; '"' and because this 



* Notandura, signum universalitatis non esse apponendum prse- 
dicato, sed tantum subjecto ; recte enim dicitur, " omnis homo est 
animal ;'''' sed non recto dicitur, " omnis homo est omne animaV 



12 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

cannot be done in a great number of cases — in all 
those cases, indeed, in which an individual is brought 
under a concept, or a species under a genus, (as 
we cannot say, " all man is all mortal,") — since this 
cannot be done, to have lightly thereupon thrown 
aside the whole doctrine as of no avail. It is, how- 
ever, clear, from the nature of a notion as a whole 
made up of the like characters in a number of ob- 
jects Avhich thus stand to it in the relation of parts, 
that we are quite as much at liberty to say of one of 
these objects, that it forms a part of the notion, as 
we are to say of all the objects together, that they 
constitute the whole.* We may, therefore, and in 

Verum duse limitationes adhiberi possunt : Prima, ut intelligatur 
de iiniversalibus affirmatis non autem de negatis ; recte enim dicitur 
" omnis homo est nullus asinus,^^ " nullus asinus est omnis homo ;" 
Secunda, ut signum universalitatis immediate ponatur ante praedi- 
catum ; nam si apponatur tantum adjuncto prsedicati, enunciatio non 
erit falsa, ut " visus percipit omnem colorem" " Christus curabat 
oimiem morhumj" &c. Quia adjunctum ejusmodi poterit fieri sub- 
jectum, mutando verbum activum in passivum hoc pacto, ^^ omnis color 
jjercipitur a visu." Davidis Derodonis Logica Restituta. Geneva, 
1659. (Page 573.) 

On the catholic doctrine held by logicians touching the quantifi- 
cation of the predicate, see the Appendix. 

¦^ [The older logicians laid down many rules which were often 
useless, sometimes false, and at best of only partial and limited ap- 
plication, about what they termed the regular and irregular order 
of predication — the natural or unnatural, direct or indirect, consecu- 
tion of the terms in a proposition. Natural, or regular, or direct 
predication (^predicatio tiatur'alis, directa, ordinatd) they held to be 
that in which the genus is predicated of the species, the species of 
the individual, the attribute of its subject, and in general the exten- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



13 



fact we must continually (][uantify the predicate par- 
ticularly. 



sive whole of its part ; and in which, therefore, the subject notion 
was always of less extent than the predicate notion. Unnatural, in- 
direct or irregular predication {predicatio non naturalis, indirecta, 
inordinata) was the reverse of this, that, to wit, in which the species 
was predicated of the genus, the subject of its attribute, and in 
general the extensive part of its whole. 

Language is, however, but the instrument of thought ; and its 
natural order in the last resort must ever be that in which it best 
expresses the thought of which it is the vehicle. What this order 
shall be will thus in great measure be determined by the feeling and 
purpose of the speaker. If he have a special interest in any parti- 
cular term, or wishes in any way to make it emphatic, it will occupy 
the more prominent and important place in the proposition. The 
order in such a case will be that of interest and emphasis, and this 
surely is as natural an arrangement as any other. Accordingly, if I 
wish to direct particular attention to the genus, it may stand first in 
the proposition, and the species follow as its predicate. Thus, for 
example, if referring to the Scaligers I were to say, " An acute phi- 
losopher was the father, an erudite philologer the son," there would 
be nothing unnatural in this, for by such an arrangement of the 
terms, I simply direct special attention to the diflferent departments 
of science in which they respectively excelled. So, again, in the line 
of the poet, " The proper study of mankind is man ;" and in a num- 
ber of other examples that will readily suggest themselves. With equal 
justice, if I wish to make the species (or genus) emphatic, I may pre- 
dicate the individual of it, e.g., in the expressions, " A philosopher, in- 
deed, was Socrates ;" " The poet of all time is Shakspeare ;" there 
is nothing unnatural, but attention is appropriately directed to the 
high type of poetic and philosophic character which respectively 
belonged to these great men. 

It is no valid objection to this form of predication to say, that in 
all such cases we do in reality so restrict the genus or species, that 
they become convertible with the species or individual severally pre- 
dicated of them ; for this objection lies equally against all predication 
whatever. Thus, in what is termed the regular form, the genus is never 



14 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

We proceed then — 

ii. To explain why the quantity of the predicate 
is not expressed in common language. 

We have already explained the nature of a con- 
taken in the whole of its extent, but only in so much of it as is oc- 
cupied by the species of which it is predicated, e.g.^ when we say, 
" All man is animal," we do not of course mean all animal, but simply 
that part of animal which is convertible with man, or as is sometimes 
more explicitly stated, " Man is an (one) animal," or, (if referring 
to the race,) " a species of animal." 

So, again, in relation to the second division of what is called un- 
natural predication — that in which the subject is predicated of its 
attribute — if we wish specially to signalise the attribute that will 
naturally stand first, e.g., in the exclamation, " Great is Diana of the 
Ephesians," the greatness of Diana is far more emphatically marked 
than it would be if the terms were reversed. So, again, in the line, 
" The fairest of her daughters, Eve," it is to the beauty of Eve that 
special attention is directed. 

It may be at once conceded to the logicians, that what they have 
termed the natural or direct order, is the more common, inasmuch as 
the concrete terms of a proposition are generally of greater interest 
than the abstract ones ; but it is unjust to speak of any other order of 
predication as unnatural or unlawful, while it is quite obvious that, 
logically considered, either order of consecution in the terms of a 
proposition is equally valid, for we may indifferently predicate a part 
of the genus of the whole species, or the whole species of a part of 
the genus. This liberty, indeed, is not denied, though it is generally, 
nevertheless, even by late writers, allowed as an exception rather than 
as a rule. Thus Gassendi, after giving the rule that the species 
cannot be predicated of the genus, says, in mitigation of its force — 
" Additur nihilominus, nisi generi limitatio adhiheatur ; dicere enim 
possumus, ut jam ante insinuatum est, aliquod animal est homo ; 
certus quidam color est candor ; una qucepiam virtus est justitia. 
Efficitur nempe, ut particulis hujusmodi limitantibus genus veluti 
contrahatur, neque amplius pateat, quam species ; ac proinde ut 
species de eo enunciari, fierive illius attributum reciproce possit." 
{Logica. Oxon. 1718, p. 367.) ] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 15 

cept — that it is a factitious whole obtained from a 
number of individual objects, each of which, there- 
fore, occupies a certain part of the whole concept. 
We have also shown, that this relation of quantity is 
always present to the mind, when a concept and an 
individual (or a part and whole of any kind) are 
thought together as subject and predicate. Though 
always thus contained in thought, this quantity is, 
however, rarely expressed in ordinary language. 
The name in which the totality of attribute em- 
braced by the concept is fixed, is usually applied 
to any one of its individual objects, without any 
particle of quantification. The explanation of this 
omission is to be found in the end which com- 
mon language seeks. The end which it proposes 
to itself is the clear utterance of meaning ; it seeks 
to render at once intelligible, by its signs, the thing 
signified. Asa vehicle for the conveyance of thought, 
ordinary language is mainly concerned about what is 
thought — not the manner of thinking it. In other 
and more technical terms, it is primarily engaged 
with the matter of thought, and only considers the 
form incidentally, and as a mean to an end. What- 
ever, therefore, is not really necessary to the clear 
comprehension of what is contained in thought, is 
usually ehded in expression. Thus common lan- 
guage abounds with abbreviations and elliptical 
forms of expression. The expression of those phases 
of thought and feeling which arise in conjunctions of 



16 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOIIMS. 

circumstances which are frequent and familiar, are 
almost always and conveniently of this description, 
e.g., — we meet a friend and say, " good morning J^ 
What is intended here ? A cordial greeting and 
the expression of friendly feeling. This, however, is 
not expressed in terms, but the elhptical form above 
is understood to represent, " I wish you a good 
morning." So also in " farewell," and a multitude 
of other cases which might be adduced. In fact, so 
that what is meant by it be at once clearly intelhgible, 
an expression, however elliptical, is true and valid for 
all the purposes of ordinary language. Thus, to 
facilitate the communication of thought, not only are 
words omitted, but the steps of the reasoning pro- 
cess itself are for the most part abbreviated. Com- 
mon language almost invariably makes an ellipsis of 
one step of this process. For since the reasoning 
process is the same in all men — being governed by 
laws necessary and universal — the mind at once and 
intuitively supplies the omitted step, and the process 
is complete. This principle, too, affords the true 
explanation why, in common language, the overt 
quantification of the predicate is neglected. It is 
not necessary for the clear comprehension of a pro- 
position that the predicate be quantified in terms. 
And the reason why this is not necessary is to 
be found in the universality of generalisation or the 
formation of concepts, and the sameness of the pro- 
cess in all men. All men must generalise, for the 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 17 

necessity which determines this process exists in all. 
All men must generahse alike, for the faculties which 
accomplish it are the same in all. In order to com- 
prehend the many objects by which he is surrounded, 
he must reduce them to order. To accomplish this, 
he classifies or groups into unity a number of objects 
which affect him in the same manner. But as the 
same objects affect all men in the same manner, it 
follows, that where the same term exists to express 
the same mental modification, this term may and 
will be apphed to all the individual objects which 
determine such similar impressions. 

As all men, therefore, know what is meant by a 
general term, — that it is a name equally applicable to 
all and each of the individual objects which it em- 
braces, when one of these objects is brought under 
it ; that is to say, when it is predicated of this object 
that it forms a part of the notion which the general 
term expresses, it is not absolutely necessary overtly 
to declare that it forms only some part ; for as it is 
universally known that the concept is of far wider 
extension, the quantity is immediately supplied in 
thought, and no mistake arises. Thus, when we say, 
" Every horse is an animal" — " All men are mortal,'' 
it is not necessary to say that there are other ani- 
mals besides horses, or to guard explicitly against 
the conclusion that man alone is mortal ; for as the 
extension of the general terms is understood by all, 
every one knows at once, by a reference to the matter 

B 



18 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

of the thought, that in each case the predicate is 
affirmed of its subject only in some part of its exten- 
sion, not in the whole. 

Since, therefore, it is not necessary, for the clear 
understanding of a proposition, that the predicate 
notion be expressly quantified, and as the continual 
repetition of it would be wearisome, the quantifica- 
tion is usually omitted ; in other words, since it is 
not necessary for the purposes which ordinary lan- 
guage seehs to accomplish, the quantity of the predi- 
cate, though always contained in thought, is usually 
elided in expression. 

All this, however, becomes widely different when 
in the progress of reflective inquiry a science arises, 
which seeks, as its express aim, to accomplish a full 
and final analysis of the form of thought. It will be 
the office of such a science to supply for its own 
purposes the omissions of common language — to re- 
store whatever of the form of thought may have 
fallen out of expression in ordinary parlance. The 
procedure of logic and that of common language are 
thus different, and to some extent opposed ; the 
former recalling to expression as of scientific value 
what the latter had thrown aside as of no account. 
The different nature of their procedure is, as w^e have 
hinted, determined by the different nature of the 
ends which they respectively seek to accomplish. 
Common language, as we have seen, seeks as its elid 
to exhibit with clearness the m,atter of thought. What- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



19 



ever does not contribute to this is thrown aside as 
worthless. Logic, on the other hand, seeks as its 
end to exhibit imth exactness the form of thought. 
Whatever contributes to this is retained as of scien- 
tific value. All the elements ^vhich the analysis of 
the form of thought furnishes must be brought out 
to view, and explicitly considered. Whatever does 
not belong to the form of thought must be cast aside 
as without the province of the science. We have 
seen, that in thought the predicate notion of a pro- 
position is always of a given quantity. This quan- 
tity is not expressed in common language ; because, 
by a knowledge of, and reference to, the matter of 
thought, the omission is at once supplied. This pro- 
cedure is, however, of course incompetent to logic. 
As a formal science, it knows nothing of the matter 
of thought ; it makes no elisions ; it can understand 
nothing ; it can supply nothing ; it can only recog- 
nise and deal scientifically with what is given for- 
mally. If, therefore, the predicate has always a cer- 
tain quantity in thought, (and we have shown it has,) 
that quantity must be expressed before it can be 
logically taken into account, and its significance in- 
vestigated. The recognition of the expressed quan- 
tity of the predicate is then as imperative in logic as 
the neglect of such recognition is convenient in com- 
mon language ; for it is plain that, unless all the 
elements furnished by analysis be received and con- 
sidered in their relative influence and importance, the 



20 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

science cannot pretend to completeness. Logic, in 
common with all sciences, seeks perfection ; but, as 
a formal science, it can only realise scientific perfec- 
tion as it attains to formal exactness. The condition 
of its formal exactness is, that its analysis of the 
form of thought be exhaustive and complete. As 
soon as this is the case, synthesis may commence, 
and the science will emerge in its full beauty and 
true perfection. 

This explains how it is that logic has remained so 
imperfect and deformed in the hands of all previous 
logicians. They were, in the main, right as far as 
they went ; but they did not go far enough. Their 
investigation of the form of thought was arrested 
before it had attained the necessary completeness. 
Proceeding in their analysis, they correctly recalled 
to expression what common language had omitted in 
the reasoning process, and exhibited the three steps 
of that process in their formal order and complete- 
ness. Still continuing their analysis, they proceeded 
to investigate the properties of a proposition in order 
to determine its scientific capabilities. Here they 
discovered that the subject has always a certain 
quantity in thought. This quantity, in conformity 
with the necessities of their science, they accordingly 
expressed, and turned to scientific account. But 
here their analysis was stopped, just at the very 
point the investigation of which would have conferred 
upon their science the completeness which it lacked ; 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 21 

and, as the natural result of a defective analysis, 
logic, as a science, has always remained incomplete. 
Had logicians proceeded further, they would have 
discovered that a determinate quantity always be- 
longs, not only to the subject of a proposition, but 
also to the predicate ; that the recognition of this 
quantity in logic affords an important principle, the 
true appKcation of which would relieve it of its many 
inconsistencies, and confer upon it scientific perfec- 
tion. It will be our business presently to inquire 
into some of the improvements thus effected. 

To recapitulate, then : — We have seen, from the 
nature of a notion in general, and of a predicate no- 
tion in particular, that it always has a determinate 
quantity in thought. We have thus vindicated to it an 
interest in the fundamental postulate of logic. And 
from the application of that postulate there has 
emerged the principle — That the quantity of the pre- 
dicate notion of a proposition he explicitly noted in 
logic. 

We proceed now to show — 

II. — The application of this principle to propo- 
sitions, and in particular to the doctrine of their 
conversion. 

A proposition is defined to be " the expression in 
language of the relation of congruence or confliction, 
in which two notions, two individuals, or an individual 



22 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

and a notion, (in a word, two terms,) are recognised, 
when compared together, to stand to each other." '" 

This being the nature of a proposition, it is evident 
that it involves a plurality of ideas,f thought toge- 
ther in mutual relation and dependence; since it is 
only by being viewed in relation as subject and pre- 
dicate, determining and determined, that a plurality 
of thoughts can be reduced to a mental oneness, and 
recognised together in the same individual act of 
consciousness. 

The terms of a proposition are thus always related, 
and this relation constitutes their scientific signifi- 
cance. To investigate this relation fully, and de- 
termine it exactly, is the office of logical analysis. 
As a proposition is the expression of the relation of 
congruence or confliction between two thoughts, it 
is surely of the highest importance — in fact, a con- 
dition of its intelligible existence — that the amount 
of this agreement or difference be known and stated. 
This can only be done by ascertaining the quantity 
of both the terms, and thus determining the space of 
each in relation to the other. Until this be done, 
the properties of a proposition have not been fully 
analysed ; its scientific capabilities cannot be fully 
determined. The quantity of the terms in relation 

¦**• ^'¦Jvdicium est comparatio ideas cum idea ; propositio est judicium 
terminis expressum." — Ploucquet. 

t Using the term " idea " generically, to include the products of 
sense, imagination, and intellect. 



NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORMS. 23 

to each other is thus the most important aspect in 
which a proposition can be considered ; but though 
thus the most important relation, it is one in the ana- 
lysis of which logicians in general seem to have been 
more than commonly unsuccessful. In opposition to 
the obvious importance and necessity of determining 
the quantity of the terms in a proposition, they have 
introduced into logic a class of propositions distin- 
guished by the absence of all quantity;* and this, too, 

* [The class of propositions distinguished by the absence of all ex- 
pressed quantity, and termed by logicians indefinite, (more properly 
indesigyiate,) affords another curious illustration of how completely 
the force of authority has in logic prevailed over the most obvious 
and elementary necessities of the science. Introduced originally by 
Aristotle, and subsequently reproduced by Boethius, these proposi- 
tions have continued to occupy a place in the science, and to Be dis- 
criminated as a separate class, under the division of quantity. In 
the absence of all expressed quantity, however, it was very difficult 
to turn them to any logical account. Some kind of quantity was 
necessary for this purpose ; but the only way in which they could 
be quantified with any certainty was particularly, according to the 
caution of Apuleius, who says, referring to the division of proposi- 
tions under the head of quantity, " Aliae indefinitaa, ut animal spirat, 
non enim definit utrum omne, an aliquod. Sed tamen pro particu- 
lari semper valet. Quia tutius est id ex incerto accipere quod 
minus est." (^De St/Uogismo Categorico. Apideii Opera. Lugd., 
1600, p. 415.) 

Subsequently, however, as stated in the text, rules for determin- 
ing this quantity were laid down, derived from the object-matter of 
the propositions themselves. By Ramus, indeed, and some of his 
followers, indefinites, it would seem, were altogether rejected as of no 
logical account. His English representative, Fraunce, (I have not 
Ramus' own works at hand,) says, referring to the indefinite propo* 
sition, " But Ramus expelleth that uncertaine and indefinite axiom ; 
for every conceipt of the mind is determinatly eyther generall or 



24 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

in opposition to the fundamental postulates of their 
science : — that in order to deal with a proposition we 
must know what it means — i.e., understand the quan- 
tity of its subject and predicate — and that we be 

speciall, and speciall eyther particular or singular." {Lawyer's Lo- 
gike, fol. 92.) 

They continued, nevertheless, to be currently received, and a later 
English writer but reflects this common acceptance when he makes 
them the matter of special legislation. " The canons hereof," says 
Coke, speaking of this class, " are two." He then gives the follow- 
ing, which are, however, but translations and abridgments from 
Keckermann : — 

" 1. The chief force and use of indefinites is in propositions of the 
idea : that is in such as where the universal subject is taken abso- 
lutely, as — the Lord's Supper is a sacrament ; man is the noblest 
creature ; the soul of man is immortal, &c. 

" 2. There is also a use of indefinites to signifie that the conse- 
quent is in the antecedent, for the most part, though not always, 
cog It/ tI (koTJ). As, the Cretians be lyars ; mothers are too much 
cockerers of their children," &c. {Art of Logick, p. 106.) 

A recent British writer, however, sees far more clearly into their 
true logical character and relation, and says of them, (referring to 
the rules which are given for their reduction,) with far more scien- 
tific than historic truth, " By reduction here is to be understood that 
logicians recognise no indefinite propositions, and that if an inde- 
finite occur, they require it to be expressed in a definite form. In- 
definite propositions are noticed that the logician should be on his 
guard against them, and not because they are legitimate, or of any 
legitimate class." {Thymu's Compendium of Logic. Dublin, 1827, 
p. 47.) 

This is far from being historically true, and if it were, it would not 
avail to defend the position which indefinites occupy ; for the prin- 
ciple of their reduction is as extra-logical as are the propositions to 
be reduced. In the statement, that they are not recognised in logic 
as a separate class, this author has at once overrated the acuteness 
of his predecessors, and underrated his own ; for it is only within a 
comparatively short period that their logical position has been seri- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 25 

allowed to express all that is understood. As an 
antidote to the disorders thus introduced into their 
science, they have had recourse to an extra-logical 
remedy ; that is to say, they have laid down a num- 
ber of rules for determining the quantity of these 
unquantified propositions, founded on the object- 
matter of these propositions themselves, according as 
this matter is possible or impossible, necessary or 
contingent. In so doing they have, implicitly at 
least, destroyed their science ; for if logic be com- 
petent to this discrimination, it can no longer vindi- 
cate to itself the character of a special science, but 
must become co-extensive with the whole domain of 
human knowledge. They have thus also destroyed 
the possibility of its thorough-going apphcation, since 
they have tacitly laid down, as a preliminary to such 
application, the impossible condition that we should 

ously called in question. They are, however, as need scarcely now 
be stated, to be rejected from logic as utterly unscientific in their 
character. They belong, indeed, to the same confusion of the acci- 
dental with the essential, through which the enthymeme was dis- 
criminated as a separate form of reasoning. In both the mere co7i- 
tingencies of speech are identified with the necessities of thought ; 
and the accidents of expression are received and incorporated with 
the science as valid elements of form. Science, however, is no longer 
worthy of the name when it accepts and incorporates, without ex- 
amination, the rude materials which it is its office to elaborate ; and 
places among its elements the confused wholes, which a more search- 
ing analysis would have decomposed into their constituent parts. 
This is precisely what has happened in relation to the indefinite 
proposition and the enthymeme ; and accordingly, by a truer scien- 
tific analysis, they arc finally rejected from logic] 



26 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

know all that is possible and all that is impossible, 
all that is contingent and all that is necessary. To 
say nothing of its logical inconsistency, — this being 
impossible is, as a scientific demand, absurd. 

Logicians have not, however, of course left propo- 
sitions generally in this unquantified state, or their 
science would have remained hopelessly crippled. 
They proceeded, as w^e have already said, to consider 
the quantity of propositions ; but here their incon- 
sistency still attends them, and they are destined to 
be again unsuccessful. For in their analysis, as we 
have seen, they have only considered the subject, 
and determined its quantity, while that of the predi- 
cate, which it was equally necessary to determine, as 
being of equal scientific value, is altogether neglected. 
The proximate influence of this omission in intro- 
ducing complexity and inconsistency into the science 
will be seen in the common doctrine of conversion ; 
while some of its remoter consequences will be here- 
after signalised. It may be well to premise here 
that we speak of categorical propositions throughout. 
We go on, then, to notice the conversion of proposi- 
tions on the common doctrine. When the subject and 
predicate of a proposition change places, the proposi- 
tion is said to he converted. 

This conversion is threefold. 

1. Simple conversion. — This takes place when the 
terms are simply transposed, without any change of 
quantity or quality in the proposition. This is com- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 27 

petent in universal negative and particular affirma- 
tive propositions ; e.g., — 

No man is a stone. Therefore, 

No stone is a man. 

Some man is a tinker. Therefore, 

Some tinker is a man. 

2. Conversion 'per accidens. — This takes place when 
the quality of the two propositions remains the same; 
but the quantity is altered, the predicate in the one 
being limited on becoming the subject of the other. 
This holds true in universal propositions, both affir- 
mative and negative ;* e.g., — 

All violets are flowers. ¦ Therefore, 
Some flowers are violets. 

* [This is the statement of Peter Hispanus, and it has been re- 
peated by Derodon and some others among the later logicians. The 
application of this species of conversion to universal negatives is, 
however, altogether useless, as they are converted simply, and thus 
retain their universality after conversion. It is, moreover, incompe- 
tent, inasmuch as, in such a process, an inference of subordination 
is involved. 

By the majority of logical writers it is therefore applied exclu- 
sively and formally to universal affirmative propositions. As so ap- 
plied, however, the name which it bears is unsuitable, since it no 
longer truly designates the nature of the process which it is em- 
ployed to express. Taken in this exclusive application, restrictive or 
attenvMe conversion (the name given to it by Granger) would be 
much better. 

It is worth while noticing, that the logicians in general do not 
seem to be at all aware by whom this term, per accid£ns, as applied 
to conversion, was introduced, or what was the kind of process which 
it was originally employed to denote. None refer to its authorship, 
while few attempt any explanation of its meaning ; and the few who 
do are for the most part incorrect. Isenach, whose " E'pitome Dia- 



28 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

3. Conversion by co7itraposition^'- — This takes place 
when the quahty of the propositions remains un- 
affected ; but the terms are changed into what is 
called by logicians infinite, but more appropriately 

lecticce''' was published about the year 1510, says, in explanation, 
that this species of conversion was called ^er accidens, because one 
of the accidents of the proposition (quantity, to wit) was changed. 
Keckermann gives a somewhat difierent and longer account of it. He 
says, that this kind of conversion is called per accidens, because the 
converted is not immediately inferred from the converse, but only 
mediately through the intervention of another proposition ; e.g., from 
the proposition " all man is animal," it is not imm^diatdy inferred 
that " some animal is man," but rather that " some man is animal ;" 
and as this can be converted simply, it follows that " some animal is 
man." {Sy sterna Logicce. Francof, 1628, p. 348.) While a recent 
Oxford writer gives the following not very intelligible explanation : — 
" Per accidens — putting in the place of the subject the quality, 
whether proprium or accident, which the predicate implies. By the 
old logicians the proprium is constantly called accidens proprium." 
{Moherlfs Lectures on Logic. Oxford, 1848, p. 85.) It is difficult 
to see how this statement (even supposing it to be just as far as it 
goes) can be accepted as a full account of the matter, — inasmuch as 
it can at best only apply to those cases in which the predicate is the 
property or accident of the subject, and by no means to the generic 
latitude of possible predication to which the conversion extends. 
Ploucquet is the only one among modern logicians, so far as my 
knowledge extends, who seems to have understood the sense in which 
it was originally employed, and who has accordingly given the true 
explanation of the term. He says, explaining the significance of the 
letter P (per accidens) in the mnemonic verses, " No tat universalem 
in particularem, et particularem in universalem esse convertendam, 
id quod fit per accidens, ex natura materice.^'' {Fundamenta Phil. 
Spec. Tubingse, 1758, p. 45.) This is the true explanation of the 
term, and of the process which it originally designated, as employed 



*• Some logical writers, it appears, have rejected this species as of 
no logical value. — Crachanthorpe, Book iii. chap. 10. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 29 

indefinite, by the addition of negative particles ; that 
is to say, when in the converted proposition, instead 
of the subject and predicate simply, the contradictory 
of each is found ; e.g., — 

PC very raan is mortal. Therefore, 
Everything which is not mortal is not man. 

by Boethius,* who was the author of this species of conversion, name, 
and thing. This term was employed by him to denote the conver- 
sion of the universal into the particular, and the particular into the 
universal, from the accident of the matter of the proposition. He 
says, " Harum (propositionum) igitur, particularis affirmatio, particu- 
lariter quidem sibi ipsa convertitur, universali autem affirmationi 
per accidens, et rursus universalis negatio, loco principe sui recepit 
conversionem, ad particularem vero negationem per accidens converti 
potest. Nee vero negationis particularis ad seipsam principaliter 
stabilis ac firma conversio est, sed negationi universali secundo loco 
atque accidentaliter." Introductio ad Syllogismos. {Opera, Basil. 
1546, p. 575.) 

But the formal conversion, (to be carefully distinguished from the 
material conversion of Boethius,) which the term was subsequently 
and exclusively employed to denote, had been discriminated long before 
the time of Boethius. It was expressly taken by Aristotle, and called 
by him partial or particular conversion, {dvTiffT^o(pr} sv fMs^si.) Anal. 
Pr. i. c. 2, § 1.) It was subsequently also signalized by Apuleius 
under the name of reflex conversion. His words are, " Universalis 
autem dedicativa et ipsa quidem non est conversibilis, sed particu- 
lariter tamen potest converti : ut cum sit 07nnis homo animal, non 
potest ita converti, ut sit omne animal homo; sed particulariter 
potest, quoddam animal homo. Verum hoc in simplici conversione, 
quae in conclusionum illationibus refiexio nominatur." {Opera Omnia, 
Lugd., 1600, p. 419.) 

It may seem useless to have dwelt so long on this kind of conver- 
sion in the very act of abolishing it ; but that it is dead is no reason 
whatever why so venerable a member of the ancient system should 
not receive decent burial.] 

* For the reference to Boethius I am indebted to Sir W Hamilton. 



30 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

This holds true in universal affirmative and par- 
ticular negative propositions. The rules "^^ governing 
conversion are given by different logicians with nu- 
merical differences ; in substance, however, they are 
much the same. But as the enumeration would be 
tedious, and the nature of the process in its different 
species is evident from the statement of each, we 
shall not repeat them here. 

We might remark on this process generally, that 
it is, for the most part, logically incompetent ; since 
in the second species we interpolate a quantity not 
formally given, and in the third create an entirely 
new proposition by new terms. 

But w^e pass on to remark, specially, that the whole 
doctrine of conversion, as commonly understood, is 
on the principle of the new analytic false and use- 
less. 

This inconsistent and cumbrous doctrine resulted, 
as we have said, from a false analysis by logicians of 
the elements with which they had to deal. The whole 
doctrine is founded upon the relation of quantity be- 
tween the subject and predicate in a proposition ; but 
if a principal element of that relation be left out, the 
doctrine will of course be defective. Logicians stand 
chargeable with this neglect. They commenced to 
recompose their system before, hy thorough decom- 
position, they had obtained all the elements requisite 

* Crackanthorpe gives five, Wallis six, another British writer 
twelve. — The Port-Royal three, reduced to two. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 31 

for that purpose ; and to remedy the deficiencies 
thus occasioned, they have had recourse to the com- 
phcated process briefly stated above ; — thus, with 
labour and difficulty — and even then imperfectly — by 
a complex process, and a number of particular rules, 
effecting that which a simple proximate principle of 
their science would, if recognised, have spontaneously 
and perfectly accomplished. As this confusion and 
complexity has arisen from a faulty analysis, so a 
perfect analysis at once introduces order and simpli- 
city. A full decomposition of the elements contained 
in thought discovers that the predicate is always of 
a given quantity in relation to the subject ; that this 
is known and recognised as the condition of predica- 
tion. It thus reveals that the relation between the 
terms of a proposition is one not only of similarity, 
but oiidentity ; that the subject and predicate of a 
proposition, when the relation of each to the other is 
recognised, and both are quantified, are always neces- 
sarily simply convertible ; that the terms of a propo- 
sition, in short, are of an absolute equality, and all 
predication an equation of subject and predicate. 
Quantify the predicate, and two notions of different 
extension are at once brought into equality ; the 
sphere of an individual object in a notion is marked 
out, and that sphere becomes absolutely convertible 
with the object ; e.g., — 

All man is some animal. 
Some animal is all man. 



32 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOEMS. 

Some men are all philosophers. 
AH philosophers are some men. . 

Boethius is some Roman. * 
Some Roman is Boethius. 

Thus, on the principle of the new analytic the 
whole doctrine of ordinary conversion, with its com- 
plex species and its manifold rules, passes away, 
and the whole process becomes as practically simple 
as it is scientifically complete. The terms of a pro- 
position are exhibited in their true relation, and 
that relation reduces all the species of conversion 
to one — that of simple conversion. Thus, in the 
words of an acute writer, whose apt statement in 
relation to this doctrine is true in a far wider ap- 
plication than he designed it — to the whole and 
not to a part alone of the doctrine of conversion. 
" Omnes conversionum leges pendent a cohaesione, 
vel potius ab identitate subjecti et attributi : quod si 
enim subjectum conjungitur et identificatur ut aiunt, 
cum attribute, necesse est pariter attributum uniri et 
identificari cum subjecto." '"' 

We proceed to consider — 

III. The influence of this principle on the doctrine 
of categorical syllogisms, in contributing to effect, 
1°, the reduction of their general laws to one ; 2°, the 

* ^^ Philosophia Burgundica'' 1678, torn. i. Institutiones Logicae. 
Sect. Secunda, cap. 2. (By Du Hamel.) 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 38 

abolition of their special laws : and from this new 
simplicity the amplification of the valid forms of rea- 
soning. 

We premise a word or two on the nature of a 
syllogism in general, and of a categorical syllogism 
in particular. 

" A syllogism is the product of that act of mediate 
comparison, by which we recognise that two notions 
stand to each other in the relation of whole and 
part, through the recognition that these notions 
severally stand in the same relation to a third." 

A syllogism or reasoning is thus like a concept and 
a judgment the product of the comparative faculty — 
the comparison of part and whole. This indeed is 
the characteristic of all reasoning — alike of the simple 
syllogism and of the most lengthy and profound argu- 
ment. All reasoning is but the comparison and deter- 
mination of wholes and parts. As in concepts various 
attributes, in judgments various thoughts, are com- 
pared in order to determine the relation of part and 
whole subsisting between them; so in reasoning two 
notions are compared together with a third in order 
to determine their connexion with each other — the 
only difference being the higher complexity which 
in this case the act of comparison assumes. A rea- 
soning thus differs from a judgment in the superior 
complexity of the act, in being an immediate act of 
comparison in which two notions, whose relation 

c 



34 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 

to each other is unknown, are compared together 
through a third, whose connexion with both is recog- 
nised. But it agrees with a judgment in being an 
undivided act of mind ; for as the connexion of part 
and whole between two notions, enounced by a reason- 
ing, is determined by the recognition of their mutual 
relation to a third ; and as relatives are only recog- 
nised together, it follows that it is an undivided act of 
consciousness.'"'' A syllogism indeed forms as truly a 
mental whole as a concept, though each is capable of 
being subsequently analysed for scientific purposes 
into its constituent elements. On being subjected 
to such analysis, every true syllogism or reasoning is 
found to contain three, and no more than three, pro- 
positions, each of which has three, and only three, 
terms. There will be three propositions, since the 
two notions, touching whose relation the mind is in 
doubt, are both compared with another whose rela- 
tion to each is manifest. This affords two proposi- 
tions, in one of which the third notion is a contained 
part in relation to one of the doubtful notions ; and 
in the other a containing whole in relation to the 
other doubtful notion. And there is of necessity the 
conclusion in which the doubt is dispelled, and the 
relation of the tw^o notions themselves determined. 
This process is in every valid syllogism determined 
by a law of thought, and the connexion is thus one 

* Hie modus (per syllogismum) ratiocinandi est ex simplissimis, 
et intuitive uno actu mentis perspicitur. — Ploucquet. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 35 

of absolute necessity. There will, it is obvious, be as 
many valid kinds of syllogism as there are different 
laws of thought on which they may be respectively 
founded. 

A categorical syllogism is one in whose major pre- 
mise the relation of the terms is simple ; whose pro- 
cedure is determined and whose conclusion is neces- 
sitated by the laws of identity and contradiction. 

Having premised thus much about syllogisms in 
general, and categorical syllogisms in particular, we 
shall proceed — 

i. To state with brevity the common doctrine of 
syllogistic figure, mood, and reduction; and then 
generally some of the defects by which it is charac- 
terised. 

And, 

ii. To state the one supreme canon of the new 
analytic, which potentially contains the whole doctrine 
of categorical syllogisms, and then proceed to develop 
from it some parts of that doctrine. 

We proceed then — 

i. To state the common doctrine of syllogistic 
figure, mood, and reduction. 

Figure. — What is commonly termed by logicians 
syllogistic figure arises from the relation of the middle 
term as subject or predicate to the extremes. The 
four possible varieties of position which the middle 



36 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

term may occupy in the premises thus determine 
four syllogistic figures. 
^ In iYiQ first figure the middle term is the subject of 
the major premise, and the predicate of the minor ; 
e.g,,— 

All rational is risible. 
All man is rational. 
Therefore — All man is risible. 

The laws of this figure are — 

1. That the subsumption'" be affirmative. 

* [These words sumption and subsumption are new, and may there- 
fore require a few words of explanation if not of defence. They are 
introduced and employed by Sir William Hamilton to express the 
two first propositions of a syllogism, instead of the common designa- 
tions major and minor premise. 

We much need apt terms by which to express these members of 
the syllogism, and for the creation of new or introduction of foreign 
words in such a relation, may certainly urge the first part of the plea 
of Lucretius, "propter egestatem linguae,'^ if we cannot go on to add 
with him, " et rerum novitatem." The members to be named are 
old enough, but they still have never received precise and discrimi- 
native epithets, at least in our logical terminology. The terms major 
and minor premise are objectionable, if for no other reason, from the 
confusion of terms with propositions likely enough to arise from the 
omission of the second member of the term, and the consequent in- 
discriminate use in hasty reference of the epithets major and minor 
alone. Single, precise, and discriminative words would on every 
account be far better than these combinations. The term propositio 
was the designation of the major premise of a syllogism, from the 
days of Cicero downwards, with few exceptions. Among these excep- 
tions are Quintilian who uses intentio, Boethius who sometimes uses 
sumptum, and Rodolphus Agricola who employs expositio. Assump- 
tio was even more generally the designation of the second proposition 
of the syllogism — the minor premise. So that, in fact, when the two 
first members of a syllogism are not (after Aristotle) called the major 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 37 

2. That the sumption be universal. 
In the second figure, the middle term is the pre- 
dicate in each premise ; e.g., — 

No liar is to be believed. 
Every good man is to be believed. 
Therefore — No good man is a liar. 

and minor proposition, the terms proposition and assumption are 
generally found employed to express them. These terms all more 
or less shadow forth the relation of subordination which exists be- 
tween these parts of the syllogism. This relation is, however, far 
more aptly and explicitly denoted by the correlative terms sumption 
and suhsumption ; and as we have already assume and assumption 
with other cognate terms, there is no reason why we should not also 
avail ourselves of the convenient terms subsumption and subsume. 

Even the terms sumption and subsumption are not, however, equal 
to the whole extent of the necessity, for between the two first mem- 
bers of syllogisms, in the second and third figures, there is no such 
relation of subordination as they express, so that it is only by courtesy 
to custom that these terms can be applied to them. The same is 
true of the reasoning from wholes to wholes ; so that we still need 
terms of generic latitude sufficient to express the two first members 
of any syllogism. For all ordinary purposes, however, the above are 
sufficient. They have the great merit of being single and precise 
epithets ; and after what has been said, their use in the figures can- 
not be misunderstood. 

The only thorough-going and consistent attempt ever made, that 
1 am aware of, to render the technicalities of logical science into 
English terms, was that of Ralph Lever, Dean of Durham. In his 
logical treatise, entitled, " The Art of Reason, rightly termed Wit- 
craft, teaching a perfect way to argue and dispute," and published in 
London in the year 1573, he expressly undertakes to accomplish this. 
He explains and defends his procedure in the preface, {forespeach,) 
of which the following extract may be taken as a specimen : — " For 
trial hereof I wish you to aske any English man, who understandeth 
neither Greek nor Latin, what he conceiveth in his mind when he 
heareth this word, a backset, and what he doth conceive when he 
heareth this term, a predicate. And doubtlesse he must confesse, if 



38 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

The laws of this figure are — 

1. That one of the two premises be negative ; and 
consequently that the conclusion be so. 

2. That the sumption be universal. 

In the third figure, the middle term is the subject 
in both premises ; e.g., — 

All man is risible. 
All man is capable of science. 
Therefore — Some capable of science is risible. 

The laws of this figure are — 

1. That the subsumption be affirmative. 

2. That the conclusion be particular. 

In \he fourth figure, the middle term is the predi- 
cate in the sumption and the subject in the subsump- 
tion ; e.g., — 

All oranges are fruit. 
All fruit is refreshing 
Therefore — Some refreshing things are oranges. 

he consider the matter aright, or have any sharpnesse of wit at al, 
that by a backset he conceiveth a thing that must be set after, and by 
21, predicate that he doth understand nothing at all." He accordingly 
renders every (or certainly almost every) technical term of common 
use in logic by combinations of purely Saxon words. We will give 
both as a specimen of his coinage, and as pertinent to the purpose of 
the present note, the terms which he has used to express the differ- 
ent members of the syllogism. These are foresay and endsay, first 
foresay, (major premise,) second foresay, (minor premise,) endsay, 
(conclusion ;) or, in his own words, — " The two first shewsayes (propo- 
sitions) that are placed in a reason by rule, are called foresayes — the 
third may be termed an endsay." {Art of Witcraft, p. 103.) These 
terms are sufficiently general for any form of syllogism ; but as the 
technical terms of the science are all of Latin derivation, Saxon com- 
pounds cannot be accepted.] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 39 

The laws of this figure are — 

1. When the sumption is affirmative, the sub- 
sumption is always universal. 

2. When the subsumption is affirmative, the con- 
clusion is particular. 

3. If either of the premises be negative, the sump- 
tion must be universal."' 

Mood. — What is called mood is a modification of 
a syllogism, determined by the quantity and quality 
of the propositions of which it is composed. All the 
figures admit of syllogistic variations thus deter- 
mined. Four kinds of propositions are, according 
to logicians, afforded by the various possible combi- 
nations of quantity and quality. Universal affirma- 
tive, (A) — universal negative, (E) — particular affir- 
mative, (I) — particular negative, (0.) And as there 
are three propositions in every syllogism, all the 
possible combinations of quality and quantity will be 
sixty-four. Of these sixteen are excluded from hav- 
ing negative premises ; twelve from having parti- 
cular premises ; twelve more for having a negative 
premise with an affirmative conclusion ; eight, from 
one of the premises being particular, but the con- 
clusion universal ; and, finally, four more from hav- 
ing a negative conclusion where both premises were 
affirmative. There are thus left twelve moods. Of 
these, however, for various particular reasons, six 

* These laws are taken from the Fort-Royal Logic, but they are 
substantially the same in most logical systems. 




40 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

only are allowable in each figure, making twenty- 
four in all. Of these, however, five are again thrown 
out of account from having a particular conclusion 
where a universal is competent. There thus re- 
main in all the figures only nineteen valid moods. 
These are embodied in the well-known lines — " Bar- 
bara Celarent" &c. 

Reduction. — Logicians, though altogether ignor- 
ant of the true character of figure, strictly so called, 
seem always, however, to have felt, that the form of 
reasoning in the first figure was more exact than in 
the three others, and the conclusion afforded by it 
more logically direct and satisfactory. They have, 
accordingly, devised a process for changing syllo- 
gisms of the three other figures into those of the 
first. This process is technically/ termed reduction. 
Reduction is twofold — 

1. Reductio ostensiva. — This is effected by the 
conversion and transposition of propositions ; e.g. — 
Disamis of the third figure into Darii of the first. 

Disamis. 
Some tyrant is unjust. 
All tyrants are cruel. 
Some cruel is unjust. 

Here the major premise and conclusion are first 
converted, and then the premises transposed ; thus — 

Darii. 
All tyrants are cruel. 
Some unjust are tyrants. 
Some unjust are cruel. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 41 

2. Redudio ad impossibile. — This is effected, not 
directly, but indirectly, by proving that the contra- 
dictory of the syllogism under examination is some- 
thing impossible or absurd. This is accomplished 
by taking the contradictory of the conclusion with 
one of the premises, and inferring from these the 
contradictory of the other premise — in the second 
figure the contradictory of the minor — in the third 
the contradictory of the major premise. Thus — 
BaroGO of the second into Barbara of the first figure : 

Baroco. 
All rational is risible. 
Some animals are not risible. 
Some animals are not rational. 

Barbara. 
All rational is risible. 
All animal is rational. 
All animal is risible. 

Such, on the common doctrine, is a short account 
of syllogistic figure, mood, and reduction. We go 
on to state generally some of the defects by which 
this doctrine is characterised. 

1. The whole doctrine is cumbrous and unsatis- 
factory. 

In addition to the general laws which are laid 
down by logicians as governing all syllogisms, and 
the various kinds of syllogism which have been sig- 
nalised, we have here what are represented as four 
new essential variations of the syllogistic form, each 



42 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

guarded by its own complement of special laws — 
forming altogether a code of particular rules for the 
detection of petty offences, which is certainly suffi- 
ciently intricate and perplexing. Now, the necessity 
of these empirical laws is not attempted to be vindi- 
cated on any thorough-going logical principle ; and 
until it be, we think their minute and multiform cha- 
racter is valid ground of objection. No right, more- 
over, has been established, that we know of, for the 
three last figures themselves, to occupy the place 
they do as true variations of the syllogistic form, ex- 
cept a prescriptive right, which in logic, where so 
many false principles have for so long usurped author- 
ity, and so many true ones been ignored, w^hen un- 
accompanied by any other, is rather ground for sus- 
picion than otherwise. Accordingly, till a better 
right than this be shown why they should be con- 
sidered independent syllogistic forms, their want of 
conformity to recognised law in their procedure, and 
the indirectness of their conclusions, furnish good 
ground of dissatisfaction with their logical position. 

Next we have the moods in each figure — the test- 
ing of the true moods in each by its particular laws 
— these laws determining the exclusion in one figure 
of moods that are held valid in another ; and this 
exclusion thus necessarily producing a numerical dif- 
ference of moods in different figures. That what is a 
true mood in one figure should be a false one in 
another, is, to say the least, unsatisfactory. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 43 

And, finally, we have the doctrine of eeduction — 
the most cumbrous and unsatisfactory part of the 
whole. The first half of the process involves a pro- 
cedure opposed to other parts of the common doc- 
trine, since it admits the transposition of premises 
at will. (Of this, however, more presently.) The 
procedure of the second half of the process is almost 
ingeniously perplexed and cumbrous, and when 
accomplished, so far as we see, answers no end what- 
ever. We form an entirely new syllogism, which 
throws no light upon the old ; illustrates no part 
that was before obscure ; gives us, indeed, no know- 
ledge at all. The old figure remains with its irregu- 
larity (if it had any) uncorrected ; with its illegal 
aspect (if that were its vice) unremoved. It is, in 
short, cumbrous without the justification of being 
useful ; and most unsatisfactory it should seem in 
the mere wantonness of being so, since it cannot 
urge the extenuating plea of necessity. 

2. This doctrine is inconsistent. 

We begin by noticing the inconsistency displayed 
in the discrimination of moods on the common doc- 
trine. We have seen that the principle on which 
the discrimination of moods proceeds, is the differ- 
ence in quantity and quality of the propositions 
which constitute a syllogism. In order to deter- 
mine a variation of mood in a syllogism, one at least 
of its propositions must differ, in one or other of these 
respects, from all other co-ordinate moods. If in 



44 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

two syllogisms of a given figure there be no differ- 
ence, either of quantity or quality in the proposi- 
tions of which they are composed, these syllogisms 
are logically reckoned as one and the same : there 
is in this case no modal variation. This at least is 
the common doctrine, if that doctrine have any 
meaning. In opposition thereto, however, we have 
discriminated as true varieties i/i the second figure — 

Camestres. 

All wise men are truly happy. 

No intemperate man is truly happy . 

No intemperate man is a wise man. 

Cesare. 

No intemperate man is truly happy. 

All wise men are truly happy. 

No wise man is an intemperate man. 

And in the third figure — 

Datisi. 
Every true patriot is brave. 
Some true patriots are persecuted. 
Some that are persecuted are brave. 

Disa7nis. 
Some true patriots are persecuted. 
Every true patriot is brave. 
Some who are brave are persecuted. 

Now, the syllogisms thus given under each figure 
have no difference w^hatever in the quantity or qua- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOEMS. 45 

lity of their propositions ; they are, therefore, accord- 
ing to the theory of logicians, the same. Practically, 
however, they have been considered from time im- 
memorial as distinct ; as constituting valid variations 
of syllogistic form under each figure. If this be so, 
the principle on which the discrimination of mood 
avowedly proceeds is, at least, implicitly given up, 
and another is introduced — that of the transposition of 
propositions ; for it is on this principle alone that the 
syllogisms given above can be vindicated as distinct. 
If, however, the transposed order of propositions be 
recognised as affording a w^orthy principle for the dis- 
crimination of syllogistic difference, then a number 
of new forms will emerge, of which logicians have 
taken no account. The catalogue of syllogistic va- 
riations will immediately be swelled far beyond its 
present limits, since every existing variety is capable, 
by the transposition of its propositions, of receiving 
a fivefold amplification. It is clear, however, that 
the transposed order of propositions affords no prin- 
ciple of any scientific value in the discrimination of 
syllogisms ; and, what is more to the present pur- 
pose, it is equally clear, that whatever be its value, it 
is one which has not been recognised by logicians, 
since they have not even incidentally adverted to it 
in the exposition of their doctrine. The principle 
of Aiodal variation on that doctrine is manifestly 
the difference of propositions in quantity and qua- 
lity. In obvious inconsistency, however, with this 



46 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

recognised law, there remain the syllogisms stated 
above. 

But a more important, if not more glaring inconsis- 
tency remains to be noticed in the correlative doctrines 
of figures and reduction."^' The opposition here is so 
great that it seems to us truly marvellous that they 
should ever have existed together. They appear mu- 
tually and triumphantly to destroy each other. We 
will endeavour to explain what we mean in a few words. 
The inconsistency may he stated thus : In the cogency 
of formal proof there can be no degrees. Logic, it 
need hardly be repeated, is a formal science, proceed- 
ing from, and determined through its whole course by, 
the laws of thought. This being the case, every true 
variation of the syllogistic form will afford a conclu- 
sion equally valid and direct ; since a form of rea- 
soning is true only as determined by a law of thought, 
and the laws of thought are equally universal and 
imperative. If a given syllogistic form be deter- 
mined as original and essential, it is already self- 
sufficient ; it needs no help, it can receive none. 
No process can be devised for bestowing on its con- 
clusion a higher validity than that which it possesses 
of its own inherent right. For, as we have said of 
formal proof, there can be no degrees of cogency. 
In every case it is alike valid and direct. With 

* Throughout the ensuing discussion we use ^* figure" simply in 
the sense of figure strictly so called, i.e., to the exclusion of the first, 
in order to avoid constant circumlocution. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 47 

respect, therefore, to every true variation of syllogistic 
form, what is called reduction is useless. 

On the other hand, if the conclusion afforded by 
a syllogism be one-sided and indirect, and its form, 
therefore, apparently imperfect or irregular, there is 
good ground for suspicion that there is some com- 
plexity or confusion in its form, which it is necessary 
to disentangle or clear away before the syllogism 
emerges in its purity, and before, therefore, its true 
form can be correctly determined. When this con- 
fusion or complexity is removed — and it is the office 
of logical analysis to accomplish this — the syllogism 
will appear in its real character, and naturally fall 
under some determinate class of recognised syllogistic 
form. To such a syllogism what is called reduction 
is obviously inapplicable, since we cannot talk of re- 
ducing a syllogism of a given form to itself. Thus, 
on either alternative, the doctrine of reduction seems 
alike inapplicable, if not impossible. If the syllo- 
gistic form he essential, reduction is useless ; if it he 
accidental, it is absurd. 

Logicians, however, so far as we can understand the 
common doctrine, seem to have chosen the former, and 
perhaps milder alternative, — that the figures are true 
variations of syllogistic form. If this were not the case, 
it would have been explicitly stated ; and, in fact, the 
doctrine of reduction itself is at once the evidence that 
they so regarded them, and the proof that this is not 
their true character. If they did not so consider them, 



48 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

it is difficult to account for the existence of reduction 
at all ; for it is introduced expressly to strengthen 
the position of the figures, and to vindicate to their 
conclusions the highest validity. Not clearly com- 
prehending the true nature of the figures, their doc- 
trine respecting them was imperfect. They deter- 
mined that they were true syllogistic varieties, but 
still felt that this was not perfectly satisfactory — that 
there was something wanting in their doctrine ; and 
in order to bestow upon it the requisite completeness, 
they unhappily fell upon the doctrine of reduction — 
a process which, so far from establishing the truth of 
that which it was introduced to demonstrate, is the 
clearest evidence of its falsehood. In fact, we can- 
not but regard the whole doctrine as the work of a 
most perverse and suicidal ingenuity. Introduced as 
a bulwark of strength to the figures, it becomes the 
very mockery of their weakness, and affords its sus- 
taining aid only in the moment of their dissolution. 
For we certainly cannot understand how a doubtful 
variation of syllogistic form is vindicated as valid and 
essential through a process which accomplishes its 
destruction ; in other words, by being changed into 
a form, of the validity of which there is no question. 
But even granting that the whole doctrine was, 
in the main, correct, it is chargeable with inconsis- 
tencies of detail ; such as the explicit recognition at 
one time of a determinate major and minor premiss 
in the figures, and the implicit denial of this at an- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 49 

other. These, however, it is not necessary now to 
notice. Suffice it to have shown that the related 
doctrines of figure and reduction are most seriously 
inconsistent, if not mutually destructive of each other. 

3. The common doctrine is destructive of the science 
itself. 

We bring this charge against the common doctrine 
— and it is the gravest of all — that it is destructive 
of the science, by implicitly, at least, impeaching the 
veracity of the laws of thought upon which the science 
is founded. 

This may be illustrated in one or two ways. In all 
categorical syllogisms the reasoning is founded upon 
the law of identity, that a whole is identical with all 
its parts, a concept with its attributes, &c., and thus 
that " a part of a part is a part of the whole." The 
reasoning, therefore, if it be valid, always of necessity 
involves the subordination of one part to a whole 
through a larger part.* 

* [This statement requires some modification ; for, on the law of 
identity, the reasoning from wholes to wholes is as competent as that 
from parts to wholes. By this law we are entitled to infer the rela- 
tion of identity between two wholes, from the perception that they 
stand in this relation to a common third whole, just as certainly as 
we are to infer the relation of inclusion between a given whole and 
part, from the perception that these stand in the same relation to a 
common third part ; e.g., the reasoning all B is all A, all C is all B, 
therefore all C is all A, is just as competent as the reasoning all B is 
A, all C is B, therefore all C is A. Taken absolutely, therefore, the 
objection stated in the text will not stand the test of criticism. 
Considered relatively to the common doctrine, it is, however, -valid. 
On that doctrine all direct formal reasoning from wholes to wholes 

D 



50 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

Now, the common doctrine recognises the figures 
strictly so called as ultimate varieties of syllogistic 
form ; implicitly, at least, declares that they are 
simple forms, and their reasoning valid as it stands. 
But in these figures there is no subordination of lesser 
parts to wholes through larger parts. 

It is therefore clear that if the law, according to 
which all true reasoning is affirmed to proceed, en- 
joins this subordination, but that there are found, 
and recognised as valid, forms in which there is no 
such subordination — that the law is no longer trust- 
worthy ; for having proved mendacious once, its 
character of necessity and universality has departed, 
and it may deceive again. Thus, implicitly at least, 
the main foundation of all reasoning is cut away. 

Again, we have seen in the common doctrine the 
numerical inequality of the moods under different 
figures. In each figure some mood is determined as 
valid which is ignored by the rest. Thus throughout 
the whole scheme moods are retained as true at one 
time which are rejected as false at another. 

Now, what is the test by which the validity and 

is impossible. For a direct reasoning from wholes to wholes is only 
possible through the express quantification of the predicate, which 
the forms and rules of the common doctrine alike forbid. In every 
reasoning which obeys these rules, the extent of some one term in 
the syllogism is necessarily left indeterminate, so that its identity of 
extent with any other term cannot be formally inferred. On the 
common doctrine, the reasoning is thus necessarily from parts to 
wholes. Taken with this explanation, therefore, the statement in the 
text may stand.] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 51 

invalidity of any and every variet}" of syllogism is 
determined ? No other than its ohedience to, or vio- 
lation of, the laws of thought. If a syllogism agrees 
with these laws, it is true ; if not, it is false. This 
criterion imperatively determines every possible va- 
riation of syllogistic form. If a syllogism be true 
to the laws of thought in its formal essence, no acci- 
dental irregularity or transposition in the arrange- 
ment of its parts can render it invalid ; if it be not 
thus true in the inward essence of form, no outward 
regularity of expression can supply the wanting 
validity. In other words, what the laws of thought 
allow, no schematic difference can ever ignore ; w^hat 
the laws of thought condemn, no schematic variation 
can ever successfully vindicate. 

In direct opposition to all this stands the common 
doctrine. Judged by the above standard, its whole 
procedure is most illegal. In its admissions and ex- 
clusions of syllogistic variety it is equally capricious 
and empirical ; and throughout it is consistently 
regardless of the great laws by w^hich the whole 
process, as a logical procedure, must be ever deter- 
mined. We find a certain mood rejected under a 
given figure — we presume because it is invalid ; but 
it can be invalid only because it violates the laws 
of thought. Presently after we find this same mood 
reappearing in another figure, and recognised as 
scientifically true. What the laws of thought ere- 
while condemned, the schematic difference now tri- 



52 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

umphantly interposes to allow. What we had sup- 
posed to be rejected from the science as logically false, 
now boldly returns under express scientific sanction. 

Thus, on the common doctrine, the accidents of 
arrangement triumph over the essentials of form. : 
the contingencies of expression are of higher authority 
than the necessities of thought. In a formal science 
we have its accidental arrangement actually de- 
throning its essential principles ; contingent and 
particular irregularities boldly usurping that author- 
ity, through the legitimate exercise of w^hich they 
would have been themselves exiled, — that authority 
through the recognition of which alone the science 
can be preserved — the authority of law necessary 
and universal. 

If the procedure which issues in these results be 
competent, then it is evident that logic exists no 
longer; for the destruction of the science is ob- 
viously involved in the destruction of the laws on 
which it is exclusively founded. And this destruc- 
tion of the laws of thought is, as we have shown, in 
effect accomplished by the common doctrine, in the 
practical contradictions of these which its procedure 
involves. It thus implicitly contains in it principles 
which, if fully developed, would overthrow logical 
science. 

We have thus seen amongst the more general de- 
fects which belong to the common doctrine, that it 
is practically cumbrous and unsatisfactory ; that it 



NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORMS. 53 

is theoretically inconsistent ; and that it involves 
principles destructive to the science itself. The 
special falsity and uselessness of this doctrine will 
appear more fully in detail under the division to 
which we now proceed. 

ii. To state the one supreme canon of the new 
analytic, which potentially contains the whole doctrine 
of categorical syllogisms, and then to develop from it 
some parts of that doctrine. 

That canon is — " What worse relation of subject 
and predicate subsists between either of two terms 
and a common third term, with which both are re- 
lated, and one at least positively so — that relation 
subsists between these two terms themselves." 

This canon, as we have said, involves the whole 
doctrine of categorical syllogisms ; determines every 
kind of such syllogisms ; and is to them an all-suffi- 
cient and exhaustive code of law, observing which 
none can be formally invalid. 

We have now to show, in conformity with the pur- 
pose of this essay in general, and its third division in 
particular, the influence which the principle of a 
quantified predicate has in accomplishing the reduc- 
tion of syllogistic rules to this single canon. 

And here it is obvious at once, that before any 
such reduction of the general laws of these syllo- 
gisms can take place, the special laws which govern 
particular classes of such syllogisms must be dealt 



54 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

with. In fact, the condition of the possibihty of any 
such reduction of the general laws is the annihila- 
tion of the special laws. Whatever, therefore, tends 
to effect the abolition of these special laws, (laws of 
the several figures, to wit,) tends directly to facilitate 
that simplification of syllogistic law which emerges in 
the single canon. The principle of a quantified pre- 
dicate directly contributes to accompHsh this, by 
proving the falsity and uselessness of these special 
rules. 

For example, the laws of \hQ first figure are — that 
the sumptio7i be universal, and — that the subsumption 
be ajffirmatwe. Quantify the predicate, however, and 
neither of these laws hold. 

First rule falsified. 
Some men are some fleet-footed. 
All rational is all man. 
Some rational is some fleet-footed. 

Second rule falsified. 
All idealists are some philosophers. 
No sensualist is any idealist- 
No sensualist is some philosopher. 

The laws of the second figure are — that one of the 
premises be negative, and — that the sumption be uni- 
versal. To these the principle of a quantified predi- 
cate immediately applies, and falsifies them — 

First nde falsified. 
All risible is all man. 
All philosophers are some men. 
All philosophers are some risible. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 55 

Second ride falsified. 
Some mortal is all man. 
All rational is all man. 
All rational is some mortal. 

These examples may serve to illustrate specially 
the influence which the principle of a quantified pre- 
dicate has upon these laws. It is to be remarked^ 
however, generally, that these laws exist only in con- 
sequence of a defective logical analysis, and apply 
only to such an imperfection. When the analysis, 
therefore, is complete, these laws naturally fall away 
as henceforth useless and inapplicable. The recog- 
nition of a quantified predicate and of the true nature 
of figure renders this analysis complete. Thus the 
principle of a quantified predicate co-operating with 
the true doctrine of figure, sweeps away for ever from 
logic, as an encumbrance, all these special laws. The 
special laws being swept aside, the way is prepared 
for the reduction of the general. And this reduc- 
tion effected, there emerges the supreme canon as 
given above. This canon, it is obvious, may be 
again easily evolved into those general laws of which 
it is the compend. We may take as an example the 
two most general laws of categorical syllogisms. 

1. That both premises he not negative. This is ex- 
pressed in the canon by the clause — " With which 
both are related, and one at least positively so" 

2. That the middle term he distributed in one at 
least of the premises; and it is of no consequence 



56 ^^EW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORMS. 

whether it be distributed as the subject or the predi- 
cate. 

The first part of this law is expressed in the canon 
by the clause — " related to a common middle term.'' 
If it be common to both it must be distributed. The 
latter part of the law is expressed in the clause — 
" What worse relation of subject and predicate sub- 
sists between either of two terms and a common third 
term.'' The common third term may thus be related 
to the two other terms either as subject or predicate. 

It would be by no means difiicult to evolve in the 
same manner the canon into the six more general 
syllogistic laws commonly given by logicians. The 
relation of these' laws to the diiferent clauses of the 
supreme canon is, however, manifest, and therefore 
need not be formally evolved here. 

We pass on, then, to consider this canon in another 
aspect. We said that it determined every kind of 
categorical syllogism. 

We shall endeavour to illustrate this; — 

1. Syllogisms differ with respect to the wholes in 
which they proceed. 

We have already said that all reasoning (deduc- 
tive, that is, to which, when not otherwise specified, we 
always refer when speaking of reasoning in general) 
is from whole to part ; but as there are two kinds of 
logical wholes and parts, there will naturally be two 
kinds of reasoning, corresponding severally to these 
different quantities. These wholes are — the meta- 



NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL F0KM8. 57 

physical or comprehensive whole ; and the logical or 
extensive whole. A syllogism proceeding in the for- 
mer is a comprehensive syllogism, in the conclusion 
of which the subject is the greatest whole, and the 
predicate the smallest part. A syllogism proceeding 
in the latter whole is an extensive syllogism, in the 
conclusion of which the subject is the smallest part, 
and the predicate the greatest whole. These differ- 
ent kinds of syllogism, distinguished by the different 
kinds of wholes in which they proceed, are determined 
by the first clause of the canon — " What worse rela- 
tion of subject and predicate subsists between two terms," 
&c. In the whole of comprehension the predicate is 
Avorse than the subject, since it is a part in relation 
to a whole; in the counter whole of extension, the 
subject is worse than the predicate, since in this 
quantity the predicate has become the greatest whole, 
and the subject the smallest part. 

2. Syllogisms differ with respect to figure. 

The variation of figure arises, as we have seen, from 
the various positions of the middle terra in relation to 
the extremes. This variation is evidently determined 
in the canon by the clause — " What relation subsists 
between either of two terms and a common third term!' 

But here it is necessary to go somewhat more fully 
into detail. We shall therefore return to the canon 
presently. 

In considering figure somewhat more closely, we 
shall notice ; — 



58 NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORMS. 

a. The true nature of the figures. 

We have seen that the figures, strictly so called, 
are regarded by logicians as true and original varia- 
tions of the sjdlogistic form. We have seen also some 
of the inconsistencies which such a doctrine involves: 
enough certainly to beget a suspicion that it could 
not be the true one. We were thus led to suppose 
that there must be some confusion or complexity in 
the figures which it is necessary to remove before the 
true form of their reasonings could be seen in its ul- 
timate purity and exactness. What this confusion or 
complexity is, we now proceed explicitly to show, by 
stating and illustrating the true nature of the figures.'"' 

" The figures (strictly so called) are hybrid or mixed 
reasonings, in which the steps of the process are only 
partially expressed ; the unexpressed steps are, in 
general, only conversive inferences w^hich we are en- 
titled to make from those that are expressed." 

This being the nature of figure, it follows that, 
since all the real steps of the process are not expressed 
in the reasonings, the conclusion does not of necessity 
follow from the expressed premises ; but the mind 
at once inferring and interpolating the wanting steps 
of the process, the conclusion follows in virtue of such 
inference and interpolation. When this mental in- 
terpolation is recognised, and the real premise which 
it constitutes is expressed, the s^dlogism emerges in 

* Touching the value and history of this exposition, see the Ap- 
pendix. 



KEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 59 

its simple form, and is at once recognised to be 
(through all the variations of mood and figure, strictly 
so called) a syllogism of the first figure. All such 
varieties are therefore thus shown to be, in their com- 
plex state, only unessential variations of that figure. 
We shall illustrate this in concrete examples through 
the moods of the second and third figures. 

The moods of the second figure are — Gesare, Oa- 
7nestres, Fesiino, Baroco. 

A syllogism in Cesare is — 

No unreflective man is a philosopher. 
All idealists are philosophers. 
No idealist is unreflective. 

By conversive inference we obtain as the real sump- 
tion, " no philosopher is unreflective," and this inter- 
posed in the place of the ostensible sumption, pro- 
duces a syllogism in Celarent of the first figure, e.g., — 

No philosopher is unreflective. 
All idealists are philosophers. 
No idealist is unreflective. 

A syllogism in Gamestres is — 

All animals are sentient. 
Nothing unorganised is sentient. 
Nothing unorganised is animal. 

We have already said, when speaking generally of 
figure, that the premises are in this syllogism trans- 
posed ; and that but for such transposition it is exactly 
the same as Gesare; reversing the premises then, and 



60 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

dealing with it in the same manner as the last, it ap- 
pears in the same form as Celarent of the first figure. 

Nothing sentient is unorganised. 
All animals are sentient. 
No animal is unorganised. 

A syllogism in Festino is — 

No truly wise men go to extremes. 

Some truly religious men go to extremes. 

Some truly religious men are not truly wise men. 

Here with the sumption converted the syllogism 
appears as Ferio of the first. 

None who go to extremes are truly wise. 
Some truly religious men go to extremes. 
Some truly religious men are not truly wise. 

A syllogism in Baroco^ is — 

All lilies are fi'agrant. 

Some flowers are not fragrant. 

Some flowers are not lilies. 

Here the subsumption is to be dealt with ; and by 
conversive influence we obtain " some things not fra- 
grant are flowers^ Interpolating this, we have a 
syllogism in Darii of the first. 

* [The reduction of this mood was one of the standard difficulties 
of the logicians. It could only at best be done with difficulty, and 
through the clumsy process designated ad impossihile ; nor does it 
accommodate itself well to this expository process of Kant's ; since 
after all it appears as a syllogism of the fourth figure rather than of 
the^^rs^.] 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 61 

All lilies are fragrant. 

Some things not fragrant are flowers. 

Some things not lilies are flowers. 

The third figure. 

We have seen, in removing the complexity of syl- 
logisms in the second figure, that it is the sumption 
for the most part (that is in three out of four moods) 
which is aftected by conversive inference ; and that 
that inference is made chiefly from " the absolute 
negation of the first notion as predicate of the second, 
to the absolute negation of the second notion as pre- 
dicate of the first.'' In the third figure, on the other 
hand, it is the subsumption which is chiefly affected 
by conversive inference, and that inference is generally 
made " from the total or partial affirmation of a 
lesser notion of a greater, to the partial affirmation 
of the greater notion of the lesser." 

The moods of the third figure are — Darapti, Felap- 
ton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison. 

A syllogism in Darapti is — 

Every good man is happy. 

Every good man fights with himself. 

Some who fight with themselves are happy. 

By conversive inference we here obtain as sub- 
sumption — " some who fight with themselves are good 
men ;" and the syllogism is then in Darii of the first 
figure. 

Every good man is happy. 

Some who fight with themselves are good men. 

Some who fight with themselves^ are happy. 



62 NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORMS. 

A syllogism in the second mood Felapton is — 

No man is winged. 
All men are bipeds. 
Some bipeds are not winged. 

By converting the subsumption it becomes Ferio of 
the first. 

No man is winged. 
Some bipeds are men. 
Some bipeds are not winged. 

J syllogism in the third mood Disamis is — 

Some patriots are persecuted. 

Every patriot is brave. 

Some that are brave are persecuted. 

Here the premises are first to be transposed, then 
converting the subsumption the syllogism appears as 
Darii of the first— 

Every patriot is brave. 

Some that are persecuted are patriots. 

Some that are persecuted are brave. 

With respect to the fourth mood in the figure, 
Datisi, we have already shown that it differs from the 
third only in the transposition of its premises. Con- 
verting the subsumption, therefore, it appears in the 
same form as Darii of the first. We give the syllo- 
gisms together — 

All true philosophers are truly noble. 
Some true philosophers are despised. 
Some that are truly noble are despised. 



KEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 60 

All true philosophers are truly noble. 

Some that are despised are true philosophers. 

Some that are despised are truly noble. 

A syllogism in the fifth mood Bocardo is — 

Some poets are not philosophers. 

All poets have genius. 

Some who have genius are not philosophers. 

The premises are here transposed, and the sump- 
tion converted — it then appears as Darii — 

All poets have genius. 

Some not philosophers are poets. 

Some not philosophers have genius. 

A syllogism in the last mood Ferison is — 

No hope is unattended with pleasure. 

Some hopes are delusive. 

Some delusive things are attended with pleasure. 

Converting the sumption it becomes Ferio of the 
first — 

No hope is without pleasure. 

Some delusive things are hopes. 

Some delusive things are attended with pleasure. 

The syllogisms of the figures, strictly so called, 
are thus shown to be complex reasonings, which, 
when cleared of their complexity, and simply ex- 
pressed, i.e., expressed in that form which all true 
reasonings must ultimately assume, in which the least 
part or whole is subordinated to the greatest part or 
whole, through a lesser part or whole — appear in 
their true character as syllogisms of the first figure. 



64 IS^EW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

We have here taken no notice of the fourth figure, 
not because the same process of simplification is not 
equally applicable to its reasonings, as to those of the 
second and third figures ; but because, as we shall 
presently explain, we do not consider it properly a 
figure at all. 

h. The true number of the figures. 

We have seen that in the common doctrine four 
figures are recognised as valid.* The fourth figure 

* [The validity of the fourth figure as a separate form of reasoning 
has been often contested, but that of the other three has remained 
for the most part unassailed. The third, however, has not wholly 
escaped assault. It was rejected by Laurentius Valla on the ground 
that such a form of reasoning was never used, that there are no 
examples of it to be found, and as it would seem, as much as for any 
other reason, because it offended his eye or ear. He does not, in- 
deed, so much reason seriously against its validity, but rather de- 
nounces it at once, and that, too, in the most lively and rhetorical 
manner, as in the last degree preposterous and absurd. The whole 
style of the rejection is quite in harmony with his wayward original- 
ity and independence, as well as with his habit of rash yet fastidious 
criticism. It is, indeed, but another instance of the fastidious taste 
of Valla, in whose eyes a sin against purity of style was a moral 
offence of the gravest kind, who did not scruple to correct the Latinity 
of Cicero, and of whose criticism it is said the Devil himself stood in 
such awe, that he was afraid to speak in his presence, being nervous 
as to the classic purity of his Latin style. 

The objections of Valla to the third figure were rebutted by Lazarus 
Schonerus, (as quoted by Fraunce,) who adduced examples of its use 
from Cicero and Virgil. Its validity and usefulness were also defended 
against Valla by Melanchthon, who, referring to it, says, " Laurentius 
Valla non leviter stomachatur hoc loco, et Aristotelem tanquam 
capitali judicio accusat, qui banc figuram tradiderit. Sed Valla dum 
nullum rixandi finem facit, saepe etiam incurrit, ut sit ab iracundis, 
in illos qui nihil peccaverunt. Mihi non tam plumbeo ingenio Aris- 



NEW ANALYTIC OP LOGICAL FORM55. 65 

was, however, introduced into the science later ; and 
when introduced obtained a footing less secure than 
the other three. Some logicians, indeed, have omitted 
it altogether ; while others have expressly redargued 
its claim to be admitted as a true schematic difference. 
The reasons of those who opposed its admission have 
not, however, proved sufficiently strong to eject it 
finally from the science, since it reappears in the latest 
systems, and is recognised as logically competent. It 
is, nevertheless, to be rejected from logic, as being 
utterly deformed and useless. Deformed, since its 
premises proceed in the whole of comprehension, and 
its conclusion in the counter whole of extension- 
Useless, since the reasoning in both these wholes is 
scientifically complete without it. The fourth figure 
being thus rejected, the three first alone remain. 
These, therefore, are to be considered as exclusively 
competent in logic. 

c. The true canons of the figures. 

We have said that the syllogistic diflference of 

toteles fuisse yidetur, \xi nulla de causa tertiam figuram tradiderit. 
Est eniiii reperire exempla ejus figura;, in quibus si mutes disposi- 
tionem medii, feceris totum syllogismum obseuriorem." {Dialeetica. 
Paris, 1532, fol. 42.) 

This extract is taken from Melanchthon's seco7id logical work. His 
opinion in relation to this matter does not appear to have been always 
equally decided, since Melchior Adam says, (in his short life of him,) 
referring to it ; " Edidit Philippus eodem anno (1520) primura sua 
Pialectica in quibus tertiam jiguram syllogismorum neque recipit, 
neque rejicit ; quara deinde iterata editione, an. 1528, admisit." ( Vit(S 
Oermanorvm Philoaophorum. Francof, 1706, p. 88). ] 



Q6 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

figure is determined in the supreme canon of syllogism 
bj the clause, " What worse relation of subject and 
predicate subsists between either of two terms and a 
common third term," &c. It is obvious, that this 
clause determines figure ; for the syllogistic differ- 
ence of figure is discriminated by the position of the 
middle term in relation to the extremes ; or in other 
words, by the " relation of subject and predicate 
subsisting between the two terms and a common third 
term." 

But this clause not only determines the difference of 
figure, it also immediately determines all the possible 
varieties of such difference. For the relation of sub- 
ject and predicate, subsisting between two terms and 
a common third term, must be either that in which 
the common third term is the subject of one and 
the predicate of the other, or that in which it is the 
predicate of both, or that in which it is the subject 
of both. No other is possible. Now, these three 
possible variations of relation determine at once the 
number of the figures and the canons by which they 
are regulated. For the number of different figures 
can only answer to the number of different relations ; 
and the evolution of these different relations in de- 
tail will be the expression of the laws by which the 
figures thus discriminated are severally governed. 

These relations are — 

I. That in ivhich the common third term is the 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 67 

subject of one of the terms, and the predicate of the 
other. 

This constitutes the first figure alike in extension 
and comprehension. 

First in Extension. 

B is A Here B, the third term, is the subject of 

C is B (that is to say, contained under) A, 

C is A the one term ; and the predicate of 

(that is to say, contains under it) C, 

the other term. 

So in Comprehension. 

C is B Here B, the middle term, is the predi- 

B is A cate of (that is to say, comprehended 

C is A in) C, the one term ; and the subject 

of (that is to say, comprehends in it) 

A, the other terra. 

The canon of this figure is — " In so far as two no- 
tions or terms are related, either both positively, or 
one positively and the other negatively, to a common 
third term, of which the one is subject and the other 
predicate, — these two notions are related positively 
or negatively to each other as subject and predi- 
cate." 

II. That in which the common third term is the 
predicate of both the other terms. 

This constitutes the second figure, and that (con- 
trary to the logicians) is either of affirmative or of 
negative syllogisms. 



68 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

Affirmative. Negative. 

All A is all B. All A is all B. 

All C is some B. No C is any B. 

All C is some A. No C is any A. 

The canon of this figure is — " In so far as two terms 
or notions, both subjects, are either both positively, 
or the one positively and the other negatively, re- 
lated to a common predicate, — in so far are they 
either positively or negatively subject and predicate, 
and that indifferently of each other." 

III. That in which the third term is the subject of 
both the other terms. 

This constitutes the third figure, and that (also 
contrary to the logicians) in syllogisms with either 
universal or particular conclusions. 

Universal. Particular. 

All B is some A. All B is all A. 

All B is all C. Some B is some C. 

All C is some A. Some C is some A. 

The canon of this figure is — " In so far as two no- 
tions or terms, both predicates, are either each posi- 
tively, or the one positively and the other negatively, 
related to a common subject, — in so far are they 
positively or negatively subject and predicate, and 
this indifferently of each other." 

The relation of the middle term in the second and 
third figures explains how it is that these figures have 
no determinate major or minor premise, and two in- 



XEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 69 

different conclusions. There can be no determinate 
major or minor premise ; for a determinate major 
premise is one in which the middle term is compared 
with the greatest notion, and determined by it ; a 
determinate minor premise, one in which the middle 
term is compared with the smallest notion, and de- 
termines it. The middle notion thus always is in the 
former determined, in the latter determining. Now, 
in the second and third figures there can be no such 
relation of determination. In one the middle term 
determines both the premises, in the other it is deter- 
mined by both. Hence, since there is no determinate 
major or minor premise, it is manifest that we may 
have two indifferent conclusions ; for we may, in the 
second figure, indifferently predicate one subject of 
the other, and in third the one predicate of the other. 

In the first figure, again, it is equally clear that 
there is such a relation of determination. In it the 
reasoning is perfect, proceeding from the largest whole 
through a lesser whole to the least whole. The first 
figure accordingly has a determinate major and minor 
premise, and one immediate conclusion. 

d. The true relations of the figures. 

We have already spoken of the two wholes in which 
reasoning proceeds — the whole of comprehension and 
that of extension — the characteristic of the former 
being that the predicate is contained in the subject, of 
the latter that the subject is contained under the predi- 
cate. This being remembered, it will appear that in 



70 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 

the second figure, where the middle term as predicate 
contains both the subjects under it, extension will pre- 
dominate. In the third, where the middle term as 
subject is contained under, and therefore comprehends 
in it both the predicates, comprehension will prevail. 
In the first figure, again, where the middle term is 
both subject and predicate, extension and comprehen- 
sion balance each other. The first figure is indiffer- 
ently competent to either. 

Reasoning, however, proceeds not only in different 
wholes, but in different aspects of the same whole. 
We may, it is evident, regard any whole, considered 
as the complement of its parts, in either of two ways ; 
for we may, on the one hand, look from the whole to 
the parts, and reason accordingly downwards ; or, 
on the other hand, look from the parts to the whole 
they constitute, and reason accordingly upwards. 
The former of these reasonings is called deductive, 
the latter inductive. Deductive reasoning is founded 
on the maxim — " What belongs to the containing 
whole belongs also to the contained parts :" Induction 
on the contrary maxim — " What belongs to the con- 
stituent parts belongs also to the constituted w^hole." 
Thus in deductive reasoning the whole is stated first, 
and what is affirmed of it is affirmed of the parts it 
contains ; in other words, a general law is laid down, 
and predicated of the particular instances to which 
it applies. In inductive reasoning the parts are first 
stated, and what is predicated of them is also predi- 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 71 

cated of the whole they constitute ; in other words, 
the particular instances are first stated as facts, and 
then the law they constitute is evolved. 

This being the nature of these counter and corre- 
lative reasonings, it appears to us, that though each 
kind is competent in either whole, (extension or com- 
prehension,) yet that the reasoning in the whole of 
extension is more naturally allied to the deductive, 
and that in comprehension to the inductive. For, in 
the whole of extension, the reasoning proceeds from 
the general to the special — from the abstract to the 
concrete — from general laws to the particulai> in- 
stances which are contained under them ; while in 
that of comprehension, on the other hand, the rea- 
soning proceeds from the special to the general — 
from the concrete to the abstract — from the parti- 
cular instances to the general laws, whose operation 
they exemphf)^ 

The special adaptation of comprehension for induc- 
tive, and of extension for deductive reasoning, might 
be illustrated more fully in detail, and on other 
grounds ; but it may perhaps suffice to have indi- 
cated the relation between the two kinds of reasoning, 
and the two counter wholes in which they proceed. 

Considering these kinds of reasoning in relation to 
the figures, it will appear, then, that since extension 
prevails in the second, that will be so far more suit- 
able for deductive reasoning ; and since comprehension 
prevails in the third, that figure will so far be more 



72 KEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 

adapted for inductive reasoning ; while, since exten- 
sion and comprehension prevail equally in the first, 
that figure will be equally fitted for either kind of 
reasoning.* 

* [The relation of the figures to these different kinds of reasoning 
will be best illustrated by an example. We will take first the second 
figure : — ¦ 

Deductive reasoning : Quantity of eictension. 
/ Endowed with reason is all man. 
J European, Asiatic, African, American, are all man. 
^^' ' \ European, Asiatic, African, American, are endowed with 
V reason. 
Here the reasoning is deductive, for the law is first enounced, the 
indiviflual instances are next brought under it, and it is then affirmed 
of them J it is eMensive, for it proceeds from the wider notion through 
the narrower to the individual. Let us now take the same terms and 
treat them inductively, beginning with the individuals. The reason- 
ing will then be in the whole of comprehension, and will naturally 
appear in the form of the third figure : — 

Inductive reasoning : Quantity of comfreheixsion. 
( European, Asiatic, African, American, are all man. 

-,. ^_.^ ) European, Asiatic, African, American, are endowed with 
Pig. III. \ 

I reason. 

^ Endowed with reason is all man. 

Here the reasoning is inductive, for beginning with the individual 
in the premises, we arrive at the law (with which we started in the 
previous syllogism) in the conclusion ; it is comj^rehensive or inten- 
sive, for it proceeds from the concrete to the abstract, from a greater 
totality of attribute to a less. In other words, in either quantity 
(extensive or intensive) we reason from the greatest whole ; but in 
the quantity of extension the greatest whole is the most abstract 
notion, {i.e., the widest law,) whereas in that of comprehension, the 
greatest whole is the most concrete notion, {i.e., the individual in- 
stance.) But proceeding thus from the widest law the reasoning 
is necessary deductive, while on the other hand, proceeding from 
the individual instance, it is as necessarily inductive. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 73 

The second and third figures are indeed naturally 
respectively connected with deductive and inductive 

We may give the same example in the first figure, to illustrate 
(what will now be quite obvious) that it is indifferently competent 



Deductive reaso7iing : Qiiantity of extension. 

All man is endowed with reason. 
European, Asiatic, African, American, are all man. 
European, Asiatic, African, American, are endowed \vith 
reason. 



Fig. I. 



Inductive reasoning : Quantity of comprehension^ 

European, Asiatic, African, American, are all man. 
All man is endowed with reason. 

European, Asiatic, African, American, are endowed with 
reason. 

I need scarcely say, that at the time of writing the essay, I was 
quite unaware that any of these special relations of the figures had 
been noticed by logicians. I find, however, that Wilson, in his " Rule 
of Reason,''^ (1580,) has, among other remarks tracing the use of the 
figures, the following : — " Use of the third figure: This figure profiteth 
much in provoking particular things, and gathering of conjectures in 
causes that are doubtful, when probability only, and no assured 
knowledge, boulteth out the truth of a matter. And because several 
things (individuals) come sonest to our senses, we use suche gather-' 
ing moste commonly, and by triall of particular causes, assure our- 
selves of the truthe generally." Again, " when we make an argu- 
ment and procede from the general word (genus) to the kind (species), 
it is in the first figure, and even by our reason we learn this, that if 
the greater bee not, the lesse cannot bee." 

" When we procede from the kinde to the general, making the con- 
clusion particular, the argument is in the third figure. And this \6 
for ever true, that when the kinde is rehearsed, the generall must 
needes foUowe." (Fol. 30-1.) This, however, is little beyond a more 
explicit statement of what is commonly said of the thii'd figure, that 
it is a reasoning from the special.] 



74 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

reasoning ; for in the second we judge the likeness 
or unHkeness of two parts, as they are contained or 
not contained by a common whole ; while in the 
third we judge the likeness or unlikeness of two 
wholes, as they severally contain or do not contain 
common parts. 

3. Syllogisms differ with respect to mood. 

The syllogistic variety of mood arises from the 
different quality and quantity of propositions, and 
this difference is determined by the supreme canon 
in the clause — " What worse relation of subject and 
predicate" kc, since a negative quality is a worse 
relation than a positive, and a particular quantity a 
worse relation than a universal. 

Logicians, however, in their enumeration of moods, 
as we have seen, have taken into account only one 
quantity of propositions ; have considered the subject 
as quantified to the exclusion of the predicate ; and 
have, in so doing, deformed their science by excluding 
from it many valid forms of reasoning — forms which 
logic, if it be an exact science, and its analysis of the 
form of thought exhaustive, is bound to recognise and 
vindicate as valid. 

It is the design of the " new analytic " that its 
analysis shall be thus exhaustive ; and it vindicates 
its title by discovering and developing, in its various 
relations, an element of formal thought which had 
remained undeveloped, if not unrecognised, in every 
previous analysis. That element is, as we have 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 75 

said, the express quantification of the predicate, the 
true application of which recalls to the science many 
true forms of reasoning, the date of whose logical 
proscription may be reckoned as coeval with that of 
the science itself 

We shall proceed briefly to vindicate these forms. 
Logicians, combining the quality of a proposition with 
the quantity of its subject, reckon in all four kinds 
of propositions ; and combining these propositions in 
every possible way, evolve sixty-four moods. But 
it is clear, that if the quantity of the predicate be 
taken into account, the various kinds of propositions 
discriminated by quantity and quality will be doubled 
in number, and a proportionate increase effected in 
the number of possible moods ; for we shall now 
have eight kinds of propositions, viz., four affirma- 
tive : — 

Definite, affirmative, definite. 

Definite, affirmative, indefinite. 

Indefinite, affirmative, definite. 

Indefinite, affirmative, indefinite. 

And in the same manner, four negative propositions. 
With this increase in the number of propositions, we 
need new symbols by which to designate them. We 
may, however, still retain the old notation A. I. E. 0., 
and express the new forms by combining the letters 
into diphthongs, or placing them within brackets, as 
occasion may require ; e.g.^ — 

Definite, affirmative, indefinite = (Al.) 
Indefinite, negative, definite = CE, &c. 



76 



NEW AKALYl^lC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 



This increase in the number of propositions to be 
combined effects of course a great increase in the 
number of moods resulting from such combination. 
Of the possible moods thus given, a number are in- 
vaKdated by the clause of the canon, " o?ie at least 
positively so," from having two negative premises. 
A number more are excluded by the clause, " a com- 
mon third term" from the middle term being undis- 
tributed* Throwing these out of account, together 
with some others having particular conclusions where 
universal are competent^ there remain in all thirty- 
six valid moods, (twelve affirmative and twenty-four 
negative,) and these thirty-six are valid in each 
figure. 

We employ the symbolical notation,''^ using the 
comma (,) to denote " some,^' (indefinite quantity,) 
and the colon (:) to denote "alV (definite quantity). 

Valid moods of the first figure. 
Afiirmative. Negative. 



i. A : : B : . : C J 

' (2. A: 



ii. A , 



B ; 



,C 



l.A, 
2. A, 



n.A:-|— 

iii. A : : B : , C \ 

(2. A : 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



:C 
:C 
,C 
,C 



* On this system of notation, see the Appendix. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 



77 



iv. A , 


: B : 


V. A: 


: B , 


> 
vi. A : 


, B : 


vii. A , 


: B , 




, B : 


ix. A : -^— 


: B , 


X. A , 


, B : 


xi. A , ¦ 


> 
: B , 


xii. A : 


, B : 



:C 



:C 



: C 



,C 



,C 



:C 



,C 



r 

(2. A 

... 

(2. A 

r 

(2. A 

r 

(2. A 

r 

(2. A 
|1.A 
I2. A 

I" 

(2. A 

r 

(2. A 

r 

h. A 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



B 



We have given the above syllogisms in the first 
figure ; but they may all be easily translated into 
the two others.* 



* [The only one of the prescribed requisites which the essay does 



78 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 

To recapitulate then. We set out with the prin- 
ciple of a quantified predicate. We have noticed 
some things by the way not immediately connected 
therewith ; but recurring to it, we have endeavoured 
to vindicate that principle. We have indicated its 
influence on propositions in abolishing the complex 
doctrine of conversion ; its influence on categorical 
syllogisms, in reducing their laws to a higher sim- 
plicity, and amplifying their vaKd forms, — in short, 
by correcting what was false, and supplying what was 
wanting ; and thus, by securing to logic a higher 
degree of formal exactness, realising for it a higher 
degree of scientific perfection. 

not to some extent attempt to meet, is that in which it is required 
" to show in concrete examples, through all the moods, the unessen- 
tial variation which figure makes in a syllogism." This was omitted 
at the time of writing through haste ; but it is so obvious, that with 
a little trouble, each reader may do it for himsel£ As an illustration, 
however, the following is a concrete example of the first mood, car- 
ried through all the figures : — 

( All man is some animal. 
Fig* ^' <. Every Celt is some man. 

' Every Celt is some animal. 

i Some animal is all man. 
Fig. II. J Every Celt is some man. 

( Every Celt is some animaL 

r All man is some animal. 
Fig. III. ) Some man is every Celt. 

( Some animal is every Celt. 

( Some animal is all man. 
Fig. IV. < Some man is every Celt. 

' Some animal is every Celt. 



NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FORMS. 79 

The " neiv analytic^' accomplishes this by being- 
true to its office, and fully investigating the form of 
thought. The form, the whole form, and nothing hut 
the form of thought, is indeed the bannered motto 
which it bears on its triumphant way. True to 
its purpose, it advances over the whole region of 
formal thought, conquering and to conquer ; de- 
stroying the false landmarks which had been set 
up by the early discoverers of that territory ; re- 
pressing the incursions which were continually made 
into neighbouring kingdoms ; destroying the border 
ground by determining for ever the frontier line ; 
dethroning the potentates who had intrenched them- 
selves in its high places, and long there exer- 
cised a usurped authority ; recalling from their 
long exile the true lords of the soil ; re-establish- 
ing the laws on which their rights were founded, and 
enforcing strict obedience to these in every province 
of the empire. Thus, though in some respects its 
path is as the path of the destroyer, in a higher and 
truer sense it is the path of peace ; for through its 
instrumentality there breaks at length upon this long 
distracted region the golden age of simphcity and 
order. And anarchy, the result of laws neglected 
and rights ignored, is for ever abolished in the esta- 
blishment of perfect harmony — a harmony the result 
of law clearly expounded and rigidly obeyed through- 
out the entire empire of formal thought. 



80 NEW ANALYTIC OF LOGICAL FOKMS. 

In conclusion, we are. well aware of the very im- 
perfect manner in which we have signalised those 
parts of the new^ discovery on which we have touched. 
We cannot, however, close without expressing the 
true joy we feel, (though, w^ere the feeling less strong, 
we might shrink from the intrusion,) that in our 
country, and in our time, this discovery has been 
made. We rejoice to know that one has at length 
arisen, able to recognise and complete the plan of the 
mighty builder, Aristotle,— to lay the top-stone on 
that fabric, the foundations of which were laid more 
than two thousand years ago by the master hand of 
the Stagirite, which, after the labours of many gene- 
rations of workmen, w^ho have from time to time built 
up one part here and taken down another there — -re- 
mains substantially as he left it ; but which, when 
finished, shall be seen to be an edifice of wondrous 
beauty, harmony, and completeness. 



APPENDIX. 



No. I. 

HISTORICAL NOTICE TOUCHING THE EXPLICIT QUANTIFICATION 
OF THE PREDICATE. 

The statement made in the first page of the Essay, that " the 
principle of a quantified predicate had, in its full scientific sig- 
nificance, been totally overlooked by logicians, and that, when 
noticed at all, it had, for the most part, been referred to only to 
be discarded as useless, if not to be condemned as false" — was 
made, it scarcely need be said, upon a very limited acquaintance 
with logical works. It was, however, the conclusion to which 
my inquiries, so far as they extended, led me. I had examined 
several logical treatises, and found that the majority made no re- 
ference at all to a quantified predicate, that the few who noticed 
it, (two of which are quoted,) treated it in the manner described 
in the text ; while, so far as my reading extended, I had not 
found a single instance in which it was admitted in any form. 
Since writing the Essay, I have naturally been curious in my 
occasional logical reading to mark any references which might 
be made to this subject; and as the result of a somewhat fuller 
knowledge of the historical development of the science, I am able 
to establish, upon somewhat wider evidence, the general truth 
of the statement made in the text. The full scientific signifi- 
cance of the principle certainly never has been appreciated. It 
has been, *' for the most part, rejected;" that is to say, it 
has been denounced by the vast majority of logicians as 



82 APPENDIX. 

useless and false. Some exceptions, however, to this sum- 
mary rejection of the principle are to be found. A few of these 
I have met with, some of which as in themselves curious, and 
as lying out of the way of ordinary reading, it may be worth 
while explicitly to notice. In order, therefore, to place the Essay 
on a level with my present knowledge, I shall briefly establish 
historically the common rejection of the principle of a quantified 
predicate, and then notice some of the exceptions to this treat- 
ment of it which are to be found. 

I. The common doctrine which altogether rejects the express quan- 
tification of the predicate. 

This doctrine dates substantially, as do most logical truths 
and heresies, from Aristotle. He refers explicitly in two 
places* — in his Book on the Doctrine of Enunciation^ and in his 
Prior Analytics — to the quantification of the predicate, and 
in both rejects it in a very summary manner. In the Book 
touching Enunciation he says, — " 'Et^ hs rou xarriyopovfisvou 
xa^oXo'j TO xa&oKov xciTrjyoosTv, oox sffriv dSrjXsg' ovds/j^ia ya^ za-d<puflig 
dXridrig idrai, si/ fi tou xaryiyo^oviJbsvov zccdoXou to -/cadoXou TLOLTrfyo^uTOLt 
o)ov sffTi <adc a)/6^oj-7rog crav ^woi/." (De Eiiunciandi Ratione^ c. vii. 
§ 4.) The parallel passage in the Prior Analytics is as follows : 
" Auro hi to s'tto/xsvov oh Xi^'TTTiov oXov sTso'^a/* Xsyu d\ ohv dvd^uj'ru) 
irav ^woc, 5^ fiovgiKfj •Tracai' s<n't(fT^fir}v' aXX' acrXwg fMovov dxo7.o'oh7v^ 
xccMts^ otai 'r^onmijji&a' xai yd,^ oi^^rjgTov daTSoov^ xcci dd-jvuTov, 
ohv TrdvTO, avS^wirov sivai crav ^oDov vi bix,aioC'jvrjv acav a^a^ov." 
{Anal. Pri. i. c. 27, § 9.) The quantification of the predicate is 
to be absolutely rejected; such is the judgment of Aristotle on 
the point.f That this judgment v^as given rashly and without 

* Other references are made to the subject by Aristotle in the Book of the 
Categories and the Posterior Analytics ; but the above are the most decisive 



+ It is right to state, that the only case which is here explicitly contem- 
plated by Aristotle, is that in which the predicate is quantified unitersally. 
His dictum, however, in relation to this is not true, since we may often 



APPENDIX. 83 

due consideration is, however, manifest, both from the fact that 
Aristotle himself explicitly quantifies the predicate in other parts 
of his writings, as also from the fact that his formal rejection of 
such quantification is unsupported by a single argument. All 
that is offered in its defence is an illustration so inept and one- 
sided, that its fallacy seems almost transparent. He says, in 
effect, that it is impossible to quantify the predicate, because it 
is false to say, all man is all anirnal; which is surely no better 
as an argument than it would be to say, that it is impossible to 
divide a foot into inches, because it is false to say that one inch 
is a whole foot. With the exception of this example, and one 
or two others of the same kind, Aristotle wisely abstains from 
offering any defence of his hasty judgment. His wisdom in 
this respect has not, however, been imitated by his followers, 
who have, in various ways, endeavoured to explain and defend 
the dictum of their master. 

Passing over the Greek commentators, (with whose labours 
I am not sufhciently familiar to enable me to speak of them 
with confidence,) we come to the first, as in some respects he 
still remains the best Latin expositor of Aristotle — Boethius. 
Boethius flourished during the latter part of the fifth and the 
beginning of the sixth centuries. He translated all the books 
of the Organon, and wrote elaborate commentaries on more 
than one, besides furnishing other and more direct contributions 
to logical science in the form of original treatises. To his ver- 
sions and commentaries the schoolmen were mainly indebted 
for their knowledge of Aristotle; and to these, accordingly, 
may be traced several of the particular interpretations which 
subsequently became current in the science, and were, indeed, 
for the most part authenticated as of Aristotelic origin. To deter- 
mine, therefore, the opinion of Boethius on any particular point, 

quantify the predicate universally ; but as he implicitly makes this case re- 
presentative of the whole doctrine, it is obviously altogether false, since we 
may, and must always quantify the predicate unirersalli/ or particularly. 

UNIVEKSITr] 



S4 APPENDIX. 

is of some importance, as it will be often found to be that which 
subsequently prevailed. 

He gives the point in question fuller consideration than it 
receives at the hands of Aristotle ; but in his treatment of it, 
nevertheless, he confines himself to the same restricted aspect, 
and arrives substantially at the same one-sided conclusion. 
Considering exclusively the case in which the predicate is 
quantified universally^ he proves triumphantly what seems to re- 
quire really very little proof, that the genus cannot receive a 
mark of universal quantity when it is predicated of its species. 
Commenting on the passage already quoted from the Book 
touching Enunciation, he says as follows : — 

"Quod dicit hujusmodiest: — Omnis propositio simplex duobus 
terminis constat, his saepe additur aut universalitatis aut particu- 
laritatis determinatio ; sed ad quani partem hae determinationes 
addantur, exponit. Yidetur enim Aristoteli, praedicato termino 
determinationem non oportere conjungi. In hac enim proposi- 
tione, quae est * homo animal est,' quaeritur — subjectumne debeat 
cum determinatione dici, ut sit ' omnis homo animal est ;' an 
pragdicatum, ut sit ' homo omne animal est ;' an utrumque, ut 
sit ' omnis homo omne animal est.' Sed neutrum eorum qna^pos- 
terius dicta sunt, fieri oportet ; namque ad prcedicatum nunquavi 
determinatio jungitur, sed ad subjectum tantum, Neque enim verum 
est dicere ' omne animal omnis homo est ;' idcirco, quoniam 
omnis prcedicatio, aut major est suhjecto, aut cequalis. Ut in eo 
quod dicimus, ' omnis homo animal est,' plus est animal quani 
homo. Et rursus in eo quod dicimus, ' homo risibilis est,' risi- 
bile aequatur horaini. Ut autem sit minus praedicatum atque 
angustius subjecto, fieri non potest. Ergo in his predicatis qua? 
subjecto majora sunt, ut in eo quod est animal, perspicue falsa 
est propositio, si determinatio universalitatis ad praedicatum 
terminum ponitur. Nam si dicamus, ' homo est animal,' animal, 
quod majus est homine, per banc determinationem ad subjectum 
hominem usque contrahimus ; cum non solum ad hominem, sed 



APPENDIX. 8'5 

ad alia quoque, nomen animalis possit aptari. Rursus, in iis 
quae cequalia sunt, idem evenit. Nam si dicam, ' omnis homo 
omne risibile est,' primum, si ad humanitatem ipsam referam, 
superjluum est adjicere determinationem. Quod si ad smgulos 
quosquam hominum, fcdsa est propositio ; nam cum dico ' omnis 
homo omne risibile est,' hoc videor significare, singuli ho- 
mines omne risibile sunt, quod fieri non potest. Nou igitur 
ad prwdicatum, sed ad subjectum detemiinatio ponenda. Verba 
autem Aristotelis, hoc modo sunt, et ad hanc sententiam du- 
cuntur : — * In his prsedicatis quae sunt universalia, his adjicere 
universale aliquid, ut universale praedicatum universaliter pra3- 
dicatur, non est verum ;' hoc enim est quod ait. In eo vero quod 
pr£edicatur universaliter, id est, quod habet prasdicatum univer- 
sale, ipsum universale prasdicatum [praedicare] universaliter, 
non est verum. In prsedicato enim universali, id est, quod 
universale est et praedicatur, ipsum prasdicatum, quod univer- 
sale est, universaliter praedicare, id est, adjecta determinatione 
universalitatis, non est verum. Neque enim potest fieri^ ut ulla sit 
affinnatio vera, in qua de universali prwdicato universalis determina- 
iio prwdicetur ; eisque rei notionera exemplo aperit, dicens, ' ut 
omnis homo omne animal est ;' hoc autem quam sit inconve- 
niens, supra jam diximus." {Opera Omnia. Basil., pp. 348, 349.) 
In the opening sentence of this (corrected) extract Boethius 
states the question fairly, and looks at it from a higher point of 
view than that in which it had been considered by Aristotle. 
He begins by saying, that every simple proposition is composed 
of two terms, that to these a determination of universality or par- 
ticularity is often added, and then proceeds to inquire to which 
of the terms these determinations should be affixed. From this 
introduction it might reasonably have been inferred that the 
question would be discussed on broader grounds than those on 
which it had previously been treated, and that quantification in 
relation to the predicate would be considered in its generic lati- 
tude, and not in one of its species alone. This expectation is, 



86 APPENDIX. 

however, as we have said, not fulfilled ; for immediately after 
having said that the terms receive marks o^ universality 2i\i^ par- 
ticularity^ and that the inquiry is, to which of the terms these 
marks should be appended, Boethius proceeds to consider the 
mark of universality alone ; and decides on this restricted con- 
sideration of the matter, that the marks of quantity are to be 
affixed exclusively to the subject, and never to the predicate. 

The whole passage is, however, curious and valuable, not only 
in itself, but also in its historic relation, from its having (as al- 
ready hinted) determined in effect nearly all that was subse- 
quently said by others on the subject. There is not, I think, in 
all the subsequent refutations of a quantified predicate which 
have been attempted, a single argument which is not substan- 
tially contained in this quotation. 

The next name of authority after Boethius is that of the 
Arabian Averroes, who, from the extent and value of his labours, 
as expositor of Aristotle, was called The Commentator^ xar 
s^oy^^Tjv. He flourished in the twelfth century, and by his almost 
incredible devotion to Aristotle, and his unwearied zeal in ex- 
pounding and epitomising his works, contributed not a little to 
promote the complete ascendency which the peripatetic philo- 
sophy subsequently obtained. 

Averroes treats the point in question with much greater 
brevity than Boethius, but arrives at precisely the same con- 
clusion. 

In his commentary on the passage in the Book of Enunciation, 
he says, " Et non dividuntur enunciationes ex parte conjunc- 
tionis clausura} cum praedicato ; quia, clausura cum adjungitur 
pradicato, est falsa euunciatio, aut superfua ; et falsa quidem est, 
' omnis homo est omne animal ;' superflua sicut cum diximus, 
' omnis homo est quoddam animaV " {Averrois Opera omnia. Venet. 
1560. Tom. i. fol. 45.) He has another sentence to the same 
effect in his commentary on the twenty-seventh chapter of the 
first book of the Prior Analytics. It is as follows — " Oportet 



APPENDIX. 87 

ut sepimentum (hoc est determinatio) semper coaptetur subjecto 
propositionis acceptae, non autem prcedicato, quoniam si conjun- 
getur praidicato, erit aut impossihilis, aut inutilis ad syllogisraum, 
secundum quod declaratum fuit in libro praecedente." Fol. 118. 

The first of these extracts from Averroes, though so brief, is 
curious, inasmuch as he there explicitly takes account of what 
is not noticed by Aristotle or Boethius before him, or, as far as 
I remember, by any of the rejectors of a quantified predicate 
after him, — the case, to wit, in which the predicate is quantified 
particularly. He considers, with Aristotle, first, the case in 
which it is quantified universally^ " all man is all animal," and, 
with him, rejects this as false and impossible. He then pro- 
ceeds to consider the case in which it is quantified particularly, 
" all man is some animal ;" here he was free to act as he would, 
for of this second case nothing had been said ; but the spell of 
Aristotle's rejection of the universal quantification was still 
strong upon him, and accordingly he rejects the particular also 
as superfluous and useless. The grounds of this rejection are, it 
need scarcely be said, totally extra-logical; for the particular 
quantification of the predicate in the given example is superfluous 
only by an appeal to the matter of the proposition, with which 
logic has nothing whatever to do ; and so far from being useless, 
such quantification is absolutely necessai'y, before the predicate 
notion, as the constituent of a reasoning, can be turned to its 
full scientific account. 

From Boethius and Averroes, the logical treatises of Aristotle, 
with the traditions founded upon them, passed, as we have said, 
to the schoolmen ; among these Albertus Magnus and St. Tho- 
mas Aquinas are quoted as having anew defended the rejec- 
tion of a quantified predicate. The hereditary confession of 
logical faith, now become venerable through constant subscrip- 
tion, passed from the schoolmen to the later commentators on 
the Organon. These, while throwing off, to a great extent, 
the formality of the scholastic style, are yet rarely wise in imr 



88 APPENDIX. 

portant points above the teaching of their masters. On the 
point in question, that of a quantified predicate, they seem to 
have remained, with scarcely an exception, faithful to the re- 
ceived traditions. In illustration of this we will take two, 
which are among the best and most valuable of the later com- 
mentaries on the Organon, that of Julius Pacius, and that of the 
College of the Society of Jesus at Coimhra. 

Julius Pacius, the pupil of Zabarella, and preceptor in philoso- 
phy of Casaubon, was both a very learned and a very acute man ; 
and his works accordingly exhibit the accuracy and penetration 
resulting from these blended excellencies. His commentary on 
the Organon was first published in the year 1597. It was so 
full, clear, and precise, and altogether such a useful book, 
that it speedily attained a high reputation, and has ever since 
maintained its place as a standard work on the Organon. Pacius 
discusses the question of a quantified predicate in connexion with 
both the passages which we have quoted from the Organon ; 
and as his opinion in this matter stands in much the same rela- 
tion to the later philosophy as that of Boethius did to the earlier, 
it may be worth while to quote it in full. The more so, too, as it 
is in itself the fullest discussion of the matter probably to be 
found among the later writers. 

The first passage is from his Commentary on the Book of 
Enunciation; it is as follows : — 

" In duabus primis particulis sejunxerat indefinitas ab uni- 
versahbus ; quoniam universales subjecto universali addunt 
notam universalem omnis^ vel nullus ; indefinitas vero nullam 
notam subjecto apponunt. Unde potuisset aliquis suspicari 
tale discrimen, quod modo exposuimus in subjecto, nempe 
recipere notam universalem, aut ea nota carere, tale (in- 
quam) discrimen etiam in attribute spectari posse ; quasi vel 
simpliciter proponi possit, vel cum nota universali. Hunc er- 
rorem ut Aristoteles tollat, ostendit universalem notam nunquam 
posse adjungi attributo : quia tunc omnis afiirmatio falsa esset. 



APPENDIX. 89 

Quod declarat exemplo hujus enuiiciationis, 'omnis homo est 
omne animal,' qu£e sine dubio falsa est: nam si homo esset 
omne animal, esset etiam asinus et bos. 8ed notare hie 
oportet, alia attributa latius patere quam subjecta, alia vero 
reciprocari cum subjectis. Hoc est quod dicebat Porphy- 
rius, cap. 2, pars 37, aut majora de minoribus aut asqualia de 
aequalibus dici. Ubi igitur attributum latius patet, ut in ex- 
emplo Aristotelis, res dubitatione caret : certum enim est, affir- 
mationem esse falsam, nee posse dici, ' omnem hominem esse 
omne animal.' Sed merito dubitatur de attributis, quae recipro- 
cantur cum subjectis, veluti si quis dicat, ' omne animal est omne 
sensu prasditum,' et ' omnis homo est omne aptum ad ridendum :' 
nam hie absurditas ilia non agque apparet, ut in ilia enuncia- 
tione, ' omnis homo est omne animal.' Sed ut intelligatur has 
quoque enunciationes esse falsas, in quibus attributum, quod re- 
ciprocatur, adnexam habet particulam o?nms, notare oportet, hanc 
particulam omnis, habere vim quam in scholis vocant distribu- 
tivam ; ut omnis homo, proinde valeat atque quilibet homo, vel 
singuli homines ; et similiter omne animal, idem valet, quod sin- 
gula animalia, vel unumquodque animal seu quodlibet animal. 
Quapropter si vere diceretur, ' omne animal est omne sensu 
praiditum,' etiam homo esset omne sensu praeditum ; nam qui 
dixit omne animal, non exclusit omnem hominem, homo igitur 
esset quodlibet sensu prseditum : proinde hac ratione fieret, ut 
homo esset equus, et bos, quandoquidem equus et bos sunt 
sensu prsedita." {Pacius in Aristotelis De Interpret, cap. vii.) 

The second passage is from the commentary on the Prior 
Analytics, and is as follows : — 

" Quintum prasceptum est, ne sumamus consequens, quod 
totam consequatur, sed quod toti sit consequens : id est, ut nota 
universalis omnis vel omne, jungatur subjecto, non attributo pro- 
positionis. Primo, Aristoteles proponit hoc praeceptum. Deinde, 
cum ait, ' verbi gratia,' prseceptum illud exemplis illustrat. 
Tertio, cum ait, ' quonium alterum,' duplici argumento praecep- 



90 APPENDIX. 

turn illud confirmat. Primum est ; quia si sumas id, quod totum 
consequitur, pars ejus erit inutilis, et ad rem non faciat. Alterum 
argumentum est; quia propositio erit impossibilis, id est, ne- 
cessario falsa. Posterius argumentum declarat his exemplis, 
* omiiis homo est omne animal,' et ' justitia est omne bonum.' 
Nam hae propositiones sunt evidenter falsas, ut etiam expositum 
fuit Capite 7, De Interp. Partic. 4. Prius argumentum ab Aris- 
totele non explicatur, ideoque a nobis est breviter explicandum. 
Ergo etiamsi vere dici possit, omnem hominem est omne ani- 
mal ; tamen illud omne nihil faceret ad concludendum prob- 
lema ; tantumdem enim valet hsec propositio, ' omnis homo est 
animal.' Exempli gratia, si probandum sit, omnem hominem, 
vivere ; et primum, suraatur hsec propositio, * omne animal 
vivit ;' si addas assumptionem, quod ' omnis homo est animal,' 
etiamsi non sumas esse omne animal, tamen recte colliges 
omnem hominem vivere. Postremo, cum ait, ' sed cui [aliud] ' 
concludit universalem illam notam omnis^ esse subjecto adjun- 
gendam." (Pacius in Arist. Analyt. Pri. i. cap. 27, § 9.) 

The commentary on the Organon by the College of Coimbra 
was first published in the year 1600, a few years after that of 
Pacius. It was one of those able works on philosophy to 
which, after the decline of scholasticism, the zeal and energy of 
the Jesuits in letters and philosophy gave birth. It is far 
from being a mere slavish transcript from previous writers, but 
has on the contrary acuteness and originality enough to enable 
it to stand out in its individuality from the works of the time. 
In relation to the point in question it is, however, in harmony 
with its predecessors and contemporaries. The following is its 
deliverance on the matter : — 

" Docuerat (Aristoteles) in propositionibus universalibus signa 
universalia addi subjecto, ambigeret quis, an praedicato etiam 
addi oporteret, ut quemadmodum dicimus, ' omnis homo est 
animal,' libeat ita loqui, 'omnis homo est omne animal:' re- 
spondet negative in affirmativis, quia aliter omnis affirmatio uni- 



APPENDIX. 91 

versalis falsa esset, veluti si dicas, ' omnis homo est omne animal,' 
neque enim omne animal in homine est. Notanter, addit Aris- 
toteles, nulla erit affirmatio vera, quia in quavis materia, etsi 
prcedicatum cequale existat suhjecto, propositio erit falsa. Nam 
sensus hujus propositionis, ' omnis homo est omne risible,' est 
quod Idc homo est omne risible, et ilk homo est omne risible, 
distribuit enim particula omnis, subjectum copulative pro omni- 
bus. Unde patet, quam errent Averroes et Boethius existi- 
mantes addi posse signum universale prsedicato, universalis pro- 
positionis, quando illud exaequat subjectum : nisi propositionis 
accipiant non copulative prseter earum usum et naturam. De 
negativa propositions nihil docet quia in ea, etsi negatio addi 
possit pr^edicato absque falsitate, superflua tamen est, quia vir- 
tute prsecedentis negationis ad omnia extenditur prsedicatum." 
{^Comment. Coll. Conimhr. in universam Dialecticam Aristotelis. 
Colon., 1611. Pars ii. p. 158.) 

I confess that Boethius and Averroes appear to me to be but 
hardly treated in the above passage, in being held guilty of error 
for saying that the universal quantification of the predicate, 
when it was equal in extent to the subject, was simply super- 
fluous, instead of denouncing it as false. Boethius, indeed, as 
we have seen, hypothetically does the latter, but considers the 
whole case with far greater wisdom than his censor, since he 
says in relation to it, that the quantification is superfluous, if the 
subject be taken collectively, but false if it be taken distributively. 
With the exception of the admission that the predicate of a 
negative judgment may be quantified, without making the 
proposition false, the above extract is at one with the previous 
authorities. 

Keckermann adds nothing new, save one example, (which is, 
however, something, where the whole question is solved by 
examples,) if possible, still more inept, not to say absurd, 
than the common ones. A number of other logical writers, 
about equal in authority to Keckermann, such as Burgersdyk, 



92 APPENDIX. 

Hereboord, Stahl,* Derodon, &c., might be referred to as giving 
deliverances to the same effect. There is nothing, however, in 
their statement of the common opinion that merits special atten- 
tion, or that need be quoted here. 

Such is the position which the opinion of the illegality of 
quantification in relation to the predicate has maintained in the 
history of the science. It has been held from the earliest to the 
latest times. Nor is it by any means yet obsolete. With the 
exception of the comparatively few quarters in which Sir W. 
Hamilton's refutation of the old, and application of the new doc- 
trine, have become known, it is as firmly and as widely held to- 
day as it ever was. The marvellous acuteness of Kant, in rela- 
tion to everything connected with formal thought, which did 
good service in other parts of logic, brought no help here. Nor 
has the newly-kindled zeal on behalf of Aristotle and his philo- 
sophy, manifested in Germany and France, been of any more 
avail. The last German editor of the Organon, Theo. Waitz, 
still says, on the classical passage in the Book of Enunciation, — 
" Quum additur ' omnis,* non id de quo praedicatur univer- 
sale esse significatur, sed de re aliqua universa aliquid prse- 
dicari judicatur. Si vero quod praedicatur, quum univer- 
sale est, universum prasdicatur, enunciatio exit non vera." — 
(Aristotelis Organon, Edidit T. Waitz. 1844. Pars i. p. 337.) 
Finally, the last French translator and expositor of Aristotle, M. 
J. B. Saint- Hilaire, in his excellent version of the Organon, 



* Stahl and Derodon have been quoted already in the Essay. While 
referring again to Stahl, 1 may mention here what ought to have been 
stated in the note respecting him at page 2, viz., that in what he says of 
comprehension and extension, he but repeats Cajetanus, quoted, indeed, him- 
self to the same effect ear her in his work. {Reg, Plul., p. 881.) The work of 
Cajetanus on the categories from which Stahl quotes, dates from 1496, so 
that the discrimination of these quantities by the epithets cxtemlxe and in- 
tensive is of some antiquity. The term intensire was commonly employed 
in the Leibnitian school in the same sense, and was probably revived by 
Leibnitz, immediately from Cajetanus, or mediately through Stahl. 



APPENDIX. 98 

still reiterates, without a reason, in his notes, the rejection of the 
text : — " L'attribut n'a jamais la marque d'universalite : et I'on 
ne saurait dire : Tout homme est tout animal : on dit simple- 
ment et d'une maniere absolue : Tout homme est animal. Le 
signe d'universalite n'est jamais qu' a I'antecedent, e'est-a-dire, 
au sujet." — {Lofjique d'Artstote, trad. Paris, 1839. Tom. ii. 
p. 125.) 

To sum up, then, the evidence we have obtained, the whole 
question, as commonly treated by the logicians, may be stated 
as follows : — The predicate, they consider, (with a single excep- 
tion,) can only be quantified universally. Now, this being the 
only possibility contemplated, two cases arise ; for either, in the 
first place, the predicate is greater than the subject, and then such 
quantification is false, as "all man is all animal;" or it is equal 
to the subject, and then such quantification is superfluous, as " all 
man is all risible." The later commentators, however, are not 
satisfied with this comparatively mild dismissal of the second 
case, but maintain, that in any case, in the latter as well as in 
the former, the quantification is necessarily /a/se; and this on 
the apparently inconceivably inconsequent ground, that if aZZ man 
is all risible, then necessarily each man is all risible ; or to take 
a parallel example, (one, however, which they do not take,) 
that if twelve inches are one foot, then necessarily each individual 
inch is also one foot. 

When we consider these grounds, and remember the real 
ability of the men by whom they were successively urged, we 
cannot but be struck with a wonder amounting to marvel, that 
they could remain satisfied with them, and that a truth so obvious 
on its first enunciation, so imperative on its fuller exposition, 
should have been so uniformly and so long thus rejected. Allow- 
ing that the original judgment of Aristotle was given rashly 
upon but a partial consideration of the subject, we still cannot 
at all understand how his followers should not, on the one hand, 
having undertaken its examination, have discovered its fallacy. 



94 APPENDIX. 

or, on the other, having adopted and undertaken to defend it, 
have offered something better — something at least not absurd — 
in its vindication. It is, however, but another instance, per- 
haps the most illustrious of all, of what has been often noticed, 
of how completely the weight of authority often prevails against 
the clearest evidence. As in physical science the older philoso- 
phers refused to believe the evidence of their senses against the 
recorded judgment of Aristotle, so in mental science they re- 
fused to accept the equally obvious evidence of their understand- 
ings, where it testified against the same infallible authority. 

The only explanation which can be offered of this strange 
oversight, and it is probably the true one, is, that the logi- 
cians for the most part (after Aristotle) limited their attention 
to the single case of universal quantification. This, considered 
in relation to the rules which were already laid down for predi- 
cation, according to which the predicate notion was always of 
greater extent than the subject notion, would not only naturally, 
but necessarily lead to the rejection of such one-sided quantifi- 
cation. 

Some exceptions do, however, as we have said, occur, in which 
the subject is looked at in a wider aspect, and to these it is time 
that we should more explicitly refer. 

11. Some exceptions to the common doctrine, in which the prin- 
ciple of a quantified predicate receives a more enlightened considera- 
tion, and is partially^ either in principle or practice^ formally alloived. 

Laurentius Valla was, so far as I know, the first by whom 
the express quantification of the predicate was in any form, or 
to any extent allowed. And if, indeed, the force of the tradi- 
tion against it was ever to be broken through, this was a service 
which we might naturally have expected to receive at his hands, 
since he was assuredly one of the most independent and active 
thinkers, not alone of his own, but also of any age. The same 



APPENDIX. 95 

orij^inality of wliich his life and writings were the constant ex- 
pression, characterises also his logical inquiries. He complained 
of the diffuseness and defects of the existing logic, undertook a 
thorough examination of its doctrines, and accepted none but such 
as appeared founded on the truth of things. Whatever, there- 
fore, rested simply on authority he at once threw aside, while 
whatever appeared to have scientific evidence in its favour he 
with equal readiness adopted. As the result of this thorough 
independence, he was doubtless sometimes led into error, from 
which an adherence to authority would have preserved him ; but 
he was often also led into truth, to which the force of authority 
would as certainly have denied his access ; so that on the whole 
he certainly introduced more truth than error into the science, 
and had he been less hasty and capricious, the result of his 
labours would probably have been still more valuable. As it 
is, however, his treatise has all the freshness and vigour of in- 
dependent thought, and with no loss of accuracy, possesses the 
rare merit of being a really interesting introduction to a science 
not proverbial for the attractiveness of its elementary works. 

Valla flourished during the first half of the fifteenth century, 
having been born at Rome in 1408, and dying in 1457. His 
logical work, De Dialectica, dates therefore from the middle of 
that century. I cannot find, however, any account of a printed 
edition of it before the one published at Venice in the year 
1499, though in all probability it must have been printed much 
earlier. From the title of this earlier edition, " De Dialectica 
contra Aristoteleos" it would seem at first to have been avow- 
edly published against the logicians of the day ; as it is quite 
certain, from his short defence of himself at the close of the 
work, that Valla did not escape severe censure, and indeed per- 
secution. The boldness of his criticisms on the current doc- 
trines, indeed, (though these were coupled for the most part 
with the most respectful references to Aristotle himself,) 
when taken in connexion with the enmity aroused by his 



96 APPENDIX. 

stubborn adherence to the truths which he had obtained by 
his own industry, and his contemptuous rejection of those which 
were merely traditional ; — his criticisms, we say, taken in con- 
nexion with the enmity Avhich his conduct in these respects had 
excited, were likely enough to provoke active and fierce opposi- 
tion. His attack (or what seemed an attack) upon the time- 
honoured and sacred fortress of the Aristotelic logic, would 
naturally be the signal for a general assault on the part of his 
enemies. There are none, however, but must be struck with 
the calm beauty and dignity of his protest against the meanness 
and the malice of the persecutions to which he had been sub- 
jected for his defence of what he held to be the truth ; and 
none, too, however wayward, haughty, and petulant that de- 
fence may sometimes have been, who will not heartily respond 
to the noble sentiment wdth which he closes : — " Verum Im- 
perator noster, Deus, railites suos ex acie fugere non vult ; sed 
aut vincere, aut strenue fortiterque pugnantes, mortem oppetere. 
Non enim ipsis pereuntibus veritatis gloria perit, sed vivit, sed 
vincit, sed illo piissimo cruore sancitur, atque consecratur." 
For myself I feel that I could freely forgive the errors of his 
life had they been far more serious than they were, when I 
find him consciously upheld by such high inspiration ; and see 
that amidst all its pride and storm he cherished so sincere a love 
for the truth, and so stern a determination to defend it, against 
all odds, and at every hazard. 

Some apology, we feel, is due for having dwelt so long upon 
the man, when it is, in strictness of speech, with his doctrine 
that we are here alone concerned. We trust that this may be 
found in the fact, that he is at once the least known, and the 
best worth knowing of all logical writers. To return, however, 
to his work, — the only edition of this with which I am acquainted 
is that printed at Paris in the year 1530, 4to, and it is from 
this accordingly that I uniformly quote. This edition has not 
the title given above, but simply the following, — ^'' Larirentii 



APPENDIX. 97 

Vallce Romani De Dialectica, libri iii." In this work, as we have 
said, Valla allows the express quantification of the predicate in 
theorj, and to a certain, but very limited extent, adopts it in prac- 
tice. Before, however, referring to the passages* which contain 
the evidence of this, it may be worth while to look for a moment 
at what he says of Conversion. This is very curious and acute ; 
and though it does not explicitly bring out his doctrine of the pre- 
dicate, will yet very well serve as introductory thereto. In his 
chapter, " De Convertenda Enunciatione" he says as follows : — 
" Hie locus admonet ut aliqua de conversione dicamus : nam 
licet major atque amplior significatio praedicati fere sit quam 
subjecti, sicut ostendi ; non tamen amplius ac latius accipitur 
prcedicatum quam subjectum. Ideoque cum illo converti potest, 
ut * omnis homo est animal,' non utique totum genus animal, sed 
aliqua pars hujus generis j nam Cicero speciem partem generis 
vocat ; ergo aliqua pars animalis est in omni homine. Item ' quidam 
homo est animal,' scilicet est qucedampars animalis; ergo ' quse- 
dam pars animalis est quidam homo.' ' Omnis leo est rutilis,' 
' quidam leo est rutilis ;' hoc est, quod quisque leo, et quidam 
leo partem aliquam habet sive quandam rutili coloris, non ipsum 
omnino rutilum colorem ; ergo aliqua pars rutili coloris est in 
singulis leonibus, et quaedam in quodam. Idem intelligo de in- 
finite quod de universali, cum universaliter accipitur. Idem 
quoque de particulari singularique, cum particulariter singu- 
lariterque significat: nee aliter, cum totaliter accipitur, ut 
' homo est species animalis,* id est qucedam species animalis ; ergo 
' qucedam animalis species est homo.* In negatione ratio e diverse 
est, quando adest signum universale ; ut ' nuUus homo est 
satyrus,' id est ' nuUus homo non [?] est uUus satyrus ;' ergo 

* I may state at once that I do not profess to give all the references to 
this subject which may be found in Valla. I give only the passages which 
I marked in a former reading, undertaken without express reference to 
the doctrine of the predicate. The urgency of th(3 press is too great to al- 
low of my going through it carefully again with this end specially in view. 

G 



98 APPENDIX. 

' nullus satyrus non [?] est uUus homo.* Quando non adest, ut 

* homo non est satyrus,' id est, ' ullus homo^ ' ullus satyrus ;* ergo, 

* ullus satyrus non est ullus homo.' Quando per totalitatem 
loquimur, ut ' satyrus non est species hominis,' id est, ' ulla species 
hominis,' ergo ' ulla species hominis non est satyrus.'' Quando 
adest signum particulare singulareve, ut * nonnuUus piscis,' vel 
' hie piscis foetum enititur,' scilicet est aliquis ex illis piscibus qui 
foetum enituntur; ergo aliquis ex piscibus fa3tum enitentibus 
est aliquis, vel est hie. Item, ' ille piscis' vel ' hie piscis non est 
foetum enitens, sed ova pariens ;' videlicet ex iis qui foetum eni- 
tuntur, ergo aliquis piscis ex iis qui foetum enituntur, sed ova 
non pariunt, non est ille, vel non est hie piscis. ' Thales est 
unus ex septem sapientibus,' id est aliquis ex septem, ergo * ali- 
quis ex septem Thales.' ' Pythagoras non fuit e septem sapi- 
entibus,' id est ullus e septem, ergo ' ullus e septem non fuit 
Pythagoras.' " — De Dialectica, fol. 37. 

Valla has here manifestly penetrated into the true nature of 
conversion. His doctrine, in effect, is, that by explicating the 
proposition, the conversion is, in any case, a simple turning of 
the sentence. Thus, for example, when we say, " all man is 
animal," what do we mean ? Obviously, that all man is some 
animal, or a species of animal, or a certain species of animal ; 
therefore, " a certain species of animal is all man." In other 
words, that though the predicate notion is in general, absolutely 
considered, of wider extent than the subject notion, yet that 
when considered relatively in a proposition, its extent is always 
restricted to that of the notion with which it is connected ; so 
that by expressing this restriction, that is, by explicating the 
proposition, the subject and predicate are always convertible 
terms, and thus all conversion is necessarily simple. He accom- 
plishes this, it will be seen, by explicitly quantifying the predi- 
cate ; as, no man is a satyr — that is, any satyr. He has, how- 
ever, blundered in the example. He should have given ullus 
for nullus, or est for non est. 



APPENDIX. 99 

We pass on, however, to his more explicit judgment in this 
matter. In the third book of his Treatise, Valla considers the 
right of the predicate to the marks of quantification in a brief 
chapter devoted expressly to this subject. It is headed, " Dum 
signum applicatur prcedicato, dumque abest a toto syllogismo signum" 
and is as follows : — " Hactenus locuti sum us cum signum uni- 
versale applicatur suhjecto : quid cum applicatur^roe J?cato ? Certe 
pari ratione ; quae exerapla breviter subnectam, ' Tu amas omnes 
tuos cives, hi autem omnes sunt cives tui, ergo, tu amas hos 
omnes.* Hoc universaliter ; particulariter vero si assumas, * hie 
est civis tuus,' concludasque ' ergo, tu amas hunc ;' sive diverse 
exemplo, * Deus est ubique,' id est in omni loco, ' Tartarus est 
locus, ergo Deus est in Tartaro.' Hoc affirmative ; negative sic, 
* tu nullum civem tuum, sive nuUos cives tuos amas, hi omnes 
sunt cives tui, ergo neminem vel nullum horum amas.' Item, ' in 
nuUo loco scelerato est Deus, Tartarus talis est, ergo non est in 
eo Deus.' Exempla quae attuli per signa universalia, si toUamus 
signa, eandem vim habebunt redacta ad infinita, ut superiore 
libro probavi ; ut, Deus non est in loco scelerato, sive in locis 
sceleratis, subauditur enim. ullo, sive ullis; tu non amas cives 
tuos, suhintelligitur omnes. Idem fit in superioribus exemplis, 
ac caeteris omnibus." — Cap. xlvii. fol. 62. 

Here the quantification of the predicate is explicitly allowed ; 
and though the examples given of its lawfulness be incorrect, the 
rules of the common doctrine are falsified. For these examples 
are affirmative syllogisms of the second figure, contrary to the law 
that all valid reasonings in that figure must be negative. It is 
also further shown in this chapter that the quantity of the pre- 
dicate is invariably a determinate one, and that when not so ex- 
pressed, it is nevertheless always understood. 

Valla here accordingly allows the quantification in theory, 
elsewhere he follows it in practice. Besides the examples given 
above, I remember two other passages in which he does this. 

The first is, when speaking of subcontraries, he employs the 



100 APPENDIX. 

express quantification to prove that these cannot both be false. 
The passage is as follows : — 
J " Quocirca propria et pene sola subcontrarietas est in pro- 
nominibus ac propriis nominibus, nunquam (ut dixi) utraque 
parte vera. Quo magis illorum confutatur opinio, quibus pla- 
cuit duas aliquando subcontrarias simul esse falsas, vhi eorum 
prcedicatis adest signum universale ; ut ' Plato est omne animal,' 
' Plato est nullum animal.' Neque enim sunt verse subcontrarias 
quarum secunda non negat quod prior affirmat. Habet itaque ilia 
affirmativa, ' Plato est omne animal,' suam negativam, ' Plato 
non est omne animal;' et hsec negativa suam affirmativam, 'Plato 
est aliquod ammal,' quia ullum dicere non possumus." — Cap. xxxv. 
fol. 48. The whole passage is longer, and the quantified predi- 
cate is used in illustration of the same point to the end of the 
chapter ; but the above extract may suffice to illustrate this use. 
The second passage is contained in a brief but important 
chapter, headed, ^^ Syllogismi per totum et partem." The two last 
sentences contain the specific examples, but the whole chapter 
is well worth quoting, and the more so, since in some of the 
earlier examples also the predicate is quantified. It is as fol- 
lows : — 

" Similis ratio in* toto et parte, quae in genere et specie ; quas 

* Valla seems somewhat strangely to employ the terms whole and part, 
exclusively in relation to physical wholes and parts. In this chapter, accord- 
ingly, under the general head of whole and part, he confines his attention 
entirely to these, without making any reference to the wholes and parts 
which had been commonly discriminated as logical and metaphysical. To 
the logical or extensive whole, indeed, no express reference was necessary, 
since all ordinary syllogistic reasonings (his own amongst the rest) pro- 
ceeded in this quantity, it being the Only one formally recognised in the 
science. To the metaphysical whole he himself refers elsewhere. In a 
previous chapter, devoted to the consideration of the order of the syllogistic 
parts, he gives an example of a reasoning in the metaphysical or compre- 
hensive whole, and very sagaciously asks, why the syllogism does not pro- 
ceed in this order, from the individual or species to the genus — from the 
narrower to the wider notion? " What is the reason," says he, " that we 
may not construct a syllogism thus — ' Socrates is man ; but all man is 



APPENDIX. 101 

exempla brevissime subjungam. Prima forma erit haec, * Tota 
Italia est in Europa; tota Campania est in Italia; ergo tota 
Campania est in Europa.' Altera quae hujus particularis est, 
hsec erit, ' Tota Campania est in Italia ; Neapolis est pars Cam- 
paniaj ; ergo est in Italia.' Terti^ negativa, haec, ' nihil Italiaa 
est in Asia ; tota Campania est in Italia ; ergo nihil Campaniae 
est in Asia.' Quarta quse hujus particularis est, hsec, * Nihil 
^gypti est in Africa; Alexandria est aliquid -^gypti; si velars 
sive joars qucedam ^gypti ; ergo non est in Africa.' Nam ' nihil,' 
idem est quod ' non aliquid,' sive ' non quiddam,' id est non uUa 
res, sive non quaedam res, quemadmodum superius docui ; sicut 

* omne ' et * omnia ' substantivum, id est omnis vel omnes res. 

" Quando adest prcedicato signum, hsec quoque sint exempla; 

* totum corpus anima nutrit; toti ungues sunt ^ar5 corporis; ergo 
totos ungues anima nutrit.' Vel assumendo particulariter, quae 
est secunda forma ; * hie unguis est pars corporis ; ergo hunc 
unguem anima nutrit.' 

" Item negative : ' Nihil corporis anima negligit ; toti ungues 
sunt aliquid, vel pars corporis, sive hie unguis est aliquid, vel 
pars qucedam corporis; ergo nihil unguium, aut non hunc unguem 
anima negligit." — Cap. xlix. fol. 62. 

It will be seen that in these last examples the rules of the 
common doctrine are again falsified ; for they contain syllogisms 
of the second figure, some of which are affirmative, and others 
particular. The examples may, indeed, be objected to. 

Such is the doctrine of Laurentius Valla on the point in ques- 
tion ; and it will be seen from the extracts we have given, that 
he recognises (though appreciating very partially and imper- 
fectly its significance) the express quantification of the predicate. 

animal, therefore Socrates is animal;' ascending as it were by certain 
steps, Socrates the individual, man the species, animal the genus?" This 
vras in effect asking, though he himself probably did not see the full mean- 
ing of his own question, why the syllogism in logic did not proceed in the 
whole of comprehension as well as in that of extension ; a wise question, which 
was not replied to, by subsequent logicians, and remains still unanswered. 



] 02 APPENDIX. 

The two next witnesses whose evidence T have to quote in 
favour of a quantified predicate, have this much in common — 
that they were contemporaries — were both men of great learn- 
ing and ability — both acute writers on logic — both well and 
widely known in their own day, and that their names and works 
have long since passed into utter forgetfulness. It may, I be- 
lieve, be added, that I am the first in modern times to have 
directed any attention to their writings ; — they are Jodocus T. 
Isenach of Erfurt, and Ambrosius Leo of Venice. Of these we 
shall take the latter first, since, as a fellow-countryman, his 
evidence will naturally enough follow that of Laurentius Valla. 

Ambrosius Leo* was a physician at Venice, and flourished 

* Ambrosius Leo, called fi:om Nola the place of his birth Nolanus, was 
one of that noble band of men, distinguished for varied genius and scholar- 
ship, whose labours towards the close of the fifteenth, and commencement 
of the sixteenth centuries, conferred on Venice a name of imperishable re- 
nown. He was, as stated in the text, for many years a physician in that 
city, but like several of his craft at that time, was not only skilled in medi- 
cine as a physician, but also profound as a philosopher, erudite as a scholar, 
and accomplished in all worthy and noble arts as a gentleman. His very 
name, however, seems to have been long since forgotten, and his works to 
have passed into complete oblivion. For a time, indeed, these seem to have 
been kept in some remembrance, since they appear in some of the older 
catalogues of distinguished works and authors. Thus, Simler, in his epitome 
of the Bibliotheca of Conrad Gesner, says, " Ambrosius Leo Nolanus scripsit 
opus quaestionum, turn aliis plerisque in rebus cognoscendis, tum maxime 
in philosophia et medicinae scientia. Impressum Venetiis 1523. Idem edi- 
dit Castigationes in Averroem, qui liber magnus est, ac totius philosophiae 
thesaurus. Sunt enim quasi commentarii quidam, ordine in singulos Aris- 
totelis libros. Excusae Venetiis 1517. Actuarii Johannis Zachariae fihi de 
urinis libros septem, ex Graecis Latinos fecit. Impressi Basileae apud Cra- 
tandrum 1528." — (Epitome Bibliothecce Conradi Gesneri per Josiam iSim- 
lerum. Tiguri 1555.) 

And Vossius adds to this comment the following : — " Anno 1517, ac 
deinceps, non exiguae eruditionis laudem reportavit Ambrosius Leo No- 
lanus, vir Latine Graecequ« doctissimus, philosophus idem, ac medicus in- 
signis. Hie praBter ea, quae a Simlero memorantur, reliquit libros tres de 
Nola non incuriosfe perscriptos : quorum saepius meminit Leander Albertus 
in descriptione Italiae : imprimis quo loco agit de Nola."-— (De Hist. Lat. 
L. iii. c. xii.) 

He appears to have soon lost even such distinction as this, for his name 



APPENDIX. 103 

during the latter part of the fifteenth and the beginning of 
the sixteenth century. He was the author of several smaller 
treatises, but his greatest production is a work against Averroes, 

does not appear in any of the later catalogues of a similar kind which I 
have been able to examine. Indeed, for some time after having obtained 
his work against Averroes, I could not find out who or what he was. At 
length, however, I discovered that he was a friend of Erasmus, the latter 
having become known to Leo during his stay in Venice, and having after- 
wards corresponded with him. In the Epistles of Erasmus, accordingly, 
there are a few scattered references to Ambrosius Leo, and to this source 
I am mainly indebted for the few particulars of his history with which I 
am acquainted. 

The first mention of Leo which we meet with in the Epistles, is in a letter 
written to Erasmus by John Watson, and dated from Cambridge in the 
month of August 1515. Speaking of a recent visit to Venice, Watson says, 
" I conversed almost daily with the physician Ambrosius Leo in the apo- 
thecary's shop at the sign of the Coral. I remembered him from what you 
had said of him, in connexion with the proverb, Tis ^/a vcttrut. He did 
many things for me, for your sake." The reference here is to the " Adagia" 
of Erasmus, who, in his commentary on the proverb quoted above, refers to 
Ambrosius Leo in the following manner : — " Etenim cum hsec meis illinirem 
commentariis, forte fortuna supervenit Ambrosius. Leo Nolanus philoso- 
phus hujus tempestatis eximius, et in pervestigandis disciplinarum mys- 
teriis incredibili quadam diligentia solertiaque praeditus ; neque vero medio- 
criter exercitatus evolvendis et excutiendis utriusque linguae scriptoribus." 
— (Adagia Erasmi, in h. 1.) 

In the summer of the year 1518, Leo himself writes to Erasmus, and after 
referring to a small work which he had written on the history of his native 
town and district, Nola, and to other labours in which he had been engaged, 
tells him that he has completed a great work, divided into forty-six books, 
peripatetic in doctrine, and written against Averroes. Erasmus writes a long 
and very interesting letter in reply, almost a twelvemonth afterwards, in 
which he calls to remembrance the pleasant intercourse he had had with 
Leo and his brother scholars at Venice, and congratulates him upon the 
happy fortune which had cast his lot among the most learned scholars 
and in the first city of the world : — " Quo minus expectatae venerunt tuae 
liter ae, Ambrosi doctissime, hoc mihi plus voluptatis attulerunt. Sic enim 
mihi totam illam nostras consuetudinis memoriam renovarunt, ut eas legens 
apud Venetos mihi viderer agere, veteres amicos meos tueri coram et am- 
plecti, Aldum, Baptistam Egnatium, Hieronymum Aleandrum, M. Musu- 
rum, te cum primis amicorum omnium suavissimum. Agnosco lepidissimos 
tuos mores in epistola tua, quae tota jocis ac salibus scatet. te felicem, 
cui contigerit in pulcherrimis studiis, et in urbe facile omnium magnificen- 
tissima, inter patricios et eruditos viros consenescere!" 



104 APPElS'DIX. 

entitled " Ambrosii Nolani Castigationes, adversus Averroem" 
This was first published at Venice in the year 1517, and again 
at the same place in 1532. The first part of the work is occu- 

He afterwards expresses his earnest wish that the book against Averroes 
were published. 

We hear no more of Leo in the Epistles till the year 1528, in which year 
he seems to have died, for in the month of October in that year, Erasmus 
writing to a friend, says : — " Ambrosium Nolanum nobis ac studiis ereptum 
doleo, sed quandoquidem omnibus semel est moriendum, ille nee vixit in- 
Qommode multos annos, nee infehciter mortuus est." — {Opera omnia Erasmi. 
Ed. Clerici. Lugd. VoL iii., pp. 161, 334, 506, 594.) 

The most considerable of the works of Ambrosius Leo, both in value and 
extent, is evidently this one against Averroes. It is a large folio volume, 
containing upwards of 1100 pages ; and comprises within itself, as Simler 
says, a perfect storehouse of philosophy. He follows Averroes pertina- 
oiously into almost all subjects, and seems equally at home in logical, mathe- 
matical, physical, or metaphysical discussions. I speak, of course, only from 
a limited knowledge of the work, having only consulted it in relation to 
particular subjects in which I felt specially interested ; but the acuteness 
and knowledge it displays seem equally balanced and both great. The 
reading of Leo, indeed, appears to have been not only very extensive, but 
critical and exact ; he is critically read (as were all the learned men of his 
time) in ancient Greek philosophy ; and what was a less common accom- 
plishment, seems also quite familiar with all the later Greek and Latin com- 
mentators. The wide reading and varied sagacity which it displays, as well 
as the size of the work itself, are quite sufficient to explain the declaration 
he playfully makes in writing to Erasmus, that he did not waste away his 
nights in bed. 

This volume is, as I have said, now of the greatest rarity. The biogra- 
phers of Averroes, as far as I can find, are ignorant of its existence. The 
ordinary bibliographers make no reference to it. It is not, so far as I can 
ascertain, in any of the public libraries of the country. And what, per- 
haps, is a stronger proof of its rarity than anything else, and proves it to 
be as little known on the continent as in this country, is the fact, that a 
man so curiously and widely read as Morhof, should not only never 
have seen it, but expresses his belief that it was never published. In his 
jPolyhistor, Morhof, while referri^ig to the notices in the letters of Erasmus 
that such a work was in preparation, says, at the same time, that he does 
not believe that it was ever really published. 

In abatement, however, of the statement, as to the utter obUvion into 
which the name of Ambrosius Leo has fallen, I should say that it is still 
remembered in connexion with his small work on the history of Nola, which 
is not very rare, and is still, I see, referred to in connexion with the history 
of the Italian states. 



APPENDIX. 105 

pied with a detailed criticism of the commentary of Averroes 
on the Organon ; and in this he examines, among other state- 
ments, what Averroes says on the passage in the book touching 
enunciation relative to the quantification of the predicate. We 
have already given the passage from Averroes. Leo joins issue 
with him on this statement ; he takes the case which is also 
taken by Averroes, but not referred to by Aristotle, — that in 
which the predicate is quantified particularly, — and he defends 
against Averroes the validity and usefulness of such quantifi- 
cation. The passage in which he does this is a somewhat long 
one ; but as the rarity of the work is such as to preclude any- 
thing like general reference, it may be worth while to give it 
entire. It ought to be premised, however, that the text is in 
such a state, partly through carelessness in printing, partly 
through excessive and strange contraction, that the making it 
out, in many cases, is a kind of divination. It is as follows : — 
" Aliud est non recipere rem, et aliud non recipere divisionem 
rei; ut aliud est non recipere esse genus, id quod dicimus pe- 
destre, et aliud non recipere divisionem pedestris in bipes et 
multipes; unde Aristoteles genera facillime recipit, divisiones 
vero eorum facile non recipit. Non igitur, si enunciationes quae 
in praedicato habent clausuram non dividuntur, etiam non reci- 
piuntur, nam existere possunt etiam sine divisione ; sed potius si 
non recipiuntur, non etiam dividuntur : quamobrem Aristoteles 
monet non esse recipiendas, non autem non esse dividendas. 
Idema ptius in primoPriorum docuit. ' Ut similiter,' inquit, ' eli- 
gendum, et quae ipsum sequitur tota, per eandem causam; ipsum 
autem quod sequitur, non esse sumendum totum sequi. Dico 
autem, ut in homine esse omne animal, aut in musica omnem dis- 
ciplinam; sed tamen simpliciter sequi, quemadmodum antea 
monuimus. Etenim inutile alterum et impossibile, ut omnem 
hominem esse omne animal, vel omnem justitiam omne bonum ; sed 
cui alterum consequens est, in illo omne dicitur.' Haec ille. Quare 
ab arte repelluntur tales propositiones ut ineptas et malae ; non 



106 APPENDIX. 

autem non numerantur, vel dividuntur, propter eas causas : nam 
liac via qua ivit Averroes, non excludere moneremur, quas ex- 
cludere velle ars ipsa comperitur. Quinetiam ubi legisset Aver- 
roes haec Aristotelis verba : ' Sed universale prsedicatum uni- 
versaliter prsedicare, non est verum ; nulla enim affirmatio vera 
erit, in qua praidicatum fuerit universaliter universale, ut, est 
omnis homo omne animal :'* vidissetque nihil dictum esset ah Aris- 
totele de nota particularitatis, quonam modo se haberet, si etiam 
prsedicato termino addita fuisset. Yoluit eum locum, veluti 
mancura, exponendo perficere ; dicens de omni clausura, ut 
si universalis clausura est addita prasdicato, enunciatio erit 
falsa, si particularis, erit superflua. Aristoteles vero, neque 
hie, neque in loco Priorum prasdicto, meminit particularitatis, 
atque superfluitatem earn non particular! tribuit, sed universal!. 
Quare duobus modis videtur Averroes aberrasse. Tu vero si 
melius fueris interpretatus, videbis clarius aberrasse Averroem, 
nam hoc in loco Aristoteles exacte dixit. Namque si ejusmodi 
universalis cum praedicato quod universaliter praedicatur, est 
falsa semper, nullamque talem esse arti aptam, tenendum est. 
Quare, si universalis ea ..ejecta est, etiam ea universalis cum 
praedicato quod particulariter prcedicatur ejicienda est, vel si vera 
sit ? Non enim opponi potest illi, quod in arte ipsa non habet 
locum ; prsesertim quum in hoc loco omnis enunciatio conside- 
rata in oppositione collocatur. Quinetiam neque usquequaque 
nota particularitatis addita praedicato superflua est, neque falsam 
reddit enunciationem. Dicentes enim, omnis substantia quoddam 
ens est, vere dicimus ; atque si determinamus ita dicentes, non 
etiam superflua erit ea additio. Dicentes enim subsiantiam esse 
ens, verum dicimus, non quia ipsum ens, usquequaque inest 
praedicato substantiae, sed quia pars entis est, quse de sub- 
stantia praedicatur. Quod, ubi determinantes, significamus, non 
inepte facimus et superflue ; monemus enim ita, ne per multa 
vagetur audientis animus. Quamobrem in more est Aristoteli uti 
hujusmodi genere loquendi, cum ea nota addita prcedicato. Veluti 



APPENDIX. 107 

in primo De Moribus, ' Omnis ars/ inquit, * et omnis doctrina 
atque actio, similiter et electio, bonum quoddam expetere videtur;' 
et in sexto, 'Divinaehae omnes,' inquit, ^uuujn quoddam, genus- 
que quodpiam exceptum sumentes, de hoc, non de ente simplici- 
ter, neque ut est ens, considerationes siias efficiunt.' Quamobrem 
et si notsi particulantatis addita prsedicato faciat enunciationem 
ineptam in oppositionibus ; non u?quequaque tamen inutilis est, 
atque idcirco Aristoteles de ea nihil locutus est. Nam quoad 
oppositionem, de ea determinatum est — non esse recipiendam ; 
quo vero ad modura loquendi determinate — non esse rejiciendam 
putavit, sed non rejiciens illam admisit. Quod si de nota universali- 
tatis addita praidicato, qua swperfiua est, locutus est in Prioribus 
Analyticis, hie vero non locutus est, nihil mirum est; hie enim, de 
oppositionibus enunciationum disputaturus, considerat eas enun- 
ciationes, quoe in eis clausuram (?) ponunt, quae vero inesse non 
potest in oppositione, ilia rejecta manet, nee oportet amplius con- 
siderare et de rejecta, an sit in ea superfluitas. In priore vero 
Priorum prohibetur nota universalitaiis in preedicato^ turn quia est 
impossibilis propositio, tum quia si esset vera, esset inutilis illi, 
qui facultatem qujerit medii inveniendi ; quippe quod ei satis 
sit, simpliciter prasdicatum referre. — His ita se habentibus, patet 
male dixisse Averroem de nota particulantatis, addita prasdicato, 
tum quia non semper est superflua, tum quia superfluitas quae 
spectabat ad universaliter prasdicatum, transtulit ad particulariter 
prsedicatum." — {Castigationes, &c., in lib. De Jnterp., fol. 46.) 

This is, on the whole, the most elaborate and acute criticism 
on this passage from Aristotle which I have met with ; and it 
quite triumphantly establishes against Averroes the particular 
quantification of the predicate. The way, too, in which Aris- 
totle himself is made to uphold this view is somewhat ingenious: 
— that since, on the one hand, he does not reject it in theory, 
and on the other actually adopts it in practice, he must be held 
to have received and approved of the particular quantification 
of the predicate. Leo is very careful, while rejecting the inter- 



108 APPENDIX. 

pretation of Averroes, not to oppose Aristotle ; and I am half dis- 
posed to think that he was led into the adoption and defence of 
this particular quantification, as much through a determination 
to oppose Averroes when this was possible, without directly- 
contradicting Aristotle, as from any previous insight into the 
question. His opposition has, however, in this case, led him 
into the partial adoption of a truth, which few of the commen- 
tators on Aristotle have at all perceived, but which he has so 
far very well stated and defended. 

Jodocus Isenach,* or Justus Jodocus of Eisenach, was pro- 

* Justus Jodocus Trutvetter Isenach, or as he was more commonly styled, 
Dr. Jodocus Isenach, was one of those devoted adherents to the ancient sys- 
tem of things, who formed so numerous a class m Germany at the begin- 
ning of the sixteenth century. Monastic scholars they were, for the most 
part, who were hostile to the Reformation, because they discerned in it a 
reaction against scholasticism, rather than because it menaced the imity of 
the Catholic Church. In the seats of learning, in Germany in particular, in- 
deed, the battle of the Reformation was fought rather on the ground of 
letters than on that of religion ; and when a religious plea was ostensibly 
urged in defence by those in authority, it was generally only as a mask under 
which they could more eflfectually attack their opponents. By these men 
the true faith was identified with an ignorance of letters and a knowledge 
of scholasticism. Those, therefore, who sought to disparage the latter, and 
to introduce the former, were necessarily heretics, and were persecuted as 
such. The fierceness of this persecution, indeed, combined with the ob- 
stinacy of those in power in clinging to a system now obsolete, deter- 
mined a crisis in the struggle for improvement which had long been gradu- 
ally going on, and hastened the complete reformation which soon followed. 
They would admit no innovation whatever in the existing system of instruc- 
tion ; they resolved not to modify in any particular their philosophical faith 
or teaching ; and by thus blindly refusing to give up anything, lost all. 
To this class, as we have said, Isenach belonged ; and to this it is probably 
to be attributed that so few particulars can now be gleaned of his history. 
Hardly any amount of individual genius was sufficient to save a single 
one of the vanquished in that warfare, from the oblivion into which all 
speedily fell. To those who were interested in the revival of letters, and 
the general progress of the Reformation, it became almost a duty to forget 
the names and reject the works of the abettors of ignorance and barbarism. 
Amidst the general enthusiasm which the new life had inspired, few were 
sufficiently interested in those who had sought to crush it at its birth, to 
redeem their names from forgetfulness, or hand down any record of what- 
ever virtues they possessed, to posterity. 



APPENDIX. 109 

fessor of theology and philosophy at Erfurt during the latter 
part of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century ; 
and if the slender accounts which I have been able to obtain of 
him be correct, was afterwards called to teach in the new uni- 

Accordingly, with the exception of the very few particulars mentioned in 
the text, no specific biographical account of Isenach is to be obtained from 
any of the ordinary sources of information. The particulars there given 
are obtained from the Zedlerian Lexicon, which being one of the older en- 
cyclopaedias, devotes six lines to his memory ; — that being, I believe, the 
longest biography of Isenach to be found. 

I have obtained, however, if not some additional particulars of his his- 
tory, at least some materials for forming an estimate of his character, from 
another source, viz., the Letters of Luther, which contain some interesting 
references to him. Isenach may indeed be said to have been specially con- 
nected with the Reformation in Germany, since Luther himself was first his 
pupil, and afterwards, I was about to say, his murderer, but I ought rather 
to say, the cause of his death. Many grave accusations have been brought 
at different times against Luther, but none that I am aware of have ever 
laid this particular crime to his charge. He was notorious, indeed, for the 
summary manner in which he dealt with his opponents ; but it was still 
not exactly in this literal sense that he was in the habit of destroying them. 
He was known to be a mighty man — mighty in the practical power which 
force of will and fiery enthusiasm bestow — mighty in the Scriptures — 
mighty, for that matter, in bodily strength ; but it was, nevertheless, of the 
former kind of force rather than of the latter that he was used to avail him- 
self in controversy; so that there would seem no just ground on which to urge 
such a serious charge. It is one, however, to which Luther himself in part 
pleads guilty. How far he really was so must be judged of from the sequel. 
Luther was, as we have said, the pupil of Isenach. He was placed imder 
his care, as it would appear, by his parents, in the year 1498, and con- 
tinued for four years to attend his teaching at Erfurt. The two first of 
these were occupied with grammar, rhetoric, and other elementary studies. 
The third was devoted to logic ; but he does not seem to have displayed 
any particular aptitude for the detail of that science, as he certainly does 
not afterwards recall the time thus spent with any particular satisfaction. 
After leaving Erfurt, Luther seems still to have kept up some communica- 
tion, more or less direct, with Isenach. In particular, he seems to have 
been very urgent with him on the subject of scholasticism. Directly, by 
personal converse and by letter, and indirectly through his friends, Luther 
laboured earnestly and incessantly to modify his views as to the value of 
dialectic in theological training, and to abate his zeal in the interest of scho- 
lasticism. He was often, indeed, carried away by the strength of his feelings 
on these subjects ; and what was intended as remonstrance became down- 
right and stern denunciation. It was hardly to be supposed that Isenach 



110 APPENDIX. 

versity of Wittemberg. If this were the case, he must have 
been a distinguished man, since none but the best men of the 
time were called to occupy posts in that university. That he 
really was so is confirmed by the manner in which he is referred 

would be prepared to listen calmly to these denunciations of his favourite 
studies. He regarded them indeed with the greatest grief and indigna- 
tion, — feelings which deepened in proportion as Luther's zeal increased, 
and were aggravated by the reflection, that this contemptuous rejection of 
what he held most valuable proceeded from one of his own pupils. This 
was indeed that " most unkindest cut of all," that went far to sever the 
thread of his earthly life : so that Luther, on hearing of his death, writes 
to a friend that he fears he is responsible for having hastened that event, — 
so grievously had Isenach taken to heart his rash and profane condemna- 
tion of the sacred writings of the schools ; in short, that he had died of his 
(Luther's) contempt of scholasticism : — " Hac hora," says Luther, writing 
to Spalatin, December 1519, " ex socero Lucas [Cranach] pictoris audivi, 
excessisse e vivis D. Doctorem Isenacensem Erfordiae. Timeo et me causam 
acceleratae suae mortis ftiisse ; tantum aegritudinis fuit animo ejus ex meis, 
ut dicitur, profanitatibus et temeritatibus, quibus scholasticam theologiam 
doluit incredibiUter contemni. Dominus misereatur animae illi. Amen." 
— [Luther's Briefe, Ed. De Wette, vol. i. p. 373.) 

How far this was likely to have been the case will be better seen from the 
following extracts, which I translate from Luther's letters, on account of 
their interest as illustrating the character of Luther, of the times, and of 
Isenach. 

The first extract is from a letter written in February 1616, to John 
Lange, Prior of the Augustinians at Erfurt, inclosing a letter which he had 
written to Isenach against the existing course of study. It is as follows : — 

" I send you this my letter to the excellent D. Jodocus Isenach, full of 
discussions against logic, philosophy, and theology, — that is to say, of blas- 
phemies and maledictions against Aristotle, Porphyry, and the Sententiaries 
— the accursed studies, to wit, of the age. For so it will be interpreted by 
those who have vowed, not for five years, as the Pythagoreans, but con- 
stantly and to all eternity, to keep silent as the dead — to believe all things 
— to be obedient listeners — and never, even in joke, to venture a skirmish, 
or to breathe the slightest word against Aristotle and the Sentences. For 
what will not be believed as truths by those who have such faith in Aris- 
totle — who, himself the most caliminious of all calumniators, attributes to 
others things so absurd, that an ass or a stone could not possibly hold their 
peace at them ? 

" See to it, therefore, that you carefully deliver these to that same excel- 
lent man, and be sure to smell out what judgment he or any of the others 
may give concerning me in this matter, and let me know. For I desire 
nothing more earnestly than to immask that actor who has so befooled the 



APPENDIX. Ill 

to by Luther^ who speaks of him as ^' princeps dialecticorum 
nostra aetate." Isenach was the author of several works on 
various branches of philosophy ; his logical treatises are, how- 
ever, two, a larger and a smaller one. The former was en- 
Church with his Greek guise, and to make his shame manifest to all, had I 
only leisure. 

" But the greatest sorrow to me is, that I am compelled to see so many 
of our brother monks, endowed with excellent genius for all worthy studies, 
waste their lives and lose their labour amidst such filth as this ; nor do the 
universities cease to condemn and burn good books, while at the same time 
they dictate, or rather dream out bad ones. 

" I wish that Magister Usingen, and Isenach to boot, would abstain, in 
fact, contain themselves, for a while from these labours. My repositories 
are all filled [with writings] against their publications, which I am con- 
vinced are worse than useless ; and all others would think as I do, were 
they not (as I have said) laid under an obligation of silence." — (Pp. 15, 16.) 

The second extract is from a letter written in May 1518 to Spalatin, in 
which Luther gives him an accoxmt, after his return to Wittemberg, of the 
good reception which he met with from the Count Palatine at Heidelberg, 
and of his conferences with Isenach and Usingen. He says : — 

" To the Erfurthians my theology is a dish of death in the pot — re- 
warmed; and Dr. Isenach made himself remarkable at Heidelberg, by 
prefixing to all my theses a black theta, [a mark of reprobation,] accord- 
ing also his written testimonial, that he considered me an ignoramus in 
logic, not to say divinity. 

" I would have disputed likewise among them, [those of Erfurt, to wit, 
on his return from Heidelberg,] had not the Litany days* prevented. I 
had, however, a private conference with Doctor Isenach ; and if I did no- 
thing more, made him understand that he was unable to prove his own 
positions or to confute mine; nay, that their opinions, [or perhaps sen- 
tences, in which case the word will refer to those of Lombard,] were that 
beast which is said to devour itself. But the fable falls on deaf ears : they 
obstinately stick to their distinctions, confessing, howbeit, that these are 
established upon no authority, except what they call the dictate of natural 
reason, which in our eyes, who preach no other light than Christ Jesus — 
the true and only illumination — appears simply as a night of chaos. 

" With Dr. Usingen I strove more than with any other (for he was my 
companion in the carriage) to persuade him of the truth. But I know not 
whether I made any way ; I left him in thought and wonderment : so 
strong is prejudice when we have grown old in evil doctrines. But the 
minds of all the young were diametrically opposed to these veterans ; and 

» In the old uniyersities there were certain holidays on which the prelections were i)ut a 
stop to, and certain others on which not only the prelections, but also the academical dis- 
putations were intermitted. The days on which the Litany was used marked the latter. 



1J2 APPENDIX. 

titled, " Summa Totius Logicce" and was printed at Erfurt in the 
year 1501. The latter, which seems to be an abridgment of the 
previous work, is entitled, " Epitome seu Breviarium Dialecticce" 
It is without any date, but was probably published not more 

my hope is good, that as Christ passed to the Gentiles when rejected of the 
Jews, so now His true theology which these opinionative seniors repudiate, 
may be embraced by the young." — (Pp. Ill, 112.) 

The third extract is from another letter, written in the following month 
of the same year, to Spalatin, touching the value of dialectic in theological 
studies : — 

" You ask, how far I think dialectic is useful to theology ; verily I do 
not see how it can be other than poison to a true divine. Grant that it 
may perhaps be useful as a sport or exercise for youthful minds, still in 
sacred letters, where simple faith and Divine illumination are to be awaited, 
the whole matter of the syllogism is to be left below, even as Abraham, 
when about to sacrifice, left the youths with the asses. And this, John 
Reuchlin, in the second book of his Cabbala, sufficiently confirms. For if 
any dialectic be necessary, that given by nature is enough, by which 
a man is led to compare one belief with another, and so to arrive at the 
truth. I have not unfrequently engaged in discussions with my friends 
as to the profit to be gained from this so sedulous study of philosophy and 
dialectic, and truly with one consent we have marvelled at, yea, bewailed 
over, the calamity of minds, finding in these studies no help, but rather a 
whole flood of hinderance. 

" Finally, I have written to Doctor Isenach, the prince of dialecticians 
(as it seems) in this age, insisting most strongly on the same thing, which 
indeed cannot be denied, to wit, that dialectic cannot help theology, but 
rather hinders it, because the same grammatical terms are used in a widely 
different sense ia theology and in logic. How, therefore, I say, can dia- 
lectic be of any use, when, after I enter on theology, the same term which 
in logic signified such a thing, I am compelled to reject, and to receive in 
another sense ? And that I may not multiply words, take, for example, the 
following : — Body, in the tree of Porphyry, signifies a thing made up of 
matter and form ; but such body cannot belong to man, seeing that in the 
Scriptures our body signifies matter only, not also /orw*, — as where it is 
said, ' Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.' 
Farther, I instance the absurd statement, that an angel is neither rational 
nor irrational ; as also, that it is of no use to the Scriptures for a man to 
be called sensitive, rational, corporeal, animated ; and briefly, the whole of 
that arrangement of the tree of Porphyry, I have said, and still say, is more 
trivial than an old woman's fancy or a sick man's dream, and justly, there- 
fore, is it called Porphyrean, (that is bloody,) from the Christian souls, to 
wit, which it has slain. 

" The good man took it much to heart, and affirmed that my sophisms 



APPENDIX. 113 

than a year or two after the former, since its press-work mani- 
festly identifies it with the earliest productions of the sixteenth 

could not be credited even by myself. But these worthies are the bondmen 
of Aristotle and Porphyry, and consider not vhat is said, but simply vho 
says it. Hence it comes that they are not able to understand a single 
chapter of Scripture, much less to render it. 

" If, therefore, you accept my judgment, dialectic, of whatever use it be 
in other things, in sacred letters only does harm. I myself have observed 
the doctrines and rules of the scholastic theology, and have designedly en- 
deavoured to treat the inspired writings and those of the Fathers of the 
Church according to them ; but (may God condemn me if I lie) I recoiled 
in horror from the confusion, worse than that of Tartarus, [which this treat- 
ment caused.] But I will make the same attempt on you when we meet, 
and shall then detail, what you now briefly hear." — (Pp. 127, J 28.) 

These extracts are very characteristic of Luther — of his honesty — his 
thorough out-spokenness — his utter want of sympathy with the ancient 
barbarism, and his fiery zeal for its destruction. When we remember, how- 
ever, that such deliverances as these were addressed to a man of whose 
character and history the only remaining record is, that he was a " lover 
of the scholastic theology;" and remember also, that they came with the 
bitter aggravation of having been given by one who had enjoyed the best 
opportunities of knowing the worth of the things he despised, since he had 
heard theu' value expounded by the ablest lips — the case certainly assumes 
a very grave aspect ; and one can hardly wonder that Luther should have 
felt some misgivings as to his innocence in the matter. On the somewhat 
extravagant hypothesis, that such a catastrophe was possible to the abet- 
tors of scholasticism, there is here amply enough to explain a broken 
heart ; and certainly the mildest jury that ever was empannelled could not 
have acquitted Luther of manslaughter. 

The works of Isenach are now altogether forgotten. This smaller one 
on logic is the only one that I have ever seen. My copy is quite perfect, 
but contains no date, printer's name, or place of printing, nor has it catch- 
words or paging of any kind. Its title is curious, and (except the pimc- 
tuation) is as follows : — 

" Epitome sen Breviarium Dialecticae, hoc est, disputatricis scientise. 
Iterum jam recusum; planiori siquidem, et praeceptorum, et exemplorum 
filo. 

" Per D[octorem] Judocum Issennachenum. 

" niitium Empturienti. 

" Non sum, Lector, Breviarium Romanum Moguntinum, aut id genus 
aliud, quo sacri Deo flamines supplicia fundunt; sed Logicae, quo pueri 
prima ejus rudimenta haurire poterunt. Eme modo ; non dices olim, quod 
Calcearius Romanus de Corvo suo, — Opera, et impensa periit." 

Then follow a dozen of verses by Daripinus, Poet and Orator Laureate, 
which occupy the rest of the title-page. 

H 



114 APPENDIX. 

century. This is the only work of Isenach's with which I am 
acquainted ; but the general knowledge and acuteness which it 
displays, certainly go far to vindicate the justice of the title 
which Luther bestows upon him ; and to prove that he was not 
only an accomplished logician, but what is far more rare, an 
independent thinker in the science. It proves clearly, among 
other things, that he was familiar with the use of a quantified 
predicate ; but what precise value he attached to it, or how far 
he really employed it in the science, it is extremely difficult 
from the work to determine. This difficulty arises mainly from 
the circumstance, that this treatise being simply designed as an 
introductory one, the longer, more novel, and abstruse discus- 
sions are left out of it, and we are referred for them to the 
larger work. This is the case with those which relate to the 
quantification of the predicate. When we come fairly upon 
the subject, and hope to have it fully discussed, we are dis- 
appointed in this, and get instead a quiet reference to the opus 
niajus, which to those who only possess the opus minus, and have 
no access to the other, is provoking enough. Quite sufficient, 
however, remains in this smaller work* to establish the fact, 

* This work, though relatively less, is not absolutely small. It is a 
quarto volume of some thickness, printed very closely, in the most con- 
tracted style of the most contracting era of black-letter printing. In this 
ipespect it is sometimes worse even than the work of Leo, three letters being 
often deemed amply suflBcient for a word of three syllables, and sometimes 
for one of four. The text is, indeed, a perfect forest of large black-letter 
contractions, overrun with a tangled underwood of smaller black-letter con- 
tractions in the shape of notes, and intersected continually with tables de- 
signed to render clearer, and sometimes to supersede the divisions of the text, 
but which, owing to the ingenious interpenetration and general confusion 
of their bracketting, are in themselves a new and independent source of 
perplexity and bewilderment. This being the case, I will not undertake to 
§ay that I am familiar in detail with every part of the work. I have looked 
through the whole, read some parts carefully, and marked the passages 
which seemed specially to bear upon the subject in hand. It is more than 
probable, however, that some point of interest may have foimd its way into 
some of those labyrinths of note or table which I have not yet perfectly 
explored. The extracts here given illustrate clearly enough, however, the 



APPENDIX. 115 

that he was familiar with the quantification of the predicate, 
and that he employs it to some extent in the science. I shall 
accordingly extract from various parts of his work some of the 
passages which go to show this. These passages will neces- 
sarily be given out of their own connexion ; and as I shall 
often be obliged to forego the comment they tempt, in order 
that this note may not be unduly extended, they will often be 
found to have no other relation to each other than their com- 
mon reference to the principle in question. I shall first give 
some extracts from Isenach's exposition of terms and their signs^ 
then from what he says of propositions and their relations^ and 
finally select one or two passages from his comments on the 
special rules of syllogism. 

In relation to terms he adopts the common division of Cate- 
gorematic, and Syncategorematic, — the former including the sub- 
ject and predicate of a proposition — the latter the various affec- 
tions or modifications of these. On this second division he has 
the following passage, which I quote, both on account of its 
own precision, and for the sake of what is to follow : — 

*' Sincathegorema, quod per se et solitarie non est significa- 
tivum alicujus rei vere vel imaginarie, sed junctum termino sig- 
nificativo et cathegorematico variat modum concipiendo rem 
significatam per ipsum, quod denotat ipsum accipi pro suo 
significato vel significatis aliquo more ; puta universaliter, par- 
ticulariter, singulariter, et cum iis ; ut omnis, aliquis, iste, non. 
Nam dicendo omnis, nuUam rem concipio vel intelligo; sed 
dicendo omnis homo, concipio vel intelligo hominem non simpli- 
citer, sed universaliter omnem. Ita quoque dicendo iste, nihil 
addendo vel subintelligendo, nuUam rem intelligo; sed quum 
dicitur iste homo, intelligo singulariter hunc hominem demonstra- 

point in question, and are sufficient for the present purpose. I have 
some hope of being able to obtain the larger work of Isenach ; and should 
it prove of sufficient interest, will hereafter give a fuller account of his 
doctrine. 



116 APPENDIX. 

turn. Idcirco dicuntur hujusmodi signa nihil significare sed 
duntaxat cowsignificare. Unde nee grammatiee, se soils possunt 
reddere suppositum verbo; nee logice, esse extrema proposi- 
tionis, sed solum determinationes et modificationes eorundem. Et 
quia hujusmodi signa, ratione considerationis et habitudinis, 
(puta, universalitationis, particularisationis, singularisationis, 
distributionis, confusionis, et cum iis,) quam important circa ter- 
minos sibi additos, mutant sensa propositionis et saepius veri- 
tatem vel falsitatem, idcirco logicus perquirit de ipsis hujusmodi 
passiones." 

This passage will serve to show his just appreciation of the 
value of modifying marks as affixed to terms in restricting or 
extending, or in general in rendering definite their meaning. 
A little further on he says very significantly in relation to 
these : — 

" Illud vero quod ad copulam principalem est suppositum, 
quocunque loco ponatur, est subjectum propositionis cum omni 
quod ipsum determinate dempto sincathegoremate, sumpto ir- 
restricte sive non restricte ; ut ' caput canis pilis intextum 
habet homo decrepitae aetatis:' ubi verbum ^habet' -pro suo formali 
significato est copula, et idem pro suo materiali significato cum 
hoc toto, * caput canis pilis intextum^' quod ipsum determinat, est 
praedicatum ; subjectum vero est hoc totum, '¦homo decrepitoe cetatis/ 
Siraili modo judicandum est de illis : 'homo omni animali princi- 
patur ;' ' degeneres animos timer arguit ;' ' velocibus alis mors 
volat ;' ' ignis et aer sunt elementa calida.' Additur, dempto 
sincathegoremate sumpto irrestricte, quum illud usu communi 
logicorum non est pars subjecti vel prcedicati. Sincathegorema 
autem sumi restrictive vel non restrictive stat in arbitrio uten- 
tis. Fateor tamen, quod usu communi logicorum tunc sumi- 
tur restrictive quum ponitur a parte prsedicati ; (ut ' Adam fuit 
omnis Aomo/) vel inter partes subjecti diversorum casuum, et 
determinat obliquum (ut ' conservans omnem creaturam est Deus.') 
Irrestrictive vero sive non restrictive frequenter sumitur quum 



APPENDIX. 117 

ponitur in principio propositionis secundum veram construc- 
tionem ; ut ' omnis lapis est durus j' ' caput habet omnis homo ;' 
' verba dat omnis amans.' 

" Scias tameU) quod sensus orationis variatur quum sumitur 
restricte et irrestricte, verbi gratia, * omnis homo est animal :' — 



" Sumendo 

signum < 

' omnis.' 



'Restrictive valet; 'aliquod existens, omnis homo est 
animal ;' sic est falsa, quia nihil est dabile quod 
sit omnis homo, 

Irrestricte valet ; * quicquid est homo est animal :' 
vel sic, ' de quocunque verum est dicere quod 
sit homo, de eodem verum est dicere quod sit 
animal ;' sic est vera." 



I give a single extract from a long chapter on signs, (in which 
Isenach often employs propositions with their predicates quan- 
tified,) mainly to illustrate his use of the terms determinate and 
confused. At first, from his casual use of these terms in other 
places, I thought that by the former he meant a term with a 
mark of quantity, and by the latter one without such mark ; 
but it appears from his exposition and illustration that he 
simply means by confused a universal subject, and by determi- 
nate a particular or individual subject. The following is the 
passage : — 

" Confuse: ita quod alteram extremorum denotatur ipsi con- 
venire pro aliquo omnium suorum significatorum, hoc vel illo, 
et nullo certo vel determinato ; ut * omnis homo habet caput,' 
ubi denotatur quemlibet hominem habere caput, nee omnes aut 
plures, unum, sed quemque suum. Et hie dicitur supponere 
communiter, confuse, tamen disjunctim sive non collective. 

" Determinate : ita quod alteram extremorum denotatur ipsi 
convenire, inter omnia sua significata, pro aliquo certo et deter- 
minato, vel aliquibus certis et determinatis ; ut, ' caput habet 
omnis homo;' ubi denotatur esse aliquid certum et determinatum 



118 APPENDIX. 

caput quod quilibet homo habeat. Hie dicitur supponere de- 
terminate." To illustrate this by an example which is given a 
little below : — " ' Omnis homo non est omne animal,' ubi ani- 
mal supponit confuse tantum : * Anna non est omnis mulier/ 
ubi mulier supponit determinate." 

"We pass to the consideration of propositions. Isenach's view 
of the logical relation of a proposition is singularly just; and 
his exposition of its scientific capabilities and significance is at 
once comprehensive and exact. He explains in detail, that the 
matter of a proposition is its terms, and that its true logical sig- 
nificance ever lies in the affections of these, and the manner in 
which they are connected with each other. He divides the affec- 
tions of propositions into those which belong to them considered 
in themselves, and those which arise out of their relation to each 
other. The former are of course quality and quantity. It is 
with the last member of this division alone that we are now 
concerned. In relation to it Isenach first gives the common 
doctrine, with its four-fold division founded exclusively on the 
quantity of the subject. He endeavours to explain the prin- 
ciple of his one-sided division, by saying, that the subject was 
selected as being the more important part of the matter of a 
proposition : — " Quantitas propo&itionis, hoc modo sumpta, penes 
subjectum principale, vel partem principaliorem subjecti, dici- 
tur quantitas propositionalis ; et ab ea propositio simpliciter de- 
nominatur aliqua denominationeexjam dictis. Yocatur autem 
hoc nomine propter hoc, quia subjectum est prima et principalis 
pars materialis propositionis, atque principale fundamentum prae- 
dicationis, de quo cetera enunciantur." 

He then gives a statement of his own, as a supplement to the 
common doctrine, founded on a far wider and juster considera- 
tion of terminal quantity. He asserts in effect, that the affec- 
tion of quantity belongs to the whole matter of a proposition, 
and not to one of its parts alone, as hitherto exclusively con- 
sidered ; and that whether it fall on the subject or the predi- 



APPENDIX. 



119 



cate it is equally of logical account. His statement is as fol^ 
lows : — 

" De quantitate terminali: Solet etiam nonnunquam suml 
quantitas propositionis penes quamquam partem materialem 
propositionis, (i.e., quemlihet terminum cdthegorematicum,) non cu- 
rando quocunque loco ponatur. In hunc modum : — 

fl. Singularis, est universalis : ut * ille asinus 
istius hominis est tardigradus.' 



" Omnis propo- 
siti© in qua 
ponitur (quo- 
cunque etiam^ 
loco) terminus 
cathegorema- 
ticus 



2. Communis * 



DistributuSf est universalis: ut 
' oculus ciy usque hominis est 
aqueus ;' ' iste Deus est omnis 
Deus.' 

Accepttts determinate, proprie est 
particularise ut, 'hominis alter 
oculus est dexter.' 

Acceptus confuse tantum, vel de- 
terminate reductive, est inde- 
finita : ut ' Petrus est musicus.* '* 

He then goes on to make the following somewhat curious 
statement : — 

" Hoc modo una propositi© potest esse universalis^ particu- 
laris, indefinita, et singularis ; ut patet de ilia : ' alter oculus 
est cuj usque hominis (vel istius hominis) dexter oculus.' Haec 
quantitas vocatur terminalis, et ab ea non denominatur propo- 
siti© quanta simpliciter, sed cum addito ; ut dicta propositi© n©n 
den©minatur simpliciter universalis, sed ratione illius termini 
hominis; nee denominatur simpliciter particularis, sed ratione 
illius terminus oculus ; simpliciter ver© denominatur indefinita, 
quia subjectum accipitur determinate reductive." 

This he proceeds to apply t© m©dal propositions, whose pe^ 
culiarity, indeed, is Icgically ccnsidered, in the last resort, but 
an affection of the predicate. 

The affections which belong to propositions considered in 



120 APPENDIX. 

their relation to each other are three — opposition^ equipoUence, 
and conversion. We shall extract without comment one or two 
sentences from what is said touching the first and last of these, 
and then pass on to the Syllogism. The following passages are 
from his discussions — the one of subalternate, the other of sub- 
contrary opposition : — 

" Terminus qui in subalternante stat confuse tantum respectu 
termini distributi in subalternata, non stet determinate respectu 
ejusdem termini distributi, sed accipiatur confuse tantum. . . . 
' Omni tempore risibile est omnis homo ;' ' aliquo tempore risi- 
bile est omnis homo.' Sed subalterna prioris est ; * aliquo tem- 
pore a risibile est omnis homo,' posito quod ly a faciat terminum 
risibile stare confuse tantum; vel ilia, ' aliquo tempore omnis 
homo est risibilis ;' vel ista, ' aliquo tempore risibile est homo.' . . . 

" Si in una subcontrariarum ponitur aliqua universalitas, in 
altera omnia debent particularisari. Quare hoc non sunt sub- 
contrariae ; ' aliquo tempore risibile est omnis homo ;* ^ aliquo 
tempore nullum risibile est omnis homo;' sed subcontraria 
prioris est, ' aliquo tempore risibile non est omnis homo.' " 

The last sentence on this subject is the following, which is at 
once significant and disappointing: — 

*' Oppositio non solum sumenda est penes quantitatem pro- 
positionalem, sumptam penes subjectum propositionis seu prin- 
cipaliorem ejus partem; sed penes quantitatem terminalem, quce at- 
tenditur penes quamque partem materialem propositionis. Potest 
itaque sumi oppositio, ex parte subjectorum, prcedicatorum, et 
determinationum tarn . subject! quam praedicati, atque etiam 
copularum. Hoc est quod aliter dicitur." 

The following is from his exposition of conversion : — 

*' Quod secunda, sive convertens, sequatur ad conversam, in 
bona cousequentia, sic quod con versa non possit esse vera sine con- 
vertenteret propter hoc nihil debet universalisari in convertente 
quod non fuit universalisatum in conversa; nee terminus stans in 
conversa confuse tantum respectu termini distributi debet in 



APPENDIX. 



121 



convertente stare determinate respectu ejusdem termini distri- 
buti, sed stet confuse tantum; vel terminus distributus in con- 
versa non distribuatur in convertente. Cujus ratio est, quia in 
omni consequentia bona oportet caveri, ne arguatur a non distri- 
bute ad distributum, vel a termino stante confuse tantum ad 
euudem stantem determinate respectu ejusdem termini distributi. 

1. Omnis homo est animal 5 ergo, 
omne animal est bomo ; sed sic 
convertatur; quoddam animal 
est homo. 

NuUus homo est omne ani- 
mal; ergo, nullum animal est 

( homo ; sed sic convertatur ; 
quoddam animal non est omnis 
homo. 
3. Aliquod animal non est homo ; 
ergo, homo non est animal; 
sed sic convertatur ; quidam 

\ homo animal non est. 



" Propter 
defectum 



Primi, non valet 
haec conversio : 



Secundi, non 
valet hagc con- / 
versio : 



(1. Cujuslibet hominis oculus est 
dexter ; ergo, dexter oculus est 
oculus cujuslibet hominis ; sed 
sic convertatur ; ergo, dexter 
oculus est oculus alicujus ho- 
minis; vel sic, dexter oculus 
est cujuslibet hominis oculus. 

Omni tempore risibile est 
omm's homo; ergo, homo est 
risibile omni tempore ; sed sic 
convertatur; ergo, homo est 
omni tempore risibile, vel sic ; 
ergo, homo est risibilis aliquo 
tempore. 



122 APPENDIX. 

" Volens itaque convertere aliquam propositionem, consideret 
diligenter, quae sint ejus extrema, (puta subjectum et praadi- 
catum,) atque habitudines logicas eorundem, (puta, supposi- 
tionem in genere, ampliationem, restrictionem, &c.,) quas circa 
extrema exprimat, et suhinde extrema transponat ; sic quod de sub- 
jecto fiat praedicatum ; et e diverse, constituendo aliam proposi- 
tionem ejusdera qualitatis, in qua nihil universalisatur quod est 
particularisatum in priore, nee terminus aliquis stat determi- 
nate, respectu termini distributi, qui in priore, respectu ejusdem 
termini distributi, stabat confuse tantum, Hcec enim conversio 
semper valet" 

I quote the following passage mainly to show that Isenach 
saw clearly, what indeed he elsewhere more fully explains, that 
exclusive propositions distribute the predicate. It is the last 
passage in a chapter on exponibles : — 

" ' Tantum homo est animal ' sic probatur : hoc prasdicatura 
^ animal ' enunciatur de hoc subjecto ' homo,' et de nullo alio ah 
eo, (sive negatur ab omni alio,) et ita denotat per hoc signum 
tantum. — ' Omnis homo est animal ' sic probatur : hoc praedi- 
catum 'animal' universaliter verificatur de hoc subjecto ' homo,* 
(sive convenit subjecto pro omni supposito,) et ita denotatur 
per hoc signum omnis; ergo, &c. De quo alibi latius diximus. 
Hcec pro rudimentis puerorum sujiciant" 

It will be seen that both in this passage, and in the closing 
one treating of opposition, reference is disappointingly made 
for fuller discussion of the matter to the other work. 

Isenach's discussion of the syllogism is, in every respect, the 
most important part of his book. He gives an acute prelimi- 
nary exposition touching the general rules of inference, some of 
which, as partially relevant to the question in hand, I had 
designed to quote. His discussion of figure, too, is curious and 
interesting, especially his doctrine in relation to the fourth. 
These points of interest must, however, give way to those which 
more immediately refer to the question of the predicate. These 



APPENDIX. 123 

are the exceptions which he takes to the universal validity or 
necessity of the special rules of syllogism. He partially falsifies 
these by quantifying the predicate, as will be seen from the fol- 
lowing passages : — 

"1. Ex puris affirmativis nihil sequitur formaliter 
in secunda figura. 

" Cujus ratio est ; quia contingeret medium in neutra pre- 
missarum distribui aut singularisari. Nam prasdicatum non dis- 
tribuit in affirmativis (saltern de communi forma propositionum, 
in quibus non ponuntur signa pregnantia.) Si vero hoc caveretur, 
valeret arguraentatlo ; ut, ' omnis homo est omne animal;' ' omne 
risibile est animal ;' ergo, ' omne risibile est homo.' 

" 2. Secunda figura regulariter solum concludit 
negative. 

" Nam, cum una premissarum debet regulariter esse negativa, 
oportet conclusionem esse negativam. Additur notanter, regu- 
lariter, quia, casu quo contingit amhas premissas esse affirmativas, 
sequitur etiam conclusio affirmativa ; utpatet in priori exemplo. 

" 3. Minore existentc negativa nihil sequitur for- 
maliter, in prima et tertia figuris, directe conclu- 
dendo. 

" Quia contingeret argui a non distribute ad distributum. 
Nam, minore negativa, oportet majorem esse affirmativam, (quia 
ex puris negativis nihil sequitur,) et altera praemissarum nega- 
tiva, oportet conclusionem esse negativam, etsic major extremir 
tas, praedicatum majoris et conclusionis de communi forma pro* 
positionum, non distribueretur in majore sed in conclusione. 
Sed si hoc evitatur, (puta indirecte concludendo, vel quolibet 
aliter,) valet argumentatio ; ut, ' omnis asinus est animal ;' et 



124 APPENDIX. 

* nullus homo est asinus ;' ergo, ' aliquod animal non est homo/ 
vel sic, ' nullus homo est omne animal.' 

" 4. Tertia figura regulariter solum concludit par- 
ticulariter. 

" Nam aliter contingeret argui a non distributo ad distributum 
ex parte minoris extremitatis. Haec enim distribueretur in con- 
clusione universali in qua subjicitur, et non in minore affirma- 
tiva in qua prsedicatur : ut est cernere exemplo, * omnis homo 
est animal ; et, omnis homo est substantia ; ergo, omnis sub- 
stantia est animal.' Verum si illud cavetur, quomodocunque 
firma est argumentatio, ut hie : * omnis lucidissimus planeta lucet ; 
omnis lucidissimus planeta est omnis sol ; ergo, omnis sol lucet.' 

" 5. Majore particular!, nihil sequitur formaliter et 
syllogistice, in prima et secunda figuris, directe con- 
cludendo. 

" Cujus ratio est, quantum ad primam figuram, quia contin- 
geret medium in neutra praemissarum distribui vel singularisari. 
Nam quum major sit particularis, medium quod in ea subjicitur, 
non distribuitur ; et quum minor non posset esse negativa (ex 
superiori regula) in qua medium praedicatur, nee in ilia distri- 
buitur, de communi forma propositionum, uti hoc claret exemplo. 
' Animal est asinus ; et, omnis homo est animal ; ergo, omnis 
homo est asinus.' " (Omitting his application of his rule to the 
second, I pass on to his refutation of it in relation to the first 
figure :) " Verum si hujusmodi inconvenientia vitantur (ut puta in- 
directe concludendo, vel quolibet filter,) valebunt argumentationes ; 
ut, ' lucidissimus planeta lucet ; et, omnis sol est omnis lucidissi- 
mus planeta ; ergo, sol lucet :' * Animal currit ; et omnis homo 
est idem animal ; ergo, homo currit.' " 

It is here clearly stated, that if the syllogism be taken in its 
regular form, as commonly considered, and as exclusively al- 
lowed by logicians, the rules are valid. The reason of this is 



APPENDIX. 125 

explained by showing what logical vice would be committed if 
they were violated ; but it is quite truly added, that if we can 
avoid committing this vice in any other way than by obeying 
the rules, the syllogism is good, and the rules, therefore, no 
longer hold. This Isenach shows can be done by quantifying 
the predicate. He accordingly falsifies the two first rules by a 
syllogism of the following form : — 

All A is aU B. 

All C is B. Therefore, 

All C is A. 
He partially falsifies the third rule by a syllogism in the follow- 
ing form, in which the predicate is not quantified in the premises, 
but in the conclusion : — 

All B is A. 

No C is B. Therefore, 

Some A is not C. Or, 

Not any C is all A. 
The fourth rule is falsified by a syllogism in the following 
form : — 

All B is A. 

All B is all C. Therefore, 

All C is A. 
And finally, the last rule is falsitied to its first division by one 
in the following form, which, except that it is less definite in 
quantity, is much the same as the preceding one : — 

Bis A. 

All C is all B. Therefore, 

Cis A. 
Such is a brief outline of the doctrine of Isenach in relation 
to the quantification of the predicate. It is clear, even from 
this imperfect account, that he was familiar with its use, and, to 
some extent, appreciated its value. I am disposed, however, to 
think that he was far more familiar with its somewhat indiscri- 
minate use in practice than conversant with its true scientific 



126 APPENDIX. 

significance in principle. His insight into this does not appear 
to be great. Hence he often uses it capriciously, and without 
any particular end in view ; and though, without doubt, he does 
occasionally employ it to simplify the working of the science, 
yet, after all, he does this very sparingly, and by no means to 
the extent we should expect from one apparently so familiar 
with its use. It is of course, however, as we have said, some- 
what difficult to determine, upon such partial evidence, what 
precise value he did attach to the principle, since we are re- 
ferred for this to discussions to which we have at present no 
access. 

The last two writers whose names we have to quote in 
support of a quantified predicate are both much later than the 
preceding ones. We shall briefly quote from these the pas- 
sages in which they partially allow in theory, or adopt in prac- 
tice, such quantification. 

The first is an Englishman, Joshua Oldfield, who, in his 
curiously discursive and ingenious " Essay towards the Improve- 
ment of Reason," which was published in London in the year 
1707, touches, among other subjects, upon logic. Without pro- 
fessing to give anything in the shape of a regular system, he 
has some acute remarks on the syllogism, and among them the 
following, relative to the point in question : — 

" The predicate of each enunciation is also supposed to be uni- 
versally taken if denied, and particularly, when affirmed ; so that 
in this latter case it ought to have a note of universality added, 
if it he universally designed, as it may be, in imagining a property, 
and must be, in giving a just definition, or a right description ; 
for these ought to be made universal when the proposition is 
converted, and such predicate put in the place of the subject. 

" Now, when the affirmed predicate is thus universally taken, 
the argument will certainly admit of being otherwise formed 
than according to the usual allowed moods or modes." — (P. 248.) 

" Now, w^hereas it is commonly said, the enunciations must be 



APPENDIX. 127 

so and so, (as in the technical words before mentioned,) and 
that there can be no more concluding moods in such respective 
figures, it must be understood to be so upon the forementioned 
suppositions as to the quantity of the predicate ; for otherwise, 
where this is universally affirmed, there may be, e. g., such a 
mode as ITALI in the first figure ; thus : — 
I- rAliquod trilaterum est aequiangulum ; 

TA- •< Omne triangulum est (omne) trilaterum ; 

LI. vErgo, aliquod triangulum est aequiangulum. 

In English, thus, — 
I- rSome three-sided figure has equal angles ; 

TA- -< Every triangle is any three-sided figure ; 

LI. ^Therefore, some triangle has equal angles." — (P. 250.) 

These are the passages relative to the point in question which 
are to be found in Oldfield, who is the only English writer, so far 
as I know, by whom the quantification of the predicate is in any 
form allowed. It will be seen, however, from these extracts, 
how little he understood the principle which for the time he 
uses, since he even attributes to it none but a material cogency, 
and grants that the syllogisms commonly recognised by logicians 
are the only ones which are of formal, and thus of universal 
validity. It is also further manifest how limited was his view 
of its practical application ; since, both in its statement and 
illustration, he confines his attention exclusively to the case of 
universal quantification, and this is considered only in relation 
to affirmative propositions which contain a definition or descrip- 
tion. 

The last instance to be adduced of the partial use of a quanti- 
fied predicate is that of Godfrey Ploucquet. He lived during 
the greater part of the last century, was for many years Pro- 
fessor in the University of Tubingen, and published many small, 
but acute, and often original, treatises in connexion with logic 
and philosophy. The only work of his, however, with which I am 
acquainted is that entitled " Fundamenta Philosophiae Specula- 



128 APPENDIX. 

tivse," and published at Tubingen in the year 1 759. In this work 
he employs the quantification of the predicate, in his treatment 
of propositions, to simplify their conversion. The following are 
the passages in which he does this, and they fully explain its 
use in his hands. I quote first, however, in order to render 
what follows intelligible, his own explanation of the peculiar 
symbols he employs : — 

§ 34. " O prsefixum denotat omnitudinem positive sumtam. 
N praefixum denotat omnitudinem negative sumtam. 
Q vel q. prsefixa denotant particularitatem. 

Duse pluresve litterae conjunctae significant subjectum cum 
suis praedicatis. v. g. AB significat subjectum A cum praedi- 
cato B. 
ABC significat subjectum A, cui inest prsedicatum B, quod prae- 

dicatum B includit simul praedicatum C. 
A — B denotat, A est B. 
A > B denotat, A non est B. 
N.A — B denotat, Nullum A est B. 
A praefixum propositioni significat affirmationem universaliter 

sumtam. 
I, affirmationem particulariter sumtam. 
E, negationem universaliter sumtam. 
O, negationem particulariter sumtam. 
Cum seriei cuidam subjungitur signum, &c., denotatur series 

infinita, vel integra. Cum non subjungitur, denotatur series 

abrupta." 

§ 36. " Sit primo, propositio universaliter affirmans, O.A — B. 
Haec in generalibus et in symbolis spectata non infert hanc O.A 
est O.B sed O.A est q.B, § 24. Ubi vero notandum, quod par- 
ticularitas nunquam intelligatur exclusiva." 

§ 40. " Sit particulariter negans q.A> B. 

Omne, quod est B, diversum est a quodam A. Ergo 

N.B est q.A. 
Not. Operatio haec vocari solet Conversio propositionum." 



APPENDIX. 129 

§ 41. " Apparet hinc, conversionem propositionum nihil aliud 
esse, quam transpositionera eorundem terminorum logice expres- 
sorum, nee quidquam in sensu ipso immutari. Si enim in sensu 
aliquid immutaretur, propositio non amplius esset hsec proposi- 
tio. Ita nee ex particulari fit universale, nee ex universali fit 
particulare." 

§ 43. " Sit propositio identica O.A — O.B : Hie A cum B 
identificatur, adeoque conversio fit O.B — O.A. 

" Sint enim du£e series : 

AB. AB. AB. &c. 
CB. CB. CB. &c. 

" Hie C non potest esse diversum ab A. Si enim B est idem 
cum A, tum B non potest inesse tm A& tuj non - A, quia idem 
est idem. 

" Cum usitatus loquendi modus non secum ferat banc propo- 
nendi rationem : O.A est O.B, sed pro bac propositione substi- 
tuatur O.A est B ; eonvertendo dici potest q.B est A, modo 
attendatur ad id, quod particulari tas comprebensiva et definita 
sit intelligenda, quse justo modo extensa potest coincidere cum 
omnitudine. Si vero exacte loquendum sit, propositio O.A est 
B distingui debet ab bac O.A est O.B. 

" Brevius : O.A est O.B. Si est O.B, pr^eter B nibil aliud 
datur ; adeoque O.B est O.A per conversionem. 

" Vel sic : O.A est O.B; boc est: Omne quod est in A tarn 
ratione comprebensionis, quam extensionis, est quoque in B. 
A et B igitur nullo modo differunt, adeoque A est B, uti A 
est A." 

§ 44. " Sit propositio particulariter affirmans q.A est B. 

" Hie aut q.A est q.B, aut q.A est O.B. 

" Priori casu patet, eonvertendo q.B fore q.A ; posteriori 
autem, O.B esse q.A. Si enim quoddam A est quoddam B ; 
patet ex bypotbesi, nee ad omnia A, nee ad omnia B beic 
respici ; adeoque seriem ita esse concipiendanr 
AB. AB. CB. CB. AD. AD. &c. 



loO APPENDIX. 

" Ex intuitione manifestum est, A et B non semper conjungi, 
sed tarn A quam B cum diversis signis connecti. Ergo q.A — B 
idem est cum q.B — A. 

" Posteriori casu autem sequens apparet facies 

AB. AB. AB. &c. 

AC. AD. AE. &c. 

" Ex hypothesi non datur B, quod non insit rtZ A ; adeoque, 
OB — A, sed tantum quoddam A est cum B conjunctum. e.g.j 
Quidam homo est miles. Non datur miles, de quo non prasdi- 
cari possit, quod sit homo, adeoque omnis miles est homo, sed 
tantum idea cujusdam hominis connectitur cum idea militis. Sed 
cum in expressione consueta quantitas priedicati non determi- 
netur ; utraque propositio facta conversione habebit subjectum 
particulare." 

It will be seen from these extracts that Ploucquet compe- 
tently understood the use of a quantified predicate in relation 
to propositions. Strangely enough, however, he makes no use 
of it in his treatment of syllogisms, where especially, or rather 
exclusively, its higher scientific value rises into view. With 
the exception of two short sentences, (if I remember aright, for 
I speak only from past reading,) he gives no intimation of its 
use in relation to syllogisms. These sentences are both notes. 
The first, which is appended as an exceptional provision to the 
rule, that from two particular propositions nothing follows, is 
this: — "Hie tantum agitur de expressione conclusionis con- 
sueta, ubi praedicato non addi solet signum quantitativum." 
The second, which is given at the end of his consideration of 
the third figure, and is to the effect that valid negative syllo- 
gisms may be obtained in it, is as follows : — " Si in proposi- 
tionibus particulariter negantibus adjiciatur praedicato signum 
particularitatis ; figura hsec procedit in omnibus modis supra 
recensitis." 

This want of anything like a scientific application of the prin- 
ciple to the syllogism may indeed be said to be universal. 



APPENDIX. 131 

None of those to whom we have referred as having partially 
appreciated it, seem to have been at all aware of its value in 
relation to the forms of reasoning ; but, after having applied it 
to some particular detail in the treatment of propositions, or at 
most to some exceptional case of syllogism, appear to have 
abandoned it altogether. 

The promised historical evidence touching the previous partial 
appreciations of the new doctrine properly terminates here. I 
cannot, however, close this note without quoting a curious pas- 
sage from a recent British writer, whose contributions to logical 
science have not met with the attention which their merit de- 
serves. This writer is Mr. Thynne, who would probably have 
become better known, but for the comparatively humble form 
which he has chosen as the vehicle of his logical discussions. 
These discussions were published in the form of notes to Walker's 
Compendium of Logic, which has been for many years, and, for 
anything I know to the contrary, still is, the text-book of Trinity 
College, Dublin. These notes evince a careful study of logic, 
and an acute comprehension of the science, both in its general 
scope and in its particular detail ; they show also an amount 
of independent thought in relation to the science, very rarely 
indeed to be met w^ith in recent logical writings. The para- 
graph I am about to quote is really a very curious one, on ac- 
count of its strange prophetic significance. It is given as a 
note to a passage in the text, in which the author, after giving 
the common statement that there are in all 64 moods, and that 
so many are mvalid, adds, '^ accordingly there are 19 concluding 
7noods." The note is as follows : — 

" (8) This, as logicians say, is gratuitously assumed. Suffi- 
cient has been said by our author to establish that all other 
modes than these 19 are inconclusive, but nothing has pre- 
ceded to verify the conclusions in these modes. This may be 
done by the axioms, even more easily perhaps than by the 



132 APPENDIX. 

famous rules of Aristotle ; but in the application of the axioms 
the distinction of the premises and extremes into major and 
minor vanishes. If all men and so7ne animals agree with a third, 
they agree with each other ; and it is indifferent whether it be 
understood that all men are certain animals, or certain animals 
are all mankind. And it is certain, that if syllogistic reasoning 
had been thus viewed and followed up, it would be more readily 
brought into practice, or rather — as it is already, in the general 
practice of reasoning, thus treated, imperceptibly because en- 
thymematically — it would receive less distinction of mode and 
figure ; and consequently require less rule, and admit of simpler 
and readier, although not more ingenious, complete, or elegant 
verification than as at present treated." 

This prophetic foresight, however, exercises no beneficial in- 
fluence on Mr. Thynne's own treatment of the science. Logic 
certainly receives no simplification at his hands ; on the con- 
trary, the whole subject of mood and figure is made, if possible, 
still more intricate by the ingenious involution and evolution of 
detail which Mr. Thynne has introduced into its treatment. 
He therefore does not accept the doctrine he foreshadows. He 
may be said indeed to have explicitly rejected the quantification 
of the predicate ; for he has propounded a theory of his own in 
relation to quantification, which is, to say the least of it, of the 
strangest kind. Mr. Thynne holds that quantification is an af- 
fection of the copula. This is a confusion so strange and com- 
plete, that were it advanced by a less able author, it might 
be rejected at once. Anything, however, which is seriously 
urged by so careful a student of logic as Mr. Thynne proves 
himself to be, is entitled to consideration, and if found to be 
erroneous, merits at least the courtesy of a refutation. 

Mr. Thynne adverts to his doctrine in several of his notes; 
but the passage in which he most clearly propounds it is the 
following : — 

'' Such marks of quantity, although grammatically qualifying 



APPENDIX. 133 

the subject, do in sense qualify the copula ; intimating the ex- 
tent in which the agreement or disagreement of the terms is 
declared — that this extent is implied to be, either general or 
partial. ' Every man is an animal' implies that ' man is uni- 
versally an animal :' * No man is a stone,' that ' man — is uni- 
versally not — a stone:' and ' some men are just' that ' man — 
is in part of the extension — just.' " 

On this I would remark generally, that even supposing it to 
be correct, and that we may thus explain the quantity of the 
subject, still no account is given of the quantity of the predicate, 
which on the same principle ought also to be an affection of the 
copula, and to be represented accordingly in the same manner. 
Thus, to take the last of the above examples, since this is the 
only one which is given in the regular form, Mr. Thynne hav- 
ing in effect quantified the predicate in the others by the articles, 
— this is, '* some man is just," which, says Mr. Thynne, is truly 
expressed thus, " man — is in part of the extension — ^just;" but 
whether is this part of the extension of man equal to all just or 
some justi This is a pertinent inquiry, for "just^* is indefinite 
and must be formally limited or amplified in the same way as 
the subject. On Mr. Thynne's doctrine, therefore, two parts of 
extension must be expressed by the copula, in some such man- 
ner as the following: " Man — is in part of its extension — just 
— in part of its extension." All of this on the doctrine in ques- 
tion save man and just belongs to the copula; in short, Mr. 
Thynne maintains that the terms of a proposition are always 
taken absolutely/, and that all modification of this absolute mean- 
ing belongs not to themselves but to the copula. The absur- 
dity of such a doctrine will be better seen from an example in 
which the modification of the terms is of a more definite numer- 
ical kind than that usually found in the ordinary examples ; 
for as all modification of the terms, that is, everything indicating 
the extent of the agreement or difference existing between them, 
belongs to the copula, then necessarily numerical modification 



184 APPENDIX. 

of extent belongs to it also. Take then the following proposi- 
tion : — " ten horses are equal in strength to a hundred men." 
This expounded according to Mr. Thynne's doctrine will become 
the following : — " horse (taken absolutely) — is, considered under 
the relation of ten — equal to man (taken absolutely) considered 
under the relation of one hundred : or a part equal in extent to 
ten taken out of the whole concept horse — is equal in a given 
relation, that of strength, to wit, to a part equal to a hundred 
taken out of the whole concept man." The former way of stat- 
ing it is contradictory enough, and in the latter surely no one 
will seriously say that the true subject is the whole concept horse, 
and the true predicate the whole concept man. 

This criticism would be in part inapplicable, did Mr. Thynne, 
with Aristotle and some of the older logicians, and indeed with 
the Compendium itself on which he comments, — did he hold, we 
say, with these, that the copula is included in the predicate. 
It is manifest, however, partly from his remarks, and abundantly 
from his practice, that he does not do so, but with logicians in 
general considers it simply as the bond of connexion between 
two terms, and in the last resort, therefore, always the substan- 
tive verb. 

Mr. Thynne gives the following illustration in confirmation 
of his doctrine : — 

" This is not the only respect in which a circumstance gram- 
matically associated with the subject is logically associated with 
the copula. In the proposition above, * no man is a stone,' no- 
man is surely not the subject, for the declaration is intended to 
be made of man, and not of that which is not man : nor is the 
copula zs, for the relation is intended to be one of disagreement. 
The negation therefore is here logically a modification of the 
copula, although grammatically of the subject." 

If the principle was unfortunate, the illustration is certainly 
equally so. " In the proposition, ' no man is a stone,' " says 
Mr. Thynne, " no-man is surely not the subject, for the declara- 



APPENDIX. 135 

tion is intended to be made of man, and not of that which is not 
man." Now, what is the declaration made in the above propo- 
sition ? It must surely be, " is a stone,'' which, says Mr. Thynne, 
is intended to be made of man, and not of that which is not man, 
but which I cannot but think notwithstanding is intended to be 
made of that which is not man, since it cannot be truly said that 
any stone is a man ; and accordingly that no-man is the subject. 
Speaking generally, it may be said that in any negative propo- 
sition the negation may fall on the subject, on the predicate, or 
on the copula ; but that on whatever member it falls, it becomes 
truly a part of that member ; falling on the subject therefore in 
the proposition above, no-man is the true subject. 

Let us look, however, for a moment more closely into the 
matter. A proposition is but the reflex in language of a judg- 
ment; a judgment is the product of a particular mental act. 
Now, the whole question is determined by ascertaining specifi- 
-cally ivhat that act is. It is, in brief, one of comparison. Two 
things (terms of any kind) are compared together in order to 
ascertain whether they stand to each other in the relation of de- 
termining and determined, of whole and part ; in a word, to 
discover what is the extent of their agreement or difi'erence. 
Now, does this extent of agreement or difference belong to the 
objects which are compared together, or to the mind which com- 
pares them ? Surely when two things are compared together, 
and found to stand to each other in the relation of part and 
whole, that affection of quantity belongs to the things, and not 
simply to the mind which perceives them. But on the theory 
in question the act of judgment is not only cognitive, hut creative ; 
it not only perceives a relation, but also creates the relation which 
it perceives. This involves a double confusion ; a confusion in 
philosophy of the perceiving mind with the things perceived, of 
the mental act with its object : a confusion in logic of quantity 
with quality, of the matter with the form of a proposition, of 
things to be connected with the bond of their connexion. It is 



136 APPENDIX. 

indeed an error so manifest, that we need not dwell upon its re- 
futation, and one which could only have been committed by so 
able a logician as Mr. Thynne through great haste, or greater 
oversight. 

We have thus the subject of quantification viewed in almost 
all the aspects in which it can possibly be considered. The 
common doctrine considers it in relation to the subject-, Sir Wil- 
liam Hamilton as it aifects the, predicate ; Mr. Thynne maintains 
that it is an affection of the copula ; while Mr. De Morgan 
(after Lambert) has elaborated a particular quantification of the 
middle term. This last scheme, however, as but a trivial and prac- 
tically useless refinement on a doctrine universally held by logi- 
cians, may be thrown out of account. Mr. Thynne's notion, we 
have endeavoured to show, must, as the result of a strange 
confusion, be at once rejected. The subject and predicate, 
therefore, alone remain to be considered. The quantification of 
these terms, as the ultimate constituents of logical analysis, is, 
we need scarcely say, all-important. Through the working out 
of quantification in relation to the subject, the existing logic has 
attained to whatever of perfection of detail it can pretend to ; 
through its working out in relation to the predicate, it will at- 
tain to the whole perfection of which, as a science, it is suscep- 
tible. The former is substantially the work of Aristotle ; the 
latter is equally so that of Sir William Hamilton. 

To sum up, then, the evidence we have gained : We have 
found, on the one hand, that the express quantification of the 
predicate has been rejected with singular uniformity throughout 
the entire history of the science. On the other hand, that it has 
been sometimes partially adopted in theory, and at other times in 
various ways applied in practice ; only, however, to amend some 
particular detail of the science — it may be to simplify the process 
of conversion — it may be to modify, by a problematical excep- 
tion, some particular rule of syllogism. But we have also seen, 
that its want has never been signalised as a fundamental de- 




APPENDIX. 137 



feet in the original logical analysis ; — a defect through which 
the science had been encumbered by unscientific supports — dis- 
figured by unscientific additions — dwarfed by unscientific re- 
strictions, and thus shorn of its true beauty of proportion and 
completeness ; that it has never, therefore, been employed as a 
principle to reconstruct the whole edifice of the science, and by 
removing what was useless, rejecting what was false, and sup- 
plying what was wanting, to restore it to its perfect and har- 
monious beauty. 

Despite, therefore, the evidence of partial perception which 
we have adduced, the original statement, " that the principle in 
its full scientific significance has been altogether overlooked by 
logicians," is vindicated. 




No. II. 



ON THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE TOUCHING THE IMPLICIT 
QUANTIFICATION OF THE PREDICATE. 



Though logicians have with one consent rejected the eoq)licit, 
they have, nevertheless, always held an implicit quantification 
of the predicate. This was indeed absolutely necessary to the 
existence and working of the science. For since all reasoning 
is in the last resort but the comparison of two terms with a third 
term, — but the perception of how far two terms mutually agree 
or disagree through the perception of how far they agree or dis- 
agree with a third, — it is obviously not only important but im- 
perative that the extent of these terms themselves should be 
taken into account. This is, indeed, the very essence of the 
reasoning. Apart from this there can be no measurement of 
extent, and no conclusion of identity or difference of extent ad 
the result of such measurement. -^^^•^%^'^Ia^^^ 



V OP TH7? 

tTiri7EE3lT7l 



138 APPENDIX. 

In other words, in any syllogism the process of the reasoning 
and the evidence of its validity is the same, and it is the follow- 
ing : — the middle term is the mean or measure ; in the first place, 
one extreme is compared with the middle term, and seen to agree 
with it so far; then the other extreme is compared with the middle, 
and also seen to agree with it so far ; and thereupon this iden- 
tity of agreement is affirmed. But, in either case, if I do not 
know the extent of the term compared, (cannot take it, that is, 
in some definite extent,) I cannot tell how far it agrees with the 
middle. Or, again, if I do not know the extent of the middle 
term, (cannot take it in some definite extent,) I cannot tell 
whether the term to be compared agrees with it in extent or 
not, — whether it is part, or whole, or none. The predicate no- 
tion, however, in every reasoning is one of these terms, and 
stands in one of these relations. It is, therefore, absolutely 
necessary, as we have said, to the validity of the reasoning, that 
it should have a definite quantity ; and a definite quantity, accord- 
ingly, it always has had in the science. This quantity, how- 
ever, instead of being left like that of the subject to reflect 
itself in language according to the whole extent of its possible 
variation as an element of formal thought, was made the sub- 
ject of arbitrary legislation. Logical law enacted that the quan- 
tity of the predicate should always be held particular in affirma- 
tive propositions, and universal in negative ones. That logicians 
by this arbitrary and unjust enactment crippled their science, — 
crippled it too in a useless and preposterous manner — could be 
very easily shown. The natural scientific action of one of its 
parts was at once interfered with ; it could only work now under 
given artificial restrictions — restrictions which had not the 
slightest shadow of scientific warrant for their imposition. 
These restrictions are, indeed, not only artificial but capricious, 
for no reason whatever can be shown why one term of a rela- 
tion of quantity should be made the subject of arbitrary legis- 
lation rather than another. It would have been just as wise 



APPENDIX. 139 

and just as scientific to have laid down arbitrary rules for the 
quantity of the subject as for that of the predicate. Why not, 
it may be asked of the logicians, place the subject under the 
same restrictions, and enact, for instance, that its quantity shall 
always be held universal in affirmative propositions, and parti- 
cular in negative ones? 

The whole subject may be illustrated more fully in detail by 
the use of a figure which we have already partially employed. 
The subject and the predicate may be said to be the legs on 
which the syllogism stands. Its free progress, of course, de- 
pends on the natural unrestricted action of these members. 
Logicians have, however, crippled one of these — the predicate 
— by preventing such natural action. In order, however, that 
the syllogism might work at all after having been thus maimed, 
it became necessary to provide some support for the crippled 
limb. This, accordingly, was found, and in the shape of a body 
of special rules, a crutch which partially supplied the place of 
the natural support, was realised. Why did not the logicians, 
we ask, since they had thus endorsed the principle of such a 
procedure, destroy the natural action of the other limb also, 
and provide it with the same artificial support? They would 
thus have solved the problem, how far the syllogism could pro- 
ceed when altogether deprived of the native strength of its own 
members, and supported on two crutches instead of one ; — an in- 
genious experiment enough, certainly, but one which bears 
exactly the same relation to the natural development of the 
science, that racing in sacks does to the natural exercise of the 
limbs in walking. 

This ingenious problem, however, the logicians have not at- 
tempted in its integrity. They have remained satisfied with its 
partial solution in relation to the predicate. The laws which 
they have laid down for the regulation of its quantity are, as 
we have said, two, viz. : — 



140 APPENDIX. 

1°. That in all affirmative propositions the quantity of the 
predicate is particular. 

2°. That in all negative propositions the quantity of the pre- 
dicate is universal. 

On these two axioms, as they are commonly, but of course 
erroneously termed, the whole detail of the existing logic rests. 
They have determined its peculiar form and necessitated its 
special rules. These special rules may indeed be appropriately 
described as a body of provisions to secure that the predicate is 
always really taken according to the quantity assigned to it in 
the axioms. This will be at once manifest by an examination 
of the demonstrations of those special rules which are sometimes 
given in logical works. These demonstrations contain of course 
the reasons on which the rules rest, and these will be found in 
every case to arise from the necessities of the predicate in rela- 
tion to its implied quantity. We quote the following in illus- 
tration from the Port Royal Logic, where all the special rules 
are briefly but adequately explained. 

" RULES OF THE FIRST FIGURE. 

" The minor must be affirmative ; 

" For, if it were negative, the major would be affirmative by 
the third general rule, and the conclusion negative by the fifth ; 
therefore the greater term would be taken universally in the con- 
clusion, since it would be negative, and particularli/ in the major; 
for it is its attribute in this figure, and would be affirmative, thus 
violating the second rule, which forbids us to conclude from the 
particular to the general. This reason holds also in the third 
figure, where the greater term is also attribute in the major. 

" I'he major must be universal; 

" For, the minor being affirmative, by the preceding rule, the 
middle term, luhich is its attribute, is taken particularly; therefore 
it must be universal in the major, where it is subject, which 
renders this proposition universal ; otherwise it will be taken 



APPENDIX. 141 

twice particularly^ contrary to the first general rule." — Pp. 189, 
190. 

" FIRST RULE OF THE SECOND FIGURE. 

" One of the two propositions mmt he negative^ and consequently 
the conclusion also, hy the sixth general rule ; 

" For, if both propositions were affirmative, the middle, which 
is here always attribute, would he taken twice particularly, contrary 
to the first general rule." — P. 193. 

The necessity of these special rules is manifest, for of those of 
the first figure, if the former were violated, a term which, as 
the predicate of an affirmative proposition, was particular in the 
major premise, would, as the predicate of a negative proposition, 
become universal in the conclusion ; if the latter were violated, 
the middle term would, as predicate in the affirmative minor 
premise, be particular there, as well as in the major, and thus 
remain undistributed. The same reason holds in the first rule of 
the second figure. The other special rules are susceptible of a 
similar explanation, as may be readily tested, by taking them 
and the two axioms of quantity, and working out the relation 
of determination which exists between them. These axioms 
are thus, as we have said, operative through the whole detail 
of formal reasoning, as it stands in the existing logic. Re- 
jecting the explicit, and accepting only the implicit quantification 
of the predicate, the question to be determined by logicians was, 
— how many of the possible forms of reasoning are valid with- 
out such explicit quantification ? The commonly accredited 
syllogisms were the result of this examination. The special 
rules which protect them were generalisations from the causes 
which rendered the rest invalid. Those which severally, accord- 
ing to their figure, obeyed the conditions of these rules, were 
alone accepted. These reasonings were declared, moreover, not 
only to embrace all the valid syllogisms which could be obtained 
under such restrictions, but also to exhaust all the possible forms 



142 APPENDIX. 

allowed by the laws of thought. This is, indeed, one of the 
grounds expressly taken by Pacius in his rejection of a quan- 
tified predicate. He says, (at the close of the second of the ex- 
tracts given from him earlier in the Appendix,) that the quan- 
tification of the predicate is of no use to the syllogism, — that it 
does not at all aid its validity ; and gives a syllogism in Barbara 
of the first figure in illustration of his statement. The answer 
to this is easy. The express quantification of the predicate will 
not, of course, help the validity of those syllogisms which have 
been expressly constructed so as to be independent of its aid ; and 
the cogency of which, therefore, is complete without such quan- 
tification. All the syllogisms of the existing logic are of this 
kind ; and their validity, accordingly, is independent of any such 
expressed quantity. But this does not at all prove, on the one 
hand, that even these would not possess a higher formal com- 
pleteness with the quantity of the predicate expressed ; or on 
the other hand, that there may not be other syllogisms whose 
validity entirely depends on such expressed quantity. This is 
indeed the case ; for on the one hand, everything of force in a 
formal science ought to be formally expressed; and on the 
other, there are a number of forms of reasoning guaranteed by 
the laws of thought., whose validity is not only contributed to, 
but constituted hy^ the expressed quantity of the predicate. 
Looked at therefore from the lower ground of the axioms of 
quantity, and the reasonings possible through them, the ex- 
pressed quantity of the predicate is not absolutely necessary ; 
but, regarded from the higher ground of the laws of thought, 
and their scientific development, this quantification is not only 
imperative, but indispensable. 

These so-called axioms of quantity, it may be worth while to 
notice, are but corollaries from the laws laid down touching 
regular predication ; for if the only lawful predication is that in 
which a genus is predicated of its species, since the genus is al- 
ways of wider extent than its species, when so predicated it can 



APPENDIX. 143 

only be taken in some part of its whole extent, that is say par- 
ticularly. Again, if it be unlawful to affix marks of quantity to 
the predicate, we cannot deny some part of a genus of one of its 
species; and all negative propositions must therefore contain 
repugnant species or genera, which will accordingly be denied 
of eacU other in their ivhole extent. The rules for predication, 
and those for the quantity of the predicate, thus at bottom im- 
ply each other. It would perhaps be difficult to say which were 
cause and which effect ; or rather, it would probably be nearer 
the truth to say, that they are both the result of the same defec- 
tive analysis and want of scientific insight. Out of this original 
defect have arisen, as we have shown, the complexity, the re- 
striction, and the disorder, of which the special rules, and the 
syllogisms they indorse, are at once the evidence and the result. 
The simplicity of the reasoning process, contrasted with the 
complexity of the rules devised for its guidance and protection, 
could hardly, however, fail to arrest the attention of some of 
the many thinkers who have from time to time undertaken their 
exposition. They accordingly have, in various ways, betrayed 
their sense of the want of thorough scientific simplicity and com- 
pleteness which these rules indicated : some, as we have seen, 
by falling upon stray syllogisms which violated the rules, but 
which were nevertheless quite valid, without, however, being 
able to offer any theoretic explanation of the fact : others, 
again, by simplifying the syllogistic law in theory, without 
being able to show how this theoretical simplification could 
be realised in actual practice. A curious instance of this latter 
kind occurs in the Logic of Caspar Wyss, which was published 
at Geneva (where he was for some time Professor) in the year 
1669. He reduces all the rules of syllogism, both the general 
and the special^ to the single one, that every syllogism should have 
three and only three terms. We subjoin his reduction of the 
special rules as a specimen of the way in which he accom- 
plishes this : — 



144 APPENDIX. 

" De Regulis specialibus Syllogismorum. 

" Regiilse speciales syllogismorum sequentes po- 
nuntur a Philosophis : I^ Regula specialis est : In 
prima fig lira, major debet esse universalis. Unde hie 
syllogismus non valet : Omnis homo non est in hac 
urbe ; Tu es homo ; E. tu non es in hac urbe. Item : 
Omne animal non est rationale ; Sed homo est ani- 
mal ; E. homo non est rationalis. 

" Verum contra banc regulam dici potest, illam non esse uni- 
versaliter veram ; si enim toUatur ambiguitas, et sint tantum 
tres termini in syllogisrao, syllogismi primae figurag, ex majori 
particulari, sunt legitimi : v. g. Aliquod animal est rationale ; 
Homo est animal ; E. bomo est rationalis. Quare dicendum 
est : syllogismos superius allatos esse vitiosos, quia in iis dantur 
quatuor termini. In priore enim syllogismo, homo aliter su- 
mitur in majore, quam in minore. In posteriore vero, animal 
aliter sumitur in majore, quam in minore, ut patet attendenti. 

" II*. Regula specialis est : In prima figura, minor 
debet esse affirmata. Unde hie syllogismus non valet : 
Omnis asinus est animal ; Sed homo non est asinus ; 
E. homo non est animal. Item : Omne rationale est 
animal ; Solus homo est rationalis ; E. solus homo 
est animal. 

" Verum contra banc regulam, dici potest, illam non esse uni- 
versaliter veram, eo, quod dentur syllogismi primi© figuras, ex 
minore negata, qui sunt legitimi : v. g. Qui non credit in Cbris- 
tum damnabitur; Sed reprobi non credunt in Christum; E. 
reprobi damnabuntur. Quare dicendum est, syllogismos primas 
figurse, ex minore negata, esse legitimos, si sint tantum tres ter- 



I 



APPENDIX. 145 

mini; esse vero vitiosos, si sint quatuor termini, nt patet in 
syllogismis superius allatis, in quibus sunt duo media, adeoque 
quatuor termini. Nam in priore, asinus est medium in majore, 
non asinus vero, est medium in minore. In posteriore vero 
syllogismo, rationale est medium in majore, non rationale vero, 
est medium in minore. Adde, quod in ejusmodi syllogismis, ani- 
mal aliter sumatur in majore, quam in conclusion e, ut patet 
attendenti. 

" IIP. Regula specialis est : In secunda figura, 
major debet esse universalis. 

" Verum contra banc regulam dici potest, syllogismos se- 
cundae figurse ex majore particulari esse bonos, si sint tantum 
tres termini, non aequivoci ; esse vero vitiosos, si sint quatuor 
termini, sicut diximus, de syllogismis primse figurae ; adeoque 
haec regula, est superflua. 

" Iy^ Regula specialis est : In secunda figura, 
altera prcemissarum debet esse negans ; juxta illud 
vulgatum : ex puris affirmantibus, in secunda figura, 
nihil concluditur. Quare hie syllogismus non valet : 
Asinus est animal; Sed homo est animal; E. homo 
est asinus. Item : Asinus habet aures ; Tu habes 
aures ; E. tu es asinus. 

"Verum, contra banc regulam dici potest, illam non esse uni- 
versaliter veram, cum multi sint syllogismi recti, in secunda 
figura, ex puris affirmantibus : v. g. Omne rationale est risibile ; 
Omnis homo est risibilis ; E. omnis homo est rationalis. Item : 
Omne brutum est animal ; Omnis asinus est animal ; E. omnis 
asinus est brutum. Quare dicendum est, ex puris affirmantibus, 
in secunda figura recte concludi, si sint tantum tres termini; 

K 



146 APPENDIX. 

male vero concludi, si sint quatuor termini, ut patet in syllo- 
gismis vitiosis superius allatis. In priore enim, animal aliter 
suraitnr in majore quam in minore ; in majore enim, sumitur 
pro animali conlracto ad asinum, in minore vero, pro animali 
contracto ad hominem. In posteriore vero syllogismo, medium, 
scilicet aures, aliter sumitur in majore ac in minore. In ma- 
jore enim, aures sumuntur pro auribus asininis ; in minore vero, 
pro auribus humanis. 

" V^. Regula specialis est : In tertia figura, minor 
debet esse afirmata. 

" Verum, contra banc regulam dici potest, syllogismos tertise 
figurse, ex minori negante, posse esse rectos, modo, non sint 
quatuor termini, et nuUus terminus sit aequivocus, sicuti dixi- 
mus de syllogismis primae figurse; atque adeo base regula est 
superflua. 

" VI^. Regula specialis est : In tertia figura, con- 
clusio debet esse particularis : Unde hie syllogismus 
non valet : Omnis homo est rationahs ; Omnis homo 
est animal ; E. omne animal est rationale. 

" Yerum, contra banc regulam dici potest, syllogismos tertiee 
figurae, conclusionem universalem habentes, esse rectos, modo, 
sint tantum tres termini non a^quivoci. In syllogismo autem, 
superius allato, sunt quatuor termini, eo, quod animal aliter su- 
matur in conclusione, aliter vero in minore. Quod si, animal, 
in conclusione sumatur eodem modo ac in minore, scilicet pro 
animali identificato cum bomine, conclusio erit vera, omne 
scilicet animal, identificatum cum bomine, esse rationale; et 
sic, syllogismus erit rectus, ut patet attendenti. 

" Ex bis omnibus patet: omnes regulas syllogismorum, esse 
superliuas, bac unica excepta, in syllogismo, debent esse tantum tres 



APPENDIX. 147 

termini^ nonplures, nee pauciores ; et per consequens, omnia sophis- 
mata, ad unum posse revocari, scilicet ad sophisma ab gequivo- 
catione." Logica C. Wyssii. Genevse, 1669, pp. 318-321. 

All that is here said touching the certainty of obtaining valid 
syllogisms, if we only avoid having more than three terms, is 
quite true ; but the question arises, how are we, under the ex- 
isting syllogistic forms, to avoid having more than three terms ? 
The answer is more simple than satisfactory. It is, by observ- 
ing those very precautions which the special rules enjoin ; — in 
other words, by recalling in practice the code which bad been 
theoretically abolished. The reduction of the special rules is 
so far just, but not a single step is thus taken towards relieving 
the science in its practical working from the necessity which 
imposed them. This could only have been done by the express 
quantification of the predicate, without which, indeed, many of 
the syllogisms given by Wyss in his reduction are formally 
worthless, but of which he does not seem to have had a glimpse. 



No. III. 



ON FIGURE. 



The opinions which have been from time to time held by 
logicians touching the nature and value of the Figures, (that is 
to say, of the second and third,) seem to have been very fluc- 
tuating, if not inconsistent and even contradictory. Some have 
maintained their independence as separate forms of reasoning. 
Others, again, and these are the great majority, have maintain- 
ed, that whatever value they possess is reflected on them from 
the first figure, and thus solely derived from their connexion 



148 APPENDIX. 

more or less direct with it. Of the former, some inconsequently 
retained the doctrine of reduction^ and thus neutralised by a 
vicious practice their purer faith; a few, again, altogether 
rejected it ; while Valla (abolishing the third) even proposes 
to reduce the moods of the first figure to those of the second. 
Then, again, with regard to the different members of the syllogism 
in these figures, opinions seem to have been almost equally 
divided. The great majority maintained that the syllogisms in 
these figures had a determinate major and minor premise, and 
consequently a single determinate conclusion. Others, again, 
could see no grounds sufficiently decisive on which to establish 
such certainty of premise, and held, as Apuleius and Valla, 
in certain cases, two conclusions. The former, however, while 
at one in their belief, are by no means unanimous as to the 
grounds on which they vindicate a determinate major and minor 
premise to these figures. They all agree, of course, that the 
major premise is that in which the major term is found. All 
the difficulty lay in discovering the major term ; and the ways in 
which this was attempted to be done are, so far as I have met 
with them, of the most inconsequent and assumptive kind. 

Sometimes the major term was held to be the predicate of the 
question, or rather the term occupying the predicate place in 
the question, that, to wit, touching which the doubt arises ; 
for example, if it were inquired whether man were a stone, 
stone would on this doctrine be the major term. Sometimes, 
again, the major was held to be the term which was first 
enounced; and often enough a major term was conveniently 
postulated through the arbitrary assumption of a major pre- 
mise. The methods, indeed, by which it has been attempted 
to vindicate determinate members to the syllogisms of these 
figures, all resolve themselves, in the last resort, to a beg- 
ging of the question. This was generally done in one of two 
ways ; either a determinate conclusion was begged in order to 
establish determinate premises, or determinate premises were 



APPENDIX. 



149 



begged in order to obtain a single determinate conclusion. I 
had intended to have gone into this whole question at some 
length historically, and for this purpose had marked a number 
of references in various logical writers ; but though those are 
numerous and varied in character, I do not feel that I am by 
any means in possession of sufficient evidence to determine his- 
torically what the catholic doctrine in relation to the above 
points really was. I have accordingly thrown them aside, and 
must for the present leave the statement given in the body of 
the work as it stands. 

One thing, however, is plain ; that from the earliest to the 
latest times the procedure of the other figures was felt to be less 
direct, and their conclusion less authoritative than those of the 
first. To rectify this imperfection two processes have been 
devised. The first — that of Reduction — is of old date in the sci- 
ence, and is that usually practised by the logicians ; the second 
— which may be termed that of Exposition — is comparatively 
new ; for though anticipated in some of its details, it is substan- 
tially Kant's.* This process is that briefly expounded and ap- 
plied in the text. These two processes have this much in com- 
mon — that they accomplish their end by the transposition and 
conversion of propositions. In the former, however, the change 
made in the proposition is accomplished by formal conversion, 
in the latter by real inference. Of reduction we have already 
spoken in the Essay, and need not dwell upon it again here. 
With regard to the process of Kant, it is itself as tedious and 
involved as are the reasonings which it is employed to explicate. 
It is at best but a round-about way of accomplishing what per- 
haps there is no need for doing at all. The new doctrine, in- 



* Kant first expounded this speculation of his in a tract published in 
1762, and entitled, *' The false Subtilty of the Four Syllogistic Figures Demon- 
strated," (Die falsche Spitzfindigkeit der vier Syllogistischen Figuren er- 
wiesen.) This is, I believe, republished with Kant's Logic, in the French 
translation of that work by M. Tissot. 



150 APPENDIX. 

deed, does away with the necessity or usefulness of any such 
process. On that doctrine this exposition is itself expounded, 
and this abolition of the figures itself abolished : — figure appears 
in its true character as an unessential variation of syllogistic 
form ; the several figures remain in their integrity with what- 
ever of special value they ever possessed, while the essential 
form of the reasoning, when fully stated, is manifest through all 
the accidental positions of its constituent elements. The same 
reasoning may be given in either of these accidental varieties of 
position ; but since it obviously appears as essentially one, its 
cogency remains the same, and reduction and exposition are 
therefore equally vain and useless. 



No. ly. 

ON NOTATION. 



The notation employed in the text is that of one of the 
systems devised by Sir W. Hamilton, in order to represent to the 
eye the various possible forms of reasoning by distinctive sym- 
bols. It has all the virtues of a perfect notation. It is simple, 
distinctive,* perspicuous, and complete. It can represent any 

* That it be distinctive is a virtue of first account in any system of logical 
notation; for to borrow the accredited signs of any other science is on 
every account to be avoided. I need scarcely say, therefore, how earnestly 
I unite with Mr. Mansell in deprecating ** that mathematical method of ex- 
position," which is, as he truly says, in relation to logic, " alike injurious 
to the science and repulsive to the learner." 

The introduction of mathematical symbols and methods of working into 
logic is indeed, on every account, to be protested against by all who are in- 
terested in the welfare of the science. The rejection of these is the more 
to be insisted on, as well-meaning efi'orts still continue to be made to im- 
prove logic by mathematical treatment, if not indeed to afford it mathe- 



APPENDIX. 



151 



relation of the terms, any order of the propositions, any extent 
of quantity. The letters represent the terms, the points their 
quantity, and the lines with the letters the propositions. The 
letters express, by position to the eye, the relation which the 
terms have in thought, the middle being placed between the ex- 
tremes. The meaning of the points has been already explained ; 
the colon denotes universal quantity, " all ;" the comma particu- 
lar quantity, " some." Of the lines the shorter denote the pre- 
mises, the longer the conclusion ; the thick end denotes the 
subject, the thin end the predicate. Thus the first syllogism given 
in the table would read as follows : — 

All B is all A. 

All C is all B. Therefore, 

All C is all A. 
Negative propositions are marked by crossing the copulative 
line on which the negation falls, as shown in the premises of the 
negative syllogisms given in the table. I may here notice that 
the cross is absent from the lines of conclusion in these syllo- 
gisms by accident, and not by design. It was omitted in the 
cutting of the type ; and I must request the reader to be good 
enough to supply it by the pen. 

This system of notation will now probably be generally known 
to logical students through the exposition of it given by Mr. 



matical protection. With all such help, however, it can well afford to dis- 
pense ; if it could not — indeed, if this were not to it hindrance rather than 
help — it would have no claim to rank as a separate science. The notion of 
extending the sphere of mathematics so as to include logic, is as theoreti- 
cally absurd as its realisation is practically impossible. To identify logic 
with mathematics is to make the whole equal to its part : while to subor- 
dinate the former to the latter is to increase the marvel, by making the 
whole less than its part. And those who, without attempting this, display 
their skill by translating logical forms into mathematical language, accom- 
plish a work just about as useful and praiseworthy as that " of the two 
zealous, but thick-headed logicians — Herlinus and Dasypodius by name — 
who rendered the first six books of Euclid into formal syllogisms." All 
such endeavours possess the singular merit of making logic as repulsive as 
possible, without doing the least service to mathematics. 



152 APPENDIX. 

Thomson in his "Outline of the Laws of Thought," where further 
details respecting it may be found. Mr. Thomson says, in intro- 
ducing his explanation, that " many of the different elements 
of the notation are not new." With all respect for the statement 
of so careful and zealous a student of logic as Mr. Thomson, I 
must say I cannot but think that this is a mistake. I do not 
know, of course, what authority Mr. Thomson may have for his 
statement ; but, with some general knowledge of most of the 
previous systems of logical notation which have been employed, 
I cannot recall any which anticipate the present, either in no- 
tion or detail ; unless^ indeed, the bare use of lines, though in a 
totally different manner, can be said to do so. I cannot think, 
however, that this is what Mr. Thomson refers to ; for the linear 
notation is a separate system, altogether distinct from the one in 
question. 

I had intended to have introduced here fuller tables, running 
the positive and negative syllogisms through all the figures, as 
well as some specimens of other systems of notation which Sir 
William Hamilton has kindly placed at my disposal. I am not 
without hope, however, that Sir William will himself publish 
them in full before very long ; and I need scarcely say, there- 
fore, how gladly I relinquish their partial introduction here. I 
know how earnestly all who are interested in logical science 
will unite with me in the hope that Sir William Hamilton's 
health and leisure may be such as to enable him to carry 
through the press at no distant interval some portion of his 
promised work. 



APPENDIX. 15{ 



NOTE BY SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON. 

The following note contains a summary of my more matured 
doctrine of the Syllogism, in so far as it is relative to the pre- 
ceding Essay. 

All mediate inference is one — that incorrectly called Categori- 
cal; for the Conjunctive and Disjunctive forms of Hypothetical 
reasoning are reducible to immediate inferences. 

Mentally one, the Categorical Syllogism^ according to its 
order of enouncement, is either Analytic or Synthetic. Analytic, 
if (what is inappropriately styled) the conclusion be expressed 
first, and (what are inappropriately styled) the premises be then 
stated as its reasons. Synthetic, if the premises precede, and, 
as it were, eifectuate the conclusion. These general forms of 
the syllogism can with ease be distinguished by a competent 
notation ; and every special variety in the one has its corre- 
sponding variety in the other. 

Taking the syllogism under the latter form, (which, though 
perhaps less natural, has been alone cultivated by logicians, and 
to which, therefore, exclusively all logical nomenclature is rela- 
tive,) — the syllogism is again divided into the Unjigiired and 
the Figured, 

The Unfigured Syllogism is that in which the terms compared 
do not stand to each other in the reciprocal relation of subject 
and predicate, being in the same proposition, either both sub- 
jects or both predicates. Here the dependency of Breadth and 
Depth, (Extension and Intension,, Extension and Comprehension, 
&c.,) does not subsist, and the order, accordingly, of the pre- 
mises is wholly arbitrary. This form has been overlooked by 
the logicians, though equally worthy of development as .iny 

L 



164 APPENDIX. 

other ; in fact, it affords a key to the whole mystery of Syllo- 
gism. And what is curious, the canon by which this syllogism 
is regulated, (what may be called that of logical Analogy or 
Proportion,) has, for above five centuries, been commonly 
stated as the one principle of reasoning, whilst the form of rea- 
soning itself, to which it properly applies, has never been gene- 
ralized. This canon, which had been often erroneously, and 
never adequately enounced, in rules four, three, two, or one, is 
as follows : — In as far as two notions, (notions proper or indivi- 
duals,) either both agree, or one agreeing^ the other does not, with a 
common third notion ; in so far, these notions do or do not agree 
with each other. — The propositions of this syllogism in no-figure 
are marked in the scheme of pure logical notation by horizontal 
lines of uniform breadth. 

In the Figured Syllogism, the terms compared are severally 
subject and predicate, consequently, in reference to each other, 
containing and contained in the counter wholes of Intension 
and Extension. Its canon is : — What worse relation of subject and 
predicate subsists between either of two terms and a common third term, 
with which one, at least, is positively related; that relation subsists be- 
tween the two terms themselves. — In the scheme of pure logical 
notation a horizontal tapering line marks this relation ; the sub- 
ject standing at the broad, the predicate at the pointed end. 

There are three, and only three. Figures — the same as those 
of Aristotle ; and in each of these we may distinguish the orders 
of Breadth and of Depth. 

The First Figure emerges, when the middle term is subject 
of the one extreme and predicate of the other ; that is, when we 
pass from the one extreme to the other, through the middle, in 
the order whether of Extension or of Intension. In the nota- 
tion of this Figure, we may of course arbitrarily make either of 
these orders to proceed from left to right, or from right to left ; 
that is, two arrangements are competent. — There is here, deter- 
minately, one direct and one indirect conclusion. 




APPENDIX. 155 



The Second Figure arises, when the middle term is the predi- 
cate of both extremes ; the order of Breadth proceeding from 
middle to extremes, the order of Depth from extremes to middle. 

The Third Figure is determined, when the middle term is the 
subject of both extremes; the order of Extension proceeding 
from extremes to middle, the order of Intension from middle to 
extremes. 

In the Second and Third Figures there is thus only one ar- 
rangement possible in logical notation. And as Extension and 
Intension are here in equilibrium, there is no definite major and 
minor premise, and consequently no indirect, but two indifferent 
conclusions. — This is best marked by two crossing lines under 
the premises, each marking the extreme standing to the other 
as subject or as predicate. 

Of course each Figure has its own canon, but these it is not 
here requisite to state. The First Figure, besides its more 
general canon, has also two more special, — one for Syllogisms 
in the order of Extension, and one for Syllogisms in the order 
of Intension. And what is remarkable, Aristotle's Dictum de 
Omni, &c., (in the Prior Analytics,) gives that for Extension, 
whilst his rule — Prcedicatum prcedicati^ &c., (in the Categories,) 
affords that for Intension, although this last order of Syllogism 
was not developed by him or the logicians ; — both inadequately. 

In regard to the notation of Quality and Quantity in the syllo- 
gisms unfigured and figured : — Negation is marked by a per- 
pendicular line, which may be applied to the copula, to the 
term, or to the quantification. — As to Quantity, (for there are 
subordinate distinctions,) it is sufiicient here to state, that there 
is denoted — by the sign [ ? or « ] (for the quantity of one term 
ought to face the other), some; — by the sign [ *.], all; — by the sign 
[ . ], 05 half; — by the sign [ ' or * ], more than a half The last 
two are only of use to mark the ultra-total distribution of the 
middle term of a syllogism, between both the premises, as af- 
fording a certain inference, valid, but of little utility. This I 



156 APPENDIX. 

once thought had been first generalized by me, but I have since 
found it fully stated and fairly appreciated by Lambert, to say 
nothing of Fromraichen. 

Above (p. 76) is a detail of ray pure logical notation, as ap- 
plicable to the thirty-six moods of the first figure. The order 
there is not, however, that which I have adopted. The follow- 
ing is my final arrangement, and within brackets is its corre- 
spondence with the numbers of that given above : — The moods 
are either A) Balanced^ or B) Unbalanced. In the former class 
both terms and propositions are balanced, and it contains two 
moods — i ; ii, [=i ; ii.] In the latter class there are two sub- 
divisions. For either, a) the terms are unbalanced, — iii, iv, 
[=xi, xii] ; or, b) both the terms and propositions are unbalanced, 
— V, vi; vii, viii ; ix, x ; xi, xii, [=vii, viii ; iii, iv ; v, vi ; ix, 
X.] The following equation applies to my table of moods given 
in Mr. Thomson's Laws of Thought; — i; ii ; xi, xii; vii, viii; 
iii, iv; v, vi; ix, x. — The present arrangement is also more 
minutely determined by another principle, but this it is not 
here requisite to state. 

If we apply the moods to any matter however abstract, say 
letters, there will emerge forty -two syllogisms ; for the formal 
identity of the balanced moods will then be distinguished by a 
material difference. On the contrary, if we regard the mere 
form,al equivalence of the moods, these will be reduced to twenty- 
one reasonings, — seven affirmative, and fourteen negative. Of the 
balanced moods, i and ii are converted each into itself; of the 
unbalanced, every odd, and the even number immediately fol- 
lowing, are convertible ; and in negatives, the first and second 
moods (a, b) of the corresponding syzygy or jugation, is reduced 
from or to the second and first moods {b, a) of its reciprocal. 

There are no exceptions. The canon is thorough -going. 
Only it must be observed : that the doctrine is erroneous which 
teaches, that a universal negation is not a woi^se relation than a 
particular ; and that the identity of a negative with an aflnirma- 



APPENDIX. 



167 



five mood, is regulated exclusively by the identity in quantity of 
the two syzygies or antecedents. The Greeks, in looking to 
the conjugation of the premises alone, are more accurate than 
the Latins, who regard all the three propositions of a syllogism 
in the determination of a mood. 

It is not to be forgotten, that as the correlation of the logical 
terms ought to be known only from the expression, (ex facie 
propositionis aut syllogisrai,) for all other knowledge of the re- 
ciprocal dependence of notions is contingent, material, and ex- 
tralogical; and as the employment of letters, following upon 
each other in alphabetical order, may naturally suggest a cor- 
responding subordination in the concepts which they denote : I 
have adopted the signs C and F, which are each the third letter 
in its respective alphabet, for the extremes ; and the sign M, for 
the middle term of the syllogism. The scheme is thus eman- 
cipated from all external associations, and otherwise left free in 
application. I also transpose the former symbols in the in^ 
terconvertible moods ; so that whereas in the one stand C M F, 

in the other stand F M C. 

W. H. 



EDINBURGH I T. CONSTABLE, PRINTER TO rfER MAJESTY. 



ERRATA. 

Supply brackets to the extracts given from Ploucquet at the foot of pages 

22, 23. 
Page 48, second line from bottom, ./or premiss, read premise. 

,, 73, line 17, note, /or tracing, read touching. 

„ 85, line 20, /or eisque, read ejusque. 



^^^Al^ 



OF THT: 



:UHIVBIISIT7^ 




POBT-ROTAL LOGIC, 



In r2mo, cloth, price 5s. 6d., 

LOGIC; OR, THE ART OF THINKING. 

BEING THE PORT-ROYAL LOGIC. 

Translated from the French. With an Introduction. 

By THOMAS SPENCER BAYNES. 



This work possesses nearly every quality desirable in a text-book, and, in 
this point of view, stands in remarkable contrast to the feeble, superficial, and 
incomplete compilations with which even our best schools of learning have 
hitherto been contented. There have been two previous translations into Eng- 
lish, but the present is the only trustworthy one. We have to express our en- 
tire satisfaction with the manner in which Mr. Baynes has discharged his duty, 
and to express the hope that a gentleman who can write so well as he has done 
in his introductory essay, may soon appear before the public again in the char- 
acter of author." Critic. 

" With regard to this translation we need say little. The ability, accomplish- 
ments, and competence of Mr. Baynes are a suflBcient guarantee for its ac- 
curacy. We have examined several parts of it, and can freely affirm, that the 
terseness and precision of the original are admirably preserved in the transla- 
tion. The manner in which the publishers have performed their part is every 
way worthy of the work itself. We would, therefore, earnestly recommend this 
treatise to all who are desirous of acquiring habits of accurate thinking. No 
modern work in English with which we are acquainted is at all so well 
adapted to secure this end — Whately not excepted. We trust, then, that 
the success of this book will be proportioned to its merits ; and, in parting 
with Mr. Baynes, we would express our hope that he will ere long favour us 
with other similar contributions from his pen, which are at present so much 
needed in this country, and for which his acute philosophical powers and great 
stores of knowledge so well qualify him." Edi7iburgh News. 

" The Port-Royal Logic, though familiar to the more advanced logicians of 
this as of other countries, and appreciated by them as it deserves to be, has not 
hitherto met with an English translator capable of doing, or who has done, any- 
thing like justice to the work. Mr. Baynes has a freedom and power which 
could only have been achieved by one fully conversant, not only with both the 
languages he has to deal with, but the subject of which the book treats ; while 
we instinctively feel the rendering to be faithful, without necessity for reference 
to the original, from its reticence of that idiomatic spirit which so pleasantly in- 
troduces us to the individualities of its authors, without that undue deference to 
the mere idiomatic form which might have painfully obtruded on us continually 
that they were men of another country and another era." 

Caledonian Mercury. 

" The translation is evidently the product of an accomplished scholar and an 
expert logician — who has done good service to the cause of mental improve- 
ment by the publication of this volume, appropriately dedicated to Sir William 
Hamilton, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh, 
to whose kind encouragement the author expresses many obligations." 

Glasgow Constitutional. 

" We have much pleasure in commending this volume to the favourable 
notice of students and intelligent general readers ; and have to bear testimony 
to the accuracy, spirit, and elegance with which the translation is eifected." 

Scottish Press. 

" Mr. Baynes has performed a welcome service to the student. The Port- 
Royal Logic needs no commendation from us ; and this neatly-printed transla- 
tion of it will contribute, we trust, to make it better known to the youth of 
the country." British Quarterly Review. 

SuTHEi.LAND &. Kxox, Edinburgh ; Simpkin, Marshall, & Co., London. 



MR. M'COSH ON THE METHOD OF THE DIVINE 
GOVERNMENT. 



In the Press, Second Edition of 

THE METHOD OF THE DIYINE GOYEMMENT, 

PHYSICAL AND MORAL. 
By the rev. JAMES M'COSH, A.M. 



" Aloof from any difference of opinion, and though I have as yet only read 
the work in part, it appears to me worthy of the highest encomium, not only 
from the excellence of the intention, but" for the ability with which it is exe- 
cuted. It is refreshing to read a work so distinguished for originality and 
soundness of thinking, especially as coming from an author of our own coun- 
try." Sir William Hamilton, Bart. 

" In the writer of this work we meet with a man of extraordinary calibre, 
alike remarkable for the vigour and originality of his thinking — for the fine 
taste and freshness of his writing — for the extent of his learning, and the 
breadth and minuteness of his acquaintance with those sciences which, from 
the circumstance that they are prosecuted with avidity by the greater minds of 
the age, impart, more than the others, colour and tone to the age's thinking. 
Mr. Si'Cosh's work is of the compact cast and thought-eliciting complexion, 
which men do not willingly let die ; and we promise such of our readers as may 
possess themselves of it much entertainment and instruction of a high order, 
and a fund of solid thought which they will not soon exhaust." Witness. 

" To the great task which he has thus set himself, Mr. M'Cosh has brought 
great powers and ample resources. He is evidently a man of a profoundly plii- 
losophic spirit, and at the same time a man of extensive and varied culture in 
science and literature. His philosophic reading seems to have been very ex- 
tensive, embracing not only all the better authors in theological, metaphysical, 
and ethical science, but also the most approved writers on the various branches 
of physical speculation. He combines with this a power of independent think- 
ing and original speculation which enables him to move easily under the accu- 
mulated mass of his learning, and at the same time to apply what he has learned 
from others to purposes of his own. Perhaps, for most readers, less copious- 
ness of matter, and greater condensation and point in respect of argumentation, 
would have been an advantage, as it requires considerable previous familiarity 
with the subject to be able always to find the author's bearings in the extensive 
field he has selected for exploration. To others, however, who desire not 
merely to gather a result, but also to witness the process by which the author 
has himself advanced to it, the plan Mr. M'Cosh has followed will have its 
charms ; whilst for those who find it somewhat difficult to follow him, the sum- 
maries he has given at successive stages of his argument will, doubtless, prove 
serviceable. We may add, that he possesses an enviable power of apt and 
striking illustration, by which he is enabled both to relieve the attention and 
facilitate the comprehension of the reader in the abstruse parts of his book." 

British Quarterly Revieiv. 



DESCARTES. 



In the Press, 

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF DESCARTES 
ON METHOD. 

By JOHN VEITCH. 



Sutherland & Knox, Edinburgh ; Simpkin, Marshall, & Co., Loiidoti. 