
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



I 




J 



%ilt^ 



-e,/^^ 



pi^^w) 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogIc 



MANUAL OF LOGIC, 



DEDUCTIVE AND IHDTJCTIVE. 



H. H. MUNRO. 



it i> reagon wUch sets in csder and finishes all things, it onght not 

Itsalf to be left in diaorder." — Stoic. ..-¦^rT — ~~.^ 



GLASGOW: UAUEICE DOLE AND SON. 

LOHDON: HIHILTOH, JDAMS tXM CO. 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogle 



PEETACE. 



The object contemplated in the following pages is to 
present the tyro with a eucdnot, yet comprehensive; view 
of Logic in the simplest possible form. 

InetruotioD in Logic is now no longer confined to 
Colleges and Universities ; it has been introduced into 
many of our schools and Bcademies ; and it is hoped that 
an effort to simpliiy, without compromising, the dietinc- 
tive characteristics of a stady, so elegant in its nature, and 
so higlily calculated to train the youthful mind to correct 
habits of thought, may not be unaooeptahle to the latter 
class of seminaries. 

. The irriter has been induced to this undertaking, Irom 
its having appeared to him, when employed as a tutor in 
Logic, that an elementary manual, more simple in its 
phraseology, and more copious in illustrations and ex- 
amples, than any of the treatises now in use, might 
tend, in some measure, to faoilitate an earlier and easier 
aoquaintance with the science than is at present at- 



In the hope of securing this object, the use of abstract 
symbols in illustration has been almost entirely dis- 



hyGoogle 



carded; foi althoagh coovenjent for the compiler of a 
lo^cal treatise, and intelligible to the advanced student, 
they are invariably unintereBdng, if not repulsive, to tbe 
beginner. 

Simplicity has been invaiiably adhered to, in selecting 
examples, alike in propositions and syllogisms ; but it is 
hoped that they are not of such a nature as to incur the 
charge of triviality, so frequently brought against works 
on Logic, owing to the meagreness of the illustrations 
usually employed. 

The conflicting views entertained, regarding the true 
province of Logic, surround the publication of an ele- 
mentary treatise with peculiar difficulties. Any person, 
however, who has duly considered the matter, can have 
little difficulty in deciding, that if Logio is to be consi- 
dered a distinct and self-sufficient scientific art, the for- 
mal view mnst be adopted ; for this is the only aspect 
under which its proper function can be adequately de- 
fined and defended. It is possible, however, that the 
disciples of the formal school, in their abhorrence of the 
material and verbal views, have somewhat overstrained 
their own tlieory; and that, in order to arrive at a yet 
more satisfactory definition, they must either ^ree to a 
sUght compromise, or reject, as estralogical, many mat- 
ters admitted at present into logical works. 

In declaring his adhesion to the formal view of the 
province of Logic, the writer readily admits that he has 
introduced into the following pages much that ia extra- 



hyGoogle 



paEFACB. iii 

logical ; asd his apolo^ is, that bia object was not to 
vindicate any partioulaz theory, but rather to lay before 
the tyro whatever seemed most aseAil as an introduotioD 
to the subject, more particularly ae it has Dot as yet been 
determined to vhat special branch of knowledge matters 
now deemed eztralogical are to be assigned. 

The discussion of vexed questions has been altogether 
excluded from the text, as their introduction seemed in- 
consistent with the plaiuuess requisite in an elementary 
work; but when considered necessary, they have been 
adverted to in Notes. 

To the authors of the many very valuable works on 
Logic, which have recently emanated from Oxford, the 
writer gratefully acknowledges his obligations. The 
treatises allud«d to are obviously intended to supply the 
defects and correct the errors of the University Text- 
book, with such additions as have seemed necessary to 
prepare students for the present high standard of logioal 
examinatioDS. But although extremely valuable in this 
respect, the works referred to have left the necessity of a 
work purely introductory unsupplied. 

The writer also wiUingly acknowledges the benefits he 
has derived from the unrivalled article by Sir W. Hamil- 
ton in the ' Edinburgh Beview,' as may be seen from the 
ample use made of its contents throughout this Manual. 
To this article the more correct views of the province of 
Logic, recently adopted in this countiy, are mainly 
attributable. 



hyGoogle 



It was origiDally intended to treat of Induolive Logic 
at some length in this JManual ; but the unexpected 
space which Deductive Logic has occupied, has rendered 
a full consideration of it incompatible with the publish- 
ing arrangements of the present edition. 

Glaboow, JaB«ary!'1660. 



hyGoogle 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTEE I. 
Sboqon L Heads of the AncEeot Lo^o — Simple Apprehenmon, 
Jodgment, Keasoning-— General Eiplanatjon of this Divinon — 
Rationale of this DiriaioQ — Notes, .... 

SacnoH n. DefiuitioD of Simple Apprehennon — IHvided into In- 
conqJex and Ccmplex — Inixanplez Appreheniion ezpluned — 
Complex Apprehendon aiplmned— Simple Terms ezpluned — 
Simple Terms may coQinat of one or more Words — Errors ioddent 
to Simple Apprehension, Jndgmsnt, and Seasoning — Terms de- 
fined — Divided into Simple, Coinplei, and Deoomplex^Simple 
Terms — Oitegorematic, SjDcategorematio, ftnd Hized — Simple 
Terms ezfJained acoording to this Drrimim — Complex Twnii 
explained — Deoon^ei Terms expli^ed — Definition of the Lopoil 
Term — The Logical Yorm tUllded into Singtilsr and Common — 
Singular and Common Terms explained — Vuioos Names appli- 
cable to Common Terms — Notes, 

CHAPTER II. 
Section L Abstraction explained and iUostnUed — GenaaHsataDn 
explained and iQastnited — Nominalism and Baalism — Notes, 



hyGoogle 



Sbctioh TL Extennon and Comprebenwon of Tenna eipluned — 
Scheme of Exteneion uid ComprebenBion, . . . 32S7 

Sbctioh m. The PredicablsB — GenenJ EiplBJUtion, with Exam- 
plea — Scheme of the PorphjriaD Tree — Definition and Eip]aa&- 
tioD of Genus — Definitdon uid Explanation of Spedea — Scheme ot 
Subaltern Genera and Infinue Spedea — Definition and Eiplana- 
tJon of Difierentia — Divided into Generic and Spedfic — Definition 
¦od Explanation of Proprinm — Divided into Generic and Spedfic 

ofPredJoables, with thdr Snbdivisians, . . 87-62 

SKCTioa IV. TbB Categories or PredioaniBnte— EnmnBration of 

them — Ariatotelic Enumeration adopted, as simplified bj Sir W, 
- Hamilton— CUeai£catiansof Locke, Hume, East, Mill, Thomson, 64-69 

Sbctiom v. Division — Rules of Logical Division — Logussl AVholes 

of Exteasian and Comprebension— BoetMna on Diviaion—Notea, 69-75 

Sbctioh TL Definition — Defimtiou of two kinds — Nominal and 
Real— Rnlee of Definition— AristoUe's riew of Defimtiou, . 76-83 

Sectiok Vn. Of the Distribntdon of Terms— Of the Subject— Of 
the Predicate, ...... S3-8B 

CHAPTER III. 
SEonoir L Jodgmtot — Simple Pn^Mjsitionj-^Diviskai <rf Ptopoai- 
tions — Substance of Pnqiodtions — Qnali^ of Pcopoutions — 
Quantit;<tf Propositions— Notes, .... 89-101 

Sbctiok n. Modality of Propoatioiis — Eliamination of Aristotle's 
four Modes, ....... 104-110 

Sbctiox in. The Opposition of Propositions— Snballmution— 



hyGoogle 



Contraiy Oppodtion — Snb-oontraiy Oppodtion — ContrBdictory 
Oppositjon — Opposition of Singukr PcopMitionB, . . 110-131 

Sacnon IV. CoarerBioa of Pn^iodtioiu — Simpk ConTenioii — 
Convendon of UmTereal Nc^tivea — CoiiTersiiin of Puticnlar 
AffinaatiTe» — CoitventiNi per AccUaiu — Convenfam of nuiTeml 
Affimutiyea — Conreraoa of noiTersal NegUivea — ConTsnion by 
Conb'^iodtiui or N^istkni, ..... 122-180 

CHAPTER IV. 
Skctioh I. Of S jHogiem — Rnl«g of Syllogkni— Canons — Rnloi of 
SyllogLsm of two kinds — General and Speinal — General Bolea 
expUinod and exemplified — Spddal RnleH expired tud oxeDl' 
pliBed—Plgurea of Syllogism— Moods of Syllogism, . . 130-168 

SsonoN n. Redaction of Syllc^^sma — Redaction, of two kiude — 
Direct and Indirect — EiamplBB, .... 168-176 

Section HI. Rednctjo per Impossible en ad Absnidom — Exam- 
ples — Componnd Fropodlioiis, .... 176-lSC 

Sectioh IV. Cosditumal Syllogisms — DiqanctiTe Syllogisms — 

186-192 



Seotiok V. Of the Dilemma — Destructive and ConrtrnotiTe. 
Examples, ....... 192-201 

SbCtiok YL OftheEnthymeme—AiistotelicTiswof theEnthy' 
meme — Ordinary yiew — Rnlce — Examples, . . . 201-208 

SEcnos Vn. Of the Epicbeirema— Explanation— Examples, 208-210 

SzcTlOH Vm. Of the Sorites — Its meaning as a spedes of argn- 
mflntation---Expanded into aepaiate Syllogiama — Roles — Exam- 
ples— Tbe Godenian Sorites expluned, . . . 211-218 



hyGoogle 



TtU CONTEKTS. 

I Sectiox IX. Of Che Eiamplo— Different torn lodndiCHl — Exam- 

, plea, ... . . . . . 218-S20 

I 

Sicnos X. Of Scfthisnu — Divided into Falladei in the E^iiwe*- 
I aion, and F&UaciM in th« Matter— Both kinds eiplained ud 

ezemplIGed — Of Indndaon— Ezpiuned ai nndentood liy Arit- 

totle— Vlewi cS the natli 

view adopted, 



hyGoogle 



INTRODUCTION. 



The oooflicting opinions entertained by writere on Logic, 
as to its proper province, and also as to whether it is an 
art or science, or both, veriiies the adage — Omttis t^finitio 
periculoaa est. Aristotle has unfortunately left us no de- 
finition of Logic ; and from the mixed nature of the con- 
tents of the Organon, it vould certaiiily have been difficult 
to do BO. 

That Logic is both a science and an art has always been 
admitted by every one acquainted with its proper proirince 
and nature. It is a science, inasmuch as by analysing 
the elements, prinoiples, and stmcture of arguments, it 
teaches us how to discov^ their truths, or detect tbeir 
fallacies, and point out the sources of such errors. Jt is 
an art, inasmuch as it teaches us to arrange arguments 
in suoh a manner as that their truth may be most readily 
perceived, or their falsehood detected. 

It would be out of place here to enter on an examina- 
tion of many definitions, as it would lie an unprofitable 
encroachment on space that may be more usefiiUy occu- 
pied. It is only intended, therefore, to consider briefly 
those of Dr Beid, Archbishop Wfaat«ley, and Sir William 
Hamilton. 

h 



hyGoogle 



X INTEODDCTIOM. 

Accordiug to Beid, the professed end of Logic is ' to 
teach men to think, judge, and reason, with precision and 
accuracy.' This definitioD is evidently founded on the 
usual divisioa of the cognitive faculties, and, on this ac- 
count, must be considered at least ingenious. 'To think' 
is obviously intended to refer to simple apprehension — 
'judge,' to judgment, mental or verbal — and 'reason,' to 
syllogism. But this distribution of the cognitive &oulties 
is itself a cross -division, for the dividing members are not 
distinct They run into one another, and consequently 
the same fault characterises the definition founded on 
them. Logic is certainly furnished ^th its own peculiar 
niles and canons ; but rules, in any science, can never be 
employed for the discovery or investigation of truth. Their 
sole use and end is to guard against error. If this de- 
finitioQ were to be admitted, all known sciences might 
be at once stripped of their distinctive appellations, and 
be indiscriminately classed under the name — Logic, The 
grand error in this definition is, however, that it confounds 
the material vith the loffical; in other words, the process 
of investigation with the inference necessitated by the laws 
of thought. Logic has nothing to do vrith things as they 
exist really and in themselves, but only the forms of 
thouf^ht under which the mind conceives them. It is 
oonveraaot solely about second, uotjirgt notions. Hence, 
a logical inference is not determined by any oij'ective 
casualty subsisting between the terms of the premisses 
and conclusion, but solely the subjective leintionoiieasoa 
and consequence under which they are construed to the 
mind in thought. The question whether the premisses 
of an argument in any objective science are true, is, no 
doubt, a very important one ; but the logician, as such, 
cannot be c^led upon to answer it. He may be able to 



hyGoogle 



INTRODDCTIOH. XI 

answer it, but it will be as an Astronomer, Chemiat, Geo - 
logist. Botanist, &c., as the ease may be, bnt not as a logi- 
cian ; for as a logician he is merely responsible for liie 
soundness of the consequent on the assumed truth of the 
antecedent.' The merit of the correct antecedent is ma- 
terial of the correct consequent logical, Cuique in sua arte 
credendum. 

In Archbishop Whateley's opinion, 'Logic %» the art of 
employing language properly for the purpose of reason- 
ing.' This definition restricts the province of Logic to 
the regulation of language. It may be a slight improve- 
ment on the definition of Hobbea, viz., that Logic is ' the 
art of computation ' — a kind of mental arithmetic, not 
conducted by figures, but by words. We add, for in- 
stance, two terms to make an affirmation, two affirmations' 
to mt^e a syllogism, and many syllogisms to make a de- 
monstration. There is undoubtedly an intimate connec- 
tion between thought and language; but the regulation 
of language. Mis within the province of grammar, not of 
Logic ; for if it were, thought would necessarily be oon- 
stdered a function of a language, instead of language 
being a function of thought. On this definition, the 
pointed remarks of. Mr Chretien are conclusive: 'If 
thought be only a function of language, man is better 
characterised as a speaking than as a reasoning being; 
for it is more natural and more scientific to define by the 
cause than the efi'ect, And then, to draw any such in- 
ference from man's possessing reason, as that his actions 
are therefore probably free, or bis thinking nature im- 
mortal, becomes at once absurd ; for none will assert 
such hberty or immortality to be a consequence of speech, 
of which reason itself is on this theory a consequence.' ' 

¦> Eraa7 on Logical Metbod, bj Charka P. Gbreliea, M.A,, Oi&rd. 



hyGoogle ^"" 



zii nnsoDCOTicai. 

Sir William Hamilton defiQee Logio to be ' the science 
of the laws of thought as thought — that is, of the neoes- 
sary conditions to wMoh thought, coneidered in itself, is 
snbject. This is teohnioally called its form.' This defi- 
nition is probably intended as an improTement on that 
given by Kant, viz., ' the science of the necessary laws of 
the understanding and the reason.' The definition df 
Kant may be simplified by the explanation, ih&t the in- 
ferences of opposition and conversion axe considered by 
him as syllogisms of the understanding, and the usual 
form of syllogisms as the syllogisms of the reason. Sir 
William Hamilton's definition is here adopted. 

In connection with this definilion, the foregoing brief 
introdnotory remarks may be very appropriately closed 
with the following judicious passage from Mr Mansel: — 
'It is not intended to deny the usefulness of Logic ; but 
it may safely be asserted, that its more valuable fruits are 
to be found in the training which the mind unconsciously 
receives, than in the oonscious employment of knowledge 
in the formation and examination of reasonings, and that 
both, in respect of the true character of the science, are 
secondary and accidental results — not primary and essen- 
tial features.' 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



CHAPTER L 

SECTION I. 

The ancient Logic coDsiat«d of three heads, viz., Simple 
Appkbhensioh,* Jddouent, and Reasoniho. The earlier 
Logicians considered these, in so far as the province of L(^c 
-was concerned, as the only operations of the mind. From 
its convenience, thia distribution of the cognitive faculties has 
still been followed. 

Under the first head, viz., Simple Apprehension, notions are 
treated of, and these notions, when expressed in words, are 
called simple terms. 

The second head, viz.. Judgment, treated of the agreement 
or disagreement of any two notions, whether mcomplex or 
conqtha;, when compared together in the mind; and this 
comparison is termed a judgment, (amiipamf) and when 
verbally expressed, a proposition (^ir^irauit). 

The third head, viz., Reasoning, treated of syllo^sm, or the 
manner in which, from two judgments or propositions related 

. * Tbect i> DO phrue ia AiUtoUe uscClj comapondbg to limpla tpprebsn- 
lieii : Uk nearwt i« q Tito aiiaigtratv voigSfc — tlia appnbendoo of oncom- 
poanded notioni; MtiSis k, bowdrar, not raatrictod to mj ipedfio mMning hf 



hyGoogle 



2 MANCAL OF LOQIC. 

to each otber, the mind proceeds 1o a ihird jadgment or 
proposition, founded npon and resnlling from them. 

This division' of the mental powers, although objecdonable, 
ia at all eyenta recommended by its simplicity. Ita ratwn<Ue 
ia as follows : — 

1.. We first acquire simple notions; from these we proceed 
to notions of a more complex character, and to the mental 
faculty by which these two classes of notions are acquired 
we give the name, Simple Apprehamon, 

2. In virtue of our mental constitution, when once pos- 
sessed of notions, we begin to compare (hem ; in other words, 
we institute mental judgments'' as to whether the notions or 
ideas we have acquired by simple apprehension, agree or 
disagree with each other j and the judgments thus formed, 
when expressed in words, we term propotitiom. 

A proposition consists of a subject, predicate and Ci^la. 
The subject is that of which Bomethiug is affinned or denied; 
the predicate that which is a^rmed or denied of the subject ; 
and the copula that wliich unites the subject and predicate; as 

Knowledge is power ; — 
or disjoins the subject and predicate ; as, 

Predacious animals are — not ruminanL 

» On thiadJTiaion Sir W. Hamilton remarks ; — ' The diTinon in qneilion, I 
mabe bold to sa;, nerer vu proposed bj t,oy philosopher, u ft pigtAfftoffkcJ 
distribotion of the cogmtiTe ftcolties tn geRtnd ; on the contnii^, it Is oiilj a 
togieal diatribation of that section of the cognitive fkcnlUea nbioh wo denomi- 
nate ^teartiee, as those alone wUch an proiimatelj concerned in the process 
of reasoning or thought, in its strictest ugnifioation.' — Racti Worhi, p, 342. 

*> Bead deGnes judgment to be anad^thembidiiAer^oiu&ingii a^rmed 
or deiAd qf another. On this definition Manaell remarks Tei7 properlj, 
[ Bndboenta, p- 3) : ' Thing is Tsgae enongh ; bnt it is not easj to eomprehflnd 
the vuions kinds of jadgment nnder any mote precise exprea^on. The tarma 
of a jodgment are not alwajs objects of perception, and the vay notions of 
igTMnient and diaagreement am the conaeqaencea of judgment, not the con-, 
ditions of posnbility. In fact, jodgment is as necMiarr to appreLenaiDn as ap- 
prebenaion t« jadgmeat.' 



hyGoogle 



KAsakL OP Loaic. 3 

Tlie snbatantive vei^, in the prevent tense, is tW affirma' 
five copnla. With the negative p&rticle not affixed, it coa- 
stitates the n^ative copula. The afBrmatiTfl judgment ia 
sometimes called eompoeUion (eutSten), beoaase it onites the 
two conceptions compared. The negative is sometimes called 
dwitim (dttu^Af), because, on the other hand, it separates 
the two conceptions compared. 

When comparing ideas, we find agreements to be ei&er 
total or partial, and also disagreements to be either total 
or partial. Hence an affirmative proposition* may be either 
uMMTsa^ or particular,' and a negative proportion' also uni- 
versal or particular. 

3. In a syllogism we altematelj compare two terms (the 
major and minor) with a third, called the mvidh term ; and 
in this way we ascertain whether the two terms, alternately 
compared with it, agree or disagree witb each other. 
. A r^:ular syllogism consists of three proportions : the two 
first wre called the premisset, and the last the conchuion. In 
the premisses, the two terms whose agreement or disagreement 
ia sought to be }m>ved, are compared with the middle term, 
and the new proposition lesolting &om them is called the 
conclusion, e. g. — 

Every efiect is the result of an adequate cause. 

The world is an effect ; therefore, 

The world i* the result of an adequate cause. 

Ko mminant animals are predacious. 
The lion is predacious ; therefore, 
The lion is not a ruminant animaL 

This division of the c<^iliTe facnltiea into three (Ustinct 
ports does not imply that they are altogether ind^>endent of 
each other., A pn^ressive connection exists between them j 

* luirafaSit-'^ratio <0irmmi, ^ iuideXou. 

° xara /l.*fOf. ' Am^dif — onth tugem. 



hyGoogle -- ' 



4 UANOAL OF LOGia 

and in. the view of (he logieian, api»rehension' most 1>e consi- 
dered in its reference to jadgment, and judgment in ita rela- 
tion to discourse.' 

All Bdencce have their technicalitiei, and without them no 
science would be intelligible. Apprehension, jndgment, and 
reasoning, are the names by which It^cians have agreed to 
express the faculties of obtaining evidence, whether intuitive 
or deductive ; and they Btand to each other in the relation of 
emg>h, complex, decomplex.^ 

It will be seen from the foregoing — 

1. That a notion obtained bj simple apprehension, when 
expressed in words, is called a term. 

2. That an act of judgment is expressed by a propositum ; 
and, 

3. That an act of reasoning, when stated in regular form, 
is termed a syllogism. 

These three heads will be more fully iUustrat«d in their 
proper places. 

' The reUtioD enbsisUng b«tire«n the three acts of thooght is eipieesed in 
both these iiomenelnCnres ; the on« (simple, eamplez, decomplex) inipljiDg 
the BTiithetieil idTiDce from ipprehen^an la judgment and discomM ; the 
other (sjlloj^sm, pTOpoaitioii, term ) reaolTing, uuljtiinllj, ths complete and 
final act into its component jodgmeuta and apprehensions. — Wbolla), p. 19. 

'' In spesking of this diraion, Bead states (Inqnirj, cap. f) ; — 'The second 
inclades the first, and the third Inclades Inth the Grab and second, hut the firtt 
may Ik exercised without ^tber of the other two.' On this opinion Sir W. 
Hamilton remarka: ' Apprehenaion ia as impossble without jadgment as 
JQ^ment is impossible witbont apprehension. The apprehension of a Ibuig or 
notion ia only reaUsed in the mental affirmation, that the eonoept ideally eiista: 
and this affirmedou is a judgment. In iact, all consdonsness aupposes a 
jndgment, as all conacioDaneBa anpposea a dlaciimination.' — Saift Worki, p. 
213. To tlis same eSbot ia ttis fellowlog paaaage from Aqninaa (in Peribenn, 
lect. 1) : ' Banun antsm operationnm prima ordinatnr ad secnndam ; qaia non 
potest ease mmpositio et dirisio nisi sknplicium apprebensortim. Secunda Tern 
ordinatnr ad tertism : gnia lidelicet Opertet qnod ax aliqna vira oognlto, cni 
intellectoa aasentiat, procedatni ad certilndinem acupiendsm de aliqnibns 



hyGoogle 



KANIIAL OF LOQIC. 5 

SECTION II. 
SIMPLE APPBEHENBIOM.* 

Simple apprehenBion is defined to be the mere intellectual 
conception of a thing.'' It is of two kinds, viz.,{iicomplex and> 
txmplex. locomplex apprehenBion is prior in point of time. 

ItrOOUPLBX APPBEHEHSIOir. 

Incomplex apprehension property implies simple uncom- 
pounded notions ; but, for the purposes of the logidan, it is 
sufficient to consider all apprehensions incomplex which are 
verbfJly expressed by one word, whether that word repre- 
¦enls a simple or compound notion .° 

Simple notions or intuitions are obtfuned immediatelt/ by 
the mind, and they cannot he analysed into any elements 

^ It ma; ba remarked, thst tbs lean umple ippreheDsbD is oFtea indiaciirBi- 
mtelj used to denote aiOier OeJiiaiUg of ^pls apprehension, or an act of this 
cappoaed fkcultj; in otbei vorda, the mental power, or the notion acquired b; it. 
It maj be observed also, that the worda ptre^Oioa and cone^tlon are alas 
fraqnently used to danota dtber the act or tha objoct. Thia ambiguity, agonal 
vhich the English language doea not proTida, is completely obriated by the 
Latin. A jienxpfton (percsptlo} denotes the mere act of perceoving ; a peretpl 
(peroeptam) denotes the result of the act. In hke manner, a coac^tioH 
(eoncepUo) eignifiea the mere act of eonoeiving, while a concept (concepCnm } 
tignifies the thing coDCaiTed. 

Mr Uanull ia of epinioo, tbat umple appnhenaion is syncnymonf witb con- 
oeption, in tbe proper aecw of the term. Thia ia tnie with regard to mediate, 
bnt not Immediate, notlona. 

b Nndna rei conoeptua lal«lleelivm.—Aidrici. 

Operatio qna mena redpit notionea. Notio est representamen rei In intal- 
lecto. — Mtara^t Comp^ Part I. 

' Any one word (wbelbar repnaentatira of a ^ple or a compoand idea) 
denot«s an UKoroplsx aimple apprehenalon in ita logiad genae. Bo also any 
Domber of words, vben combined ao ai to form a aentenca, become reprcsenta- 
lire of cotnplex apprehenaion. — Siyihe, p. 3. 

Inoomplex appreheoiioii is of one object, or of several withont any order or 
reference; as, a ting, a Ctrane. Complei apprehenaion is of aeTerat oljjecta, 
irith inch order or reference ; as, a king tgxm a Itimae. — Jaektoa, p. 2. 



hyGoogle 



6 HANCAL or LOOIC: 

more umple ibaa tbenuelTee. Compound notions, on the 
odier hand, are obtuned mediattlff; that is, they are the 
results of man; prevutne mental states.' 

It is b7 iucomplex t^prahensiMi, that the mind ac- 
quires the notJons represented hy each word in a sentence, 
when the words are considered separaielg. The term ' t»- 
complex ' cannot be affirmed of any notion denoted by a com- 
hmatton of words that have a grammatical relation to each 
other, with the exception of such combinations as, ' a street,' 
' a palace,' &c 

COUfLEX AFFBEHBKSIOH. 

Any combination of words grammatically related, but not 
forming a proposition, represents a comples notion ; as, ' a 
member of Parliament,' ' the balance of power,' < a regiment 
of soldiers.' In contradistinction to incomplex apprehension, 
complex apprehension represents the notions implied by all 
the words of a sentence taken collecUeely. The notions ac- 
quired, both by incomplex and complete apptvhension, are 
expressed by nng>le terms. 

SIUPLB TEKHS. 

A simple term is one or more words, expressing the subject 
of a proposition, or what is affirmed of that salgect. The 
sutgect of a proposition may be expressed by one or more 
words ; as, time, wisdom, a tFtx)p of cavalry ; and so also 
may what is affirmed of any subject ; as, invaluable, from on 
high, advancing to battle. If we join these subjects by a copula, 
to what is affirmed of them respectively, we shall have two 
terms in each proposition, and no more, e. g, — 

Time is invaluable. 

Wisdom is from on high. 

A troop of cavalry is advancing to battie. 

¦ A peTOepUoD iatnudiak ind indiTidail, ia an intuition ; tie wm« mtiiaU, 
¦nd bj meuii of s mtxk mmmoii to many thiogi, ia a coucaptiou. — S, 7. CcU- 
Tidg*. 



hyGoogle 



HAXUAJL OF LOata- 7 

A propoaiUra, in wfai<sh the ct^ula and predicate are sepa- 
rated— «s, magna eat verita*-^ stud to be tertii adjacentU ; 
and a propositioa, in which the copula and predicate form 
one word — as, aves volant, U awd to be tecundi adjacentU.'- 

A simpTe t«rm, whatever ntunber of worda it may contain, 
must not be confounded with a sentence or propoiition contain- 
ing a, judgment. In a simple t«rm there is nothing affirmed 
or denied. It is a collection of words grammatical!}' related, 
but not connected bya copuk, and may be either the subject 
or predicate of a proposition, but not the whole of a proposi- 
tion, e. g., Burton'* Anatomy of Melancholy^ ia a simple 
term ; but Burton't Anatomy of Melancholy m remarhahle 
for learning and research, is a proposition. 

As the correctness of simple acts of judgment^ as well as 
of prolonged processes of reasoning, depends on the clearness 
and distincbieaa of our apprehensions, this head of the ancient 
logic treats of the logical instruments that direct us in appre- 
hending well, and the chief instruments are definition and 
division. Our nodons themselves Diay be obscure, or their 
verbal expression maybe indistinct^ Hence the error inci- 
dent to apprehension is indistincineis. 

Indistinctness in our apprehensions may arise eitiier from 
the imperfections of our faculties, or from a limited know- 
ledge of the objects of which we form our conceptions. In 
the former case the indistinctness is unavoidable, e. g.) Our 
conceptions of the Divine Being, his attributes, heaven and 
angett, tmd of whatever is only communicated to uS by reve- 
lation, must be obscure. In the latter case the indistinctness 
is accidental, and may be remedied by study and observation. 
Id aH cases, the distinctness or indistinctness of onr appre- 
hensions will depend on our acquiuntance with the object- 
matter. For without a definite and accurate knowledge of 

• Tliii diitinctkiD ii reeogniMd bj Ariitotls, but h< dow Dot dBom it Decea- 
U17 that the latter ahsnld be ni(riv«d into the former. It wu BDumg th* 
La^ oocuneiitstDii Chat thediitiDClion first acqiured prominence. 



hyGoogle 



8 UAJUJAL. OF L0eiC4 

the meaning of tenns, we coniiot reason about th^ with' an 
assurance that they are iiill and trae representativeB of the 
things tdgai&ed. 

T^e error incident to the faculty of judgment iBjahittf, and 
arises from asserting the agreement or diflagreemeut of things 
according to the knowledge we possess regarding them, and 
not as they are in themaelves. Hence such incorrect judg- 
ments; as, 

The earth is stationary. 

The surface of the earth is a plane. 

Dews fall fixim the air. 

Moonlight is cold. 

The sun rises from the sea upwards. 

The eye judges of distance and magnitude intuitively. 

Judgment is liable to be misled by the tenses, authority, 
example, and the possums- 

The error incident to reasoning is & faulty mode ofinjerr' 
ing (mendosa collectio.)V If our previous apprehensions are 
indistinct, and our judgments regarding tiiem &lse, new 
judgments deduced from them cannot fcul to be erroneous, e. g., 
Honesty is the whole of rel^ion ; therefore, / may irtdulye 
in excess Kith impunity. Qui tapit pauca loquitur ; pauco 
loquor; ergo, tapio. It frequently happens, on the other 
liand, that from true premisses a false inference is deduced." 

The olyect of logic is to obviato these defects, by pre- 
scribing rules for our guidance alike in investigation and 
inference. 

* Xtndoia coBectio ii nm«died bir the niles of sjUo^Bm ind indnctiaa ; and 
bcnk^not onl; enables us to perRum ttie operation rightly, bat idea M l««t 
the conectDen of anj ^tsq argmnentaUoti UarueB, p. 0, 

^ The Melituudreir ID enoDBoasaiaelaDiHl, when tbcf reasoned thus: Thu 
Itranser it aioul to be MUed iy a veaomom Krpent; therefore, heua mur- 
dertr piMtatd bf vtngetmc*. Nor tree their snbuqnent inference leae enoneoiu, 
when, in cooKqaeuce of hu tliaking off the aninwl «itlMabiiuai7,tbe7 rnHkt 
vxu a Qod. 



hyGoogle 



MlNOAt OF LOGIC. 



TERMS. 



A. term has been defined to be a vicariom sign of a tkmg 
or idea used hy conventional agreement.* 

A term ie the sign of a thing when it represents an object 
known hy &ay particular sound, or combination of sounds. 
It is the sign of an ufeawben it conveys by being uttered the 
same idea to the hearer's mind which the speaker had in his 
own. It is a vicarious Mgn, because it not only conveys the 
idea of an object, but it also supplies the place of that 
object'' 

Whatever sounds, therefore, are not es institute, i. e., rati- 
Sed by conventional agreement or mutual consent, cannot be 
conudered terms — such as groans, shiiekSi exclamations, &c., 
which are suggested by nature. 

Terms are divided into three classes — simple, complex, and 



•Signnm rei «I eonceptilB «i institato yicuiam. — AldrvA. Thfl t«tm 
'ngDnm' ia somewliat bdefinita, for anftliing maj }x made a sign, nbethsr 
TOnl 01 Dot, bjr ooaTOD^onil Hgreement. ' Signnm vocals' would remoTc all 
¦mbignitj. 
Ir M. Duval JoDTo's Logic, p. 201, language is thos divided, — 
' /Absolote — CHct and Gatum. 

Nrtnral \ Con«iBtionJ^%»M*. 
°^ - j-AbaolntB — PamUng and Scu^ture. 

Artificial < Conventional — SnSJsTM, TAgra^ue Sfffni, Hiero- 
^ V ffljfphicf, Wriiing, 

b Word* are Eaerely arbitmrt/ ligns, and they do not natorallj poasftsa any 
fitness in thai sound or fbim, as necessarj in order tliat the; should expreaa 
Ms id«aa or otyecta intended. If this were Che case, all UngUagea nonld have 
tlie lamt words to expnaa the nuns ideas, which ia not the case ; for the eame 
¦onnd eoDvejB Cerent ideas in different langoagea, and not odI; in digereat, 
but in the some language, as ia the case with eijmroeal words. — Boj/iAe, p. 1 , 

' The old logicians called a terni a vol simplex, B propDeitiea ¦ voi compleiti, 
and an argmnent ¦ vox decomplexa. For by 'vox.' tbej BnderBtood not a 
woni, but an eipces^oa of thought in langnage-^ifohr^, p. 9. 



hyGoogle 



KAKUU OP UM31C. 



I. OP BIUPLE TZBUB. 



Simple terntB are of three kinds, viz^ Categorematic, %n- 
categorematic, and Mimed. 

1. Cateoobeuatio Tebhs are also call^ simple terms 
(termini simplices) and are snoh as may be used alone either 
as the subject or predicate of a propoaitioa, as ommtcietice, or 
constitnling together with tbeir a^nncts one ^mple logical 
term, as, the Queen of England. They must expreas a 
completed act of apprehenuon,* but no more. In the propo- 
sition, 

Virtue is its own reward, 
the term vtHue by iteelf conatitates the subject, and the t«rm 
reward, with the adjuncts, itt own, constitutes liie predicate. 
There are therefore only two simple terms. 

This class of terms consists either of nonns substantive in 
the nominative case, used by themselves, nouns substantive in 
, the nominative case with adjunct*, or verba in the infinitive 
mood — these last being, properly speaking, nouns substantive. 
Nouns in the oblique cases are not simple or categorematic 
terms. 

But allhoogfa simple or categorematic tenns may be used 
alone, either aa the subject or predicate of a proportion, they 
may conust of an indefinite number of grammatical words, 
provided the combination expresses a complete act of appre- 
henuon. In the following propositions, the subject, copula 
and predicate are laid down in regular order; the copulas are 
printed in itaUct, and the grammatical words which express a 
simple complex apprehenaon, either as Subject or predi- 
cate, are united by hyphens : — 

¦ Bj idniple ttnna, Ariitotle metuu the ' lioiita or tenui {igoiy into nhidi 
» prapMititD is nmHrrd.' ThcM an the dodh u satiject, uid tlu Tab u 
pndtMte, •. g., MM vdaL 



hyGoogle 



UAFDAL OF UH3IC. 11 

The— way»— of — wisdom are waya — of — pleaaaatness. 
Man — that — is — bOTn — of — a — woman it of — few — 
daya— and— full — of— (rouble. 

finite— spirit— to — perfection it a — conwderation — suffi- 
taxsat — to— extinguish — all— envy—in — ^inferior — natures — 
and — all — contempt — in — enperior. 

2, Stkc&tbgobeiutic* Tebub are such as in sense form 
only a part of a subject, or predicate, inasmuch aa they only 
imply an incomplete act of apprehension, and consequently 
have not enough of independent meaning for a term. Kngly 
they express not a term, but a part of a term. This clat-s 
comprises all adjectives, nouns in the oblique cases, verbs, ad- 
verbs, &c. ;^ for these by themselves do not express complete 
acts of apprehension, as they always stand in a relation to 
some other word, either expressed or understood, e. g,, The 
following words — single, some, miserable, this, 'wonderjulb/, 
Wvly, of me, htm, John's — must be joined with some other 
words, in order to render the act of apprehenaion complete. 

Some writers on logic are of opinion, that adjectives may 
by themselves constitute a predicate ; they are, however, 
merely ayncategoreius, and can only form a part of a predi- 
cate, for th^ require a substantive either expressed or im- 
plied. In the proportion, 

Fame is precarious, 
the word precarioits does not constitute the entire predicate, 
for of itself it is incomplete, and mnst be supplemented by the 
adjection of thing, either expressed of understood, 

¦ The terms citagorematlc uid sfDcategoramatic, u« oot mod b; Ariatotle. 
Tbej originated with thg QnA commeataton. The latter term la oompaimded 
of iTui', imfA, and xon^Ogiu, to predtaatt, becauae it is onl; vntA some other 
words that t«nas o/ this descrif tion can be preheated. 

'¦Themiamtiaeptien totUswhenwe tisipvakiiigof th«tcniuthenieelr«a, 
iritbont rela&n to anj ether ; u irhen we state tliM largt le wt M^MtiTe, or 
that newr is aa Engliih irord. 



hyGoo^le 



li lUKDAt. or LOGIC. 

This will appear still more evident by conveiliiiga propo- 
sition, in wUdi tbe predicate is expressed by an adjective, 
e. g. Some animali are four-footed. Thia pfropoBition, 
when wmply converted, becomes, some four-footed thingt are 
animaU. Now, without the introdnction of the word tkings, 
or beings, thia last proposition wonld be ungrammatical ; and 
since by conversion is meant the tninspositicm of the extremes 
of a proposition, without any change in the extremes, it is 
obvious that the word things, or beings, must have been im- 
plied in the predicate of the converted proposition.' 

3. Mixed Teiois are formed by a comlanalion of the other 
two species. They have been distributed into three classes : 
— 1. A mixed term may be made up of two syncategore- 
matics, as semper, i. e., omni tempore, always. 2. A mixed 
term may be made up of a categor^natic, and a syncategore- 
matic ; as, nemo, i. e., nollus homo, none; and, 3, a mixed 
term may be made up of a syncategoremalic and the copula 
eurrit, i. e., est currens, u running.'' 

To this class all grammatical verbs must be referred, as 
tbey are all resolvable into the copula i^d.the partidple, 

¦ Ad adjectjre, however, ia capable of standiDg by itsolf, ss the pmUcate of ¦ 
propoailion ; as nhen we sa;, snow is whiCa ; and ooossionallj' otsd u tbe anb- 
ject, for we may gay, white u an agreeable colour. Tbe adjective is oReo wai 
to be H) used by s grammatical ellipaia : sDOw is wliite ; instead of, snoir is a 
white vljject ; white is an agreeable colom', inatead of, a wbite ealoor, or the 
coIdoc of white, is agreeable. The Greeks and Romans were permitted, bj the 
rnles of thdr language, to empto; thia ellipBia niuTersallj In the sabject, as well 
as in the predicate, of a proportion. In Eogliih this cannot, geoerall; speak- 
ing, be done. We may saj-, th« earth is ronnd ; but we cannot aaj, Toniid ia 
easily moTsd ; ve most aa;, a imind otgeet. This distincttoa is, however, 
rather grammatical than logicid. Since there is no difierence of meaning 
between roumf and a round olgect, it ia onlj coltom whicb preacribeB that^ an 
any giTSD occaaion one shall be nsed, and not the other. — MilTt Logic, vol. i. 
pp. 29, SO. 

* Tb» diririon and examples are those of Aldrtch. The division Is a crow 
we ; \hx part^ n^t bong oppowd ; for every mixed word mnst eitlter be Mtego- 



hyGoogle 



HAKOAl, OF LOeiC: IS 

e. g^ I Stand, is eqaivftleiit to, I am standing ; oi, I am a 
perton ttanding.^ There is an exception in the case of the 
subetaatlTe verb,, in the indicative mocd and present tense, 
when it simply denotes unqaalified exjatence ; for of itself it 
is not a predicate, but may coalesce with a predicate. lbs 
sole ose is lo connect an attribute with a sulyect. But where 
existence only is affirmed, it may be both copula and predi- 
cate ; as, Dens ett, God is." 



II. COUPLBX TEUId. 

A Complex Tesu consists of three simple words, for it ex- 
presses ^tu^^en/. An act of judgment presupposes two com- 
plete apprehensions, tbe decision as to the agreement or 
disagreement of which is a judgment; and consequently 
the form of language necessary to express an act of judg- 
ment must consist of three simple words, which together 
constitute one complex word. The three simple words 
may, however, be expressed in one; as, scribo — I am 

ffiriting; ahest — he U absent i or in two, as. Ipse adegt 

He u present. Hence a complex term may be implied by 
either one or troo words, if they are respectively resolvable 
into three. But of the three simple words which form a 
complex term, the two denoting the subject and predicate 

* ' A mixed term in, in tbe onl; naafnl wiue of tha word, <»tegareiitatic It 
betoDgB to the clau of Khat \me been called nuuij-worded nemiw.' — MUl't 
Logic, ToL L, p. SO. 

^ The copoU it meiuB alwafi txiitt, bat. when lued in ¦ propoaition, it ei- 
prenM *q uiatencs modified or limited bj the predicate ; wbea emplojed iloae, 
it eipOMS oinJide eiiiteaee, L e., that the subject isamosg t^e cluaofreallj 
existing thinga. Upon this lartation a well-knonn fallsc; xaa fannded — that 
of tuning that, becanse ' Plokmj it dead,' (i. e., onlj eiiata te na in the nj 
that a dead penon can, bf a remembered or liaditionaij notion j} theteftre, 
'Ptolemy it' (i. e., hai an aotoal Uring existence among otber living persons,) 
irhieliisaTeiydifiraitsUtemKit.— <7N(idi«^li<jL(Mc«^7'Aoi^A^ p. ]79, 



hyGoogle 



2i lUVGlL OF Loaic. 

vuty coiudat, «s has been shown above, of r number of 
gnuDmadcal words, s. g. — 

The — doctrine — which — places — the — chief — good — in — 
the — pleasnres — of— tKe — body U unworthy — of— a — philo- 
Bopher. 

The — dialogues — of— Plato are often — very — lively — re- 
presentalionB — of — conversations — which — might — take — 
place — at — a — great — universi ty^ — full — of — rival — professors 
— an d — eager — disci plea." 

The— origin — and — sufferance — of— evil, m a — question 
which — has — more — than — any — other — harassed — meta- 
physical — reasoners — but — especially — theologians — and — 
upon — ^which — it — is — probable — that — no — very — salis- 
fexjtory— conclusion — will — ever — be — reached — ^by — the — 
human — iacnldes — in — our — present — state.'' 

As to signification, the sulijcct is tdwaye first in a Bentence, 
and the predicate last. They are often, however, reversed in 
arrangement, e. g. — 

Sweet is the breath of mom. 

Shoreless is the sea of praise. 

In deciding on which is the subject and which the predi- 
cate, in such proposifions, the meaning of the context must 
be our guide. 

HI. DECOMPLEX TEBMS. 

A DscoMPLEX Tebh expresses an act of reasoning, and 
coufDHts of three complex terms or propositiona, having a cer- 
tain relation to each other ; for a completed act of reasoning 
implies two previous judgments, fi^m which a new judgment, 
asserting agreement or disagreement, is inferred. Hence, 
when in regular form, it cannot be expressed in fewer than 



hyGoogle 



UASVil. or LOGIC. IS 

three looporitioDs, e. g., Is inferring the immorlality of the 
soul from its imroBterialityi the mental process is as fol- 
lows ;— The mind first assents to the judgment, that eeery- 
thing immaterial ie immortal; it then assames, that the aoul 
isimmateritd; and, lastly, proceeds to a third judgment, viz., 
that the sou/ it immortaL It is It^jcBlIy represented thus — 

Whatever is immaterial is immortal. 

The hnman sotd is immaterial ; therefore, 

The human sonl is immortal. 
Or in inferring the tphericifff of the earth, from its catting a 

circular shadow, the same process is repeated, thus All 

bodies which, in whatsoever position thej may be, cast 
a circular shadow, are spherical. The earth is a body which, 
in whatsoever position it may be, casts a circular shadow ; 
therefore, the earth is spherical. Or in inferring that an 
infant is not retpontihle, from its not being capable of deli- 
berate crime, thus — 

No b^g incapable of deliberate crime is responsible. 

An infant is a being incapable of deliberate crime ; therefore, 

An infant is not responsible. 

OF THE LOGICAL TEBH. 

The LooiCAL Term is defined by Aldrich: 'Terminns sim- 
jdex ei^ne tempore significativus' * — i. e., a term mhich it tigni- 
Jicant, and hat no reference to time. This definition is 
obviously inaccurate, for althongh it excludes reference to 
time, it does not exclade relation; and therefore fiuls in 
giving the li^col term a sufficiently absolute character. By 
excluding relation to time, the logical term becomes opposed 
to the verb. The following definition is more accurate : A 
logical term is a mord mhich is signi^ant, and inexprestive 
of relation or time. This additional limitation excludes all 
adjectives and nouns in the oblique cases f^m being lo^cal 

* putr) eij/iMvriKti xernt ffvvStjXiiv attv ¦}^Mw,—AriiUSt, 



hyGoogle 



16 UAMDAL OF LOGIC. 

Bul^eote or {dedicatee. By this definition, a logical term is 
equivalent lo a nmple term, or categorem, and consequenUj 
excludee adjectivee, nouna in the oblique cases, verbs, &c., 
except OS forming a part of a subject or predicate ; for as 
these have no complete and independent signification of their 
own, they can merely serve to qualify or denote the relation 
between the words with which they are joined. By Aristotle 
the oblique cases of the noun were named tmiotis nmii.it.riii, 
i. e-> fallings or flections of the nonn, and the past or futare 
tenses of the verb were termed (ttojoei; jj]/iaro(. 

A logical term must not be confounded with a grammatical 
term or phrase. It is employed to express distinctly an idea, 
umple or complex, particular or universal. 

The word or words employed to espreea a subject or pre- 
dicate, constitute a logical term ; as, 

"Wisdom is valuable. 

A clock it a mechanical contrivance, to show the progress 
of time. 

Criminal indulgences are benumbing to the moral feelings. 
Unsought advice U the dictate of presumption. 
All the metals are fusible by heat. 

Logical terms are divided into gingular and com7nim. 

A SraGULAK Term expresses the notion formed of an indi- 
vidual object and its qualities. Hence it is called in logic an 
individual noun (tndividuum'), borrowing that distinctive 
epithet from the nature of the notion it represents — namely, 
an individual notion, or the apprehension of an individual 
object. Such a notion cannot be divided either by clasufi' 
cation or enumeration, for its object is numericalli/ one. 
Anything that has actual existence is singular, i. e., numeri- 

•The Kcoorate etymological BOnM of the word indifidumn isplainlj tbat which 
hag DO qaaliliee nhidi we know of — gmd nOul tuAtt dividtd — but is bd object 
of Mnsation (perceptinri) kaown to at oa]j hj ita occupying a certuD space at 
a pnu.\iiaa.—Mottrfy, p. 11. 



hyGoogle 



HIHDAL OF LOOIO; 17 

cally. one, aad is Iherefore c^)able of haag expressed by a 
siognlar sign or term ; as, a sqfa^ a coach, a tree, &a. 

So long as our knowledge is veiy cootraoted, this may be 
done ; but as knowledge becomes increased, it would be bur< 
denaome to appropriate a distinct name to each individual 
object. 

liat when we mereljr consider the general nature and cha- 
racter of an object expressed by a singular term, i. e., its 
being of such a description as may equally apply to other 
angle objects, the inadequate or incomplete view thus taken 
of it is expressed by a common term, e. g., When we use 
the term bridge, we do not refer to any particular individual 
bridge; but when we say thU bri4ge, we refer to some 
existing bridge, distinguished by accidents or peculiarities 
from all other bridges. It is evident, therefbre, Uiat singular 
terms, which denote any one individual object, cannot be 
affirmatively predicated of wiything but themselves t in 
other words, they cannot be the predicate of any affirmative 
proportion, unless its subject be a term expressive of that 
same individual object which the singular term represents, 
e. g., Thit river, and the Danube, are singular terms, which 
cannot be predicated of anything but themselves ; for we may 
say, Tkit river ii the Danube, but we cannot predicate of 
any other river that it is tiie Danube. Singular terms may 
be used, however, as the predicate (^ any negative propos- 
tion, whose subject does not express the same individual ob- 
ject, e. g., .^na is not Mount Blanc. 

All proper names are singular terms; as, England, the 
Thamet, Aristotle, ^c. 

Singular terms are sometimes employed (not logically, but 
figuratively) as common nouns ; as. 

The Cicero of his day. 

The grand Napoleon of the realms of rhyme, 

A CouiOK TsRU is a name which is u^iable of being 
affirmed truly in the same sense of each of an indefinite nom- 



hyGoogle 



1 8 lUJnrAi. OF Loeic. 

ber of iadividoala. It does not rqavBOnt anytlui^ that has 
ttctnal exutence, bat wi idea or nature commtm to many Indi- 
vidoala ; and tbia oommon notion ia formed by cksnng 
TariouB obj^^ togelber tliat have common points of resem- 
blance. Common terms denote a whole class. A class is 
the indefinite mnltittide of individuals denoted hj a common 
name ; as, bird,fl(mer, conqueror, river, and any individnal 
in that class, and, conseqnently, may be affirmatively predi- 
cated of aU or any one of these individuals, e. g.. An eagle 
is an individual included in the oommon term, ' bird.' Hence 
we can say, An eagle is a bird; and in the same way, we can 
¦ay that a dmty a a fioner, and that the Troeed is a river. 
A common or general name most be distiuguisbed &om a 
collective name. A general name is one which can be predi- 
cated of eocA individual of a multitude ; a collective name 
cannot be predicated of each separately, but only of all taken 
together. 

Common terms are called jiredicahUi, from their capability 
of being affirmatively predicated of several things, viz., the 
individuals they denote. 

It ought to be remembered, that a common t«rm does not 
give us an adequate notiim of an individual, because in form- 
ing a class (of which a common term is merely the sign or 
expression) we attend to points of resemblance, but exclade 
points of difference. And it is the inadequacy occasioned by 
this exclusion of points of difference or accidents, that renders 
it equally applicable to any of the individuab possessing the 
property or properties which have been abstracted, and which 
are designated by that common term. If, for instance, we 
exclude from consideration all the peculiarities which distin- 
guish ' Sicily' from any other island, and merely attend to 
the circumstance of its being surrounded with water, we form 
a notion expressed by the common term idand; but this 
notion does not adequately distingiiiBh Sicily, for it does not 
imi^y any of its pecuUaride^ and is therefore equally appli- 



hyGoo^le 



lUinui. or Loeia 19 

cMn to any one of u indefinite number of islands, or in the 
plural to several together.* 

A DsFrarrii Term is one to which the negative particle ie 
not preflxed. 

Ad Imdefinitb Tehh'' is one to which the negative particle 
u prefixed ; as, that man u not a Swede. The negative par- 
ticle is termed indefinitant, becanae when prefixed to a noun 
it renders tiiat noun indefinite. In the proposition, That man 
u not a Swede, the term Bnsede is used indefinitely j for when 
it is averted of that certain man that he is not a Smede, the 
elaea Swede alone is excluded, and to what other class of men 
he m«j belong remains wholly undefined. 

The definite and indefinite terms together constitute a per- 
fect division or dichotomy. Thus all animals are either 
rational or not rational ; all created things are either 
tentietit or not sentient, corporeal or incorporeal. All men 
are either virtuout or not vtrtuous. 

A FosmvE Tkbh speaks of a thing as bdng present, i. e., 
poteetsed by a sutgect ; as, a rational man ; a living man ; 
pleasant sodetj ; a man of feeling ; a mortal hoAy ; &Jruit- 
fvl vine ; a man of wit ; a man of merit.' 

A Privative Tebm denotes the absence of a thing from a 
sulgect capable of possessing it ; as, an uneducated roan ; un- 
pkatant sounds; immortal fame; an unfeeling wretch; a 

* Sm Abitraction and QeDeraliBaUoD. 

'' KomeD idfioitam — AUrid>. More properly, nomta imjf^ntuni — ovo/Ml 
aoiiOTOt. This miBlTanslation of B6^tbiDS liu been the cause of error, uaong 
othen, to Kant.— So- W. HamilliM Sfid'i Worts, p. 686. 

' Nunn whidi ire pc^ve In form ue oftvn nagiliTe in qnalitj, and otheia 
are reaDf pomliTS, though thrir rorm ia negatiTS. The void ittomtemmt, for 
example, dote not expren tb« men ibeeuoe of eoorenWues; it npreiMa a 
pa«itiT« (ttribate — that of Imug the oauaa of diacomfbrt or uiiMrauce. So the 
word wfUatani, aotwithatandiiig ita oo^tive form, doat uot onmote the mere 
abMoea of plaiaantueaa, bat a lu* degree of wbM if aignifisd bf the word 
poB/U, wtucb it ij htodlf Mtmntj to «>; i« postiTtt— ifitf'a Logic, toL i. 
p, S2. 



hyGoogle 



Sd lUNTAI. OF LOQIO. 

fruHlea search; va uncomtitUtu»ial declaration), die de- 
m^Ht of onr work^. 

A Nb^ativx Teru denotes the absence of a thing from a 
subject mcapable of possessing it; as, a Zt/eZeu corpse ; un- 
pleasant sarcasms ; the lemeien rook ; the unfruitful elm ; 
the demerit of sin. 

Aji Ukitocal Tbbu has one ^gnification only, and in that 
one signification it is equally applied to many things. ' Thus 
mam, genus, electricity, are unirocal terms for thejr always 
signify the same thing. 

An EQDiroOAL Tebu has more than one signification, and 
in each of its difFerent meanings is a distinct commoo term— ~ 
the coincidence in sound or sense, or both, being purely acci- 
dentaL That some words should be used in different senses, is 
unayoidable, owing to the scantiness of language, e. g.,' Club : 
a stick; a society. Mail: & post-bag; armour. Tract; a 
small book ; an extent of country. Ounce : a species of ani- 
mal ; a legal weight. Palm : a species of tree ; the interior 
of the hand. Page: an attendant; side of a leaf in a book. 
Bull: the animal; the Pope's official letter ; a blunder. 

Analogous Tekhs are such as have one meaning, with 
various applications and modifications. In this clsjss of terms 
'a few only of the leading ideas are retained, while the 
terms themselves are appropriated in a modified and sub- 
ordinate sense to objects which bear no more than an analogy 
or similarity to their original application. 

A word the same in form and sound, if it be predicated of 
several subjects in the same sense, i. e., to express the same 
collection of qualities, is univocali if in i^erent senses, i. e., 

¦ In ra>]it}', an equiTOcal or amUgnoni word is not Ons naiae, bat two munoa 
noddentallj' eoindding in Koind. Filt standing for an iron inBtmaieot, KoAfiit 
standing fbr a lin« of soldiers, hare no more title to t>« conudered one irord, 
becatus vritten alike, tfasn gmue and CraeM have, becanse they are pro- 
Donnced alike. Thsjan one eonnd, appropriated to foim two different word*. 
— jWiiTjioyfo, voL L p. fl7. 



hyGoo^le 



lUKUAL OP LOGIC. 21 

to express difierant collections of qualities, and these connected, 
is arudogous ; ifi unconnected, equivocal, e. g., Man is predi- 
cated of John tmd Thomas, imiTocallj ; of Thomas and his 
piotare, analogously ; of an island and Thomas, equivocallj. 

The following are examples of analogous terms : — 

Sting; of an animal; ofconsdence; of an epigram. 

Jttdgnient : a legal decision ; a fkcultj and an act of the 
mind. 

Fall: the act of dropping; moral degradation ; the 
autumn i diminution in price; musical cadence. 

A rei« of the body j of metal ; of poetic feeling. 

Heat; caloric; the sensation produced by caloric 

Intention : the state of being strained ; purpose ; close 
attention ; application of a word. 

Justice: social right; punishment; the administrator of 
social right or legal punishment. 

SacramentUTti : a military oath ; a christian sacrament. 

In these examples, the resemblance in signification is in 
some cases more, and in others less distinct, though in every 
instance some analogy may be traced. 

A Concrete Teem is the name of an object, and represents 
a quality in connection with a subject ; in other words, it ex- 
presses the quality, and at the same time implies the subject 
in which that quality exists; as, brave, reiie. The words 
brave, Tvise, cannot be used without at the same time imply- 
ing or referring to the beings possessed pf the qualities, 
bravery, roitdom; hut bravery and tmsdom are abstract 
ideas, and might be used without any reference whatever to 
the subjects, brave, wise. Concrete nouns consist of ad- 
jectives, and words which, though substantively used, are 
equivalent to Bdjectives ; such as,/ool, philosopher, astrono- 
mer, geometrician, &c. These are all concretes, of which 
the abstracts are folly, philosophy, astronomy, geometry, 
&C , ¦ 



hyGoogle ¦ 



22 lUXUAL OF LOQIC 

An Abstbaot Tksx is the name of an ^tribute, and ex- 
^pnaaeB a qaality by itself, widiout anj n&renee to the 
snbjoct in which it eidats ; as, mckednett, t^fltkneia.' 

An Absoldtx or NoN-RRLA^nvE Tebi^ as <^poeed to a 
relative term, denotes a word wfaoae meaning is complete in 
itself, and does not imply a reUlaon to any otlier Uiing. 

Abaolnte tenne are also named tton-coimotatioe, as merely 
denoting an object, without implying any attribute of that 
olgect-, as, Parit, Momulus- 

A Relative Tebh expresses an object as related to some 
other, or an idea which cannot be apprehended without 
having at the same time a notion of its correlatiTe. Thas, 
father implies the notion of »on, and ion of father ; such are 
also king and mi^ect, cause and effect, whole, half, double, 
treble, great, email, ttpift, thro, high, low. 

Every relative term has its correlative. The correlative is 
that which the relative term suggests. Thas the word 
children calls Dp the correlative parent*. In this case 
children is the relative, and parents the correlative, term. 
The word parents, agun, suggests children, in which ease the 
word parents is the relative, and children the correlative. In 
short, the same t«rm may be either a relative or a correlative, 
according as it suggests or is suggested. 

Aqseeino Tebus are such as express qualities which can 

' Do abslnct OBmes belong ta tb« dua of geiuni, or to that of nngnlar 
DamcB ? Soma of them ora certiial; gvnenl ; I idnui tbOM trludi *re 
names not of one singte and definite attribnta, bat of a elan of attiibnlea. 
Such ia the vord ealmir, which ia a nama eomiDon to wMtanaaa, ledneaa, &c. 
Sach ia tha word magnitade, in regpect of the Tarioiu degreea of nugnitade and 
the Tariona dimandona of apace ; the nord wagAt, in respect of the Tariom de- 
gieea of weight. Sach alio ii the word ataibule itaelf, the eommon name of 
all particDlar attribatee. nt when onlj one attiibata, naither Taiiable ia 
d^ree nor in kind, ia deugnated bj the name ; aa, Tiaiblaneaa, tangibleneaa, 
eqnalitj, &0., then tha name can hardlj be conaiderad gjaneral ; tor thoagh it 
denotea an attribnta of manj difibrant ot jeota, tha ittribnte itaelf i* alwajl con- 
cdved a* one, not manj. — MSft Logic, toI. L pp. 86, 86. 



hyGoogle 



KAKVAL OF Loaic. 23 

be affirmed of any ooe object at the lame tims; as, a theory 
may be popular end dangeroui; an edifice may be masti/ 
and elegant. Agreeing terms are etHnetimes called compati- 
ble or contittent terms. 

Orposm! TEBm exprege qualities wliioh cannot be affirmed 
of any one object at the same time, e. g,| A style cannot be 
said to be eloquent and bald at the same time ; neittter can 
we aay that a report can be at once true and false, nor a 
man miserable and happy. At different times, however, 
opposite terms may be predicated of the same object. Thus, 
a man may be said to be active to-<)ay, and inactive to- 
tnorrow. 

Terus of Fkihabt and Secondacy Intention,* 

A. first or primary/ intention is properly defined a concep- 
tion of a thing or things formed by the mind from materials 
existing without itself; as, man, animal, tree, A second 
intentitm is a conception of another conception or conceptions, 
formed by the mind from materials existing in itself; as, 
gemis, species, accident, &c. 

'Notions are of two kinds; they have either regard to 
things as they are — as, horse, ship, tree, and are called first 
notions — or to tilings as they are understood, as notions of 
genus, species, attribute, subject, and in this respect are called 
second notions, which, however, are based apon the first, and 
cannot be conceived without them. Kow log^c is not so much 
employed upon first notions of things as upon second ; that 
is, it is not so much occupied with things as they exist in 
nature, but with the way in which the mind conceives them. 
A logician has nothing to do with ascerttuning whether a 
hoise or a ship or a tree exists, but whether one of these 
things can ha regarded as a genus or species, whether it can 
be called a sutiject or an attribute, whether ii-om the conjunc- 
tioR of many second nodons a proposition, a definidon, or 

¦ Tbia diitinction ii af Aratoui origin. 



hyGoogle 



24 UUIUAL OF LOGIC. 

B syllogism can be formed. The first intention of every 
word b its real meaning; the second inteotion its logical 
TaJue, according to the function of thought to which it 
bdongB.' ' 

ComJOTATiVB Terms. All concrete common terms are 
connotative. They denote a subject, and imply an attribute.- 
Tbe common term man, for example, denotes Cicero, Quin- 
tilian, Juvenal, &c., and any other number of individuals, 
because it is the name of the class to which, as a class, they 
belong ; and it is applied to them not only is virtue of their 
possessing, but aa denoting that they do possess certain 
marks or attributes. 

There is another class of terms, which, although individual 
terms, are called connotative : e.g., 'the author of the Uiad' 
connotes (i. e., notes. along with it) 'Homer;' 'the founder 
ofBome' connotes 'Romulus ;' ' the capital of France ' con- 
notes ' Paris,'" 

¦ Oatlini of the Lan of Thougbt ; pp. 39, 10. 

A ,firil notion is the coDceptJoa of a thing as it exieCa of ilulf j ai, John, 
man, animaL A gecoad iKtion Is the coDceptiim not of an otiject, aa it is in 
reality, but of Iha mode under which it ia conceiTed bj tha mind itself; as, 
iDdiTidnal, ipeciea, genua. The former ie the concsption of a thing — real, im- 
mediate, direct; the latter the concsption of a conception — formal, mediate, 
reflex.—^ W. flamifion, Ed. Sen. vol. Ivii. p. 210. 

Whalely and a host of others define tha^firtt ialention of a term to be a cer- 
tain TBgae and general mgnifiuliDn, and the second intention to be the more 
predte and Umited, which it bears in some particnlar art, adence, or system. 
This misconeeptian, which Is to some extent conntenaaccd b; Aldrich, has 
arissn fiom oonfoncding the vatda irOaition and meaniag. IntsnUo — 
tirasis — in this appUcaCian properly mgnifies a atietching of the mind to a 
thing. The examples nsnally ^«en are of analogoaa leitnt, not of terms of the 
Hmt and second intention. 

* In treaUng of terms, no partienlar method has here been followed. The 
proper ^Ti^on is into anffvlar and coramon, as it is eihaoatiTe of the whole 
elaes. With Uie exception of the lerma diatinctiTely designated ongolar. all 
the terms abOTo eiiri«nsd are really common tenns employed in diSerent ways, 



hyGoogle 



UAHCAL or LOOIC. z5 

CHAPTER II. 

SECTION I. 

ABsntiCTION AMD OENERALISATIOK. 

A coRBEOT understandiiig of the procesBOB indicated by these 
terms respectively, will be of advantage in studying the doc- 
trine of the predicables. 

1. Abstraction. — A.bBtractIon literaliy signifies a drawing 
off, or taking aroay from; but in its strict and secondary sense 
it means the separate consideration of one or more of the 
parts or qoalitiee of any spedes of whole, omittiog or exclud- 
ing for the moment all consideration of the other co-existing 
qualities. This process invariably precedes generalisatioa. 
The parts or qualities excluded at one time may again be 
made the otgects of new abatractioos, and become the ground- 
work of new classes denoted by common names. 

When, therefore, we draw off and consider separately any 
part or quality of an object* presented to ns, we are said to 
abitract ; and with this ample act the province of abstraction 
terminates. 

We may, for example, attend to the fragrance of a violet, 

¦ There it a. preT^ent coDfniioD raguding (he mesning of the wonk wfriBut 
and otjed. ' !Not to nndeistuid these nards,' remarka the nnthor of the ' Ont- 
lint of the Lews of ThoagbC,' note, p. 52, ' is a diiqoaliGoatioD for the stadj of 
modem pbiloBopby. The ta/ged ia the peisoD who receires impresiuoDg ; the 
cifeci is-the exterasl Hung which gives them. When I see ¦ moQQtiin, I im 
the lulgeot, and the monntam the otgect. Subjective, therefore, would mean 
"lelating to the mind that thinks ;" o^jeetiiie "relating to the tbing tlumght 
df." This nee of the worda, though now nniTeraallr followed, is of modem 
Oiigio ; formerijr that in nbich uij qoalitiea inhered was called the " subject" 
of tbom, ¦ nrj diS^at uao of the word.' — [For a maM«!; disqaidtlon on 
this point, sea Tigipati't Elaneiili (^L<igie, sect, iv'.] 



hyGoogle 



26 ICANUAL OF LOGIC. 

and for the moment exclude all consideration of its f^yrrn and 
coUmr, or we maj contemplate ita form and colour, diaregard,- 
ing its fragrance ; and in either case, after this individual 
violet (which may have been tiie first we have ever seen) is 
withdrawn Irom our conraderation, we stjll retfun a notion 
of ils fragrance, or notions of its form and colour; and the 
notions thus retained are pi^operlj termed conception*. 

Again, a person may have for the first Ume seen a sheep, 
and may have attended to, or abstracted the drcumstance of 
its having four legs, excluding from con»deration all the 
other Go-existing marks ; and the conceplum remaining in 
the mind, afW this individual was no longer present, wculd 
be that of a four-footed animal. If be had beard the name 
»hee^ applied while contemplating it, this name, when ottered 
again in his hearing, would also surest the conception of a 
four-footed animal, and, in the circumstonoee, this would be 
properly termed a reproduced notion. 

By abstraction, then, the mind fastens upon a particular 
quality or mark, and separates it from the co-existing aggre- 
gate of qualities. Hence when abstracting, wc think of the 
properties or marks, and not of tbe object to which they 
belong. 

In8t&nce.<4 might be multiplied indefinitely, but those given 
above will suffice to show the exact nature of what is termed 
abstraction, and that it should not be confounded, as it too 
frequently is, in logical treatises, with its co-process generali- 

2. Gmeralisation. — We have seen that, in abstracting, the 
mind attends to the conuderation of any one or more of tbe 
qualities or parts of any species of real or ideal whole, disre- 
garding for the moment all the remaining co-exisdng parla or 
qualities, and that beyond this its province does not extend. 
It is manifest, however, that if we could not classify the 
abstracted attributes or marks according to some relation 
subsisting between tbem, our knowledge would be of little 



hyGoogIc 



KIHUAL OF LOOIO. S7 

I^actioal adTBDlage. But Ibo difficulty of making our know- 
ledge available is obviated hj a natural tuidency in the mind 
to proceed from abstraelion to generalisation; in oUier words, 
to assemble together aud dasufy all such qualities or parts of 
whales as poesess commoa poiute of resemUance or agree- 
ment ; and when any two or more of these are classed toge- 
ther, we are said to generalise, and we express tiie generalised 
property or mark hy a common or general tflrm.* It is not to 
be supposed, however, that what is implied hj ¦ oommoD 
term has any actual raistenee. We conceive it to exist, 
merely for the purposes of daasificBtion and generalisation. 

Common or general terms are always employed as signs of 
general notions, and are obtwied by comparing several indi- 
vidual oljects with each other ; and after noting the marks or 
pdnts in which they agree, as well as several in which they 
differ, we lay aside the consideration of the latter, and adopt 
and class all aud only those pcnnte in which the individual ob- 
jects appear to agree with each other. A common term is 

* We eumot genenUae witlraat hiring Snt abatncted \ bnt irhether then 
mi; bs HbatnotioQ without gensnliution is ¦ qofstiOD not quite agreed DpoQ. 
In the ' LesBOiiB on Reaioniiig,' (nnullj attriboted to Archbishop Wbatelej) 
ths fallowing pawege occnn: — >T1ie two words bare not the lame meaning; 
for though we cannot "generaliie" without " abitraoting," we mtj parfbnn 
^latraction without generahMtion. If, for ioBtince, one ie tbinbdng of " IJU 
nm," withoat having anj notion Uut there Is man than oat anch bodf in the 
Uoiveree, he maj considei it witbont an; reference to its ptaet id the tkj, whe- 
ther ri«ng or Betting, or in in; other atoation (though it mnit be alwiji 
actaell; lo mme mtna^on); or, again, ha maj be conaideting iti itat alone, 
witboat thinliing ef ite UglU, oi of iti light alone, or oF its apparent magmiudc, 
withoQt an; reference to !ta light or beat. Now Sn each of these cases there 
wonld be oftifr-ocfwo, thoogh there would bs no ftnemUtaliim, ai long ai he 
would be contemplating onlj a single indiTidna] — that which we call the "sno." 
Bnt if he came to the belief that each of the jGtwf atari is a bod; aS'arding 
light and heat of itsalT, ae oar iim does, he might then, bj oiilracfny thia 
ammon ciccnmitance, ippl; ta all and each of these (the snn of our sjstam, 
and the stare) one common term denoting that oroamitaiMS — MiUng tbem all 
"snnB." And this wonld be to senerafite.' 



hyGoogle 



2B MANnAL OF LOGIC. 

consequently only applicable to the several oI)jects in respect 
of Ihat which is common to them all, and therefore makes 
no account of the differences between them. In this way 
we obtain a term denoting the indiTiduals themselves, in 
respect of their points of resemblance, and thia we designate 
a concrete common t«rm ; or we obtain a l«rm implying the 
points or circwmstances in which the various individnals 
agree, which we call an ahitrctct common term, e. g.. From 
noting the various points of agreement in various individual 
kings, we obtain the common term king, while the term 
royalty, which is an abstract common term, denotes the 
qualities or properties common to them all. And so also in 
the case of any other common term. 

In order to generalise, it is not necessary that there should 
be an exact resemblance between the objects denoted by a 
common term. Similarity in certmn points is sufficient. 
Accidents, and non-essential attributes, are not taken into 
account. If accidents and subordinate properties were re-. 
garded, generalisation would be impossible, because no two 
objects are in every respect alike. It is by omitting minor 
points of difference that we proceed from individuals !« 
species, and from species to genera.* 

Generalisation must, in the first instance, be from indivi- 
duals to species ; and in illustration of the process, we may 
take Socrates, Aristotle, Plato, Kant, Leibnitz, Male- 
branche, &c. Now by excluding &om consideration the 
various circumstances in which they differ from each other, 
and attending to the attribute predicable of them in com- 
mon, we form the general notion denoted by the common 
term, philosopher. In like manner, from Sesiod, Homer, 
Pindar, Sophocles, ^achylus, Virgil, Sorace, Juvenal, &c., 

'In early lifa our goneraliMtJona ant inTolnnlMj; thej are in a manner 
farced npan nn by the reonirence of [ndividDal objeota poHesBing Ibe same 
marks ; bnl wban ve heffa to form claasea foi the purposes of amngamoDt 
and knowledge, ire generalise Inteotionallj. 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 29 

we derive the common name, poet ; from Herodotiu, Thucy- 
dides, Livy, Tacitus, &c., the common name, kiitorian; iirom 
Denuatkenes, Cicero, Sorfengiuf, &g., the common name, 
orator. This ia the simplest form of generalising, viz., noting 
one common point of agreement.* 

But we may generalise by noting in several individuals a 
l^urality of poiats of agreement. If, for instance, we observe 
a variety of objects, and each provided with a mast, a *ail, and 
a rudder, as (common points of resemblance, and if we attend 
to these only, we form the notion expressed by the common 
term gkip; and this generalised notion is applicable in the 
same sense to every individual ship contained under the class 
ship, since each of tbem possesses marks corresponding to 
the component parts of this common nolion, as none have 
been token into account except those implied by the term 
thip. 

It is obvious, however, that each of the individuals denoted 
by this common term has certain peculiar attributes which 
the others have not, and which, entering into the comprehen- 
sion of some particular individual, must confine the applica- 
don of the peculiar attributes to some one particular ship. 
Hence the notion of any individual ship is more complex 
than that expressed by the common term ; for in forming it, 
the distinctive marks peculiar to each were excluded from 
consideration. 

* We ue enabled Dot anlj to leparate and oooudsr dugl; one part of ui otgect 
preseDted to tlie mind, bat also to fix nrbiCrarilji apoa nhataier put ne plmoe, 
accordiag la m^j euit tb« purpose ne happen to bace in view, e. g., anj indivi- 
dnal peraoo to whom ne maj direct oar atlsntion maj be conaidered either in a 
iraliCical pojit of lUw, and iccordiuglj referred to the claaaafmercbant. farmer, 
lawyer, &C., >¦ the case roaj be; or, pbyalologicallj, as nogto or wbits man; 
or, theologically, as Pagan, MaliomelBn, Christian, Ste. And ao, in reapect ef 
anjtbuig else that maj be the sobject of onr reasoning, we arbitratily fii apoa 
and abstract that point which is casentiHl to the pnrpose in hand ; so that the 
eame olgeet m«j bo reftired to rarioos dUTerent dauBI, according to the occa- 
KDB.— Whaieleifi El, book I., sect. vi. 



hyGoogle 



30 UAHCAL 07 LOGIC. 

Bat generalisation a not only lirom individuab to epedea. 
We may apply abitraction to tbe common terms denoting 
species, and ascend to a class still higher. Tbe words deff, 
tkeep, cow, lion, horte, each denote a common notion obtained 
by abstraction and generalisation, from the individuals of 
which th^ are reepeotJvel/ predicable ; and as in these we 
discover attributes cAmmon to all of them, we may resome 
the former process, and divest these classes of their respective 
formal characteristics, and express the notion comprehending 
all the marks in which they resemble each other by the com- 
mon term, quadruped. Generalisation may evidently be 
carried to almost any extent by considering common nouns 
(for instance, quadruped) as nngulari for by omitting their 
points of difference, we arrive at new aggregates, expressed by 
more general terms. Thus from quadruped we may arrive 
at the more general term, animal, and from animal we may 
obtain the still more general term, corporeal being. By pro- 
ceeding in this way, laying aside points of difierence, and 
considering only points of resemblance, we arrive ultimately 
at mbitance or being, the highest possible generalisation. 

It win be seen &om the foregoing, that abstraction is in a 
certain sense analytic in its character ; for by it we separate 
mentally all tbe attributes and marks of a whole. Generalisa- 
tion is, on the other baud, synthetic in its nature ; for by it 
we collect into classes all such attributes or marks of wholes as 
have common points of resemblance or f^;reement. 

It is not requisite that the individuals &om which we 
obttdn a common or general notion should co-exist. Suc- 
cession in point of time is sufficient, e. g.. We could have 
the common notion king, if only one had existed at a given 
time, in the same manner as we have the common notion 
PfiT^, which is founded on the points of agreement noted in a 
succession of individual Popes. We can reason about either 
of them without necessarily referring to any one individual 
king or Pope. 



hyGoogle 



KAiro#I. OP LOGIO. 31 

The procees of abstniction, and the use of common terms, 
»/n BDbordinate to that arrangement and classification, with- 
out which our kROwledge could not be applied to much prac- 
tical uae. The elements of our knowledge are almost unli- 
mited, both in number and varietj ; and on this account 
claBsification becomes an unavoidable necessity. After we 
hare abstracted and generalised accurately, we can make the 
results the otgects of separate examination. We may, for 
instsmce, contemplate at pleasure, nuiitber, form, iveigkt, 
eohnr, motion, attrattion, heat, etectricitg, &c; and the 
results are related to some of the most important sciences 
with which mimkiad are conversant. 

It follows that the only limit to our power of forming 
classes is the capability of tracing differences upon which to 
gronnd dislinctionB} and the only rule that requires to be 
observed, is to make the classification subservient to our con- 
venience, whetiier for the purpose of recording or examin- 
ing." 

Common terms expresrive of a class are nouns substantive i 
aa, field, Jiomer, city, rock, tower, detert, &c. ; but points of 
difibreuce, whether essential or accidental, are denoted by ad- 
jectives, and the nee of the a^ective ia to limit the meaning 
of the noun to certain individuals. Of tbemselvea, adjectives 
have no independent meaning ; they merely indicate or connote 
attributes, whether of objects, of attributes, or of feelings. 
By means of adjectires, instead of requiring a separate noun 
substantive for each object to be denoted, one nonn-subslan- 
Uve, coupled with appropriate adjectives, vrill serve to denote 
many objects. Thus we say, tall man, short man, amiable 
man, active man, useful man, &c. So of eohurt, we call 
them bright, dark, pleasing, gloomy, vivid, lively, i&c. ; and 



* It is tlie Mnplajmeiit of th< power of geacnliBJng that ocoiititatei tii« obi- 
nctsuttc diMinotion batwaen the higksr and tbs lower iDimili. Tba higbeit 
ibfin of iiutinot oid uMux tana nor oomprgbend > goural notion. It oviDot 
go bejond tho knowledge of an in^Tidul ud Its eooidaati. 



hyGoogle ' 



32 UANDAt. OF LOGIC. 

of ckaracteri, we say they are just, cruel, decided, vacillating, 
sagacipuB, reflecting, &c. ; and of affections, we say they are 
intense, moderate, absorbing, divided, lasting. 

It may not be out of place to refer here briefly to the 
furions controversy which long existed between the sect^ of 
Bealists and Nominalists, regarding the nature of Universals, 
and which only terminated when a more important question 
¦^— the Reformation — diverted their attention from it. Por- 
phyry, in his treatise od the predicables, probably originated 
the strife by the following passage : — ' Whether,' he says, 
' genua or species are substances, or exist in bsire thought 
alone, or, supposing them to be substances, whether they are 
material or immaterial, and, again, whether they eidst sepa- 
rately or in composition with sensible objects, I must decline 
discussing. The subject is profound, and needs a separate 
and more detailed inquiry.' 

' Averroes may be regarded as the founder of the Kealiste, 
although his view of the matter was but a species of neo- 
Flatonism. He held that genus and species were substances, 
but leftr it matter of doubt whether these substances existed 
apart from matter, or whether they were to be considered as 
always present in the concrete.* Among the schoolmen, long 

¦ B^d Btat«B the Platonic itoctriae of ideas smnmarilj as follons : — ' Flato 
and Ua masters held Ifiat there are abjecls of intellect of ¦ gnperioT order and 
DBtnre which are permanent and immutable. These aie ideas, or noiiersal 
naUies, of which the objects of sense are onlj the imigea and skadons. To 
these ideas Ihe; ascribed tlie moat magnificent attributes. Of man, of a ivae, 
of a circle, and of evei; apedes of things, the^ believed that tbere is one idea or 
form, irhich existed from etemitj, before anj Individnal of the species was 
tiimied; that the Idea ia the exemplar or pattern, according to which the DeiCr 
formed the indiiidaal spedee ; Chat averf indiiidnal of the apecies partidpates 
of this idea, which constitutes its essence. Thns the idea of eTBi7 spedea, 
thongh one snd immataUe, might he caD«derod in tbeir difierent tiews or 
respeclB— j5n(, as having an eternal eiislence before there wss anj indiridoai 
species ; teaondlg, ss existing in every indiTidnal of that speciee wjthant diiidon 
or mnltiplicadon, and making the essence of the species ; and, tAtrdtg, as an 
object of inteUect and acience ui man. — Int. Foaers, eaaa; S, cap. 6. 



hyG.OOgle 



LOGIC. 33 

before Nominaliam took its rise, this doctrine waa generally 
considered heterodui. They acquiesced in it only in conceiv- 
iag the Universal to be an actual existence. They held that 
genera and species were really existing things — that they 
existed actually as substances, and not merely as conceptions 
of the mind — that there was an universal man exbdng as one 
and the same in Socrates and Plato, and all the individuals of 
the spedes — and that the various individuals are formed .by 
the addition of accidents to the species. 

Roscdin of Compeigne founded the sect of the Nominalists. 
He held that nniversals were nothing but namet. Itoscelin 
was followed by Abelard, wtto held an intermediate view 
between absolute nominalism and realism. He believed 
universals to be conceptions, but without an independent and 
olqeotive reality. In order, however, that these conceptions 
sbould be formed and retained in the mind, they must rest on 
the signs of language; but he made conceptions turn on the 
proposition, while Roscelin made them turn on the ^mple 
term. His doctrine, however, continued vague and assailable 
until the days of Occam, whose opinions correspond with that 
of modem conceptualista.* He held that genera and spetdes 
existed, but existed only in the mind — that every universal is 
realty a singular in itself and therefore is only a universal in 
virtue of its signification, which is a sign of many things." 
The following is a specimen of his reasoning ; — ' If the realist 
opinion,' he remarks, ' were true, God could not anni- 
hilate one individual without destroying all ; for to annihilate 
one individual, he rauet destroy all that is of its essence. 
Consequently, he must destroy the universal which exists 
both in it and in other individuals ; and these could not con- 
tinue to exist when deprived of a part of their substance, such 
as the universal is supposed to be.' 

* AtiBtotls hu been claimed u ¦ realist, b coaceptcutUit, and a nominalllt. 
*> NDllam uniTcnale eat aliqaa anbaCaDtia aztn animam siiateDa, OeeaHt. 



hyGoogle 



SI UANIJAI. OP LOGIC. 

SECTION II. 

BXTE3ISI0IT AND COMPSEHEMSIOir. 

The extension of a teroi means the number of individual 
things of which severally that tenn may be predicated; in 
other words, it regards the number of species into which a 
genus, or the number of individuals into which a species may 
be divided. Thus of the term Jlomer the parts of extension 
are violet, liiy, blue-bell, daisy, buttercup, &a., because of all 
these and of as many more as answer to the description, the 
term flower may be predicated. For as we have seen, com- 
mon tenns denote a whole class, and any individual in that 
class ; and may therefore be predicated of all or any one of 
these individuals. 

The parts of extension of a genus are consequently the 
species contained under it^ and of a species the individuals 
contained tinder it. 

The comprehendon — otherwise called the intension— of a 
term means all the simple notions which, taken together, 
make up the more complex notion signified by the teim ; 
in other words, it is the aggregate of all the known properties . 
of a genus, species, or individual, to which it may be applied. 
Thus the notions of euiUamx, body, life, lengation, and 
reawn, are the parts of comprehension of tbe term man. 

By keeping in view what is meant by the ext^mion, and 
what by the comprekeTuion of a term, it will be seen that a 
singular term has the least exiension of all ; for it can only 
be predicated of the. one individual thing to which it belongs, 
while, on the contrary, a singular term has a greater compre- 
hension than a term denoting a class, i. e., a common term. 

Of common terms some have a wider and some a more 
restricted extension, according to the number of things to 
which they may be applied in the same sense. Common 



hyGoo^le 



HASCAL Q» LOGIC. 35 

tenns denote an A^regate of diigulArs claBsed blether, 
and the extension of a tenn will ther^ore depend on the 
amount of generality which an attribute or mark possesses, 
or ihe number of individuals to which it belongs. Thua the 
common t£rni man has a greater extension than the common 
term city, as it can be predicated of a greater number of 
irutividttab; the term cit^, again, has a greater extension 
than the term uaivernty, and tree than river, and so on. 
The extension, therefore, or, as it may be termed, the quantity 
of a term, is the number of individuals contained under it, 
and of all or any one of which it may be predicated in the 
same sense. 

By making terms the objects of reflection, we shall dis- 
cover that some involve a smaller and others a greater num- 
ber of ideas; in other words, that some are less aod others 
more compleas, according to the number of component parts of 
which they consist, e. g., The notion expressed by the term 
Jioner is less eom[4ex than that expressed by the term violet 
— for this reason, that the term violet implies all the ideas or 
component parts of the term fiower, and, in addition, all the 
notions which distinguish that parldcular species of flower 
from all others. 

It follows that the aggregate of simple notions, which make 
vp the more complex notion expressed by a terra, consti- 
tutes what is called its comprehension ; and also, that differ- 
ent terms haTe a greater or smaller comprehea^on, in pro- 
portion to the degree of complexity tJiey imply. This may 
easily be seen, by analysing or resolving a term into its com- 
ponent ideas or parts. 

The terms instanced in, viz., Jiotver and violet, may be 
viewed, then,' under two different aspects — 1st, With regard 
to the number of individuals of which they may be predi- 
cated ; and, 2d, with r^;ard to the complexity of the notions 
which they imply, or, in other words, with regard to their 
extm^on and comprehension. 



hyGoogIc 



36 UANCAL OF LOaiC. 

On considerlag these terms closely, we discover that the 
term which has the greater extension has the smaller com- 
prehensioQ, and vice versa. The notion expressed by the 
term vuilet is more complex, or consists of a greater number 
of simple notions, than the complex notion expressed by the 
tena Jiomer, and the individuals of which the term violet may 
be affirmed, or which may be termed violett, are fewer in 
number than the individuals which may be ttna^AJlowers. 

For in addition to die notion of an individual' of the flower 
tribe, the term violet is intended to express the notions of a 
particular form, colour, and fragrance which some flowers 
have, and which some have not ; and as these notions of 
form, colour, aui fragrance are contained in the comprehen- 
sion of the term violet, that name can only be affirmed of such 
flowers as have that particular form, colour, and fragrance. - 

It follows from this, that each component notion, in the 
comprehension of a term, limits the application of such term 
to those things which have a correBpouding character; and, 
therefore, that the greater the comprehension of a term, the 
smaller is the number of individual objects to which it may 
be appUed, or the less is its extension. 

The comprehension of a term denotes its extension. Sup- 
posing that we know the term rhinoceros to denote an ani- 
mal, and that we wish to ascertain what other animals may 
be called by that name, we must, in the first place, learn the 
exact meaning of the term, i. e., we must become acquainted 
with all the less complex notions, which, when taken together, 
form the more complex notion expressed by that term ; and 
when we have ascertained all these, and see some other 
animal which does not possess corresponding attributes, we 
affirm immediately that this animal is not a rhinoceros, or 
that this individual animal is not included in the extension of 
the term rhinoceros, since the term can only be applied to 
such animals as possess attributes corresponding to the com- 
plex notion expressed by that word. 



hyGoogle 



lUHDAL OF Loaic. 37 

It frequently h&ppens, that the comprehension of one term 
is inclnded in the eomprehensioa of another, e. g., The com- 
prehension of the term fimver is incladed in that of the term 
violet; for all the component notions that make up the term 
jlorcer are implied also in the term xAoUt, but it has its own 
pecoliar attributes besides. In this case the extension of the 
latter most be included in the extension of the former ; for 
since the notion of a Jlower iucludea in it no attributes that 
are not also contained in the notion of a violet, every indivi- 
dual that may be named a violet must posBeas all the attributes 
which the comprehension of the term flower includes, and 
may be therefore also named a jfenwr, or is cont^ned in the 
exteneion^of the yrorAJlomer. 

Since the comprehension of a term determines its exten- 
sion, it is manifest, that if the comprehension of any two 
terms be idendcal, their extension must also be identical, and 
that if the extenuon of any two terms be the same, so in like 
maouer most be Uieir comprehension. 

It will easily bo seen from the foregoing, that a singular 
term has, of all terms, the smallest extension, as it consists of 
only one individual, while its comprehension, on the other 
hand, must be greater .than that of any common term ; for 
peculiar attributes enter into its comprehension which cannot 
enter into that of any common term. 

In the highest genus the comprehension is necessarily the 
least, and the extenrion greatest, while in the lowest species 
the comprehension is greatest and the extension least. 



hyGoogle — 



SI 

il 



sis 

III 



hyGoogle 



HAinjAI, OF LOGIC. 



SECTION III. 



OF THE PBEDICABLEB. 

The processes of abstraction and generalisation, as has been 
already observed, are subordinate to that classified atrange- 
ment of conceptions which renders our absolute knowledge 
practicallj adrantageoDS. Itui, amidst the mass of general 
notions acquired, the mind discovers certfun distjaguishing 
qualities, which may form the basis of a new and complete 
arraDgenient of them nnder certain distinct heads. Many 
outlineB for such a claasification have been suggested, but that 
which has been generally adopted is the fivefold division into 
genus (yt'of), differentia (fcapoga), epecies (iiini), proprium 
(liim), and accident {mi/i^s^tixog). These are named the five 
jyredicables or univenals." 

The tcnn predicable has been defined 'nomen commune 
univotmm tecunda intentionis,' or a common unifocal noun 
of the tecond intension. It is univocal, because, althongh 
applicable to many individuals, it is considered as representa- 
tive of only one idea; and it is of the second intention, as 
being the conception of a conception. 

The object of the doCtrine of the predioables is to reduce 
to certain classes all conceivable predicates, or whatever can 
be logically asserted about any subject. 

¦ The Gtb heads of Predirabira, or fiTs-fold diviaioD of geoerd auaea, were 
nntten by Forphjij, in the third ceatury, u an addition to the Aristotelian 
Logic The/ ue oontained id his Isagoge cv Introdnction to the Categories of 
Aristotle. That Aldiich'a Tiewa diSu eonaiderablj in mnir points trtm thou 
of Poiphjiji will be seen fram ttie notaa in the aeqneL 

'' ArisCotle'i ennmention of the predicabies diflers eonaiderabl; tiinii that ef 
Forphjrj. ThefiinneiouljiiNDUonigeaiu (^irof), pmpatj (iSiov), definition 
Of°f), and Bcddent ^Ou/ifit^tixoi.') IMerontia has no distinct place as- 
tigned to it, bnt is eonriderad aa belonging natnralij to tba genna (ii( eunai 
y$»xtiv,) Spedea il nguded as eonatitutad not so modi bj tba combuied 
Dotionaof QiaganMloddifiinneeta&om the mnkaof twocoacairent oroom- 



hyGoogle 



40 HAKtJAL OF LOGIC. 

There are Gve distinct classes of relatioDS which may ob- 
tain between a subject and a predicate, for of any subject we 
may affirm its genus, or its differentia, or its species, or its 
proprittm, or ila accidens. 

Id conceiving of some imaginary common nature — as, 
man, triangle — we are naturally led to conceive, also, that 
this supposed essence or nature is composed of parts, and 
that the conception of it may therefore be resolved into more 
simple conceptions; for instance, the conception of man 
resolves itself into those of animality and rationality ; tri- 
angle into Jigure, aai the qaalitj of having three sides. These, 
again, suggest other conceptions as belonging to the primary 
essence or nature ; as, risibility/, nobility to tnan; the Jiaving 
three angles; the being equilateral to triangle. 

These in their order we tenn the essence, the part of the 
ttsmmre, and the quality joined to the essence. The essence 
8 of two parts, of which one is conunon to it, and to 
essences, as animality is common to man and hrute, 
to triangle, circle, square, &c. The other is peculiar 
essence, and distinguishes it from all others, and forms 
which it is, i. e., rationality distinguishes man from 
.er animals ; the having thret sides distinguishes tri- 
rom all other figures. 

the quality joined to the essence may be twofold, 
ng either necessarily or contingently united with it. 
with man the idea of risibility is Ttecessarily joined, 
Jie ideas of nobility, tallness, &c. , are only contingently 
With triangle, the having three angles is necessarily, 
! being equilateral, or isosceles, &c., is only accidentally 

se have been termed, as above stated, the five predic- 
ir universals- It may be proper to remark, however, 
lie predicable and the universal are not one and the 
The former is the sign expressive of the latter. The 
¦ibU is that which is asserted of many, and the uniner- 



hyGoogle 



ml is d 



UANUAL OP I.OG1C. 

; nature existing in many, o 



the ent unum in 



The subjoined examplea niaj be of use to the Bladent :- 



Spedes, . 
Proprium, 

Awadens, 



Diffitrentia, 



Fropriian, 

AccideoB, 



Genus, . 
Difierentia, 



Difiereotia, 
Spedes, . 
Proprium, 

Acddena, 

Genua, . 
Differentia, 
Species, . 
Proprium, 
Accidens, 

Genua, . 
Difierentia, 



rational. 



learned, illiterate, ( 



declaratory, 
proposition. 

categorical, modal, &c. 

substance. ' 

having solid extension. 

occupying space, 
white, red. Etc. 



Mling from the clouds in drops. 

ferdliang the earth. 

cold, violent, excessive, &c. 

surface. 

bounded bj one or more lines. 

enclosing space. 
Urge, small, &c. 



hyGoogle __ 





MAKCAL OP LOGIC. 


Genus, . . 


figui*. 


Difierentia, . 


iumng three rides. 


Species. . . 


triangle. 




having three angles. 


Acddeos, 


equilateral, isosceles, &c. 


lua, . 


star. 


erenda, . 


wandering. 


eies, . 


planet. 


prium, 


describing an elliptical orbit. . 


idena, 


seen from the earth. 


lUS, . 


institution. 


erentia, . 


posaeasing the highest executive 




power in a ccuntry. 


dea, . 


government. 


prium. 


able to enact or abrogate laws. 


ideas, . 





above examples have been selected on account of 
mplicity, and with the view of showing that all the 
iportant knowledge we possess, regarding the nature 
Jig, may be briefly summed up by the five predicables, 
ve say, ' Man is a rational anima], possessing speech, 
,' &c., we give an adequate account of his nature, 
ect of all investigations into the nature of things, ia to 
n all the predicables that bear relation to them ; and 
)w1edge must always be confined to the predications 
make with certunty. It is a simple matter to refer a 
to its taiie genus. We readily refer iron to the genus 
eagle to the genus bird, &c ; but to decide on the 
lal quality which essentially distinguishes one species 
lother, and what specific property is to be held as 
necessarily from the essential attribute of any given 
is often a point of extreme difficulty. Even is the 
ss prefixed, simple ae they are, many of the differentice 
pria are by no means beyond the reach of objection. 



hyGoogle 



UAHUAL OF LOGIC. 



CHEME OF THE POBPHYKIAN XREE. 



StJBSTAKOB. 


DiriBive. 


w™™. 


COKFOBBAL. 


Incokpobbal 






BODT. 


DivUiTO. 


Diri«i»e. 


ANIMATE. 


iKAimUTE. 


CoDStilDtiTe. 




LrviNG Body. 


DivtaiTS. 


w™™. 


Sbnsitite. 


iKSBKaiTTTE. 


Coiuatntive. 




Akqiat,. 


DiriBite. 


Oman. 


Rational. 


Ieratiohal. 






Man. 



i M i i ¦ 



hyGoogle 



ii UANDAL OF LOOIC. 

In this aimple scheme of the Porphyrian Tree, mbstance u 
taken as the highest geous, and man as the lowest or infirrut 
tpecies ; all the other terms in the direct line between tub' 
stance and man are subaltern terma. The scheme m&j be 
thus expluned ;^~Substance, taken as the highest genus, is 
divided, as indicated by the term ' divisive,' into two species 
— ' corporeal,' and ' incorporeal.' On the left side are the 
logical differentitB, which distlnguiah each species from the 
collateral species belonging to the genua immediately above it. 
On the right side are the differences of those collateral speues 
which are not specified in the scheme. ' Substance,' then, as 
has been said, is divided into ' corporeal' and ' incorporeal ;' 
by combining the terms 'corporeal' and 'substance,' i. e., 
the differentia and genua, they constitute, as indicated by the 
term 'constitutive,' the species 'body,' which is one and the 
same with corporeal substance. Then, again, considering 
'body* aa a genus, it is divided into 'animate' and 'inani- 
mate;' and, by combining 'animate' Eind 'body,' we consti- 
tute the species ' living body.' Living body may, however, 
be considered a genus, and as euch may be divided into 
'sensitive' and ' insensidve,' and, by combining *BenBiti>ve' 
and ' living body,' we constitute the species 'animal.' Am- 
mal may also be considered a genus, and is divisible into 
'rational' and 'irrational,' and, by uniting 'rational' and 
animal,' we constitute the species ' man,' which is equivalent 
to rational animal. 'Man,' however, is an infima species, 
and is consequentJy only divisible Into the individuals con- 
tiuned under it. 

The term genus denotes the material, or common part of 
an essence; differentia, the distinguishing oi formal part of 
an essence; species, the mkole of B,a essence; proprium, some 
property necessarily '^oia^ to an essence; and acddens, some 
property continently joined to an essence. 

The predicables belonging to each of these five classes are 
predicated or asserted in the same sense of many things, 



hyGoogIc 



HAMUAL OF LOOIC. 45 

miatiy, of all those objects in which the common or universal 
nature represeDted by the term is supposed to exist. 
First. We can predicate of any sul^ect its genus ; as, 

Violets are flowera, 
Daisies are flowers. 

Here the termflorvers denotes the genus, and is predicated of 
both violets and daiiiea, two of the species comprehended 
under it. ^ Or, secondly, its species ; as, 

This plain figure is a triangle. 
This plain figure is a square. 

Here the ternis triangle and tquare denote species, and are 
predicated of their genus plain figure. Or, thirdly, its dtffer- 
enfio, i. e., the formal and distinguishing part of its essence; 

as, 

A triangle is a figure contained by three sides. 

Here, contained hy three sides, denotes the differentia, and is 
affirmed of triaiujle, of which alone it is predicable. Or, 
fourthly, its proprium ; as, 

Every triangle has three angles — 

the jHvperty of having three angles being necessarily joined 
to the differentia, contained by three tides. Or, fifthly, its 

accidens, i. e., something accidental to it — a quality which is 
found in some, but not in others i as, 

This triangle is equilateral. 
Men are toits. 
Bodies are round. 

Here the terms equilateral, nits, round, are accidents to the 
subjects triangle, men, bodies. 

It must be kept in view, however, that each of these heads 



hyGoogle 



46 , MANBAL OF LOGIC. 

of predicftblee is a relive tenn ; for tbat whkh ie a geiaa, 
when predicated of some things, may be a differentia, tpedet, 
propriuTit, or accident, when predicated of other Ihing^.* In 
short, we cannot say what predicable any term is, or whether 
it is reallj one, until it be specified of what it is to be predi- 
cated, e. g., The term sotmd ia a genus, in relation to the 
species contaiited under it, viz., sharp sound, flat sound, &k. 
On the other hand, it is the differentia of a sounding hodi/, 
the proprium of bodies, which, from their nature, are c^iable 
of producing soimd, and it is an accident of bodies in 
general." 

definition and explanation of the five pbedicables. 
1. Of Gends. 

Genus is defined to be a universal predicable, predicated in 
' quid ' of many things differing in ^lecies, as the material or 
common part of their essence. 

Things are said to differ in species, or, apecificallj, when 
viewed as divided into different classes. 

Terms which belong .to the class genus express common 
natnres, derived not immediately from the comparison of 
individuals, but from the comparison of several classes or 

¦ Althongh in their aj^lica^on the pntdicablei ue to be lieired *s leUtiva 
tenDB, jetr irbeo regarded as the specific contained onder a geam, their relation 
to each other i£ determinate and opposed. 

'' It is to be remarked of theae diaUnctions, tbat they eipress not what the 
predicate is in its own meauiiig, but what relation it bears to the anhject of 
whidi it happens oa the parljcalar occsaioD to be predicated. There are not 
sonie names which are czdaiiTelj' genera, and othera which are excluairel; 
ipeciet, or MffrrenHa; bat the same term ia referred to one or another predic- 
able, according to the snlgBCt of which it is pi-edicated on the particular occs- 
aon. Anhntd, for hiatancs, ia a genus, with respect to man or John; a 
apedes, with respect to snbstance or bring. The words genna, apecies, &g., are 
tbetsfora relaliie ierna \ the; an oaoHa applied to oertaln predieatoi, to ex- 
praas the reUHim between them and kdm ^tw Migeet.— JfiU'j Logk, p. 162. 



hyGoogle 



HAKCAL OF LOQIC. , 47 

Bpecies alreitcly ibimed by abstraction and generalisation from 
individnak; and it is for this reason that each terms are 
teclinicall}' said to be predicated of things differing in speeiea. 
The torm ^emu denotes a class that has immediately under 
it two or more classes or ^lecies, and each of these, if not 
apeciei u\/ima, must have at least two other species or classes 
under them'. It is an universal term, and the classes under it 
must be universal terms, i. e., they must be expressive of 
species or classes. Thus the genus 
AmHAi. 

comprehends under it the dassee man, lietut, bird, Jleli, iruect, 
which are also all universal terms. A term, thm^ore, which 
only includes singulars under it cannot be a genus. 

Qenw, Haea, is an abridged expression of all the collected 
properties found ia the subject species, with the eiceptioa of 
the differentia, and the propeilies resulting from them. 

There are two kinds of genus, viz., summum and mbalter- 
num. The twmmwn., or highett genus, is the last step in 
generalisation. Any genus that cannot be considered a spe* 
cies of anything, is a tummum genus. A summum genus 
can therefore in no case be a species, is it manifestly can 
have DO constitutive differenUa. 

Summum genus, in its strictest ngnidcation, is that aQ- 
extensive term under which every object of whatever kind 
may be classed, and of every one of which it may be affirma- 
tively predicated. The word generally used to express it is 
tuhitance, or, as Borne call it, being. It is the highest and 
most general notion which the mind can conceive, and cannot 
consequently be classed under any superior genus. Many 
other gener<B are, however, frequently used as summa genera, 
according as they may be most suitable for any particular 
science or system. Thus by on ornitholt^st, bird would be 
regarded as the summum genus under which he would class 
the various subdivisions of birds; in like manner,^A. would 



hyGoogle 



48 . KANDAT. or Loeic. 

be regarded as the sammum genus moBt applicable to the 
studj of ichthyology. 

Any term between a highest genus and a lowest species, 
expresses a species with reference to the genus above it, but 
a genua with r^ard to the species below it ; and such terms 
are respectively named genus subaltemuTn, and ^ecU* tub- 
aUema. This will be more clearly illuatrated by an ex- 
ample : — 

Highat Genut- Lowest ^teciea. 

StIBSTAHCE, BODT, LlTraO BODT, AsiMAL, MaN. 

Here bodt/ is a species with reference to its genus tubstance, 
but a genus with reference to living hody, which is one of the 
species included nnder it. Living body, again, ia a species 
with reference to its genua body, but a genua with reference 
to animal, which is one of its subject species. Animal, on 
the other hand, ia a species with reference to lining body, but 
a genua with reference to man, being one of the species which 
it comprisea. Man ia the lowest species (apeclea infima), in- 
cluding nnder it no terms except the proper names of individual 
men, and cannot tiierefore be considered a genus of anything. 
Species atill lower might be formed, indeed, if we were to 
claasiiy men according to their country ; as, Ajnerican, 
Asiatic, African, European, or, according to their tize, age, 
or colour; but auch claaaifications would proceed on acciden- 
tal, not on eesential distinctions. 

In the series tubstance, body, living body, animal, man, the 
term substance is the highest genus, and cannot be a species 
of anything more abstract, aa it is the last step in generalisa- 
tion ; and the term man is the lowest apeciea, and cannot be 
considered a genus, as it is the Jirst step in generalisation. 
With the exception, therefore, of the tenns substance and 
man, every other term in the aeries is a genus mbalfemum 
with regard to the terra below it, and a species subaltema 
with regard to the term above it. 



hyGoogle 



UAKDAL OF LOQIC. ¦ 49 

In any series of tbis kind, it is evident that tbe Bammom 
genus Las the least comprehension and greatest extension of 
all die terms, bdng the name of the simplest conception, and 
that the species infima lias the greatest comprehension and 
the least eztenriou of them all, although, as a universal term, 
it has a smaller comprehension, (as it excludes accidents) and 
greater extension than any of the singular terms included 
under it. 

Genos, as already mentioned, means the material or com- 
mon part of an essence ;* and hence it can only be predicated 
of things differing in species. When we say violets are 
Jloteers, daisies aieJUmers, the affirmation is only made as to 
the common part of their essence, i. e., their common points of 
resemblance. Yiolets and daisies, and all other flowerS) pos- 
sess certain qualities in common, and it is upon these that the 
genus is founded. The characteristic and distinguishing attri- 
butes do not enter into the comprehension of the genus. But 
every attribute included in the comprehension of the genus 
is predioable of every one of its subject species. 

It fallows that a genus can only express an essenoe inade- 
quately, since it merely expresses a nature common to many 
things, excluding from its comprehension all the disUnguish- 
ing characteristics of the species of which it may be predicated. 

A genus vi called a logical or univefsal whol^ because it 
is the most extensive term- in its signification, containing 

¦ From wliat bu b»D said at tha dow of tbe Iwt Mctron, regudiag mltsm 
and DomiiudlBm, it will nadilj ba s«en tbat tbe defiaitioDB ben giisa of tba 
prodicablas' in atrictlj realistic in thidi cbancter, for tbey caanot be defended 
except on realist priodplea ; tbst la, that genera and species are not mere eon- 
oeptions of tbe mind, but bava an independent eiiaCenoe in native. Like moat 
of the BcboUitie definiUDDS, Hie; aie idmpia, clear, and teiae, and not likelj to 
be iqilaced b; anjtbing preferable. Indeed, all definitdODB of the au^'ef^we, aa 
tbe pndicablea at« now nnireraallj regarded, are diaractariaed bf leas or mora 
looaeneas ud Tagnenesa; at all ecents, the;f fall (hort of the exactness andpn- 
(ni^on wHcb can be eecnred in definidons of the r^ectivt. The defiiutiona are 
Ibtne of Aldricb, nho probabl; took them immediatslj IroQi Albertna Magnus. 



hyGoogle 



A\ 



50 MAMCAL OF LOGIC. 

species as its subject parts, and affirmadvelf predicabte of all 
of them, as mnj be seen from, the following esample, viz. :— r- 
/Men 'V 
Beasts 
AH ¦< Birds > are Animids. 
Fishes 
Vlnsects ) 

Here animal is the logical whole, aod Ttten, hetnU, birds, 
&c., its coDlaiaed parts. 

A logical whole — such as a genus — has onl^ parts of ex- 
tension, while a metaphysical, or essential whole — such as 
a apeciea — has parts of comprehension. 

Genus is said to be predicated in ' quid ' (if rifi ri leri). If 
in reference to a genus the qnestion be asked, Quid est 
illiidf the answer is, The common or material part of the 
essence of many tkingt differing in gpecies. Strictly apet^ing, 
however, we cannot answer the question, Q^id est ? for we 
do not know of anythlDg Q,uid sit, what is its essence ; and 
can only say Qaale sit, i. e^ we know it only indirectly 
through its attributes and murks. 

The species into which a genus is divided are termed co- 
ordinate or cogjuite spedea. They are termed 'co-ordinate,' 
as not being gubordinate to one another, and 'cognate,' as pos- 
sessing certain marks or conceptions in common. The genus 
of which co-ordinate or connate species are sub-divisions, is 
termed the proximate genus to them all, while in this case 
the summum genus is called the remote genu*. All the other 
genera, between it and the proximate genua, are called inter- 
med,iate genera. 

n. Of Spkcies. 

Species is a predicable predicted in 'quid,' of many 
things diQering in number, as the mhole of their essence. 



hyGoogle 



9UKUAL OP LOaiC. SI 

Things ore said to differ in numier, or numeticallj, vlien 
viewed aa divided into irtdividuals. The namerical difference 
IS' constituted by the peculiar acoidenta, vrhich distingaieh the 
individuals centred under an infima species from one an- 

Terms which belong to the class »pecie» represent the 
geuend or common noljon of some nature conceived to exist 
in a nnmber of different individuals ; and it is for this reason 
that a species is teehnicaUj said to be predicated of things 
differing in number. 

A species, tbeB, is an abridged expression of the collective 
mariis of the individuals contained under it, with the ex- 
ception of their acHdenti. Thus city is a spedea, including 
Athens, Rome, Carthage, ParU, London, Oxford, &o. 
River includes the individuals — Ae Tyber, the Scamand^, 
the Salyt, the Danube, the Thames, Im, Cam, Ac. Man 
denotes a species, comprehending Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, 
Anacreon, Momer, Virgil, Tkucydides, Serodotus,Tcuntm, 
&c. Star, includes the Polar Star, Arcturus, Bootes, Sirius, 
&c. 

A species is denoted by a universal term. It is any class 
included under a higher class, which must be its genus. We 
say any class, because a genus has generally many classes 
under it, and in any case must at least have two. 

Spetnee is of two kinds, viz., species svhaUerna, and species 
infima. The latter expresses the first common nature, 
founded on the observation of similar marks in a number 
of individuals. It is the first st«p in generalisation. A 
species trtjima cannot be considered as a genus with respect to 
anything, as it only contains individuals under it.* Thus the 

¦ An iiiGma ipsidM ooald be oonudered ¦ genus, if tb were at liWty ta 
raise aecHaiial diSBrences to the rank of tuaitial diS^reDces. On this lap- 
podtiOD, ire migbt diyido nun (an infiina spedaa) into learned and onleaned, 
chnrchman, dissenter, priest, tajnisn, or into white, hlack, or red man. On 
this point Mi Mill remarks, vol. i. p. 1 61 : — ' By the AristottlUn logidana. 



hyGoogle 



52 UANCAI, OF LOGIC. 

univerBal term mastiffis a species infima, including nndcr it 
only iadividual maetifis. In contradistinction to a rpecies 
subaiterna, a specie^ infima is termed apeciet proper, that 
is, the species of logic. 

The attributes by which the individuals conftuned under a 
epecies injima are distinguished from each other, are acciden- 
tal, e. g., it is accidental to a man to belong to a particular 
country ; to be an astronomer, or botanist, &c. ; but the attri- 
butes by which the differentspecies of the same genus are 
distinguished irom one another, are essential. 

A species denotes the whole of an essence ; for it is made 
up by the union of the genus and differentia. These are the 
component parts of a species; for the genus denotes the com- 
mon or material pari, and the differentia the formal, or cha- 
racteristic parL Thus by tmiting the two parts, a plane 
figure (the genus), and contained by three sides (the differ- 
entia), we .form triangU, which is a spedes of figure. 

A species can have but one difierentia. This attribute is 
peculiar to it, and distinguishes it irom every other species of 
the same genus; but although a species can have only one 
differentia, it may hare many propria, or subordinate attri- 
butes, resulting from or accompanying that differentia. 

It is obvious that the differentia cannot be included in 
the com prehension of the genua ; for if it could, it would be 
common to all the species; neither can any of the attributes 
resuldng from the differentia enter into the Gomprehensiou tii 
the genus. 

the terms genos and apecies ir«re need in s more mbicted ssdk. ThBj did Dot 
admit ever; elus which ooold be dirlded m(o alher cIswm to be ¦ geniu, or 
everj clan irhich could be incloded in ¦ larger clau to be > species. Sywd 
woald Dot hiTB beoD admitted to be a genoi irith retereoce to Uao, bat a pn>- 
prima oi: accideni oalj. It was requuite, accordjng U> thai tbeorj, that 
genua RDd ipedea iihoald be of tha eaaeaoe of the aobject. Aniaal wu of tlie 
essence of man ; b^ed «u Dot. And in eTsry cliuifieatioD tbej coDmdered 
aome ooe olau u the lovMt inSma qieciei.' 



hyGoogle 



uandal of logic. 53 

Species, like genus, is said l-o be predicated in ' quid ;' bat 
species is predicaWd as to the whole of the essence of many 
things differing in n-tmber, whereas genus is merely predi- 
cated of the material or common part of the essence of tBany 
things diffeiing in species. 

It must be borne in mind, when we speak of species as 
expressing the whole essence, that no predicate can com- 
pletely and strictly express the tvhole essence of its subject, 
unless it be another word of the very same import and co- 
extensive with it ; as, Wellington was the conqueror of 
Napoleon. The words whole essence must therefore be un- 
derstood as meaning only the whole that any common term 
can express, i. e., the nearest approach to the whole essence 
of the individual that any term not synonymous with the 
subject can denote. 
' When species is spoken of as a vshole, this ia property in 
reference to the genus and differentia, each of which denotes 
a part of that species which is constituted by the union of 
both.' 

Species being the whole essence, as ezpliuned above, 
necessarily implies the genus, which is a part of that essence. 
It is a more complete and comprehensive term than gentis, 
and is therefore a metaphysical, or essentiul whole, e. g., 
Man is a metaphysical whole, and implies rational ani- 

¦ Tbe author of tbe ' Ontliae of the Laws of Thooglit,' in eiumniag Aiii- 
totU's view of the predicabla claBses, eiplaina speclea Ihoa : ' Tba apaiaH miy 
bo rtgardod as composed not of tbe marks of tbe genna and diflereoca, bo well 
aa of Hiasa of ttro coDoorroDt or commimicuit genera ; for the di^rence is bat a 
genua irbicb, fiom ita averlapping part of anotber, ia naed aa a diadnetive taaik 
of that part which it oTerlapg. If in analjring oar notion of " the red flower- 
ing cnrrant," we regard "encraat" ae the genna, and " red flowering " as the 
^fienncs, we may alao regard " red flowering " aa a wide genna, wider, in 
fiict, than " OTrranti' and theroftre we may say, that onr notion of the plant 
ia generated by tlie coneonence of two gmera.'— [P. US; see alao p. S9, 



hyGoogle 



HAHCAI, OF LOGIC. 



The following scheme 
infima species :~ 


( Vulture, 




^Kftpacious, 


.- Falcon, 
. Owl, &c 
Parrot, 




Pies, 


.- HornbiU, 
. Crow, &c. 
Turkey, 




^Land Birds,... ( 


Gallinaceous,-. 


A Pheasant, 
Partridge, Ac. 






Columbine, 


. Pigeon, &c. 
/Thrush, 






Passerine, 


-j Finch, 


BiBOB, 






I Lark, &c. 








Dodo, 
1 Ostrich, &c. 








Heron, 
Snipe, &c. 




I Water Birds,.. 


Pinnate-fooled, 


1 Fhalarope, 
1 Grebe, &c. 






Web-footed,.... 


, Duck, 
1 Diver, &c. 



hyGoogIc 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



DIFFEIUINTIA. 



Differentia' is a predicable, predicated in 'quale quid,' 
(af rtfi voiot Ti) of m&aj things differing either in »pecie* 
or in numher, as the dutmguisMng part of their essence. 

It has been already shown that things are said to difier in 
species, or specifically, when viewed as divided iato different 
classe^'and to difittr in number, or nnmerically, when viewed 
only as iudividoals. 

The difiereotia is the formal or dittinguiskuy part of an 
essence, and is variously termed the essential difference or 
attribute, the divisive and constitutive part, and, in common 
discourse, the chaT-aeteTHstic par& It must be podlive, not 

A difierantia belongs to a species alone, and every species 
included under a graius must have a differentia peculiar and 
belonging to itself, exdusively, in order to distinguish it from 
every other species of the same genus. Thus under the 
genus plane figure we have the species triangle, square, 
circle, oblong, &c., each of which has its own formal or 
distinguishing part, in addition to the common or material 
part plane figure, e. g., the being contained by three side* is 
the essential difference of a triangle, for it conslitntea the dis- 
tinction between it and ail other figures, since no figure can 
be a triangle which is not contained by three aides, nor can 
any three-sided figure be anything but a tritm^e. 

The differentia first divides the genus, and then constitutes 
the spedes. Thus the genus animal is divided into two dis- 
tinct species, by adding the attribute rational to one part of it, 

* Poq>fayry recogLiue only a rdatise dLff«rence between too giocn tpecia. 
Thns rationale a nol tbe ^fferentia of mtn per le, but of man aa tliatingaubnl 
fnini bniteg. Heace he dofioiB una ^UQt "koyixoi htiroi (a rational marlnl 
being) — the last term being in like iDumer ttw diStontia of man, ts compued 
»i:h the goia.^Matueli, p. 21. 



hyGoogle 



56 UAMCAL OF LOOIC. 

and the attribute irrational to anottier part of it, e. g., 
rational animal, or man ; irrational animal, or beast. 

Witb respect to its dividing the genus, it has been termed 
dioitive (differentia divisiva) ; and with respect to its con- 
stitnting the species, it has been termed eongtitulive (diSer- 
entia constitativa).* 

It is by the differentia that the varioas species contained 
under a genus become opposed to each other, and such oppo- 
ntjon consists in each species having some one essential 
attribute peculiar to itself alone. In short, it signifies the 
attribute which distinguishes a given species from every other 
species of the same genus. 

Porphyry gives five definitions, of, rather, explanadons of 
the differentia, but they are alt substantially one ; for the same 
difierenlia is either formal, or divisive, or constitutive, &c„ 
according to the view in which it is for the thne regarded. 

The differentia is predicated in qwak quid, e. g., to the 
question, What is a man? with reference to his genus, the 
answer is an animal, but to the question Quale animal? what 
descripli(m of animal, with reference to his species, the answer 
is ratiwial. The answer to 'quid' points out the material 
part, and the answer to ' qaale,' the distinguishing part, and 
both taken together complete the species or whole essence. 

GENERIC AND SPECIFIC DDTEREKCB. 

There are two kinds of difference, viz., generic and spe- 
dfic. 

Generic difference is that which constitutea subaltern 
species. It is termed generic, because the species which it 
constitutes may be considered as a subaltern genus, and con- 

* H»a diniio ««t FJDsdem rei in diiersos tantnm modoi ; eadem SDim dif- 
ferentia peiretuo at at ^vWva et oooMitoti™, dlreno tunen respeotn.— iSm- 



hyGoogle 



UANDAL OF LOGIC. 57 

sequently tiie generic difierence may be affirmatively predi- 
cated of «Teryspeciea which, is contaiaed under it; and hence 
it is predicated of things difiering from each other in species, 
e. g., iensiHve may be predicated of betut, bird, JUk, insect, 
as well as of man, for it is a generic difference to all animals. 
Speciju^ difference is that which constitutes infima species. 
It is this kind of diS^nce wbieh isdistiDCtivelymeantbythe 
logical diCerence. It can be predicated of all the individuals 
contained under die species which it constitutes, and is there- 
fore said to be predicated of things differing in number. Thus 
rational, which is the specific difierence of man, b predicable 
of every man, but not of any other animal. 



A proprium is a predicable, predicated in 'quale' of things 
difiering either in species or in number, as neceisariiy joined 
to their essence. 

Terms which belong to the heads differentia, proprium, 
and accidens, are said to be predicated of things differing 
either in species or in number, because they may have imme- 
diate reference either to a genus, in which case they are pre- 
dicated of all the species conlaiaed under that genus, or to a 
tpeeiet, in which case they are predicated of the individuab 
Irom which that species is formed. 

A proprium is a quality necessarily joined to an essence, 
but not its differentia. It is predicated universally and ex- 
clusively of all the individuab of a species, but m predicable 

* i^eeijlca (diSerentia) eat qiue Bpei^em mflmam conBtitnit; hso rat, que de 
nomero difierentibiu predicator. — Aldrieh, This diffeia BoDiewh&t froni the view 
of Porph7i7,whooaiieidentheepe>^fiodiff«rencs(3ja^Dfa iiSo-jreiat) an opposed 
to acddenlal digvraKt, {&ia.(poia Kara »ii^a(3»|K0f)—tliofonn9r denoting 
the differentia proper (i. e., either coQBtituEive or divisive] irhlch distinguishes 
one ¦pHsea from snotber, whether snbaltem or itifim& — the Utler donoticig Ih* 
¦cddeuts which distingnisb between individualB. 
g2 



hyGoogle 



58 HAHDAX. OP IX>QIC. 

of no other spedee. A property of this . deecription forms 
part of the essence of a species, and is the result of the diffe- 
rentia, e. g., the diffffl^nUa of a triangle is, that it is ' contained 
b7 three sides ;' and ve cannot concdve of a figpre contained 
bj' three sides but as having also three angles. The property, 
therefore, ' having three angles,' is the result of the Sifferentia 
' contEuned bj three sides.' RetpontihUity, again, is a pro- 
perty of man, and is the result of the differentia rational. It 
is evident, however, that when we call anTthing a proprium, 
we should first know the difierentia &om which it flows, 
because a proprium mnst be considered as an accident, unless 
deduced firom a known differentia. 

A proprium might therefore be defined as the expression of 
those attributes which are observed uniformly to accompany 
a class, though not taken into consideration when forming it. 

OBNXBIC ItID 8FE0IFI0 FBOPXBIT. 

Property is divided into two kinds — generic and specific. 

Generic property is that which necessarily accompanies or 
is joined to the essence of the snmmum or subaltern genus.* 
It is evident from this that generic properties may be predi- 
cated of many species, and of all the individuals contained 
under them, while spedfie properties can only be predicated 
of the difierent individuals contained under one spedes, e. g., 
the property in triangles that ' the three angles are equal to- 
gether to two right angles ' is a generic property, and may 
be predicated of all triangles. 



¦ Gmericam est, quod paixeaxna comitatoi eg 
¦ItemL — Aldrich. 

Oa the prindpleB of Aiiatotle and Porphyr;, a gvaeric properCjr can on); be 
nffxieA w a prop«rtj witb mpeet \a tba bigliMt qncks of which it ia predi- 
cable. Aa Tagudi all anbocdiiute apedes, it muat be con^dered aa an aoMatL 
MMU, for aiampla, a propert; of a/r^pv, ii an accident to anhwl and to Itomo, 
aa not oaayeitible with thsm. — Mau^ p. 28. 



hyGoogle 



UAHCAL OF LOGIC. 59 

Spectre property is that wbich flows from the essence oC 
the species infimo,* and is predicated of one species and its 
diSerettt individuals, e. g:, the property that ' all equilateral 
trian^es are also equi 'angular,' is a specific property', and can 
only be predicated of that species of triangle which is termed 
' equilateral.' Generic property is predicable, theD, not only 
of species, but also of the various individuals contained under 
those species. Specific property is only predicable of the 
iodividuals contained under one species.'' 

Froprium has also been divided into four kinds: — 

1. That which is peculiar to «Hie species, but not univer- 
laUjf found in ita contained individuals. Thus it is proper to 
man alone to be a phy^cian or statesman^ though all men are 
not so. 

2. That which is predicable of the whole species, but not 
of that species alone, i. e., found in every individual of a 
species, but found also in other spedes. Thos maUeahility, 

' Sptc^iemi, qood fluit al) easantia speciei infim«. — AldrM. This mm of 
proper^ ia not comiUDUiGed nth«r b; AiutDtta or Poiphyi?. laeteai of consi- 
dering it OS flmring or naolthig neoesaaril; Cnm the ra»Doe, tliej regard it bb 
simply ooniertible with its subject, Aldricli'fl view ie, however, a very old 
one, aod ie probablj traeeabia to tbe AnbiaiiK. 

** Tbe diSbnnce and apeciQo prapertj an often difficult te dislinguiali &om 
eacb otber ; bat it sliauld be remembered tbaC a piopertj ia onij joined to an 
ewenee, and resDln from the ^fiarenoe; wbereaa tbe diSmnce is a con- 
¦UtDtiDg part o[ the eaaenca. If, then, maj part of an essence be supposed 
to be taken awaj, tbat essence can no longer rdmun as it nas. The follomng 
test, therefore, will in most caies sncoeed: — Since the gepas and diffBience 
nidted Ibrm tbe spedes, it follows tbat if tbe difference be snpposed to be taken 
away from anj epedea, tbat apeuea most revert to its sabaltem genus — in fact, 
the spedas will no longer exist ; bnt if a property be snpposed to be taken &om 
it, tbe eesenoe, i. e., tbe spedes, will not thereby be iDJored. — Hi^the. In illtu- 
tration of tbi*. lot na take the Mowing example : — From the spedea ' rational 
animal* suppose 'rationaF to be taken away, and the apecies immediately reverts 
to it* anbalten genne 'animal'— bnt snppoae, agun.the property 'speech- 
possessing' to be taken away, tbe apedn 'rational admal' would not tbereby 
be destroyed. 



hyGoogle — 



60 UAHCAL OF LOOIO. 

fwtbiaty, weight, value, are predicabl« of gold, bttt not of 
gold only. 

8. That which may bo predicated of all the indiriduals of 
a Bpeciee, and of that spedes only, bnt not always. Thus, 
vines bear grapet; man U a laughing ammal. 

4. That which may be predicated untrersally, peculiarly, 
and at all times, of one species only and its individuals. Thus 
it is the property of every circle, and of circles only, that die 
lines drawn from the centre to the circumference are all 
equal.' 

Of tbese four classes the first is only an accident of the 
Bpeues, and cannot therefore be strictly termed a property. 
Every property must be applicable to aU the individuals of 
the species, and must belong to that species necessarily, as 
flowing from the differentia. A property differs from an acci- 
dent in this, that it can be predicated of its species, and 
vice verta. They are reciprocally predicable, e. g., man it a 
being gubject to law. A being rul^ect to latv it a man. The 
two propositions are simply convertible. An accident and 
its species are not, however, reciprocally predicable. We can 
assert that every ttaiesman is a man, but vre cannot say 
that everi/ man is a statesman, because the being a states- 
man is only predicable of some men, and consequently not 
universally found in the members of the species. 

The second is the generic property. It is characteristic of 

* Quod amTcmit KiUsed nan omni. nt homim aut grammalxum. 

Qood eoDTHdt omni Md uon boU, nt homini eae b^tdaa. 

Quod ooDTcmt oinni at aoli sed oon Bsmper, ct hnmini canacert. 

Qand coDTenit cimn[ soli eC semper ot ionuni rilibiUiaa. — A!drich. 
' On the abore eiainplM Uaiuwll remarks (p. SS) : ' Thi liict of Forpfajry 
¦DEirera to the Toarth kind of propntj mentioned in the I«it. The ottieT three 
are aeddenU, the fint and third eepsrttble, tba Wcood inMpiinibla, bat still 
onlj ut acddenC, ai being predicable of mora aatyecta Cban homo. On the 
¦diotutic theoi7, il li iln an aoddent,' as not flowing iwecMacilj &ND ni<>Dik>I*, 
tbe di~ 



hyGoogle 



UAKUAL OP LOGIC. 61 

a genus, and predicable of the different apeciee under it, bnt 
it is not characteristic of a species as such. 

The third is not sufficientlj distinct &om the first to require 
separate notice. 

The fourth is the specific property, and ia that alone which 
constitutes the proprtum of logic. 



Accident is a predicable predicated in 'Quale' of many 
things differing in species or in number, aa contingently 

An accident denotes something contingentlj joined to an 
essence, e, g., the being 'equilateral' or 'right-angled' is 
an accident to a triangle, for such attributes do not neces- 
sarily belong to a triangle, since every accident must be sepa- 
rable from the species, otherwise it would be a property. 

Accidens is divided into two kinds — inteparahle and sepa- 
rable. 

The inseparable aeddents are such as cannot be separated 
irom the individuals of which they are predicated. They 
are circumstances which have happened in past time to some 
members of a spetues, and cannot now be separated from 
them, e. g., the place of birth, the parents, the past events of 
life, &c., are inseparable accidents to any individual man. 
The circumstance or fact of liaving been horn at Mantua, has 
no conceivable relation to Virgil as one of the species matt, 
but, as an individual, the circumstance is inseparable from 
him. This class of accidents may be predicated of their 
subjects at all times. 

The separable accidents are such as can be separated from 
the individual, e. g., a man's dress, posture, residence, opt' 
nions, &c., are separable accidents. This class of accidents 
can only be predicated of their subjects at certain times. 

An inseparable accident is predicable only of individuab; 



hyGoogle 



for all accidents are separable &om the genus and spedee ; 
bat with regard to individuals, thej ase separable or insepa- 
rable. 

The last three heads of predicablea, vlz^ difierentia, pro- 
prium, and accidena, are predicated of things differing as well 
in number as in species, becaase they have a relation either 
to a genns or a species. If the; relate to a genus, they can 
be predicated of all the species which that genus contains ; 
and if they have reference to a spedes, they can be predi- 
cated of all the various individuals under that species. 

In conducting classification on a great scale, as in natural 
history, the technical designations furnished by the predicables 
are found to be tao few. Others have therefore been invented 
diiefly to express the varieties of intermediate gejtera. Those 
best known are used in the Liuifean system, and consist of 
five kinds — 1. Clatset, corresponding to snmma genera; 2. 
Orders, corresponding to intermediate genera; 3. Oenera, 
confined to the proximate genera ; 4. iSpectei, confined to the 
co-ordinate species under each genus ; 5. Varieties, including 
the species infima, and all divinons depending merely on 
accidental, or on some of the less important proper qualities. 
Other s}^lems employ a still greater variety of designations, 
e. g., divisions, claitet, orders, tribes, families, legions, sec- 
tions, stth-divisions, &c. 



hyGoogle 



HAIfTAL OF LOQIC. 

¦s 



(¦SS~ 



{ Separable. 



1§ 

Is U 



Specific. 



H 

i s 



li- 
li 

t. 

li 
I 



hyGoogle 



UAHUAL OF LOOIC. 



SECTION IV. 



a FBEDICAXEMtB.* 

The five predicables or nniversala, aa has been shown, do 
not express anj actually existing tMng; they are merely 
terms expreasive of common notions, and present them aa 
classified under certtun distinct heads. They express second, 
not first notions. In nature we find no actually existing 
thing corresponding to genus, species, or any of the other 
predicables. They indicate conceptions, not reaiittet. 

Second notions, however, presuppose first notions, and as 
under the predicables we classify conceptions, so under the 
categories we classify realities, or distribute into classes all 
tJie possible real things about which we can discourse. 

Id short, a perfect list of categories or predicaments would 
be a classification of whatever can be the subject or predicate 
of a proposition,'* while tbe predicables are a cla^fication of 
all the possible afBrmations about these things. 

The usual distribution of the categories, according to the 
Aristotelian school, is into ten ; and it is supposed &at to 
some one or other of these heads of division any term ex- 
pressing a first notion may be referred. The divbion is -as 
follows, viz.;—" 

Ou<rnx . . . substantia . . • substance. 
Tlonv . . . quautitas . . . quantity. 

¦ Th(7 an termed cattgoria from tbe Greek noan snbetantiTe xxTyfyapa, 
and jiredicamenU txtim the Latin nnderiiig. prtcScamentmn. Tlie catagoriea 
are aaid to bare been firet dasslfied b; Arcbjtas of TarentDin j hut of thii tben 

^ la tbis the oitegoiies of Aiiatotle are defecUie ; for man; thmga that fbnn 
tbe Botject and piedioeto of a propomtioa ire excluded ia the enamentisn, 
such as en(u nih'onu (beings of tbe reason) and hcoihJ noft'oiu. 

' Tbe Fjthagorean, Platonic, and Stoic scboola Mnong tbe Greeks, bad eaeli 
a favourite eDamerstJoa of categories. 



hyGoogle 





MAMDAL OF LOGIC. 




no/«» . . 


qnalitas .... quality. 


TlgOf Tl . , 


nJado 






. KlatioQ. 


now , . 


obi . 






. where. 


Tlart . . 


qnando 






. when. 


Ktieiai . . 


9itil8 . 






. posture. 


^X"' • • 


babitoa 






. habit. 


ntutiv . . 


actio . 






. action. 


naffx*" ¦ 


passio 






. auffering 



To some one of these heads we may refer every term, 
according as may best suit our purpose, for the subject nnder 
discuBsioD, 

Substance (answering to the question, ' Quid eati'} consi- 
dered without reference tO inhering qualities, has been de- 
fined quod sub te »tat, i. e., which supports itself, or which, in 
the mode of its existence, is independent of everything else. 
With reference to inhering qualities, it has been defined 
ent per le tubshlent et tviutans accident&na, i. e., an entity 
having independent existence and supporting qnaUties. The 
substance is the en#, the self-existing thing; the accidens is 
the ens entis, which may be fireely rendered the mode, quality, 
or accident of the self-existing entity. 

Substance is divided into first and second substances. In- 
dividual things are first substances; as, Socrates, Buee- 
phaius, this castle, that tree; second substances are denoted 

¦ The voida tuitiaaee, enlils, being, Kre each of them leaa or more vnbigaaoa 
in tbeir aignificaljoa. Of sabstance, in its ptailoeophical sense, we hiTe no 
direct knowledge ; we onlj know it in^rectlj or through sttribntea, bnt when 
iu ¦ famiUar iangnage ire nsa Che word aabstance, ws are snpposod to mean bj 
it nma niUj aiiating olgeot or thing cogoiubie bj tbs aeosM. EnCitj and 
binng Bra io thdr rtrict meaning ¦jnoajnunis, being betb immediatal; odd- 
neoted with a verb which simplj denotes mare eiistenee. ' Beiog' is, however, 
commonl; need sa a STnonjm (br substann, with this diSiirence, that being ia 
applied equal]}' to mind and matter, while luiilonce rather suggests the idea of 
matter only. Being and entity sbonld be nnderatood as implying mere abstract 
existence, and nerer separate existence, as oogniiable by the sensee. 



hyGoogle 



hj common or gener^ termB, wbidi merely denote cTe&lions 
of the mind ; as, man, animal, body. This cat^orj includes 
wbateTer cooatitutes lie very being of things, and of which 
all otg'ects of thought are modifications ; substances are 
divided into telf-existent and dependent, material and imma- 
terial, &c. 

Quantity. — The ansvers to the questions, Hqw great? 
How many t How long in time? &o., Ml under this category. 
It includes all things capable of being measured or numbered. 
Quantity is diridod into cotUinaous and discrete. ContinuouB 
quantity is that whose parts are united by some common 
boundary, such as m^nitude, or the modifications of exten- 
sion, having permanent continuity ; and time and motion 
having successive continoity. Discrete quantity is that whose 
pans have no c<Hitinaity, such as number, to which sound and 
speech are sometimes added. 

Quality, (answering (a the questioii ' Quale V) includes the 
properties whioh prihcipaUy distingmsh or characterise objects. 
It is divided into natural or innate powers and properties, as 
the mental faculties and the capahilitiea of objects ; acquire- 
ment*, suc^ as learning, virtoe ; untibte quaHtiet, such as 
sounds and colours, and forms or figures, with all their modi- 
Soaiions. 

Xtlation inclodes all the dnmrnstances about objects which 
imply a ooaneetion with oHiers, in considering which we may 
observe both the princ^le of the relatious, and the tkiru/t 
related, eaUed correlatives, e. g., the consideradon of master 
implies servant, and ot pastor, Jlock, &c. 

Place (answering to the question Ubi 1) includes all the 
modificationB of space, and the more general relations of 
objects to space. 

Time (answering to the question QuandoT) as to-morrow, 
yesterday, in the year of the building of Borne ; but time im- 
plied by the question qttando, roust not be confounded with 
the time denoted by the question guoM diu ; the latter is 



hyGoogle 



HANUAI. OP LOOK. 67 

coatvtuous time; as, a month, a year, and belongs to ^e 
second category. 

Posture includes cliiefij the relations of objects to one an- 
otlier as occupying space, such as the rdations of the con- 
stituent ports of objects, die relatdons of parts to tbe whole, 
and the relations of entire objects to one another in their 
attributes, combinations, &c 

Hahit expresses what anytbiDg has ; «a, tobe clothed, to 
mear thoet, hat a ring, &c. It should be noted, however, tbat 
'clothes,' 'shoes,' &c, do not of themselves imply hatrit ; tins 
is only predicable of them when possessed. 

A.ction includes all the rarieties of causes, or all the ways 
in which objects may produce changes in others. 

Pamon includes whatever implies the notion of ntffering, 
and all the varieties of efiecta, or the ways in which objects 
may undei^ changes. 

Various objections have from time to time been made to the 
Aristotelic enumeration of the categories, and probably upon 
satisfactory grounds ; it is questionable, however, whether a 
more eatisfiiiCloiy clasufication has yet appeared. TbeAristo- 
telic categories are adopted here, as deduced and simplified by 
Sir W. Hamilton : 'They* (the ten categories) 'are ^divisions 
of being, — ens. Being is divided int'i em per te, and era per 
aceidem. Ens per »e corresponds to mAHanoe, the first of tbe 
Aristotelic cat^;ories. Em per acddens comprises the other 
nine ; for it either denotes something ^soltUe or something 
relative. If something absolute, it either originates in the matter 
of the substance, and is divisilde — qttantity, Aristotle's second 
category ; or in the^omi, and is indivisible — quality, Aristotle's 
third category. If sometMng relative, it constitutes relation, 
the fourth category; and to relation the other six may easily 
be reduced. For the fiilb, where, denotes the relation be- 
tween difierent oljecia in space, or the relation between place 
sod the thing placed. Tbe sixth, when, denotes the relation 
between objects in succession, or the relation between timo 



hyGoogle 



68 UAMOAI, OF LOOIC. 

and a thing in time. The seventh, posture, is the reUtioii of 
the parta of a bodjr to each other. The eighth, having, is the 
relation of the thing having and the thing had, while the ninth 
and tenth, action aai pamon, are the reciprocal relations be- 
tween the agent and the patient. There are on this scheme one 
supreme category— fttftn^; two at the first descent, emper te, 
etaper accidens, four at the first and eeconA,subttanee,quantitg, 
gualitif, relation, and to Uie dignity of category these four are, 
of Aristotle's ten, pre-eminently, if not exclusively, entitled.' 

Locke has reduced all things to three classes, viz., tub- 
stanceg, mode/, and relation*. 

Hume clasufiee all things under the two categories of idea* 
and impretsiona. 

Kant's list amounts to twelve, viz., unity, plurality, totality, 
affirmation, negation, limitation, independence, dependence, 
interdependence, actuality, possibility, and necessity. 

Mr Mill's categories are four in number, viz., 1. Feelings, 
or states of couscioueness ; 2. Minds which experience these 
feelings; 8. Bodies or external objects which excite certain 
of these feelings, together with powers or properties whereby 
they excite them ; and, 4. The successions and co-existences, 
the likenesses and untikenesses, between feelings and states 

The author of the ' Outline of the Iiaws of Thought ' pro- 
poses the following scheme : — ' Couceivable tilings,' he says, 
' are substance and attribute.' He subdivides attribute into 
quantity, quality, relation, and relation into that of time, of 
space, of causation, of composition, of agreement and repug- 
nance, of polar opposition, of finite to infinite. 

' Most of these names,' he remarks, ' will be easily under- 
stood : the relation of polar opposition may not be so. We 
find that, in different parts of the field of knowledge, pairs of 
things unite and form a new whole different froip either of 
them,' He gives, as examples, the doctrine of the Mean in 
morals ; in chemistry, the neutral salts, &c. 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOdlC. 



A facetious matliematidaD, of the last age, waa of opinion 
tliat all the predicaments of the peripatetics might be suhsti- 
tuted hy these two, viz., daia and quasita.^ 



SECTION V. 



Division literally signifies the separation of the component 
parts of some really existing whoU, as when we divide a tree 
into its sevenJ parts ; as, root, trunk, branches, &c. 

In a divbion of this nature, each of the parts is strictly and 
properly a ' part,' and is really less than the whole ; for it 
cannot be affirmed of any part separately, that it is a 'tree.' A 
whole of this description is said to be a real or physical 
whole. It follows that physical division can only be applied 
to individuals. 

As recognised in logic, division is used in a figurative 
sense, and means the distinct, i. e., the separate enumeration 
of the several things signified by a common term* It is 
therefore on common terms only, as denoting classes, that 
logical divi^on can operate. A whole of tius kind is said to 
be an ideal or metaphysical whole. 

If we conrader the common term tree as a genus, and 
proceed to divide it, the word ' division ' will be used in its 

¦ It is Btill ID op«ii question wbether tbe cslegoriea ought to h« lefened to 
metaphjidcfl, lo^c, or grammu'. The weight of opinion is, lioweier, in fsTour 
of tlieir being coneidered a metaphjiical dielritralion. 

'> Boetbina is tha chief anlhoritj on the il«!tmie of ' diiiHion.' His tmUse 
(fa (finnofw ia fbnnded on a wm^ on tbe ouna inlject b; Andronicns Bhodim, 
¦ pBripat«Uo. 

i termiao ugaiflointnr.— 



hyGoogle 



70 MANUAL OF LOGIC. 

figuratiTB Bfflise ; for since there is nothing in nature corres- 
pondingto the common term 'tree,' it follows that it cannot be 
divided into really existing parts. The only division of which 
it is susceptible is the distinct enumeration of the several 
Bpedes contained nnder it — such as oak, elm, ath, birch, fir, 
&c These are called parts, but they are so in a figura- 
tive, not in a real sense, since each of the parts, as regards 
comprehension, is greater than the whole divided, for in 
addition to the common nature (i. e., the genus) predicable of 
oak, elm, &c., each of them implies a differentia or distinguish- 
ing characteristic, vhich b not predicable of the genus ' tree.' 
This kind of division is distinctively named logical division. 

It follows, from the nature of logical division, that any 
term denoting some really existing individual thing cannot 
be logically divided ; and hence a term of this description is 
in logic termed indivisible (ara/j^at), but any term denoting a 
genns admits of logical division. To ennmerate, therefore, 
the various co-ordinate spedes of which a genus ia composed, 
is to divide such genus.' 

¦ Ldg^dans eDimiGrata ai/ieUi of larioiu iioAa. 1. A Logical at univenai 
irbols ia a geniu. The gemu animal maj bs divided into nwn, btatta, birdi, 
^ei, and imecU. A vhole of this deacripCioD ii termed DDiTenal, as the tenn 
denoting it must be a common or UDiTeru] Dame. 2. An ateniial nhole is one 
to which all its paita are eaeenlial; the parts are Mid to ht corutUiilnit (partes 
cooatitntivn), and if from an waeotlal irhole aay of the parts be taken away, 
the whole is destrojed, as alt the parts are eaaenUal to its eiialence. An essen- 
Ual irhole is either jtAgvioaf or metap^iical. A pb jrical niential whole is made 
Dp of parts that baTS real existence, e, g,, a ioi^ consists of maUer tnd /orm; 
a man eonnsts of a kunait boc^ SLd a rational umL A metaphyeical esaentinl 
whale i< one 'Alioso parts hate no real exiateoce. It is the same with tbe logi' 
eel irhole eipMoed Id the test. 3. An UOtgnil whole is some actiiallj existing 
thing, and consists of integrant paita (partes integnntes). and tbese, accor^ng 
to the natnre of the wholes, maj be memba-i, parti, or poriiela, b. g., the 
boman bod; Is an integral whole, amsigtiog of htad, arms, kgt, &e. ; a book is 
an integral whole, the parts of which are Itates, back, cover, ke. When an in- 
te^^l whole u made ap of particles of the same kind, as a ilab ofmarbk, it is 
called a SomijeiieoBs whole ; but when it conuets of parts or members, It is 



hyGoogle 



BLLES OF LOGIC AL DIVISION. 

1. The parte, i. e^ the constituent speciea, must tt^ather 
be eqoal to the genus divided. 

The following axt exiun[des of logical wholes, where the 
constituent q>ecies taken together are equal to the whole 
divided: — ^The imptmderahh bodiet are 'light,' 'caloric,' 
'electricity.' Oratory is either 'deliberative,' 'forensic,' or 
' demonstrative.' Theology is either ' biblical,' ' systematical,' 
or ' historical.' 

2. The constituent species, i. e., the diriding meinberB, 
must exclude one another. 

This rule is merely a caution against any contravention of 
the first, and it can be best illustrated by examples, in vhich 
the diriding members (Tnembra dimdmtid) do not exclude 
one another, 'e. g., suppose we divide cmue into efficient, 
material, formal, final, and inttrumental, the members of the 
division would not exclude one another, for the ' instromen' 
tal ' is included in liie ' eSidenL' Or let the whole to be 
divided be imaginaiive writers. Now if we diride these into 
the species ' poets,' ' dramatists,' and ' writers of fiction,' 
the parts do not exclude one another, i. e., they are not 
opposed, for some poets are dramatists, and aorae works 
of fiction are rythmical. Again, should we divide gevern- 
¦ment into patriarchal, despotic, monarckial, democratic, and 
republican, the dividing members would not exclude or be op- 
posed to one another; for a patriarchal government may be 
despotic, and vice versa, and a democracy and a republic can 
only differ in accidental circumstances. 

called a helengauoui vrhole. Ad int^ral vhols ma; b« deprirsd af a nan-euen- 
tiKl part, nithoDt iujuring its eiisteace. — [This cots is, in antntuice, taken 
fi>om WalUt SBil Sanderioa.^ An; Bpedea inbslteraa ma; be conaidered a 
logical dhole, aa classBS are its contaiDed paitB. A apeciea iDfinu la cot, 
bovaTsr, a lo^csl irbole, aa its snbject parts are indiTidiulg, not claues, aod 
iDdividaala tie distingi:ushed by accidents, not by differentia. 



DigwerihyGOOgle 



72 MAKOAL OF lOOtO. 

The Forphjiian dividon of the predicables into genut, 
tpicieM, differentia, proprium, and acddem, is & correct and 
&mUiar exempMcation of this rule. Oa the other hand, the 
operadons of the mind, viz., single apprehemwn, judgntsnt, 
and reatoninff, wonld be a cross division, ioasmach as judg- 
ment ispresnppoeed in rimple apprehension as well as reasoning. 

8. The dlTinon must proceed on one principle.' 

This mle has particular reference to the point of view in 
which we ore to consider the whole to be divided, e. g., 
anwialt may be divided on one principle (Jvndamentum 
divitionw) into rational and irrational, on another principle 
into gremlin, volatUia, natatilia, reptilia, and zoopkyta, or, 
agfun, into cold-blooded and marm-llooded. iS, however, we 
were to intermir the members of these several modes of divi- 
don, we wouId.be introducing a different principle from that 
which we set out withi and, consequently, the division wonld 
be incorrect." 

But the above refers merely to wholes of extension. There 
are also wholes of comprehen»d<m. In the former we separate 
or enumerate the co-ordinate species ; in the latter we resolve 

* We mmt be caiefiil to keep in n^d the prmcipk of rfieiiian with which we 
»t ont, e. g., whether wa begin dividing books accoTding to ttieir maUer, 
their bingtiage, or their liie, &o,, all these being so mini cmea diTinons. And 
when ujtliing is cap&ble of being dirided in serenl diflorait wajs, we are not 
to reckoD one of tboe u the true, or reai, oc right one, wittaont spcdQring - 
wtst the oiflect il which we ll»Ta in tiew; for one mode of diriding msy betbe 
moat nilablfl for one poTpose, and another fin another, as one of lbs atioTa 
modes of dlTidiag books would b« the most tnitable to a bookbinder ; another 
in a philosophical, and another in aphilokgicd Tiew. — Whaldej/ibiiok IL 

>¦ The principle of division mentioned is tbe point of view fiom which we are 
to r^ard the cmusption to be divided ; for we mair divide one miDj times in 
varions ptunls of view. Thns man maj be divided into £nn>peaii, Aaiatic, 
Africao, Ameiican, and Amtra^n, or, again, into Christian, Mahometan, and 
Pagan, or, agun, inlo jost and nnjnst ; and in the Qrst diviaion hcaSbi, in the 
seeond rdigioa, and in the third ieAoFiDir, ia tbapiindple of divisoo. — OutiiiK 
qftite Loot ijf Th/m^ 



hyGoogle 



IIA.NI7AL OF LOGIC. 73 

tiia mcve complex couceplioD into tbe simple concepHoDS of 
which it ia composed. The one analfsea the extension or 
denot&tioi), the other the connotation of a term. In a whole 
of comprehension* we divide, as it were, the ideas or concep- 
tions ; whereas in a whole of extension we separate the 
species. 

The fbUowiog are examples of wholes of comprehension : — 
Ooodnest of memory vaaj be resolved into the conceptions 
of 'susceptibility,' ' retentdveness,' and ' readiness ;' Repen- 
tance into ' confeMton,' 'contrition,' and 'amendment;' 
Oratitude into a ' consciousness of favour received,' 'a dispo- 
sition to acknowledge it on every proper occasion,' and ' a 
resolution to s^ze the first opportunity of returning a similar 
&vour to the benefactor.' 

Boethius enumerates three kinds of division, — 1st, The divi- 
sioQ of a genus into its subject species, which is distinctively 
named logical division, as mentioned above. 2d, The division 
of a whole into its parts, corresponding to physical diviuon, 
wiiii this difference, that Boetidus includes under this head 
the individuals contained under an infima species, which 
must be referred to logical division, if to any ; but the diffi- 
culty of enumerating the number of individuals contained 
under it, would render it in almost every case impracticable ; 
and, Sd, Tbe division of an equivocal term into its various 
meanings. This species of division is sometimes termed dit- 
tinction, and is restricted to the division of equivocal terms 
or names; it amounts to nothing more than an explanation 
of the various senses in which an equivocal tenn may be un- 
derstood.'' In many cases a perfect divisum may be obtained 

¦ Tbe puts of a whole of oitentiDn are connMted bj b disjancUrecanjaiic- 
tion, uid of a whole of compreheneion by a copulative coDJuDction. — Wstta^ad. 

'• The teat of this is, that the Dama ispredicablsof each member, bnt not the 
ume i^Maa—ltameU, p. 80. 

Tt nuj be obaerTAd, that it [a freqaeDUj neceasary, in BiaminiDg the arga- 
menta of anothei, to mark the diffeient senna in which wa ma; nndentaad a 



hyGoogle 



74 MANUAL OF UJOIC, 

by the use of the definite and aidefinite ntnuB. Aa already 
stated, a noun is said to be Indefinite to whicb Uie particte 
'mm' ia prefixed, and definite when this particle ia not pre- 
fixed. By this manner of divinon, a whde ia divided into 
two parts, one of which muat be inttnediately opposed to 
the other, e. g,, men may be divided into those who 
are JEhtropeatu and those who ore not Enrepeans ; ani- 
mals into bipeds, and not bipeds, or into rational, and 
not rational, or trmtrono/. A logical division of tbia kind, 
according to the old logidans, has a Komen Finitam, tbe name 
of an exhaustible kind, on one dde, and a Nomen Inflnitom, 
the name of an inexhaustible kind, on ibe other. Tbia divi- 
^on into two membeis, osnally twmed dtckotomy {iiyjmij^ia), 
jrom its simplicity, shows more readily and {dunly than any 
other, thai the dividing members are dialinct and opposed; for 
tbe union of the two members will be equivalent to tJie whole 
divided, and aeeures, therefore, tiie requisites of good division 
mentioned in the two first mUs.' On the otherhand, bowever,it 
is comparatively nseleea, becanae of one of tbe dividing mem- 

iFord 01 propoaitkin tii&t we employ, and to dittingniih them caretbOj. For 
instancet a propcmtlon may fa one instance ba tme, and ia ara^er false or 
donbtAil. And manj miten taka adfaitags of UuB ambigoitj, omfdaDdiag 
tha tiro (an«e(i, ditplajing its truth and certainCj, in the sense nliicli ia indo- 
bitahle, bnt which periiapa male* nothing for thdr argnoient, and Chen spplj' 
ing it to tbsir aiignoMiil ia ttie other sense, in which it is bj no means trne or 
certain. — WiJIier'i Conaambrii, cap. 10. 

¦ (Sccro menUont only two kinds of diTioon, vii., paititicm imd diT^on, and 
eiplidna Ui^ iMpedJn signlfiaations thns: ' Scd qnid intsr se diflbnuiC planios 
dicendom cat. In potition* qnaai memhra loiit, nt coiparit, caput, hnmen. 
' manns, later*, cnua, pedes, et cetera ; in diriuone, fbim« sniit, qnas Gneci 
lisai Yocsnt ; nostri. A qni heec fbrte tractant, ipedei appellant. — Ti^,, 
cap. 6, T. 

A role of division ollfln laid down is, (hat it aiujuld be Into its proxioiate 
parts, i. a., that the diriding part* shonld be of tbe same degree in Che predics- 
mentalUne, no one of them of a bighai species than the others; in other words, 
that tbey shonld be equidistant &«m some conunon ftoteoedaat gcnns. 



hyGoogle 



UAHDAI. OF LOaiC. 75 

bers, and that geaeraHy the larger, we know nothing, except 
that it wantB the leading characleriBlic of the other ; in other 
words, a ^fferentia is affirmed of one of the parts into which 
a whole is thua divided, but denied of the other ; so that we 
can onlj have a distinct conception of one of die parts, viz., 
that which haa the difierential atbibnte. AH we can know 
of the o&er part is, that it is not contained in the class speci- 
fied hy tiie difierentia. Divifflon b; dichotomy, or bipartite 
division, is usually aUribnted to Peter Bamus. He and bia 
follower^ were attached to it ; but it had been a &vourite with 
Plato and others loi^ beibre his lime. Both Plato and 
Bamus used dichotomy by contradiction' Aristotle approved 
of &a.t by contraries, bat r^ected that by privative and inde- 
finite terms. Boethins eaucti<mB the ose of contraries, contra- 
dictories, and also poutive and privative terms, but discards 
relatives. 

Those who hold log^c to be purely a formal science, must of 
necessity hold diviMon by dichotomy to be the only logical 
mode, for any other description of division implies a know- 
ledge of the matter of the whole divided. It may be fairly 
qneelioned, however, whether ^vision by dichotomy, as well 
as other modes, does not imply a knowledge of the matter, 
altfaongfa possildy in a more restricted degree. 



SECTION VL 

DUMNTHOK. 

DefinilioD (s£(iF/Mc) literally eigmfles the laying down the 
boaadary of a tiling ; but in logic it signifies an expression 
of thought in language which so explains a term as to sepa- 
rate it from any otiher, and thus to lay down, as it were, the 
limit of its ngnification ; like division, it is used in a figura- 
tive sense. 



hyGoogle 



76 MANUAL OF LOCUC. 

Correct definition aubeerves a. tvro-fold olject. It ^ther 
CoDve^B to the mind of a hearer the exact coaception which 
the term defined repreaenta, or it may correct any indiBtJnct 
or inaccarale notion he may have previously entertained re- 
garding it. l^e first ot^ect presupposes that the hearer is 
altt^ther ignorant of the meaning of the word or thing 
defined { the second implies that a conception is conveyed to 
hia mind more correct than that previously entertained. 
Definitions are of two kinds, viz., nomincU and reaL 
In nominal definition we merely explain the meaning of a 
term, with the view of guarding against ambiguity in the use 
of it, or misconception of its exact import. In this case the 
meaning of the term to be defined must be explained by acme 
equivalent expression, which must be more intelli^ble,* e. g.> 

The Decalogue is the ten commandments. 

The Pentateuch is the five books of Moses. 

A telescope is an instrument for viewing distant objects. 

In many cases, the nominal and real essence of a thing 

¦ Komiiial defiaitioD, aa andeisCood bj Aldricb, ' Bomo, jui ex huma 
¦ (hq an£]rtiu»t« eiampla, bj tbe waj) should mare properlj be termed deSoi- 
tioD bj etjmolog;, Ibi it merel; eiplaicia th« ori^nal import of ttie word. It 
is qa«Btionab]e, bowcTer, whether ¦ deGaitioii of this bind obonld be amadHred 
a dsfluition at all, for in the modificatioDS words Dndsrgo in meaning, aa ap- 
plied in language, tbeir etymological Bigoificatian is often completely loet sight 
of. DefiniOon, by a eynoaymon* leno, as ' hooesty is probity,' is also com- 
paralirely nseleaa, for the synonym used to define may not convey a more dis- 
tinct c(iDception than the ifeiinibon or thing definad. Neither of these methods 
is Aristotelic, although they can both be traced bach to an early period. 

In a rhetorical point of riew, however, definition by etymology may be Teiy 
eBectiTe. In Cicero's defini&n of fbrtitnde, m., ' virtos pngnans pro eqoi- 
tate,' the. remains of the original sense of virha, manhood, give a beauty and 
force to the eipreseion, which cannot be prcserred when translated into another 
language. The Greek Agtrij, and the German Ti^end, originally denoted 
tmnglA, afterwards aiarage, and at last virlae. The happy derivation of vir- 
)ua from nr, gires an energy to the phrase of Cicero, which illustrates the use 
of etymology in the hands of a skilfnl writer. 



hyGoogle 



KANUAL OF LOniC. 77 

exacUf coincide, i. e-, the idea conveyed b; the term is the 
same as tlie nature of the thing. Thus a triangle is 'that 
which has three sides,' which is both a Domiaal and real 
definition. 

Id real defini^on we explain not only tlie meaning of the 
term, but also the nature of the thing ugnified by it. 

Beal definition is of two kinds, accidental and enential, 
otherwise called imperfect and perfect. It is common to 
both that they are used in explaining things, not nartua. 

In accidental definition, we describe or enumerate some of 
the jyroperties or accidents of what is implied by a term. 
This kind of definition is therefore usually termed descrip- 
tion. Any definition may be considered accidental, where 
only tbe genus and a property occur; for a property must in 
all cases be regarded aa an actudent, unless it is deduced from 
a known differentia. The following are examples of actndental 
definition.* 

A hall is a figure that has an aptitude to roll. 
Heat is the sensation produced by approaching fire. 
Man is a risible animal. 

Animal is a body which can move itself from place to 
place. 

Ink is a liquid used for the purposes of writing and printing. 

Accidental definition is frequently the only method by 
which we are able to define a thing or term represenliag it, 
in consequence of our ignorance of the characteristic quality 
which constitutes the difierentia. In such cases, we often find 
it necessary to enumerate a number of marks or attributes, 
the aggregate of which must be considered as the diflerentia,' 
until we are able to single out some particular attribute sa&- 

* An acddenta] defioitioii nevgr iodade* a di&rantui. Tb« coDoeptioDS 
SDibracsd in it t,n thoae of x genns and ons or mora properties. Porpbyry *nd 
BoethiuB rq'ect it ; but It hu beea adopted tijr lome mon racant imten. A 
definitioQ of thli Idad it propeiij dttariflim, vid not deSarUon, 



hyGoogle 



78 lUIftJAI. OF LOGIC. 

cient of itself lo diBtinguuh iu lulqect from all odien. Csaes 
of this nature are constantly occurring in Botaoj', Natural 
History and Mineralogy. 

Id essential definition we lay down the consiitntuig parts 
of the essence. It is of two kinds, viz., logical, or tMtaphy- 
gical, and phyticed. In logical definition we lay down the 
ideal parts, i. e., the proximate genns and differentia. 

This is of all kinds of definition tlie moat perfect. It fol- 
lows that any term that can be logically defined must be 
expressive of a species. Hie following may suffice as 
examples : — 

Man is a rational animal. 

.SA«fortc is the art of speakiDg persaasively. 

Slavery is compulsory sulgectioii to a master. 

A parallelogram is a four-aded figure, the opposite Bides 
of which are parallel. 

Belief ia assent produced by apparent credibility. 

A proporition is a declaratory sentence. 

In physical definition, we lay down the really existing and 
distinct parts of an essence, i. e., parts that admit of actual 
separation. In essential definition this is not the case, for 
genns and differentia are only distinguished by the under- 
standing. The following are examples of physical defini- 
tion ; — 

An antmoZis a living body, consisting of bead, body, legs, &c. 

A tree is that which consists of root, trunk, branches, 
leavsB, sap, ka. 

A. house is a structure composed of foundation, walls, roof, 
chimneys, &a. 

For the sake of deameBs, the various kinds of definitic8i 
already explained may be illustrated by one example : — 

nominal. — A proposition is that which is proposed to the 
mind for its assent or rejection. 

Accidental. — A proposition is the verbal expression of an 
act of judgment 



hyGoogle 



¦CAUDAL OF IjOQIC. 79 

Xiogieal. — ^A propimtkHi u a deelarotoiy wntetice. 

Phytical. — A propoaitioD is that whidi consists of a sub- 
ject, predicate, and copola. 

The ibUawing Bcheme i»-eaeiita Ae difierent kinds of defini- 
tion, as laid down by Aldrich, ' definition * being used as the 
summnm genns ; — 

lominal, 

AcddentaJ, 

^Pb^dcal, 

, Essential, -< Logical, or 

l,Afet(^f8ical.* 
The rales of definilioQ are three — 
1. The definition must be adequate to the term defined." 
The conception intended to be conveyed by the definition 
must be exactiy equal to the d^nitum of term defined/ 
Hence the definition must neither be too extensive nor too 
narrow. It will be too narrow if it omit any essential attri- 
bute, and too exiennve if it include any as essential attribute 
which does not belong to it. As in adequate lo^cal division, 
the whole and the dividing parts should reciprocate ; so in 

*' Aldrich Dliutratcs (be Tuiooi kinds oT deOidtioa Urns : ' Um, tunmnaOg, 
qoi 91 bamo ; ao cU m t t ^ , in nnfathved tvo-kf^ed uiinuil ; Uigica^s, a 
ntioiul wiiilutl ; j^tyrianffr, s biiDg consUting of tm atgudaad bodj aod a 
rMJOEul (DOl.' 

^ A daflnitioii nu^ b< iiudeqiiiM [n two wrjt — rather if it be not tppli- 
oibia to CIm witole thing defined, or if it be applicable to anjtbtng else than the 
thing defined. 

° There an time oana ia which logical definition ii inipplicaUe : 1. Afnma 
gmera, whish hue no higher gmna, and ooateqaenUr, no omutJtutiva diSer- 
enca; 8. /wgwiiMfc ifhiah have no wiential differanoB, and can only be defined 
bf dcacnption, L e., bf emnncntiiig the acrideola belon^g to indiridiialsi 
whenb; the difbrenoca betweea tbem and anj otW maj be ihown ; and, 8. 
The nanu* of laeipb tdta*, Tii., iatniUoiii^ nHtib, tma tbeb natHre, can hare 
no compleiitj. 



hyGoogle 



80 KAKUAI, OF LOOtC. 

adequate definition the defimtum and its definidon should 
also reciprocate, i, e., be simply convertible, 

The adequacy of any definition may be tested in this way. 
The following ore examples of adequate definition : — 

Wine, a juice extracted from grapes. 

Corucience, the faculty by which we judge of right and 
wrong. 

Pension, an allowance for past services. 

Tlie following examples err by excess : — 

An insect ia an animal that fiiea. 
Man ia an intelligent being. 

In the first example the definition is too extensive, being 
applicable ta birds as well as insects; in the second, the 
definition applies to all intelligences as well as to man. The 
definitum and definition are not, therefore, simply convertible, 
or do not reciprocate. 

The following examples, on the other hand, err by defect : — 

Man ia a cirilised, rational animal. 

Here the definition ia too narrow, for it excludes uadvi- 
lisedman. 

A religious person is one who holds the peculiar doctrines 
of Calvin. 

This definition is also defective, for many persons who 
mnst be accounted religious r^ect some of Calvin's doctrines. 

2. The definition must in itself" he clearer than the thing 



¦ It hu freqoentij bsea objeotcd to metsphjaical dafinition, that it ia not 
cleinr, in moat oomb, thui the tsnn defiood ; and nhen the term which is to 
be defined is ver; bmilisr to the heann, tfaii oertaialf it the foot. Tbni tha 
need nun a man fomiliar to the ear, and ia acddentatlj better kmnm than 
the term mtKinal onniaf ; but yet the worda ' rational anhnsl ' are in their 
nature mora cleat and better knomi than the word ' man,' inaaniDoh as thej 
conrej leia eomphcated ideal. — Buj/ihe, p. ii. 



hyGoogIc 



¦ANCAI. OP LOOTC. 81 

It is necessary ^t the definidon should convey a clearer 
idea than tlie definitam, otherwise it would not explain it ; 
«nd it is one of the objects of definition to expl^n a tenn im- 
plying a complex conception by other terms implying less 
complex conceptions, or, at all events, better known. 

The fdlowing examples offend ag^nst this rule : — 

Net-KOrh, anything reticulated or decussated with inter- 
stices between the points of intersection.* 

Spedef is the identity of determinate form, cardinal pro- 
perties, and oi^ianific or constitutiTe law.'' 

3. The defiaition must be included in a just number of 
proper words.' 

By proper mords (voces proprus) Aldrich means words 
sanctioned by common usage,' in contradistiDCtion to meta- 
phorical and obsolete phraseology. The terms which com- 
pose the following definitions are metaphorical : — 

Old age b the evening of life, 

A warrior is a thnnderbolt of war. 

The following examples are characterised by undue 
brevity: — 

A chariot is a vehicle. 

A etucctde is a waterfall. 

Money is coin.' 

• Johnson. *> Tiippan. 

" Hun m Mstqihoria oritur ambignitaj, ex pioliiitate, confnaio — for fttm 
nuU^oriad terms Ibera ironid rise indiBUnctness oc unbigiuty, Irom ondne 
hnrntji obscnritj, snd bom too great proiiseity confiuian. — Aldrick. mvv yap 
asaptf n TUtra. fiiirafiogav Xfyo/itiav, •xa.r ya,g ana^ti ro /*>) tiuSit 
—far STerTthing is defidsnt in p«daian ud cleamBBB wbich is spokea meti- 
plnrieallj, or in langnage not saocUoned t>7 conmioii ussgc — AriitMk. 

* xujia owitMriti otherwise called established nameB (xH^gjoi tvoflMTo). 
— ArittaOe. 

' TfacM iiBtaiicefl nemplUy what a called bf some, definition trom change 

of wgmbc^ whvo both snliject and predicate are sjmboUcal conceptions — the 

lattffi boDg ^ven as ¦ snbstitnte for the (brmer on a prindple of expedience 

ODlj.— See OaOmt ofOit Loot tjf Thought, p. 160. 

D 2 



hyGoogle 



J 



The subjoined examples, on the other hand, are vitiated b; 
iinneceBsaiy prolixity : — 

Axtrology is that carions science, bo mach in vogne during 
the middle ogee, which instructs mankind in the supposed in- 
fluences which the stars possess over human circamBtances 
and actions, and bjr which thej rule and direct the world- 

Money is that useliil species of propertj which, hj serving 
as a common measure, b^ which all the necessaries, all the 
conveniences, and all the luxuries of life maj* be estimated 
and procured, becomes itself the great essential, and com- 
prises within itself all that can be thought needful to render 
life desirable." 

Aristotle's view of definition is threefold. 1. The defini- 
tion of a thing as it is in itself (Xoyoe rou n leri), correspond- 
ing to the Beal Definition of more recent logicians. This kind 
of definition isfirst applied to substances which exist ^rse; and 
as their existence is assumed, not demonstrated, their defini- 
tion is said to be unsusceptible of demonstration (atamSuxnf). 
2. The definition of an attribute. This is also a definition 
(tbu ti fari), with this difference, that the existence of an 
attribute is not assumed, but demonstrated to exist in the 
substance, or subject of inhesion, and the demonstration con- 
sequently pmceeds on the as^mption of the existence of the 
subject : in other words, the cause of the attribute is sought 
in the subject. This is illustrated by defining an eclipse. — 
Why is the moon eclipsed? Because the sun's light is inter- 
cepted by the earth. Consequently, to the question, What is an 
eclipse of the noonT the answer (i. e., the definition) will be, 

• If B definition be diargeablo wilh tautology, it is iocotTBot, tliongh without 
oIKading agunst Vae two rales. Taatoiogy consitts ia mserting too mooli, not 
in mere irords, but ia sense. Thus to define d puallelognua, b ' foar-mded 
figure, nfaoie oppcsite sides me parallel and egwd,' would be taDtological, 
becaaie thoogh it is tme that mah a Sgare, and sucli alone, Is g parallelograni, 
the eqasnt; of the udes ia implied in theii being parallel, and may be proved 
from it— Whatdeg, boot II, cap. 6. 



hyGoogle 



HAinjAL OF LOGIC. 83 

TheinterceptioD of the aun's light from the moon hy the earth. 
Thia demonatration is capable of being rednced to ByUogiBtic' 
form ; but 08 it Stands, it difiers from demonBtr&don, ae stated 
by Aiietotle himself, in the arrangement or position of the 
terms (Sfen), or grammatieal variety of form (ttwihc). S. 
Nominal definition, or, according to others, imperfect Beal 
Definition. Aristotle's explanation of it is, ngc nv ri tern 
ovraSti^tut au/j/ifipieiiM — the conclusion of the demonstration 
ofwhatathing is- As Aristotle objects to nominal defini- 
tion, on the gronnd that it furnishes no proof of the actual 
existence of the things to which it applies, and as in many 
cases the nominal and real definition of a thing may nearly 
or altogethercoindde, the latter opinion, Tiz,, that of imperfect 
real definition is here considered to be meant by him. His 
views on the whole doctrine of definition are, however, ob- 



SECTION VII, 

OF THE DISTBIBDTION OF TERMS. 

The subject (uinx(ifi.tn*) ie distributed in all universal pro- 
positions, and the predicate in all negative propositions, since 
in the former the entire conception is included, while in the 
latter the entire conception is excluded. In considering 
terms with reference to their distribution, there are two rules 
which it will be necessary to remember : — 

1. All universal propositions (and no particular) distribute 
the sntgect. 

2. All negative propositions (and no affirmative) distribute 
the predicate. 

When we say that a term is distributed, we mean that it is 

* Omna mrpns DBtonla illnminntnm > lols, priTstam luos ft tdirae objecta 



hyGoogle 



84 UAKDAL OF LOQIO. 

used ia its fnllest extent ; that it stondB for all its rignificatee, 
viz^ the several ttiitiga ^iriiidi it signifies or to which it is 
applicable. 

1. Of the Subject. 

In all universal propoaitiona, whether affirmative or nega- 
tive, the snbject must be diBtributed; for this ia the difibrentia 
of a universal proposition viewed aa to ite quantity. In the 
proportion, 

All tyrants are miserable, 
the common term ' tyrants ' includes Dionysius, Fhraates, 
Nero, and every other individaal answering to the deacrip- 
tion t in other words, it stands ibr the whole of its ngnlfi- 
cates. When, again, we say, 

No islands are surrounded by water, 
everything of which the common term ¦ island ' can be 
affirmed is excluded from the application of the predicate 
* surrounded by water ;' in other words, none of the signlfi- 
cates of the term < island ' agrees with the predicate. 

Since the distribution of the terms of propositions is indi- 
cated by the universality of the subject or the negative cha- 
racter of the propoution, it is maniiest that in all particular 
propositions the subject ia undistributed,^ as it atands only for 
a part of its significates, being restricted te this either by its 
indefinite character or some quahfyiag term. In the example. 

Some islands are fertile, 
the term ' island,' though applicable in its unrestricted sense 
to Iceland, and all barren blands, yet, as used in this propo- 
sition, it does not embrace these among its significates, as it 
only contains in its extension such islands as may bo affirmed 
to be fertile ; and hence it is not distributed. In the ex- 
ample, 

¦ WLen we repnsent, judge of, or xvisaa {roai a wbele canception, it is nid 
in teelmical laagoagB to be iittrib»tid; vbeie > part 01^7 is trested, we call it 
m£tribated.~0«i>iat qf&e Laai 0/ TTioii^ p. 18S. 



hyGoogle 



HANDAI. OP LOOIC. 85 

Some critics are not caadid judgee, 
the snl^ect ' critica ' is aUo used in a reetricted aensef iix it ex- 
cludes from itB e^naioD all such cridos (ta are candid judges. 

It is evident, therefore, that the distribution or non-distribu- 
tioa of a term depends on its quantity, and not on its quality. 

It follows from the ioregoing, that the subject of an inde- 
finite propcatJOQ, in neceisary matter, ia distributed. la Uie 
example, 

Angels are incorporeal, 
although there is no sign of uuiverBality prefixed to the sub- 
ject, yet, as it is in necessary matter, we are warranted to 
afflrm the predicate of oU wagels. 

The subject of an indefinite proposilioii, in contingent mat- 
ter, on the other hand, ia undistribnted. In the example, 

Misfortunes are unavoidable, 
we know &om the matter l^t the subject must be taken in a 
restricted sense, and that all we can affirm is tome misfor- 
tunes, &c. 

2. Of the Predicate. 

The predicate (xttrjiyD^tu^ivov) of an afiirmatiTe proposition, 
with few exceptions, is never distributed. In the following 
example of a universal affirmativei viz., 

All metals are fusible, 
the predicate 'fusible' is not distributed; for although it is 
affirmed of all metak, this does not exhaust its application, 
inasmuch as it is predicable of many other substances be- 
sides metals, and, consequently, it cannot be said to be wholly 
distributed, since the ti^ject of the proposition does not ex- 
press all the substances capable of being fused. 

This is still more obvious in the case of a particular 
affirmative, e. g.. 

Some vapours are luminous. 
Here the predicate 'luminous* is predicable not only of some 
vapours, but of an indefinite variety of bodies. 



hyGoogle 



86 lUKI^AL OF LOGIO. 

It happens occanonallj that the permeate is of equal exteat 
with the subject, i. e., that the predicate full; distritmted may 
be affirmed of the enbj^t also fully distributed. The judg- 
menta expressed in propositjous of this nature are said to be 
tiAstttutive ; for since in them the predicate is used to define 
the eul^ect, the whole of it must be given, otherwise it would 
be useless for dcGnition. The subject and predicate are 
therefore exactly co-extensive, for they may change places in 
the judgment, so that the defiuitum may in its tarn become 
a definition, e. g., in the example, ' Man is a ratioual animal,' 
no individual comes into the class of ratiotiat animaU which 
b not also in man; and, conversely, no individua] comes 
under man which is not also under rational animal ; for 
here both the subject and predicate are generalisations &om 
the very same class of beings — the only difference being 
that the subject is symbolical, or the sign of a class, while 
the predicate is nolative, that is, noting essential attributes. 

It is only in definitions that the subject and predicate are 
co-extensive, and this coincidence' occurs wherever the predi- 
cate is a definition of the subject ; as, 

Rhetoric is the art of speaking persuad vely. 
Or its logical difierence ; as, 

All men are rational. 

A proposition is a declaratory sentence. 
Or a specific property ; as, 

A triangle b a figure having three angles. 

A proposition is aseatence signifying something trueor false. 
Or in any case, in short, where the subject and predicate are 
simply convertible. 

In these examples the predicate may, in its distributed 
sense, be afBnned of the sulgect ; but it is to be observed 
that this circumstance cannot he inferred from the mere form 
of the proposition. It follows from the matter, not from the 
terms of the expression. 



hyGootjIe 



The judgment expressed b^ any propodtion in vhich the 
subject and predicate are not co-extensive, is said to be attri'- 
butive, as the predicate merely expreBses an attribute not 
simply convertible with the eubject, and cannot therefore be 
used to define the subject, e. g., 

Metab are fuuble, 

Gold is heavy, 
are jadgments in which this kind of predicate occurs. 

In negative propoeitions, whether universal or particntar, 
the predicate must be distributed, otherwise the proportion 
could net be true, e. g., the proposition, 

Irrational animals are not morally responsible, 
would be felse if any part of the predicate, ' morally respon- 
sible,' agreed with the subject, ' irratioaal animals,' 

In particular negatives, however, the distribution of the 
predicate is not so evident, e. g., the propositioa. 

Some critics are not candid, 
asserts that there is a certain class of critics comprised in the 
subject, from which everif individual of which the predicate 
can be affirmed is wholly excluded ; in other words, the pre- 
dicate ' candid,' in its most extensive signification, cannot bq 
aflirraed of any individual comprised under the particular 
class of critics denoted by the subject. Consequently, the pre- 
dicate is used here in its universal, i. e., its distrUmted sense, 
and unless it were so, the propositioa would not be true. 

No signs of universality or particularity are prefixed to the 
predicitte, because in affirmative propositions its non-distribu- 
tion is indicated by the affirmation, and in negative proposi- 
tions its distribution is indicated by the negation. 
I, It has been shown above that a term may consist of one 
word, or several j but the only terms consisting of one word, 
which can be used as the subjects or predicates of proposi- 
tions, are nouns substantive in the nominative case. We may 
add here that the infinitive of a verb, a certain form of which 
is only one word, may iQso be used as a term in a proposition, 



hyGoogle 



88 JUSIIAL or LOQtC. 

beoDg equivalent to a noDD-mbstaotiTe. In En^iah, in ad- 
dition to the uBoal fonn of the infinidTe, wfaicli may be 
used as a term ib a propodlion, there is another, ending in 
' tn;,' eynmiTinons with the ordinary fonn, e. g^ * Inetructing 
the ignorant is pnuseworlhy,' and *It ia praiseworthy to 
instruct the ignorant,' are equivalent proponlionB. 

Thia kind of infinitjve is of the same fonn and sound as 
the parUciple present, bnt it can always be distinguished from 
it in this way, viz., when \he usual form of the infiuitire can 
be substituted for it without iiyaring the sense, it is the infi- 
nitive in 'ing;' but when this snbetitution cannot take place 
without injuring the sense, then it is the partidple present. 

The infinitive in 'ing' may be used as a categorem, i.-e., 
as a word having enough of independent meaning in itself to 
constitutfl a term, as, 

Seeing is believing; 
or it may be used as a syncat^gorem, i. e,, as oonslitnting a 
t«rm in connection with other words, e. g,, 

Accuracy in observing individual &ctB is necessary to cor- 
rect induction. 

It may be remained, that the infinitive is often the predi- 
cate of a proposition ; but this never happens except when 
another infinitive is the subject, e. g., 

To imitate, is to admire. 

To bear, is to conquer our &te. 

To be loved, is to be happy. 

Laborare est orare. 

It may be remained, that neither the infinitive, which is 
properiy a noun-substantive, nor the participle, which is a 
noun-ttdjective, is indnded under the word ' verb,' ka stricily 
speaking they are verbals, i. e., they have a relation to their 
verbs in signification, but they differ from them in the mode 
of signification. This arises from the <uroumstance that 
qffirviatum, which is essential to a verb, ia not an attribute 
either of an infinitive or a participle. 



hyGoogle 



ItANDAt. OF £.0910. 



CHAPTER III. 



Haviko already conadered the first bead of the logical dis- 
tribntion of the cognilire faculties, vis., Simple Apprehension, 
and having treated of notions as simple or complex, of terms 
as singular or common, together with their names and classi- 
fications, as well as the logical instnimeats wherehj we ac- 
quire distinctness in the apprehension of the meaning and use 
of terms, we now proceed to the second head, viz., JudgTiient. 
Under this head, we connder the mind not onl^ as possess* 
ing notions distinctly, but as capable of comparing tbem to- 
gether, and of asserdng some relation between them, whether 
of agreement or disagreement. While sucb assertion remuns 
purely a mental act, it is called a judgment; but when it is 
expressed in words, it is termed a propotition. 

OF SIHFLZ PROPOSITIONS. 

A proposition is defined by Aldrich to be ' Oratio indica- 
tiva^ congrua et perfecta verwn vel faltum ngaijieam giite 
ambiguitate,' — an asserting sentence grammatical and perfect, 
signiiyiag something true or false, and tree from ambiguity. 
This definition is of a mixed natnre. It is partly metaphy- 
rical, and partly accidental. It is metaphysical, in so &r as 



hyGoogle 



90 HANOAJ. OP tXMlC. 

it defines a propoutioa to be an atterting tmience (oratio 
indicativa) ; but it is accidental, in so &r aa it states it to be 
true or falte — and accidents should be excluded &om tbe 
definition of what is implied \>j a common term. 

This objection to die definition of Aldrich may be removed 
by restricting the definition to the two first words, ' oratio 
indicativa,' an eutertUtg tenUaee ; for a propodlionj lo^caUy 
defined, is a sentence which asserts, i. e., affirms or deaiea. 
This latter definition will^onseqnentij ooftiprehend the whole 
essence of a proposition; for a tmtence is its gemu, and 
Mterting, i. e., affirming or denying, its difference. 

Since, therefore, a proposition must assert, i. e., affirm or 
deny some thing, all exclamatioru, interrogatiom, requetU, 
and armmemdi, &c., as no assertion is made in them, most be 
excluded ; as, for ezamplo, 

Oh ! how amiable are thy dweliings I 

Do ye now believe T 

Give me thy heart 

Love thy neighbour as thysel£ 

In a legitimate proposition, the four following conditions 
are requisite :— 

1. WiHi regard to the words, it most be a sentence which 
affirms or denies; as, 

All beasts of prey are camivoroua. 
The earth is not a plane, 

2. In respect of signification, it must signify something 
tine; as, 

The air is elaslio ; 
or blse; as, 

Moonli^t is cold. 

8. A proposition must not be ambiguous ; in other y/nrda, 
it must not admit of dubious construction ; for if it did, it 
would be more than one tentence, and iostead of being ' oratio 
iudicativa,' an 'asserting sentence,' it would be 'orationes in- 
dicative,' ' asserting sentences.' 



hyGoogle 



HAMOAL OF LOOIC. 91 

Aq7 propoaition of an aml^aoas nature, i. e., capaUe of 
being conBtrned in more wajB than one, must be a double 
sentence ; and this ambiguity is usually produced by equi- 
vocal words ; as, 

Tbat is a ball. 

That is a bar. 
For the -predicate in each of these propodtions may be used 
equivocally. 

4. A propositioil mast not be tmgrammatica] ; for in this 
case it might be unintelligible. In ^orerbs, and elliptical 
sentences, the meaning may be intelligible, while the proposi- 
tion itself cannot be strictly termed complete, e. g., 

A word to the wise, 
as a proposition, is incomplete in form, but not in sense. The 
same ellipsis is adopted in the Latin — 

Yerbnm sat sapieati. 
The corre^KtUding French proverb-^ 

Le sage entend «. demi-mot, 
IS complete in form as well as in sense. 

Division of PropoKtiont. 
Froposidons are divided according to their su&rionce,* 
their quality, and their quantity. 

1. Of the tuhttattce of Propotitions. 
With regard to their substance, proponlions are of two 
kinds, viz., categorical ** and h^potheticaL 

' AeUwn. giulity, giumtily. — Ktal. 
'' Thfl dinsioa of propcationi into cat^orical and hypothaUnl, ii not Arii- 
lotclian. In mtrj inatsnoe in irhioh xarvyoeixcs occon in tlia orguian of 
Ariitotle, it rignifiM effinm^ee, and Is nwd b; bim not is oppowd to kgpo&t- 
^eai (i^ hvoiteiai), but to the words tvnpttrixDt and on^riKcf, which 
ngniPr u^atUM at pnnoluin. Tbs meaning nsoallj attaohtd to ' catagcsical,' 
via., an nneondHdoDal ineitioa, whether sfflnnatiTS or nsgattrs, is lappawd to 
hiTS arigioilod with Theophruto*, and is tberefbre not of Ariatoteliin oii(^ — 



hyGoogle 



91 MANDAI, OP LOGIC. 

1- Categorical Prt^msitions. — A categorical proposition 
asserts absolutely, i, e<, nnconditionall; ; aa, 

Music is the elocution of poetry. 

Honesty b the best policy. 

Man is not omniscient. 

Categorical propositioDsareoftwokinds, viz., pure and modal. 

A pure categoric^ proposition simply asserts whether the 
sulgect does or does not agree with the predicate ; as, 

Virtue is its own reward. 

Benevolence is not the whole of virtue. 

Man is not infallible. 

A pure categorical proposition is eometiines called propo- 
sitio de inesse, because it simply slates whether the predicate 
is or is not (metaphysically) in the subject. A modal cate- 
gorical proposition expresses in what inorfe or manner the 
subject does or does not agree with the predicate ; as, 

This man may perhaps be religions. 

No man can be altogether disinterested. 

A prejudiced historian will probahly misrepresent the truth. 

The modality of a proposition afiecls the copula. 

Modal propositions may be reduced to pure categoricals hy 
either considering the word which expresses the mode as 
united to tiie predicate, and thus forming a part of it; as, 

Man is necessarily an animal ; 
or sometimes by attaching the word denoting the mode to the 
subject, which may be done when the mode only expresses 
whether the matter of the extremes be necessary, impossible, 
or contingent ; as, 

A fish lives necessarily in the water ; 
which means, 

[Ste Ed. Aw., ToL ST.] The dividon of piopoatlona, hoKeTU, into categoriul 
uid bypothedcal, eta mmelj be oonNdareil ¦ tzou one ; for ill ¦¦iiiiliniiii most 
be made dther imtA « oiiAoul i nmditimi. 



hyGoogle 



HAMTAL OP UJOIC. 93 

All fish live in the water. 

A prc^igate man niay poaubl? repent, and b« saved ; 
which may be thaa stated — 

The repentance and solration of a profligate man U a thing 
that is possible.* 

Modal propoaitiooB will be more fully treated of hereafter, 
and in a di£fereot point of view, 

2. Of the Quality of Propomtions. 

The qnality of a proposition is of two kinds, esiential and 
accidentdl. 

The quality of the expression of a proposition constitates 
its euential qoality ; because affirmation or negation forms 
the lineal difierence or formal part of the essence, and is the 
only differentia from which all the propria may be deduced. 

The qoality of the seme is the accidental quality ; because 
the expression of truth and of falsehood is the property, and, 
GonsequeDtly, only an adjunct to the essence. 

When the tenn qualityis used concerning propositions, with- 
out any distinguishing epithet, the essential quality is signified. 

The essential quality of a proposition is determined by the 
copula ; and hence it must be carefiilly observed, when a sign 
of negation occurs in a proposition, whether it really afficts 
the copula. This may be done in any case, by analysing the 
proposition, and making allowance for the idiom of the language 
in which it is expressed. In a strictly logical point of view, 
the negative particle is always considered to afifect the copula 
in whatever part of a proposition the idiom of any particu- 
lar language may place it; and for this reason, propositions 

' BrtweenUMinodBlitjaiid mUterof ai>n)(»sitiaD,Iogiciuu li>T« m«da tbU 
diatuKstion : Modilitj ia an (fiecUoa of tha copola, ud dtpands on tbe aaeer- 
tioa ; MttlflT ii an afffiOtioo of the tflim^ aud dependj aot on the UMrtioD, but 
on tbe actual relation of the thingi spoken of. In Aiutotle'e riew, hoirever, 
the modilitj of b propoutian U to be looked for rather in tlis matter than in the 



hyGoogle 



- 94 UAKUAL OF LCMHC. 

virtually negative, although not so apparently, may, by Ic^- 
cal resolution, be reduced to a proper negative form, e, g., 

No bratee are morally responriUe, 
may be resolved into 

Brutes are not morally responsible. 

On a ntnilar principle, negative propoutionB may be re- 
duced to an affirmative fonn, by changing tbe place of the 
negative eign, and uniting it either witJi the subject or predi- 
cate, e. g., 

Miniitt are not material, 
may become affirmative by uniting tiie negative particle with 
the {ffedicale, thus — 

SGnds are, not-matnial ; 
and by another change of phrase, the same conception may be 
thus expreesed — 

Hinds are immateriaL 

Vropontjons which thus vary both in form and pbraseo- 
logy> but in which the same cono^tions are virtually ex- 
pressed, are designated equipoBsnt propositions. 

According to their essential quality, proposilionB are divided 
into oj^rautfttw and lugaHve. 

1. An affirmative^ proportion is one which asserts that 
its extremes, viz., its eattject and predicate, agree with each 
other i in other words, that the predicate may be affirmed of 
llie sutiject ; as, 

All tme Christians are lovers of Grod. 

The EngBsh are the sovereigns of Uie ocean. 

Errors an marks of human infirmity. 

All philosophers profess to aim at the discovery of truth. 

2. A negatimf proportion is that which asserts that its 
extremes disagree} in other vrords, that tbe predicate cannot 
be affirmed of the Bul^ect ; as, 

* xaraipasis cgriv ain'pciyais rims ^utra rnos, — Aratolk. 
** Avopaais tgriv uTCfatgit ritat awn ritoi. — Idem. 



hyGoogle 



VANDAL OF LOOIO, 95 

No miser is h^);. 

All the troops nnited, were not able to defend the for- 
tress. 

A modest man cannot allege his own merits. 

A propoidliott is not negatiTe, unless the particle of nega- 
tion immediately affects the copula. The following proposi- 
tions are therefore affirmative : — 

He who is not dishonest deserves oar esteem. 

The man who snneth not, is blessed indeed, 

Non injussa cano — I sing things not uncommanded. 

In English two negatives, connected in one sentence, make 



^0 man ia Ttot mortal ; 
which is the same in meaning with man is mortal. But in 
Greek, and often in French, two negatives render the nega- 
tion intensive. 

According to their accidental quality, propositions are 
divided into true onA false. This is said to be the proprium, 
inasmuch as it results from the essence of the proposition, 
i, e.tjrom the difference or assertion. 

A true proposition is that which asserts what is the fact; as. 

Every good man is virtuous. 

All islands are surrounded by water. 

A false prtqmsition is that which asserts what is not the 
fact; as, 

A Uiief is trustworthy. 

All the planets are stationary. 

Troth is either logical or ethical. 

A proposition is logically trae, when the relation predicated 
between a sutgect and a predicate actually exists. 

A proposition is ethiccdly true, when its enunciation 
agrees with the judgment of the mind. If I say, 

This chifibnier is made of mahogany, 
and believe it to be so. the proposition is etktcalijf tme ; but 



hyGootjIe 



96 U41ICAL OF LOGIC. 

if it be merely veneered, the propositioD is logically false. If 
Uie mind judge aright concerning things, the same proposi- 
tions will be both Ic^icall^ and ethically tnie. If the mind 
judge not aiight, the < proposition that is ethicallj true will be 
logically lalse, and the proposition that is to^cally true will be 
ethically &lse. 

3. Of the (luantity of Propotitiom. 

The quantity of a proposidon means the extent to whicli 
the predicate is asserted of the subject. . 

According to tbuir quantity, propositions may he divided 
into universal, particular, singular, and indefinite.^ 

1. A universal aiBrmatJve proposition is that in which 
the predicate is afBrmed of the whole of the subject; and in 
this case the subject is taken in its whole sense, i- e., for 
everything signified by it, and is therefore said to be distri- 
buted. 

A term, whether used as a subject or predicate, is dittri- 
buted or universal, when ttsed in its widest signification, as 
being applied without Umitation to every individual signified 
by it. 

Such distribution is indicated by some sign of universality, 
as all, every, whatever, &'c., e. g^ — 

All the metals are iiisible by heat. 

All animals have the power of motion. 

Every intelligent being is responsible for his conduct. 

Whatever is produced by regular laws, is a proof of an in- 
telligent agent. 

2. An universal negative b a proposilion whose subject is 
an universal term of the whole of which the predicate is 
denied. Its usual signs are no, none, neither, &c., e. g,, — 

No conscientious person is deserving of ridicule. 
No human foresight can check the advance of old age, in- 
firmities, and death. 

* loatcKd of indtfiniU, Sit W. Hamilton raeommcnill Meiignatt. 



hyGoogle 



UAHUAL or LOGIC. 97 

Kone of the ttncient pbiloaophers underatood flaxinns. 
Neither of the Beraoullis proved the case ^ainat Newton. 

The universality of a proposition is of two kinds, meta- 
phyxical and moral. 

A proposition metaphysically universoZ is that in which the 
predicate agrees with all ihe individuals contained in the 

subject, without exception ; as, 

Every man is an animal. 

All circles have a centre and circumference. 

All spirits are in their nature immortal. 

In each of these examples the predicate agrees with all the 
individuals of the subject, and we may therefore leptiraately 
deduce from any of them either a particular proposition ; as, 
lor example, 

Some men are animals ; 

or a singular propomtion ; aa, 

John is an animal. 

A proposition moraUy universal is that in which the pre- 
dicate agrees with most of the individuals of the subject, but 
not widi all ; e. g — 

All men prefer their own interest to the public. 

In this example the predicate, in its agreement with the 
individuals of tlie subject, admits of some exceptions. From 
this proposition, therefore, we may deduce a particular pro- 
position; as. 

Some men prefer their own interests to tiie public ; 

but not a singular ; as, 

Aristides prefers his own interest to the public ; 



hyGoogle 



98 MANCAI, OF LOGIC 

for the Buigular subject ' AristideB ' may be among Hk iDdi- 
Tidnals witii which the predicate does not agree (vide Snbal- 
ternation of propositions). 

3. A particular affirmatiTe proposition Ib that whoee sub- 
ject 13 a uDiversal term, with a particular nga prefixed, and 
of^a part of which only tbe predicate is affirmed. The usual 
signs are some, many, most, few, several, there are, &c., e. g. — 

Some men of deep erudition confine their knowledge to 
their own breasts. 

Maaj men have raised fortunes, at the hazard of their lives. 

Most arbitrary mouarchs are revengeful. 
^ Few men are truly wise. 

Several animals are amphibious. 

There are metals wtiich are lighter than water. 

A particular negative proposition is that whose subje<^ is 
a universal t«rm, with a particular sign prefixed, and of a 
part of which only the predicate is denied. The neual signs 
are those of a particular affirmatioe with the particle not an- 
nexed to the copula, e. g. — 

Some ofionders are not duly punished. 
Many authors are not men of original genius. 
Several troops were not armed. 
There are creatures which are not responsible. 

The subject of a negative proposition may have a universal 
sign, and yet the proposition may be equivalent only to a 
particular negative. In the following propositions, for ex- 
ample, — 

All men have not futfa, 

All is not gold that glilMrs, 
the logical order should be, 

Not all men have &ith. 

Not everything which glitters is gold. 



hyGoogle 



Hence the; are equivalent onl; to — 

Some men have Dot ^th. 

Some thiags which glitter are not gold. 

There are some particular signs which make a near approach 
to a univenal affirmative ; as, almost all, by far the greater 
part, &c., 0. g. — 

Almoat all the poets have been unfortunate. 
By far the greater part of men prefer private interest to 
that of tlie public. 

Some particular signs, on the other band, render a proposi- 
tion almost equivalent to a universal negative; &B,few, Scc., 
e. g— 

Few men, in this period of universal knowledge, atta^ to 
literary eminence. 

There are scarcely any who are free from the influence of 
acme prejudices. 

4. A singular proposition is one whose subject is (1) 
either a singular term — as, 

Napoleon was a brave man ; 

Des Cartes was.an ingenious philosopher ; 

Sir Isaac Newton was the author of the Prindpia ; 

Noah's ark contained animals of every species ; 

or (2) a singular pronoun ; as, 

Thou art the man ; 

Non omnis moriar,— I shall not altogether die ; 

or (3) a common term, with a dngular sign, i. e., a univer- 
sal in the form of an individual — 

This feWe is instructive j 



hyGoogle 



100 MANCAL OP WWHC. 

Tliat general was defeated ; 

This man is occasionally intemperate ; 

or (4) when the subject coneiBts of a number of nonns coUec- 
tiveh/ understood; bo that they may be viewed as one single 
thing or hodg ; as, 

GiBsar, Fompey, and CraSBua constituted the first trium- 

All the books in Ptolemy's library connst«d of 200,000 
volumes, i. e., all together. 

The &ing, lords, and commons form a British parliament. 

The 8yncat£gorem all, when used distrxhutively, is a sign 
of a unieersal proposition ; when it is applied in a collective 
sense, the proposition is singular; when it is distributive, its 
place may be correctly supplied by every or each; as, 

All the colleges are governed by their respective statutes, 
i. e., each of the colleges. 

All the primary planets revolve in" elliptic orbits about our 
sun as tlieir centre. 

When it is collective, it admits of the introductiMi of the word 
together; as, 

All the colleges constitute an university, i. e., collectively 
taken, 
AU the primary planets are eleven. 

In all singular propoeiUonB the predicate ia asserted of the 
whole of the subject. Hence the subject is distributed, luid 

singular propositions are considered as nniversals. 

5. An indefinite proposition has a common term for its 
subject; but it has no sign expressed to indicate whether its 
subject is to be taken in a universal or particular sense ; as, 

Beaste have four feet, i. e^ all beasts. 

A planet is ever changing its place, i. e., aU planets. 



hyGoogle 



I 



MANOAL 01" LOGIC. 101 

The st&rs appear to na when the twilight is gone, i. e., 
those stars only ivhich are abo^e the horizon. 

Every indefinite proposition will admit either of an uni- 
versal or a particular sign, for the predicate must be asserted 
either universally or partially of the subject. Bat to deter- 
niine this, we must look to the Tiiatter of the proportion, 
as it is in this way alone we can ascertain the natural con- 
nection between the subject and the predicate. The matter* 
of a proposition is the extent of connection which naturally 
exists between the extremes, and it is of three kinds — neces- 
mry, impossible, and contingent. 

When the terms of a proposition agree essentially and in- 
Tariably with each other, it is said to be in necesaary" matter, 
e. g.— 

All moral agents are responsible. 

* Those who hold lo^cto b« a formal adcnco mai,t of comse discard bom its 
domaiD all iMm^deratiDa of real existence, and of the relations of real existODce. 
Of the truth or falBebood of propo^tioiu ia tbomseWes, it is supposed to knov 
nothing, aod oan take no accoant of it. If this view of logic be correct, the 
aatter and modoU^ of propoaitiona must be eiclnded from its province as extra- 
logical. ' If tmth or falsehood,' ramarks Sir W. HamUton, ' as a material 
quality of propositions and sjllogismg ia eitralogical, so also is their modalit;. 
Necessity, posfibilitj, &c., arc drcomstances which do not affect the logical 
copnia or the logical inference. Thej do not relate to the connection of the 
subject and the predicate, of the antecedent and consequent, as terms in tbonght, 
bat 4S realitiea in eilatence \ thej are metaphysical, not lo^cal conditions. Hie 
sjllogistic inference is alwajB nacessarj ; it is modified bj no eitrafurmal doq. 
dition ; is equally apoiiictic in contingent as in necessary matter,' — Ei. Rev., 
Vol. LVII. 

Eant sanclJons the modalitj of propontions and syllo^sms as necessary to be 
taken into accoont by the lopoian. Whateley's views of the proiince of logic ' 
are so contradictorj that his aathont; on either ude of the qneation goes for 

*¦ There aiB three ways in which a predicate may be cone^ved of aa naces- 
saiy to its sntject : — First, if it is an essoDtiai or formal quality — this is formal 
neeeacdty; — aecondly, aa being an inseparable dednction from some easential or 



hyGoogle " 



When the terms of a proposition differ from each other 
essentially and iDvariably, it is said to be ia impoitible 
matter, e. g. — 

No triaugleBare squares. 

When the terms of a proposition partly agree with each 
other, and partly differ, it is s^d to be in contingent mat- 
ter, e. g.— 

Legal enactments are beneficial to society. 

Of propositions implying necessary matter, affirmatives are 
tnie, and negatives false; of those expresung impossible 
matter, negatives are true, and affirmatives false ; of those 
expressing contingent matter, uniVersals are felse and parti- 
culars true. 

In necessary and impossible matter indefinite propoidtions 
are reduced to the class of universals, and in contingent 
matter to the class of particulars. In the following example, 

Angels are incorporeal, 
the subject angels is not accompanied by any sign of univer- 
sality or particularity ; but as we cannot conceive of ' angels* 
aa not being incorporeal, we affirm this predicate of all 
angels ; and hence the proposition is universal, the predicate 
being asserted of the mhole subject. In the following propor- 
tion, 

Human inventions are benefidal to society, 

there is no sign indicative either of universal or particular 
quantity prefixed te the subject ; but on examining the mat- 

Cbrma] qualitj' — tliu is natoral nec«saitj ; — thirdly, u 1>oing incapable of bdDg 
denied to it hauxfomord — thia is necusity of facC The first neceistj is 
eipreaMd, when ire nj^ii a quality is ganeiio or spedGc — tha ataaoA, whsQ 
we call it a propmup — the third, when we txj that a fact bw bstxaae aa inse- 
parable accident. — Mobtr^, p. SO. 



hyGoogle 



UAMVAL OF LOGIC. 103 

ter of the propositioD, we aBcertain that the predicate cannot 
be affirmed of the whole Bnbject, because the matter of the 
proposition is contingent ; and hence we can only assert, 

Some hnman inventiona are beneficial to societj. 

Since singular propositions may be considered as imirer- 
sab, and since mdefinite propositions can be reduced to uni- 
versalsjiftheir matter is necesaaiy or impossible, anA to partiat- 
larg, if their matter is contingent, it is unnecessary to conrider 
either as a separate class of propositions ; for, strictly speaking, 
propositions, when viewed according to their quantity, may 
be divided into two kinds, viz., universal and particular. 

All pure categorical propositions, therefore, considered ac- 
cording to their quality and quantity, may be regarded as of 
four kinds, viz., universal affirmative, universal negative, par- 
ticular affirinative, and particular negative. These four 
classes of propositions are marked by the first four vowels, 
called symbols. Thus — 

A. Universal affirmative. 

E. Universal negative. 

I. Particular affirmative. ~ 

O. Particular negative. 

The following scheme eshibits the relations of quantity 
and quality : — 



Universal affirmatives, Universal, Particular. 

Universal n^atives, Universal, Universal. 

Particular affirmatives, .Particular, Particular. 

Particular negatives, Particular, Universal, 

In reference to the universality uid particularity of the pre- 
dicates of propositions, the following mfiTimH will be found 
in all cases to apply: — ^In negative propositions the predicate 
is oniversal by necemty. In affirmative propositions the pre- 



hyGoogle 



104 HAKUAL Off LOeiC. 

dicateis parlicnlar when it is only on attribute of tlie subject; 
but it 19 universal when it can be sabBtituted for, or reciprocate 
with Ibe subject. 

The following scheme presents the division of proportions, 
with tbeir sub-divisions : — 

(Pure, 

{ Cal^orical, 4 

Substance ( Modal. 



Hypothetical,.. 



into I ( Conditional, 

Di^unclive. 

AfBrmative, 

Quality, I ( N^egative. 

namely, r True, 

V Acddental, into..] 

I False. 

(Universal, \ 
_ ,. , I reducible to 

Fartujular, 
V Universal and 
^"»"'"' Prfcul». 
Indefinite, / 



SECTION II. 

OF THB HODAUTT OF PBOPOSITIONS. 

Modal propositioDB have been already cursoiily noticed la 
the manner in which they are geaerally treated, viz., that of 
considering any proposition to be modal in which the copula 
is affected by some modifying word, e. g. — 

Men are necessarily mortal. 



hyGoogle 



HAM DAL OF LOGIC. 105 

A modal proposition of this deacription connsts of what is 
termed the dictum and the modus. The dictum is the sub- 
ject, and the modus the predicate. In the esamples given 
already, tliere is no difficull; in diatioguisbing the subject 
trom the predicat«, for the; stand in tiieir legitimate order, 
while the nature-of tbeir reladon is determined by the word 
qualifying the copula; and the relation maybe eitlier that 
of necessity, possibility, impossibility, or contingency. But 
propositions often occur, usually considered modal, in which 
it is often requisite to alter the arrangement of the words in 
which they are expressed, in order to see clearly which is the 
dictum, and which the modus. In such cases, it is necessary 
first to ascertain the term, or the parlicular number of words 
constituting a term, which represents the dictum; and when 
this is ascertained, all that remains is, to connect the term 
constituting the modus with the copula, — for the modus must 
be always joined to the copula, — and what is so joined is the 
predicate. In the following proposition, y\z.. 
It is necessary that a man should be an animal, 

there is a necessity of agreement asserted between the subject 
and predicate, and on examining the proposition, we find 'that 
a man should be an animal ' is the dictum or subject, and 
' necessary ' the modus or predicate. By uniting the modus 
with the copula, the proposition will stand thus : 

That a man should be an animal is necessary. 

It is evident that the first kind of modal propositions men- 
tioned, (viz., those in which the subject and predicate occupy 
their legitimate places) may be multiplied to any extent ; for 
any adverb afiecting the copula, and thereby qualifying the 
predicate, or even an adjective qualifying the subject, is suf- 
ficient to rank the proposition in which it occurs in this class 
of modals. It may be remarked, however, that this indefinite 
mulfiplicalion of modals is not to be attributed to Aristotle i 



hyGoogle 



and, t 

appear, although, as well as the former, easily redui 
categorical form, will, if they are to be resolved into the dictom 
and modus, which they easily may be, constitute a second 
class of modals equally numeroas. If, however, modality is 
to be restricted to one or both of these classes (and it would 
appear that these are the only kinds of it recognisable in pure 
log^c, as they necessitate, under certain conditions, a corres- 
ponding modification of their immediate or mediate conse- 
quents), a Uttle consideration will suffice to show, that the pro- 
positions falling under either of the classes should be designated 
propositions verbally modal — their modality being expressed, 
not implied; for in all cases, by a slight alteration in the 
phraseology, or a different arrangement of the order of the 
terms, they may be reduced to pure categorical proposi- 
tions. 

Whether modality, either expressed or Implied in a propo- 
rtion, should be relegated from the domain of pure logic, is a 
question among logicians. Some, holding the formal view, 
admit the expressed, but reject the implied; while others ex- 
clude both. No sufficient reason has been shown, however, 
why expressed modality should foe banished irom pure logic; 
for if a premiss is assumed under a necessity, or probability, 
or possibility, of being true, any of these conditions will, in a 
corresponding degree, determine the conclusion to be deduced, 
which, under any of these assumptions will be as purely logi- 
cal as that the tmth of the conclosiou follows irom the truth 
of the premisses, or the labdty of the concluraon from the falsity 
oi the premisses. 

In applied logic, on the other hand, there seems no reason 
yihy implied modali^ should not be recognised; and hence 
the modality of a proposition would depend, in many cases, 
not on the effeot a qualifying epithet may have on the copula. 



hyGoogle 



MAKCAL OF LOOIC. ]07 

but OQ the degree of certainty a thinker may enterttun re- 
garding a jadgmeni, and in contradiaUnction to verbai mo- 
dality, it migbt be very properly dedgnated material modality. 
Aristotle, whose view of modality may be, with some strain- 
ing, interpreted either as expre»aed or understood in a pro- 
position, enumerates four modes, viz., the necessary (artvyxain'), 
the impossible (aiuvaret), the contingent (nisxo/'^'f), and the 
possible (iuvanr). HThether he added the true (aXji#(() and 
the^^ (dux ttkti^ti) is not quite clear. From his claaufica- 
tion of judgments, however, and the grounds on which they 
must be explained, it may be presumed that he would not 
exclude implied modality from applied logic. In this view, 
therefore, the modality of a judgment in applied logic may 
depend on our knowledge of facts and things, or tite degree 
of certtunty wilh which we can assert the agreement or dis- 
agreement of any given subject and predicate. Hence the 
modali^ of our judgments will vary with the increase of our 
knowledge, and what ia problematical at one time may 
amount to belief at another. The objective &clfi and things 
concerning which we judge remain the same, whatever 
changes may take place in the qiind of the thinker aa to 
clearer apprehensions of them. The change is subjecttve, not 
objective. 

On examining Aristotle's four modes, it will appear that all 
possible judgments may be reduced to three classes, viz., the 

Problematical, 

Assertory, and 

Demonstrable. 

This is Aristotle's distribntdon. All judgments which are 
merely matters of opinion come under the class ' problemati- 
cal;' all judgments founded on belief may be referred to the 
dABs 'assertory!' while all judgments resnlting from the 
amoms and deductions of pure science belong to the cUss 
* demonstrable.' 



hyGoogle 



108 UAKTIAL OF LOGIC. 

Of the three, the pn^lematical judgment is obviously the 
weakest, for it is neither regarded as true by the thinker, 
nor can it be shown to be a true decision in reference to the 
object or thing concerning which the judgment is made. 
Consequently, it cannot be hud down as truth either in a 
suttjectiTC or olijective ^nse. In illustration, let us lake the 
following example : — 

The solar system may be a gradual projection from the sun. 

In this judgment, there may be either a total, partial, or no 
agreement between the subject and predicate; but from our 
imperfect knowledge of the object-matter of the judgment, 
we can only atBrm a possible dependence or agreement be- 
tween them. The judgment may indeed be true, and farther 
knowledge may prove it so, but now it is merely matter of 
opinion. 

All judgments which rest on pombtUly or probability, or 
to which doubt attaches in the mind of the thinking subject, 
may be classed under problematical judgments. 

The learner should obsert'e, that in propositions the words 
'maybe' often occur in two different senses. In ihe proposi- 
tion, The world may be circumnavigated, 'maybe' means 
is capable of being, and &e proposition is assertory ; while ia 
the proposition. All tlie species in the world may be the off-, 
spring of a few primary species, ' may be' means are, for 
anything rve hnow, and the proposition is problematical. 

An assertory judgment implies belief in addition to opinion, 
and is therefore subjectively true, i. e., held as true by the 
thinker. An assertory judgment may also be true with re- 
spect to the fact or object regarding which it is made, but its 
truth objectively is indemonstrable. An assertory judgment 
is therefore subjectively true, but not objectively certain. 
The following is an example of an assertory judgment : — 

A mixed monarchy is the best form of government ; 



hyGoogle 



LOGIC. 1 09 

and to a person holding this opinion as belief, the judgment 
¦is suhjectJTelj true, inasmuch as the thinking subject believes 
it to be so. Objectively, however, it is not certain, for one 
may believe the democratic, a second the despotic, and a 
third the patriarchal, to be the best form of government. An 
assertory differs firom a demonstrable judgment in this, that 
however firm our own belief may be in the truth of an asser- 
tory judgment, we cannot compel men in general to acquiesce 
in it, because however strong the evidence in its favour may 
be, it cannot amount to absolute demonstration. 

Belief in the truth of an assertory judgment may be con- 
fined to one thinking subject, because he may have examined 
the object-matter of it more carefully and minutely than 
other thinking subjects, or he may have been influenced by 
prejudice, inlerest, or any other adequate cause. 

Belief in the truth of an assertory judgment may be com- 
mon to any particular sect or school, e. g., Calvinists may be- 
lieve in common that Calvin's Institutes are the best compend 
of Theology. The same holds true in the case of political 
classes, or in philosophical schools, &c. This coincidence of 
belief may arise from similarity in habits of thought, or from 
educational training, or any cause sufBcient to present a judg- 
ment to the mind of the thinking sut^ect as true. 

Belief in the truth of an assertory judgment may be com- 
mon to all, e. g.. That there is a First Cause; That there is 
a day of final retribution; That there is a future state; are 
matters to which univet^al belief is acceded, although not 
susceptible of absolute demonstration. 

In every case, the truth of an assertory proposition, whe- 
ther held by an individual, or a class, or men in general, 
depends on moral not on demonstrable certainty. 

Belief in the truth of a demonstrable judgment occupies 
the highest plac« in the scale of credibility. It is not only 
subjectively, but also objectively true, and differs, conse- 
quently, both from the problematical and assertory judgment. 



hyGoogle 



110 BUNUAL OF LOOIO. 

A demonslrable judgment is Belf-evident, as id mathematical 
axioms, e. g. — 

If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equaL 

Things wliich are equal to the same thing are equal to one 
another. 
Or it may be a deduction from self-evident principles; as, 

The circumference of a circle is thrice its diameter. 

The angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are equal. 



SECTION III. 

THE OPPOSITION OF PROPOSITIONS. 

FroposiUons have hitherto been treated in their absolute 
character, we now proceed to consider them in their relative 
character or afFections. The relative afiections of proposi- 
tions are of three kinds, viz., stAaltemation, conversion, and 
oppodtion. A knowledge of these is subservient to the doc- 
trine of syllogisms; for by subaltemation we infer several 
conclusions irom the same premisses ; by opposition we reduce 
imperfect moods to perfect, while conversion aids in both. 
1. Subaltemation. 

Subaltemation is the deduction of a particular or singular 
proposition from a universal, — both, namely, the premiss and 
deduction, having the same subject and the same predicate. 
Snbaltemation is either between A. and I. or £. and 0. 

The two propositions compared together are — the one a 
universal proposition, called the suhaltemans; the other, de- 
duced from the former, and called the euhaltema, — a particu- 
lar or singular proposition, with the same subject and the 
same predicat«. In all cases the subaltemans and snbaltema 
must agree in quality, e. g. — 

A. All diseases are contagious. 

I. Some diseases are conta^ous. 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOaiO. Ill 

The principle on which subaltemation proceeds U, that 
uuiversals include particularB, but that particukrs do not 
include universala. 

From any universal proposition we may infer a particular 
subalterna ; but before we can infer a singular auballema, 
the subaltemans muEt be metaphysically nniveraal. The 
following is an example of a proposition metaphyaically uni- 
versal; viz., 

Every effect has a cause ; 

and as it is metaphysically universal (that is, admitting of do 
exceptions), we can infer from it not only the particular 

proposition, 

Some effects have causes, 
but also the singular proposition — 

Gravitation has a cause. 

The relation between a suballernans and a subalterna can 
scarcely be called opposition, in the common acceptation of 
the term, though it comes within the range of the definition 
of that term as here used. 

In pronouncing on the truth or falsehood of propositions 
thus related, we have to consider how far we may infer the 
truth or falsehood of one of iheai from the truth or falsehood 
of the other ; and in reference to snbaltemation, we have the 
four following axioms : — 

1. The truth of the universal infers the truth of the par- 
ticular, — for if it be true that 

All islands are surrounded by water, 
it must be true that 

Some islands are surrounded by water ; 
and it is also true that 

Sicily is an island aurronnded by water. 



hyGoo^le 



112 MAKtTAI. OP LOGIC. 

In this esample, however, we infer a singular suhaUema, 
because the subalternans is metaphysically universal. 

A sign of universality prefixed to the subject of a proposi- 
tion docs not, let it be observed, necessarily render that pro- 
position metaphysically true, e.g., the following proposition : — 

All children reverence their parenia, 
is only morcdly anivenial, and therefore admits of some excep- 
tions; for all children donot reverence theirparents; and hence, 
although from such a proposition we can infer with truth that 

Some children reverence their parents, 
we cannot infer (his with regard to any particular individual 
contained in the subject ; for it may be among the exceptions. 

The truth of this axiom is equally valid in negative as 
in affirmative propositions; for if in affirmative propositions 
the predicate contains the whole extension of the subject, it 
contains a part ; and if in negative propositions it excludes 
the whole, it excludes a part. 

It will be seen &om the foregoing, Ihat the suhalternans and 
the subaltema, deduced from it, difier in quantity but agree 
in quality. 

2. llie truth of the particular does not infer the truth of the 
universal. 

The predicate of a proposition may agree with a part of 
the extenaioD of the sulgect, yet it may not agree with the 
whole extension of the subject ; for although it may be true that 

Some wars are just, 
it is not trae that 

All wars are jnst ; 
and although it may be true that 

Some men have not an affectiondte disposition, 
it is not true that 

No men have an affectionate disposition. 



hyGoogle 



MAHDAL OP LOQIC. 1 18 

In referenc« to the terms of a proposition, it is to be laid 
down that in 11117 inference no t«rm can be changed from a 
particular to an aniversal ; in other words, that an argument 
a particulari ad univermU is invalid ; for if anj term is 
particular, a part of it only is stud to agree or disagree witb 
the other term. About the remaining part of it, therefore, 
nothing can be inferred. 

3. The falsehood of the particular infers the felsehood of 
the universal. 

In illustration of this axiom, it m&y be stated that if it be 
false that the predicate contains or agrees with any part of 
the extension of the subject, it must also be false that it con- 
tains the whde ; for instance, if it is false that 

Some men are patriotic, 

it must be &Iee tiiat 

All men are patriotic. 

4. The Msehood of the universal does not infer the felse- 
hood of the particular. 

It may be false, for instance, that the predicate contains or 
excludes the whole extension of the subject, jet it may con- 
tain or exclude a part. Thus it may be &lse that 

All men are logicians, 
or that 

No island is fertile ; 
yet it may be true that 

Some men are logicians, 
or that 

Some islands are not fertile. 

It most be observed, in relation to the four axioms, that we 



hyGoogle 



114 MANUAL OF LOGIC. 

are to understand bj the imiTersal and particular propoeitions 
mentioned, a universal and a particular deduced firom it by 
aubalternatdoD. 

On examining the four for^ping axioms, it will appear 
that they may be reduced to two, for the third is conttuned in 
the first, and the fourth in the second. 

The third and fourth axioms differ from the first and 
second, in being their converses by contraposition. 

It may be mentioned that Aristotle takes no notice of sub- 
altern propositions. Its laws were first laid down by Apuleins, 
and the name given by Boetbius. 

2, Contrary Opposition, 
Contrary Opposition is between two universal propositions 
difTering in quaiitt/ only, viz., between A. and E. ; as, 

All trees possess vegetable life. 
No trees possess vegetable life. 

With regard to the truth of contrary propositions, both of 
them may be Jalx, but they cannot both be true, or the one 
may hejalse and the other true. 

When the opposed propositions are in necessary matter, 
the affirmative will be true and the negative false ; e. g. — 

A, All human institutions are imperfect. 
£. Ko human institutions are imperfect. 
A. All bad habits should be avoided. 
E. No bad habits eboiJd be avoided. 

When the opposed propositions are in impossible matter, 
the negative will be tnie and the affirmative false ; e. g. — 

E. None of the planets are stationary. 
A. All the planets are stationary, 
E. No island is under water. 
A. All islands are under water. 



hyGoogle 



HANUAL OF LOGIC. 115 

When tbe opposed propositioas are in contingent matter, 
both are Mse; but the particulare, whether affirmative or 
amative, are both true. The following propositionH — 

A. All children honour their parents, 
E, No children honour their parents, 

have the same terms ; and these are used in each of the pro- 
positions in exactly the same sense; jet both the propositions 
are false — for in contingent matter nniversals are false, and 
particulars true ; and all vre can with troth assert is, that 

I. Some children honour theur parents. 

0. Some children do not honour their parents. 

With respect to contrary propositions itappears, therefore, — 

1. That in necessary matter affirmatives are true, and ne- 



2. That in impossible matter negatives are true, and afiir- 
mativee false ; and, 

8. That in contingent matter, both propositions are 
fiOse. 

3. Bub-contrary Oppontwn. 

Sub-contrary Opposition subsists between two particular 
proportions difFeiing in quality, viz., between I. and 0.; e. g. — 

Some minds are too much beclouded with pr^udice to 
admit of the light of genuine science. 

Some minds are not too much beclouded with prejudice, 
to admit of the light of gentiine science. 

Sub-contrary opposition has been so named, from the 
Opposed propositions being under two universal contraries. 
Sub-contraries must have the same terms as the contraries 
to which they are related. 



hyGoo^le 



1 1 6 UANIIAL OF LOOIO. 

In neceaary matter particular affirmaliTea are tme, but 
particular oegatiTes &lse ; e. g. — 

Some human institutions are imperfect. 

Some human institutions are not imperfect. 

In the former of these examples, the predicate agrees with 
the whole subject, and the proposition is consequent); true; 
while, in the latter example, the predicate disagrees with the 
whole subject, and the proposition is consequentl; false. 

In impossible matter particular n^j^atives are tme, but par- 
ticular affirmaUves false; e. g. — 

Some of the planets are not stationary. 

Some of the planets are stationary. 

In the particular negative the predicate disagrees with the 
whole subject ; and being in impossible matter, the propor- 
tion is true. In the particular affirmative the predicate ia 
asserted of the whole subject ; but being in impossible matter, 
the proposition is false. 

In cotitingent matter sub-contrary propositions may both 
be true ; e. g. — 

Some men are astronomers. 

Some men are not astronomers. 

In the first of these examples the predicate is said to agree 
with part of the subject, and in the last the same predicate is 
said to disagree with part of the same subject. The predi- 
cate ia therefore not really affirmed of the same subject, but 
of different parts of the same subject. Hence, both pro- 
positions are true. But between two snb-contraiy proposi- 
tions, in contingent matter, there is in reality no opposition. 
Sub-contraries cannot be both faUe, nor can diey be both 
true, except in contingent matter. The very definition of 
contingent matter requires that it should be such as to allow 
the predicate to be at the same lime asserted of some things 
contuned under the aul^ect, and denied of others. 



hyGoogle 



MAKHii, OF Loaic. 117 

With regard to sub-contrary propoaitioDS, it is evident, 
therefore, 

1. That in necessary matter, affirmatireB are true anil 
negatives false. 

3. Tbat in impossible matter, negallTes are true and 
affirmatives false ; and, 

3. That in contingent matter, both the propositions are 
true. 

4. Contradictory Opposition. 

Ckintradictoi7 Opposition is that which subsists between tvro 
propositions, differing both in quantity and quality, viz., be- 
tween A. and 0- or E. and I. ; e. g. — 

A. All men are responsible. 

0. Some men are not responsible. 

Of all the kinds of opposition, the contradictory is the 
most pei^ct ; for contmdiclories differ from each other in all 
points; in quantity, for one is universal and the other par- 
ticular; in quality, for one is affirmatiTe and the other nega- 
tive. Hence it follows, that when a proposition is trme, its 
contradictory must of necessity beji^ie ; and, conversely, if a 
proposition is fiilse, its contradictory must be true, lliere 
can be no intermediate judgment. Consequently, contradic- 
tories can neither be both (eiee nor both true together, for 
the &Isity of the one establishes the truth of the other. 

In order that two propositions should he directly contra- 
dictory, the terms of both the propositions must be used in 
exactly the game tente with respect to each other. The con- 
ditions necessary to ensure this are the following, viz., that the 
terms of the contradictories must be used : — 

1. Eodem modo, io the same manner. 

2. Secundum idem, as to the same part. 

8. Ad idem, compared with the same thing. 
i. Eodem tempore, existing at the same time. 



hyGoogle 



118 MANUAL OF LOQIC. 

If any one of these conditiona be omitted, it and u tu>t may 
be compatible, e. g., an opinion u and is nol faith ; it is a 
dead faitli ; it is not living fiiith. 2. Zoilus u and u not 
black ; for his face w black, and his hair is not black, but red. 
3. Socrates has and has not a fidl head of hair ; for be hat, if 
compared with Scipio, he has twt, if compared with Xeno- 
phon. 4. Nestor is and is not old ; for he is, if you speak of 
his third age, he is nol, if you speak of his first. 

The four requisites to a complete contradiction may be 
comprised in one rule, which is eqoally applicable to all the ' 
species of opposition, viz., that the subject and predicate of 
the oppoung propositions most be employed in the tarns setue 
and in the same manner with respect to eacfa other. 

Let the opposbg propositions be A. and 0. in necessary 
matter, e. g. — 

A. All men are responsible. 

0. Some men are not responsible. 

In the universal affirmative the predicate ' responsible ' is 
asserted universally of the subject ' men,' and in the negative 
proposition the same predicate, used exactly in the same 
sense, is denied partially of the same subject, nsed also exactly 
in the same sense ; but since the matter is necessary, the ex- 
tremes of the affirmative agree essentially, and the proposi- 
tion is consequently tme; its contradictory, therefore, (the 
particular negative), which asserts the partial disagreement 
of the extremes, must be false. 

Let the opposing propositions be E. and I. in impossUiie 
matter, e. g. — 

E. No human institulions are perfect. 

L Some human institutions are perfect. 

In the universal negative the predicate ' perfect ' ia denied 
rvkolly of the subject 'haman institutions,' and in the particular 
affirmative the same predicate, used exactly in the same 



hyGoogle 



HAMTAL OP LOGIC. 119 

sense, is asserted partially of the same subject, used also 
exactly in the same sense ; bnt educe the matter is impositble, 
the extremes of the negative disagree essentially, and the pro- 
poaitioD is consequently true ; its contradictory, therefore, (the 
particular affirmatiTe), which affirms the partial agreement of 
the extremes, must be false. 

Let the opposing propositions be A. and 0. in contingent 
matter, e. g, — 

A. All human inventionB are beneficial to mankind. 

O. Some human inventions are not beneficial to mankind. 

In the universal afflrmadve, the predicate, ' beneficial to 
mankind,' is affirmed of the whole subject, ' human inven- 
tions ;' but on examining the matter, it will appear that the 
connection between the extremes is not invariable and essen- 
tial, and that all we can assert with truth is, that 
. Some human inventions are beneficial to mankind. 
Hence there is a part of the subject with which the predicate 
does not ^ree ; and with respect to the part excluded, it may 
be asserted that 

Some human inventions are not beneficial to mankind. 
Hence the particular negative is true, and its contradictory, 
the universal afllrmative, &lse. 

Let the quality of the above propositions be changed into 
E, and L, e. g. — 

E. No human institutions are beneficial to mankind. 

L Some human institutions are benefidal to mankind. 
And from the preceding illustration, it will be seen that the 
particular affirmative is true, and its contradiotoiy, the uni- 
versal n^iative, false. 

In the case of contradictory propositions, it appears, there- 
fore,— 

1. That in necessary matter, affirmatives are true and 
negatives false. 



hyGoogle 



120 UAMCAL OF LOGIC. 

2. That in impossible matter, negatives are true and affir- 
matives false ; and, 

3. That in contingent matter, universal affirmafives are 
felse, and particular negatives true, and that universal nega- 
tives are false and particular affirmatives true. 

5. d}g>osition of Singular Propositions. 

It is difficult to refer the opposition of singular propositions 
(sometimes called secondary contradictioTi) to any particular 
kind of opposition. Ostensibly their opposition is that of 
contrariety, for their quantity cannot be changed. 

The matter of singular propositions cannot be contingent ; 
and, consequently, two singular propositions cannot both be 
false, as may happen in the case of contraries, when they are 
both in contingent matter. The opposition of singulars is, 
therefore, not properly referrible to contrariety. 

Singular propositione must be either in necessary or im- 
possible matter ; and hence the contrary to a singular propo- 
sition forma as perfect an opposition as the contradiction 
between nniversals and particulars, for they have the essential 
features of contradictories, viz., that the one is alwa}^ true 
and the other blse ; for if a singular be true, its contrary 
must of necessity be folse, and vice versa, since in necessary 
or impossible matter no two opposed propositions can be both 
true or both false together. 

rSOTB.] 

Aceoidicg \f> the formal view of logic, tbe irords ' naceaaaij' ' impossible,' 
' rontiDgent,' sbonld h&ve no place in tho doctrine of oppoutioD ; fbr id order 
to carrj cot Che fbrrDHl Tiew consifitcntlj, the logician can tfike no acoouDt of th« 
mRt«rial trath or fakehood of a propoaiUan. Be hu nieivlj to do nlth the 
formal iafbrsDces or dednctioDi irhicb follow from the auiuned trolh or faMtj 
of a premiu. It may be remarked, that, la reference to the docliine of apposi- 
tion, the formal liev maj be eaul}' maintained b; expFesdng the canons or 
axioms hypothetieallj. 



hyGoogle 



The oppoBition of propositioiiB is Bummaril; presented in 
the annexed Scheme : — 



['Between A & I. 



I Between £ & 0- 



Contnuy Between A& E.... 



Sub-Contrary ...Between I & .. 



^Between A & O ...- 



.Contradictory, / 



N.— IWe. True. 

I.— False. False. 

,C.-^False. True. 

(E. 0. 

N.— False. False. 

I.— True. True. 

C— False. True. 

A- E. 

N.— True. FaUe. 

L— False. True. 

,0.— False. False. 

f I- 0- 

In.— True. False. 

j L— False. True, 

ic— True. True. 

/ A. O. 

I N True. False. 

I I.— False. True, 

ic— False. True. 



E. 



I. 



V Between E & I .. 



-Fabe. True. 
-True. False. 

ic False. True. 

In tbe abore Scheme tbe letCen NIC doaote tlie mstter of tlie propOEi- 
doDS, viz., ntcmaaij, impawibla, i»iiljiig«nt. It hu beea prefetnd here to the 
leheme oiuU; ^toi in logicd treatiaw, u more uit*Ui|jble, ind tbv«fiB% 
[uore Gkel; to wcun ¦ttenUoo. 



hyGoogle 



MAKDAL OP LOGIC. 



SECTION IT. 

OF THE C0NTEH310N OP FROPOSITIOKS. 

Conversion is the transposition of Uie subject of a proposi- 
tion into tile place of tlie predicate, and of the predicate into 
the place of the subject; bat in the transposition, both the 
quality and the truth of the proposition must be preserved.* 

The propoeition to be converted ia called the convertend or 
e:rposita, and that into which it is converted, the conva-ie. 

In legitimate conversion, the truth of the converse ought 
to follow from the coDvertend, because logical conversion 
must be iUative, tha^ is, the trdth of the convertend necessi- 
tates the truth of the converse. If, therefore, the convertend 
is true, its logical converse must also be true. 

Illative or inferential conversion is, when the truth of the 
converse may he intimated by the words ' therefore,' ' where- 
fore,' ' consequently,' &c. ; hence these are called illative par- 
ticles. But it should not be supposed, from the words ' illa- 
tive ' or ' inferential,' that this conversion is a process of 
reasoning," — it is, in fact, only stating the same judgment in 
another form. 

¦ Tbe terms of a logical propoution are the Donn andTerb; tbe fbrmsr as 
Bnbj«ct^ the Utter tu predicate. In jnopesitioos terlii aeljacenlit, the copula 
and predicate are coaaidered aa eqairalent to a aingle verb. When tbe temiB 
are tramposed, tbe noun most become a verb to form the new predicate, and 
the verb a nana to form ¦ new mbject. For this reason, all propositioDB abonld 
be reeolved uito the tbrm Urtii adjaoaiiU before conTcruen, la order that the 
predicate ma; l« flved from tbe coneignificition of time, so as to form a nonn, 
and the copula maj be left to nnlte nlth the Babject, and form a verb. — J/oB- 
wi, p. 49. 

*> Whether the armene is to be considered an infersttea U a qoestion of some 
interest, from its having been a contested point among the acholaatie commenta- 
tors of Aristotle at an early date. There can be no donbt that Aristotle himself 
conudered it an inference, from tbe labour he expends in endeaToaring to 



hyGoogle 



HANL'AL OF LOGIC. 123 

Hence it fbllowB, that no converee may asBert, more ge- 
nenllj, than the convertend, — in other words, a consequence 
must not go beyond it& premisses, and, consequently, what is 
affirmed in the convertend of a part only, cannot, in the con- 
verse, be affirmed of the whole. When we attempt to deduce 
from a proposition another which does not necessarily follow, 
it is said that there is no vis consequentice. 

Dladve conversion is of three kinds, viz., simple conver- 
sion, conversion per acddens, and conversion by negation or 
contraposition. 

1. — Simple Conversion. 

Simple convemon (utXi] atriargo^ii) is the mere transposi- 
tion of the extremes of a proposition, without changing either 
the quantity or the quality. Hence, whether the convertend 
be universal or particular, affirmative or negative, the con- 
verse must retain the same attribute?. 

In order that a proposition may be simply convertible, its 
extremes must be co-exten»ve, i. e., both of them must be 

demoniLnta it. Bdd ia of opimoo, how^rer, that bia dsmonstratioii is mrrel; 
¦rgning in ¦ circle, and remariu that, ' it ii indeed a fault nr; diScolt to be 
¦Tnided, when men attempt to proie things that are self-evident.' Rdd, 
DSTertheless, considers the coDrerealobe an inferance. The eonrene nnqneetion- 
¦bly depends entirely Car its tralli on the coaiertend ; bnt there is no reason nhj 
it ahanld on that accoant be called an inference from it. Whateteji's vien ii 
adopted in the teit, onlj in reference lo simple convennon ; for converses ob- 
tuned in this vsj are obvionslj the same jndf^ents in another fonn. This does 
not, however, in all cases hold tme ia aeddtrUoi coDvenion, for here the con - 
Terse or inference is not neceisaiil; the same as the convertend or eipouta. In 
ampie conversion the converse most retain the aondental qoaUtj of the con- 
vertend; the Bcddental converse, however, doea not of necessitj follow the troth 
of the convertend, eicept when the latter is Ime. Hence, if the convertend is 
fidse, its umple converse must also be false, bat its acddental converse may 
be uther trne or false. Conrei»on per accidene ia founded on the laws of anb- 
altem apposition, in which the paiticolai does not retain the acddental qnatit; 
of the nnivereal nnless the nniverssl ls itself true. 



hyGoogle 



124 UAKCAL OF LOGIC. 

distributed, as is the case in universal natives; or neither 
of them distributed, as is ibe case in particular affirmatives. 
In eitber of these cases, the mere transposition of the extremes, 
without any alteration of the sign, does not interfere with the 
quantity, or the accidental quality (the truth or falsehood of 
the proposition). Hence, the only propositions which admit 
of umple conversion are universal negatives, and particular 
affirmatives, because in universal negatives both predicate 
and subject are universal tenns, and therelbre when trtuis* 
posed the nnivereal predicate of the convertend becomes a 
universal subject to the converse. In particular affirmations 
again, both predicate and subject are particular terms, and 
as the converse does not require any terms but particulars, 
they are sufficient to render it pardcular and affirmative. 

Of Universal Negatives. 
The following proposition, viz., 
No true philosophers omit the enforcement of moral duty, 

is simply convertible, for since both the terms are distributed, 
the proposition indicates that ' every true philosopher ' differs 
from 'every person who omits the enforcement of moral 
duty ;' while, on the other hand, it is equally true, that ' all 
who omit the enforcement of moral duty' differ from 'all true 
philosophers,' consequently, the proposition may be simply 
converted thus — 

None who omit the enforcement of moral duty, are true 

philosophers. 

But to take a more obvious example, viz. — 

It is asserted in this proposition, that there is no individual 
common to the extension of both terms, for no individual in- 
cluded in the extension of the subject ' angels ' is included in 



hyGoogIc 



UAKtlAI. OF LOOIC. 125 

die ettensioTi of the predicate ' men ;' and we ma; therefore 
affirm with certainty, that none of the individiials induded in 
the extension of the predicate is found among the individnals 
incladed in the ezteneion of the subject, — and consequently, 
the truth of the converse, viz., 

Ko men are angels, 
necessarily follows. 

Of Particular Affirmaltces. 

Particular affirmatives are simply convertible, for since 
the extremes of the convertend are both particular, which is 
the case in all particular affirmatives, they retain their original 
quantity when transposed in the converse, e. g. — 

Some proud men occasionally stoop to acts of the basest 
servility. 

may be simply converted thus — 

Some who occasionally sloop to acts of the basest servility, 
are proud men. 

The truth of the simple converse of a particular affirma- 
tive is proved by Aldrieh as follows: — If the particular affir- 
mative — Some blacks are civilised, ia true, its contradictory, 
JVb blacks are civilised, is false, and so also is the simple 
converse of the contradictory, No civilised beings are blacks, 
therefore, the contradictory to this, viz., Strnie civilised beings 
are blacks, is true, which is the simple converse of the ori- 
ginal proposition, Sows blacks are civilised, 

2. — Conversion per Accident. 
Conversion per accidens, or, as it has been termed, con- 
version by restriction, or limitation, or particular conversion, 
b exemplified, when together, with transposing the extreme^ 
of the proposition, the quantity is also changed ; in other 



hyGoogle 



1 26 MANDAL or LOGIC. 

worjs, the quantity ^hich is uDiversal ia the converlend is 
changed to particular in the couverae, (the affirmation or 
negation of the origiaal proposition being always, however, 
retained.) This kind of converdon may probably hare been 
called per accidem,' inctsmach tts it is not a conversion of the 
universal per se, bat rather as containing the particular. 
The propositions which admit of accidental conversion are 
universal afflnnalives, and universal negatives. When tbe 
latter is accidentally converted, it is on the principle of sub- 
alternation, for it may be simply converted, as Ehown above. 

Universal Affirmatives. 

This class of propositions may obviously be converted per 
accident; for from the truth of a universal affirmative a true 
subaltern necessarily follows, and as the subaltern is a par- 
ticular affirmative, it may be converted simply, and when 
so converted, it will be the acddental converse of the uni- 
versal affirmative. Thus, if it is true that 

Every poet is a man of genius, 
it is also true that 

Some poets are men of genius ; 
of which the simple converse must also be true, viz., that 

Some men of genius are poets, 
which is the accidental converse of the ori^al proposition. 

For the sake of clearness, the three propositions may be 
brought together : — 

Obioinal proposition,... Every poet is a man of genius. 

SuBALTESM, Some poets are men of genius. 

AccmEKTAL COKTERSE, ...Some men of genius are poets. 

• Per »(xiitnt, pntting in Ibe plara of the robject, the qnalitj, whether 
proprism or acddent, whieh the predicate implies. B; the old lo^dam, th* 
proprinm u coaMaiitlj called ' accidesi proprium.' — Habttig, p. SS. 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OK LOGIC. 127 

. The reason wby a nniveraal affirmatiTe cannot be con- 
verted simply, or into an nniverBal afflrmative, is, that in 
that case the predicate of the convertend would become the 
subject of the converse ; bnt since the predicates of nffinna- 
tive propositions are particalar, we would be' arguing, did wc 
convert such propositions simply, a particulari ad univej-*ale. 
There is a class of aniyersal allirmatiTes, however, which 
may be simply converted, viz., reciprocal propositions. In 
such propositions the predicate is an adequate definition of 
the subject, aa being co-extensive with it, e. g. — 

Wine is the juice of the grape ; 
simple converse — 

The jnioe of the grape is wine. 

All triangles are figures bounded by three strtught lines ; 
simple converse — 

All figures bounded by three straight lines are triangles. 

Cicero was the discoverer of Catiline's conspiracy ; 
simple converse — 

The discoverer of Catiline's conspiracy was Cicero. 

The circumstances under which the subject and predicate 
reciprocate or change places with each other, without a 
change in signification, have been already explfuned. 

Mathematical propositions may be referred to this class, 
e.g.— 

All ecjuilatera] triangles are equiangular ; 
simple converse — 

All equiangular triangles are equilateral. 



hyGoogle 



1S8 UANTJAL OF LOQIC^ 

It ia not neceesaij, however, to eonsider this last example, 
or ita coaverse, as a imiversal proposition ; for we are not 
speaking of all trkuigles, but only of s<»ne triangles, viz., 
those which ftre equilateral ; we may therefore reduce it to a 
partlculaT affirmatiTe, and convert it simplj as such, thus — 

Some triangles, i. e., all the equilateral, are all the equi- 
angular ; 

^mpte c<mTer8e — 

Some triangles, i. e., all the equiangular, are all the equi- 
lateral. 

It may be remarked, that the accidental distribution of the 
predicate in affirmative propositions should not be allowed to 
affect an argument. An inference drawn from an accidental 
circumstaQce of this description would be illogical, for it sup- 
poses something to be known which is not made known by 
the premisses laid down. The inference would be correct ut 
a material but not in a formal point of view. 

Universal Negatives. 
Uoiversal negatives can be converted both simply and per 
accidens. For since the simple converse of a universal nega- 
tive is true, the subaltern deduced from that umple converse 
is also true ; thus, of the proposition, 

No larks are web-footed birds, 
the simple converse is, 

Ko web-footed birds are larks ; 
of which simple converse the subaltern is. 

Some web-footed birds are not larks ; 

and this is the coaverse per acdden* of the original propo- 
sition. 



hyGoogle 



XANtJAL OF Loaic. ] 29 

Particular negatives cannot be converted either eimply or 
per accidena ; for dnce the subject of a particular negative is 
not distributed, the- converse would require the predicate to 
be undistributed, which is impossible in negative propositions, 
whetiier universal or particular. 

3. Convenion by Contripontion or Negation.' 
Particular negatives, it has been said, cannot be converted 
either simply or per accidena, in the form of particular nega- 
tives, yet this class of propositions may be le^timately con- 
verted by Bbifting the sign of negation from the copula to 
the predicate, and thus rendering a particular negative a par- 
ticular affirmative, in which form it may be simply converted ; 
e. g., the proposition, 

Some animals are not rational, 

becomes affirmative by uniting the n^ative particle with the 
predicate, thus — 

Some animals are not-rational, or irrational ; 

which may be simply converted into. 

Some in'ational beings are animals. 

The application of this mode of conversion to particular 
negatives has the same effect as if the particle of negation were 
disjoined from the copula and made a part of the predicate, 
and the proposition then simply converted like an affirmative. 

This mode of conversion may abo be applied to universal 
affirmatives, in which, after transposing the terms, the nega- 
tive particle is combined with the new subject, and the 
proposition made negative by affixing the negative particle 

* This Idjid of codtcisihi ia not made any use of by Aristotle for logicul 
purposM, althoagh the prindple ms; be gstbered from his vritinga. It was 
tint eipluaed b; Boetliioa. 



hyGoogle 



180 HAHUAI. or LOGIC. 

to the copula, so as to form a contrary, viz., a universal nega- 
tive, which in dgnifieation will be found to be exactly equi- 
pollent to the original, for to assert the presence of some 
attribute is the same thing as to deny its absence ; e. g., the 
proposition, , 

All po«ts are men of genius, 
by tronspofation and negation becomes. 

All not men of genius are not poets ; 
which is exactly equipollent to, 

No poets are not men of genius ; 

None bot men of genias are poets. 

The following mnemonical lines may assist the learner in 
remembering the rules of conversion : — 

Simpliciter fEcI, convertitur EvA per accid. 
AstO per contra, sic fit converwo tola. 

The two vowels in fleet, £ and I, represent universal 
negatives and particular afflrraatives which are converted 
simply; the two vowels in era, E and A, denote nniversal 
negatives and universal affirmatives which are converted 
accidentally; and the two vowels in aato, A and O, indicate 
universal affirmatives and particular negatives which are 
converted by negation or contraposition. 



hyGoogle 



MAItUAL OF LOdlC. 



CHAPTER IV. 



SECTION I. 



Hayinq already treated of simple apprehension and judg- 
ment, we now proceed lo the third operation of the mind, 
viz., reasoning. 

Id an act of reasoning, we compare two terms or concep- 
tiona with some third term or conception ; and in this way 
adcertain whether any relation does or does not subsist 
between the two original terms or conceptions. A simple 
act of reasoning of this description is termed a tyUogism. 

The term syllogbm literally means a gathering or summing 
up; and, as used in l(^c, it signifies a gathering of the con- 
clusion from the premisses. ' 

According to Aristotle, ' a syllogism is a speech' in which 
certain things (the premisses) being supposed, something dif- 
ferent from what is supposed (the conclusion) follows of 
necemty^ and this solely in virtue of the suppositions them- 

¦ Ths -waA \iniii b«rs truisUted ' apeech' might be reodered a ttnteace 
or Staiyht, tOr XoYO; mmiB eithei ratio or oratio, L e., a tbongbt, or a Ibooglit 

<• Tbe form or nsence of a Bjllo^sm coDuits not in the tnitti of the jodg- 
mant laid dowQ, or tbit wbich ia aniTod at, bat ia tbe prodnctioa of a new and 
distinct judgment, not a mere repetition of the antecedents, tbe truth of which 
cinnot be denied withont impogiUDg those we Iibts already accepted foe true. 



hyGoogle 



132 lUNDAL OF LOQIC. 

Aldrich defines a sjllo^m to be 'a speech in which - 
certuu thiDga being laid down and granted, something else 
mutt follow dietJnct from but in virtue of those things which 
have been laid down and granted.' 

It has been shown, when treating of the relative affections 
of proportions, tliat one judgment maj follow from another ; 
but in these the terms of the new proposition are ^e same 
as those of the ori^nal proposition. There, from one propo- 
sition another was inferred, consisting of the same terms, 
either in the same order, as in subaltemation, or in a trans- 
posed order, as in conversion. In a syllogism, however, 
there must be more than one proposition either expressed or 
understood ; and the inference deduced, although following 
immediately from the premisses, must not consist of the same 
termsasanyof the propositions from which it is deduced, e.g. — 

£ver7 man is faUible. 

The Pope is a man. 

The Pope is fallible. 

It is plain, however, that the propositions forming the pre- 
misses must have a necessary connection with each other; 
for if thb were not the case, no conclusion could follow from 
ihem, e. g., from the propositions — 

Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, 
Rome was mistress of the world, 

no conclusion can be inferred, because no connection exists 
between them ; whereas, in fact, the connection between the 
premisses and the conclusion should be such, that from a 
knowledge of the former the mind should l>e led irresistibly 
to the latter. 

The premisses, whatever be their matter, should be laid 
down as hypotheticallj true, inasmuch as the principles from 
which the conclusion is drawn are supposed to be known and 
granted. 



hyGoogle 



HAKCAL OF LOGIC. 133 ' 

The coonectioQ existing between the premisses and con- 
clusion is termed in logic the contequence ; and of this there 
are two kinds, viz., the material and ihn formal." 

The consequence is said to be material, when the conclu- 
sion follows from the premisses, In virtne of the matter of the 
argument, or the meaning necessarily attaching to the terms. 

The consequence is said to he> formal, when the conclusion 
is inferred from the premisses, in virtue of the farm of the 
ea^presHon. 

The formal consequence depends on the disposition of the 
terms, and cannot lead into error ; but the material, as it 
depends solely on the meaning of the terms, may oftenjead 
to illogical conclusions. 

Every simple syllogism consists of three terms, and no 
more, vie., the subject, predicate, and middle term. 

Every syllogism consists of three propositions, viz., the 
Tnajor* and minor' premisses, and the concluswa.'^ 

The major and minor propositions are by a common name 
called premisses, as they precede the conclmiim. 

Every syllogism coosbta of two parts, viz., that which is 
proved, and that by means of which it is proved. That by 
means of which anything is proved is called the antecedent 
or premisses, and that which is proved is called the inference 
or conclusion. 

• CrakaDtborpe eiplBina the maUer anA Jarm of sjllDgiams thas: — ' Aad as 
in a categorical proposition the two terms, nauiel;, tbo subject tuid predicate, 
are the jnalter; the copals, on the other hand, nhich ia the snbetantiTe verb, DC 
some person oF it, ia tbo form; and aa Id a hypothetical propoaitioD tiie t^o 
propositions are the natter, the conditional conjnnction, copnlative or disjonotiTe, 
nhich joins these prapcuHions, is, as it were, Wi farm. In like manner, also, 
in argnnieiitation, the premisees and concluaion are ita maOer, and the illatita 
mark, which unites them !? the inFerence, ia, aa it nere, the /cnn.'— [Book 3, 
eap. 13.] 

* eufiTiinafia. — Ariitotle. 



hyGoogIc — 



134 UAM0AL OF LOGIC. 

The propoBition propoaed to be either proved or disproved 
is at first called the question (to ^ijrou/^Evov), and when the 
ayllogiam is formed, this propositioo becomes the conclusion. 
Hence, in the phraseology of logiciaas, the questioD and con- 
clusion mean the same thing. 

The predicate of the question is called the ma/or term 
(pu^ut og«e), and its subject the minor term (iXarrut ojof), but 
in relation to the middle term, they are by a common name 
designated extremes. 

Any judgment, whether affirmative or negative, when ver- 
bally expressed, constitutes a proposition ; and as every pro- 
position must have a subject and predicate, the truth or falsity 
of the judgment enunciated by it depends on the agreement or 
disagreement of the terms representing the subject and pre- 
dicate ; and the nature of syllogistic reasoning is to prove the 
agreement or disagreement of these terras with some third 
term with which each of them ia alternately compared in the 
premisses. This tliird term is by Aristotle called the middle 
term, not the argument, as usually stated. 

The three propositions of a syllogism are called its proxi- 
mate matter; and as they consiat of three terms, these terms 
are called its remote matter. 

In every correct syllogism, the middle term occurs twice in 
the premisses, but never in the conclusion. 

The major term occurs in the major proposition ; and this 
proposition may be easily discovered by observiug, that pre- 
miss which consists of the middle term, and the predicate of 
the conclusion. 

The iQiy or proposition is sometimes simply styled tAe j>ro- 
position. 

The minor term occurs in the minor proposition ; and this 

proposition may readily be distinguished by observing that 

premiss which conusts of the middle term and the sid^ect 

of the conclusioD. 

The minor propomtion is sometimes called the assumptioTt. 



hyGoogle 



HAHUAl. OF LOGIC. l35 

The condusioii is designated Tarioasly the colkction, in- 
ference, deduction, &c. 

The dispoaitioD of tbe terms of a ^logism will be best 
illustrated hy an example. Let the question be, ' Is Chris- 
tianity worthy of belief T' 

Whatever is of divine origin is worthy of belief. 
Christianity is of divine origin. 
Chriatiaiiity is worthy of belief. 

In this syUogism, ' worthy of belief,' i. e., the predi- 
catfi of the conclusion, is the major term ' Christianity;' its 
subject is the minor term, and 'of divine origin' is the 
middle term. 

The reason why the predicate of the conclusion is called 
the major term, and its subject the minor, is this, that the 
predicate of a universal affirmative proposition has gene- 
rally a greater extension than its subject, and must at least 
have as great, for a universal affirmative asserts that the 
entire extension of the subject is conttuned in the extension 
of the predicate ; and as a syllogism in which a universal 
affirmative conclusion can be deduced is deemed the most 
perfect kind, the extremes came to be invariably distinguished 
from each other by the names major and minor, on account 
of what is true of them when occurring in a universal afBr- 
mative conclosion. 

The middle term in perfect syllogisms has a greater exten- 
sion than the minor, bnt not so great as the major; and 
hence it has received the name of middle. 

The reason why the major is called the proposition, and 
the minor the assumption, is, that when a syllogism is in its 
most perfect form, the major proposition is some generally 
admitted truth or principle, and therefore not Ilbely to be 
called in question ; and for this reason it is, by way of emi- 
nence, sometimes called the proposition ; while the minor 
proposition may be objected to as boiog an atmmed truth. 



hyGoogle 



136 UANUAi- OF Loarc. 

having particular reference to the question under consideni' 
tion ; and hence the name asmm.ption, e. g., — 

Whatever acts with uniformity and consistency is the re- 
sult of intelligence. 

Nature acta ivitb uniformity and consistency ; 
therefore. 

Nature is the result of intelligence. 

The major proposition in this example is a general truth 
which no one will call in question ; but the minor, viz., 

Nature acts with uniformity and consistency, 

is not a general truth, although accidentally it may he as well 
known. 

It is more convenient, but by no means necessary to the 
accuracy of a syllogism, that the major proposition should be 
first in order. In material arguments, it oflen happens that 
the minor premiss is first, and, still more frequently, that the 
conclusion begins the sentence. Thus — 

Habitual cheerfulness is the best promoter of health ; for it 
checks those secret anxieties and those violent fermenU which 
derange and wear out the constitution ; and whatever has this 
excellent quality must have a tendency to promote health. 

In every syllogism the major proposition consists of the 
major and middle terms ; hut whether the middle term is its 
subject or predicate depends on the figure of the syllogism. 

In like manner, the minor proposition in every syllogism 
consists of the minor and the middle terms ; but whether the 
middle term is its aul^ect or predicate, depends also on the 
e of the syllogism. 

f the figure of a syllogi^ is meant the legitimate dispo- 
1 of the middle term in the premisses; and as the middle 
may he either the subject or predicate of the major, or 



hyGoogle 



MANOAI. OF LOGIC. ] 37 

the subject or predicate of the minor, it may be dieposed in 
four difTerent ways ; and, consequently, there are four figures. 
In the first figure the middle term is the sulject of the 
major and the predicate of the minorj e. g. — 

Every pkilanthropist deserves to be held in remembrance. 

Howard was a philanthropist. 

Howard deserves to be held in remembrance. 

In the second figure the middle term is the predicate of 
both premisses, e. g. — 

The filed stars do not revolve about a centre. 
The planets revolve alout a centre. 
The planets are not fixed stars. 

In the third figure the middle term is the subject of both 

premisses, e. g. — 

Some acts of friendship are acts which militate agfunst 
jusUce. 

All acts ofjriendship appear virtuous to the thoughtlesB. 
Some things which appear virtuous to the thoughtless 

militate against justice. 

In the fourth figure the middle term is the predicate of the 
major and the subject of the minor, e. g. — 

Some professors of the healing art are quacks. 
All quacks practice on the ignorance of the public 
Some who practice on the ignorance of the public are pro> 
feasors of the healing art. 



hyGoogle — 



RULES OF sriXOfilSM. 

All the rules of Bjllogism are based on the three follov'JDg 
caiioua,' viz., 

1. If any two terms agree with one and the same third 
term, they agree with each other. 

Let the question or problem be, ' Humility is worthy of 
constant cultivation.' The predicate, ' worthy of constant 
cultivation,' agrees with a third thing, viz., ' an orDament of 
the Christian character;' but the subject, 'humility,' agrees 
with the same third; therefore, the extrcraes agree with each 
olher. Hence the following syllogism is correct :— 

Every oroament of the Christian character is worthy of 
constant culdvatjon.' 

Humility is an ornament of the Christian character ; 

therefore, 

Humility is worthy of constant cultivation. 

2. If of two terms one agrees with the same third term, 
and the other disagrees with it, they disagree with each other. 

Let the question or problem be, ' Literature is not within 

the reach ef the idle.' The subject, 'literature,' agreeswith 
a third thing, viz., ' an acquisition of real value ;' but the pre- 
dicate, 'within reach of the idle,' differs from that third. 

^ The canons and special rclea of AjHogiam given In Morra^'fl Compondiam 
are liere adopted. Aldrich gives sis canons and twelve rnlea, many of which 
ate SDp«rflaouB, Ihim bdng iacladed in the others. It nay be p:Dper lo remade, 
regarding the three canons ^ven, that althoogh clear as priiicipleB in mathe 
matical reasoning, idiere they appi; to eqnal magnitudes, the; lose in some 
measure their definiCa meaning, when applied snalogicatly to the agreement or 
dLBBgreement of terms or concepUona in affirmative or negative propositions j 
for the relaOon of the middle term to the major and minor, as to oitedaon, 
Tiries according to the difleient fignres; and hence the eompsrison does not 
proceed on euot equUtf of guanlitia. 



hyGoogle 



UAXUAL OF LOGIC. 139 

Therefore, the extremes disagree with oach olberj and the 
argument is thus expressed — 

Acquisitions of real value are not within reach of (be idle. 
Literature is an acquisitioD of real value. 
Literature is not within reach of the idle. 

3. Two tenns, of which neither agrees with the same third 
term with which they are compared, may agree or disagree 
with each other. 

The agreement or disagreement of any two terms can only 
be ascertained by comparing each of them alternately with 
some one third term ; but it may happen that no third term 
can be found with wliich to compare them, so as to discover 
whether both agree with it, or the one agree with it and the 
other differ from it ; and therefore we cannot prove whether 
they agree with or difier from each other ; for since no third 
term has been brought forward with which to compare them, 
it is matter of doubt whether any such third term can be ad- 
duced. And hence their agreement or disagreement cannot 
he established until this doubt b removed. 

The use of a third term, in syllogistic argument, is indis- 
pensable ; for no syllogisti<f argument can exist unless there 
be a comparison of some two terms with a third, on one or 
other of the principles contained in the first and second canons. 

Those two canons may be considered as axioms, since they 
challenge immediate assent as soon as understood, and are the 
basis on which the syllogism is founded. Tliey bear some 
analogy to the mathematical axioms ; — Things which are eqnal 
to the same are equal to one another, and things of which 
one is equal and the other not equal to the same, are not 
equal to one another. 

The validity of all affirmative conclusions depends on the 
first of these canons, and the validity of all negative conclu- 
sions on the second. Wlien the condition mentioned in the 
third canon is pNaent, there can be no conclusion. 



hyGoogle 



MO MMSUAl, OF LOGIC. 

These two gudoiib are closely allied to the Dictum* de omni 

(xara frafroj) and the DiclHUi da onllo (xara /Ltiiiwi), viz., 
that whatever is affirmed or denied of a whole class may be 
affirmed or denied of whatever is comprehended in that class- 
It is ft-om conforming to these dicta that all syllogisms drawn 
in the first figure derive their validity ; for whatever can be 
predicated of a whole subject or class is neceasarily a predi- 
cate of aU the subjects, whether particular or aingular, con- 
tained in that subject; and, on the other hand, whatever 
predicate can be denied of a whole subject or class is neces- 
sarily denied of all the subjects, whether particular or singular, 
contained under that snbject. 

The rules of ayllogisra are of two kinds, viz., general and 
special. 

The general rules apply to all syllogisms, in whatever 
figures they may he drawn. The special rules, again, have 
reference to particular figures. 

The general rules are six : — 

1. The middle term cannot be taken twice particularly in 
the premisses, but must be at least once universal, i. e., by 
bdng the subject of a universal, or the predicate of a nega- 
tive proposition. 

It is plain, that if the middle term be tvnce particular, it 
can in either premiss represent only a part of its significates, 
and may therefore be taken for different parts of the same 
universal whole, and then there will be in reality two middle 
terms ; but it is with the same third term, and not with dif- 
ferent parts of it, that the other terms must be compared. 
If, then, the middle term is not distributed in one or other of 
the propositions foTming the premisses, the major and minor 

• The dictum de omni et ie nnlio ipplies only to the Biat figure. The dicta 
applicsible Co the other Sgurea are eipluaed b; KeckennaD snd LHmbert, and 
vlll \n noticed in their proper pUcev. 



hyGoogle 



UiNUAL OF LOGIC. 141 

teMus will each be con^>ared with odIj b part of it ; and we 
cannot know that thia may have been the same part. Hence 
one of the terras may have been compared with owe part of 
the middle term, and the other with another part of it, e. g. — 

Some arts are useful. 
Logic is an art. 
Logic is useful. 

In this example, the middle term is twice particular; for in 

the major proposition there is a sign of particularity prefixed 
to it ; and in the minor it is the predicate of aa affirmative 
proposition. In the major proposition, therefore, the term 
'usefiil' is only compared with a part of the middle term 'arts,' 
and in the minor proposition the lerm 'logic' may be compared 
with another part of the middle term. But since from the 
form of the expression we cannot assert that both the ex- 
tremes have been compared with one and the same middle 
term, we cannot legitimately infer the conclusion, 'logic is 
useful,' but from such premisses as the following, viz., — 

All arts are useful. 
Logic is an art. 

We can legitimately infer the conclusion — 
Logic is useful. 

2. The extremes cannot be taken more universally in the . 
conclusion than in the premisses. 

This rule may be mcve clearly understood by the explana- 
tion, that a term must not be distributed in the oonclusion 
which was not distributed in the premisses. The object of the 
rule is to guard against inferring a universal conclusion from 
particular premisses. When either the major or minor term 
is employed universally in the conclusion, but particularly 
in the premisses, this is termed an illicit process of the 
major or minor term. A lerm undistributed in the pre- 



hyGoogle 



I4S UAHCAI. OF LOGIC. 

misses, and the same diilributed in the conclusion, cannot be 
called one and the eajne term ; and, conBequently, to draw an 
inference from anj term employed particularly to the same 
term employed univertaUy ia the same as to infer the troth of 
the ucivereai from the truth of the particular ; for a term dis- 
tributed bears the same proportion to the same uadistribnted 
as a universal does to its particular, e. g. — 

All innocent things are allowable. 
Some pleasures are not innocent. 
Some pleasures are not allowable. 

bi this example the major t«rm 'allowable' is illicitly distri- 
buted, for it is particular in the m^or premiss, being the pre- 
dicate of an affirmative proposition ; but it is universal in the 
conclusion, being the predicate of a negative proposition. 
There are consequently two mtyor terms, instead of one, and 
therefore four terms in the syllogism. The conclusion may 
be true notwithstanding, but its truth cannot be formally in- 
ferred from the premisses. 

In the following example, viz.. 

All beasts of prey are carnivorous. 
All beasts of prey are animals. 
All animals are carnivorous, 

there is an illicit process of the minor term for ike predicate 
of the minor proposition, ' animals ' is used particularly in that 
proposition, but universally in the conclusion ; consequently, 
the inference is illegitimate, 

• It is evident, from the two preceding rules, that the num- 
ber of universal terms in the premisses must be at least one 
more than in the conclusion ; for by the second rule eveiy 
term that is universal in the conclusion must be also universal 
in the premisses; but besides this, by the first rule,^the 
middle term, which never enters the conclusion, must he at 
least once universal in the premisses. Therefore, there must 



hyGoogle 



\ 



HAMUAI. OF LOGIC. 143 

at least b« one universal term in the premisses more than in 
the concluaioD. 

It follows, that the numher of naiveraal terms in the pre- 
misses cannot exceed the number in the conclusion by more 
than two. For there can be but three universal terms in the 
premisses, as one of them, by the third rule, must be affirma- 
tire, and to afford three one of the premisses must be nega- 
tive. But in this case the conclusion must be negative by the 
fifth rule, and will therefore have its predicate universal. 
And that the excess may be two, the premisses should be E 
and A, and the conclusion O, or, if the mood be affirmative, 
the premisses must be A and A, and the conclusion I, in 
order to preserve the required excess. 

It follows, also, that the greatest number of particular 
terms that can occur in the premisses are three, when both 
are affirmative and one particular ; and then the universal 
term that occurs in the premisses must be the middle terni ; 
and therefore there are two particular terms in the conclusion. 
¦ If there are but two particular terms in the premisses, both 
are affirmative, or one particular ; and so in either case the 
conclusion has a particular term. The excess is never more 

3. From two negative premisses nothing follows. 

In this case a middle term is employed, from which both 
extremes dififer ; and, consequently, there can be no inference, 
e. g.— 

No irrational being is accountable. 
Man is not an irrational being. 

Here tlie disagreement of the extremes with the middle term 
affords no ground for inferring that they either agree with or 
differ from each other. They may agree or differ; but these 
premisses will neither prove their agreement or disagreement. 

4. From two afGrmative premisses a negative conclusion 
cannot follow. 



hyGoogle 



144 MASVAJ. OF LOGIC. 

It must be assumed, in reference to this role, that the pre- 
misses are not both particular ; for in that case, as shown 
below, there could be do inference, and that there are not 
two middle terms ; for in that case, there could be no legi- 
timate conclusion, as faa£ been explained above. If, therer 
fore, there be but one middle term, and the extremes agree 
with it, and consequeoll; with each other, the conclusion 
mast be atQrmative, e. g. — 

Every science that tends to elevate our conceptions of the 
Deity is worthy of being studied ; 

Astronomy is a science tending to elevate onr conceptions 
of the Deity ; therefore, 

Astronomy is worthy of being studied. 

5. The conclusion follows the weaker part. 

In logic a negative proposition is considered inferior to an 
affirmative, or weaker thwi it, and a particular weaker than 
a universal. 

This rule may be divided into two parts: — 

Part 1. — If one of the premisses be negative, the conclu- 
sion, as it follows the weaker pari, will be negative also ; for 
in this case one of the extremes agrees with the middle term, 
and the other disagrees with it, and by the second canon 
they consequently disagree with each other, and the conclu- 
sion is negative. 

The prenuBses necessary to proVe a negative conclusion are 
an affirmative and a negative, Nnce the extremes can be 
diown to differ only by means of a middle term which agrees 
with the one and differs from the other, e, g. — 

Ko mere man is infallible. 

The Pope is but a mere num. 

The Pope is not infallible. 

Part 2. — If one of the premisses be particular, the conclu- 
sion will be particular, e. g. — 

All flowers are beautiful. 



hyGoogle 



HANDAL OF LOGIC. 145 

Some deciduouB plants are flowers. 
Some deciduous plants are beautiful. 

Id this example there are three particulaT teuna in the 
premisses, viz., the two predicates, and the subject of the 
parUcular proposition ; consequently, there is but one uni- 
versal t«rm in the premisses, viz., the subject of the major 
proposition ; and hence there can be no universal term in the 
conclusion, since the premisses must contain, at least, one 
more universal term than the conclusion. Hence the subject 
of the coDcluuon must be particular, and therefore the con- 
clusion itself. 

Again, if one of the premiasee be uegatdre, let them be A 
and 0, e. g. — 

Every man is an animal. 

Some living things are not animala. 

Some living things are not men. 

In this example there are two particular terms in the pre- 
misses, viz., the predicate of the major proposition, and tlie 
subject of the minor ; therefore, there are but two universal 
terms, viz., the subject of the major proposition and the pre- 
dicate of the minor, and consequently, but one in the conclu- 
sion, which must be its predicate, as the conclusion is nega- 
tive. Hence the subject of the conclusion is particular, and 
therefore the conclusion itseK 

Agfun, if the premisses are not A and O, they must be 
E and I, e, g, — 

Ko works of human invention are perfect. 
Some machines are works of human invention. 
Some machines are not perfect. 

In this example there are also two particular terms in the 
premisses, viz., the subject and predicate of the minor ; there- 
fore, there are but two umversal terms, viz., the subject and 



hyGoogle 



146 KAKUAL OF LOOIC. 

preiiicate of the m^or propoatioD, and coDBeqnently, but one 
in the conduBion, which moat be its predicate. Hence the 
subject of the conclusion is particalar, and therefore the con- 
clusion itielf. 

6. From two particular premisses nothing follows. 

If both propositions be affinnative, there will be no uni- 
versal term in the premisses, and consequently, the middle 
term will be twice particular, e. g. — 

Some sciences are worth knowing. 

Some arts are worth knowing. 

Some arts are sciences. 

In this example the middle term is not distributed in either 
premiss, and consequently, no legitimate concln«on can be 
inferred. 

If, again, one of the premisses be affirmadve, and the other 
negative, there will be but one universal term, viz., the pre- 
dicate of the negative proposition, and if a conclusion follow, 
it wiU be negative, and therefore its predicate universal ; con- 
sequently, there will be as many universal terms in the con- 
clusion as in the premisses, e. g. — 

Some talented men are not good men of business. 

Some En^iEhmen are good men of bumness. 

Some Bnglishmen are not talented men. 

In this example there is an illicit process of the major 
term ; for while it is used particularly in the premias, it is 
employed universally in the concluaon, being the predicate of 
a negative proposition. 

Universal premisses do not always warrant a nniversol 
conclusion ; but when a universal concludon can be drawn, 
it is allowable to deduce a particular, for the truth of the 
particular is implied in that of the universal. 

In testing the correctness of a syllogism by the & 
general rules, we must see — 



hyGoogle 



lUinjAl. OF LOOK). 1-17 

1. Thattlie middle term has been distributed. 

2. Hmt no term has been employed mord univenallj' in 
the coaclosion than in the premisses. 

5. ITiat both the premisses are not negative. 

4. "Hiat a negative concInsiiHi is not inferred from affirma- 
tive premisses. 

5. That if one of the premisses be particular, the conclu- 
sion most be particular; and that if one of the premisses be 
negative, the conclusion must be negative. 

6. That from two particular premisses no conclusion can 
be inferred ; and, 

7. That the conclusion is not particular where a universal 
niaj be inferred, 

SPECIAL KDLES OP STLLOGISH. 

First Figure. 
The special rules of the first figure are two: — 

1. The minor must be affirmative. 

2. The m^jor must be uoiverSBl. 

The special rules of syllogisms are founded on the prin- 
ciples implied in each figure. In the first figure the ar^ment 
is from a general to a specific statement ; and hence we infer 
an attribute to belong, or not to belong to something, because 
it belongs or does not belong to a class in which that thing is 
contained. But in order to advance a genertd statement, the 
miyor must be universal, vrhile the specific statement can 
only be inferred from it by means of an affirmative minor.' 

* Tha Die of u argameDt ia tbis fignre implies th«t ir« poesees {at cancan 
DunalTBa to pomeas) aQ raqnirad knowledge abont both tbs autgact lod the 
pndicBtei wliieb are tha terms of our reasoaiBg. Tbe mqor pnmiss is a meta- 
phjiical pn^iontitni. ascrilnng a diaUnct predicate, wbatbet propriam or acd- 
dent ts a known genns or higher kind ; the minar premiss is a lo^cal propov- 
tian. inclnding in this geaos a known species or lower kind. Tbe ftnmer 
premiss implies a Biiffldeiitl}> com; leta act at logjcal deSnition i tha latter 
a iDfficientlj compkta act of k^ical dinsion. — ifcier^, p. 100. 



hyGoogle 



148 UANUAL OF LOGIC. 

ta syllogisms drawn in the first figure, the middle term, or 
medinm of proof, is less extensive than the major, and more 
esteosive than the minor. 

The middle term is the sulgeot of ihe major proposition, 
and the predicate of the mio<ff, e. g. — 

All luntinout bodUt emit particles of light. 

The BSD is a luminous body. 

The sun emits particles of light. 

1, Of the Mitwr Propotitton. 

If the minor be negative, the major will be affirmative by 
the third general rule, and its predicate therefore particular, 
while the conclusion will be negative by the fifth general 
rule, and its predicate universal; but in the first figure the 
major proposition and the conclusion have the same predi- 
cate, viz., the major term. The m^or term would therefore 
be particular in the m^or propoaition, and univerml in the 
conclunon; but by the second general rule, a term cannot be 
employed more universally in the conclumon than in the pre- 
misses ; for this would be arguing a parttculari ad universale. 
The minor must therefore be affirmaUre. 

2. Of the Major Proposition. 

Since the minor must be affirmative, the major proposition 
must be universal; for if the major proposition is particular, 
the middle term, which is its subject, will also he particnlar; 
but since the minor must be affirmative, the middle term, 
which is lis predicate, will be particular in it also ; the middle 
term will therefore be taken twice particularly contrary to 
the first general rule, and any inference drawn vrill be invalid. 
The middle term must therefore be distributed in the major 
premiss, in which by the first figure it is the subject, and 
universals alone distribute thai subject. Any syllogism ihea. 



hyGoogle 



in die first figure, will be inconclafflve ia which the minor is 
negative or the major particalar. 

In the first figure, 

The major may be A or E. 

The minor may be A or I. 

The conclusion may be A, I, E, or 0. 

Second Figure. 
The special rules of the second figure are two : — 

1. One or other of the premisses (fuid therefore the con- 
clusion) must be negative. 

2. The major must be nniversaL 

In the second figure the middle tenn is the predicate of 
both premiasea, e. g. — 

No honeet reaaoner reeorts to tophtstical arguments. 
Some aectaries resort to nophutical arguments. 
Some sectaries are not honest reasoners. 

In sytlo^Bms drawn in die second figure, the middle term 
or medium of proof is more extensive than dther the major 
or minor term. 

The principle' of this figure is to prove a distinction or 
disagreement between two classeB, or between one class and 
a portion of another, by showing that an attribute possessed 
by the one is wholly excluded by the other ; for if one term 

¦ The distinctive piiadples of this and the tno fullowing figures an 
founded an the oonclufdons arriied at bj Lambert. Tha Keond fignre is saitcd 
to ilia dlscorerj or proof of dia^ctiona bstweOD tbiogs, mad its principle la 
caiyd the dUslum de dwtno. Tbe tbud figure is snited to the diaoorerr "f 
proof of iruUncca and exoepUons. It* piiodple ia termed tbe i&etum dt txen^ilo. 
The fbmth fignie ia acdted to ths diacoverf or udaaioD oF tbe diSivent apecin 
of a geana. Ita prioeiple is deugnsled ths dtdam dt rte^/nai. The inTantiaa 
of tbeee iSeta, though gsneisllf ¦ttributad to LamlKit, properl; belongs to 
Kackarmsii, who pnbliBhed tliem aboat a century esrlisr. Ijunbert ma;, how- 
ever, claim the invention of tbe dictnm of the fbnrtb, ai tbia fignie wia rejected 
bj Keckennau. 



hyGoogle 



150 MAmjAL OF I.OGIC. 

is contained in, and anotlier excluded from, a third term, thej' 
are motoallj excluded. For this reason, the leading pro- 
position of the antecedent mnet be uniTcrsal, and one o£ the 
premisses negative, e. g. — 

Every planet describes an orbit. 
The sun does not describe an orbit. 
The sun is not a planet 

Ho planet is fixed. 
Every star is fixed. 
No star is a [danet. 

Of the Negative Premin. 

In the second figure the middle term is the predicate of 
both premisses ; and hence, if both the premisses are affirma* 
five, the middle term will be particular in each, contrary to 
the first general rule> In the second figure, therefore, a cor- 
rect afiHrmative conclusion can in no case be drawn. 

Of the Major Premiss. 

It will be seen, from what has been said above, that one of 
the premisses must be negative, and consequently, the con- 
clusion ; but the predicate of the conclusion is universal, 
being the predicate of a negative proposition, and by the 
second general rule, it must be universal also in the major 
" proposition, where it is the subject. The mtyor premiss must 
therefore be uuiversal in this figure; and any syllogism 
drawn in it, in which both the premisses are affirmative, or 
the major particnlar, will be illegitimate. 

In the second figure, ' 

The major may be A or E. 

The minor may be E, 0, A, or L 

The conclusion may be E or 0. 



hyGoogle 



T/iird Figure. 
The special rules of the tlurd figure are t^o : — 

1. The minor most be affirmative. 

2. The concluaion mus^ be particular. 

Id the third figure the middle term is the subject of both 
premisses, e. g. — 

AU men ofimt are desirable companions. 

Bome men ofmit are indolent. 

Some indolent men are desirable companions. 

The principles of the third figure are two : — 1. If two 
attributes belong to the same class, or the same part of the 
same class, the)' may co-exist in the same class or subject. 
Hence the subjects will partly agree, the attributes not being 
incompatible or opposed to each other ; but in this case the 
conclosion must be particular, e. g. — 

All men are responsible. 

All men are mortal. 

Some mortal beings are responsible. 

For if ' responsibility' and 'mortality' are both predicable 
of the species ' man,' aa asserted in the premisses, it must 
follow that ' some mortal beings are responsible.' 

2. If of two attributes one belongs to a cerl^n class, 
and the other is excluded from the same class, or the same 
part, the attributes do not universally co-exist in the same 
subject; and in this case also, the conclusion must be par- 
ticular, e. g. — 

Some men are not Tirtuous. 

All men are responMble. 

Some responmble beings are not virtuous. 

For unce the attribute ' virtue ' is excluded from some men, 
and the ottribnte ' responsibility ' is predicable of all men, 



hyGoogle 



153 MANUAL OF LOQIO. 

the Bttribnte * virtue ' is eepanible (torn the attribute ' respon- 
sibility ;' and hence it follows, as a particular conclusicHi, that 
eome reBpontdble beings are not rirtuous. 

In sjllf^ismB drawn in this figure, the middle term or 
medium of proof is less extensive than either the major or 

The minor must be affirmative. 

If the minor is negalive, the major will be affirmative) by 
the third general rule, and then its predicate will be par- 
tioular; but in this case the conclusion would be negative, 
and its predicate, the major term, wonld be universal in the 
conclusion, and particular in the major proposition, where it 
is also the predicate, contrary to the second general rule ; but 
this has been shown, when explaining the same special rule, 
in the first figure. 

The conclusion mutt be partuxlar. 

Since the minor proposition must be affirmative, as shown 
above, the minor term, as its predicate, is particular in it; 
and as no term can be used more universally in the conelu- 
sion than in the premisses, it must be particular in the con- 
clusion also, where it is tlie subject; and consequently the 
conclusion itself must be particular. Hence any syllogism in 
the third figure will be iUegilimate in which the minor is 
negative or the conclusion universal. 

In the third figure. 

The major may be A, E, I, or O. 

The minor may be A or I. 

The conclusion may be I or O. 

Fourth Figure. 

The special rules of the fourth figure are three . — 

1 . If the major be affirmative, the minor must be universaL 

2. If the minor be afBnnalive, the conclusion must be par- 
ticular. 



hyGoogle 



HAKCAL OF LOGIC. 153 

3. In negative mooda (i. e., if an; proporition be negative) 
the major muat be nnivergal. 

In ibe fourth figure the middle term is the predicate of the 
major proposition, and the snbject of the minor, e. g. — 

All ynae statesmen legislate ffitk caution. 

All \rho legislate mitk caution regard the interests of the 
commnnity. 

Some who regard the interests of the community are wise 
statesmen. 

" Tlie peculiar principle of the fourth figure is this : — If the 
whole or part of a class is contained in another, and that also 
in a third, then the first class must contain acme individuals 
belonging to the third. I^ again, one class universally ex- 
cludes another, which is in whole or in part contained in a 
third, the first b in part excluded from the third. But, on the 
other hand, if one class is universally contained under an- 
other, from which a third is wholly excluded, the third is 
wholly excluded from the first. Hence there cannot be a 
universe affirmative conclumon. 
IlluBtration of the rales ; — 

1, If the major be affirmative, the minor must be uni- 
versal, e, g. — 

Worldly honours are transient vanities. 
All transient vanities are sources of certain disappoint- 
Some sources of certain disappointment are worldly honours. 

In this example the major is affirmative, and its predicate, 
the middle term, therefore particuliir ; but the middle term is 
also the subject of the minor; and if the minor were par- 
ticolar, its subject would be parUcular; and in this case the 
middle term would not be at all distributed in the premisses. 
' The minor must therefore be universal, in order that its sub- 
ject, the middle term, may be universal 
Q 2 



hyGoo^le 



154 lUmiAI. OF LOGIC. 

2. If the minor be affirmative, the concltttion nvtl be 
particular, e. g, — 

Some learned men are egotistical. 

All egotistical men are fond of popularity. 

Some persons fond of popularity are learned men. 

Id this example the minor is affirmative, and the concla- 
fiion must therefore be particular; for since the minor is 
affirmative, its -predicate is particular} but the predicate of 
the minor proposition is the same as the minor term or sub- 
ject of the conclusion ; the subject of the conclusion must 
therefore be particular, and therefore the conclusion itself. 

3. Jn negative moods the major must he univenal, e. g. — 

No fallacious ailments are legitimate means of persuasion. 
Some legitimate means of persuasion fail in convincing. 
Some things which fail in convincing are not fallaciciu 
arguments. 

K fflther of tbe premisses be negative, the migor mnst be 
universal, else the m^or term, which is the subject of the 
mtyor proposition, would be particular ; but the sul^ect of 
the major proposition, and the predicate of the conclusion, 
are the same ; and as the conclusion is negative, its predicate 
will be univeraal. The major term must therefore be nni* 
versa] in the major proposition ; otherwise the inference would 
be a particulari ad universale. 

It is obvious, therefore, that any syllogism in the foarth 
figure will be illegitimate — 1. If the major be affirmative, and 
the minor particular ; 2. If the minor be affirmative, and the 
Goncluuon universal ; and, 3. If the conclusion be negative, 
and the migor particular. 

In the fburth figure, 

The major may be A, E, or L 

The minor may be A, £, or L 

The conclusion may be E, I, or O. 



hyGoogle 



UAHUAL or LOGIC. 155 

The fourth figure, introduced here merely to show all the 
possible ways in which the middle term can be arranged in 
the premisses, is not of Aiistotelic origin.' It is attribated 
to Galen (hence called the Oalenic figure) on the authority 
of Avemi^; but the words of Averroes — viz., Et ex hoc 
planum, quod Jtgiira guarla, de qua Tneminit Cfalenta, non 
est tyUogitmva super quern, cadet naturaltter cogitatio — are by 
no means decisive on the point. Aldrich truly says that this 
figure is nugatory, as it proves the middle term by itself. 
This we shall illustrate by the following example and analysis 
from Hill's notes on the Compendium, viz. — 

All metaphysical inquiries are involved in some degree of 
obscurity; 

But all things involved in obscurity are liable to error; 
therefore, 

Some things liable to error are metaphysical inquiries. 

This sytlogism predicates the medium 'involved in obscu- 
rity' of the m^jor term ' metaphysical inquiries ;' this ia 
predicated, in tbe conclusion, of die minor term, ' things 
liable to error ;' and this minor term is predicated in the 
minor premiss of the medium, ' involved in obscurity ' — that 
is, the class of ' things involved in obscurity' is represented 
to comprehend all ' metaphysical inquiries ;' the term ' meta- 
physical inquiries ' is asserted to comprehend ' some things 
liable to error,' and ' some tilings liable to error ' are repre- 
set)t«d to comprehend ' everything that is involved in ob- 
scurity.' Thus it is implied in a circle, that ' things involved 
in obscurity ' comprehend ' things involved in obscurity,' 
which is nugatory. 

¦ Ariitotls aclniovledgea only tbrm SgnrM, and r^aida the middle taiD>-in 
rtfereace to ita eitdoudn, u compired with the m^oi and miDor, ntLer thui 
with nfenoee to 



hvGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



Tlie following table presents at one view the special rules 
of the figures, with their respective proob : — 



Fig. 


RULES. 


PROOFS. 


I 




EI» illicit process of the nuyot term. 






ElM middle not dirtributod. 


3 


Od« pnmim D^tirs. 






Condnnon Dsgittfe 


Bccatue of the nagatire pnmiss. 






Elae Ulioit prooeu of tlis m^or tem. 

ElM ilUdt pxwew ¦<>( the m^or torn. 
EIk yUdt prooen of the minor («nn. 


R 






Condarioa pwUcnkr 


* 


Major pnmin out 


Else midt piocen of the nuuor («nn. 




MiDOr pmaiBS Dot 


EIn middle not diatiihuted. 




Ctmdiwon not A : 


Elw ilCcit ptdcM* of the minor torn. 



The following table represents the proportions according 
td the quantity and essential qnali^ which are admisfflble in 
each figure i — 



Kg. 


H^or Propotdtloo. 


Minor Propodtion. 


Condoson. 


3 

* 


UniTBTBri 

UniTOwJ" 

AdJ 

Ad7 except 


AfflimMi»e 

An/ 

Any swept 


Adj. 
KegetiTe. 
Putioalar. 
Aojeio^A. 



* In the Koond Sgnre odo piemin ii DsgitiTe. 



hyGoogle 



MANUAL OF LOfllC. 



The Moods of Syllogum. 

The mood of a syllogisin is defined by Aldiich to be, Legt' 
tima determitMtio propositionam secundum quantitatem et 
qualitatem, i. e., the legitimate determination of the pro- 
positions with respect to quantity and quality. 

When, therefiA^, the three propositions of a Byllogism are 
lud down in their proper order, as to their quantity and 
quality, the mood of the syllogism is determined. 

Vicious and illeg:itimate moods are of course excluded from 
the class of eyllogisms to which the above definition applies. 
Vicious moods are designated parali^isms. 

Any three propositions in combination form a mood ; and 
as there are, in all, four kinds of propositions, and as each of 
these four kinds may be used as ii major premiss, while each 
of these major premiBses admits of four different minors, viz^ 
A, E, I, or O, there may be formed four times four, or six- 
teen pairs of premisses ; and to each of these premisses may 
be subjoined a fourfold conclnsion, viz., A, E, I, or O j com- 
sequently, all the permutationa that can possibly be formed 
amount to sixty-four. 

Of these sixty-four varieties, eleven only are found to be 
legitimate moods of syllogism. Consequently, fiffy-lhree are 
excluded as Tiolating some of the general rules, and are there- 
fore paralogisms. 

These permutations are of course nothing more than an 
arithmetical calculation, for the number of combinations that 
can be formed by any four things, taken three and three toge- 
ther, ia 4 X ^ X 4 = 64. 

Of these, sixteen, viz., EEA, EEE, EEI, EEO, EOA, EOE, 
EOI, EOO, OEA, OEE, OEI, OEO, OOA, OOE, 001, 
000, are excluded by the third general rule, because their 
premisses are negative. 

Twelve, yiz., IIA, HE, III, HO, lOA, lOE, I0I,I00,0IA, 



hvGootjIe — 



158 UAJSUAL OF LOGIC. 

OIE, Oil, 010, are excluded by the sixtli general rule, 
because their premisses are particular. 

Twelve, -nz., AEA, AEI, AOA, AOI, EAA, EAI, EIA, 
En, lEA, lEI, OAA, OAI, are exoluded by the fifth gene- 
ral rule, because one of the premisses is negative, but not the 
conclusion. 

Eight, viz., AIA, AIE, AGE, EIE, lAA, lAE, 
lEE, OAE, are excluded also by the fifth general rule, 
because they liave universal conclusions with a particular 

Four, viz., AAE, AAO, AID, lAO, because they have 
negative conclusions without any negative premiss. 

To -which must be added lEO, for an illidt process of the 
major in every figure.* 

Fifty-three moods (16 + 12 + 12 + 8 -f 4 -)- 1) are 
therefore excluded, many of which otfend against several 
rules, although one alone is noted. 

The following is a list of the eleven legitimate moods, viz., 
AAA, AAI, AEE, AU, AEO, AOO, EAE, EAO, EIO, 
lAI, OAO. 

But these moods cannot be used legitimately in each figure, 
for the first excludes all such as have not a universal m^or 
and an afBrmative minor. Six of the above moods, therefore, 
can only be used legitimately in the first figure, via., AAA, 
- AAI, AH, EAE, EAO, EIO. 

But of these two AAI and EAO, although conclusive, are 
useless in the first figure, since, instead of a particular, the 
premisses warrant a universal conclusion ; for the minor 
term, being universal in the minor proposition, may be uni- 
versal also in the conclusion. There are therefore only four 

¦ lEO has been coademned STer eince the 3ajs of Apo]eiia, an far as Iha 
BScend and tbiid GgDraa are c»Dcenied. It vm sametimes slloiced in th« flnt, 
¦1 the indirect mood Frisesmo, bnt (honld Dot have been retamedby Aldikh, 
vbo doea not recognue the indirect moods. With a direct coodnuDn, it mani- 
fertl; prodDcce id illidt proceu of Uie major terra. — XatutU, p. 66. 



hvGootjIe 



-^ 



HANDAI. OF LOGIC. 159 

moods used in the first figure, viz., AAA, EAE, All, £10, 
The following are examples : — ¦ 

bAb — Every efFect is the resalt of &n adequate cause. 

bA — ^The world is an eifect ; therefore, 

rA. — The world is the result of an adequate cause. 

oE — No subject of a highly solemn charaeter is suited to 

lA — Beligion is a subject of a highly solemn character ; 

therefore, 
bEnt. — Beligion is not suited to poetry. 
dA — All comets are irregular planets. 
rI — Some luminous bodies are coinets. 
I. — Some luminous hodios are irregular planets. 
yE — No afflictions of nature are disgraceful. 
bI — Some personal deformities are afflictions of nature. 
0. — Some personal deformities are not disgraceful. 

In the second figure no mood can be used legitimately in 
-which the major is not universal and the conclusion negative. 
The le^timate moods of the second figure are consequently 
five, viz., AEE, AOO, EAE, EAO, EIO. But of these 
EAO would be useless, as the premisses warrant a universal 
conclusion. Hence the moods used in the second figure are 
only four, viz^ EAE, AEE, EIO, AOO, e. g.— 

cEs — No ruminant animals are predaceous. 

A — The lion is predaceous. 

rE. — The lion is not a ruminant animaL 

cAh — Every planet describes an orbit. 

Es — The sun does not describe an orbit. 

teEs. — The sun is not a planet. 

fEs — ^No man of strict veracity sports with truth. 

tI — Some jocoae men sport with truth. 

vO. — Some jocose men are not of strict verad^. 



hyGoogle 



] 60 KANCIL OF LOGIC, 

bA — All honest reaeonere weigh the arguments of an 

opponent with caution. 
rOc — Some aectariea do not weigh the arguments of an 

opponent with caution ; therefore, 
O. — Some sectaries are not honest reasoners. 

In the third figure no moods can be used except those whose 
minor is affirmadve, and whose oonclusion is particular. Of 
these there are six, viz., AAI, AH, EAO, EIO, lAI, OAO. 
None of these is useless, because although the minor be A, 
jet the minor term is particular in it as its predicate, and 
must tlierefore be particular in the conclusion. "Die follow- 
ing are examples of all the moods :— 

dA — All who assist in the progress of true science deserve 

the respect of mankind. 
rAp — All who assist in the progress of true science have 

to contend with difficulties. 
tT. — Some who have to contend with difficulties deserve 

the respect of mankind. 

dIb — Some acts of friendship are acts which militate against 

justice. 
Ah — All acts of finendship appear virtuous and splendid to 

the thoughtless. 
Is. — Some things which appear virtuous and splendid to 

the thoughtless militate agfunst justice. 

dA — All moral ^^ents are responsible for their conduct. 
tIs — Some moral agents are subject to severe temptations. 
I. — Some subject to severe templaldons are respondble for 
their conduct. 

fEU-No branch of science is altogether perfect. 
lAp — All branches of science are worthy of diligent culture. 
tOn. — Some things worthy of diligent culture are not alto- 
gether perfect. 



hyGootjIe 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 161 

bOe — Some distingnished poets have not esc^>ed poverty, 
Ak — All distingnished poets do hononr to thmr coonliy. 
dO.— Some who do hononr to their country have not 

escaped porertj'. 
fE — Ko bombasdc writers are worthy of imitation. 
rIs — Some bombastic writers are amusing. 
On. — Some thing§ amuiing are not worthy of imitation. 

In the fourth figure the legitimate moods are five, viz., 
AAI, AEE, EAO, EIO, and lAI. The following are ex- 
amples of all the moods :— 
brAh — AD wise statesmen le^slate with caution. 
An — All who legislate with caution regard the interests of 

the commanity. 
tIp. — Some who regard ttie interests of the community 



cAh — All the planets are opaque bodies. 

En — No opaque bodies are capable of transmitting light in 

any other way than by reflection. 
Eb. — No bodies capable of transmitting %ht in any other 

way than by reflection are planets. 

dIm — Some learned men are deeply involved in prejudice. 
Ar^AII who are deeply involved in prejudice are sus- 
picious advisers. 
Is. — Some suspicious advisers are learned men. 

fEs — No factious man is truly religions. 
Ap — All truly religious men are charitable. 
O. — Some charitable men are not &ctiou3. 

frEs — No fallacious argument is a legitimate mode of per- 
BuasioD. 

Is — Some legitimate modes of persuasion &il in convincing. 

On. — Some tilings which &il in convincing are not falla- 
cious arguments. 



hyGoogle 



162 UAMEAL OF LOGIC. 

Althongh eleven mooda were stated to be admissible, ^et 
some of tliem occur in rntve than one flgnre ; imd since each 
separate oceurreace is ret^oned a new mood, from this re- 
currenue of the same a;rmbob-in difierent flgnres, there are 
reckoned in all nineteen moods. 

Oo examining the vowel symbols used to represent the 
moods admissible in the difibrent figuTes, it will be found 
that of the eleven legitimate moods six occur twice indifferent 
flgnres, viz., AAI io Darapti and Bramantip, AEE in Ca- 
mestres and Camenee, All in Darii and Datisl, lAI in Disa- 
mis and Dimaris, EA£ in Cesare and Celarent, andEAO in 
Felapton add Fesapo. The mood EIO occurs in all the 
figures, viz., in Ferio, Festino, Ferison, and Fresison. Add 
to these, three moods that only occur once, viz., AEO, A00> 
OAO, and we have nineteen moods. 

For these nineteen moods lo^dans Iiave formed certain 
names, which serve to denote the mood and figure ; for it has 
been shown that the same mood is used in different figures. 
Hence the vowels which denote the mood would not alone 
point out the fignre, and they have therefore been incorpo- 
rated in words which are of great use in reduction, as will be 
hereafter seen. 

The names are exhibited in the following lines, which 
mention also the figures to which they respectively belong j — 

Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prions. 

Cesare, Camedlres, Festino, Baroko aecundae. 

Tertia, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton. 

Bokardo, Fenson habet, Quarta insuper addit. 

Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison. 

In addition to these, there are five namelest moods, viz., 
AAI and EAO in the first figure, AEO and EAO in the 
second figure, and AEO in the fourth. These are deemed 
superfiuooB, being snperseded by other moods, having the 
sune premisses with universal coQclusions ; for the eonolu- 
sions in the nameless moods are all particnliu', and may be 



hyGoogle 



KAHUAI. OP LOGIC. 168 

conmdered u deduced bj snbalternadon from tbenniverBal 
coDclosioDS. And since the truth of the unirersal implieB the 
tniUi of the particular, the namelesa moods are of no practice 
nse in strict argument, for it is needless to infer a parlicalar 
where a unirersal conclusion can be deduced. 

These moods, although useless, are not illegitimate. 

There are no useless moods in the third figure, for a uni- 
versal conclusion cannot be drawn in that figure. 

llie mood AAA belongs exclusivelj to the first ^ure. It 
is excluded from the second, because the mood is affirmatire ; 
from the third, because the condusioa is universal, and from 
the fourth, because in that figure the concluuon is always 
particular when the minor is affirmative. 

A nniversal affirmative conclasion can be deduced only 
from two universal affinna^ve jwemissos in the first figure, in 
the mood Barbara. 

Universal negative conclusions ma^ be proved hj the first 
figure in Celarent, hy the second figure in Cemre and 
Caittie*tret, and by the fourth figure in Camenei. 

Particular affirmative conclusions may be proved in the 
first figure by Darii, and the nameless mood, AA^ by the 
third figure in Darapti, Ditamia, and DatiH, by the fourth 
figure in Sramantip and Dimatis. 

Particular negative conclusions may be proved by each of 
the figures, viz., in ^erto of the first, Fettitto and Baroko 
of the second, Felapton, Bokardo, and Ferison of the third, 
Feaajto and Fretison of the fourth, t<^ther with the subal- 
teraates of the four moods I7 which uaiversal n^atives are 
proved. 



hyGoogIc 



MANUAL OF LOGIC. 



SECTION 11. 
KBDnCnON OF SILL0G1SU8. 



The first figure of syllogism is considered perfect,* and the 
other three as imperfect, although the same designations are 
given to moods under each. 

The first figure is said to be perfect, for two reasons — 

1, It proceeds directly and immediately on the Dictum de 
omni et de nuUo ; and, 2, It arranges the terms in the most 
natural order, so as to show at once then: motusl relations. 

The first figure asserts in the mi^oT proposition, that an 
attribute expressed by the predicate is found in a whole class 
without exception, that class being expressed by the subject of 
the proposition, and states in the minor proposition, that an- 
otlier class or part of it, expressed by the subject, b contained 
within tiie former class, now the predicate of the minor, and 
it is therefore inferred that the subordinate class has all the 
qaalities found in the larger class to which it belongs. This 
may be seen more clearly from an analysis of the following 
syllogism : — 

Every effect has a cause. 
Gravitation is an effect. 
Gravitation has a cause. 

This syllogism exemplifies the Dictum de omni. The pre- 
dicate ' cause,' in the major proposition, is affirmed of every- 

* la »mB lo^ca] treatiHea, perfect and unpflr/ccf Ajllo^smH jm ooofbaodod 
with the direct and ndinct The latter designatiooB ire an innoratian of the 
nhoolmen. In ui indirect ajUe^sm. properir speaking, the miner is the jire- 
dieate, and the nuyor the nlgectci the eonchiaDD, and fnun which the immediate 
eeneliuion is not inbn«d, bnt ICa coniene. In ¦ direot mood the predioale of 
the condnBion Is the nu^or l«rm. 



hyGoogle 



XAMUAL OP I/»IC. 165 

thing tbat can be termed an 'effect,' without any exception. 
Now the singular tenu ' gravitalJon,' the subject of the 
minor propontion, is contained in the common term 'effect,' 
which latter term is now the predicate of the minor. Hence 
if tbe predicate cnn be affirmed of everything represented by 
the common term * effect,' it may also be affirmed of any one 
thing contained under it. 

The following syllogism, viz. — 

No man is infallible, 
The Pope is a man. 
The Fope ia not infallible, 

exempUfiee the SictUT/t de nulla. The predicate ' infallible,' 
in the mf^or |a«pontion, is denied of every individual con- ' 
tained under the common term 'man' without any excep- 
tion. But the singular term ' Pope,' the subject of the 
minor proposition, is contained in the common term ' man,' 
which latter term is now the predicate of the minor. Hence 
^ce Uie predicate ' in&llible ' is denied of everything de- 
noted by the common term ' man,' it may also be denied of 
any individual contained under it. 

In the other figures the * Dictum' is applied indirectly and 
partially, and the relation of the terms is not ahown by their 
position. The first figure, therefore, institutes the most ob> 
vious comparison of the extremes, and furnishes conclusions of 
all kinds, while the other figures furnish only certain kinds 
of conclusions. 

It must be remembered, however, that the principle of the 
first figure is imphed in all the other figures, notwithstanding 
their pecaliaritiee, and that it is the presence of this principle 
that warrants their reduction. 

To reduce a syllogism is to bring an imperfect mood to a 
perfect, i. e., to reduce a eyllo^sm drawn in any of the last 
three figures to a corresponding figure of the first, by altering 
the arrangement of the premisses. By this process the 



hyGooglc 



166 UAHCAI, OF LOGIC. 

amutgement of the terma is not only improved, bat the com- 
parison is rendered closer, and the concludoa more obvioiM, 
aa we then can apply to each, as the case may be, the JDictnm 
de omni et de nuUo. Hence redaction is often called demon- 
stration, because it shows tbe validity of imperfect moods 
by bringing them to corresponding moods of the firat fignre, 
which fiimish either the same conclnsions or snch as are equi- 
valent by conversion. 

The imperfect mood to be reduced is called the reducend, 
and that to which it is reduced the reduct. 

Reduction is of two kinds — 

1 . Direct or ostenaive reduction. 

2. Indirect or reductio per impoS^Ue. 

Ostensive reduction consists io bringing the premisses of 
the reducend to a corresponding mood in the first figure, by 
transpositioii or conversion of the premisses, and from the 
premisses thus changed, deducing either the original conclu- 
sion or one from which it follows by conversion. 

In this speoiea of conversion no new terms or propositions 
are introduced ; those of the reducend being either transposed 
or converted. The validity of ostensive reduction depends on 
the perfection of the redact ; for since the reduct, being a 
perfect mood of the first figure, must yield a true conclusion, 
it is inferred that tbe original conclusion of the redncend is 
tme, because it is found to be the same with the conclusion of 
the reduct, or implied in it. 

Indirect reduction, or reductio per impossible, properly so 
called, consists in the following process ; — From one of the 
premisses of the reducend, and the contradictory of its con- 
clusion, new premisses are formed agreeably to a correspond- 
ing mood in the first figure ; and from these a concluuon is 
drawn, contradicting the other premiss which is omitted. The 
reduction is called indirect, because it does not positively 
prove the original conclusion to be tme, but merely shows 
that an absurdity follows Ibe aupposition of its being false. 



hyGoogle 



KAHOAL OF LOfllfl. 167 

Tbe validity of thb process depends on the principle of 
contradictory oppoaitioa, viz., Qt&t of contradictory proposi- 
tions, one is always faise, and the other true. If, therefore, 
the original premisses of tlie redncend be trne, as is always 
sapposed, then a conclusion, whioti contradicts any of tbetn, 
most be &Ise ; but as that false conolnsion is dedaced from 
the new premisses, one of them mnst also be &Ue, and tbat 
most be the contradictory of ihe or^nal conclusion. 

This is the common process by which some imperfect 
moods are reduced ; but it will be fbnnd that these moods 
admit of dir«ct reduction, by means of conversion by negation 
or contraposition. Thns, reduction may be confined to one 
kind, direct or ostensive. 

In any case, however, all conclusions inay be proved by 
one or other of Ihe two modes, viz., the direct or indirect. 
The direct mode shows the original conclusion to be true, by 
arranging the data from which it is deduced in such a way . 
as to show that it results from them necessarily, so that the 
mind cannot deny the truth of the conclnsion, after admitting 
the troth of the premisses. In U)e indirect mode, on the 
other hand, the conclusion is assumed to be false ; and thus 
assumption results in some palpable absurdity, showing, as a 
necessary consequence, that this assumption mnst bave been 
&lse ; and hence the conclnsion, which was pro forma, 
aesamed to be false, must in reality have been true. This 
latter mode is probably the more forcible and convincing. 
i- In direct redaction, the imperfect moods are reduced to the 
perfect, by various processes of tran^osition, conversion, or 
contraposition. These processes are indicated by the principal 
consontmU, in the technical words which designate the 
moods. 

1. The initial consonant indicates that the mood expressed 
by the word is reducible to a mood of the first figure, the 
name of which commences with the same letter, e. g., all 
moods designated by words commencing with B, viz., Baroko, 



hlGoog\c 



168 VAiniAL OF LOGIC. 

JBohardo, Jiratnaniip, are reducible to Barbara ; tliose with 
C, viz., Cesare, Camestret, Ca/menes, are redacible to Ceia,- 
rent ; those with D, tiz., Daraptt, Datiii, Duaviis, Dima- 
ris, are redacible to Darti ; and those with F, viz., Festino, 
Felapton, Ferimn, Fesapo, Fresuon, are reducible to Ferio. 

2. The letter M indicates, that in the mood expressed b^ 
t^ name in which it occurs, the premisses must be trans- 
posed, so that the major of the reducead becomes the minor 
in the redact, and vice verm, e. g,, in reducing Camestres, of 
the second figure, to Celarent of the first, M shows that the 
premisses must be transposed, to give them the reqnisito 
arrangement The same process is followed in reducing 
Bramantip to Barbara, Cameneg to Celarent, DigamU and 
Dimarii to Darii. 

8. The letters S and F show generally that in reducing the 
moods expreBsed by the names in which they occur, the pro- 
position designated by the vowel preceding each must be con- 
verted in the redact. S denotes simple conversion, and P 
acddental conversion (conversio per accidens), e. g., in re- 
ducing Ceiare, of the second figure, to Celarent, of the first. 
S shows that the major proposition E is to be converted 
simply, so as t« bring the predicate or middle term to the 
place of the subject, as in the first figure. Again, in reducing 
Felapton, of the third figare, to Ferio of the first, the minor 
proposition A must be converted per accidens, so as at once 
to become a parlicniar affirmative, and bring the snlject, the 
middle term, to the place of tiie predicate, as in the first 
figure. 

4. The letter "K. indicates that the moods undergo indirect 
reduction by contradiction or contraposition : by contradiction 
when the contradictory of the conclusion is substituted for the 
premiss deeagnated by the vowel after which K is placed ; — 
by contraposition (or conversion by negation) when the 
quality of the propositions is changed, so as to bring them to 
a state in which they may be directly reduced. 



hyGoogle 



UAMUAl. OF LOGIC. 169 

It mnet be remembered that tlieae letters are intended to 
applj to tbe rowels which precede, and not to those which 
follow ihem. 

In reduciog sjUogisms directly, the process is much more 
simile in some cases than in others, e. g., Cesare and Feitino, 
of the second figure, may be redaced to Celarent and Ferio, 
hy amply oonverting the mqor premiss, aa majr be seen livm 
the annexed examples : — 

1. Cesare. 

No man of honour is addicted to equivocation. 
All Bars are addicted to equivocation. 
No liars are inen of hraioar. 

Beduced to Celarent — 

No man addicted to equivocation is a man of honour. 

All lius are addicted to equivocation. 

No liars are men of honour. 

2. Fettim. 

No man of strict veracity sports widi truth. 

Some jocose men sport wiUi truth. 

Some jocose men are not men of strict veracity. 

Reduced to Ferio — 

No man sports with tratb who is of strict veracity. 

Some jocose men sport with truth. 

Some jocose men are not of strict veracity. 

In like manner, DatiH and Feruon, of the third figure, 
maybe reduced to DaHi and Ferio, by the simple conversion 
of the minor. Thus — 

1. Datin. 
All moral agents are responsible fbr thcdr condset. 



hyGoogle 



170 tOHTIAL OF LOGIC. 

Some moral agents are subject to severe teanptatioas. 
Some mbjeot to severe templatioiu aie raspotudUe for their 
conduct 

Reduced to Darii — 

All moral agents are responsible for their condnet. 
Some salgect to severe temptationa are moral agents. 
Some sntgect to severe temptations are responsCUe tfx their 
conduct. 

2. Femes. 
No men addicted to prqndice possess powerfid minds. 
Some men addicted to pr^ndice are teamed. 
Some learned men do not possess powerful minds, 

Bednced to Ferio — 

No men addicted to pr^udice possess powerful minds. 
Some learned men are addicted to prgndice. 
Some learned men do not posseaa powerfiil minda. 

In redudng Darapti and FeJapton, oS the third figure, to 
Darii and Ferio, it is merely necessary to convert the minor 
per accidens.' Thus — 

1. Darapti. 

All who assist in the prc^p^ess of true science deserve the 
respect of mankind. 

All who assist in the progress of true science have to con- 
tend with difficulties. > 

Some who have to contend with difficulties deserve the 
respect of mankind. 

Bednced to Darii — 

All who assist in the progress of true sdence deserve the 
respect of mankind. 



hyGoogle 



lUin7AL OP LOGIC. 171 

Some have to contend with difflcnltiea vho assiBt in the 
progress of true science. 

Some have to contend wilh difflcnbies who deserve the 
reapect of mankind. 

2. Felapton, 
No branch of science is alti^ther perfect 
All branchsB of science are wcnrthy of diligent coltore. 
Some things worthy of diligent coltmre are not alt<^ther 
perfect. 

Bednoed to Ferio — 

No branch of science Is altogether peilecL 

Some things worthy of diligent culture are branches of 
science. 

Some things worthy of diligent coltoie are not altogether 
perfect., 

In reducing Frenton, of the fourth fignte, ta Fmo, both 
the migor and miQor are converted simply — 



No fitUaaons argnm^its are l^ttimate means of persuasion. 
Some legitimate means of persuasion bil in convincing. 
Some things which &al in convincing are not fiilladous 



Bednced to Ferio — 

No legitimate means of persuasion are bUadous arguments. 
. Scmie things whicti fail in convincing are legidmate means 
of persuasion. 

Some tliingB which fiul in convincing are not &tlacious 



In redndng Feit^Ht, of the fourth Hffin, to Ftrio, the 



hyGoogle 



172 UAIIDAL or LOOIC. 

migor ia converted simply, and the minor per acddens. T&u^— 
1. Fempo. 

No factious man ia trnly religions. 

AU truly religious men are charitable. 

Some charitable men are not Cnctious. 

Reduced to Ferio — 

No tmlj religions man ia Actions. 

Some charitable men are trulj religions. 

Some charitable men are not fiicdons. 

In reduciog Dimarit and Camene*, of the fourth %ure, to 
Darii and Cdarettt, the premisses are ttanapoaed, and tite 
conclusion converted amply. Thus— 

1. Dimarit. 
Some learned men are egotistical. 

All egotistical men are fond of popularity. 

Some fond of popularity are learned men. 

Reduced to Darii — 

All egotistical men are fond of popularity. 

Some learned men are egodsdcal. 

Some learned men are fond of populari^. 

2. Camenet. 

All useiiil studies are worthy of encouragement. 

Nothing worthy of encouragement is injurious to the morahr. 

Nothing injurious to the morals ia a nsefUi study; 

Reduced to Celarent — 

Nothing worthy of encour^|;ement b injurious to ttfe morals. 

All useM studies are worthy of enconragement 

No useful study is injurious to the morals. 

In reducing Camettret, of the second figure, to C^arent, 
the premisses are transposed, and the minor and c(»iclunon 
converted simply. Hius— 



hyGoogle 



MAinjAL OP LOnic. 178 

Camettret. 
£veiy man of sense is anxious to g&in uaefiil information. 
No idle man is anxious to g^ useful information. 
No idle man is a man of sense. 
Beduced to Celarent — 

No person who is anziout to gain useful information is an 
idle man. 

Every man oi sense is anxious to gain useful information. 
No man of sense is an idle man. 

In redncing Duftmu, of the third figure, to Darti, the pre- 
misses are bttnsposed, and the major and conclusion converted 
simply. Thus — 

Jhsairtu. 

Some poets prefer sound to sense. 

All poets dislike to be severely criticised. 

Somewhodisliketobeseverelycriticised prefer sound to sense. 

Keduced to Darii — 

All poets dislike to be severely criticised. 

Some who prefer sonnd to sense are poets. 

Some who prefer sound to sense dislike to be severely 
criticised. 

In redudng Bramantip, of the fourth figure, to Barbara, 
the premisses are transposed, and the conclnsion converted per 
accidens. Hius — 

BramarUip. ' 

AH blaaphemons writers injure the public morals. 

* Tbe reuon whj in this mood the DOnohiaiOD ma; be acddenUllj oonverUd 
is, that Cba mqar teim hai been distributed in Uis m^or pmniia, and tfaerefora 
is (JufrtbaftiUe in the condnson, although, oniog to the figore, it cannot ie dia- 
tribnt«d, for > term ehonld not be ^stribnted in the oanclnnoii, if it baa not 
been distrilnil«d in its pnauss ; and it abonld be remembered also, tliat a terni 
ooght pot to be ondisttibated in the oonclnuon, if it hss tieen nndistribnCed in 



hyGoogtc 



MAHUAL or LOOK). 



All irbo injure tiie paUio morals deserve pw 

Some wfao deserre pamsbmetit are bUsjAunous writws. 

Beduc^ to Sarbara — 

AH who u^nre the public monlii deserve pnniBhrnent. 
All blasphemous writera iiiJDre the public mor&ls. 
All blasphemouB writers deserve poaishment. 

The following table presents sanunarily the miouB pro- 
ceases by which imperfect Mpods are reduoed to perfect : — 





.^.^oxs. 










CuDotras 


Cdinnt 






Mbsc wnrgrtod paraaddgtu. 


D»»pf 


Dirii.. 




Dicfi 


elonoD MBToKd dnii^r- 




Dtm. 


Dirii 


HiDor<«<.T«toi.imptT. 


F«>«Pt»n 


Fnio. 














TorUd par aeoidtBa. 




Cnneua 


OtbnDt 


«rt«dMn.ply. 




Dua 










udden*. 


¥mi^ 







hyGoogle 



lUlTDAI. OF LOOIC. 176 

Examplea of bU tbe Mooda m tite thne laat flgoies (except 
Baroko and Bokardo) converted to the oorrespondtng figures 
of the first : — 

SEOOKD FiaURR. ME«T riOURE. 

^ /SoplHHtliflnd. amort tlmplt\ | /MolxfdbailT liipUntl. 

g j BTxr; glac I* Bud a Hit \ | j Etb? nir K Sicd. 

I (ehr Hull And. S ^nmfBo.owf I I Cno flitd bodj li ¦ pUa«. 

u iNspluMiiaiUr amrerliiarlf ) "^ 

f j(o pUnM ta ¦ Bon amttrifmftr f He au la a pluH. 

J I Sana Ismiaoiii bad)« ar*! „ ^ ^ ( ? 1 '^'''* I"''"''™* t>odlM are 

J 1 Boom h^^iinu botfea anl _ m, i ^] 8™" InmtiKKU liodl» an 

, "¦ I DotplanMa jMBM J ^ Botplaimi. 

THISD FiaCBB. FIRST PIOUKE. 

w .AUflOMnambeaatiftil.... otba i < AU flonn an buntlhd. 

J j aooM dstddaiM tUnga in> „ « ;, ^ B™" dMUhuat thinfa an 

«\ bauUful .73^; t««" J I beanUAil. 



f 1 Born* bM«tl(bl thing! awl,^^,,;^^ « 



Some dvaldnou tblnga u 



X r An fiawan an beautiftil aiilb -j a rAllBtmanar* tMaqUAil. 

-i i BaBwflcivmanplanta comcrt l io if it f B -] Soma ptaota an Oonn. 

j iBoiDa plaiai anbaanUfal.. aiitili 1 R IBoma Hantaan beutUia. 

iCr."rL:;;::.;:.[~« --"-i | 

4 SonMtlilaiadl''nt •»'">>') ^^^ I ki 

I /NaMarltdKk »«<¦ 'J ^ I Mo atai ia dark. 

6 I ScBPe thlnga mnetB »f» POtT -, a a I K 1 ^"'"" aiillilniia iin ii 

^ I dark.... ........».....i .J I dark. 

FOUIXB FIOUBE. FIRST FiaCKE. 

J- |.8igT pwatona Una* li at^_,,„„ „__ - , Er«i7 gam la brilUaat. 

j|W!S™iSi=i;;;:::}i;=. 2 |5«]".'~^ — " 

¦q ^ pnolau - i Miuf -> (4^ UaiK. 



hyGoogle 



176 UUWAL OP LOGIC. 



;rBrarT>Urlta<xadlio4j...-|(T*»«N>w Ui^ IT"*" 
I jIlaaudbod/liftpUiiat....J pnmttttt ( ^JEt* 
S Cno pluut li ¦ itu. amrtri timply J S CHo i 

•!> ( coram" '""^iK 

fj All eomett d* hT«gnUrt 
1 pUiwti.. J 



And bodf li ¦ pluat' 
ET*r7 bUt !¦ ¦ Bied bodj. 



comeU %xi IrregnZar 



ofNofUIlngbodjlurtK-.... CMHri W«p2|r ) _[ 
§-) Allftuiue iDuliKiiu SDKKrtjHirtA;. I -g J 



Irregulftr pluHta. 
Is itir U t. fBlllog body. 



not&lllDgboiUei i" 






SECTION III. 

Reductio per impoKible, or ad Absurdum. 

Tbia Bpedes of redaction, as already partially expluaed, 
conuatB in the hypothetical felseliood of that which is under 
discuadon; and in the tracing of such a concession to its 
legitimate consequences, with the view of proving that what 
was hypothetically conceded as &lse, InTolves some palpable 
, impoBsibility or absurdity. 

This kind of reduction is usually confined to the moods 
Baroko of the second, and Bokardo of the tliird figure. 
It is equally applicable, however, to imy of the three last 
figures, as vnll be shown by examples. But let us, in the 
first place, take Baroko and Boh-ardo. 

In reference to Baroko and Bokardo, it is naccSBary to re- 
mark that the contradictory of the conclusion most be substi- 
tuted for the fKtrticular negative premiss, while the nniversal 
premiss retains its original place. In other moods redudble 
in this way, the contradictory of the conclnraon must be sub- 
stituted fi)r the major or minor premiss, as the requirements 
of a syllogism in the first figure may render such subetitn- 
tioD necessary. 



hyGoogle 



UUIUAL OF LOQIC 177 

1. Baroko. 

bA — All truly wise men live virtaously. 

kOe — Some pliilosopbers do not live virtuously; therefore, 

O. — Some philosophers are not truly wise men. 

If instead of the minor (a particular negative) we substi- 
tute the contradictory of the conduaion, viz., 

All philosophera are truly wise men, 
the middle term will be universally affirmed of t^e majoi' in 
the migor proposidon, wlule in the new minor proposition it 
will be affirmed that the whale minor term is contfuned in the 
major, and by the Dictum de omni the conclusion will follow 
that the middle term is affirmed of the whole minor. By thus 
substituting the contradictory of the conclusion, in place of 
the minor (a particular negative), the syllogism will stand 
thus — 

Barhara. 

B^— All truly wise men live virtuously, 

bA— All phUoeophers are truly wise men ; therefore, 

bA. — All philosophers live virtuously. 

ITie concluuon of the reduct is the contradictory of the 
original minor premies of the reducend, and must be false, 
since the premisses of the reducend were supposed to be true ; 
and therefore one of the prenuases of the reduct, from which 
the conclusion has been legitimately deduced, must also be 
false. But as the major proposition is one of the original 
premisses granted to be true, the fobity must be in the minor, 
viz., the contradictory of the original conclusion, which 
proves the original condusion to be true. 
2. Bohardo. 

bO — Some kinds of money have not intrinsic value. 

eAb — All kinds of money have adventitious value. 

dO. — Some things having adventitious value have not in- 
trinsic value, 



hyGoogle 



178 UARDAI. OF LOatO. 

If in place of the negative premisa (the m^n), we sabsll- 
tute the contradictoiy of the condnsion, \iz,— 

All things haring adveatitioas value have intrinfac valne. 

We ehall have the following syllogism in Barbara, viz. — 

AH things having adveotitioaB value have inta^nsic value. 
All kinds of money have adventitioua value. 
All kinds of money have intrinsic value. 

This new concluBion must be Jdlae, because it contradicts 
the major premiss of the roducend ; therefore the sabstituted 
miyor premias, from which the conclusion of the reduct is 
drawn, must be false, and consequently its ccMitradict«iy (the 
conclusion of tiie reducend) most be true. 

Bnt although the moods Baroko and Bokardo are nsually 
reduced, by redttctio per impotsible, to Barbara, they may 
also he oetentively reduced by contraposition or n^;alion — 
the first to Ferio, and the second to Darii. Let the follow- 
ing syllo^m be in Baroko : — 

Every true patriot is a friend to religion. 

Some great statesmen are not friends to religion. 

Some great statesmen are not true patriots. 

In order to reduce this syllogism to Ferio, we first convert 
the m^or premiss by negation, and then render the minor 
premiss affirniatiye, by combining the negative particle with 
the predicate. Thus — 

He-who-is-not-a-fiiend-to-religion is not a true patriot. 

Some great statesmen are not-friends-to-religion. 

Some great statesmen are not true patriots. 

In like ipanner, ^kardo may be reduced to Darii. Let 
the following syllogism be in Bokardo : — 
' Some systems of uiyust exaction have not been followed by 
immediate punishment. 



hyGoo^le 



MANUAL or LOGIC. 179 

All sjrstema of anjust exaction incur goilt. 
Some things which incur guilt have not been foOowed by 
immediate punishment. 

In redndng thia example to Darii, we first transpoae the 

premisses, and next convert the nii^or hj contraposition. 

Thus- 
All systems of qpjust exaction incur guilt. 
Some things which have not been followed by immediate 

punishment are systems of unjust exaction ; therefore, 

Some things which have not been followed by immediate 

punishment incur guilt. 

It has been stated above, that the moods in the three last 
figures may be reduced to the first by the reductio per im- 
postihle, as well as Baroko and Bokardo. To assist the 
learner in the way in which this may be done, tie fi>Ilowing 
example is annexed ; — 

Let the mood to be reduced be in Disamis, of the third 
figure. 

This mood is represented by the vowel symbols, lAI, If 
this conclusion I is &lse, its contradictory E, must be true ; 
for of contradictories one must be false, and the other true. 
Kow, this assumed contradictory E 'contradicts the major 
premiss I. If we substitute this contradictory for I, the new 
premisses will be E A, from which we can legitimately deduce' 
the conclusion E, and the new mood will be Celorent of the 
first figore. Hie &laity involved in this assumed contradic- 
tory will be best illustrated by examples of the reducend and 
reduct : — 

dI — Some infidels publish their opinions. 
sA — All infidels are opposed to true religion, 
Hls._Some beings opposed to true religion publish their 
opinions. 



hyGoogle 



180 , UAHUAL OF X.OOI0. 

Thia s;)rllo^sni, when reduced per impottibk, U as foQo'WS ; — ' 

cE — Nobeingsopposed to truereligion publish theiropinions. 
xA — All infidels are opposed to trae religion. 
bEnt, — No infidels publish their opinions. 

In this reduction the conclaaon of Ihe reducend was 
assumed to htfa^, and its contradictoay assumed to be true, 
aud from the contradictory assumed to be true, united to 
the minor premiss of the reducend, a' new conclusion 
was drawn ; but this conclusion is obviously false, because it 
contradicts the major premiss of the reducend, which was 
assumed to be true. Hence it must follow, that the contra- 
dictory of the reducend (which was assumed trne) is in 
reality &be; and hence the conclusion of the reducend must 
itself be true. 

It has been observed, that in redudng the moods Baroko 
and Bokardo per impomhle, the aesumed or new conclusion 
directly contradicts an original premiss of the reducend. In 
the other moods, however, which may be reduced in this 
way, the assumed or new conclusion will not in every 
instance directly contradict an original premiss of the reda- 
cend. The contradicted premiss may be one deducible from 
the original proposition, or its simple or accidental converse ; 
for by the laws of conversion, if a proposition is true, the 
particular contained under it is true, and so also b its simple 
or acdden'tal converse; and the contradiction of any of these 
will prove that the original conclusion cannot be &lse, equally 
as well as if the original premiss were itself contradicted. 

OF COMPOUND PBOPOSITIONS. 

Compound propositions* have been variously classified, but, 

' 1 The CDiioiu in compoDDd propoutiou ara nftrred to Dr Klrwan^ I»g)<N 
Tol, I., irhov tber nill find the aalyect u amplj and BatiEfactQiiljt tnatad u 



hyGoogle 



XAHCAL OF LOniC. 181 

generallj speaking, willi questionable Baccess. This has 
chiefly arisen from an nudue multiplioation of names, founded 
on dUtinctioDa comparatively non-essential. Many of them 
are now veiy properly disappearing from logical treatiaes, and 
all intended here is a mere enumeration. 

1. Copulative Propositions. 

A copnlatiTe* proposition is one which has its subjects or 
predicates joined by copulative or negative particles. 

A proposition of this kind may have several subjects, and 
bnt one predicate ; as, 

CEOsar and Foiupey were great generals. 

Neither gold nor ulver will parchase immortality. 
Or several predicates, and but one subject ; as, 

Csesar vras a great and a fortunate general. 
Or several sutgects and several pre^cates; as, 

Cato, Varro, Cicero, and Seneca cultivated logic, physics, 
metaphysics, and ethics. 

When the conaecting pu^cle is attd, the proposition is a 
copulative affirmative ; but when the particle is not, neither, 
&c,, the proposition is a copulative negative. 

A copulative affirmative is felse, if any of the parts is &lse ; 
for the truth of such a proportion depends on the truth of all 
its parts. The proportion, 

The earth and moon revolve ronnd the sun, 
wonld be false if the predicate, ' revolve round the sun,' did 
not apply to both. On the other hand, a copulative negative 
is false, if either of tiie parts is true ; as. 

Virtue and riches are not necessary to salvation. 

* Th« onmber of einipl* propositioiw into which ¦ copnlitiTO Duiy be re- - 
¦oWed is dfltanuinid bj moUipljiiig tb* Bamber of mlgacta into tbal of the pre- 
dicitM.— r*ji««. 



hyGoogle 



188 UANUAL OF LOQIC. 

2. Di^wiKtive Propoattom. 

A di^uDctive proposition is one in which the whole sub- 
ject is said to be contained in two or more predicates, con- 
nected by a disjunctive particle, e. g. — 

All wms are either juat or unjust. 

Every animid is either rational or irrational. 

The parts of a disjunctive proposition are always affirmative 
in quality, and the proposition is true, if any of its parts b 
true, e. g. — 

The true ret^on is either the Mahometan, or Jewiah, or 
Christias. 

But if it can be shown that none of the parts is trae, the pro- 
position is false ; as, 

The true religion is either the Mahometan or Jewish. 

The truth of a disjunetive proposition depends on the 
necessary opposition of the parts ; for since a diviajon is mode 
in every disjunctive proposition, it must be subject to the 
rules of logical division. The predicates are the parts into 
which the whole subject is divided ; and it is therefore neces- 
sary that the predicates taken t<^ther should contain no 
more and no less than^the whole subject. Thus — 

The teeth are either incisors, canine, bicuspid, or molar. 

S> Condition^ Proporitioru. 
A conditdoaal* proposition ia one in which the assertion is 
made under a condition. 

* IatlWKbeniai)fdiri^anuidBDb<UTi^oiuofpn^ioatUaiHlaiddoiini(p. 101), 
the Boal method nu followed of dividing At/polieSeal ftopa^iimt into omdi- 
tional and di^wictift ; tbe nuttei Dot appearing of aoeli importuiGe a* to nm. 
der an; alteration in the ordinaiy uhame neouaai;. Bat u it ia not intssded 
la treat either of hjpothatical propootioni or ajllogtami aaparatelj, hot to 
rniplcj both u ^TDOnjiDODB witli the eoadilioiu^ it nu; Im neeeaaaiy to 
itite that a diTiaira of hjpotbotical [vapiititkaia into conditlanal and ^^nscliro, 
ia lllogiul, for bjFpotheldeB] and eenditiooal propoeitiona are idmtie*! in araaa, 



hyGoogle 



lUNUAL OF LOGIC. 183 

The port, or branch of the propocition in vhidi the condi- 
tion occurs, is called the antecedent, and the part or branch 
which followa from it the eoruequent. The c(»uection be- 
tween them IB called the coiwequence. 

The antecedent and consequent cannot always be diatin- 
guished by their order. The antecedent is that which must 
have the conditional particle prefixed, and may be distin- 
guished in thiB way, although it should follow the conseqaent 
in the verbal arrangement of a sentence. 

In a conditional proposition, there is no absolute assertion 
made aa to the truth of either the antecedent or consequent. 
lite condtti<His are, that if the antecedent is true, the conse- 
quent must be true ; in other wcvds, that if the antecedent is 
granted, the consequent may be inferred. Hence if there be 
a fts eontequentia in the inference, the proposition will be 
tme, though one or both of the parts be false, e. g. — 

If there be no providence, there will be no future state. 
In this proposition both antecedent and consequent are &lset 
yet the proposition, as a whole, is true, for the consequent 
follows from the antecedent. But, on the otiier hand, both 
of the parts may be tme, and the proposition itself fiJse, if 
there be no vu cotuequentice, e. g. — 

If Cicero was a Roman, he was a patriot. 

*nd cUS«t onlj to th« extent of being nameg ippinpmlAd from difibient lan- 
giugw ; Ki that In the diiisuni ivfensd to, the nima of i gemu <¦ oasfouadsd 
witli thatof a ipaoe*. It nuj be msDtioDod, *lw), th*t tliEi diTWOn hu not 
etai tbe tuMiliaa of RDthoritri for fioethiua, the chief rmthoritr on this pdnt, 
employi iniMeraDllj the terms hgpolhetiaa, andUiaiu^u, non tiaipitx, for the 
gencu), ud as tqipoeed t« caltgoriaa or nnipfeei — [See .EiJ. Bee., to!, trii., 
p. 210.] Hr Hansel Is of opinion, tfaat ' with rafeienee to modem nsage, it 
wiQ be bettw to contract tbe Qraek mud than to eitaud tbe Latin one ;' and 
therefbr* nses the term tigpotketieal at i^iunijiiigiis with ewtdMonal. It mi; be 
neceasai7 to inform the learner ilao, that hjpDthgtioab, in the pntent aoccpta- 
tion of ths term, in not trerted of h; AriirtoUa. Thef wen fliit iketdied b; 
Theophiwtna, and aAnward* nun M7 danlopad \ij EvdinBt and Uw Stnca. 

— C8m MmuO, An. p. S7.] 



hyGoogle 



184 lUKDAL OF LOOIC. 

Here botb of the parts are tme ; jet as the latter does not 
follow from the former, the proposition, as a whole, is fiUse. 
The rules of conditional propositions are three — 

1. If the antecedent is granted, the consequent may be 
inferred. 

2. If the consequent la denied, the . antecedent may be 
denied. 

3. Nothing can be inferred either &om taking awa; the 
antecedent, or granting the consequent. 

This arises from the circumstance, that the same consequent 
may follow fiwm another antecedent, although not from that 
from which it is sought to be inferred in some particular 
instance. 

i. Advertative Propodtiora. 

An adversative proposition is one in which the parts are 
joined bj an adversative particle ; as, but, yet, &c., e. g. — 

Travellers may change their climate, bnt not tbeir dispo- 
sitions. 

Hannibal was a great general, yet finally unfortunate. 

The only difference between a copulative and an adversa- 
tive proportion is, that the adversative particle implies some 
decree of contrariety ; for if we say, 

Anacharffls was a Scythian and a philosopher, 

the proportion is a copulative one ; but if we say, 

Anacharsis was a Scythian, yet a philosopher, 

the proposition is adversative, as it indicates that the terms 
' Scythian ' and ' philosopher ' are not generally predicates 
of the same sntgect. 

Adversative propositions are Bometimes called eUtcretivet. 



hyGoogle 



ILUniAL or LOGIC. IBO 

5. Relative Propotitiona. 

A relative proposition is one whose parte are conoected by 
a. particle expressing relation ; as, 

Books are valuable, in so far as thej are useful. 
6. Cautal Pr&positums. 

A causal propoulion is one whose parts are connected bj a 
particle asserting that one of them m the cause of the other ; as, 

C«sax def^atAd Pompey, because hts army was better dis- 
ciplined. 

Or indicating that one of them m not the cause of the other ; 
as. 

All evcnte are necessary, because they were decreed by fate. 

A causal proposition is contradicted by denying the causa- 

7. Comparative Fropontiam. 

A comparative proposition is one which expresses the 
agreement or disagreement of a predicate and sabject with 
each other in a greater or less degree ; as. 

The Greeks were more polished than the Bomans. 

The Christian religion is preferable to the Mahometan. 

%. Exclusive Propositions. 

An excluare proposition is one which asserts tliat the pre- 
dicate so ^rees with the subject aa to agree with it only;* as, 

Victoria alone is Queen of England, 

The Platoniste were the only school of philosophers who 
maintained the immortality of the soal. 

¦ Thgre is a diffennce betweeD ths voids tdcme and on^, fbi ' oal; ' im- 
plies Hist thsre is do other of the siin« kind, wliils ' slone' impart! being mt- 
¦ecompuiied with in; otker. 



hyGoogle 



186 lUSOAi, or LOGIC 

Exclusive propoBitions &re &Ue, if the predicate does not 
agree with the subject, or if it agrees with more sutgects than 

9, Exceptive Propositions. 

An exceptive* propoEdtion is one which expresses the 
agreement or digagreement of the subject with the predicate) 
except in some part of it ; ae, 

AB except the wise men are mad. 

All but the pious are foolish. 

The fitlsehood of an exceptive propoffl&in is diown in titt 
same way as in an exclumre. 

10. Inceptuie and Derittve Propositions. 
Inceptive and desitive" proportions are those in which 
BomeduDg is aud to begin or end ; as, 
After the death of the Gracchi, Bome censed to be free. 



SECTION IV. 

CONDinOlUI. BTLLOQISHS. 

A syilogism is said to be conditional when eitlteT its major 
or nuBor premiss is e^)res5ed under a condition, or both the 
major and minor. 

¦ An cidn^m jnopodtioo dh; be obtnged into a. tjaoejnimM euepCire, 
and in the duDge the rotyect of the exoliuTe bectraica the sxesptsd part of 
(he eioqitiie. If the eidnuTe be afSmutiie, tlie BzceptiTe will be n^atire, 
tmd dee ttrta, loi an afflnoatiTe ezdomie uaerta tlbat the piedioata agieea 
with the mbject alone, whleh la the aame tiiag aa to mf, that tba pndicato 
diMgnei with iD auept that aabjeoti ud tbia ia « negBlna eiet^ptne. ^oa 
the Molnaivft— ' Hen are the anl; aniipila Qat nuim' — wban axprewcd in the 
fbim of an exoeptlTe, will be, 'Ho uiimsli but menittason.'— tFoUer, p. 80. 

'' An ine^Te beoonMB de«tiT« bj aaiag t^ dMiti*e verb fbc tlie ineep- 
tira, and inatead of the itate after, the cbange declaring tbe atate befbie, and 
¦inuliri; tlM dMftive maj become inoaptlTe. — WaUer, p. 80. 



hyGoogle 



lUNVAL OP LOGIC. 187 

ConditioiuJ syllogiamB are conaeqaently of three kinds : — 

1. When ODB of tbe premisaea is conditiooal, and the con- 
dasion abeolnte. lii this ease the mqjor most be the condi- 
tional propoaitioa. 

2. When one of the premisses is conditional and the con- 
closion conditionaL In this case the minor must be the con- 
ditional proposition. 

3. When both mtgor and minor prapoudona are conditional. 
In this case the conclusion mnst also be conditional. 

When the jnaioc [avpoeition is alone conditional, the oon- 
clnaion is absolute, for this reason, that in the nun<^ the part 
which asaerts or denies the condition is pnt absolute^, and 
thus prevents the condition from entering the condusion. 

In conditional Vfllf^isms of this kind, Intimate coodusions 
may be obtained in two wa^ : — 

1. From the position of the antecedent to the position of 
the consequent, e. g.-r- 

If the Christian miracles are credible, the Cbristiaa doc- 
trines are true ; 

But the Christian miracles are crediUe ; therefore, 
The Christian doctrines are true. 

Id IbiB eoxmple we proceed from the position of the ante- 
cedent to the position of the consequent An argnment of 
this kind 18 s^d to be comtntctive, or as it is technically 
termed in the modus ponena. 

2, From the remotdon of the antecedent to the remotion of 
the consequent, e. g. — 

If Atheists ore in the right, then the world ezisla without a 
cause; 

But the world does not exist without a cause ; therdbre, 
Atheists are not in Qie rig^t. 

Ill this example we proceed from the remotion of the oon- 
sequent to the remotion of the antecedent. An argument of 



hyGoogle 



186 HANDU. OF LOaiC. 

diis kiiid is said to be deitntctive, or, as it is technically 
termed, in the fnodui ioUens. 

The conclusivenesa of each of these pTocesses of reasoning 
is obriouH. In the former example it is asserted in the major, 
that the consequent follows from Ihe antecedent, and conse- 
quently, if the antecedent be true, the consequent must be 
true. In the latter example, the consequent is denied, or, in 
Other words, is not true ; and hence the antecedent from 
which it follows cannot be true. 

In examples like the foregoing, where the major alone is 
conditional, we must consider the minor as the true proposi- 
tion, for it is absolutely posited ; and the conclusion, there- 
fore, depends for its truth on the truth of the minor. 

It may be remarked, that the removal of the antecedent or 
consequent does not merely signi^ the denial of it; but the 
contradiction* of it, for the mere denial of it by a contrary 
proposition, will not make a true syllogiam, e. g. — 

If every creature is reasonable, every brute is reasonable ; 

But no brute is reasonable ; tiierefore. 

No creature is reasonable. 

But if we put the minor in this form, viz., 

Every brute .is not reasonable, 
then it wUl follow legitimately in the conclusioD, that 

Every creatnre is not reasonable. 

It may be remarked, also, that when the antecedent and 
consequent are negative, they are removed by an affirmative. 

If there be no God, then tbe world does not exhibit crea- 
tive wisdom; 

¦ If the «b«olate premiM assert the hlaBbtxid gt.liiB oonsejoent, we muit 
Uks csra to make the coiidnsioD the contradictory, not tiie contrrwy of the 
¦ntSMdant. For ve can only infer that the anlccedant ii false, but are not 
tbcnos winanted (o assert Oa tiath of its ixiDtrai7.— Wedier't Covmmlars. 



hyGoogle 



HAKiyAL OF LOGIC. 189 

But the world doeB exhibit creative wisdom ; therefore, 

There is a God. 

But while, in conditional syllogiams of this description, ^cre ' 
are two legitimate modes of reasoning, there are also hvo ille- 
gitimate modes, — 

1. When we proceed from the remotion of the antecedent 
to the remotion of the codseqnent. 

In illnstration, let us take the following example ; — 

If Mahometaniam be tme, idolatry is rinfiil; 
But Mahometanism is not true ; therefore, 
Idolatry is not ainfiil. 

It is clear that in this example we cannot proceed from the 
remotdon of the antecedent to the remotion of the consequent, 
for the sinfulness of idolatry is not affected by the truth or 
non-tntth of Mahotnetanism. ^ 

2. When we proceed fnun the position of the consequeDt 
to the pOEdtion of the antecedent. 

In illustration, let us take the following example :— 

If states hare great standing armies, they are powerful. 
But this state is powerful ; therefore, 
Hiis state has great standing armies. 

It is obvious that in this example we cannot proceed &om 
the position of the consequent to the position of the antece- 
dent for great standing armies do not necessarOy prove the 
internal power of a state. 

When Uie subject of the antecedent and consequent is the 
same, a conditional syllogism may be changed into a categori- 
cal one, e. g. — 

If Cfesar bo a Hag, he must be honoured ; 
But Caesar is a king ; therefore. 
He must be honoured ; 



hyGoogle 



190 ILUrUAL OF LOGIC. 

and this BjDogiBm maj be changed into a categorical, thus, 

Erer^ king must be honoured ; 
Bat Cfesar ia a king ; therefore, 
He most be honooied. 

It has been stated above that when the mqor alone is con- 
ditional, the conduaion is abaolate or categonoal ; bat wben 
the minor is conditional, the conclasion is conditional, e. g. — 

The worshippers of images are idolaters. 
If tlie Bomanists vrorship a crucifix, the7 are worshippers 
of an image ; theiefin^ 
If the Bomaiiisis Trorship a crucifix, thej are idolaters. 

SjIlogiBmB in which both the nugor and minor proportions 
are conditdonal, are beat suited loacondidonalorbypothetieBl 
sorites. 

DISJmiCTIVI aTLLOGIBUB. 

A difjonctiTe ^llogism is one whose nu^or premiss is dis- 
janctive, and affirmaUve in quality. 

The parts of a disjnnctiTe syllogism are assumed to contain 
all the possible assertions that can be made regarding the 
subject 

1. The miyor premiss must consist of at least two membeia. 
In this case the minor dther asserts the one and the conclu- 
sion denies the other, ot the minor denies the one and (he 
cooolarion bbsnIs the other. 

hi a di^nnctire sjllog^sm, therefi>re, we either draw a cm- 
dusion from the podtion of one part to the remotion of the 
other, or firom the remotion of one part to the position ot the 
other, e. g.^ 

The olgects in nature either had a commencement, or they 
are self-exiBtcnt ; 

Bat they had a commencement ; therefi>re, 
They are not self-existent. 



hyGoogle 



i 



UAttUAI. OF LOGIC. 191 

In this examine we draw a conclusion from the poailioti of 
one part to the remotion of the other. 
Again, 

The objects in nature are eitber eelf-existest, or were created 
by a self-existent being ; 

But they ar« nut self-exifiteiit ; tiierefiire, 
They were erected by a self-existent being. 

In this example we draw a coiiclu«on from the remotion of 
the one part to the position of the other. 

2. When the miyor consists of more than two members, 
either the minor denies some one of them, and tlie c<»icInsion 
asserts the truth of the rest, or the minor asserts the truth of 
some <me of them, and the conclusion denies the rest, e. g. — 

All virtues ere ^tber &cnlties, pasnons, or habits ; 
But the virtues are neither fiiculties nor passions ; there- 
fore, - 

The virtues are halnts. 

In this example the minor denies two of Ihe suppositions, 
and the conclusion asserts the trutli of the third. 

The sciences aiose either from intuition, inspiration, or ex- 
penance ; 
But they arose from experience ; ^erefore, 
The sciences did not arise from intuition or inspiration. 

In this example iJie minor asserts or posits the truth of one 
of the 'suppositions, and the -conclusion denies the other two. 

Oi^'unctivee may be resolved into conditionals, by altering 
the form of the miyor ih%iiusb, i. e., changing the di^unctire 
particles into conditi<»]a], e. g. — 

The objects in nature are either eternal, or the results of 
chance, or the effects of intelligent agency ; 



hyGoot^le 



192 UANTJAL OF LOGIC. 

But the; are neither eternal) nor the results of chance ; 
therefore, 

They are the effects of intelligent agency. 

This example, reduced to the conditional form, ia as fol- 
lows : — 

If the otgecta in nature are neither etern^ nor the resolta 
of chance, they are the effects of intelligent (^ncy; 

But they are neither eternal nor the results of chance ; 



They are the effects of intelligent agency. 

Here the same minor and conclumon equally ^ply. 



SECTION y. 

OF THE DILEMHA. 

The dilemma* is a conditional syllogism, with adilgunctive 
antecedent or consequent. It partakes both of the conditional 

and di^unctive argument. 

In the conditional premiss of a dilemma, either the antece- 
dent or consequent may be disjunctive. 

A. dilemma may prove either an affirmative or negative 
conclusion. 

When an affirmative is proved, the dilemma is said to be 
in the modus ponens ;¦ when a negative is proved, it is siud to 
be in the modus toUem; when the conclusion is in the 
modus poneos, the argument is said to be cotutructive ; and 

¦ TIm word dilemma means ' double proporitioa ;' to that the nhola u^- 
msnt take* ita name fivm tl» one mixed judgment in it. When this ¦¦ more 
tlian donbk, ¦« in, ' ff a priaoner ia I^all; ^lehargsd, ritbra the Iha^atrate 
moat rdhae to oonunlt. or Um grand jnrr igoorB the will, or the ccmmon jtu? 
acquit, or the (Town exeroBe the prerogatiTS of pudon,' the argnmeot haa Yieea 
called a trilemma, tetralemma, or pol^lonma, aooording to tlw nnmber gf wiaa- 
ben the jadgmsnt majbara.— OitdMat^lia ZonN^lAoi^ p. 396. 



hyGoo^le 



HAHOAL OP LOGIC. 193 

when in the modus tollens, dettruclive. A dilemitia is said 
to be simple vhen it concludes categorically, and complex 
y/btai its conclusion is di^unctive. 

A dilemma is an argument hj which we endeavour to 
prove the absurdity or felsebood of some asserdon. With 
thb view, a conditional proposition is assumed, the antece- 
deut of which is the assertion to be disproved, white ibe con- 
sequent is a diigunctive proposilion, enumerating all tbe 
possible suppositions upon which the assertion contained in 
the antecedent can be tme. Should all the euppoaitions con- 
tuned in tbe consequent be rejected, it must follow that the 
antecedent must also be rejected. If, therefore, a proposition 
of which the antecedent is conditional, and the consequent 
disjunctive, be tbe major of a syllogism, and if the minor 
deny all the suppositions enumerated in the consequent, it 
will follow necessarily that the conclusion must deny the 
antecedent 

In the strictest form of the dilemma, it is supposed that 
some one of the antecedents must be true, or some one of the 
conBequenta false ; but without determining which of them is 
80. The name dilemma also refers to the circumstance, that 
the m^or, in sladng the ailment, presents two suppoeitions 
or cases from each or both of which the same conclusion may 
be drawn. 

Certain kinds of dilemmas require, as will be seen from the 
following examples, that the deniaL of each branch of the 
consequent must be proved in tbe minor by a prosyllogism, 
e.g.— 

If there are two independent first principles, the one good 
and the other eviJ, either the one is more powerful than the 
other, or they are equal in power.* 

But the one is not more powerful than the other ; (for if it 

it were, it would entirely prevent the other from having any 

¦ Arthnr'a Eua; on ' EtUi and theic CaDaee.* 



hyGoogle 



19 1 MANTAI. OF LOGIC. 

share in the production or govemmeDt of the universe : and 
therefore ereiything would be eitlierBbsoIutelj good or abso- 
lutely evil.) Neither are they equal in power J (for if they were, 
but had opposite wills, they would counterbalanoe each other, 
and therefore produce nothing.) 

Therefore, there are not two independent first principles, 
the one good and the other evil. 

In this dilemma, the antecedent is the assertion to be dis- 
proved by remotjon. All the suppositions enumerated in the 
disjunctive part of the major, on which the antecedent could 
be tenable, are removed in the minor by means of proofs pro- 
syllogisticall} attached ; and, as a necessary consequence, the 
conclusion rejects the antecedent. 

This dilemma may be reduced to the two following condi- 
tional syllogisms : — 

1. If there are two independent first principles, the one 
more powerful than the other, everything would either be 
absolutely good or absolutely evil. 

But the present is not the case of everything being either 
absolutely good or absolutely eviL 

Therefore, there cannot be two independent first principles, 
the one more powerful than the other. 

2. If there are two independent first principles, equal in 
power but of opposite wills, they must counterbalance each 
other, and produce nothing. 

But the present is not the case of nothing being produced. 
Therefore, there are not two independent first prindples 
equal in power, but of oppodte wills. 

The following example is of a simpler character: — 

If perfect virtue exists, it exists either among civilised or 

among uncivilised communities. 

But perfect virtue cannot exist among civilised commn- 

nilies i {for civilisation produces only a spurious kind of 



hyGoogle 



s 



MAHUAL or Loaic. 195 

virtue, inclining rather to expediency than rectitude.) Neither 
can it exist among unciyilised communities ; (for the actions 
of savages are regulated by narrow Belfishness, which is in- 
compatible with perfect virtue.) 

Therefore, perfect virtue does not exist. 

The simple comtructive dilemma has a. major premiss, con- 
ttuning several antecedents, with one common consequent, 
and a minor which grants these antecedents disjunctively, 
i. e., grants some one of them, e. g. — 

If the heavenly inhabitants have either no desires, or have 
these fully gratified, they are perfectiy happy. 

But they either have no desires, or have them fully 
gratified. 

Therefore, they are perfectly happy. 

If a ChriMian be living, he is the Lord's servant ; and if he 
be dead, he is the^ Lord's servant 

But he must be always either living or dead. 

Therefore, he is always the Lord's servant. 

In a constructive dilemma, some one of the antecedents is 
assumed to be true; and in a destructive, some one of the 
consequents is assumed to be false, but which is left unde- 
termined. 

The complex comtructive dilemma has a m^jor premiss, 
containing several antecedents, each with a different conse- 
quent, and a minor which grants the antecedents difgunc- 
tively ; while the condusion infers the consequents disjunc- 
tively, i. e., determines one of them to be tnie, e. g. — 

If the evangelists speak truth, Christianity is of God ; and 
if they do not speak truth, the ezist«nce of Christianity is 
unaccountable. 

But the evaogelists either do or do not speak truth. 

Therefore, Christianity is either of God, or its exiettaee is 
unaccountable. 



hyGoogle 



196 HAHtTAL OF LOGIC. 

The destructive* dilemma has a m^jor, containing several 
antecedents, each with a different consequent, and a minor 
denying the consequents disjunctivelj ; while the concluuoa 
alno di^unctiTely denies the antecedents, e. g. — 

If men were wise, they would avoid speaking irreverently 
of sacred things, even in jeet; and if thej were good, they 
would avoid doing so in earnest. 

But many do not avoid this, either in jest or earnest. 

Therefore, many are either not wise or not good. 

If a witness be an honest one, be will not bear &lse t£Bti- 
mony designedly ; and if he be a competent one, he will not 
do so imdedgnedly. 

But a witness who speaks &lse, does so either dedgnedly 
or undesignedly. 

Therefore, he is either not honest or not competent. 

The facility with which a destructive dilemma may be 
reduced to two conditional syllogisms, may be seen from the 
foUowing example, viz., — 

If this man were prudent, he would behave well for hia 
own sake ; and if he were benevolent, he would behave well 
for the good of others. 

But be does not behave well, either for his own sake or the 
good of others. 

Therefore, he is neither pmdent nor benevolent 
1. 

If this man were pmdent, he would behave well for hia 
own sake. 

* WTiatalsj and otheis seem to be of opinion, tlut a deatmoCiTa dOetana, 
properlf so called, abanld, like the complex eonstrncttTa, hara a diqoiicliTe 
minor pranisai and tbia the^ term the otHj ttoe form of tbs deatmctira 
dilamma. In p<dDt of fkct, howerar, the tmpit dsatmctiTe ia a atili mora eom- 
mod fiirm, and an; argamanti adduced againat it will equallj apply to ths 



\ 



hyGoogle 



HAKDAL OF LOQIO. 197 

But h« does not behave well for his own sake. 
Therefore, be is not pradent. 
2. 
If this man were benevolent, he would behave well for the 
good of others. 
But he does not behave well for the good of others. 
Therefore, he is not benevolent 

A dUenuna may become invalid in one or other of three 
ways, 

1. When the members of the division in the disjunctive 
part of the major are not adequate to the whole divided ; in 
other words, when they do not enumt^te all the possible 
suppositions, e. g. — 

If a writer is to be accounted original, it most either be in 
virtue of innate ideas, or of thoughts taken from other 
authors. 

Sut a writer cannot be accounted original in virtue of in- 
nate ideas ; (for if ideas are innate, they are common to men 
in general ;) neither can he be accounted original, if his 
thoughts are taken from other authors ; (for in this case he is 
a plagiarist.) 

Therefore, in no case can a writer be accounted ori^nal. 

In this example, it is evident that in the di^unctive part of 
the me^oT an alternative is omitted, viz., that a writer may 
have ideas which are peculiarly the product of his own in- 
tellect, and which consequently are neither innate nor taken 
Irom other writers. 

If Abraham were justified, it must have been either by faith 
or by works. 

Now he was not justified by folth (according to James,) nor 
by works (according to Faul.) 

Therefore Abraham was not justified. 



hyGoogle 



198 lUNDAL OP LOGIC. 

In diis example the alternative — bg faUk and morkt 
conjointly is omitted.* 

2. If the prosjUogiadc preof is insufBcient to prove the 
minor, e. g. — 

If the soul be annihilatedi it must be hy something which 
is in existencfi, or something which is not." 

But that which is in existence can never prodnce what ia 
physically contrary to iteelf ; and that which has no existence, ¦ 
cannot act 

Therefore, the Bonl cannot be annihilated. 

That the proof of the minor fiuls will be readily seen by 

reducing the argnm^it to two conditional syllogisms ; ibna — 

1. 

If the sonl can be annihilated by something which exists, 
that something must produce what is phy^cally contrary to 
itself. 

But DO existence can produce what is physically contrary 
to itself. 

Therefore, the soul cannct be annihilated by anything 
which exists. 

2. 

If the soul can be annihilated by sometlilng which does 
not exist, that something must act. 

But that which does not exist cannot act. 

Therefore, the soul cannot be annihilated by that which 
does not exist. 

Two objecljons may he made to the part of the minor, 
which asserts that what is in existence cannot produce any* 
thing phyracally contrary to itself. 1. The asserted impos- 

¦ Con^dering logic aa > forraal science, the Bappljing of in omitted altcnw- 
iin is a malerial, not a logical merit. 

^ Drew's Em; on tbe ImmottiG^ of tbe 8«id. 



hyGoogle 



UANDAL OF LOGIC. 199 

ubilily b merely tm assumpUon; and, 2. If the Omnipotent 
can create out of nothing, a greater exertion of power is not 
required to annihilate what has been so created. 

But to lake a simpler example, viz, — 

If a miin study metaphysics, he must either follow implicitly 
some existing works on the subject, or he must trace the 
workings of his own mind. 

But if he follows implicitly some existing works on the 
subject, he must take his knowledge from authority ; and if 
he traces the workings of his own mind, he will involve him- 
self in inextricable confusion. 

Therefore, be must either take his knowledgefrom autb o- 
rity, or involve himself in inextricable confiision. 

In this argument the second alternative does not hold true ; 
for a man may trace the workings of his own mind without 
involving himself in inextricable confusion. 

3. A dilemma ought to be incapable of being retorted. 

The retortibility of a dilemma is rather a mark by which 
we may conclude it to be Mlaoious, than any distinct circum- 
Btence of invalidi^. 

The following example is, in substance taken from one of 
Cicero's letters to a provincial dignitary who .had upbraided 
him for negligence in his correspondence. 

If your letters have ceased, you have either become lazy, 
or you do not value my friendship, or you have forgotten me. 

But your letters have ceased. 

Therefore, you have either become lazy, or you do not value 
my friendship, or you have forgotten me. 

This dilemma is vitiated by an illogical distribution of the 
major premiss for the supposition, ' or your attention is other- 
nise engroued,' is omitted. Instead of pointing out the logical 
inaccuracy, Cicero retorts ihe dUemma, as they were both 
equally dilatory in their correspondence. 



hyGoogle 



200 HAKUAL OF LOOTC. 

There is a well-knoim Rncieiit esample of a retortible 
dilemma mentioned I7 AuIuh Gelliu§, and generallj quoted 
by It^ciana, which may be added: — 'Knatlilus, a rich yonng 
man, denroiu of learning the art of pleading, applied to Pro- 
tagoras, a celebrated sophist, to instruct him, promising a 
great smn of money as his reward, one-half of which was ptud 
down, the other half he bound himself to pay as soon as he 
should plead a cause beibre the judges and gain it. Prota- 
goras found him a rery apt scholar ; but after he had made 
good progress, he was in no haste to {dead causes. The 
master, conceiving that he intended, by these means, to shift 
off his second payment, took, as he thought, a sure method of 
getting the better of his delay. He sued Euathlus before the 
judges; and, having opened his cause at the bar, he pleaded 
to this purpose : — " O most foolish yonng man, do you not see 
that, in any event, I must gain my point ? for, if the judges 
g^ve sentence for me, you must pay by their sentence ; if 
^^nst me, the condition of our agreement is fulfilled, and 
you have no plea left for your delay, after having pleaded and 
gained a cause." To which Euathlus answered, " O most 
wise master, I might have avoided the force of your argu- 
ment by not pleading my own cause. But, giving up this 
advantage, do yon not see that, whatever sentence the judges 
pass, lam safeT If they give sentence for me, I am acquitted 
by their sentence ; if against me, the condition of our ^ree- 
ment is not fulfilled by my pleading a Ciuise and losing it."' 

The dilemma, as used by Protagoras, may be thus stated ; — ¦ 

Bither the canse will go on my side, or on yours. 

If the cause goes on my side, you must pay me according 
to the sentence of the judge ; if the cause goes on your side, 
yon must pay me according to your bargain. 

Therefore, whether the cause goes for me or against me, 
yon must pay me &e reward. 

Euathlns retorted the dilemma thus : — 



hyGoogle 



HAKDAL OF LOGIC. 201 

Either I shall gain the caitee, or lose it. 

If I gain the cause, then nothing will be due to jou, ac- 
coi^ng to the sentence of the judge ; but if I lose the cause, 
nothing will be due to jou, according to mj bargain. 

Tberetbre, whether I gain or lose the caose, I will not paj 
yon, for nothing will be due to you.* 



SECTION VI. 

OF TH* KNTHTMEKE.'' 

A very p^valent error, regarding the nature of the entby- 
meme, is, that it is a syllogism with one premiss suppressed, 

* This ibn? ii bj tbs Greek aQthora genendlf told of tbe Rhetoridm Corax 
{orow) «Dd his pnpil Tinu. The paizled jadgea, in lieu of ¦ deciuDs in the 
oue, ingril; pronmiDced of plaintiff and defendent— Kaxou xegaxef xaxov 
»I0V (pltgn; egg of t pUgnj orow !} Hence the piOTerb. — Sir W. BamiiMt 
Had'* WorJa, p. 701. 

The dilemma of Bias, tIe.^^ uxoTem dncaa fbtmoiain, habebia conamonflm, 
tt dsfiKiaeia, pamam : ergo Nulla eat dacenda — lite mac; otLsr azamplea, may 
be shown to be false, fram not ennmenting all the poB»ble supposiUona ; for 
aa Aldrioh obaerrei, 'atguadammtdiapaliAritudo, — (there ia a certain inter- 
mediate d^rae of beaatj,) or it nuj be ahewa to be I'etortibte ; thna :¦ — 

S Jbcmosam dnxera, nan hibebo psnam ; ai defbrmem, non babeto com- 

^ The nfoal Tiew of the entbjrmeme, though of a remote date, in not Aristotolic. 
The Sta^rite, aa mentioned in the teit, dialingniahea tbe entbjpmeme tirom the 
pure ajUogiani bj eonaidering it aa a reaaoning of a peculiar natter, a reaaonhig 
proceeding od ngat or iiktShoodi, suXKoyiffiMf {ctn'k^f) c| ux-dTU* q 
ntiitmr. The lenn artX^t (imperfect), nanallj introduced into thia defini- 
tion, and on which tbe oommoa view of tbe enthTmeme mainlj resto, baa been 
(jeotad at apaiiona, en tbe moat aatia&ctoi; anthoritj. The mppoution, alao, 
that the word niujitiip^ from bong componnded of t> and du/Mi, which, 
in an etfmolo^cal ptdnt of view, ia cettainlj coireet, baa tended much to 
confinn Uie general n^pprebenaiotu In the langoige of Ariatotie, dv/tfie 
is not fie nmid; neither doea he nae the word ftiviiniJia. ai faailng anything 
to do either with eipiesead oi suppressed piemiases. Other writara also osed 



hyGoogle 



or, as it is often termed, an imperfect or defective s^llo^m. 
In Aristotle'8 writings) it never means this. Tlie tenn tm- 
perfect is not applied b; him to an argument with a sup- 
pressed premiss, but to a syllogism drawn in the second 
or third figure, the truth of which is not directly evident by 
the dictum de omni et de nuUo. 

An enthymeme, in its proper signification, may be as com- 
plete in its expresBioa as any other kind of syllogism ; for it 
merely differs from the syllogism in this, that its conclusion 
depends on sigjis and likelihoodi.* Its province is mainly 
probable reasoning, and therefore treats reasoning as applied 
to a particular kind ef matter. It does not proceed npon 
axioms, like the syllf^sm. The matter of the m^jor pre- 
miss of an enthymeme is taken from the ronai (topics or com- 
mon places), and these hold the same place in regard to the 
enthymeme, which the axioms do to the syllogism. The 
r^rej, or common places, are general principles, based on 

the word, bat nithoat any tediDical sigaificance. Tha fblloviDg pasu^ tram 
Sophocles in»7 suffice in proof of this : — 

Tap$iiv /My a ytpaif raiSu/i.iif^^'^ ffoXXj; er ata-yxji rcKTO ffou. 
~(Ed. Col 292. (Much and fordble naaaa ig ttetB to be awed bj the 
tentimenti uttered by thee, old man.) 

'%"« 70J buyj ^aia TavBufiij/Lara ran aaiv aSs^KTav o/tfuxrut 
TtjTa/iivoi. — Ibid, 11B9, (For JOB bear no alight unprunimf of tliia, beii^ 
deprired of joor sightleas ejes.) 

It wonld appear hum theaa paaaagee, that the word i>iufi,t)/ia Dii^iull; 
meant (ometbing preseat to the mind for eotuideratum or rglectton; and the 
tmultion from this, as Mr Manael observes, to an argameat ofprobiiAilg — > 
BnggeeUon, though Dot domoDetratiTe, jet deserving attention in practical qoes- 
tioDS — is easy and nitaral enoogli. On this point the learner m^ idvanta- 
geously cocBDlt £d. Bev., voL IviL, p. 221 : Hansel, app. p, 40, et seq. 

' EfxOT-o — iTipitia — TlXlt/ri^lOM. 'An argomant which alleges aoina 
antecedent, is called bj Aristotle an tiXOi ; and that which allsges soma con- 
seqQent, a niifLiinv. If it slleges • cmseqnent which oould not have been 
prodaced by auy other cansebnt the BDpposed one, the tjganient ia s TtK/ii!gifiV, 
or pomtive proof. For inatance, if it is to be prored that A msrdered B, any 
fonner grudge of A's against B'would be an i,xe(, or predispodng caose 
which might have produced tha act ; and any sudden enricbment of B just 
about tha time of the mnrder, wonld be a Di^fiiioi, or probable effect of tha 
action.'— Jfb((r^, p. ISO. 



hyGoogle 



F L^GIC. 203 

probabilities, not on axioma ; and the term ratroi, iQ this ap- 
plication, may bo explained bj naming it the place where 
middle terms are found." But since enthyroemes derive their 
force only from cumulation, there is nothing gained from 
reducing them to syllogistic form. 

The foregoing is a brief statement of tbe nature of the 
Aristotelian eothymeme, and is merely given to guard the 
learner against a prevalent, though erroneous notion. The 
common view, however, whether the result of misapprehension 
or of iDtentional innovation, has been too long countenanced 
by almost all writers on logic to be readily rejected. It is a 
qaestjon, indeed, how far the rejection of the common view is 
desirable, if we consider bow much it conduces to logical 
expertness. In ordinary argumentation, syllogisms invari- 
ably occur in an abbreviated form, for the entire statement of 
premisses and conclusion would appear pedantic and artifidal; 
and in connection with the word enthymeme, iu ils ordinary 
acceptation, it may not be out of place to lay before the learner 
the rules by which he may ascertain the particular figure in 
which any enthymeme may be drawn." 

An enthymeme, as commonly defined, is an irregular syllo- 
gism in which one of the premisses is suppressed, or, as it 
might be, more properly defined — an argument in the form in 

¦ Qaam perveaUgBre aUquod TDlnmua locoi nosse dsbemaa : sic eaita up- 
pellalK Bant hffl qoBsi eedee e qiiibn* argumonU promootnr. Itaqno licet 
definirc locum es3« argnmentl sedem ; ai^meiitom autem, ratianem, qnz r«i 
dubiee fedat fldem ; Cic. Top. op. 3. — (Whaa we iiiah to trace out any uga- 
ment, ve ought to know tbe ptaces, fijr, on tbie aecoimt, Ornj have baeo named 
by Aristotle tbc seats, ss it n-era, wbenoe argameuts are adduced. Therefore, 

or OBDSe which confirmB something doubtful.) The word argnmeot is used her* 
as BjnonjmoBS with the middle term. 

^ In tbe foraiil view of logic, the enthjmenie canoot be coDsIdered as syllo- 
gistic, for oar belief in its coocloairanoss must srise from our knowledge of 
tbe object-matter, and without this knowledge wc conid Dot supply the sup- 
pressed premiss either actually or mejitally. 



hyGoogle 



804 HANTAI. OF LOQIC. 

which it would naturaUy occur in thought or speech. It coq- 
aequenUy consists of only the expressed premisB and the con- 
clusion. These are designated the antecedent and consequent, 
the latter being the conclusion of the syllogism, and the 
former either the m^jor or minor premiss. 

Although the enthymeme, as ordinarily nnderstood, is a 
defective syllogism, consisting of only one premiss and the 
conclnsion, it always implies a syllogism, and expresaeg ita 
terms. 

If the syllogism implied in an enthymeme be a simple one, 
it will be easy to discover which of the premisses lias been 
suppressed, by observing which of the extremes occurs in it; 
because one or other of the extremes must occur in each pre- 
miss, and from this we ascertain which of the premisses the 
antecedent is, and how the syllogism is to t>e completed. 

One of the terms (viz. one of the extremes of the question) 
always occars twice, and when this term is the subject of the 
consequent, the major premies is Buppressed ; but if the term 
twice occurring be the predicate of the consequent, the minor 
premiss b suppressed. The suppressed premiss is supplied 
by comparing with the middle term the extreme which occurs 
only once.* 

In the greater Dumber of enthymemes the minor is ex- 
pressed as being more particularly related to the question to 
be proved, and also as being more likely to he called in ques- 
tion than the mQJor. Tlie major, as already stated, is usually 

Although the mtyor pmnin la generally aappresfied m moat eDtbTmomes, 
jet there ere lome enthymemea in which the miDor premiiB ig fbnnd to be 
omitted. This maj happen when the nilnoi premiu is veij evident, or nhea 
mnch stress it meant to be laid npon the m^or, e. g. — ' Everj tyrannical king 
deserres to be deposed bj his sabjecta ; tberefore, Nero desarved to be deposed 
bj the Bomans.' The minor premiss irhich is enppressed may be thns snp- 
plied— 

' Kero was a tyrannical king;' 
and thns the argoment is reduced to regnlu eyllogistiG form. — Hw/Ae, p. 129. 



hyGoogle 



UANCAI, OF LOOIO. 205 

of a more general clianuter than the minor, containing a tnilh 
better known, and coDseqaentl; less liable to objectioa or 
contradiction. 

In order to show in what fignre an enthymeme is drawn, 
the following roles have been l^d down ; and by attending 
to these, in connection with the special rales of syllt^isma, 
the figure of an enthymeme maj be readily ascertained. 

Bulk L 

When the antecedent and consequent have a common sub- 
ject, the enthymeme is drown uther in the first or second 
figure, and the miyor premiss is suppressed. 

Here three things are to he noted. 

1. l^at it is only in the first and second figores that tLe 
minor proposition and conclusion can liave a common subject. 

2. That if the minor is negative, the enthymeme is not 
drawn in the first figure. 

3. That if the conclusion is affirmative, the enthymeme is 
not drawn in the second figure. 

In the foUowing enthymeme, viz. : — ¦ 

Isaiah was a true prophet; therefore, 

Isaiah was inspired, 
the antecedent and consequent haye a common subject, viz. 
' Isaiah.' The other terms are ' prophet,' the predicate of the 
antecedent, and ' inspired' the predicate of the conaequent; 
but since a syllogism can only have three teims, and as the 
middle term does not appear in the conclusion, the term 
' prophet' must be the middle term ; and by comparing it dw- 
tributed with the major term ' inspired,' we supply the sup- 
pressed premise, and have a ^jrUogism in Barbara of the first 
figure. Thus, 

All true prophets are inspired. 

Isiuah was a true prophet. 

Isaiah was ii 



hyGoogle 



306 MASUA^L OF LOOIO. 

The following enthymeme, viz. : — 

' No guilty pleasures are unattended with remorse, there- 
fore no guilty pleasures are truly satisfactory,' 
ia drawn in the second figure. The consequent and the ante- 
cedent have a common subject, viz. ' No guilty pleasures ;' the 
other terms being ' truly satisfactory,' and ' unattended with 
remorse,' which, latter term must be the middle, as it does not 
appear in the conclusion ; and by comparing it with the major 
twin ' truly satis&ctory,' we supply the suppressed premiss, 
and have a comp!et« syllogism in Camostres of the second 
figure. Thus, 

Whatever is truly satisfactory is unattended with reTOf^se, 
No guilty pleasures are unattended with remorse- 
No guilty pleasures are truly satisfeclory. 

Rule II. 

When the antecedent and consequent have a common pre- 
dicate, the enthymeme is drawn either in the first or third 
figure, and the minor is suppressed. 

It must be noted here, — 

1. That it is only in the first and third figures that the 
major proposition and conclusion can have acommon predicate. 

2. That if the conclusion is universal, the enthymeme is not 
drawn id the third figure. 

In the following example, viz. : — 

Nothing difiicult of attainment is within reach of the indo- 
lent; therefore, useful knowledge is not within reach of the 
indolent, 

the antecedent and consequent have a common predicate, viz. 
' vrithin reach of the iudolent ;' and, as the only other term 
which does not appear in the concluraon is ' nothing difficult of 
attainment,' this must be the middle term ; and by comparing 
it with the subject of the conclusion, viz. ' useful knowledge,' 



hyGoogle 



UANdAL OF LOGIC. 207 

we Bapply the minor pretqigg, and have a complete syllogiani 
in CeUrent of the first figure. Thus, 

Nothing difficult of attainment is -((ithin reach of the indo- 
lent. 

All useful knowledge is difficult of attainmenl,- therefore, 

Uaefiil knowledge is not within reach of the indolant. 

The following enthymeme, viz. : — 

All who believe in dreams, must be ignorant of the efiecta 
produced hy external objects on the body in sleep ; therefore, 
some ancient poets must have been ignorant of the effects pro- 
duced by external objects on the body in sleep, 
is in the third figure ; and by comparing the subject of the 
consequent or minor term, viz., ' some ancient poets,' with the 
middle t«rm, ' believe in dreams,' we Hupply the minor pre- 
miss, and have a regular syUogism in Datisi. Thus, 

All who believe in dreams must be ignorant of the efiecta 
produced by external objects on the body in sleep. 

Some who believed in dreams were ancient poets. 

Some ancient poets must have been ignorant of the effects 
produced by external objects on the body in sleep. 

When the subject of the antecedent is the predicate of the 
consequent, the enthymeme is drawn either in the second or 

fourth figure, and the minor is suppressed. 

It must be observed here, — 

That it is only in the second and fourth figures that the 
subject of the major proposition can be the predicate of the 
conclusion. 

An enthymeme is frequently an abbreviation of a condi- 
tional or disjunctive syllogism, and in either of these cases it 
presents /our different terms, neither of which occurs twice. 
But aa the consequent, in such circumstances, depends alto- 



hyGoogle 



208 UABUAL OF LOQIO. 

gether on the euppressed premise ^^^ prenuBS must be 
either a conditional or diqun^fve mtyor proposition, e. g. — 
' The objects in natnre aiw not sdP existent Therefore, tiey 
were created hj a aelf-existent being.' This example, on 
examination, wiD prove to be a conditional S7ll<^;ism in an 
abbreviated form, and may be expanded thus, — 

If the objects in nature are Dot self-existent, they were 
created by a self-existent being. 

But the objects in nature are not self-existent ; therefore, 

They were created by a self-existent being. 



SECTION VII. 



An Epicbeirema^ is a syllogism, with a prosyllc^ism ap- 
pended eilher to the nugor or minor premiss, or to both. 
The prosyllogism is incidentally introduced, with the view of 
proving one or other of the premisses of tbe ai|;nment lud 
down. It forms the expressed premiss of an enthymeme, of 
which the premiss to which it is appended is tbe conclufflOQ, 
e-g-— 

All sin is dangerous. 

Covetousneas b sin, (for it is a transgression of the law;) 
therefore, 

CovetousnesB is dangerous. 

The minor premiss, viz. — 

Covetonsnessisatran^iressionofthelawitherefiH^itisffln — 
is an eotbymeme. 

The following example of an ejucheirema is a Byll<%iatic 
condensation of Mr Payne's refutation of Dr Brown's theory 
on the nature of virtue. In answer to the questions, What 

* ABjIlo(^iritliiacb«pemu»i«io oalbd&om aer^tipu, I nodattake 



hyGoogle 



is virtue? How do our feelings of moral approbation arise t 
Dr Brown states that virtue is a relation, and that relations 
do not eiist in the objects, but in the mind that contemplates 
them — that there is no virtue in actions — nothing that is in 
one action which does not exist in another, to excite the 
emotion of moral approbation — that virtue is a felt relation to 
certain emotions, and nothing more — that the mind might have 
been formed capable of approving what it now disapproves ; 
and in this case vice would not only seem virtue, but would 
reall; be virtue, as both depend on the arbitrary constitution 
of the mind. 
Mr Payne's refutation maybe epicheirematically stated thus — 

Whatever theory maintains that virtue has no character of 
itself, but depends on the arbitrary constitution of the mind, 
must be false ; (for it supplies us with no adequate cause for 
the rise of the emotion of approbation ; for it proceeds on a 
practical forgetfuluess of the distiDction which exists between 
what u and what ought to be ; for it implies that the most 
flagitious actions may, upon a change of opinion, not only 
lose all their turpitude, but become positively virtuous; for it 
implies that we do not approve of an action, because it is 
right, but that the action becomes right, because we approve 
of it.) 

Bat Dr Brown's theory mtuntains that virtue has no cha- 
racter of ilseK but depends on the arbitrary constitution of 
the mind ; therefore, 

Dr Brown's theory muat be false. 

The prosyllogistic proo& may be stated in separate syllo- 
^ems; thus — 

Every theory on virtue that supplies ns with no adequate 
cause for the rise of the emotion of moral approbation must 
be false. 

Every theory on virtue maintaining that it has no 
character of itself but depends on the arbitrary constitution 



hyGoogle 



210 MAMCAL OP LOGIC. 

of the miad, supplies us vith no adequate canse for the rise 
of liie inolion of moral approbalion ; therefore, 

Every theorf on Tirtne maiDtaimng that it has no 
character itael^ but depends on the arbitrarj constitution 
of the mind, must be &lse. 

The learner may easily throw the remaining prosyllo^tic 
proofe into eyllc^niB. 

The following examples may be subjoined for exercise. 

One of the best and most frequently quoted examples, is 
Cicero's defence of Milo. It is as follows : — 

He who attempts to aasassinate anothw, toay be joslly 
killed by the object of his murderous intentions ; (for the laws 
of nature, and of nations, and the conduct of good men, proye 
it UwfuL) 

But Clodius attempted to assassinate another ; (for he 
formed an ambuscade against him, and provided himself with 
armed soldiers ;) therefore, 

Clodius was justly killed, by the object of his murderous 
uitenlioDB. 

Studies which regulate the conduct of the mind are of the 
utmost importance ; (for it is the mind which directs all our 
actions.) 

Logic is a study whiUt regulates the conduct of the mind ; 
(for it is wholly emplt^ed about its operations ;) therefore. 

Logic is a study of the utmost importance. 

This form of reasoning is often employed efficaciously; but 
every superduoua proof should be omitted. In many exam- 
ples, the proof of the minor is of little use ; yet, whenever 
the auxiliary propositions are employed to strengthen either 
the agreement or repugnancy of the extremes in the con- 
durioD, they are used with effect. 



hyGoogle 



HANCAL OP LOGIC. 211 

SECTION VIII. 

OF THE SORITES. 

The BoritfiB* is bo named from ffcuf nf, a heap. It consUtB of a 
series of proportions so arranged, that the predicate of eacli 
becomes the subject of the next, till at length, in the ultimate 
conclusion, the predicate of the last proposition ia affirmed or 
denied, as the case may be, of the first subject in the series. 
In a Borites there are as many middle terms as there are io- 
lermediate propOBitions between tlie first and last, the subject 
of each intermediate proposition being a middle term. A 
sorites may, therefore, be drawn ont into as many separate - 
syUo^ms as there are intermediate propositions, since each 
intermediate proposition contains a middle term.'' 

In this kind of syllogism the mind proceeds from link to 
link in the chain of reasoning, without drawing separate con- 
clusions, as for InBtance, 

Ais B, 

BisC, 

CisD, 

DisE, 
Therefore A is E, 
hut for these abstract, symbols let ub substitute an exunple. 

^ The lenn soritts implioa that tha propositions ara piled, as it were, ODe 
on another. The German term (kettenschloas), meinini' ohaia-argnment, ia 
man appropriata, as it denotes the mind's progress hi linkiag one jodgmeot lo 
another in a process of argomcDtatian. 

^ A saritea baa u ¦numj middle terms as there are propoatioDS, lai hg too, 
for then an ezaetlr aa manj diSsient terms as propositions, bid two of theaa 
terms ars eitremea. It hence also appears that if a eoritea be naalved into 
¦jlloglsms, those sjllo^sms will be tno less than the propositions of tUo soritea, 
since there will be as mvaj ajllog^s ta there are middle taima. Howeret, 
the number of syllogisms ma; be better det«rmiDod tins ; if bat one proposition 
of the sorites were employed in each sf llogjam, there woold be as manj sjUo- 
^ams aa propointioiis ; bnt in the firat and lut sjUogism then are, lespeodTelf, 
two propontions of the sorites used, and for each of (ha inlerrening Sfltogisms 
hat one propou^on. — TFaU«r. 



hyGoogle 



212 UANtTAL or LOGIC. 

All who truly Iotb Trisdom earaeatly desire it; 

All who earneetly deaira wisdom use tiie means of attain- 
ing it j 

All who use the means of attaining it encounter difficulties ; 

All encountering difficnltiea are patient, persevering, and 
self-denied ; 

All who are patient, persevering, and self-denied, are vir- 
tuous; 

Therefore, all who tmly love wisdom are virtuous. 

The separate syllogisms into nhich a sorites may be 
expanded may be all of the first figure, and as the design of 
forming them is to bring the minor extreme, or first term, ' 
into connectiou with all the other terms, the following 
arrangement is followed. The first syllogism in the series 
has for its major premiss the second proposition in the 
sorites, and for its minor premiss ihe first propoMdon ; while 
the conclusioa connects the minor extreme with the second 
middle term, thus — 

All who earnestly desire wisdom use the means of attun- 
ing it; 

All who truly love wisdom earnestly deedre it ; 

All who truly love wisdom use the means of attaining it 
In the second syllogism, the major premiss is the third pro- 
position in the sorites, and the minor the conclusion of tlte 
first syllogism, thus — 

All who use the means of attaining wisdom enconnter 
difficulties; 

All who truly love wisdom use the means of attuning it. 

All who truly love wisdom encounter difficulties. 

The same order is followed in the remdning syllogisma — 
the succeeding proposition becoming the major, and the con- 
clusion of the preceding syllogism the minor of each. Tfae 
seiies ends when the first term in the sorites, or the minor 



hyGoogle 



extreme, b connected, or compared with the laat predicate, 
or major extreme, as follows : — 

All who encoanter difflcoltiea are patient, persevering, and 
Belf-deoied. 

All who truly love wisdom encounter difScnldee. 

All who tmly love wisdom are patient, persevering, and 
self-denied. 

Allwho'arepatientjperseveriDg, and self-denied, are virtuous. 
All who truly love wisdom are patient, persevering, and 
self-denied. 

All who truly love wisdom are virtuous. 

The true force of the ailment in a sorites is to be de- 
duced, not &om the resolution of it into ayllo^ms, but from 
the coDfiideration that something is universally affirmed or 
denied in the last premiss of a term, in which the preoeding 
premisses show that the first subject is contained ; and there- 
fore, in the conclusion, the same is legitimately aJflrmed or 
denied of tlie first subject, in the same quantity which it has 
ia the first premiss. 

It has been stated above, that in expanding a sorites into 
separate syllogisms, the first in the series has for its major 
premiss the second proposition in the sorites, and the first 
proposition for its minor. This transposition is required, in 
order that the separate syllogisms may be in the first figure, 
and consequently brought under the dictum which applies to 
that figure. Thus all the syllogisms will be in the first figure, 
and all except the last will be in the moods AAA or AAI, in 
the latter, if the first premiss of the sorites be particular. On 
examining the two first propoeitions in the foregoing sorites, 
it will be seen that the middle term is the predicate of the 
m^or and the subject of the minor ; hence were a conclusion 
to be drawn without a transposition of the premisses, the 
syllogism would be in Bramantip of the fourth figure ; thus — 



hyGoogle 



214 MAN0AI. OF LOGIC. 

All who truly love wbdom earnestly desire it. 

All who earnestly desire wisdom use the meansof attaining it. 

Some who use the means of attaining it truly love wisdom. 

It has also been stated, that in the second syllogism of an 
expanded sorites, the major premiss is the third proposition in 
the series, and the minor the conclusion of the first separate 
8yll(^;ism. And it may be mentioned, in explanation of this, 
that as the two first propositions in the sorites have been made 
nee of in the first separat« syllogism, iu drawing the second 
syllogism, the third proposition in the sorites, used as a major 
premiss, with the conclusion of the first separate syllogism 
used as a minor, will give a conclusion in Barbara of the fi^st 
figure. The process consequently to be followed, in expand- 
ing a sorites into separate syllogisms, is to berin with trans- 
posing the two first propositions in the sontical series, in 
order to give the middle term its proper place in the premisses 
of a syllogism drawn in the first figure ; and, in the second, 
to use the third proposition in {he sorites as a major, with the 
conclusion of the first separate syllogism as a minor. This 
latter process is equally necessary as the first, in order to 
bring all the separate syllogisms under the principles which 
regulate the first figure. 

With reference to a categorical sorites, such as given above, 
it may be remarked — 

1. That no proposition of a sorites except the last can bo 
negative. 

2. That no proposition of a sorites can be particular ex- 
cept the first. And 

3. That if the first proposition be particular, the conclusion 
must be particular. 

In explanation of the first of these rules, viz., that no pro- 
position except the last can be negative, it may be stated 
tiist when a sorites is expanded into separate syllo^sms, the 
last syUogism can alone admit of a negative premiss and con- 



hyGoogle 



Loaic. 216 

elusion ; for BiDce the middle term is the subject of the m^or 
proposition, the syllogiam must be either of the first or third 
figure, and, consequently, bj the special rulea applicable to 
these figures, the minor must he affirmative. But the minor 
of each successive syllogism is the conclusion of that preced- 
ing, ami, by being affirmative, proves that the premisses firom 
which it was deduced were also afiirmative. The last pre- 
miss of the sorites, therefore, viz., the last intermediate propo- 
sition, is the only one that can be negative, because the last 
premiss alone never gives occasion to employ the conclusion 
of the last expanded syllogism as the minor of a subsequent 
one ; for should any other premiss of the sorites but iLe last 
be negative, it would lead to a negative conclusion, and that 
conclusion being made the minor of the following syllogism, 
would violate the special rules of the first, which does not 
admit of a negative minor premiss. 

In explanation of the second of the foregoing rules, viz., 
that no proposition of a sorites can be particular except the • 
first, it may be stated that sinco in expanding a sorites into 
separate syllogisms of the first figure, it is necessary to trans- 
pose the two first premisses, for this transposition gives a 
m^or with a universal subject ; and in all syllogisms of the 
first figure the major must be universal ; for if this were uot 
the case, the middle term would be taken twice particularly. 
Hence all the intermediate premisses of a sorites must serve 
as premisaea to universal conclusions. 

In explanation of the third rule, viz., that if the first propo- 
sitioa be particnlar, the conclusion must be particular, it may 
be stated, that since the subject of the first proposition in a 
sorites is also the subject of the conclusion, and since no term 
can be need more universally in the conclusion than in the 
premisses, the subject of the conclusioa must be particular, 
and consequently the conclusion itself. These condiUons 
apply of course only to the categorical sorites. 

A sorites may also be drawn in the conditional or hypo- 



hyGoogle 



thetlcal form. In the constructive conditional Boritee, the 
proceBB is from tbe poution of the first antecedent to the poBi- 
don of the last conaequent. 

Example 1. 

If it is the i atj of a parent to take care of his children, he 
should keep them as much as possible from vice. 

If he should keep them from vice, he ought to leach them 
what is virtuous. 

If he ought to teach them what is virtuous, he is bound to 
instruct them in religious knowledge. 

But it is the duty of a parent to take care of Ms children ; 



He is bound to instruct them in religious knowledge. 



If the scriptures are the word of God, it is important that 
they should be well explained. 

If it be important that thej should be well explained, they 
deserve to be diligently studied. 

If they deserve fo be diligently studied, an order of men 
should be set apart for that purpose. 

But the scriptures are the word of God ; therefore, 

An order of men should be set apart for diligently studying 

In the destructive sorites, on the other hand, we proceed 
from the remotion of 4be last consequent to the remodon 
of the first antecedent. 

EXAHPLB 1. 

If Bomish councils speak truth, Fopery should be credited. 

If Fopery should be credited, Frotestantism is &llacioQS. 

If Frot«Btantism be fallacious, the scriptures are not the 
rule of faith. 

But the scriptures are the rule of &ith ; therefore, 

Bomish councils do not speak the truth. 



hyGoogle 



lURUAL or LOGIC. 217 

Example 2, 
If the BOiil is m&teml, it most have axtenedoD. 
If it has extension, it mnst bare parta. 
If it baa parte, it must b« dissoluble. 
But the sonl IB not diaeoluble ; therefore, 
The soul is not material. 

If the propositions in a soritical series be metapbysicallj 
true, and the connection between them strictly just, this sort 
of leasoniug will be legitimate i but it is fivqaently very 
eophistical) as will appear from tbe following hamoroDB sorites, . 
BEud to be used by Themistocles, to prove that bis son go- 
Temed the worid : — 

My son goreniB his molber. 

His mother governs me, 

I goTOTD Athena. 

Athens gorema Greece. 

Greece gOTema the world; therefore, 

My son governs the world. 

The sorites invented by Goclenina, and hence called the 
Grodenian sorites, differs from the common form in two re- 
epecta — 1. Its prenussea are reversed; an^ 2. It b^inswith 
the premiss containing the two terms which have the greatest 
extension, while the common form starts with the premies 
containing the terms which have the greatest intension or 
comprehension. 

The Goclenian sorilea may be represented by the following 
symbols: — 

DisK 
CisD. 
BisC. 
A is B. 
AisE. 



hyGoogle 



218 HAKUAL OF LOQIC. 

(Nora.) 
Aiiitatle do« not notice Uio wriUe u > distinct apeoiea of ai 

bnt its prindpla ma; be gmtliered ftom his vrilangi See Csteg. 8, 1, sod 

AniL Pr. 1,26, 2, II. Its dstoiled expantion, as ¦ distinct formof nuoa- 
ing, ihoold property Iw attiibnC«d to the Stoics. 

The writes wu ¦ bTonrica mode of nrgnment with Cicero, althongfa in mxaj 
instiDcei with qncstioDable coodraiTeDess. The fiillaviiig Bra selected as 
¦uiHiAm: — 

EXAKTLB 1. 

Qaonismqae dnoa l>eatisnmiis essa coniitat, beatns sulem can eine virtnte 
memo pallet, nee Tirtns sue rations conitara, nee ratio naqnam inesse, Did in 
hominii fignra ; hominis esse spede deos conGtcndiun est. — De Nat. Dear. I, 
sect- 18. 

EZUIFLX 2, 

NeoKSe est, qni fiirUs sit, eimdein esBe magni animi ; qni magni uiimi ait, 
inTictnm ; qui inTictca ut, enm res homanas despicere atqne infn se poaitas 
ailntraii ; deepicen antam mama potest eaa rea propter qnaa ngritndine affid 
potesc Ex qno effidtni fratesn Tinun ffigritadina nnnqnam iSd. — Toa. Dia, 
Ub. iii. aac 16. 

SECTION IX. 

OF THE BZAUPLB. 

In the species of argament called example,' we draw a 
conclusion from a single fact or occurrence — in other words, 

¦ The eiampls amanls a defectire BjVo^no, and ;et t^eie is no aigDment 
BO commonlj employed. ' The Fwudi EorolnBon <rf 1J92 will end in an ab- 
Hdhile monaichf, becansa the En^h fierolntian of 1010 did so.' Sndi 
rauoiung is onlj Tslid, prorided we can omdnde, ftom the fAta of the Bngliah 
' BoTolntion, that all rarolntlonB lead ta abwlnta monarchT — a judgment which 
maj be tme in itself, bnt cannot be fbrmalij conclndod liom the ^Ten premiss. 
We require other oompatiBons and argnmeDta, to show t^at the tendencj to ab- 
Bolnla monanhr is an inaapanbte muk of reTolntion, and not a mere acddoit 
hHimpDg to the English Rerolatian onlj. And yet ciampleB are so svggestiTS, 
that tb^ oflsn appear ahiiost to amomit to demoDstration ; and it would ba 
sbsiird to endeavDOT to expel them from rhetoric, or from ecieace, on ttie gronnd 
that they are not (oraallj iX}niplete.~~Ouliiae of Oie Laato/ Thought, ^.SSS. 

The aximple diflen from inunction b two rcepeds — Blrst, Indaction pnvM 
the muTcnal from a complete ennmetation of the indiridnala ; example seleots 
dngle cases. Second, iDdoction stops at the tmiTenal ; eiamplo inftn ajDo- 
^Ucally a coHdnsiDii regarding another indlTidos]. — Jfotwe^ p. 82. 



hyGoogle 



HAtirAL OP LOGIC. 219 

we infer &oin a feet that bas occurred, that a eimiliur rcauit 
will take place in respect to some other unknown &ct or oc- 
currence. 

Example has some relation to indtu^ion, but it differs from 
it in two rejects— 1. Tin indaction the enumeration muat 
conEnst of many ringnlar &cl8, while example requires no 
more than' one. 2. In induction the conclusion ia vmverial, 
but in example singular. 

In induction the nature of the process is sncfa, that when 
we draw a conclusion we infer that in ^milar circumstances 
the same result will always follow. In esample this is not 
the case, for tbe conclusion does not infer the certainty of any 
fact occurring in the same manner as the individual fact or 
facta from which we draw our conclusion, but merely the 
probability of such a result or occurrence. 

Example. 

1. The civil war between Marias and Sylla rent the re- 
public i therefore, the war between Pompey and CEcsar will 

2. Artabanos employs this argument to dissuade Xerxes 
from his intended iuTasion of Greece : — 

' It was I that advised your father, and my brother Darius, 
not to cany arms against the Scythians — men who have no 
cities in any part of their territory ; but he, cherishing the 
hope of subduing tbose pastors, heeded not my counsel. He 
proceeded on the ex^»edition, and returned, afler lonng many 
men of hia army. But yon, my liege, are about to carry war 
against men &r more brave than the Scythian»~men who 
are reported to be most valiant both by sea and land. It is 
right I should inform you of the danger that we are to appre- 
hend in so doing.' — Serod. Book, 7-10. 

3. I, O king, who have already beheld nnmeroua and 
mighty powers overthrown by smaller, would not ^n permit 
you in all things to give way to yonth — knowing what an 



hyGoogle 



220 KAMUAL OF LOOIO. ' 

evil thing it ia to covet mucli — recollecting, likevise, what 
wu the nnfOTtnnate result of Cttuh' expedidon against tbe 
MaBBagebe— calliiig likewise to mind that of Camby see agunat 
the Ethiopians, and having myself with Darius fought the 
campugn againat the Scythians, — aware of all these things, I 
held the c^inion, that if you did not stir, you would be held 
the happiest of mortals. — Bei'od. Book, 7-16. 

SECTION X. 

or SOPHISMS. 

Sophisms are of two lunds — verbal and material. In the 
former, the follacy is in the diction ; in the latter, the f^lacy 
Inrks in the object-matter. In the language of the schools, 
these were termed fallacies in dictione and extra dictionem, 
corresponding with the Aristotelic division, viz., oJ irajA n)» 
>j^«v, and hi i^fv r^f hi^iut. 

Fallacies in the expression are necessarily and essentially 
connected with language. Fallacies in the matter, on the 
other hand, are related to language only in a secondary or 
accidental sense.* 

Fallacies have been defined to be ' decepdve or apparent 
arguments, by which a man is himself convinced, or endeavours 
to convince others of something which is not really proved.' 

Aristotle enumerates thirteen different kinds of fallacies. 
Of these six are said to be tn dictione, or in the expression, 
and seven extra dietionem, or in the matter. This eanmera- 
tion is not given as exhaustive of all the possible species of 
faOacies, but rather as a catalogue of the forms under which 
fiiUaciea most generally present themselves in dialectics or 
probable reasoning. 

¦ Th« fonnu atiBeftoin defecta in the ¦rtiiCni7 £gn9 Dfttunght; and bran 
w* IrBqiUDtl; oonfinsd to a iliigls langnage. The latter an in tb« tliaagbt 
itieir, irbethnmitaialljin thsfKlwappliciUoiiofDatioiKta tbiiigi,aifbrma]l7 
is tb« nolatioD of tba Uwi bj nbicb the operations of the reoaon ahould b« 
govenied. Under tbia bead an tbna inclnded boCb fHlaejad^menta and Hlo^ail 
reaaoiiingB. — MimtA, 



hyGoogle 



UUIUAL OF LOQIC. 22t 

L 

rALu.ciK8 IS monosB, ob m the xxPBBseHnr. 
The fiiUacies in the ezpresnoa are the fdlowing : — 

1. HoiDonTmio, or quibUe. 

2. Amphibolia, or nmbignity. 

3. The ftllacy of compoBition. 

4. The fallacy of division. 

5. llie fiUlacf of accent or prosody. 

6. The fellacy of figure of speech. 

1. A sophism of HOHONTUiA, or aquivomtio, is when any 
term in the syllogiam can he used eqairocally, or in a double 
sense, and thus constitute in reality two terms, lliereby intro- 
ducing four terms into the syllogism. 

This species of fallacy b too obvious to be employed in a 
process of reasoning. No one can be decuved by it. The 
f<^owing may saffice as examples : — 
1. 

All that believe shall be saved. 

The devils believe ; therefore, 

The devils riiall be saved. 

2. 

The dog is aa animaL 

Sirins is the dog ; therefore, 

Siiius is an animaL 

8. 

The turtle sings. 

The turtle is a fish ; therefore, 

ASsbsings. 

It may not be out of place here to enamerate some of the 
(nrcumstances under which words may have double meanings. 
1. By accident, as light meaning the contrary to heavy and 
also to dark. 2. From analogy, as line in the military or 
naval art, ugnifying a form of drawing up troops or ships ; 
in geography, a certun division of the earth; in mathematics^ 
the shortest distance between two points ; in fishing, a string 



hyGoogle 



S33 MAHDAI. 07 LOGIC. 

b> catch fish ; in morale, a rale of condoct ; or, more gene- 
rally, as we term that a sioeet taste which gntttfles the palate, 
or & Kiveet sonnd which gratifies the ear ; so in like manner 
the le^ of a table, the le^ of an animal; theyixitof amonutun, 
Hie foot of a man. 3. From raenMance, as a blade of grass 
from its resemblance to the blade of a sword ; dove-tail in 
joinery, &om its similari^ to the tail of a dove. 4. From 
metaphor, as a ship ploughing the deep. 

2. Ahphibolia. In &is species of feUacytheambignitydoes 
not arise so mach fi^im the double meaning of a word as from 
the various constroctions of which a sentence is capable. The 
ancient languages, and more particularly the Greek and 
Xatin, are liable to a variety of construction, fix>tn the in- 
flexions of the words, and the inverted nature of the sen- 
tences. Thus, in the well-knovm example given by Wallif^— 
Aio te ^acida, BonutDiim vincere posse, (I s^, the Ro- 
man you shall kill) — 

il^does not appear, from the form of the exprea^on, whether 
^acides was to slay the Boman, or the Roman ^acides. 
. 3. FiXLACT OT CouposmoiT. This &llacy occurs when Ibe 
middle term is ased distrilmtivelt/ in the m^or premiss, and 
collectively in the minor ; for ia this case we argue from a 
term first taken in its divided sense, and then in ite coUectire 
sense, e. g. — 

Three and two are two numbers. 

Five is three and two ; therefore. 

Five is two numbers. 

2. 

The teslimwiy of tkU witness is insufficient to [urove the 
&ct alleged — so is the testimraiy <^ that witness — and so of 
the other. 

We believe the &ot on the testimmiy of tliis, that, and the 
other witness. 

Therefore, we believe the &ct os soffioieiit evidence. 



hyGoogle 



KAITDAL or LOOIC- 2z3 

S. 

The gfdniDg (tf a high prize is no nncommon occoirence. 
What ia of no uneonunoa occuirence may be reaaoDablj 

expected. 
The gaimog of a faigfa prize maj be reasonably expected. 

4, Fau^ct of Bitisioh. This fellacy is the coDTerse of that 
of comporitioD. Tt oeeors w^hen the middle term is need 
collectively ia the major premiss, and dittributiveli/ in the 
minor — tbere being no legitimate inference from a term used 
in a collective sense in one premiss, and in a distxibntive 
sense in another, e. g.— 

1. 

The primary planets are seven. 

Mercory and Tenns are primary plasets ; therefore. 

Mercury and Yenns are seven. 
2. 

Alt the ap[des from that tree are tvorlh twenty ahiUinga. 

This is an apple from that tree ; Qierefbre, 

It is worth twenty aliillinga. 
3. 

All Ibe angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. 

A B C is an angle of a triangle ; therefore, 

A B C is eqnal to two right angles. 
4. 

All tbe trees make a thick shade. 

This is & tree ; therelbre, 

It makes a deep shade. 

5. Vjlli^oy of Accent ob Pbosodt. A fallacy of accent 
or prosody ie when the same thing is predicated of different 
terms, if they be only written or pronounced in the same 
way, e. g. — 

Eqnns est quadmpes. 

Aristides est ^qnus. 

Ariatides est quadmpes. 
The play of words here is upon ' equus ' and ' eequus,' and 



hyGoogle 



S24 ' HAMUAL or LOQIC. 

is nothing but a sorry pun, as all examples of tiiis &llaC7 
must necessarily be. 

6. Fallacy of the Fiocbb or Speech. This falUcj arises 
fW>in words nearly related to one another, by etymology or 
the grammatical structure of language. Many words springing 
from the same root may have siioh a Nmilarity of sound, 
although varying in sigaificatiiHi, as to make them appear to 
be identical in meaning. Soch are murder, murderer ; pro- 
ject, projector; pretume, pretttmpHon; art, artful; deeiffn, 
designing i faitk, faithful i theory, theorist, &c. The fol- 
lowing are examples : — 

Murder should ba punished vrith death 

This man is a murderer. 

This man should be punished with death. 

However jnst in this case the conclusion maybe, the syllo- 
pava cannot properly be called an argument, for the term 
' murder ' is certainly not a proper middle term, to contain 
the minor term ' murderer,' 

Projectors are unfit to be trusted. 

This man has formed a project. 

This man is unfit to be trusted. 

This argument is also invalid, for the bad sense usually attach- 
ed to the word ' projector' is not implied in the term ' project,' 

Theorists are unsafe guides. 

This man has fi)rmed a theory; therefore, 

He is an unsafe guide. 

The fkUaoy in this example lies in inferring, that a person 
who frames a theory must be a theorist. The two terms, 
though derived from the same root, cannot be conddered as 
equivalent expressions, for the meaning commonly attached 
to the latter term is not implied in the former. To frame a 
theory is considered a proof of intellectnal skill ; but to be a 
theorist, in the common acceptation of the term, impUes a 
proneness to unsound speculation. 



hyGoogle 



HANDiL OP LOGIC. 325 

n. 

FALUCtBfl BXTBA DtOnOMBH, OB » THZ lUTTSB. 

Material feUaciea, as the name imi^es, do oot arise from 
any ambiguity in tenna or forms of speeclt ; and to this class 
may therefore be referred any speciea of &Uacy not resoltiDg 
from ambiguity of language. Some are of opinion that mate- 
rial fallaeies are the only ones that should be designated 
strictly logical, while othws (the formal school of logicians) 
consider them as beyond the province altogether. The fal- 
lacies in the matter are the following :— > 

1. Fallacia accidentia. 

3. Fallacia a dicto secnudnm qiud ad dictum dmplidter, or 
its eonrerse — iall«cia ft dieto mmpliciter ad dictum secundum 
qoid. 

8. Ignorationis elenchi. 

4. A non caasa nt causa. 

9. Fallacia consequentis. 

6. Fallacia petitionis principii- 

7. Fallacia plurium interrogalionum. 

1. Fallacia AccidSntit. 
The JhUacia acctdentit* arises when one of the terms 
agrees or disagrees necessarily with the middle term, and the 
other only accidentally ; and yet in the conclusion the terms 
are inferred to agree or disagree necessarily ; in other words ' 
the middle term is used in one premiss, to signify something 

Tba /i^mia accidenlii ocean when to out of tvo eonDMt«d thiagi wme- 
tUngia attribuUd vhich agrees onlririth tbs alia- HddaiUUf. — Saundenat. 

Wiltis md Aldrich define it tbua : ' Whsn somethiiig acddenlixi it coaCaandad 
with that ichicb is eaeaHai'iir prladpall; intended.' 

'The example of thig foUacj girea bj Aristotle ii, CoriaeoB la dUAnDt from 
Socntes. Soonta ii a nun ; thenfon, Coiiacna li difinnt from m man. The 
Micj lie* in agaoming, that whatero is diSennt fiom a gifan anljact ia in- 
eompatibla with all the predicates of that aabject. The reasoning ia thoa itto- 
gical : — SocTBlM It > aum ; Corisons is not Socntcs ; tbsrebre, Coriicna ia nM 
a man.'— Jt/imaaL 



hyGoogle 



S2S HASUAI. OV LOOIC 

amply, and as to ita essence, while in the other certain 
accidents are taken into account along wiUi it. 

The following ia one of the instances commonly quoted ;*^ 

What is bought in the market is eaten. 

Raw meat b bought in the market ; therefore, 

Baw meat ie eaten. 

In the rn^or premiss the middle term, 'bought in the 
market,' must be understood simfJy as to its substance, while 
in the minor it is used as connected with circumstances and 
accidents. Hence there are four terms. In the foQowiitg 
example there are also four terms : — 

We are forbidden to kill. 

TTsing capital punishment is killing. 

We are forbidden to use capittd punishment. 

In this example it ii^ plain that the middle term, ' kill,' ia 
the major proposition, must be understood as referring to the 
divine commaiid, prohibiting violence ag^st human life, and 
that the violence is consequently of a private nature. In the 
minor, on the other hand, the middle must be understood in a 
public oijudidai sense, and that circamstauces are attached 
to it which make it a middle term, altogether difi^nt from 
that used in the major; yet, in the eonclu»on, the inference is 
&Isely drawn from the one to the other. 

^e follacia accidentjs may be refitted either by distJn- 
^ishing the different senses in whii^ the middle is tf^en, M 
as to show that there are four terms in the sylli^pam, or by 
shovring that the condumon is .luuvers^ while the minor is 
I)anicular, e. g. — ¦ 

Whatever destroys men oog^it to be prohibited. 

Wine destroys men ; therefore, 

Wine ought to be prohibited, 

* Qnod amisti comedisti, Cnidiua emisti,- Ei^ CiDdiim anntdMi.: in quo 
Syod eaatti ti, quid emiiU dufmidnntar ; onda qiutaor tenmsL — W<dlit. 



hyGoogle 



KllnTAL OF I-OGIO. S27 

In this example it is obvious thct an ac<Sdeatal circrat- 
Btance is comfouaded widi an essential one. The majcH- jvo- 
poaitjon must mean 'Whaterei necenartlt/ destroys meni' 
otherwise it is not true. The minor must mean, ' Wine accu 
dentaily destroys men ;' and hence there are four feniis. 

2. FaUacia a dicto secundum quid ad dictum sim/pliciter. 

This &Dac7 occurs Then a term is used in one premiss in 
a limited and in the other in an uniimited sense, or, in other 
words, when we reason from a statement made under a cer- 
tain resbiction ca limitation to the same statement made 
witliout restriction or limitation.* 

It is sometimes difficult to distinguish this fallacy from the 
faUada accidentU; and for this reason they have by soma 
been regarded as one and the same. In reality, the only 
difference between them is, that in ihe/allacia accidentii the 
bllacy lories invariably in the major, while in the fallacy 
under consideration and its converse, it may occur in either 
the major or minor. 

3. FaUacia Ignorationi* Elenchu 

By this form of &llacy is meant the fallacy of a false con- 
tradictory, and we are lo undersfand by it any conclusion 
which seems to be the contradictory of some other conclu^on, 
while in fact it is not. Elenckut properly signifies a conclu- 
fflon contradictory of an opponent's position, which in every 
disputation is the thing of course to be established. This 
&llacy occurs whenever a disputant either intentionally or 
through ignorance overlooks some one or other of the condi- 
tions necessary for proving the contradictory of any proposi- 

¦ ' Tbia folUc; ariaea whsa that which ie trne onljr restrictedl; (teamdim 
guid) i* Ukm aa (ayily and abadatdj tme.' — aamderion. 

' When vhat ii IM davn in ¦ Hmited and conditimsl MuBe ia applied aa if 
laid dowQ absDlntalj.'— iraOit. 

< When we procAsd frtnn a term taksa in a daterminata aense to tba «ame 
taken ibaolntelr.' — Aldrki. 



hyGoogle 



fiS8 aAKHAL OF looio. 

tion had down ; and aa four conditions are reqnired to coneli- 
tute a Tolid contradiction — ^riz., that we speak of the same 
thing in the same tetue, at to the tame part, compared nitk 
the game thing, and emitting at the tame time — ^the absence of 
an^ of these reqnirements will vitiatA a contradicloi7. 
Examiplet. 

1. The point in dispute between primitive Christiana and 
Foljtheista was whether there was one God only, or manj 
gods. Lymachns argues that th^ ancestors adored a plu- 
rality of gods, and were always Tictorious, which was quite 
foreign to the subject debated. Besides the nations they 
conquered, were also Polytheists. 

2. Pascbal, in arguing agtunst Ath^sts, inrists that Athdsm 
is more dangerous than Theism ; whereas the ptnnt in dispute 
is truth, and not the prudence of either system. 

S. Anger has been called a short madness ; and people of 
the weakest understandings are the most subject to it. It is 
remarkable, that when a disputant is in the wrong, he tries to 
make up in violence what he wants in argument This arises 
from his pride. He will not own his error ; and because he 
is determined not to be convicted of it, he falls into a passion. 

In this example, instead of going to show why anger has 
been called a short madness, the writer shifts his ground, and 
wanders into reflections which have no necessary coimection 
with the particular proportion. 

4. A Non Causa^ ut Cavta, 
By this is meant that fallacy which attributes an effect to a 



i«d are wuaii^facliity, rather than falsa — tb» 
error oioriiUiig not In the usgnmeDt of a/iilat caoM, bat at one too gaitral to 
tmmej an^ iiutniotion, and tbna decemog th« fnqiurar, ForiiiitwK«, iniJEning 
the will or permlsnoD of Qod, aa the caniw of an j ermt, tbta srerjlKidj knoix 
already ; bat aa God alvajs acts bj (h« intacmediadoD of Moondaij canaea, 
it Is the intermediat* and not the remoCa eana« tll*l it toogfat, w tbil alone 
eonveja anj new knowledge. — Kinam, p. 480. 



hyGoogle 



HAKOAL OP LOdlO. 229 

&lse cause. It is BometimeB divided into the fidlacy a non 
vera pro vera, and the &Uac7 a non tali pro tali, e. g., ' A 
comet .has appeared ; therefore, there will be war. What in- 
toxicates should be prohibited ; and wine intoxicates ; there- 
fore, it should be prohibited/ 

The ancienta attributed the damage done by lightning to a 
hard substance, which they called a thunderbolt, because they 
were unacquainted with the nature of the electric fluid, 
and supposed that the small eabstances, sach as a part of a 
brick or stone, which were fi^oently found ritaified where 
the electric fluid struck, really came from the clouds. 

5. FaSacia Comequentis. 

A sophism of a &1se consequence occnrs when there is de- 
duced &om a proposition a conclusion which does not follow 
it. This &llacy appears most commonly in the Ibrm of an 
euthymeme ; for one of the premisses is suppressed, that it 
may not be immediately evident that the rules are violat«d, 
e. g., ' GrispuB is coarleous s therefore, he is a flatterer.' 
When the suppressed premiss is supplied, the syllogism will 
Stand either thus : — 

Every flatterer is courteous. 
Crispus is conrleouB ; thereibre, 
Crispus is a flatterer, 

and the flrst rule of the second figure is violated, or it must 
be its simple converse, viz. — 

Every conrleona person is a flatterer, 

and then the roles of conversion ore violated. It is refbted 
by adducing the rule which is transgressed. 

G. Fallacia Petitionis Principii, 
Or begging the question, ia when that is assumed for granted 



hyGoogle 



280 UANDAL OF LOGIC. 

wbid oa^t to have been proved, or b^ reasoning in a drcle, 
i, e., whan the t&pntant tries to jwove reciprocally the cooclii- 
don from the premusea, and the premisses from the concla- 
sion. 

OF THE FETmO FRDTOIPn. 



1. Pride ie odious, because it is disliked b; all ; fin* it pro- 
duces anivwsal hatred. 

2. The Jews argued that Jesus could not be the Messiah, 
because he did not appear as a victorious prince, as the pro- 
phetdea announced he should, taking for granted that the 
prophecies should be understood in the ht«ral sense, which is 
the point denied 1^ Christians — not only because of the 
miracles of Christ, which proved him plainly to be the Mes- 
aah, but because the literal accon^lishment of the [Hophecies 
could occasion no change of the depraved moral state of the 
world ; and therefore could not be the true sense of these 
pnf^ecies. 

8. When necessarians say that (he mind is influenced by the 
preponderant motive, if any motive appeared to be so before, 
as well as aiW election, their position would be just £at 
they infer the preponderance of Ae motive before election, 
&om its appearance after the election, to have been that with 
which the will complied — an inference which is merely a 
petUio prindpii, assuming that for true which their opponents 

ABGCIKG nr A CIRCLE- 



1. Sceptics argue tiiat we ought to doubt of everydiiiig 
because human reason is &llible, and may deceive as. And 
since reason may deceive us, we should doubt the validity of 
the reasons that ioduoe us to doubt. 



hyGoogle 



¦iHnAi. OF LOQu:. 831 

2. Arutode Mserta that the etars seem to twinkle, on ac- 
ooimt of their immenae dbtance, and asserts also that they are 
immemely distant, because they aeem to twinkle. 

S. DescarteB endeaTOnred to prove that God exists, be- 
cause existence is contuned in the clear and distinct idea 
which we have of the Supreme Being ; but he afterwards 
derives the certainty we have, that Such ideas cannot deceive 
us from the incompatibility of such deception with the good- 
ness of the Divine Being. 

4. The whole of Dr Brown's elaborate lectures on the 
nature of virtue amounts to nothing more than a vicious drde. 
We approve of actions, because they are tight j and they are 
right, because we approve of them. 

5. llie feinons arguments of the Romanists, who prove 
the scriptures from the authority of the church, and the 
church from the authority of the scriptures, is a vicious circle.* 

6. It is certain that wealth often makes the mind uneasy, for 
it tends to fill it fiiU of care ; and it is equally certtun that it 
fills it fiill of care, for wealthy men are seldom at ease in their 
minds. 

• It maj be of idvanligv to the Iwnwr to ondantand tin exact gnmiuls on 
wluch tbia ugiutHut is to b« cnnddered as an instance of a viciaiu oinle. Tbe 
nuttsris ireD Btat«d b; Dr BUnraii, p. il2 : ' It ie commoolj sud thai Catho- 
lics foim a lidons dccle when tbej' prare the authoritf oC thur cburch bj the 
aathorit; of tba scriptares, and the aathoiitf of the sciiptania b; tliat of thmr 
cbnich. But, in faet, the aathcDticitj, and, coDseqneptlj, the aodioritT of the 
Bcriptnm in piwred b; the testimonj of Christians of all sects, that is, of bH 
those who professed OhristiBiutj aioce the apostolie age ante the prcaent daj ) 
and, ondoabledly, the Roman and Greek Catholics hare tiuir share in this let- 
tunontol anthoiit;, which ehonld be carefoll; distingnished trom dodrinal 
anthoritj. And as the doctrinal is not proTcd bj the teiAaonial authoritj, nor 
the testimonial b; tbe doctrinal, there la no dicle or redprocation of proob. 
Bat, if tbe doctrinal anthArit; of the aeriptorea were attempud to be prored bj- 
the doctrinal antbnitj of the cfanrch, and tbe dootiinil aotiiorit; of tbe chnreh 
b; tltat rf the seriptnres, them there TOold be ¦ crcfe, ' 



hyGoogIc 



2S2 uAjmu. or loqio. 

7. Fallaeia plurium interrogatiottum. 
This &Uac7 occurs when two or more qaestiona, requiriDg 
each a separate answer, are proposed aa oae; so that if one 
answer tie given, it mnst be inapplicable to one of the parti- 
cnlarB asked, e.g., 'Was Piustratua the usurper and scoorge 
of Athens!' He answer, 'No,.' would be false of the 
former particular, and 'Yes' would be false of the latter. 
This fallacy is overthrown by gmng to each particular a 
separate reply. 

OP INDCCnOK, 

The term induction (yrceyuyyi, inductio) has been variously 
expluned. By some it has been understood to mean the in- 
ducing or influeucing c£fect the nature of the reasoning im- 
plied in the inductive process has on the mind of a hearer. 
Others have explained it as a hringing in, as an inference of 
the question to be proved ; while a third class have held it to 
signify a collection cff accumulation of instances, to constitute 
an antecedent or premiaa, from which to infer a required 
conclusion. 

The last view is the correct one ; for whatever diverdtj of 
opinion may prevail, regarding the exact nature of the induc- 
tive inference, in one point all must agree, that in the induc- 
tive argument the inference is from the particular to the tini< 
versal — in other words, from tite aggregate of individuals to 
the universal whole constituted by them. 

But to pass &om the name to the thing ugniGed by it, 
three conflicting views of the proper function of induction 
present themselves : — 

1. The objective process of investigating partieular fects, as 
preparatory to illation or inference. * 

To this it is otgected, by those who adopt the formal defi- - 
nition of logic, that induction, in so br as it is a logical pro- 
cess at all (and it is only logical, in so &r as it is formal), is 
equally formal with syllogism, though proceeding in the in- 



hyGoo^le 



haSual of looic. 233 

Terse order. And it la objected, farther, that as the iavesti- 
gation of particular tacts is purely an inventive process, it i» 
beyond the bounds of a critical science, and cannot be ad- 
mitted within the province of logic 

2. A material illation or inference of the universal &om 
the singular, warranted either by the general analogies of 
nature, or by epecial presumptions afforded by the object- 
matter of any real science. 

To thia view the formal school also olg'eot, on the ground 
that tbe consequence is not logical, for the inference is effected 
vi materia, in virtue of the matter — that is, on gronnda not 
implied in the Motion of its antecedent;. 

3. A formal illation or inference of tbe universal from the 
in^vidual, as legitimated solely by the lawa of thought, and 
abstracted from the conditions of any particular matter. 

This is the formal view, according to which an^ inference. 
Strictly logical in its diaracter, whether inductive or deduc- 
tive, is determined ratioite forma, by reason of the form of 
the argument, which signifies that the conclusion is neces- 
sarily implied in the very conception of tbe premisses, for 
logic rect^ises no inference that is not necessitated by the 
laws of thought ; and it must therefore be presumed that the 
induction is perfect, i. e., that tbe individuals mentioued are 
in reality the whole constituents of tbe species before the 
inductive inference can come in any way within the province 
of tbe logician. 

To extend the province of logic to tbe selecting and testing 
of instances, would require a broader definition for tiie in- 
ductive process than for tbe deductive. A complete enu- 
meration of instances, or of the members of a class, will con- 
stitute a foundation for a valid inductive inference, but the 
completeness is the result of a material, not of a logical inquiry. 
The Baconian induction, from being more scientific and scru- 
tinising, has superseded tbe ancient induction per enumera' 
tionem nm,plicem, but both were merely material inquiries, 



hyGobgle 



234 MANDAI. OF LOQIC. 

and coDsaqu^tlf extralo^caL Log^ haa no ooDsectlou 
with the one or Uie other beytrnd iba inference dadaced from 
their asaumed completeness. 

The distinction between deductive and inductive reasoning 
ie thus: In dednctive reasoning the process is from the whole 
to the parts ; in inductive reasoning, on the other hand, the 
process is from the parts to the whole. 

Deductive reasoning is governed by the rule ; what be- 
longs,, or does not belong to the containing whole, belongs or 
does not belong to each and all of the conbuned parts. In- 
dnclive reasoning, again, is governed bj the rule ; what be- 
longs, or does not beloi^ to all the constituent parts, belonga, 
or does not belong to the constituted whole. These two rules 
are equally absolute, and detennine all formal or Ic^cal in- 
ference. Whatever transcends or violates either of them, 
transcends or violates lo^c It would not be less illegitimate 
to infer, by the deductive syllogism, an attribute belonging to 
the whole, of something it was not conceived to contain as 
a parl^ tfian by llie inductive to condnde of the wKole, what 
is not conceived as a predicate of all ils constituent parts. 
Logical inference is thus only of two kinds : it must proceed 
either from the whole to the parts, or from the parts to the 
whole ; and it is only under the character of a constituted or 
contaaning whole, or of a congtitntiag or ccmttuned part, that 
anything can become the term of a logiral argnmenlaUoD . 

As processes of reasoning deduction and induction are 
equally essential. They are so related, indeed, that the one 
requires the oUier. Deduction is only possible through in- 
duction. The chief value of the latler consists in realising 
the possibility of the former. Our knowledge commences 
wilb the apprehension of cdngulars ; and it is upon the know- 
ledge thus acquired that every universal whole, whatevCT its 
nature may be, is founded. Deductive reasoning is conse- 
quently not an original process. In the indnctive mode, 
logic, by synthetic illation, ascends to its wholes, and in the 
deductive illalaon re-descends from whole to parts. 



hyGoogle 



lUKUAL OF lOOlC. 235 

But the two processes are not aimilar. The one is the 
eonnterpart of the other. Their analogies and difierences 
can be best exemplified hj employing the same EFfmbok in au 
ascent through an indactive sjUogism, and a re>deecent 
IJirough a dednctiTe. 

Inductiw Syliogitm. 
X, T, Z, are A. 

X, Y, Z, are (whole) B ; therefore, 
Bis A. 

In this example, X, ^i % is the middle term, and b^g 
the Bntfject of both premisses, the ^llt^sm b apparently in 
the third figore ; but it is only in appearance ; for in the de- 
dactdve process the conclusion is invariably particalar in syllo- 
giams drawn in the third figore, whereas in the example 
above given the conclosion is universal ; bat a Qiiivrasal con- 
clneion is not valid in the third fignre; for since the minor of 
a syllogism in the third figure must be affirmative, its predi- 
cate must be pardcular ; and since this predicate must be 
tbe Butgect of the conclusion, the conclusion must itself be 
particular. 

To say, therefore, on the standard of the deductive, that 
the inductive Efyllogiam ia in the tliird figure is a mistake, 
and tbe mistake arises from the ambignity of the copula or 
substantive verb, which in different relations expresses dther 
are contain^ under or cotutitufe. This may be illustrated 
by Aristotle's example, viz. ; — 

Man, horse, mule, are long-lived. 

Man, horse, mule, are the whole class of animals wanting 
bill } therefore. 

The whole class of animals wanting bill are long-lived. 

Here it is evident that the subject ' man, horse, mule,' 
stands in a very different relation to its predicate in the 
m^jor and in the minor premiss, though in botii cases the 
connection is expressed by the same copula. In the major 



hyGoogle 



236 MAKUAL OF LOGIC. 

the copnla ' are' expressea lliat tbe predicate determinee the 
subject as a. contained part ; in the minor, that the Bnhject 
determines the predicate by conHituting it a whole ; thus — 

Long-lived containt man, horse, mnle. 

Man, horse, mnle, comtiiuU wiimal wanting bill ; therefore, 

LoDg-lived coDtaiiui animal wanting hiU. 

On comparing AriBtotie'B example with the statement of 
it immediately preceding, the distinctions between it and the 
^llo^ms drawn in the third figure are as follows : — 1. That 
in the minra premiss of the indnctiTe eyllogism, the mthject, 
instead of being contataed under the predicate, in reality 
comtitutei it ; and, 2. That in virtue of this distinction, a 
nniversal conclusion is logically drawn in this form, which is 
illegitimate in the third flgore of syllogism. 

The above syllogism, when put in the deductive fonn, will 
stand thns — 

Deductive. 
Bis A. 

X, Y, Z, are (under) B ; therefbre, 
X, T, Z, are A. 

In the propodtiona of both the inductive and deductive 
syllogisms, the order of the terms remuns unchanged, but 
the order of the propositions themselves are reversed; for 
the conclusion of the inductive syllogism forms the miyor 
premiss of the deductive. Of the terms the nugor A is com- 
mon to both ; but the middle term, X, T, Z, of the inductive 
syllo^sm, is the minor of flie deductive. The minor premiss 
is common to both syllogisms, but its meaning, when em- 
ployed in the deductive ^llog^m, is different &>m its mean- 
ing in the inductive. In the indactive, the parts, i. e., the 
subjects X, Y, Z, bdng conceived as constituting the mhoU, 
are the dstermining notion, while, in the dednctive the same 
parta being conceived as eoBlained under the whole, are the 
determined notion. 



hyGoogle 



HAMCAL OF LOaiC. 237 

The fbregtnng ezpUu^on of th« nature of Indnctioii, in 
its l<^cal aspect, seems sufficient for an elementary treatise. 
Examples and explanatioDB might be multiplied, bnt the 
siune tiindamental principle applies equally to any instancea 
that might have been adduced. The inventive process, by 
which general trnths are arrived at, is nnqnestionably one 
of the most valuable occupations in wfaich the human mind 
can be employed. And altbongh, in accordance with the 
view here taken of Induction, any such inrestigaUon must 
have been deemed eztralogical, still, did space permit, the 
processes by which many of the more important truths in 
the physical sdencea have been iocontrovertibly determined, 
would have been appended. 



It, PriHW^ Sqiura. 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogle 



9 Select 3.ist 

FOFTJI.AB irOBES, 

j^otlt tti( M- <^iii ^ &^% tflnsgoin. 



ALISON'S fflSTOEY OF EUROPE, doring the FEENCH REVOLU- 
TION. 20v. cro-STo-fed. Also, OB i^itome, in 1 V. 7» fti oL 

A SYSTEM OF UNIVEESAL GEOGRAPHY, Rumded on the Writ- 
ing! of Halts Bnm aodBidbL Sto.80>. 

ARNOLD'S LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE By A. D. Stanley. 
6th edidon, Sra 16*. 

AYTON-S LAYS of the SCOTTISH CAVALIERS, and other Poena, 9*. 

AN AUTOBIOGRiPHICAL MEMOIR of Sib JOHN EAKROW, 
Babi., Ute ofthe Admiralty. Sto. cloth, 16«. 

A SYNOPSIS of CRITICISMS npon those puuagea of the Old TestanwDt 
in irhich Modem CommentstorB hare diSer^ from 'the Authorised 
Veruon ; together with an ExplanoIJoii of varione DifficoltieB in the 
Hebrew and Enghsh Teils. By the Rev. Rtchabd A- F. BabsetT, 
M.A., Fallow of King's CoUege, Cambtidge. Vols. I. and H. 8to. 28> 
each, cloth; or in i half volumes 14< each. Also, half volume V. H«, 

BALFOUK (JOHN HUTTOIT) MANUAL OF BOTANY: bemg ao 
Introdnction to the Study of the StnuCuie, Pbyraology, and dasrifioa- 
tion of Plants. S81 Wood Engravings. Svo. 12j 6d. 

BLACK'S GENERAL ATLAS of the WORLD. Now edition, re- 
vised and corrected thronghont ; with numeroiu additional Maps, and 
an Index of 67,000 Names. In one handscane toL strongly halt-bound 
in morocco, with ^t leaves, price £2 IGt. 

BARTLETT'S (W. H.) The NILE BOAT ; or Glimpsss of the Land of 
Egypt. fPhUee.) 8yo. 16*, cloth, 

SEAUMONT and FLETCHER'S WORKS; the Text formed from a 
new collation of the early editions. With Notes and a BioDaphical 
Memoir. By the Rev. A. Dyce. In eleven volumes, Sva Price £6 
\2a, oloth, redaced to £3 lOi. 

BRIDGES' EXPOSITION of PSALM CXIX. Crown 8vo. 7<, doth. 

BRYCE'S (DR) TEN YEARS of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, 
18*8-13. 3 vol*. 8vo. jnet out, 21). 

BYBONS POETICAL WORKS. Med. Bro. Portrajt and Vignette, 16.. 

BLUNT'S SCRIPTURAL COINCIDENCES. Third Edititm. Sva 
cloth, 9i. 

BRIDQE'S EXPOSmON of the BOOK trf' PROVERBS. Third 
Editirai. 2 ToU. ISmo. cloth, I2t. 



hyGoogIc 



BURKE'S DICTIONARY of LANDED GENTRY, I860. 2 Toli. 
roTsl 8vo. cloth, £2 2i. 

BURTON CEDWARD, D.D.), Hwi GREEK TESTAMENT; with 
English Notei. Third Edition. 8to. doth, Um 6A 

BLOOMFIELD'3 GREEK TESTAMENT; with coinoiie Eogjiah 
Notes, Critical, Philological, and EiplaoatOTj. New edition. 2 vols. 
8vo. with a M^> of Pitlutiiie, 40<, doth. 

CAMPBELL'S POETICAL WORKS. 24nio. & M sewed, 3* M doth, 
gilt ; or, with 37 Woodcuts, fcap. 6to. 8< ; Sto. (Platee), 20*. 
. CAMPBELL'S (LORD) LIVES of ths CHIEF JUSTICES of ENG- 
LAND, from the Naimac Conqneet till tliB DaUh of Loid Msiufield. 
2 voU. 8vo. 30i. 

CARLYLE'S FRENCH REVOLUTION. A Hiatray. Br. 12mo. 81» 
6dd. OLIVEECROMWELL,hi8LEWKttsandSPBECHES.iv.42(cL 

CHALMERS' POSTHUMOUS WORKS. Edited by the Ebt. Wm. 
Hakha, D.D. Didly Scriptnre Readings, 8v. — Subbulh Soripturo 
Readings, 2v,— Sermons, 1798-18*7.— In stitntes of Theologr, 2v.— 
Lectnrei od BnUer, Foley, and BML 8to. 10> 6d per toL dottt. 

— WORKS, 12mo, ai Repablisbed by Himadf 26 vds. £5, doth. 

*^* Any snbject may be had bonnd aa a distinct work, if pFeferred : — 
Notontl Tbedogy, 2 v.— EvideDCM of Cbriadaaity, 2 v.— Mental and 
Moral Philosophy- -Commercial DiacoorMS — Astronomioal Diseo^nsee 
— Congr^;at3<tti«l DisoouraeB, 8 y. — Lectmea on the Romatis, 4 v. — 
The Essays on Christiim and Civic E^nomy, &o. &g. 

CHRISTMAS (HENKY.) The Cradle of the Twin Gianta— Sdenoe 
and Histocy, 2 vols, post 8vo. 21i. 

L POETICAL AND DRAMATIC WORKS. 3 vols, fteap. 8m 15s. 
This b the odI; complete edildoD extant, ooataining maoj new 

THE POEMS, complete in one Vohnno, tacap. Km. &. 

XL AIDS TO REFLECTION, m the Formatiou of a Mati^ Chuscter, 
on the sereral grounds of Pmden<M, Morality, and Rel^lon. Fifth 
edition, with a Preliminary Essay and tliree Appendixes. 2 vols. &ct^. 
Sto. 10*. 

m. THE FRIEND, A SERIES OF ESSAYS, to aid Id the Formalian 
of fixed Prindples in PoUtics, Morals, and Religion, with literary 
Amosements interspersed. With an Appendix by Hohbt NblsoR 

COLEBUKIB, Esq. S Tola, factqi. 8vo. IS*. 

TV. ON THE CONSTrrUTION OF CHURCH AND STATE. To 

which is added, Two Lay Sermons. Edited by H. N. Colebidoe, 
Eaq., M.A Feea^. 8to. T* Gd. 
V. The LITERARY REMAINS of S. T. COLERIDGE. Edited by 
H. N. COLEBIDOE, Esq. i vols. 8yo. £2 5i. 
- VL The CONFESSIONS of an INqDIRING SPIRIT. Edited by H. 
N. COLEBiCQB, Esq., M.A. New Editioii. Facap. 8td. 6<. 



hyGoogle 



VII. MEMOIRS of SAMUEL TAYLOR COLEMDGE, by Jambh 

GiLUun. VoL I. 8vo. 10» 6il. 
vm. COLERIDGE'S BIOGRAPHIA UTERARIA. A New Edition, 

prepared for pnhlioation by Mr H. N. COURIIWIB, aai Edited bj his 

Widow, 8 vols. 6oap. 8yo. 18*. 

CRABBE'S POEMS, (ritli lift by Mb Son. Koyal 8to. 16» doth. 

DAVIDSON (SAMUEL, D,D. and LL.D.) Ad Introdootloii W the 
Study <^ the New Testament. The Elrst valmne, conttuning the Qos- 
pels, and the Second volume, including the EpLetke to the Thewoloaiani, 
are ready. The Thiid volume, completing tLe eenes, will fblkiw im- 
mediately. Price, in .cloth lettered, 12* 6il per volume. 

DE MORGAN'S (Peof.) FORMAL LOGIC ; or, the Calculoa of In- 
ferenM, Necessary and Probabla. 8vo, cloth, 12*. 

DENNIS' (GEORGE) The CITIES imd CEMETERIES of ETRURIA 
DESCRIBED ; together with the Local Remains of Etnucan Art 
With 120 Maps, PUns, and Woodcula. 2 vols. Sto. 42t. 

DIBDIN'S BIBLIOMANIA ; w, Book Madness. Royal Svo. 28>. 

DICTIONARY ofGREEK and ROMAN ANTIQIHTIES. ByVarioua 
Contnbaton. Edited by Dr Wh. Sutb. 600 Woodcuts, 1 voL 
med. 8to. Second edition, much improved, I2t. Also, an Abridge^ 
ment for Schools, square ISmo, lOf 6d. 

— of GREEK and ROtlAN BIOGRAPHY and MYTHOLOGY. By 
Various ContribntOTS. Edited by Dr W. Sioth. Nmnerons Wood- 
cuts, 3 vols. med. Svo, £5 16< 6<i, or separate, vqL I, 36«, H. 36», IIL 

D'lSRAELTS CURIOSITIES of LITERATURE. Thirtaaoth edition. 
Portrait, Vignette, and Index, 3 vds. 6vo. 42), cloth. 

— MISCELLANIES of LITERATURE. In one vohmie, Svo, with 
Vignette, lit, cloth. 

DYER'S LIFE of JOHN CALVIN, compiled from Authentic Sources, 
and partJGularly from his CorreEpondenco, 8yo. L5f . 

THE ENGLISHMAN'S GREEK CONCORDANCE of the NEW 
TESTAMENT; being an attempt at a verbal Connexion between 
the Greek and tbs EngUsh Texts ; including a Concordance to the 
Proper Names, with Indexes, Gieok-English and English-Greek. 
2d E^on, cai^Eiilly revised, wiUi a new £dex, Greek and English. 
Royal Svo. iSt. 

THE ENGLISHMAN'S HEBREW AND CHALDEE CONCOR- 
DANCE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT; b^ng on attempt at a 
Verbal Connexion between the Original and the English Tranuatioos ; 
vrith Indexes, a List of the Prop " ¦•¦¦•• o o 

2 vols, royal Svo. £3 13> 6<^ c1 

Bn^clopRliiH jHritopDlttanB. Wow Beadg; in Croua Sw..— 

Vol. 6. Political Economy, By Naasan W. Senior, Esq^ late Proftswr 

of Political Economy, OifoM. Price 4j, cloth. — 6. ffistory of the 

Rise and Early Pmgcess of Chiistiaoity. By the Right Rev. Dr 



hyGoogle 



Hinds. 61, dotb. — i. Rhetoric. Bj ArchbUbop Wbately. 8i 6d, cloth. 
— 3. Lope By Archbiabop Whately. 8*. cloth. — 2. Univereal Grain- 
mar, or Che Pore Science of Language. Bj 9ii John Stoddut, 
LL.D. Eotirely re-irritt«n, Ga, doth, — 1. lotrodactory Diseertatkin on 
Method. By S. T. Coleridge. 2«, cloth. 
EADIE'S (JOHN, D.D., LLD.), BIBLICAL CYCLOPAEDIA, or 
Dictionary of Eastern AntiquitieB, Geogtaphy, Natnial Historf, Sacted 
Annals and Biography, Theology and Bibfical Uterature, iSostrative of 
the Old and New Testamento. With Maps and Pictorial Eluatraliona, 
drawn from tha most authentic eourcea. 8to. cloti, 10s Ci 
—(JOHN, D.D., LL.D.), NEW and COMPLETE CONCORDANCE to 
the Holy Scriptures, on the Bftsie of Criiden. With Introduction, by 
David King, LL.D. (Minister of Greyfiiars' Chureh, Glasgow.) 11th 
edition, Svo. 61, 
FOSTER (JOHN), the LIFE and CORRESPONDENCE o£ Edited 
by J. E. Rti.ai<i>. T^th Notices of Mr Foster as a Preacher and 
a Companion, by John Shbfpibd, Author of ' Tbouglits on Private 
Devotion,' &c. 2 Tola, post 8vo. 16«. 
HALLAM'S EUROPE dnring the MIDDLE AGES. tTinth edition, 2 
Tola. Sto, 24«.~-SUPPI-EMENTARy NOTES to Do. 1 toL 10» Gi 
¦— CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY of ENGLAND. 2 toIs. film edi- 
tion, Sis. 
HAMILTON (The Late Dr R. W.) The Revealed Doctrine of Rowardi 
and Punishments. (Forming the Twelfih Series of the Congcegatioaa] 
Lecture.) Svo. Ss, doth. 
MEMOIR of the LIFE of RICHARD WINTER HAMILTON, LL.D., 

D.D. By Wm. Hbri>rt Stowbll, D.D. 8to. 10» Sd. 
THE ANALYTICAL HEBREW and CEALpEE LEXICON, in wUch 
the whole of the words compOHing the entire Hebrew and ChaJdee 
Scriptures, joat as they are ibond in tiie text, are tlurown into alpha- 
betical order, and each one fiilly analysed, explained, and referred to 
its root 1 with copions Lexicography uid GTaimuatical IntrodnotioD, iu 
which every exceptional case is iUuatrated ; with vaiioua other helps 
to the Student. This work, which has occupied the laboui of seven 
years in preparation, is now complete. Ito, £2 2t. 
CESENIUS'S HEBREW and CHALDEE LEXfcON. By S. P. Tbb- 
OBLLBB, with niuuerous Additions and Corrections from the Antbor's 
latest works, and other sources ; irith an Enghsh-Hebrew Index- 
Third edidon, Ito, cloth, 28s 6d. — Gesenina's Hebrew Grammar, with 
Professor Rodiger'e Correctiona and Additions -, translated into English, 
with Notes, and accompanied by a complete Secies of Paradignis, 
Index, &c. ito, very large type, lOi. 
GILFILLAN (GEORGE), GALLERY of LITERARY PORTRAITS. 

(New Edition, in the Press.) 
—A SECOND GAIiERY of LITERARY PORTRAITS. Poet 8to. 

10<i6(i 
HEMANS- POETICAL WOEKSi with Memoir by her Sistar. Tvola. 

foolscap, 35«, cloth. Also in One Volnme, 8vo, Sl», cloth. 
HILL'S LECTURES IN DIVINITY. 8vo., Sth Edition; li,. 



hyGoogle 



HARRIS' (GEORGE) LIFE »f LORD CHANCELLOR HARD- 
"WICKK 3 Yolal 8to. cloth. 

JOHNSTON'S PHYSICAL ATLAS. In One Yoliim«, imperUl 4to. 
''handsomely bound, hair-moroooo, price £2 \2t6d. — 'Thb Fhtsioai. 
Ati^aB of NRtoral Phenomena. Kednced from the Edition in Imperial 
Folio. For the use of CoII^m, AcadamieB, and FamilieB. Bf Alex. 
KUTH JoaxSTON, F.R.G.S., F.G.S. Thia Edition contoina Twenlv- 
Gve Maps, including a PaWonloli^jjCBl and Geological Map of the 
British ^and^ engraved in the higheet atjle of art, expreealy iar t^ 
«ditit>n, nith deeciiplJTe Letterpress, njid a veiy copiotu Index. 

KEITirS EVIDENCE of PROPHECY. 8m irith Plates and Views, 
20>, 12mo. 2« 6d, 18mo. U 6d 

KITTO'S CYCLOP-EDIA ttf BIBLICAL LITERATUEE. 2 vol.. 
roval 8vo, GO) cL Also, Ad Ahridgement ofthe tame, in one rol. 26i cL 

OTTO'S DAILY SCRIPTURAL ILLUSTRATIONS: OrigiBal 
Readings foe a Year, on SnlyflctB frijm Sacred Histoiy, Biagr^>lij, 
Geography, Antiquities, and Theology, i vols, Bjolgoap, (VoL I. just 
ont) Foolscap 8yo, 6i, cloth. 

LAMB'S WORKS. A New Edition. In One Volome, 8vo. with Portrait 
and Vignette, cloth, I4«. 

LAMB'S LETTERS; withaSketcbofhisLife. 2dEdit. ISmo. cloth, 6*. 

LAMB'S ESSAYS OF ELIA. I2mo. 6*. 

LA YARD'S NINEVEH and lis REMAINS. Plates. 2t. 8to. 8G<, cloth. 

LATHAM'S CPROFESSOR) FIRST OUTLINES OF LOGIC, applied 
to Grammar and EtymcJogy. ISmo. 1> %d. 

LOGIC, or tOie ART of THINKINGj being the Port Royal Logic, trans- 
lated fiom the French, with an Introduction by Thomas SFaMOBR 
Batkbb. 12nio, 5( ^,jmt out. 

CRITICAL and UJSCELLANEOUS ESSAYS, collectad and re-pub- 

Ksbed, by Thohas Cabi.ti,b. i vols, post 8to. £2 2i. 
CHARACTERISTICS of MEN of GENIUS : being Esgaya sdeoted 

Jiom the North Amtncan Rariev;. 2 Tola. 12mo. Sji. 
ESSAYS WRITTEN in the INTERVALS of BUSINESS. Feoap. 8vo. 

Third E^didon, 5). — The Churns of I.Bl>oiir. An Essay on the Duties 

of the Employers to the Emidoyed. Foolscap 8vo. 6». 
ESSAYS on SUBJECTS connected with the REFORMATION in 

ENGLAND. By the Rev. S. R, Maitlabd, D.D,, F.RS., F.S.A., 

MHuetime librarian to tlie late Archtushop of Canterbory, and Keeper 

ofthe MSS. at Lambetb. In 8vo. lEi. 
—The DARK AGES ; Essays illustrating the Religion and Literature of 

the 9th, lQtli,'Iltli,and ISthCentnries. (Unlfomily printed.) Second 

Edition, 8yo. 12«. 
FRIENDS in COUNCIL. Essays by tlie Author of ' Cl^ms of Labour.' 

3 Tok 12mo. 15». 
FOSTER'S (JOHN) CONTRIBUTIONS, Biographical, Literary, and 



hyGoogle 



ESSAYS SELECTED fnm COKTRIBUTIONS to the EDINBTTRGH 

EEVIEW. 

By Hbkbt Roobbs. 3 vrJs. 8to, ntarlg readg. 



Vol. I. 

EsailB, BtOQKAPHIR&L iXD 

CBTtlOAI. 

1. life & WiitingB i^Thoe. Fuller. 

2. Andrair HarvelL ' 

8. Luther'B Coiretpotulence & Cha- 



Toi_ n. 

EbBAIB, TaBOLOOtOAI. A 

PoLincAi- 



Riglit of Private Jndgment. 
Posejiami or the Oifbrd Trac- 
tBiisn SchooL 
3. Recent DeTelopmentsofPnseyiBin 



tn and Faith — tltoc Claima 
and ConSicte. 
6. Berolutioii »nd Eetbnn. 
TreatmeDt of CrirninalB. 
7., Preyentjon of Crime. 



1. LifeandGeninaofLeibaite. 
5. GeniuA and WritingB of PaacaL 
e. Literary Ganius of Plato i Cha- 
racter of Socrates. 

7. Stracture ofthe^JighahLangnage. t 

8. Sacred Eloquence— th " ' " ' ' 

Pulpit 

9. TheVanity&GloryofLitoratnre. 
ESSAYS, CRITICAL and mSTORirAL, contributed to die EiiiAa-gh 

Jtevieie. B; the Rigbt Hon. TQOUiil Babihotoh Maoadi^i. Hew 
Editiou, complete in One Volume, with Portrait and Vignette. Square 
crown 8to, price One Guinea. Sixth Edition, in 3 vola. 8yo, 36i. 

The WORKS of theRav. SYDNEY SMITH, including hii Contribotiona 
to the EdMargh Stdac. Kew Edition, >»mplete in One Volnme, with 
Portrait, and View' of Combe Flofey, Somerset. Square crown 8yo, 
price (Me Gmata. Fourth Edition, in 3 Tola. Sto, with Fortnut, 3Si. 

CONTRIBUTIONS to the EDINBURGH REVIEW. B7 the late 
LoBD Jbftbei, one oT the Judges of the Court of Sesuon in Scot- 
laud. Second Edition. 8 vols. Svo, 42a. 1 

ESSAYS in ECCLESIASTICAL BIOGRAPHT. From Artiolei which 
have appeared in the EdmiarghRetneie. ^tlis Right Hon. Sm Jameb 
Stefheit, ILC.B., Profeeaor of Modem EiBlot? in the Unirer^ty of 
Cambridge, 2 vols. 8to, 24b. 

The MISCELLANEOUS WORKS of the Rioht Hon. Sib JAMES 
MACKINTOSH. Edited br Bobeki Jaubs Mackihtosh, Esq. 
Yml Collected Edidou. 8 toIs. Sto, 42*. 

STERLING'S ESSAYS and TALES. Edited, with a Memoir, b; Abch- 
DEACOH Habb. 2 Tola, post Sto. 21i. 

MONTAIGNE'S (MICHAEL DE) WORKS ; compriang hig Eaaaya, 
Lett»re, &c Edited by Hazuft. Medium Sto. 15>. 

PRESCOTTS fW. H.) EIOGBAPHICAL and LITERARY ESSAYS. 
STal4i. 

WHIPPLE'S (EDWIN P.) ESSAYS ; chiefly selected bom the North 
Amaiomt Jbnau. 2 Tola. 12mo. ISf. Jn^ aaX. 

LIDDELL & SCOTT'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON. 4to. oL, £2 4f. 

LYNCHB (CoiDUiroBB W. F.) NABKATIVE rf an EXPEDITION 

to Oie DEAD SEA and SOURCE of the JORDAN. Royal Sto. 2U. 



hyGoogle 



MAUNDERS TREASURY OF KNOWLEDGE— «f Biogr^hy-Hrf 
Science and liteiMnre — of Histoiy — cf Natural Histor;, Fatp. lOi 
each, cidtli. 

MILL'S PRINCIPLES of POLITICAL ECONOMY. 2 Vd». 8to. 30». 

—SYSTEMS LOGIC. 2 Vda. Sto. 36.. 

—ESSAYS on POLITICAL ECONOMY. 6. 6A 

MILLER'S OLD RED SANDSTONE. With Geological Sectdons. 7« 6i 

— rOOTPRTNTS OF THE CREATOR. I2mo. 7. 6rf, cloth. 

MOOEE'S POETICAL WORKS. Med. 8vo., Portrait and Vignette, 2!s. 

MOaELL'S (J. D., A.M.) PHILOSOPHY of RELIGION, gvo. olotli, 
12^— An HiBtorical and Critical View of the Speculatiye Philosophy of 
Europe in the Nineteenth Century. 2 Tola. Svo. 24l 

MACAUIAY'S LAYS of ANaENT ROME. 12aio. 4( 6ii, doth. 

—HISTORY OF ENGLAND, from JAMES n.Vok I. and D. 32», doth. 

M'COSH'S (JAMES) the METHOD of DIVINE GOVERNMENT, 
PhyacaJ and MonL 8to. I2i. 

NICHOL'S (Da J. P.) The ARCHITECTURE of the HEAVENS. A 
New Edition, Splendidly Illustrated ifith large Plates of Clusters and 
Nebnlie recently discovered by means of the great Telescc^ of Lord 
RoBse, and Symboheal Sketches by the lata David Soott, Eiq. 
Royal Svo, 21», 



NIEBUHR'S LECTLTIES on the HISTORY of ROME. New edition, 
8 vols. 8vo. doth, 24*. 

CBTRNE (W. R.) NAVAL BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY, with 
antheiitio detiuk of the Services of erory Officii in H. M. Navy, from 
fhe rank of Adiuiral of the Fleet to that of Lieatenant. One Volume 
Royal Sto. 42i. 

PALSY'S WORKS, with Notes and IllnstratiaDi by Dr Jasob Paxion. 
5 Vola. 8T0. ai(. 

PEARSON'S EXPOSITION of the CREED. Revised and oorrected by 
the Bev. Temfia CaavuxiBB, BJ). Svo. 12*. 

PRESCOTTS HISTORICAL WORKS; Ferdinand and IsabeOa, 8v.— 
Conquest of Mexico, 3v. — Cooqneat <rf Pern, St. Cr. Svo. Gt par voL 

PAYNE'S ELEMENTS of MENTAL and MORAL SCIENCE. TMrd 
edition, greatly enlarged, Svo. T< Sd. 

PASCAL'S MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS. ConaiBting of Coire- 
spondence with Relatives and Friends ; Letter on the Death of his 
father, in a eomplele state, &am ori^nal Sotmes ; Fhilosophicsl Treo- 
tisBa; Kscourse on the 'Pasaon of Love' (lately delivered); Esssy on 
tbeArtof Persuasion, andNotes on EloqnenoeaodSt^; ConveiwtionB 
—OD the Conditiona <^the Great, eta. ; Detached Tbonghts aod Notes, 
et«., etc.; the greater part never beibre published in this Cotmtiy. 
Arranged and 'DiiDsUted fiiMD the French by Gbobqb Peakci, Esq, 
Post 9to, Ss 6i^ cloth. 



hyGoogle 



¦OOKfl SOLD BT M. OOLB iSV BOS, OUMOW. 



PASCAL.— THE PROVINCIAL LETTERS OF PASCAL; wiA an 

' Enajr on Pascal, ooamdeied u a Writer and MoralLn.' B; M. Vnjj^ 

lunr, Pe«raf F^maca. TraniJ>t«d, with Memoir, NoMs, and Ai^«ndix, 

bv GeoT^ Pearca, Esq. Post 8to. 8i Gd, doth. 
PASCAL'S THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. TtaiulMed and Edited by 

PeIBCE. Uniibrai with the above, 81 6d. 
RANEE'S (LEOPOLD) THE POPES of EOME ; their Eodeaasticta 

and PoUtical Hietorj dmiiig the Sixteentli and Serenteenth CenCimes; 

Trasslated by Si.nj.ii Austih. 2'ToU. 8to. 21s. 
REID'S COLLECTED WORKS, NOTES, &c By Kr Wil Hubl- 

TOV. 8vo. 25t. 
RIDDLFS, Copions and CBmoiL, LATIN-ENGLISH LEXICON, 

fiiuDdedoiitJieGeniiaji-LatiaDiotionariMofDrWm.Freand.4to,^ 10a. 
RUSKIN, Modam Paintere. Imp. 8vo. VoL 1. 18*— Vol. n. 10» 6iJ oL 

— The Seven I^mpa of Architecture. (14 EtchingB.) Imp. Svo. 21soL 
RICH'S (ANTHONY) ILLUSTRATED COMPANION to the LATIN 

DICTIONARY and SREEK LEXICON; fbnaing a GlosMry erf aU 

tLe Words reroecttng Viable Objects connected with the Arta, Mana- 

&rOtures, and Every-day Life of the Ancieota. With Repntentationa of 

nearly 'Two Thousand OtyecLta &oai the Antique. Poet 8vo, with about 

2000 Woodcuts, 21*, doth. 
RIDDLE'S COMPLETE ENGLISH-LATIN aod LATIN-ENGLISH 

DICTIONARY, from the best sources, chiefly German. 8vo, 31a Gd, 

cloth. Separately — The Ei^jish-Lalan Dic&>na>y, lOi 8d; the Ladn- 

Engliah Dictionary, 21a, 
SCOTT'S (WM. B.) MEMOIR of DAVID SCOTT. R.S.A., oontaining 

hie Journal in Itely, Notes tm Art, &c, with Seven IllastiationB. 

8to. 10s 6d: 
SCOTTS POETICAL WORKS. Med. 8vo. 9j, or -with Plates, 16*. 
SCHMIDT'S mSTOBT of ROME, for tbe use of Stodonta. 12mo, 

7a 6* 

jiirmcms, Eutnns, tti. 
ARNOLD. The Christian Life, 2 vols. 8vo. 24a. Sennons, 8 vols. 36*. 

On loteipietatien of Scripture, 8vo. 12a, cloth. 
BIDDULPH. Plain Sermons Bar Family Beadhig and Parish Librariea, 

Svds. 8a each. 
BLENCOWE. Plldn Sermons to a Country Congregation. 2 vok 
7a 6d each. 

i Coontry Congre^tions. 2 

BRADLEY. Sermooa at High Wyctanbe, 3 vols. 21a.— At Glaabuiy, 

lOa 6d.— At ClapLam, 10a fid.— Practical Serroona, 2 vols. 21i, doth. 
BROWN (JOHN, D.D.) EXPOSITORY DISCOURSES on the nSST 

EPISTLE of the APOSTLE PETER. 2 vds. 8vo. 21*. 
—DISCOURSES and SAYINGS of onr LORD JE8US CHRIST, D- 

loBtnted In b Series of Blxpoeidons. In Three large Vdomes, Sva. 

(la the Press.) 



hyGoogle 



BUTLER. Sennona, Doctrinil and PracticaL Bj the kla Pbopbssos 

BuTLBS. EdiMd, with Memoir, by tho Rev. T. WoODWiED, Svo. 12*. 
DA VIES (SAMUEL, of America). Sermoas on Importtiat Sntgecta, 8 

vols. 12mo, 18t. 
DEALTBY. Sflmums, DootrinaJ and FncticaL 2 toIb. 8to. 10* Gdeai^ 
FOSTER(JOHN). LootnrBaatBro»dniettaCliapal,BiimoL 2vla.&reach. 
HARE (ARCHDEACON). Sermons st Hermmonceoi. 2 toIb. 12» 

each. — Mason of die Comforter, and other SenuoDS. 2 vols. 8to. 26*. 
— (Rbv. A. W.) Sermons to a Countiy CongregatioD. 2T(Jg. 12nio. 16*. 
HEBER. Parish Sermona go the Lessons, Gospel, or Epistle, fbi eveiy 

Simdaj in the Year, &c. 2 vols, orown Sto. 16t, boaids. 
HORSLETS (BISHOP) SERMONS. 2 vols. 8to. 18*. 
JAY. The Christian Contemplated, in 12 Lectures. CromSTcTiGifcL 
—At Aigyle ChapeL Crown 8vo. 7* 6d. 
MANNING-S (ARCHDEACON) SERMONS, in 4 vols. 8yo. 10* 6rf 

each, boards. 
MAURICE on the LORD'S PRAYER. Foqi. 8va 2* 6A— Relipons 

of the World. 2d «£tJoo, 6*. — Nineteen Senaons on the Pr^er Book. 

12mo. S*6d. 
MELVILLE (HENRY). Seirnons on the less prominent &ctB of Sorip- 

tare Story. 2 vola, Bvo. 21*. SermonB,,2 yda. 31*. Do. <m Public 

Ooca^ooB, 10* ad, 
PAYNE'S LECTURES on DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY, ELECTION, 

&c Tbiid edition, 8vo. Ti 6d. 

'A masterly apeoimen of theologicBl controvert, oonduotcd in ¦ 
christian spirit, and with nuflinching defennce to the supreme authority 
of the Word of Grod.' — EvangduxJ Magazine. 
ROBERT. Village Sennons, 6 vols. 13ino. 4* 6d— Sennona on the 

Histnies of Sariptme, It Bd, doth. 
WHITE (REV. HUGH). Twenty Sermons. Foolicap, 7* Gd, oloth, 
WILBERFORCE (BISHOP of OXFORD). Sermons. 12mo. 7<, oloth. 
WOODHOUSE. Parochial Sermons, 12*.— PraetiGaJSflrmonB, 3 vols. 6* d. 

SHELLEY'S POEMS, and ESSAYS, and LETTERS, from ABROAD. 
Edited by Mrs Sheujei. In one volume Svo., with Portnut and 
Vignette, 16* doth. 

SIMEON (REV. CHARLES) MEMOIRS ; oont^ning his AutoWograohy, 
together with Sdections fiW bis WritingB and CorreBpondence. Edited 
by the Rov. William CAsre, M Jl, Third edition, 1 Uiick voL 12mo. 
with Fdrtiait and Facsimile, 7* 6<iL 

SMITH'S (DR WM.) LECTURES on MODERN HISTORY, from 
the Irruption of the Northern Natitms to the Close of the American 
Revdolion. 2 vols. 8vo. 21i. 

SMITH'S (JAMES, Esq. op Jordanhill), the VOYAGE and SHIP- 
WRECK of St PAUL ; wilb DistertalJons on Qia SouicoB of Che 
Writings of St Luke, and the Ships and Navigadcm of the Amdents. 
Svo. with Views, Charts, and Woodcuts, U>, doth. 



hyGoogle 



10 



SOUTHETS POETICAL WORKS. MfNlinm 8vo., Portnut and Yjg- 

D6tte,2lt. 
SOUTHEY'S COMMON-PLACE _BOOK ; cajmpriaiiig his Raadii^ 
. and CoHectionB in Ilietory, Biography, Manners and LiteiBtnre, 

Voyages uid TiatbIs, &c &c. 1st Series, 18*; 2d Series, 21(. 
STEVENSON'S CHRIST on the CROSS. Crown 8to. 7$ 6d.— ThB 

Lord our Shepherd, 6< cloth.— Perfect Love. Foolscap 8tq. 2« Gd. 
SHAW (THOMAS B.), OUTLINES of ENGLISH LITERATUSE. 

Sm^ Bvo. ISt, half-bound. 
SMITH (JOHN PYE, D,D., &&), The RELATION between the 

HOLY SCRIPTURES and wane parte of GEOLOGICAL SCIENCE. 

Fourth edition, 8va. cloth, 9). 
—SCRIPTURE TESTIMONY to the MESSIAH; Ad Inquiry, a-ith a 

view to a satisGiGtory detenoinadon of tLe doctrine taught in tbe Holy 

Scriptmres concerning the Penon of Christ. 3 vols. Sro., 4th ed., 21). 
SPIERS (A., Ph. D.\ A NEW GENERAL FRENCH-ENGLISH and 

ENGLISH-FRENCH DICTIONARY. A New edition, in 2 vols. 

6to, 12i Sd each vol. Library Edition, and lOi Gd ea<^ .vol„ School 

Edition. 
TENNYSON'S POEMS. Foolscap, 9». -The Princesa, 5i, cloth. 
TRENCH (REV. R. CHENEVIX,) Notes on the Parables. Fourth 

Edition, evo. 12j.— Notes on the Miracles. Second Edition, Sto. 12s. 

— Hulaean Lectures for 1846 and 1846. A New Edition, in one Vol. 

Bto. 7« 6d. — St Augustine's Expontion of the SermoD oa the Mount, 

witii ObservationB. 3* 6d.— The Star of the Wise Men ; being a 
' Commentary on the Second Chapter of St Matthew. 12iiio. 8s. 
TICKNOR'S (G.) HISTORY of SPANISH LITERATURE. 3 vols. 

Svo. cloth, £2 2s. 
WALPOLE'S (HORACE) ANECDOTES of PAINTING in ENG- 
LAND, with some Aeconnl of the Princqial PaJalera. Ulustrated, New 

Edition, revised, with additional Notes. By Rii^a N. Wobnam. 3 

vols. 8VD. ttl. 

WHATELY'S LOGIC. 8yo. 10> Gd, fixJscap 8m.it, (i3i« ndyoom- 

piste editionB.) — Essays on tbe Pecnliarities of the Christian Religion. 

6vo. IQa— Easa^ on the Writings of St Paul, Bs.— Enays on lh£ 

Error of Rcmaniam, 10s. — Kingdom of Cba^at, 8i. 
WILLIAMS (GEORGE), THE HOLY CITY; BJatoricd and T<^«)- 

giaphicsl npdces of Jerogalem ; with numerous Ulnstnitioiu. New 

edition. 2 vols. flvD. i5>. 
WILSON'S (Dw JOiat OP BoMBiT) Tbe LANDS of tbe BIBLE 

VISITKD and DESCRIBED. WitL Maps and ninaCratioius. 2 vcJs. 
. 8vo, 36s. 
WORDSWORTH'S (-CHRISTOPHER) GREECE, Piotorial, Deaerip- 

tive, and HisCarical 350 Engravings an Wood and Sted. Seo^d 

editum. Imp. Bvo. 21(. 
WORDSWORTH'S POETICAL WORKS. 7 vola. foolscap, 85i, cloth, 

6 TcJs, 2imo, 16», sewed, or 2]j, doth gilt ; one vol. Svo. 20», olotk 
— (Select Pieces &om). S<[aare, 6t Cd, cIoHl 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogle 



hyGoogle 