THE 



LOGIC OF ANALOGY. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE 

ANALOGY OF LOGIC, 

AND 

LOGIC OF ANALOGY; 

OR, 

THE THIRD ORGAN 

PROPOSED. 
By G. field, 

AUTHOR OP "OUTLINB8 OP ANALOGICAL PHILOSOPHY." '« CHROMATICS, OR TRR 
ANALOGY. HARMONY. AND PHILOSOPHY OP COLOURS." ETC. 



I J;* ,J^// vr 




LONDON: 

DAVID BOGUE, FLEET STREET. 



MDCCCL. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 




LONDON: 
Printed by O. BAmcxAT, CwU« St. Leicester 8q. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TO 



WILLIAM CHAPMAN BEGLEY, A.M. M.D. 



My dear Sir, 

That an author should address a 
work on a subject which has been called the 
Medicine of the mindy to one who has long 
and successfully devoted his skill and talents 
to remedy its Diseases, will not, I trust, be 
deemed inconsistent. I have, therefore, ven- 
tured to dedicate this work to you, as an 
offering of friendship, and as a testimony 
of the respect and affection with which I 
am, 

My dear Sir, 

Faithfully yours, 

THE AUTHOR. 



The Cottage, Syon Hill Park, 
1850. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



CONTENTS. 



Page 

Introduction - - - - - - 1 

Sect. 1. The Universal Importance of Logic - 9 

2. Its Rise and Progress - - - 10 

3. Its Modern Career - - - 18 

4. Ito Scope and Plan - - - 28 



Part I. 

Philology. 

Chap. i. Introduction .... 37 

ii. Philology - - - - - 51 

iii. sect. 1. Semiotics — Letters . . 57 

2. Accentuation - - - - 71 

3. Punctuation ... 72 
iv. Grammar — Words - - - - 76 

V. sect 1. Syn taxis — Propositions - - 104 

2. Rhetoric - - - - 116 

3. Poetry - - - - 125 

4. Siyle-^Composition - - - 130 



Digitized by 



Google 



Vlll CONTENTS. 

Part II. 

NOOLOGY. 

Chap 



i. sect. 1. Introduction 


Page 

151 


2. Consciousness 


- 156 


3. Volition - 


159 


4. Understanding 


- 170 


ii. sect. 1. Logical Science - 


177 


2. Logical Faculties 


. 179 


3. Memory - - - 


184 


4. Imagination 


- 195 


5. Reason ... 


204 


6. Logical Energies 


- 213 


7. Logical Operations 


218 


iii. sect 1, Dialectics 


- 220 


2. Propositions 


225 


iv. Analogism. 




sect. 1. Introduction 


229 


2. Analogical Process 


. 254 


3. Categories 


263 


4. Forms of Analogism 


- 273 


5. Categorical Analogism 


277 


6. Hypothetical Analogism 


. 292 


7. Discursive Analogism 


302 



Part IH. 
Modern and Scholastic Logic. 

Chap. i. sect 1. Introduction - - - - 315 

2. Syllogism logically analysed - 319 

3. Philosophy of the Syllogism - - 333 

4. Logical Organs compared - - 339 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. IX 



Page 



Chap. ii. Generalogism or Induction. 

sect 1. Introduction - - - - 343 

2. Induction analysed - - 362 

3. Modes of Generalogism - - 370 

4. Physical Induction - - 372 

5. Generalogism, Analogism, and Syllogism 

compared - - - - 375 



APPENDIX. 

Chap. i. Method - - - - - 381 

ii. Sophistry or Fallacies - - - . 392 

Conclusion ---..- 408 

Index - - - - - - - 413 



ERRATA. 

FBge 14, line 29, /or anastamoris read anastomosiB. 

Fafe 119, Imes 22, 27, 28, /or Enthymemg read Enthymemes. 

Fkge 120, line 1,/or Enalogy read Analogy. 

Fkge 145, line 16,/or effecting read affecting. 

Page 236, line 24, i^er affirmed ifuert a comma. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 



1. To protect and cherish learning has been 
the gracious office of the Ministers of Religion from 
the earliest times, — and happily so; — for the pro- 
geny of mind, like the offspring of the body, 
require fostering in infancy and decline. There is, 
nevertheless, a period of adolescence for both, in 
which the free exercise of the faculties becomes 
requisite to their growth and maturity. 

2. Cloistered by the Hierophants and forbid- 
den all freedom, the Arts of Egypt were torpid, 
cumbrous, and distorted; but transported by Or- 
pheus, Danaus, Cecrops,* and Cadmus into the free 
atmosphere of Greece, and animated by emulation 
and affection, they acquired grace and beauty; 
whence it was elegantly said, that ** in Athens the 
Graces rocked the cradle of Art,** — that "Love 
taught it to speak," — and Liberty led it onward to 
perfection. Such also was the rise and career of 
infant Science, which from being mystic and mon- 

• B. c. 1556. 



Digitized by 



Google 



2 INTRODUCTION. 

strous in' Egyptian bondagej'^Jbecame in Greece, 
rational, philosophic, and free. 

3. That therefore thej mature mind should 
first have established laws for its own government 
on the latter soil, and Logic have arisen as a science 
among a people who first asserted the freedom of 
intellect, is no more wonderful than that the science 
thus theoretically established should have made its 
next great advance* with philosophy practically, in 
a land of liberty, among a people equally renowned 
for arts and sterling intelligence ; but it afibrds a 
remarkable coincidence, ^denoting that as Liberty 
has been the inseparable condition of excellence in 
art and science, so in the perfection of freedom we 
may look for Jthe perfection of knowledge through 
Logic, which extirpates prejudice, gives laws to 
thought, and authority to law, with just regulation 
to the will and actions of mankind. 

4. We may also deduce hence an important 
reciprocation between Liberty [and Logic, which 
renders them expedient to each other; for as reason 
coerced becomes folly, so liberty without reason is 
mad ; — nor is there a subject whereof a correct 
understanding and comprehension of its true rela- 
tions is more incumbent, or in which illogical and 
absolute views have led to more deplorable conse- 
quences, than in this of liberty throughout the world 
of Ethics, moral, political, and religious. 

? A. c. 1556. 



Digitized by 



Google 



LIBERTY AND LOGIC. 3 

5. Personal liberty^ when politically uncon- 
trolled, tends only to confusion and crime. Intellec- 
tual liberty^ the natural right of every mind, tends 
also to moral, philosophical, and religious scepticism. 
The liberty of Speech^ the Pen, and the Press^ 
so essential to hoth the former, too often abuses 
freedom by libel and license, or degenerates, through 
mercenary advocacy, dishonest assumption, envious 
carping, party spirit, and contentious controversy, 
into literary anarchy or intellectual tyranny. 

6. Necessary, therefore, as liberty of thought, 
speech, and actions are to the well-being of man, 
their due regulation is no less essential to their own 
interests and security ; but the full attainment and 
permanent security of external and internal freedom 
— or the liberty of body and mind — can be no 
otherwise assured than by establishing correctly 
their coessential analogy logically. 

7. Personal freedom may be governed by exter- 
nal, or political law, and intellectual freedom, or 
liberty of conscience, may be ruled by internal or 
moral law; but that by which they are coessentially 
connected, — the freedom of thought, expression, 
and the press, — without which neither of the others 
can long subsist, yields to neither of these laws, and 
can alone be adequately governed or controlled by 
Logical law — or the law and authority of reason 
and truth, — against which ignorance and selfishness 
are perpetually at war ; and hence there is nothing 
more essential to the highest good and peace of 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

mankind than a correct Logic — the criterion of 
Truth and Right. 

8. Should therefore a new and true sera of uni- 
versal liberty dawn upon the world, a corresponding 
developement of logic must arise to save and sustain 
it from that autonomy at which republicanism aims ; 
for in the authority of perfect logic, opinion and 
action will yield to reason, and demagogic and 
presumptuous authority sink alike to their proper 
levels, and names go for neither more nor less than 
they express : as in Logistics, or the science of 
Numbers ; to the ratios of which all minds submit 
without appeal. 

9* Milton, the glorious champion of virtuous 
freedom in all its forms, must have been prescient 
of this, and his treatise on Education, and his 
"Artis LogicsB plenior Institutio," were probably 
the results of such conviction; but as he added 
nothing to the science, then in disfavour, having 
adopted the doctrine of Ramus — another champion 
of freedom, and victim to intellectual tyranny — he 
left Logic, the fundamental and sole just controlling 
power of the free mind, as he found it, and commit- 
ted liberty to the coercion of policy. 

10. Happily, the Great Predisposer has ordained 
universally that every power, whether physical, sen- 
sual* or moral, shall evolve its opposite; whence 

* We do not hesitate to reclaim this term to its genuine 
signification from the gross and corrupt sense in which it is 
vulgarly used. 



Digitized by 



Google 



LIBERTY AND LOGIC. 5 

the negative arises with the positive, every love and 
indination gives out its opposite aversion, every 
virtue points its vice, every position supposes its 
contrary, and the discovery of the one discloses the 
other: just as action and reaction are equal and 
opposed, harmony results from contrast, tyranny 
educes liberty, and liberty elicits law, while free 
intellection calls forth Logic for its control, as it 
did in Greece. 

11. It is hence apparent that, conformably to 
nature and reason. Philosophy arising from the 
freedom and communication of thought is correla- 
tive with Logic, and that they can only succeed in 
concurrence, or err apart; for rational liberty is 
in every way coincident with intellect. 

12. It is because liberty has not hitherto enacted 
a perfect logic, that logic has failed to license a 
refined and moral liberty, — for these are reciprocal. 
And if liberty has been better attained, longer 
preserved, and more widely extended by the British 
people than by others, it has been because they 
have excelled in logical intelligence, no less than 
in practical diligence; affording a ray of hope for 
degraded humanity, that in the full accomplish- 
ment of these faculties, liberty, virtue, and hap- 
piness will be established and perpetuated through- 
out the world. It is by the latent influence 
of reason that men submit to any other govern- 
ment than those of brute violence and force ; and 
therefore it is incumbent on legislators to seek 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION. 



perfect logic, and by reason to make absolute the 
authority of law. 

13. As in morals and politics, so has God given 
reason to man in religion, as a light and guide 
throughout ethics — the sole ground of true convic- 
tion and pure faith in things intellectual and 
spiritual. The logician is. therefore bound to regard 
the truths of correct reason as of greater certainty 
and authority than any human records, nor can he 
receive such in contradiction to reason on any 
authority; — nor can it be truly objected that this 
is opposed to any article of sacred Scripture or 
Christian faith as divinely revealed, both being 
necessarily consonant to reason as inspired by God 
— the Divine Logos. 

14. Truth, whether of religion or of other 
things, must be brought to the test of the highest 
faculty — to that reason from which there is no 
appeal ; or men will continue to fashion their faith 
to their inclinations, and act in subversion of moral, 
political, and religious good. But truth and reason, 
which are one, are the authority of God ; nor does 
it impugn his ordinances to assert their agreement 
with the Logical faculty, which is of the spirit of 
the Logos, whence all truth and good. 

15. Nor must the unqualified state of human 
reason be urged against these positions, but only to 
impress on Logicians, Legislators, and Divines, the 
expediency of perfecting Logic, and the propriety 
of preserving modesty and forbearance in our judg- 



Digitized by 



Google 



FAITH. 7 

ments and condemnations of each other, ere we 
h.ave extirpated prejudice and established through 
reason the authority of truth. 

16. The infant and the ignorant believe or 
disbelioTe any thing, however absurd, upon confidence 
or authority, while the vicious shape their creeds to 
their selfishness. For any one to say he believes 
what he does not understand is as much only as to 
say he believes it wilfully^ or does not understand 
it at all. To believe truly is to understand, and to 
understand is to have rational or sensible compre- 
hension ; and to disbelieve is the same. Any belief 
beyond or short of either is weak, vicious, idle, or in- 
sane; but as none are of the absolute extremes of 
infant weakness or of divine wisdom, so must men be 
relatively determined in the mean, according to 
reason, or continue to be the subjects of prejudice, 
ignorance, or indiflFerence. 

17* The popular argument against Reason in 
religious judgments hits Fallacies; but these, which 
have been made so much of by Logicians, contradict 
reason, and are dissipated by its lights. To argue 
against reason is of all logical fallacies the greatest, 
and urgently demands the reparation of reason, and 
the reformation of Logic. 

18. Faith is the conviction of things thought 
but not seen ; and as there can be no true convic* 
tion that is not logical, so neither can there be any 
faith for our reliance that is not rational, and such 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

as may banish hypocrisy from the ordinances of man, 
and establish the ordinances of the God of truth 
throughout ethics. 

19. Logical instruction is therefore chiefly in- 
cumbent. — Education of the faculties, and above 
all of the highest faculty of mind and morals, is 
the first duty of man; for to reason belongs the 
control of reasonable beings, and any intolerance 
of reason, or harmless opinion by custom or autho- 
rity, is incitement to deceit, sedition, or infidelity, and 
a debasement of humanity altogether: if, therefore, 
the word liberal mean Jree^ without Logic, which 
teaches the use of the self-governing faculty of rea- 
son, the term a liberal education is a solecism. 

20. Even more forcibly is this natural alliance 
of Liberty and Logic impressed upon the mind and 
confirmed by Christianity, the Divine vindication of 
moral and religious liberty, — the only logical reli- 
gion — in its purity, binding man by no other laws 
than those of reason and truth, which are the laws 
of God: — a religion which precedes all human 
progress as a pillar of light, at once rational and 
free. 

21. And on no subject has human reason been 
more eminently exerted than on Christianity, which 
has risen in purity with sound logic, and sunk with 
it in all the corruptions of learning and the schools, 
— happily emancipated from which, and from all 
irrational restraints. Logic and Liberty may proceed 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHRISTIANITY. 9 

hand in hand; and in the perfection of logic, we 
repeat, we may confidently look for the accomplish- 
ment of religion, morality, and law. 

22. Logically, to follow Truth wherever it 
leads, is the first principle of improvement in every 
science, and will without doubt, when freely pur- 
sued, conduct men to ail Truth, and in the end to 
all Oood, for the identity of their relations is ad- 
mitted. And as truth is for good, and not good 

for truth. Truth precedes Good theoretically, but 
Good stands first practically ; and as there is no- 
thing perfect but in degree, and all human doctrines 
and institutions are mixtures of truth and error — 
good and evil — it is highly reprehensible and 
irrational to pull down any fabric of good under 
pretence of truth, until we are prepared with cer- 
tainty to set up a better in its place. And this 
applies to every doctrine and establishment, whether 
Religious, Political, Moral, or Material. 

23. Since, therefore. Truth is the great instru- 
ment of improvement and reform, and Logic is the 
science of truth, let us inquire into the rise and 
progress of Logic, that, seeing what has been done, 
we may learn what is yet required for a Discipline 
so important to the good and advancement of man. 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 INTRODUCTION. 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF LOGIC. 

24. Dialectical Philosophy, or Logical argument, 
the subject of which is as old as the human mind, 
was first attributed as science to Parmenides, and 
Zeno the Eleatic, his disciple, who was of Eastern 
origin, and both of these philosophers were Pythago- 
reans ; after whom Logic was improved by Euclid 
of Megara, a disciple of Socrates, and contemporary 
of Plato, who also employed the Socratic Induction. 
But these early Logicians seem to have accom- 
plished little more for Logic than to have collected 
and handed down the philosophic Universals, which 
were afterwards arranged by Aristotle, the scholar 
of Plato, and by him established as the Categories^ 
or Universal Predicaments and fundamentals of the 
Syllogistic Organ. 

25. Plato, and his master Socrates, when com- 
bating the Sophists, or Scholastics of Greece, who 
first elicited Logic by their quibbles and subtleties, 
employed Analogical Dialogy and Induction ; to 
which Aristotle added and carried out, if not in- 
vented, the Syllogistic organ^ and systematised 
Philosophy in correspondence with Logic : thus 
completely displaying the forces of Logical Science, 
and marshalling them with a skill and acumen that 
defeated the reigning Sophism, and justly entitled 
him to be regarded as the parent and prince of 



Digitized by 



Google 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF LOGIC. 1 1 

Logicians; although he thereby transfered Philo- 
sophy to intellectual ground, and rendered it uni- 
versally subjective: from which time to that of 
Bacon the study of objective Nature languished in 
proportion as artificial Logic prevailed. 

26. The testimony of history concerning these 
early circumstances of the science is extant in the 
writings of Plato and Aristotle, the latter of whom 
adverts to the rise of Logic at the end of his " Or- 
ganon/*and they are conveyed traditionally in various 
compilations since;* there is yet also a modern 
conjectural opinion of its origin from the East in 
countries to which the Greek Philosophers travelled, 
wherein have been discovered records of the Logical 
Disciplines coincident with those of the Greeks — 
but whether of Indian, Persian, Egyptian, or Chal- 
dean origin, may still be questioned. 

27. From the time of Aristotle, Logic ran the 
course of the Grecian schools without material 
change in its structure, subjecting every inquiry 
and science to its influence and perverting the anti- 
sophistical intention of its founders, till the time of 
Epicurus, who opposed the lofty Dialectic of the 
Stoics; with whom also the career of the Greek sects 
of Philosophy terminated, and who utterly corrupted 
and subverted their Logic by his Kavft/v — Canons 
or Critic of Judgment — under which title he is 
said to have composed a book, wherein he consigned 

• See Gale, ii. 365, 377. 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 INTEODUCTION. 

all judgment of Reason to Sense, and held the 
senses to be the messengers and judges of truth* — 
a doctrine still rife among modem empiricists. And 
consistently with which, he held Rhetoric, and also 
the Mathematics, in contempt, it being quite natu- 
ral that the Philosophy of Sense should depreciate 
the Logic of Reason, which our enlightened age has 
seen also exploded under no better pretence than 
that offences have been perpetrated in its name. 

28. Subsequently to Epicurus, and among the 
Romans, nothing important appears to have been 
accomplished in Logic ; except indeed that it is 
recorded by Quinctilian and others, that C. Julius 
CsBsar composed a treatise on ^^ The Logic of Ana- 
logy," — and a manuscript bearing the same title has 
been disinterred at Herculaneum; but it has not, we 
believe, been unfolded, nor the name of its author 
ascertained. From the title of CsBsar's work, " De 
Analogia," the object of which being, it is said, ^*to 
determine the vse of words to congruity according 
to reason^** it was probably Philological rather than 
Logical, and Bacon calls it ^' a certain Grammatical 
Philosophy ;** but the work being lost, conjecture is 
vain, and we notice it only from the importance of 
the subject, and its titular coincidence with the 
present Essay. 

29* Nevertheless the ancient Logic revived 
under the latter Platonists, and that of Aristotle 

? Diog. Laert Cic. *« De Nat Deor." I. i. 



Digitized by 



Google 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF LOGIC. 13 

established its dominion among the learned Arabs, 
and continued to reign despotically in the Christian 
and Mahometan schools during a period of learned 
darkness, from the closing of the Athenian schools 
to the reformation of Luther, about which time 
Ramus was bom. He was the most eminent op- 
ponent and reformer of the Aristotelian Logic 
preceding the great Logical and Philosophical re- 
Tolution of Bacon, which subverted the corrupted 
** Organon'' of Aristotle, unchained the imagination 
of the poet, and established the "Novum Organum** 
throughout science. 

SO. Yet not suddenly — for some of the most 
eminent reasoners of the time, and Milton among 
them, followed the Logic of Ramus ;* but the first 
fruits of freedom from Aristotle's authority, in 
Rhetoric and Poetic, which are parts of his Logic, 
were matured by the genius of Shakspeare.t 

31. Notwithstanding Bacon's reform of Philo- 
sophy at length supplanted the Logic of his prede- 
cessors, he left his own in a very incomplete state ; 
and although it has been widely extended in matter 
and practice, it has not undergone any remarkable 
improvement in form or theory. 

32. Yet under every imperfection of the Baconian 
Induction — its few improvements, its various mis- 

? See Milton's ** Artis Logic® plenior Institutio," 1672. 

t Far be it from us, nevertheless, to impugn the mighty 
works of the Stagyrite while we condemn the misuses of his 
authority. 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 INTRODUCTION. 

appliances and incapacities, it begins at the right 
practical extreme ; has done more for the advance- 
ment of physical Science than all other Disciplines 
together, as its author intended ; and has indeed 
been the mightiest advent hitherto for the ameliora- 
tion, civilisation, and mental reformation of society 
— the Christian Dispensation only excepted. 

S3. A slight glance at the modern history of 
Science may satisfy us of these facts. One of the 
earliest and most illustrious disciples of the reformed 
school of Logic and Philosophy, if not also a prin- 
cipal therein, was the friend and physician of Bacon, 
the immortal Harvey, the first great supporter of 
Experimental Induction, the fruits of whose Exer- 
citations were the doctrines of Circulation, Secretion, 
and Generation, whereby he threw a light into 
Animal and Vegetal Physiology that has disclosed 
New Systems, and discoveries that have given lustre 
to many great names in Medical and Botanical 
Science. 

34. To the Harveian circulation and economy 
of the human Microcosm succeeded the Newtonian 
circulation and economy of the celestial Macro- 
cosm, founded alike on the ground of Experimental 
Induction, and both established as general doctrines 
on true physical principles for ever. 

[35. Since this was written, it has been announced 
at Oxford that the only difficulty in the doctrine 
of Harvey's discovery, that of the anastamosis or 
transfusion of the blood from the extremities of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF LOGIC. 15 

arteries to the comineiicement of the veins by moscu* 
lation or filtratioD, has been demonstrated ocularly 
by the vast power of the Improved Microscope : at 
the same time, also, that the Newtonian circulation 
of the Physical Universe has been coinddently illus- 
trated by the astonishing powers of the Rossian 
Telescope.] 

36. Were this the proper place, we might dilate 
on the extension of Harvey's doctrine by John 
Brown, Lineus, and other eminent followers and 
disciples of the Inductive school, who have filled 
with their lights and discoveries the wide range of 
Physics between the extreme systems of those two 
great men, Harvey and Newton, to the immense 
advancement of the knowledge, civilisation, and 
well-being of mankind. 

37. More germane to our inquiry is the despic- 
able Logic prevalent in Harvey's time, concerning 
which we have his own testimony. " The method 
of investigating truth commonly pursued at this 
time,** said he, "is to be held as erroneous, and 
almost foolish, in which so many inquire what 
others have said, and omit to ask whether the 
things themselves be actually so or not ; and single 
universal conclusions being deduced from several pre- 
mises, and analogies being thence shaped out, we 
have frequently mere verisimilitudes handed down to 
lis instead of positive truths." * Whence we learn that 

• See *• Works of Harvey." by Dr. Willis, p. 162. 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 INTRODUCTION. 

Logic had fallen under idle authorities, inconclusiye 
syllogisms, and remote or fanciful analogies. Har- 
vey adds, ** whence it comes that pretenders to 
knowledge and sophists, trimming up the discoveries 
of others, changing the arrangement only, or the 
language, and adding a few things of no importance, 
audaciously send them forth as their own," &c A 
sort of practice, we apprehend, still lingering among 
writers. 

38. Harvey has also instructed us in the proper 
method of applying Logic hy Experimental Induc- 
tion in Physics: thus he remarks, "that hy ex- 
hibiting the method of investigation which I have 
followed, I may propose to the studious a new, and 
unless I mistake, a safer way to the attainment of 
knowledge.*** He subsequently traces the method 
of Experimental Induction to the Ancients, and 
especially to Aristotle, citing from the latter that 
"although that reasoning is naturally prior and 
more known which proceeds by Syllogism, still is 
that more perspicuous to us which is based on In- 
duction ;'* and more to the same purpose. 

39. He mentions in another work having em- 
ployed his process — "at too great length, it may 
appear to those who do not see the end and object 
of such pains-taking, of such careful observation. 
Wherefore I think it advisable here to state what 
fruits may follow our industry, and in the words of 

* Works, p, 152. 



Digitized by 



Google 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF LOGIC 17 

the learned Lord Verulam, *to enter upon our 
second vintage.**** Thus carrying forward the 
Logic of Bacon. And of the works and discoveries 
in which Harvey employed the new method, it may 
truly he affirmed that they supplied the plan, laid 
the foundation, and stimulated the discoveries of 
succeeding physiologists, and in some cases even of 
his detractors. 

40. Of Hippocrates it has been said that "he 
thought it not sufficient to know the nature of indi- 
viduals, but the principles of the Universe. Indued 
with every species of knowledge he enlightened 
experience by reasoning, and rectified theory by 
practice. His rules for forming the Physician are 
worthy to be engraven in letters of gold ; for they 
exhibit profound knowledge, consummate integrity, 
and an irreproachable life; — that his doctrine 
adopted among all nations would continue its bene- 
ficial effects for thousands of years ; and that the 
greatest of Empires would be unable to dispute with 
the little Island of Cos the glory of having produced 
this man:" — an eulogium singularly applicable to 
Harvey, t 

41. To Harvey succeeded Digby,1: Hobbes,§ 
and other followers of the great Verulam, who, 
impugning the scholastic logic, advanced that of 
experience and sense ; but chief among them was 

• On Generation, Ex. xxv. p. 270. 
"t See Urquart on Classical Learning, p. 12. 
X Treatise on the Soul. § Elements of Philosophy. 

C 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 INTRODUCTION. 

Locke, whose celebrated "Essay on the Human 
Understanding" maintained an influence, hardly in- 
ferior to that of Bacon, that has terminated the 
second -^ra of Logic by appeal downward to Com- 
mon Sense^ not only in physics, but in every inquiry 
of the human mind. 

42. Logic being thus referred and accommo- 
dated to popular understanding and sense, and 
Philosophy converted into practical Experience on 
the same ground, it may be expedient to take a 
wider survey of the influence of the Baconian revo- 
lution, and inquire into the means of restoring 
Logic as an entire and universal Discipline. 



MODERN LOGIC. 

43. When Bacon released Philosophy from the 
trammels of the Schools he assigned to it a new 
method, which established for the advancement of 
mankind a new and important sera in physics ; but 
which while it checked the career of idle dispute, 
and the puerilities founded on the peripatetic dis- 
cipline, nearly extinguished its Logic. And al- 
though Philosophy was thus placed on a new and 
physically reformed foundation. Logic, the criterion 
of all faith, truth, and knowledge, remained as a 
whole in the obsolescence to which Bacon and his 
successors consigned the Syllogism; and the at- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN LOGIC. 19 

tempts made to restore the science to its integrity 
have failed to disengage it from the confused mass 
of scholastic trivialities and useless suhtilties by 
which, from the time of the Sophists to the extinc- 
tion of their emulators the Scholastics, it was distin- 
guished. 

44. Hence Induction, on which the new philo- 
sophy is founded, has ever since taken precedence 
of Syllogism, or supplied its place ; and late writers 
on logic have continued to aim at keeping down the 
syllogistic logic by the inductive, without purifying 
the science from scholasticism ; while they follow 
a fashion, and fly, according to the too frequent 
practice of reformers, from one vicious extreme to 
its opposite: whence it has happened that the organ 
subserving sense and experiment in philosophy has 
overpeered the organs of higher intellect, and that 
the physical sciences have risen above the moral : 
thus Logic, whose oflice it is to regulate inquiry, is 
itself in confusion, while the rapid increase of know- 
ledge is every day rendering such regulation more 
and more necessary. 

45. The failure of modern Logicians to restore 
the science seems in a great measure attributable to 
their having adopted one or other of the hypotheses 
which involved the disputes of the schools, and the 
having retained therewith the distinctions and divi- 
sions by which they perplexed the understanding, 
but from which it is the first duty of Logicians to 
clear the ground of the science. 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 INTRODUCTION. 

46. Of these hypotheses which divided the 
schools, the most celebrated were Nominalism^ 
Conceptualismy and Realism^ — or Verbalism, Ideal- 
ism, and Materialism, either as logically or philoso- 
phically regarded, which assumed Words, Thoughts, 
or Things as their respective objects, and have, one 
or other, infested logic and philosophy to this 
hour. 

47. The first steps towards the entire re-esta- 
blishment of Logic appears, therefore, to be to clear 
the ground from these hypotheses and all useless 
distinctions, — to reconstruct the science upon the 
full breadth of its foundation, avoiding the propen- 
sity of writers to circumscribe a subject to especial 
views, encumbered with endless details and illustra- 
tions, and to treat it as a whole with all expedient 
simplicity. 

48. Yet is it not necessary in such an attempt 
to disembrangle the disputes of past ages, which 
sufibcate reason at its source, and which if, as is 
said, they sharpen the wits of men, it is only as these 
sharpen their weapons for disabling and destroying: 
but it is necessary to extirpate the taste for logical 
tournament which prevailed in the schools, to the 
obstruction of science ; and that advocacy, debate, 
and party-spirit by which logicians and philosophers, 
like politicians and divines, are led into contentions ; 
and that idolatry of names, opinions, and authorities, 
which obstruct truth ; none of which can be main- 
tained, but by the abandonment of reason, and re- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN LOGIC. SI 

storing the logic of that chivakous class "who 
always offered hy single comhat, and at point of 
the sword, to maintain whatever they asserted/' 

49. Man will, however, yet make good his title 
to rationality. And although no successful attempt 
has hitherto heen made for the re-estahlishment of a 
universal logical system, yet many and celebrated 
are the names of those who have contributed to 
Logical literature since the time of Bacon and 
Locke, without eminently advancing the science, 
although various writers have produced works that 
may be studied with advantage. 

50. Among them are especially Barrow, from 
whom, according to Wolfius, Tschirnhausen bor- 
rowed his "Medicina Mentis;*' but their Logic is 
chiefly mathematical and syllogistic. Bishop Brown, 
Cheyne, Butler, Jones, and Tatham have treated of 
Analogy, and adapted it logically to Theology. 
Archbishop Whately has accomplished a valuable 
introduction to the Scholastic Logic, which has 
revived popular attention to the subject ; — and the 
" Artis LogicsB Rudiraenta," with illustrative obser- 
vations printed at Oxford, has supplied an excellent 
work for the general student ; while the late works 
of Dr. Todd and Mr. Mill are almost exclusivelv 
devoted to Induction, and others to especial 
sciences. 

5\. Yet has the new organ of Bacon, however 
much employed by modem philosophers, been little 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 INTRODUCTION. 

improved by logicians, notwithstanding the attempts 
of De Jurain* and Dr. Shaw,f and the progress of 
Experimental Physics, in which the names of Har- 
vey, Worcester, Boylfe, Newton, Herschel, Priestly, 
Lavosier, Davy, and many others of great eminence, 
may be adduced as practical promoters of Inductive 
Logic. 

52. How little, nevertheless, has been hitherto 
achieved in this branch of the science, and also its 
present state, may be learnt from the following 
remark of a late author: — "At the risk of being 
charged with want of modesty, I cannot help express- 
ing astonishment that a Philosopher of extraordi- 
nary attainments should have written an elaborate 
treatise on the Philosophy of Induction, in which he 
recognises no mode of induction except that of 
trying hypothesis after hypothesis until one is found 
which fits the phenomena ; which one, when found, 
is to be assumed as true, with no other reservation 
than that if on examination it should appear to 
assume more than is needful for explaining the 
phenomena, the superfluous part of the assumption 
should be cut ofi; It is no exaggeration to say, that 
the process which we have described in these few 
words is the beginning, middle, and end of the 
Philosophy of Induction as this writer conceives it.'* 
And doubtlessly a cutting out, fitting, and trying 

* La Logique d^gag6 de la servitude de ia Dialectique. 
t Nov. Org. by Dr. Shaw. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN LOGIC. 23 

process like thin^ says little for the state and progress 
of Induction. 

53. But, in Universal Logic, Kant, who com- 
hated the philosophy and logic of common sense, is 
decidedly the greatest reformer since the time of 
Bacon, his whole philosophy being a new form of 
Logic, or Noology ; of which his '* Logic" is a coun- 
terpart, adapted to that of the Stagyrite, and is a 
posthumous production with which he appears ncTer 
to have been quite satisfied. And by the analysis of 
his " Critick of Pure Reason,** which seems to be 
chiefly based on the doctrine and Categories of Aris- 
totle, we find it is distributed into 1. Transcendental 
Elementary doctrinej and ?. Transcendental Me- 
thodology. The first of these he again divides into 

1. Transcendental JEsthetic, including Space and 
TimCy and 2. Transcendental Logicy which he sub- 
divides further into, 1. Analytic^ including Concep- 
tion and Principles^ and 2. Dialectic^ including 
Conception and Conclusions. Again, under Trans- 
cendental Methodology he includes 1. The History , 

2. the Architectonic^ 3. the Canon^ and 4. the 
Discipline of Pure Reason. The whole of which 
is Logical in subject, method, and nomenclature; 
and in his " Logic," Kant has adapted the Logic of 
Aristotle to the plan of his own Philosophy without 
advancing the science.* 

54. The Noological or mental Philosopher, like 

• Sec the •* Logic" of Kant, translated by Richardson. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



24 INTROPUCTION. 

the Physical inquirer, has two logical modes, of 
equal authority in the investigations of mind ; the 
one hy which he analyses its faculties and functions, 
the other hy which he sunthesises or builds them up. 

55. Kant adopted principally the synthetic mode, 
and built up the mind from experience, establishing 
at every station he attained certain absolute Forms, 
till in the end he attained to the Absolute itself; 
whence his Forms of Sense^ or Schematismy syn- 
thesising Time and Space, as conceived by Berke- 
ley ; — Forms of Understandings or Categorism^ 
synthesising the Schemata, — and Forms qfReason^ 
or Idealism of the Absolute^ synthesising the Cate- 
gories ; thus carrying out universally the Forms^ 
seeking process of the great Verulam in conjunction 
with the synthetical method of the Stagyrite, 

56. But had this Great Metaphysician appealed 
to nature, and truly analysed the Noological system, 
he would have found that what he deduced from 
thought as Absolute Ideas are no other than the 
divisions or distinctions of the first Unity or Rela- 
tion of the Logical mind, — Mind being a unifying 
faculty, or principle of Unity ; and he would have 
found, too, that his deductions and inductions of the 
Understanding and Sense, or his Categories and 
Schemata^ are the Logical Genera and Species, or 
sub-distinctions of the first Universals and prime 
Unity or relations of mind, — whereby he might 
have escaped what appears to us to be the two 
great faults of his System, infecting those of his 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN LOGIC. 25 

successors, — 1. the separation of Reason firom Un- 
derstanding^ and 2. the assumption of Logical 
Categories into Sense, to the embarrassment of both 
Physics and Metaphysics. Justly, nevertheless, has 
this learned and profound thinker declared that the 
necessary condition of a critically correct ** Philo- 
sophy rests solely upon this, that iu order to a 
complete system, it must contain a full analysis of 
the whole of human cognition a priori.*** But to 
this a complete Logic, wherein he failed, is pre- 
essential. 

57. The failure of the transcendental logic is 
even more apparent in physics, wherein the experi- 
mental method of Induction is still the effective 
mode ; and if the old English distinctions of truth 
into subjective and objective be well-founded in logic 
and philosophy, then is the subjective treatment of 
objective sciences as illegitimate, as it is illogical 
and fruitless in physics, — falsely assuming the posi- 
tion of Deity, and descending therefrom, it becomes 
obscure and mystic ; while in the objective view, 
ascent from the world to Deity is suited to the 
human faculties, progressive and perspicuous. 

58. Since, then, on the one hand. Logic and 
Philosophy have been subtilized into mere visions 
of intellect, and, on the other, sunk into the gross 
realities of sense, equally at variance with universal 
reason, a mode that reconciles these extremes to 

? Critick of Pure Reason, p. 22. 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 INTRODUCTION. 

reason is essential to the reformation of Logic, and 
correct science. 

59. The time has, however, yet to arrive for the 
consummation of Logic as a whole. Syllogism^ 
which sprung on mathematical ground and is a logic 
of mere ratios, has exercised its best powers on the 
Mathematical Disciplines, — Induction or Oenera- 
logisniy which arose similarly on a physical founda- 
tion, is still realising its powers in the Physical 
Sciences and misapplying them in the Rational, — 
and to the Analogism there yet remains the Meta- 
physical ground whereon to exercise its universal 
powers logically, and in the demonstration of Moral 
Ends. We call on Logicians, therefore, to cultivate 
this neglected mode. 

60. But here it is especially to be remarked 
that we do not employ the term Analogism in the 
rhetorical and popular signification of resemblance or 
similitude, but as strictly and abstractly denoting a 
real and reciprocal relation, which, being paradigm- 
atical, pervades and connects the universe Logi- 
callt/y and is the foundation of all parity of reason, 
all proportionalities, resemblances, and similitudes. 
To determine its regulation and laws is therefore of 
the utmost importance to developement through- 
out Philosophy, and indispensable to correct under- 
standing and Logic. 

61. Thus to the three great branches of know- 
ledge Universal Wisdom has adapted distinct Logi- 
cal Organs, and when these shall have been fully 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN LOGIC. 27 

developed, as in the progress of knowledge they will 
be, Logic will become a consistent whole, appli- 
cable through analogous organs to every subject 
with the full force and perspicuity of reason, truth, 
and conviction. 

62. The master Mechanician knows, that al- 
though one instrument may eflect many purposes 
for which it was never intended, every work is best 
accomplished by its proper instrument, and that 
correct and finished Art can be no otherwise at- 
tained ; Logic supplies the instruments with which 
reason works; the best works are produced in all 
cases by the best and simplest means, and Logic 
affords no exception to these rules : but the constant 
error of Logicians has been the multiplication, com- 
plication, and misappliance of defective tools. It is, 
nevertheless, in the simplicity, suflSciency, and skil- 
ful application, and not in the display of instruments, 
that true science and art are accomplished. 

63. It is a natural delusion of the human mind 
to regard every material thing, all sensations, and 
even thoughts, as absolute existences or things, and 
not as relations or reasons, and to name them accor- 
dingly. Hence philosophers have in vain attempted 
to supply a physiological universe to the mind, in 
place of a logical one ; in consequence of which 
they have utterly failed of establishing a truly 
Logical system of philosophy, and instead of ele- 
vating and refining being to intellect^ have de- 



Digitized by 



Google 



28 INTRODUCTION. 

graded it into the grossness of materiality, or 
framed unstable, imaginary systems. 

64. But as all knowledge is Logical^ every ex- 
isting thing is a reason to the mind, — whatever 
man can perspect or know, or of which he can any 
how have consciousness or conceive truly, is a rela- 
tiouy individual, general, or universal The right 
conception, or perception of the order of these 
relations, is pure Logic, and thence the whole system 
of truth and man, external, medial, and internal, — 
material, sensible, and intellectual, is Analogical^ 
wherein Logic and Philosophy agree; and whatever 
can be brought home to reason is logical. 



G5. We have seen then that Logic is universal, 
and requires a universal basis, which we have else- 
where attempted to supply, by a Synopsis of Uni- 
versal Philosophy, wherein we have shown that 
science as a whole is distributable according to 
nature into three great correlative departments, 
distinguished as Physiological, or the science of 
objective things ; Philological, or science of sensible 
signSf or words, &c. ; and the Noological, or science 
of subjective thoughts ; the two latter of which are 
intimately connected. 

66. We have further shewn also that Philosophy 
has universally the triple relation of Science, Art, 



Digitized by 



Google 



PLAN OF LOGIC. 29 

and Discipline ; which distinctions have been con- 
founded, with much disadvantage to the courses of 
knowledge, since some departments proceed better as 
Disciplines, some as Sciences, and others as Arts, 
according as they happen to be more or less appro- 
priately either Instrumental, Theoretical, or Practi- 
cal ; and the Logical, i. e. the Philological and 
Noological departments of knowledge, are properly 
to be regarded as connected Disciplines; all of which 
distinctions reciprocate throughout Philosophy. 

67. In representing Logic as a Discipline rather 
than BS a science^ or an arty it is apparent we do 
but follow the natural course and example of the 
chief master of logic among the antients, whose 
work, the greatest ever produced on the subject, 
bears the title of " Organon,** which was also adopted 
by the greatest of modem logicians for his "Novum 
Organum ;" and the very name of organ^ signifying 
an instrument denotes a discipline. We have not 
scrupled, therefore, to give this name also to the 
Analogism, the universal instrument of Logic as a 
Discipline. 

68. Logicians have, notwithstanding, regarded 
Logic as a Science or an Art, and sometimes as both 
these, although it is not strictly either, but is (as 
Geometry, Arithmetic, &c. are) a Discipline and 
Instrument of Art and Science ; yet are they, as 
every branch of knowledge is, susceptible of treat- 
ment either as Science, Art, or Discipline, or as all 
of these together. 



Digitized by 



Google 



30 INTRODUCTION. 

69. According to the foregoiDg views our pur- 
pose is to treat of Logic on a universal basis, 
extending to the entire signification of the term as 
derived from the Greek Aoy/«^, — from Aoyo^, reason 
and speech^ and Agyg/v, to say^ and therefore to 
signify. Logic may hence be defined, the Discipline 
and Art of argument and discourse ; or otherwise, 
the Science of thinking and conveying thought ; 
and thus it extends to all Literary art. We intend, 
accordingly, to treat thereof as Philological and 
Logical^ whence our outline will involve both the 
principles of Words and of Reasoning, which are 
not only naturally but necessarily connected as 
Signification, and connect as logical what have 
usually been treated, for convenience, as distinct 
sciences ; namely Grammar^ Rfietoric, and Logic^ 
including therewith the whole of the Philological 
sciences, and Semiotics, or the science of signification. 

70. It will be at once perceived that our plan 
is a " return to the Trivium of the Schools ; not, 
indeed, to treat the diflerent branches after the 
manner of the Schools, but in such a manner as to 
ensure the attainment of * another sort of Logic and 
Critic than what we have been hitherto acquainted 
with:'* convinced that the study of Grammar or 
Philology is an indispensable preliminary to Logic.*'t 

71. Coincident herewith Aristotle, in the Logical 



* Locke on Understanding, b. iv. c. 21. 
t Richardson's Diet. p. xix. pref. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PLAN OF LOGIC. 31 

treatises of his " Organon," comprises first Uni- 
versal Termsj secondly, the construction of Sen- 
tences^ and thirdly, Syllogisms; — the first in his 
treatise " On the Categories," the second in that 
" On Interpretations,*' and the last in his " Ana- 
lytics." Of the latter, the " Prior Analytics" treat 
of Demonstration of Terms, Propositions, and Syl- 
logisms. The " Posterior Analytics" treat of Argu- 
ment through Syllogism, Analogy or Comparison, 
Induction and Ahduction. In the "Topics" he 
treats of prohable Arguments ; and, finally, of 
Sophism or Fallacies in his " Sophistical Elenchi ;" 
— first as Grammatical^ secondly as Logical, and 
thirdly as Rhetorical. 

Such was the undoubted source of the Trivium, 
the departure from which may be regarded as an 
error in discipline. 

Logic, then, in its full extent, involves Letters, 
Words, Propositions, Organs, and Discourse. 

72. The Aristotelian Logic is essentially that 
of the Mathematician — they proceed alike; the 
simplest elements of Letters are the simplest forms 
of Geometry, and the simplest sounds of Harmonics, 
both of which as mathematical terminate only in 
the infinite ratios of Logical reason, proceeding 
from the simplest sign to the highest point or 
extreme of signification, through which Literature 
represents the Philosophic Universe and Logic in 
a corresponding whole. 

73. Thus all discursive science and discourse 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 INTRODUCTION. 

are composed of propositions connected, as all pro- 
positions consist of words connected; and as words 
consist of literal signs, sonorous, connected, so are 
propositions compound signs, and perfect discourse 
consists of complex signification connected in Logi- 
cal Unity^ It follows that Logic is grammatical, 
and Grammar logical inseparably ; whence the 
Logical and Philological Sciences constitute a co- 
essential whole, and as such should be treated of in 
connexion, and the latter in subordination to the 
former as the instrument of thought, which is the 
counterpart of things. 

74. Hence, again. Logic is the correlative of 
Philosophy ; the first comprehending the Universe 
subjectively, the latter objectively, in reference to 
the Matter of which the former supplies the Forms, 
connecting them according to immutable Relations 
in one identical System. 

75. Such are the general views under which we 
proceed first to lay down our plan of Philological 
Science as a whole ; in the execution of which we 
shall restrain inquiry, throwing aside whatever may 
embarrass more than illustrate the ground- work, and 
releasing the whole from the inexpedient technical- 
ities with which the Logical Disciplines have been 
obstructed, while we innovate as little as possible. 
We do not pretend, however, to render abstruse 
subjects popular, any more than to produce a Logic 
coincident with perfect liberty throughout Ethics. 
Perfection is beyond the human system, and to aid 



Digitized by 



Google 



PLAN OF LOGIC. S3 

or advance any subject relatively is the utmost an 
individual can hope, but to attempt it is a duty : all 
we propose is to survey the ground and trace the 
Outline of the Logical Sciences in general, and 
briefly to develope that of the Analogism in parti- 
cular. 

76. Yet we cannot close this introduction with- 
out an apology for the inadequateness of our 
attempt ; but if the difficulties of the task be consi- 
dered, together with the slow progress of the science, 
and that Bacon, with all his powers and advantages, 
published his "Cogitata et Visa*' after years of 
cogitation and revision, long before his " Novum 
Organum,*' which, following the precept of Horace 
and the example of Plato, he copied twelve times 
with his own hand, and revised annually during as 
many years, and still left it unfinished, the liberal 
reader will not be backward to excuse the imper- 
fections of an attempt, made under much greater 
impediments, but which may serve to incite some 
mind qualified to accomplish an entire and complete 
System of Logic, now become the most important 
desideratum in literature. 



May 3, 1849. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



PART I. 



PHILOLOGY: 



OR, 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE 
INDICATED. 



Digitized by vjOOQIC 



Digitized by 



Google 



PHILOLOGY: 



OR, 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 



CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTION. 



77- Having shown that Logic and Philosophy 
are universal systems, diflfering only in view, as 
suhjective and ohjective, and that Philology, which 
is the science of language, and perspective of both 
these systems, is essentially logical, and that the 
three comprehend in universal relation words, 
thoughts, and things analogically, we proceed to 
inquire into the Logical relations of language or 
Philology.* 

78. In commencing such inquiry we embark 
on an ocean which inspheres the whole world, — 
not of nature alone, but of art, science, and dis- 
cipline ; nor is it confined to the system of reality 
and truth only, but extends to things the most 

• See our " Outlines of Analog. Phil." vol. i, p. 143. 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 philology: or, 

fictitious and arbitrary, and grasping time and 
space, connects the present with the future and the 
past, while it is the medium of commerce and 
communication between men and nations, not only 

" Speeding soft intercourse from soul to soul. 
And wafting sighs from Indus to the Pole," 

but conveying precepts to the unborn, and bearing 
immortal instructions from the dead. 

79* It is by thus uniting men and ages, that 
language has given to man the highest station 
among created beings ; but for which he had 
remained, to the end of time, one only among the 
beasts of the earth : through the instrumentality of 
language, however, all the faculties of the indi- 
vidual are extended, the species becomes a great 
individual, and man a communicant with God. 

80. Such are the powers and capacity of lan- 
guage, which is, at the same time, that department 
of the system of man wherein he exercises his 
faculties most diversely with least of the aid of 
nature and science, which are the same for all 
men ; while language varies not only with nations 
and communities, but with parties, with indivi- 
duals, and even with times, occasions, and modes 
of expressions. 

81. It is hence that language has the earliest 
claim upon the attention of mankind, and that 
whatever, in the progress of philology, brings 
language nearer to universality, brings it nearer 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 39 

to science and truth, which are its objects : nor 
is this unimportant to the happiness of mankind, 
since nations will think more alike when they think 
in similar language, and will better understand 
each other, and more readily communicate every 
good, as members of one family, under the same 
father, and not regard each other as alien, foreign, 
helot, or barbarian : an amelioration of the species 
now evidently in progress. 

82. If these remarks appear exuberant, they 
are meant to shew the magnitude and perplexity 
of our subject, and how difficult it must be to 
attain satisfactorily the true natural principles, 
relations, and references of a topic so wonderfully 
comprehensive, fluctuating, and diversified ; for 
which, also, the superabundance of literary matter 
is rather a hinderance than a help. 

83. It is true, nevertheless, that the genius 
of many eminent grammarians has tended, with a 
philosophic spirit, toward the universal principles 
of language, so far as regards the grammar of 
written speech, and therein they afford us some 
aid ; but this extends to a small portion only of 
the entire system of representation, which goes to 
every possible mode and manner of communicating 
knowledge, and embraces the system of philosophy 
and science universally, which, in its turn, can 
alone conduct us to the true relations and outline 
of philology, or the genuine ground and elements 
of signification, and the true analogy of language. 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 philology: or, 

84. As so wide an investigation lies, however, 
beyond the commonly acknowledged bounds of 
this subject, and far exceeds the line of mere 
utility, a very brief outline may here suffice for 
evincing this universal philosophic connexion, and 
for bringing our subject into bearing with the 
general analogy of language upon the foundation 
of nature, so as to afford, at the same time, the 
widest possible basis of utility. 

85. We shall not need, therefore, to enter into 
the voluminous particulars and endless discussions 
of the learned in languages, nor very widely into 
the inductions of the universal grammarians, phi- 
lologists, ethnologists, and etymologists; for these 
are but branches and foliage to the tree of which 
we seek the root. The comparative ease, however, 
of tracing these ramifications, their luxuriance, and 
the facility with which they have conducted to 
literary reputation and academic honours, although 
achievements more of labour than of skill or in- 
tellect, may have been the temptations to which 
we owe the bulk of philology, and the preference 
the learned have shewn for this study to the 
neglect of logic and philosophy ; although with 
little effect, so far, at least, as regards its found- 
ation as a science : while it is to be regretted that 
learnings in particular, has been reduced to mere 
linguaU symbolical, and philological attainment in 
the study of the least instructive portion of the 
Greek and Roman classics ; thus preferring, as 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 41 

it were, a dwelling in ancient ruins, to the laying 
of solid foundations, and building of noble struc- 
tures, for her own abode. 

86. It adds to these temptations which learning 
has to found philology upon words alone, inde- 
pendently of thoughts and things — upon sense 
rather than upon reason, on the one hand, or 
nature on the other; or, in other words, to trace 
signification^ not logically and analogically through 
identity of relation, or philosophically through 
understanding, but rather through sense, by the 
very uncertain and opposite process of etymologies 
and traditions — that it admits a flattering and 
ostentatious display of erudition which astounds, 
more than it instructs ; while the rational process 
terminates in naked simplicity, and demands a 
degree and kind of intellectual exertion and at- 
tention both in the conception and reception, to 
which minds are but too commonly repugnant. 

87. We dispute not, however, the benefits 
which arise from the labours of the etymologists 
and grammarians, so far as they may coincide 
with, elucidate, and confirm, the aim of philosophy. 
Etymology gives stability to language by disclosing 
the sources of words, and it does more so when 
it points out their relations ; but, in seeking their 
originals, pedantry has often employed false and 
too remote derivations, and substituted similitudes 
of sound for analogies of reason. The source of a 
word is of much less importance than its relations 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

and signification, and is of secondary concern, 
therefore, even with the etymologist, with whom 
that which illustrates the latter is to be preferred 
to that which explicates the former, and that which 
is nearer is preferable to that which is remote, or 
beyond the compass or usage of the language 
itself. 

88. Yet little has been done systematically by 
the learned to afford a truly philosophic form of 
philology, to which our outline may, nevertheless, 
contribute somewhat, and serve as an introduction 
to our logic in accordance with the ancient synthetic 
method, which founds syllogisms upon words and 
sentences, and philosophy upon logic in the order 
of words, thoughts, and things ; a method probably 
resorted to upon the consideration that words which 
are last in philosophical analysis are first in the 
communication of thought or knowledge, — it is, 
accordingly, the method of Discipline^ and there- 
fore we have adopted it in this place. 

89* But we regard the analytical method as 
most truly scientific, doctrinal, and perspicuous, 
while the method of synthesis belongs to art and 
practical discipline, and is necessarily laborious and 
obscure. Well, therefore, might Aristotle, who 
followed this method, assure his pupil, Alexander, 
that he had published and not published his doc- 
trines, veiled, as they were, by synthesis; from 
which the scholastics of after times never emerged, 
although there arose among them, like sparks 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 43 

amid smoke, disciples of extraordinary brightness, 
who kept alive the smothered fire of philosophy. 

90. By neither of these methods can we hope 
to clear comprehension from all obscurity in a 
thing of such utter confusion and diversity as 
language and literature, and may be well content 
if we can open a way, or throw a new light 
thereon, which may assist us in conducting the 
inquiries of philosophy, and laying a foundation for 
logic. 

91- In the communication of knowledge, words 
precede ; and hence it is that, in logical and mathe- 
matical disciplines, definition precedes argument, 
and argument precedes demonstration ; while logic 
is inseparable from philology, as thoughts are from 
words : accordingly, the Greek term logos (\oyoi)y 
before remarked on, from which they are derived, 
justly and philosophically signifies both word and 
thought; as, in like manner, discourse and dis- 
cursive denote reasoning, speech, and communi- 
cation, and have both a logical and philological 
import. 

92. Philologj/y therefore, presents itself as the 
first Discipline, and is the instrument of Logicy as 
logic is of the Mathematics^ and as the three to- 
gether are of all knowledge, whether it be of science 
or of art. 

93- This is also the order of nature and of 
education, memory being the faculty of the mind 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

which is first disclosed, and that upon which de- 
pends the acquisition of language ; which, again, 
is the first subject of education, and that upon 
which all knowledge is dependent. Not, however, 
to be cultivated at the expense of the higher func- 
tions of the mind, as Languages are in ordinary 
education, since the understanding is strictly a 
capacity^ which, being surcharged with these stores 
of memory, becomes incapacitated for other and 
more important acquisitions ; nor is ever any human 
faculty unduly cultivated, but with a proportionate 
sacrifice of the rest. 

94. It appears to us that an erroneous opinion 
on the reform of learning is now prevalent with 
regard to education, and the Colleges, which are 
not properly places for teaching Arts and Sciences, 
but for Disciplines. There was, therefore, sound 
judgment in the scholastics who adopted the Tri- 
vium of Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic, with the 
Mathematical Quadrivium of Arithmetic, Music, 
Geometry, and Mechanics, or Pythagorean Disci- 
plines, as the solid foundation of education, and as 
instruments of economical and social use for appli- 
cation in the Sciences and Arts. 

95. The superficial teaching of the latter by 
Lectures may serve for illustration and recreations 
to the studious, or as refined amusements to those 
who have leisure, but are not the proper ground- 
work of teaching, and the analogical distinctions of 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 45 

knowledges into Disciplines, Sciences, and Arts, are 
important to the due propagation and progress of 
intelligence and learning. 

96. As the purpose of the ensuing sketch is 
chiefly concerned with the form of philology in 
relation to logical science, we need not enter deeply 
into the history and ethnography of language and 
the various stages of literary progress and inven- 
tion. That the first characters employed in written 
language were hieroglyphics^ or picture language, 
which represent objects by their figures and co- 
lours, there can be little doubt, and it is confirmed 
by historical testimony ; and that letters^ which 
characterize sounds, and are of general significa- 
tion by compact, were of later invention, and gave 
the first scientific form to language and Uterature, 
is of as little doubt 

97. These are the figurate extremes of written 
characters, between which are symbolic characters^ 
or signs of words, which are intermediate to alpha- 
betical characters and pictures of things ; and such 
are the Chinese literary characters. 

98. It is evident also that other intermediate 
characters have been employed, and that Literation 
has been wholly progressive. Of this we have 
examples preserved in the Bodleian Library, and 
others recently copied by Mr. Catherwood's faithful 
pencil from the table of a stone altar of an extinct 
nation, araong the ruins of Copan and Palenque, in 
Central America, lately visited by Mr. Stephens 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

and himself. This tahle is inscribed with cha- 
racters tessellated, half picture and half symbol, 
between, and resembling both the hieroglyphs of 
Egypt and the Chinese characters; and the sides 
of the altar are surrounded with well-executed 
sculptures in high relief of cross-legged figures, 
resembling the Deities of the Hindoo Mythology,* 
and indicating an early period and Eastern origin, 
China and Mexico being opposite coasts of the 
Pacific, linked together by a chain of islands. 

99. During the periods of Written Characters 
prior to the invention of Alphabetical Signs, when 
pictures and symbols of words were employed for 
correspondence and communication of knowledge. 
Language was in a state analogous to that of Com- 
merce previously to the invention of Coin and Credit 
as general signs of value, and things were bartered 
in kind; — states in which neither the riches of 
mind nor body could abound, nor correspondents 
in either possess Capital for Exchange or Specu- 
lation. 

100. Contrary to all reason and authority, some 
learned men would regard the Hieroglyph as an 
ultimate refinement. Thus Vossius asserts, "that 
the first discipline of the Egyptians is threefold, — 
1. the vulgar or Epistolographic used in corre- 
sponding, 2. the Hieratic used in civic records, 
and 3. the Hieroglyphic or sacred symbols." t 

* See Stephens* " Central America/* vol. i. p. 141. 
t De Pliilos. Sec 6. 2 ; e, 2. 85. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 4? 

Whence it is conjectured that the hieroglyph repre- 
sents neither words nor letters^ hut entire discourse 
or sentences.^ Should they, however, represent 
variously all of thesOy it may account for the little 
progress hitherto made in deciphering them. 

101. In the construction and composition of 
language, as of letters, there can be but little 
doubt also that Poetry, which merely figures and 
symbolizes knowledge, is more ancient than Prose, 
which literalizes it; the first in each case aggre- 
gates, concretes, and particularizes ; the latter dis- 
tributes, abstracts, and generalizes : hence the 
former of each is more technical, the latter more 
scientific and philosophical, but the first are here 
only of incidental inquiry. Whether language was 
the result of a natural progress or an immediate 
divine communication, are questions we leave, never- 
theless, to the determination of ethnographers and 
divines; although we are assured by sacred writ 
that " whatsoever Adam called every living crea- 
ture^ that was the name thereof." We incline, 
however, to the opinion of the human origin of 
Language, because in all refinement of art there is 
an apparent tendency to elementary simplicity, and 
this especially in literary art, through which other 
arts are advanced and perfected in a similar 
manner. 

102. Thus the first literary efltorts of unad- 

* Theop. Gale Co. of Gent. ii. 33. 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 philology: or, 

vanced society are Hieroglyphs^ the representations 
of things. From these men simplify to Symbols of 
words, and hy an ultimate refinement they proceed 
to Letters or characters of sounds. These, hy a 
like process of refinement, the Grammarians dis- 
tinguish as vocal and consonant^ simplifying the 
first into elementary tones and figures, at which 
simplicity and refinement cease, and nature and art 
terminate analytically. 

103. Alphabetical Characters are, however, 
traced by others to Egyptian learning, many letters 
of the Hebrew being found among the Egyptian 
symbols or hieroglyphics, in which they had literal 
use and employment ; and it is feasible that Moses 
obtained them thence,* and formed the first alphabet, 
or adopted the analogous Coptic, and rejected the 
hieroglyphics as of idolatrous character ; thereby 
acting with superior wisdom, and advancing biblical 
learning, whereon the Alphabetical Literature is 
foimded, and spread itself throughout the East. 
But if the hieroglyph were to be regarded as an 
ultimate refinement, and learning as revolving in a 
cycle, then might the present fashion arising in 
literature of pictural illustrations in place of text 
be absurdly regarded as the recommencement of a 
new cycle, in which a more perfect picture language, 
as destructive as the hieroglyphs were to fine art, 
is destined to supply the place of literation. 

? Warburton*8 *' Divine Legation of Moses," Book iv. sect. 4; 
and Schlegel's ** Phil, of Hist." pp. 168, 169. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 49 

104. Refinement in Characters, * as in literary 
composition, is, however, marked by simplicity of 
construction, and it is by analogy of languages that 
the general principles are disclosed through which 
Language itself may become universal, and indi- 
vidual dialects refined ; and of living languages 
there is none better qualified for universality by 
elementary simplicity and convertibility than our 
own philosophic dialect. 

105. The English is a language admirably 
adapted to precision and perspicuity — rich and 
copious above all in the abundance of words 
and variety of roots, while it is the most natu- 
ral and simple in structure — widest in relation 
to other languages — widespread throughout the 
earth, and universal in application, partaking of the 
free spirit of its people. And although, like them, 
not free from errors and anomalies, it is self- 
corrigible and flexible to all subjects, and to every 
variety of use, beauty, and purpose of language ; 
through which it abounds with immortal works in 
every department of Literature, from the profoundest 
depths of philosophy and science to the most ex- 
alted sublimities and the most delicate and ex- 
pressive beauties of poetry. Thus qualified by 
structure and habit, we may assume it to be better 
adapted than any other idiom to lay open the 
anatomy of language, and the philosophy, not only 
of speech, but of things; and although it be de- 
ficient of some peculiar excellencies of other lan- 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 philology: or, 

guages, it is, on the whole, better suited than any 
other for coalescing and assimilating with them ftU. 
But wliat shall we say to such logic as the fol* 
lowing ? '* A language which is composed of 
several others possesses more copiousness than el^ 
gance; but such is the English language: the 
English language, therefore, possesses more copious- 
ness than elegance/* The sophistry of which syllo- 
gism lies in the false opposition assumed between 
elegance and copiousness ; as if copiousness of ma- 
terials Were incompatible with elegance 6f con- 
struction. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. ^1 



CHAPTER 11. 



PHILOLOGY. 



106. It has been shewn, in our Synopsis, that 
knowledge universal implies a universal mode of 
being, or physiological science — a universal mode 
of receiving, or logical science — and a universal 
mode of conveying, or philological science ; the 
first referring to the matter and object — the second, 
to the form and subject — and the last, to the repre- 
sentation^ sign, or interpretation of knowledge, or 
the medium by which the mind, or subject, receives 
and conveys knowledge or thought 

107. As the subject is of internal^ or intrinsic 
reference, and the object is of external^ or extrinsic 
reference, so is the representation of medial^ or 
intermediate reference; and the latter is thence 
principally related to sense, as distinguished from 
matter and intelligence. Accordingly, sense sup- 
plies the representing medium and sign^ of all 
knowledge of things which are the objects of phy- 
siology, and of thoughts which belong to the logical 
subject; it has, therefore, a triple reference — sub- 
jective, objective, and representative, of which the 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 philology: or, 

first or subjective reference of philology, being the 
logic of signs, is the principal in our present view. 

108. As the elements of physiology and logic 
are powers and faculties, so are those of philology, 
and such are the senses, as limited with regard to 
knowledge ; of which senses feeling is the genus, 
and touchy sights and sound are the species : which, 
as respects philology, or the mode or means of 
conveying knowledge, are efficient of all language 
or philological operation. 

109. Strictly speaking, therefore, every sensa- 
tion is but the sign of the thing it represents ; so 
that sensation is the natural universal language of 
sensible beings^ by which kriowledge is received and 
communicated ; and, as knowledge is communicated 
artificially and conventionally only by figures^ or 
characters, and sounds ; and figure, though imme- 
diately belonging to touch, is mediately cognisable 
by the sense of sight; the language of art refers 
but to the two senses of sight and sound. 

110. And since the arbitrary language of art is 
that of the first conveyance of philosophic know- 
ledge, we may pass by the remainder of the infinite 
untrodden field of philological science, wherein 
every sense may be rendered significant of thoughts 
and things, as it is also capable of representing, 
interpreting, and conveying all knowledge. 

111. Whence all language commences from 
signs of sensible objects and their relations, which 
are transferred by metaphor and figure to the being 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 58 

and relations of moral and mental subjects, through 
a universal analogy, whereby physical and meta- 
physical relations are identified with various degrees 
of proximity or remoteness, by terms equally appli- 
cable to both ; whence the general relations of 
number, time, space, motion, &c., have a double 
signification extending to the particular qualities 
of things, and throughout language, the source of 
figurative and poetical imagery, but which, when 
not distinguished in the use of words, renders them 
ambiguous, and gives rise to logical differences and 
dispute. 

112. It is to the reciprocation and analogy of 
the parts of the universal system, remarkable 
throughout, that each sense owes its power of re- 
presenting and conveying the entire system of 
knowledge: hence, we have entire languages of 
sound, or articulate langimge ; and corresponding 
language of figures, or characters, or written Ian- 
guagBy which is silent; and we have these also 
united. 

113. According to the same reciprocation, or 
analogy, the various powers of each distinct sense 
are also capable of constituting distinct languages : 
hence colour, which belongs to sight, forms no part 
of written language ; and note, or music, which 
belongs to sound, has no necessary connexion with 
speech : yet languages might be constructed of 
note and colour, as they are constituted to the 
dumb, and in the mimes of the antients, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

modam pantomimes, by motion and gesture, which 
add, indeed, much signification to all speech ; nay, 
both reason and authority go to prove the possi- 
bility of tangible, and even gustatory and olfkctory 
languages;* to say nothing of the languages of 
signals and machines. 

114. And since there is a natural constitution 
of figure and sound, which is of universal relation 
and analogy, and of unbounded scope, there is a 
perfect natural constitution offigurate characters 
and articulate sounds^ and a capability or poten* 
tiality for a boundless variety of artificial characters 
and speech; and from hence springs the variety 
of langmiges. 

115. To this variability and fecundity of lan- 
guage may be attributed that chief cause of philo- 
sophic instability and controversy which lies in the 
fluctuation, confusion, and imperfections of arti- 
ficial language, of which it is our present business 
to trace the natural and scientific relations, and 
to reconcile, in particular, with the system of 
logic. 

116. Language, then, as spoken and tarittenf 
refers to sounds and characters^ as above limited, 
and also as coinciding with each other, or unit- 
ing in signification. Characters and sounds are, 
therefore, the elements of artificial languages ; and 

* See Smith's "Optics/' vol. ii. ; Remarks of Dr. Jurin, 
p. 29 ; Marquess of Worcester's " Century of Inventions ;" Bp. 
Berkeley ; Bp. Wilkins, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF L4N<?UAGE. 6S 

to the la9t of these belongs the Orthoepy of 
speech, and to the first the Orthography of 
writtm langaage. 

117. The Egyptian hieroglyph, or symbol of 
speech or language, is said to have been a tongue, 
with an e^e and a hand placed bei^eath it ; and it 
has been variously interpreted : — *< That the eye, as 
being most expressive, next to the tongue, was put 
beneath it, and the hand added, as executing its 
orders;" — 'Uhat the eye and hand were placed 
with the tongue in this symbol, on account of their 
powers in oratory/' tec. Be t^ese as they may, 
this hieroglyph of the Egyptians appears to be a 
most expressive symbol of language, as spoken by 
the tongue, read by the eye, and written by the 
hand, in the triple reference of vision^ sound, and 
gesture. 

118. In the simplest combination of characters 
with sounds, they constitute Letters, which are 
the elements of Words, or names of thoughts and 
things ; of which Sentences, or propositions, and all 
language, are composed. And this agrees with 
and confirms the sub-genera or species of Phu 
hhgy, of which we have before indicated the 
position and universal relations, namely. Semiotics, 
which treat of literal signs, or letters ; Orammatics, 
or inflection, which treat of names and words; 
and Syntaxis, or construction, which treats of 
enunciation and discourse: of which three, the 
first regard the elementary principles of speech. 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

letters or characters; the second, the relations of 
words, or signs significant; and the last regards 
the logical purposes^ or chief ohjects of discourse, 
propositions and judgments ; and of these we pro- 
ceed to treat in succession, in near agreement with 
Aristotle, who, in treating of diction, distributes 
this discipline into letters or signs, the syllable or 
words, and the conjunction, noun, verb, article, 
and case, or construction, and finally discourse or 
language.* 

• «• Poetics," Part ii. p, 24. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF SIGNS. SJ 



CHAPTER III. 



SEMIOTICS. 



SECTION I. 



119. Signs, or characters, which are the sub- 
ject of Semiotics, are of three kinds: vocals or 
letters; mutey rests or points, between which are 
semi-vocal emphatic signs or accents ; and these 
divide Semiotics into Literation^ Punctuation^ and 
Accentuation^ of which the first is principal, and 
the others subordinate. First, therefore, of letters, 
or alphabetical characters. 

ISO. Letters are not only oral and visual, as 
distinguished by sounds, or figures and characters, 
or by both these united, according as they are 
spoken, written, or read ; but they are also dis- 
tinguished as vowelsy consonants^ and diphthongs, 
or polythongs; although all letters are, more or 
less, vocal or vowel sounds. 

121. We will consider them, first, as vocal 
sounds, and afterwards as visual or figurate cha- 
racters, in both of which there are still some rela- 



Digitized by 



Google 



58 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

tion and connexion discoverable between nature 
and art in the practice of language ; to trace and 
develope which become necessary, ere language can 
be established on logical analogy. 

122, Of literate sounds^ the vowels are most 
truly vocal, as their name expresses ; they are, 
therefore, the principal of alphabetical sounds, and 
are chiefly distinguishable as monothongs, diph- 
thongs, and triphthongs. Imperfect and unsettled 
as the pronunciation of the vowels are, we may still 
trace a musical analogy among them ; thus, in pro- 
nouncing the vowels in the usual manner, and in 
the foUowing order, E, I, U, O, A, we fin4 the 
organs of articulation adapt themselves to a der 
scending vocal scale, or musical series : perhaps^ 
therefore, if nature ha4 been strictly followed^ ^he 
primary vowels, Sec, would have taken relation^ 
similar to those of the common chord and con- 
sonances of the diatonic, or natural scale of music ^ 
while the Consonants (which are aptly named), and 
Diphthongs and Triphthongs, or double and triple 
sounds, are but combinations, modifications, or in- 
termediates of the vowels, in similar musical ana- 
1(^, according to which the celebrated musician, 
Graun, employed the syllables da^ me, nt, />o, tu^ la^ 
be, instead of the Gammut of Guido. 

123, The Vowels I, O, A, in their genuine 
original sounds, corresponding in relation, although 
not in interval, to .the notes g, e, c, of the 
muejcal scale, would then be the primary alphar 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 59 

betical sounds; the relations of which to the se- 
condary vowels E, Y, U, may he represented : first, 
among the vowels, as primary^ in the centrf^l 
triangles, subtending alternately in pairs the se^ 
candary^ they compose in the three extreme 
triaogles, which enclose them in the following 
figure : 




And it is worthy of remark respecting thiese ele- 
ments of speech, that although the Greeks^ who 
refined upon every thing, employed the secondary 
vowels, their African neighbours acknowledged 
only the three primary : namely, the ye^ elifi and 
waw of the Arabic, corresponding with the o o rM 
which are properly the only three original vowels 
of the Hebrew alphabet ; whence it has been in- 
ferred that the two alphabets were originally con- 
structed on the same system.* 

124. Steel, after Wallis, mentions this also, 

* '* Classical Journal,*' vol. ix. p. 541. 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

and attributes to each of the three vowels, as Gut- 
tural, Palatial, and Labial, three sounds greater, 
middle, and less; of which making nine vowel- 
sounds, he gives an illustrative table.* 

125. Aristotle distributed Letters into three 
kinds, 1. Vowels^ which have sound without ejacu- 
lation, as A and O ; 2. Semivowels^ having sound 
with ejaculation, as S and R ; and 3. Mutes, which 
have ejaculation but no sound of their own, as 
C and D. All of which differ, as aspirate or 
smooth, long or short, acute or grave; and he 
refers the whole subject to metrical art.t 

126. To this representation of the powers of 
the genuine vowel sounds as elements of language, 
which appear to have been much impaired in their 
modem pronunciation, some authorities may be 
necessary; and although a great number might 
be cited, the two following will be deemed suf- 
ficient Parsons, in his " Remains of Japhet,** 
p. 413, treating of the ancient Magogian and Go- 
merian alphabet, used by the ancient Britons and 
Irish, remarks, " The vowels are thus pronounced : 
a as awy in law ; the e as ay, in way ; the i as ee,X 
in weed ; the o open, as in most languages ; the u 



• *' Grammar of y* Eng. Tong." 3d ed. 1714, p. 22. 

t " Poetics," Part ii. sect 24. See Harris's ** Hermes." 
iii. 2. 

X This also it is still properly pronounced in many words ; 
as in Indivisibility^ pronounced In-dee-vee-see-bee'lee^tee, ac- 
cording to the remark of Buchanan, '* Brit. Gram." p. 41. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 61 

as oOy in wood.'' " You know," says Socrates, in 
the " Cratylus " of Plato, " that our ancestors very 
frequently used the i (and d); hut now, instead 
of the I, they perversely use either the s or ^, 
(and I instead of a)*" Socrates alludes here to the 
ancient Cadmean alphabet, in which the i answered 
to the Hehrew and Phoenician jody and the E was 
sounded like the bleat of a sheep, as we now im- 
properly pronounce the A in English. The O of 
the same alphabet, whether long or short, had but 
this one character, and corresponded to the Hebrew 
and Phoenician oin. 

127. That the Greeks so sounded these vowels, 
we may gather also from the order in which they 
employed them in singing the ra, r^, ri, rs, to the 
notes of their tetrachord, as the modem musicians 
less regularly employ them in the monosyllables 
mty Juy soly IcLy Scc. iu solmiscUion.* And it is 
apparent that the general order of the alphabet 
partakes of this musical analogy of the vowels, as 
denoted in the table, [133]. 

128. The secondary vowels, E, Y, and U, are 
double vocal sounds, or diphthongSy when they as- 
sume not the simple power of the primary vowels. 
This is evinced with regard to U, when it is the 
initial of any word preceded by the indefinite 
article a (which, according to the rule, should 



• See •' Burney on Antient Music," p. 6, and Plutarch 
•' Dc Musica." 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 philology: or, 

become an before a vowel) ; tbus : a united \ a 
useful; a universaU &c. ; before either of which, 
in spite of the rule, the ear can hardly endure the 
pedantic an^ any more than- it can the article a 
before either of the vowels t, o, or a, as any musical 
ear will allow, although, by custom and habit, the 
ear will tolerate any cacophony ; as. Whoever saw 
an unicorn ? And Y is allowed to be as frequently 
consonant as vocal ; yet old writers used an before 
y as frequently as we now do before u : thus, ^* An 
gear's banishment," &c. ; but the usage in both 
will be dropt when we cease to affect rule against 
nature. 

129* These remarks apply also, in some cases, 
to the primary vowels; thus, in the word one the 
is a diphthong, or consonant, equivalent to w^ and 
the ear can hardly tolerate the regular article pre- 
ceding it; hence, to an unprejudiced ear, such a 
one is preferable to such an one, and before the 
two vowels or diphthong Eu we use the article^ a, 
and say, a European^ &c. 

130. Grammarians, by rendering their rules 
universal contrarily to natural usage, while they seem 
to refine a language, and render it more regular, 
learned, and scientific, destroy its melody ; and it 
is to the exceptions, or temperament of rules, with 
a correct knowledge thereof, that many of the graces 
of a proficient practice in every art belong ; and as 
we have no invariable vowels, so we cannot justly 
govern them by invariable rules. 



Digitized by 



V 

Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 63 

131. Upon the same principle, the article a 
should hecome an before any word which begins 
with a silent consonant preceding a vowel ; thus, 
before a silent A, as an hour^ &c. ; although the 
an is sometimes employed in robbing us of our 
aspirate. A correct ear will, however, guide us 
aright in all such cases of euphony ; and our in- 
definite article, assisted by the ear, is an infallible 
test for determining whether any letter it precedes 
is sounded as a vowel or a consonant, except, 
indeed, such letter stand alone : for, in such case, 
every vocal consonant, including the liquids, will 
require an before it. For example, an Fy an H^ 
L, Mi Nf i2, Sf and an X; but all the mutes will, 
in the same case, require the a prefixed ; thus : 
aB, a C, A Q. K, P, Q, T, F, W, 7, and 
a Z. 

133. It appears, therefore, that there are letters 
which are intermediates of the vowel and con- 
sonant^ although, in strictness, there are neither 
absolutely mute consonants nor perfectly vocal 
vowels ; but every letter partakes of the vocal and 
the mute as musical sounds partake of sound and 
silence, acuteness and gravity, as their extreme 
principles, or light and shade. 

133. According*ly, the vocal relations of the 
consonants, &c., to the three primary vowels, may 
be traced throughout our alphabet, as in the fol- 
lowing table : 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 



PHILOLOGY : OR, 



ALPHABET. 




These, as sounded near the lips, within the 
mouth, or at the throat, are, according to the dis- 
tinctions of Dr. Wallace, labial^ palatial^ or gut- 
turalf in the order of the vowels I, O, A; or, 
as intermediate to these, they are dental or nasal 
articulations. 

134. When it happens that a consonant in any 
word is not sounded, the vowel to which it owes 
its sound may be put in its place ; thus, the con- 
sonant G being silent in the words feign, foreign, 
cognisant, paradigm, &c., may be substituted by 
its vowel E ; thus, feien, foreien, coenisant, para^ 
diem, &c. ; or they may be entirely omitted, without 
affecting the pronunciation of the words, although 
neither of these changes is admitted by custom, or 
recorded orthography. 

135. As different nations, and even different 
provinces and individuals of the same nations, ar- 
ticulate and sound these elements of language 
variously, there can be no certainty, but only pro- 
bability concerning things so variable and composite 
as articulate sounds. 

136. After the sound of letters, as articulate or 
vocal, come for consideration their figurate cha- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 65 

racters, as graphic, or visual. Now, the earliest 
attempt at literary or epistolographic communi- 
cation or writing, seems to have been by the 
figures of particular things, or pictural represent- 
ations, as among the aboriginal Mexicans. The 
hieroglyphs of the antient Egyptians were inter- 
mediates of such representations, and the more 
general symbols of the Chinese ; and the next step 
from these symbols of words being to universal 
signs, afibrded letters, such as they appear in the 
Sanscrit characters, which bear a decided resem- 
blance to the more complex characters of the 
Chinese, and are the farthest removed from the 
more simple characters of modem alphabets, which 
finally approach the pure elementary figures of 
geometry. 

137. Thus, the natural progress of written lan- 
guage is a generalising logical process, from symbols 
of particular things to symbols of general signs, 
words, and thoughts; and thence to symbols of 
sounds, or universal alphabetical signs^ of which we 
have attempted the analysis. Thus, the philolo- 
gical and the logical progress of man from par- 
ticulars to universals, from the segregate to the 
abstract, are the same. 

138. Regarding letters, then, as visual, namely, 
in their written or figurate characters, there should 
be in nature and science a foundation for them 
also, as systematic as for their vocal sounds, for 
they are geometrical forms or figures, which have 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 philology: or, 

elements also in the same respects as sounds have ; 
and though there may seem less connexion between 
natural forms and the figures of letters than there 
is between natural and artificial sounds, yet it is a 
remarkable coincidence with our view that the 
three primary vowels in the Magogian, and other 
antient languages,* as well as in the Grecian and 
Roman characters, I, O, A, are of the three pri- 
mary forms, the line, the circle, and the angle ; of 
which all other linear figures, geometrical and 
literal, are only variations or compounds. 

139* So, again, the letter Y appears to be a 
compound, both in sound and figure, of the V and 
L Again, by opening A to a right angle, and 
adding the letter ^ to it at the bottom, E is in 
like manner composed; and \X is nearly a com- 
pound of O and I, or V and I ; whence the vowels, 
as secondary both in figure and sound, seem to be 
produced by compounding their primaries inter- 
changeably. 

140. A particular investigation of the characters 
of the various antient and modern alphabets might 
supply other similar coincidences ; not that either 
the figures or sounds of letters were really ori- 
ginated as above, notwithstanding the possibility 
thereof, but that they became such, in time, 
through a natural tendency, and the immutable 
relation and connexion between things natural 

* *' Remains of Japhet," pp. 330, 404. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 6? 

and artificial, by which the most arbitrary acts 
and contrivances of man are biased ; evincing that 
art in man is at its origin furthest removed from 
the practice and perfection of nature, to which the 
artist in the end attains, progressively refining and 
purifying practice to the simplicity of nature. Ac- 
cordingly, the vowel sounds were not distinguished 
by the inventors of the alphabet, nor in the earliest 
languages; but this was principally reserved for 
the Greeks, who all but attained the simplicity and 
perfection of nature therein. 

141. On the whole, the alphabet may be re- 
garded as a short-hand, in which a few characters 
serve by combination to express an unlimited num- 
ber of ideas and things, by an abridgement of 
figurate signs, and a classification of vocal sounds, 
coincident in their elements, whereby the I A O of 
geometry represent the I, A, O of the alphabet, 
according to the common chord or triad of harmonic 
sounds. 

14'i. We have profiered these remarks to shew 
that there is a natural and real analogy between 
the figures and sounds of letters, no less than that 
which has arisen accidentally, or been assumed by 
grammarians ; and the natural tendency of language, 
and its progress toward the simple vocal sounds 
of the harmonic chord and primary geometrical 
figures in the three vowels I, O, A, might be 
supported by many coincidences testifying the na- 
tural universality and analogy of things and thoughts 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

of which language supplies the signs ; to the gram- 
matical system of which no artificial method is 
competent, and perfection therein is attainable only 
through that of nature. 

143. This tendency and analogy of nature pro- 
mote also the gradual reduction of the various 
languages of the earth, not only to identity of gram- 
matical figures and sounds, but also toward identity 
of signification of things, and easy communication 
of thoughts; followed also by logical agreement, 
the first principle of truth and ethical good: a 
process of language much better entitled to the 
terms philosophical and universal, than the most 
ingenious artificial schemes of Wilkins, Leibnitz, 
D'Algrano, or others, and clearly exhibiting to 
grammarians and logicians the expediency of ad- 
hering to natural principles if they would perma- 
nently improve language or advance science. 

144. The first step toward the universality of 
Language (diversity in which is the chief cause 
of diversity in the family of man) is the univei*- 
sality of Signs^ already in a high degree accom- 
plished by an Alphabet purified from picturesque 
forms and simplified to the elements of figure and 
sound. The written alphabet thus simple in prin- 
ciples is incomparably the greatest of human inven- 
tions — great in the simplicity of its principles — 
magnificent in the extent of its means — and stu- 
pendous in its ends and accomplishments — the 
source of all science, and instrument of every art 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LETTERS. 69 

by which mankind is benefited, beautified, civilised, 
elevated, and dignified — compared in effect with 
which the Steam-engine and Printing-press are the 
toys of babyhood. Yet we are literalising, not writ- 
ing an eulogy; and, alas for human reputation I 
Who was the author of the first Alphabet f 

145. Although in the etymology of letters, as 
of words, there may be much plausible conjecture 
with little certainty, it is, nevertheless, truly re- 
markable, that the sacred name Je-hO-vAh, one 
of the most antient of the appellations of God, the 
tri-literal* tetragrammaton of the Hebrews, which 
they held to be incommunicable, too sacred to be 
pronounced, and of which, it is said, the genuine 
sound is lost, comprehends, evidently, the three 
primary letters, or elements of all language, and 
three only in the original Hebrew, in> ; and is, 
therefore, a name and construction the most ho- 
nourable and expressive of His universal essence.t 
It was hence, perhaps, that the Hebrews of old 
held this name mysterious in connexion with the 
primitive doctrine of triunity. 

146. It is no less remarkable that in Greek 
A I O, also one of the most antient names of God, 
the first and final cause, so called as the Being h o, 
on account of which all things are,1: is literally 



• See More's " Conjectura Cabbalistica," 47. 

t Exod. vi. 3. 

I Briant's " Ant Mythol." vol. i. 38 ; HolwelFs " Mythol. 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 philology: or, 

constituted of the three primary geometrical figures, 
the elements of all possible forms, which are also 
almost as distinctly marked by the Roman letters 
of the word Jx\0,* another antient name of God, 
from which, according to antient heathen writers, 
Moses received his laws ; and which word is 
undoubtedly derived from the JAH of the Old 
Testament.t But this inquiry is endless. 

147. It may not be impertinent here, neverthe- 
less, to remark, that the vocal sounds I, O, A, 
being analogous to the common chord in music, 
and capable of the same inversions and variations, 
may give harmony to the name Jeh6vSh, which 
includes them descending, as the word HSrm6nie 
does ascending ; and hence, also, the general 
euphony of tri-syllabic names, such as Monastic, 
Washington, Verona, &c. in which the vowels 
assume the three positions of the harmonic 
chord. 

148. We may ascribe also to a like musical 
and rhythmic principle the gratification which the 
ear receives from alliteration, and the general har- 
mony of language so far as the ear is affected by 
literary composition, and in particular by poetry. 



and Etymol. Diet." 154; Taylor's " Aristot." xxiv.; Proc. 
"Theol." i. 136; Plato, i. p. xxvii. 

? H, More's " Phil. VV^orks, Conject Cabal." 47, 48. 
" Classical Jour.** viii. 387, 388 ; xvii. 263 ; xxiii. 229. 

t *< Extol Him that rideth upon the heavens by His name 
JAH."— Ps. Ixviii. 4. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF ACCENTS. 71 

149. So much with regard to vocal signs and 
characters, or letters; next to which are semi- 
vocal characters, or accents^ which are signs related 
to the first composition of letters in syllables and 
words: after which follow mute characters, or 
points^ which relate to the composition of words in 
sentences, — ^both of which are of logical and gram- 
matical reference as modificative of signification. 
To the two latter orders of characters belong 
Accentuation and Punctuation, both of which are 
of Grecian origin and triple analogy, and of each 
a very brief analysis may here suffice. 



SECTION II. 

150. Accentuation comprehends three distinct 
characters and their offices, — the acute accent [ ' ], 
which marks elevation of voice j the grave accent 
[ ^ ], which marks depression ; and the drcumjlex 
accent [*], in which the other two forms are 
conjoined, and denote continuity of voice, rise, and 
fell, or the double cadence of acute and grave of 
simple sounds, with respect to note or tone. 

151. But accent belongs not only to letters and 
syllables, but also to words and sentences, and then 
it takes the name of emphasis : it belongs finally, 
also, to themes and emphatic sentences^ which in 
printing are distinguished by italics, capitals, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

large capitals, as they are in maDuscript by single, 
double, and triple underlines, by all of which the 
logical and grammatical value and significations of 
letters, words, and sentences are variously affected 
in signification. 

152. There are also accents of quantity with 
regard to time, which are either longj shorty or 
mean ; of which two only require marking, namely, 
the long accent [ — ], and the short accent [w], 
and these relate to all the varieties of metre. 



SECTION IIL 

153. Finally, Punctuation, which belongs to 
the composition of words and sentences, has also 
three principal characters — the period [ . ], which 
marks and terminates an entire sentence, or period j 
the comma [ ^ ], which denotes its simplest member, 
or division ; and the semicolon [ ; ]» in which the 
two preceding characters, or points, are combined, 
for dividing compound periods, denoting a half 
period, or member. 

154. As to the colon, or double period [ : ], 
which denotes conjunction of illustrative matter 
to a period already complete, it is a note of con* 
junction^ similar to the note of interrogation [ ? ], 

which is formed of the initial [Q] of Query, 
placed over the period at the end of a question ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF POINTS. ^3 

and the note of admiration [ ! ] is formed by ac- 
centing the period [ / ^9 to mark an emphatic 
sentence or expression : all of which are sufSiciently 
expressive signs. These points have often the 
powers of words, the comma being Conjmictiye, the 
semicolon Prepositive, and the period Disjunctive : 
others are Interrogative and Interjective, and de- 
rive hence considerable grammatical, rhetorical, 
and logical signification. 

156. Punctuation, which is analogous to the 
pauses or rests in music, and similarly regulated, 
has, however, in strictness, a wider reference, and 
may be sensibly denoted by spaces of difPerent 
lengths, in the manner of those used in the separa- 
tion of words, which were originally written con- 
tinuously in lines, without separation of any kind. 
Or the common points may be substituted by vari- 
ous lengths of the line, or dash [ — ], as it some- 
times is ; or by the positions of a point, or period, 
at the top, bottom, or middle of the letter, as was 
once the practice. 

156. The dash is also used to denote the omis- 
sion of words, and then it is called an ellipsis ; as 
it is also to bound a, parenthesis — thus — for which 
purpose brackets and crotchets are commonly em- 
ployed [thus] and (thus) ; as are also commas 
, thus , in which use commas would be better in- 
serted as they are in marking quotations, by in- 
verting the first comma thus * thus , — or inserting 
instead thereof the spiritus asper « thus , 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 philology: or, 

157. Besides these there is, opposed to the 
parenthesis, the caret [A], employed to mark the 
place of introduction of any words in manuscript ; 
also the hyphen [ - ], for connecting of syllables 
and compounding of words, &c. ; and the brace 
[/^*^^-^], variously employed for connecting the 
especially related members of discourse. Of these, 
as of all literary signs and characters, simplicity of 
form and natural indication is the perfection ; such 
as is the hand [l^^]) for pointing out some matter 
for especial notice or attention. 

158. Many other arbitrary signs and abbreyiates 
are employed in literature, which, being of less 
general reference, are better suited to a universal 
and practical treatise on Semiotics; — a desideratum 
in literature pregnant with utility. To this subject 
belongs literary Notation, of which we have spoken 
elsewhere. 

159. AH literary punctuation is employed in 
aid of sense and expression ; but, as these are 
literally illimitable, the points in use do little more 
than mark the chief divisions and termination of 
sentences to the eye, and leave the many shades of 
expression, through pauses, to the judgment, taste, 
and discretion of the reader; so that the times 
usually assigned to mark pauses— as one, two, 
and three, to the comma, semicolon, and colon — 
are by no means invariable, but are, or ought to 
be, entirely subject to emphasis, harmony of ex- 
pression, and sense. In poetry, they also give 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF SIGNS. 75 

way to the rhytbmos and measure ; and the reader 
who is inattentive to this converts poetry into 
prose. 

160. So much for Semiotics as the science of 
simple signs, or points, accents, and Letters. But 
Wordsy which are the suhject of Grammar, are 
compound signs also, and therefore are a part of 
Semiotics, as letters are a part of Grammar, as 
its name expresses. So also Sentences and pro- 
positions, which are the subject of Syntax, are 
complex signs, and belong also to Semiotics, and 
to Grammar ; and there can be no absolute sepa- 
ration of the three, for they are co-essential, and 
the whole of Philology is the science of Signifi- 
cation. Hence, also, the figures of Rhetoric and 
Prosody, which arise as subjects of syntax, are 
semiotic, and the metaphor and comparison are 
signs, and Poetry throughout is symbolical. Hence 
these divisions of Philology are employed, not as 
absolute, but for easier elucidation and analysis, 
as relative, regulative, and subordinate to Logic. 

161. Orthography, which antiently signified 
the Art of Writing, now means the art of forming 
Words, or spelling with letters, and is a conven- 
tional practice with us ; which requires the regu- 
lation of art, and is here the link of connexion 
between Semiotics and Grammar. 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 philology: or. 



CHAPTER IV. 



GRAMMAR. 



162. The second literary or philological science 
is Grammar, which, in common acceptation, ex- 
tends to the whole of Philology, but denotes here 
the science of the nature and relations of words or 
terms only, and has been, in a practical view, not 
ineptly defined '' the art of expressing the relations 
of things by words." As distinguished from Syn- 
tax, it is called Inflexion. 

163. Of simple articulate signs or letters are 
composed syllables, which are compound vocal 
sounds, each including one primary vowel, and no 
more, with its consonants, and also words or names, 
which are compound articulations, resolvable into 
as many syllables as they contain simple vocal arti- 
culations or vowels, and are significant of things, 
or of thoughts, or of the relations of thoughts and 
things; and upon these, therefore, depend the lo- 
gical and reciprocal relations of terms. 

164. But as thoughts and things when com- 
pounded are very different from the individual 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 77 

thoughts or things of which they are composed, 
so are the significations of the words by which 
they are represented equally changed by compo- 
sition from their individual significations, however 
they may participate and retain in some degree 
their original meanings. Hence the necessity, to 
a perfectly clear communication of knowledge, of a 
systematic analogy and correspondence between 
words and thoughts, as between thoughts and 
things, and of an entire and systematic agreement 
of the whole. 

165. Words are simple or monosyllables, or 
they are compounds of two or more syllables ; and 
as every syllable has a principal sound or vowel 
through which it is articulated^ so every compound 
word has a principal vowel, and the syllable con- 
taining it is predominant and accentiuited in such 
words, and is, or should be, that syllable to which 
a word owes its chief signification. 

166. In like manner, every sentence^ enuncia- 
tion, or proposition, has its principal word, predo- 
minant or emphatic sound, determined by its chief 
signification : for the emphasis is determined by the 
sense of a sentence ; and if the elements or mem- 
bers of a syllable, word, or sentence, are complex 
or numerous, they have not only the predominance 
of powers spoken of, but they have also a subor- 
dination of secondary powers in their articulation, 
accentuation, and emphasis: so analogous is na- 
ture and genuine art in constituting systematic 



Digitized by 



Google 



78 philology: or, 

logical wholes of their minutest, as in their greater 
works. 

167* Although signi/icalion properly determines 
both accent and emphasis, yet accent chiefly de- 
pends upon the ear, and emphasis upon the un- 
derstanding ; and, inasmuch as the signification of 
words is fixed, and that of sentences depends upon 
the speaker, accent and emphasis differ : the full 
force of expression, nevertheless, depends upon their 
union or coalescence. 

168. So much for sound; and as to signifi- 
cation, which is principal in words, the logician 
knows that every perfect proposition consists of 
something asserted of something : it therefore 
simply discloses a relation^ or connective of two 
things — the one, in a philological sense, being a 
subject^ the other an attribute ; and all that can 
be asserted may be delivered in, and resolved into, 
these simple propositions, consisting of three words 
or terms. 

169. It is clear, therefore, that there can be 
no other relations of words, or simple parts of 
speech (however variously they may be distin- 
guished by Grammarians), than SubjectiveSt or 
Nouns-substantive; Attributives^ or Nouns-adjec- 
tive, called of old Adnames or Adnouns; and 
Relatives^ or Verbs. Particles, which include 
every denomination of speech that denotes conjunc- 
tion or connexion, are relatives or verbs, or verb- 
substantives or attributives, abbreviated and com- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGT OF WORDS. 79 

pounded; as Tooke has, in many instances, satis- 
factorily proved.* 

170. So again, Substance^ or Essence, and Re- 
kttionj are philosophical universals and logical cate- 
gories ; and as they are thus ohjectively as well as 
suhjectively universal, so also must they be repre- 
sentatively universal. Hence, the Substantive and 
Relative are the true universal generic distinctions 
of words or parts of speech, comprehending all 
others. 

171* Accordingly, all words are either names 
of objective beings or things, or names of subjec- 
tive relations or thoughts ; or, finally, they are 
names of representative signs or words. The first 
are called Nouns Substantive ; the second. Nouns 
Adjective or attributive ; and the last, the Pronoun 
and Verb — that is, the Noun Relative or connec- 
tive ; and these correspond to the Subject, Predicate, 
and Copula of logic, and their common nature is 
expressed by the term Noun, or name, under which 
they are reciprocally convertible. 

17^« As both logically and philosophically we 
know nothing more of thoughts and things than 
their relations, all words are names expressive of 
relations, therefore there are no other words or 
parts of speech than nouns or Nominatives and 

* According lo the native divisions of Arabic Grammar, 
Words are Nouns, Verbs, and Particles. '* Clas. Jour." vol. xxx. 
353. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 philology: or, 

relations or Relatives^ and the variety of the latter 
are significant of the various relations of the things 
designated. Thus, while the Noun or nominative 
is unchangeable, the relations expressed by it are 
denoted by inflexion or additions of predicates, and 
the richer a language is in auxiliaries and particles, 
denoting these, the more expressive it is; but a 
perfect language must obviously depend on a per- 
fect knowledge of universal relations, and therefore 
Universal Philosophy, Logic and Language, are 
reciprocally co-essential and analogous. 

173. It is apparent, then, that words are re- 
latively convertible, whence Substantives by pre- 
dication become Adjectives; thus, gold becomes 
golden ; and impiety, impious, &c. So, Adjectives 
by subjection become Substantives ; thus, good be- 
comes goodness, &c. Some words are both sub- 
stantives and adjectives ; and others are at once 
all parts of speech, according as they may happen 
to be employed : thus we say, white-lead, or lead 
white; white -chalk, or chalk white; or these 
words become verbs, as, to chalk, to white or 
whiten, &c. 

174. So, again. Verbs become Substantives or 
Adjectives ; thus, to hate, becomes hatred and 
hatejvl, &c. And the verb-substantive and verb- 
adjective, called Participles, are verbs either sub- 
jected or predicated ; thus, to hate, becomes hating 
and hated, &c. And so on, interchangeably of all 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 81 

words ; which, like all thoughts and all things, are 
relatives, to distinguish or to connect, and not 
absolutes. 

175. Further, Participles are either verb- 
substantives^ verb-adjectivesy or adverbs^ and be- 
come such by being verbs either subjected^ pre- 
dicated, or compared : as, to love becomes loving 
present, existing, or in act ; — loved past, and lovely 
at all times. And thus Adverbs are participles 
partaking of the noun and verb. Adverbs are also 
words adjected or attributed, and when applied to 
verbs or adjectives are compound attributives, and 
are called by Harris attributives of attributives. 

176. Hence the Verb, which has been dignified 
with pre-eminence among words, appears to involve 
or combine the logical powers of the subject and 
predicate with the grammatical powers of the sub- 
stantive and adjective, and thereby to become a 
true medium or copula for uniting subjects and 
predicates in conjoint signification or discourse. 
Accordingly, the Verb is a Substantive or Subject, 
with the adjuncts or adjects of time or tense, 
number, case, gender, figure, &c. ; * which rela- 
tions are denoted by certain abbreviate auxiliaries, 

• In the language of the North American Indians, instead 
of the distinctions of gender, they use distinctions of genera — 
i. e. Animate and Inanimate; with them every thing is he, or 
i7, &c. Their Plural is triple; namely, Dual^ Definite, or 
general, and Indefinite, or universal. — See Buchanan " on the 
North American Indians," pp. 220, 289. 

G 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

inflexions, or terminations, &c. ; the employment 
of which, while it has contributed to the brevity, 
facility, and grace of language, has been the means 
of concealing the true nature and office of the 
verb.* 

177. It is apparent, then, that the verb is the 
cement of language, and the principal of Connec- 
tives, among which it is included with the con- 
junction, adjective, adverb, preposition, &c. ; all 
of which latter parts of speech the ancient San- 
scrit grammarians justly considered as indeclinable 
nouns.t Thus, our distinctions of the first genera 
of words, analogically deduced, do not essentially 
differ from the most approved authorities, including 
primarily Aristotle's ; who, in his treatise of Inter- 
pretation, begins by distinguishing language into 
Noun and Verb, and afterwards calls verbs nouns 
having the attributives of connexion, time, &c. 

178, As the Verb is the principal connective, 
and cement of language, it is universal or cate- 
gorical, and consequently it expresses both Existence 
and Relation ; whence the power of the auxiliary 
verb to be belongs to every verb, and as existence 
implies action^ of which time is the most general 
form, so time is also a universal attribute by which 
every verb is modified ; and these interpret the 
entire office of the verb with respect to time and 



• See "Class. Jour." vol. xl. p. 11, 12, 14. 

t " Asial. Researches," vol. vii. p. 215. Lond. ed. 8vo. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 83 

connexion^ and explain why the expressing of re- 
lation is essential to the verb, and that of existence 
or time is an attribute only. 

179. It may be worthy of remark here, that all 
the verbal attributes of time, number, case, gender, 
and person, have been triply distinguished: time, 
as past, present, and future ; number, as singular, 
dual, and plural; case, as nominative, genitive, 
and objective ; gender, as masculine, feminine, and 
neuter ; and person, as first, second, and third ; so 
prone are words to adapt themselves to the rela- 
tions of thoughts and things, and the universal 
analogy of nature. 

180. Moods of verbs are of logical importance, 
corresponding to the variety of Propositions, as 
indicative^ imperative^ and interrogative or opta- 
tive : which again divide into others, the impera- 
tive affording the potential and subjunctive, as the 
indicative does the infinitive ; but natural regula- 
tion requires only the three first distinctions, and 
strictly we have no others in English, though we 
can easily express them all.* 

181. These attributes are traceable to universal 
predicaments, and the whole grammar of words is 
Ic^cal, and its true distribution also categorical. 
Thus words as to kind are either Substantives 
according to the category of Substance ; — ^in respect 
to that of Quality they are Adjectives^ — and accord- 

* See ** Class. Jour." vol. xix. p. 237. 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

ing to the category of Relation they are Verbs or 
affirmations ; while Particles include the minor 
predicaments of Quantity, Numher, Time, Place, 
Action, Passion, &c, ; and Steele, one of our old 
Grammarians, distributes the parts of speech into 
Names, Qualities, Affirmations, and calls Particles 
modes or manner of words,* 

182. Again: — as Nouns Substantive denote 
either Genus, Species, or Individuals, so Nouns 
Adjective may be called DeJinitiveSj their office 
being to attribute the Generic, Specific, and In- 
dividual differences of Nouns Substantive briefly, 
according to true logical definition. For like 
reason Harris has given the name Definitive to the 
Article, because it Individuates or determines the 
Substantive. 

183. Pursuing still the logical and analogical 
distinctions of words as signs, they are either par- 
ticular, general, or universal. If particular, they 
are proper names of individuals ; if general, they 
are common namesj or special terms ; and if uni- 
versal, they are categorical terms; and they are 
distinguished as Universal, Equivocal^ and Ana- 
logous or reciprocal. 

184. Names are not formed upon the most 
intimate and accurate, but upon the most evident 
and superficial qualities arfd properties of things ; 
hence, the nomenclature of science requires change, 

• "Gram." p. 102. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 85 

and cannot become fixed till knowledge has attained 
perfection. Early language is particular, sensible, 
long-worded, and difiuse ; but in its maturity 
language becomes brief, abstract, general, and 
intellectual. Hence, the words of permanent lan- 
guage are for the most part general^ or common 
terms ; for proper namesy belonging to particulars 
or individuals, might be infinite in endless succes- 
sion, and are rather accidents of -language than 
language itself. These are also usually adopted 
or derived from general terms ; while, of universal 
termsy language is so deficient, that they also are, 
with few exceptions, borrowed from general terms, 
every one of which is a compound sign of as many 
ideas as are expressed or understood by the words 
contained in its definition. 

185. This power of general terms arises from 
their either possessing inherently the three Logical 
distinctions of particular^ generaly and universaly 
or their acquiring it by added signs, such as are 
the Articles Ay Afiy Andy Addy Asy Any^ Ally and 
the other grammatical signs of number, as singular, 
dual, plural, total, &c. ; such as OnCy Some, Noy 
Noney &c., according as they may be used distri- 
bvtively or universally, collectively or generally, or 
singularly or individually. 

186. Of the use of these added signs we need 
not examples ; and of the inherent significations of 
terms the following may suffice, in the ordinary 
usage of the word Man. 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

As Particular — A man came here yesterday . Individual. * 
„ General — Man is addicted to war . . Specific. 
,, Universal — God created Man Generic. 

In tfaese three propositions, the term man is 
equivalent to A many some men^ all men. And 
this Syncatagorem ally is in like manner singular 
when applied individually, and general when ap- 
plied collectively, or universal when logically dis- 
tributed.* 

187. All relative terms co-include in some re- 
spect with their correlates, whence there is indi- 
viduality in universality^ and universality in indi- 
viduality, and both of these in generality^ speciality, 
and particularity ; all of which are participant 
correlatively or analogically : whence these terms 
are frequently employed ambiguously, and with con- 
sequent logical obscurity. 

188. As all words, except proper names, are 
general termsy and as Generality is unity and re- 
lative to Universality, it is logically apparent that 
all the original roots of language must he Cate- 
gorical ; and as every Category or Universal term 
includes the General, and the general the Indi- 
vidual, so Categorical terms themselves may have 
been taken primarily from general names, and 
these from Individuals accordingly as the one may 
have been pre-eminently Universal or the other 
General ; whence proper names may have been the 

* See ** Artis Logicee Rudinienla," p. 78. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 87 

primitive source of the Universal metaphorically. 
Thus the name Jehovah may signify Beings or the 
name Adam become that of Marij and there is 
a reciprocation of the Universal and Individual in 
signs. 

189« In the mutations of Language Abstract 
significations of words are first given as proper 
names to Individuals, by degrees they are extended 
to Families of things or Pluralities \ then they 
become Species, Genera, or Universals. Thus are 
words rendered Categorical by abstraction from 
particular Signs, or by addition rendered General 
and Specific parts of speech from Universal signs. 
There are instances also of General words and 
terms gradually narrowing their significations to 
Particulars and Individuals, and of even changing 
their category, and of qualities and attributes be- 
coming names of substantives and things, — so that 
signs and the whole of language or signification is 
in perpetual mutation, for want of regard to which 
men run innocently into ambiguities, equivocations, 
and misunderstandings, — and Logicians into errors 
in their demonstrations ; and of this mutation 
every word is one way or another an instance. In 
infancy Pap-pap and Mam-mam first mean Milk — 
the Mammse — Meat — Matter — Mater — Mother — 
Man; then Papa — Pater — Patria — Pope, — and 
spread universally, setting out from a particular, 
to trace and disclose which is the oflSce of Ety- 
mology. 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

190. But for such mutations of words know- 
ledge would sta^ate for want of signs, or they 
would multiply beyond memory and management. 
As it is, the Logician must content himself to make 
sure the signification and ground of discourse, and 
guard against equivocation and sophistry. 

191. Of Aristotle's Predicables the Universal 
comprehends Genus, Species, and Individual as 
mere relations of classes, variable according to 
reference, and attributable to all things. Thus 
Man is a universal or genus, of which Shakespere 
is a species or individual. Man is also an indi- 
vidual or species, of which Animal is the genus or 
universal. And so on to the first Category or 
universal Substance. It is the same with other 
terms according to their category, and these dis- 
tinctions are mere attributes of number, as One, 
Many, or All — as Unity, Plurality, or Totality, i, e. 
as Individuality, Generality, or Universality, ac- 
cording to Category, Genus, or Species, equally 
belonging to Words, Propositions, and Arguments, 
and are universally Logical. 

192. Inadvertence to these powers of words is a 
frequent occasion of ambiguity and false argument, 
since that may be true of the individual which is 
false of the many, or true of the many which is 
false of the whole ; and vice versa. It has also 
occasioned terms, significant or indicative of gene- 
rality or universality, to be disregarded, as belong- 
ing to the class of Articles to which, in truth, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 89 

belong all terms and terminations expressing a 
unity, whether it be universal, general, or parti- 
cular, or signify number, as dual, plural, &c. 

193. The Article, then, is a categorical sign or 
word significant of a particularity, generality, or 
universality, as modes of Being ; but, in some 
cases, also, it defines or identifies the particular, 
general, or universal, as in the definite articles. 
The, This, These, Thee, Thou, They, That, 
Those, Them, and other pronominal articles ; for 
the Pronoun merely identifies or defines with the 
adjects of number, &c., as the Article does. Which 
and What are but interrogative, or sometimes as- 
sertive forms of this and that. Thus The and Be 
are of the same etymology. 

194. What Articles are to nouns. Auxiliaries 
and terminations are to verbs ; they are categorical 
expressions, or adverbial signs of being or relation, 
employed as significant adjuncts to the verb, to 
indicate its relations and accidents, and to abbre- 
viate and generalize language, by freeing it from 
the necessity of a constant repetition of particulars 
and periphrases. Such are the auxiliaries. Be, 
Have, Do, To, Shall, Will, If, &c., which are 
traceable to universal logical predicaments or 
categories. 

195. Of these Auxiliaries, Be, and its inflexions, 
denote the prime category. Existence, subsistence, 
or substance; Have, and its inflexions, denote 
Possession and Habit ; and of this word the pre- 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

position of seem to be a corrupt, or original pro- 
nunciation ; and av^ or have unaspirated, is still a 
common provincial pronunciation of of Doy &c., 
denote command and Action ; To signifies Place 
indefinite, as Shall and WilU &c., do Time^ and 
May^ Cariy &c., denote Power or Potence^ and i/^ 
conditionalitt/y &c. Whence the distinctions of the 
moods and tenses of verbs, of which they are the 
signs, as other signs are of the distinctions of 
quantity J or number and person, &c., in coincidence 
with the article. 

196. This reference of the Auxiliaries is con- 
firmed by etymological coincidence also; thus. Is 
appears to belong to the regular form of the third 
person singular of the verb to be, declined thus : 
I be, thou be-est, he 6'-z>, or «>, or exists. With 
the definitive article the. Is becomes The is, Th'is, 
or This, and also Th'ese and TKose, all expressing 
be, being, or actual existence. Again, It appears 
to be the irregular form of is, or Vis, namely, bHt ; 
and both is and it signify existence or being; — 
from which, in like manner, come The-it or Th'at, 
They and Them. Thus do these pronominal 
articles belong to the same category as the article 
itself. 

197. These words are full of signification, and 
afford the briefest identical propositions in our 
language, as it is it, or thHt is thHt, or that is that ; 
or, again, thHs is th'is, or this is this, or this is tliat ; 
which propositions say little to sense, but compre- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 91 

hend and import much, and are forms of universal 
application in the language and reasoning of 
mankind. 

198. Thus there is a categorical unity per- 
vading all language, which has escaped notice, 
although it is the hasis of all signification in 
general terms, and afibrds an etymological unity 
in which every inquiry after roots will infallibly 
terminate if it be logically and philosophically 
conducted, — words, thoughts, and things being of 
one original, and the same analogy. 

199. Accordingly it is logically and metaphysi- 
cally evident that attribution and affirmation ex- 
press only existence or modes of existence, and to 
do this being the office of the verb, verbs and their 
inflexions must be traceable to primary and so- 
condai^ categories, or being and modes of being. 

200. Philologists have confirmed this. Dr. Vin- 
cent, in his " Greek Verb Analysed, &c.** in- 
geniously conjectures that the various inflexions of 
verbs in the Greek and other languages were 
derived from some simple and very short original 
verb signifying to do or to existj whence tense, 
modes, and other variations ; a conjecture in which 
he was supported simultaneously without communi- 
cation by a writer in the "Encylopsedia Britannica."* 
These coincidences help to establish it as a logical 
and philological maxim that the roots of general 

* See ** Classical Journal," vol. xiv. p. 194. 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

terms are categorical serving at once as a guide 
to the Etymologist and an aid to the Logician. 

201. Numberless illustrations of this maxim 
may be traced in our own language, the most dif- 
ficult as well as most important of which ar^ the 
prefixes and terminations by which words are in- 
flected : thus the terminations /c, Ish^ Ist^ Ism^ Ive^ 
Izcj IsCy Esty Es, &c. express Being from the same 
category as Is^ from the verb to be. So again En^ 
Ent, luj Ingj Ion, On, Em, Im, An, Ance, Ain, 
Ness, express entiti/ or being; as brok-en being 
broke, wood-en being wood, good-ness good-en-is, 
and others of like universal relation. 

202. To, the prefix or sign of the infinitive of 
the English verb, by which nouns or mere names 
are converted into verbs, is also categorical, and 
denotes being in action, and is only a variation of 
the auxiliary verb to do, being itself also an 
auxiliary ; thus, / love or do love is only the pro- 
noun added to the infinitive rendered declinable, as 
thou lovest or dost love, &c. Tooke has ascribed 
To and Do to the same etymon. 

203. The universal substantive pronoun, thing, 
appears to originate, in like manner, from thHng, 
the-ing, or being ; and the termination ing, which 
distinguishes the active participle, seems also to be 
an abbreviation of th-ing, expressing being, exist- 
ence, or action : thus, writing is write-thing, or 
to write, in being or act ; and the like of other 
verb-substantives. Thus also think is allied to 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 93 

things with the same identity that being has to 
thought or consciousness ; for to think is to ima- 
gine, conceive, or form things : or, as might be 
said, to thing. So likewise the verb-adjective, or 
passive participle^ terminating in ed and en, may 
be derived from Aarf, did^ or en-dedy the past tense 
of the verb to have : thus. Printed is printhad^ or 
printen or end, &c.* 

204. Barbarous and uncouth as such anomalous 
expressions, even as examples, may seem to the 
ear, still their signification is complete. Etymo- 
logical discussions, however, any further than they 
may serve to establish the philosophical and logical 
principles of words, are out of place here, and of 
little other use any where ; we might otherwise 
trace all the Particles to their like brief categorical 
relations with like plausibility. 

205. We must not, however, omit the words or 
signs of affirmation and negation, which are uni- 
versal representatives, or replicates which answer 
to sentences and interrogations without repeating 
them ; thus, instead of replying " We wilU or will 
noty go to Richmond to-morrow, *^ in answer to the 
question, " Will you go to Richmond to-morrow V* 
we reply, Yes or iVb, which may be etymologized 
from A, signifying existence or being, — 



• Or, as Tooke would say, print-rftrf, from do, signifying 
action and time. 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 PHILOLOGY : OR, 



thus: A 



Ay, — Yea, — AyeSy — A-is, — Yes ; be it, or be it so. 
Nay, — iVb-a, — No ; whence, No one, — None, — Un, — 
In — D*is, &c. 



206. Thus Affirmation^ which includes .nega- 
tion, belongs to the same category as the Article, 
and might be considered as a distinct part of 
speech ; if, indeed, it comprehend not the whole of 
speech, since it is a universal definitive, and the 
whole business of language is either to affirm^ to 
interrogate^ or to command: but this belongs to 
the composition of words, sentences, or Syntax. 

207. So much for the genera of simple words 
as words, which may be, and have been, distributed 
into species arbitrarily, and very variously distin- 
guished as parts of speech, according to the variety 
of the things they represent, or the peculiar views 
of grammarians ; but, though we ought not to lose 
sight of the philosophical and logical relations and 
distinctions of words, it does not follow but that 
the distinctions of the parts of speech by gram- 
marians may and ought to vary with the particular 
structure of language, and that these distinctions 
may also be very advantageously employed in 
teaching of grammar as an art, or discipline ; but 
the categorical import of particles denotes their 
relations and importance in logic. 

208. Individual words and terms are in general 
equivalent to as many words as they have signifi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 95 

cations, of which most words have, or are suscep- 
tible of, a great variety, which are to be learned 
from their context in writing or discourse ; which, 
again, is too various to be defined. Hence, their 
significations change with every new relation or 
association; even a motion or gesture to the eye 
accompanying a word, or a tone to the ear, effect 
this change, and there are no more absolute signi- 
fications of words than there are of ideas ; and words 
are subject to all the mutations and distinctions of 
thoughts and things, and endless variations of 
context. It is hence that grammarians are some- 
times perplexed in deciding to which of their parts 
of speech a word belongs. 

209. Words, too, like letters, are sounds signi- 
ficanti and have, therefore, a double appropriation, 
to the ear and to the understanding ; and the most 
significant sounds afford the best or most expres- 
sive words. Further, as we speak to the ear, so 
we write to the eye ; in which way Capitals and 
Italics, which should never be employed, either 
initially or in composition, otherwise than empha- 
tically, add signification to words, as accent and 
emphasis do through sounds, — e. g.. Excuse, 
Excuse, — Attribute, Attribute, &c. ; and in the 
first case, words alike in sound, but different in 
signification and formation, or spelling, are the same 
to the ear, but differ to the eye and understanding ; 
the first belonging to the Orthoepy of words, the 
latter to their Orthography. 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 philology: or, 

210. With regard to the ear, harmony of com- 
position belongs as well to the euphony and 
accordance of words, as it does to elementary 
sounds, or letters in the first instance. But, with 
respect to words, the most important consideration 
of all is their relation to understanding, the chief 
end of language being the clear conveyance of 
thought ; and in this respect the analogy of struc- 
ture and orthography are of chief importance. 

211. It may be held as a rule, therefore, in the 
employment of words, that nothing ought to be an 
offence against grammar which is not, at the same 
time, an offence against reason and just significa- 
tion or good sense : nor can any practice in this 
respect be good, which, however tolerated by 
custom or idiom, violates this rule; and, as clear 
conceptions depend upon accurate relations, so 
perspicuous signification depends upon the like 
relations of signs. 

212. The virtue of language, therefore, lies, 
above all things, in a correct analogy of its struc- 
ture and members ; and, accordingly, the most 
perfect and fertile languages are distinguished in 
this respect — such as is the Greek ; and such 
also, so far, at least, as respects the structure, is 
our own vigorous and simple dialect, which, as- 
similating the matter of all languages, assumes the 
simplest ^rm of nature as its own. 

213. The Greeks, who produced the most per- 
feet models in art and philosophy, did not fail to 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 97 

do the same in language, making nature rightly 
understood the ground of improvement — accom- 
modating everything through analogy to the 
genius of their own language, as originally consti- 
tuted: and, hy the same means, we may arrive 
at the same end in a language, the natural prin- 
ciples, and probable similarity of origin, of which 
so much resemble theirs, and which is fraught with 
the same free and philosophic spirit 

214. It is the plastic power of the Greek 
language derived from analogyy and the flexibility 
of its terms and significations, that render it 
capable of modulation to all relations, which is 
the property most essential to science, and that 
which qualifies a language for the nomenclature 
of science universally, and renders it independent of 
other Dialects. 

215. " There are indeed very few words which 
are not analogous; probably none, except those 
few which have come into general use, but have 
been wholly confined to some philosophical or tech- 
nical application. Our notions are indeed more 
numerous than our words ; each of these must 
therefore represent many of the former. Hence we 
must use words approximating in signification to the 
new ideas which we desire to express. In judging 
of this approximation, not only the illiterate" but 
philosophers have often erred. Yet the words 
which custom has established, though philosophi- 
cally erroneous in the analogical application, must 

H 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

be retained ; while they render a particular eflfort of 
the mind necessary, to guard itself against adopting 
the false principles on which the use of them was 
originally founded. The metaphysical terms, Per- 
ceptiorit Form, Idea^ &c. afford instances of the 
error here pointed out. 

" The same words are often both equivocal and 
analogous : for instance, Foot ; the part on which 
we stand ; that which supports anything ; the 
lower part ; a measure of length ; a certain number 
of syllables in a verse. 

" Probably all these significations of the word 
fi)ot are derived from analogy. But when the 
analogy is not obvious, the several senses are often 
considered independent of each other, and the 
word is classed as equivocal. Thus it may be 
doubted whether the signification of xotrfjifog and 
mundtis, [and worlcT] were attached to those words 
by a merely accidental coincidence, or whether they 
originated in any supposed analogy.'** 

216. Analogy merits, therefore, the first atten- 
tion of the grammarian and improvers of language, 
both in respect to signs and signification, and is, 
in the employment of terms, of much greater 
import than either custom or etymology; which 
are, nevertheless, to be respected, excepting always 
in deference to understanding. Hence we have 
ventured to employ the term vegetal (as Shakspere 

* ** Ariis Logics Rudimenta/' p. 24. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF WORDS. 99 

did, and as our neighbours the French do) as a 
substitute for vegetable, in relation and connexion 
with animal and mineral, &c. ; for we cannot say 
animable and minerable in connexion with ve- 
getable. 

217. We would, according to the same ana- 
logy, reclaim the word Sensual for science from the 
gross vulgar acceptation, which disqualifies it for 
<jorrect analogy with intellectual; for the term 
sensuous^ proposed by Coleridge, is deficient of this 
analogy. In like manner, the appellation of Phy- 
sician, confined by vulgar usage to the prescribers 
of medicine, ought to be redeemed to Physics. 
We might claim excuse, on the same ground, for 
employing the term generalogism, as well for 
analogy as signification, in the place of induction, 
in accordance with syllogism and analogism ; and 
also for a few others of obvious signification. 

218. This is a point, however, upon which we 
can hardly hope to escape the censure of the 
verbal critic, who never overlooks, rarely pardons, 
and hardly ever applauds, a new term or a new 
signification ; without this kind of jealousy, indeed, 
nothing could remain with stability ; but, at the 
same time, without some relaxation of convention 
and institution, we could only have inert perma- 
nence, without progress or improvement ftf any 
kind. Still, we ourselves readily condemn all 
needless innovation in the established language, 
and more so in the Nomenclature of philosophy, 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 philology: or, 

till such a uniformity of relations throughout 
science shall have heen confirmed as will naturally 
conduct to uniformity of structure, relations, and 
termination among words. 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 

219. As words and all language are signifi- 
cant of conceptions and knowledge, correct Ideas 
and logically perfect knowledge are essential to 
perfect Language, and Language to he intelligihle 
must he adapted also to the imperfection of our 
knowledge ; consequently, as knowledge is ever 
fluctuating, so must words and language he ever 
varying. 

Language is therefore necessarily conformable 
to all the changes and improvements of knowledge. 
It is injurious, nevertheless, to the just progress of 
knowledge and science to change the names of 
things and conceptions ere knowledge itself hecomes 
clearly established, since neology, complication, and 
confusion of names, confound hoth knowledge and 
language which simple accepted terms render clear. 

S^. This is illustrated and confirmed by the 
modern Nomenclatures of Chemistry which followed 
the extraordinary discoveries and improvements of 
the science to which it was so ingeniously and im- 
mediately adapted, although it has proved inade- 
quate to the succeeding changes. The same spirit 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 101 

is infusing itself into other physical sciences, each 
of which acquires a distinct nomenclature, into 
which every reformer imposes some new confusion, 
so that when Physics^ as they may, become re- 
duced to the unity of knowledge, it will be found 
that Physicians, both medical and natural, have 
built for themselves a Tower of Babel« frustrated 
by a confusion of tongues ; meanwhile the unlearned 
will have been deinstructed, and what knowledge 
they possess converted into ignorance by new scien- 
tific names substituted for such as are vernacular 
and sufficient to simple knowledge. The attempts 
are therefore excessive and mostly abortive, that 
aim at delivering the improvements and discoveries 
of the sciences in new language beyond the neces- 
sity of giving to what is absolutely new distinct 
appellations and symbols. And for such we know 
no better rule adapted to our compound, all-absorb- 
ing, and universal language, than to adopt the 
name most expressive of the thing signified and of 
easy composition, inflection, and pronunciation ac- 
cording to any received analogy of the language, 
or the science in which it is employed, from what- 
ever point of the compass it may have come, and as 
free as possible from needless pedantry. 

221. As to Etymology, it is philosophical in 
tracing signification to its roots, when by a gene- 
ralising process and ultimate universalisation it ter- 
minates in some Category, in which respect it is of 
high logical importance ; but in tracing the roots of 



Digitized by 



Google 



1()2 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

words as signs it is merely Philological and Critical, 
antiquarian and curious, and useful only when 
logically true; but anagrammatism and transposi- 
tion, so commonly resorted to by philologists, both 
in words and sentences, are the bane of Etymology 
and Criticism, by licensing fanciful and false signi- 
fications. 

22^. Thus there is a logical as well as a philo- 
logical, and a philosophical as well as a critical 
Etymology connected with sound: — an etymolog)' 
of signification as well as of sign, by which natural 
derivation and relation are shewn, that are of much 
more philosophical and logical importance than 
the etymology of words, although neglected and 
for the most part despised by philolog*ers. The 
terms space and passion^ for example, are of the 
same philosophical root, if not of the same vocal 
origin. Thus passive signifies spacive or recep- 
tive ; and such analogies are to be preferred, when 
well founded, to the doubtful, however plausible, 
etymologies of language, which are valuable only 
when they assist understanding and advance know- 
ledge. 

223. Synonymism. The last thing with regard 
to words individually, and that which lies nearest to 
their composition, is the relation of sameness and 
of their repetition in composition, which writers 
avoid for the sake of variety ; but as a particular 
colour in a picture, standing alone and unaccom- 
panied by touches of the same hue, becomes a spot. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LANGUAGE. 103 

SO it is with any leading or significant word, un- 
repeated in a composition : and this antanaclasis is 
important, not only with respect to the harmony 
and connexion of words, but also of thoughts, for 
the leading thought of any theme must be variously 
repeated to hold a discourse well together. Sub- 
ordination to a unity is the great principle of 
construction of every kind ; and the maxim ac- 
cording to which writers too strictly avoid the 
repetition of a word, is, therefore, often at fault, 
and always so when it sacrifices unity of significa- 
tion to variety of sound in the employment of 
synonyms: but this brings us to the composition 
of words or Syntax, which lays the foundation of 
the common logic as a distinct science, and involves 
all the rhetorical arts. Our object in this chapter 
has been to disclose the philosophy and analogy of 
words and logic, and not the teaching of Grammar 
as an art and discipline. 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 PHILOLOGY : OR, 



CHAPTER V. 

SYNTAXIS. 
SECTION L 

224. The third and last division of Philology 
is Syntaxis, which is the science of systematising 
words, or of the construction of sentences or propo- 
sitions, judgments, periods, and discourse, simple 
or compound; and it involves the art of verbal 
or Literary Composition. In a particular and 
accepted sense, syntax is the art of arranging 
words according to the established rules of a lan- 
guage. 

225. The sentence, or proposition, is a com- 
pound sign, which implies or contains, essentially, 
at least, one of each of the three primary orders or 
genera of words : a substantive, or subjective ; an 
attributive, or predicate ; and a relative, or con- 
nective ; and these must agree in number, person, 
&c. Logically every proposition is a judgment 
expressive of a relation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF PROPOSITIONS. 105 

S26. But as some single or simple signs (whe- 
ther letters or syllables), are words, so some words 
are propositionsy and hold an intermediate station 
between simple terms, or signs, and perfect com- 
pound significations or sentences ; and such are 
many of the inflections of verbs. 

99ri. Propositions are regarded technically in 
logic as having only two terms or extremes, the 
Subject and the Predicate ; but the Copula, or 
verb which connects or identifies them and makes 
of them a logical judgment, is a middle term, there- 
fore every proposition has necessarily three terms. 

228. Such is the simple logical and gramma- 
tical Judgment, proposition or sentence, and if a 
second judgment be added as a reason or confirma- 
tion to the first, the sentence becomes a compound 
judgment and logical argument or Enthymeme, 
requiring only a third connecting term to become a 
Syllogism. Such reason of a previous proposition 
we call its cav^e which we require by asking why f 
and connect them by the term because ; and we 
have shewn cause to be concuirence of things 
necessarily related, or analogously. 

229- The rules of construction for the simple 
proposition are those also of the period, or com- 
pound proposition, and of all discourse which con- 
sists of propositions connected in series. 

230. Many attributes may be connected with 
a subject, or subjects, or many subjects may be 
connected with an attribute or attributes ; and these 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 philology: or, 

also afford compound sentences^ or periods, and 
parenthetical propositions; and sentences may be 
attributed and connected parenthetically in the 
manner of words. 

231. Rhetorically, the Parenthesis has been 
objected to; but every compound proposition is 
parenthetical, nor can any sufficient discourse be 
conducted without some putting in: and the 
periods which comprehend no parenthesis must 
necessarily be short and meagre enunciations, 
tiring to the eye and teasing to the mind, although 
admired by many for their terseness. 

232. This fashion of modern composition is 
opposed to the excessive employment and involu- 
tion of long parentheses by old writers, who often 
introduced several of them together, or, what is 
worse, one within another, embarrassing the sense, 
and sometimes springing &om, and always pro- 
ducing, obscurity and confusion. 

233. The Ellipsis is the opposite of the paren^ 
thesis, and there is a third form of construction of 
Periods in which the members are opposed or con* 
trasted antagonistically in sense or sound, and this 
is the Antithesis, and they may each become either 
a grace or a deformity, a good or an evil in 
discourse : for it is upon the addition, substraction, 
and division of words, rightly calculated, or upon 
the proper putting in and leaving out, that the 
truth, beauty, and excellence of all composition, 
and the fulness or faintness of the sense, depend. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF PROPOSITIONS. 10? 

But we digress ; and the Digression and Episode 
are to a poem, or an entire discourse, what a paren- 
thesis is to a period or compound sentence. 

S34. If therefore simple enunciations and ellip- 
tical sentences in a continued discourse are short- 
breathed and feeble, the too complex and paren- 
thetical are laboured and long-winded, and both 
these and the Antithetical in their extreme use are 
unnatural and affected. There lies, however, be- 
tween them a medial construction neither long nor 
short, of a healthy, manly breathing, at once easy, 
forcible, harmonious, duly opposed, and effective, 
and it is upon employment of such sentences and 
periods according to just signification and logical 
conjunction that propriety of construction, good 
taste in composition, and effective argument and 
discourse depend. 

235. To return to our position. The logical 
relation before noticed, as belonging to words 
and simple signs, prevails also in sentences as 
judgments; thus, they are particular, general, or 
universal. They are also, as before shewn, simple 
enunciations ; as, for example, "the dog barks," 
" the bird sings,** " the mathematician calculates," 
&c. Or, they are compound propositions^ periods, 
or arguments ; or they are compound arguments, 
or continued discourse. But each of these the 
grammarian acknowledges by the name of sentences^ 
as the enthymeme and sorites are acknowledged to 
be syllogisms by the logician. 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

236. As sentences and propositions can only 
assert something, or ask something, or command 
something, there can be no other propositions or 
sentences than such as are either enunciativej iri' 
terrogative, or imperative. All these are, however, 
only logical, or relative to the understanding, and 
connect this branch of knowledge with the science 
of Logic; of which propositions and judgments 
constitute the matter, and of which their signifi- 
cation is commonly treated as a part by logicians.* 

237. Logically, every Proposition is a Synthesis 
of a subject and predicate, or an Antithesis con- 
nected by a copula, and may by Analysis be re- 
solved into an Hypothesis which expresses the 
condition of agreement or disagreement between the 
predicate and subject, and a Thesis or position 
which contains that which so agrees. Wherefore, 
when the condition of the subject is expressed, the 
proposition is Hypothetical^ but when the predicate 
is given imconditionally, the proposition is Cate- 
gorical or absolute. Therefore, by expressing or 
suppressing the condition, the Hypothetical and 
Categorical, Affirmative and Negative, propositions 
are convertible, and this because every conceivable 
proposition is a correlation, or Analogous. 

238. By the above, grammatically expressed, 
every Proposition is a Position or Thesis, having 
its Composition or Synthesis, its Opposition or 

? See Aristotle's ?* Treat, of Interp." 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF PROPOSITIONS. 109 

Antithesis, its Decomposition or Analysis, and its 
Supposition^ subposition, or Hypothesis, — and here- 
on have been founded innumerable distinctions of 
propositions, more curious than useful to the Lo- 
gician. 

239. Of the three varieties of Propositions, the 
Enunciative asserts something, the Interrogative 
raises a question or inquires, and the Imperative 
demands or commands ; and they are produced by 
the conversion of the terms of a proposition : thus 
we make the Predicate emphatical in an assertion, 
— in a question we make the Copula emphatical, — 
but in a command or demand we make the Subject 
emphatical. Thus : John is good^ asserts ; Is John 
good ? interrogates ; Be good, John^ commands. 
The three terms admit only of three positions, but the 
signification of each may be varied by a like trans- 
position of the emphasis in each. In the first 
position the verb is in the Indicative mood, in the 
second Optative^ and in the last Imperative, — of 
which three all the other moods of grammarians 
are varieties. 

240. Of Propositions the Indicative or Enun- 
ciative is principal in Logic, and its prime function 
is to define. Definition is, accordingly, the funda- 
mental operation of Logic, and its office is to supply 
reason with correct premises for the compound 
operations of logical discourse, or, in other words, 
to supply argument with true and perspicuous 
terms and propositions as members thereof. To 



Digitized by 



Google 



110 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

Define is therefore to predicate or attribute of any 
subject, word, thought, or thing individuaUy^ spe* 
ciaUyj or generically ; i. e. logically, and every 
enunciative proposition does so. 

S41. To detail the various distinctions of De^ 
Jinition to be found in logical writings would be to 
compile a treatise ; we regard it as alone essential 
here to distinguish definitions as Philological and 
Logical, the first, or verbal^ being the interpreting 
a word by other word or words better understood, 
as usual in Lexicons and Dictionaries ; — the latter 
consists in explaining conceptioris by analysis ; both 
of which are of primary importance in Logic, and 
both dependent on Analogy ; i. e. the disclosing of 
the relations of the word or thought defined. Ac- 
cordingly, every definition depends on relations 
denoted through a series of higher relations up to 
first principles, which, being universal relations, 
analogies are the foundation of all connexions and 
of every definable identity. 

i242. Definitions and Propositions are hence 
distinguished by Logicians as Universal and Par- 
ticulary and each of these again as Affirmative and 
Negative ; but the first distinctions are incomplete 
and require the medium Oeneral^ between the 
Universal and Particular or individual, as ex- 
pressed by the terra Some between those of One 
and All^ — together corresponding in relation to the 
logical terms Genus, Species, and Individual. 
These and other logical terms are however am- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF PROPOSITIONS. Ill 

biguous, Universal and General being often con- 
founded; as are also Genus and Species, while 
Particular and Individual are employed synony- 
mously, and Negative and Affirmative reciprocate. 

243. Logical Definition of a Word, Thought, 
or Thing consists, then, in exhibiting that to which 
it is equivalent, or in identifying it Individually 
with its Species or its Genus ; its Genus with its 
specific difference; or, in other words, in syste- 
matising it by an equation. To be good, a De- 
finition should be brief, clear, and sufficient. So 
also to form a Proposition Grammatically is to 
systematise or identify an Attributive with a Sub- 
stantive by a Connective; — and every Logical 
Jvdgment is an equation of terms, and, when 
simple, is a Proposition, but, when compound, they 
are modes of Argument or Discourse, distinguished 
by Logicians as Categarical or universal. Hypo- 
thetical or particular, and Disjunctive or general. 

244. The whole of Logic is indeed but a con- 
tinuation of the same Philological process, defining 
and adjudging or concluding through compound 
termSf or employing propositions instead of words 
or simple terms, and so on throughout the whole 
of Discourse; whence all logical demonstration 
and reasoning or argument consists in duly sub- 
sumpting Particulars in system under that which 
is General or Universal, and true; but the signi- 
fication of the simple Proposition in Discourse 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 philology: ou, 

loses its absolute sense, being ever relatively 
affected by Context. 

245. Good logic requires that we should dis- 
pense as much as possible with superfluous Instru- 
ments, Symbols, and Distinctions, because these 
remove the mind by interposition from its matter 
which is thought^ the science of which is Logic. 
Words and terms are the necessary symbols of 
thought, and all that is necessary for correct logic 
is to insure that they be not employed equivocally ; 
but when the Logician substitutes symbols for 
words into which they must be translated for 
thoughts, he interposes ambiguities which weaken 
his logisms. They are therefore admissible only 
when they illustrate or perspiciate an argument or 
thought, which they rarely do; and although the 
practice of the great Logicians sanctions their use, 
we all know that ^ristotle mystified esoterically, 
and that, in fine, these multiplied logical imper- 
tinences, sunk the science and art into a play of 
symbols, or figured " feats of rattling swords and 
bucklers," from which reason was dismissed alto- 
gether. Logic is not therefore to be raised again 
by the confusion that overwhelmed it, but must 
dismiss the medley of distinctions of terms, defini- 
tions, propositions, and syllogisms which ring 
changes and exercise the faculties, but become tools 
of sophistry, retaining only such distinctions as 
facilitate truth, and following closely the practice 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF PROPOSITIONS. 11 3 

of the Mathematician by clearing as much as pos- 
sible the ground of demonstration. 

246. We hold it also to be a test of correct 
logical distribution in all cases that the divisions 
and distinctions of any thesis should be both few 
and true, — accuracy and simplicity being no less 
essential in the machinery of mind than in the 
mechanism of matter. But we have departed from 
the philological to the logical station, both of which 
are, however, so essentially parts of the same science 
as hardly to be regarded separately and indepen* 
dently of each other ; our present object is, never- 
theless, philological. 

247. Syntax, then, connects not merely Wordsy 
but also PropositionSy and renders them members of 
compound propositions or Periods under analogous 
relations. Thus, as a proposition requires at least 
two Words, so a period cannot consist of less than 
two Propositions ; but as two injure its unity by 
dividing it, and four or more do the same or em- 
barrass it, the best constructed, if even it be not 
a Syllogism, consists, like it, of three propositions 
subordinated as beginning, middle, and end, or 
as the subject, copula, and predicate of a propo- 
sition ; and the same holds also as a general rule 
for the more extended composition: so that the 
whole of a Discourse logically constituted is a 
continuous chain of Propositions, Periods, and 
Arguments linked together, particularly, gene- 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 philology: or, 

rally, and universally, by copular media in subor- 
dination. 

S48. Such mechanically uniform construction is 
no more necessary, however, than that we should 
argue or discourse continually through syllogism in 
mode and figure ; perspicuity is the only essential, 
and good taste demands an harmonious variety. 
Of the false taste of continuous duple-membered 
periods, we have examples throughout the other- 
wise excellent prose of Pope, laboriously imitated 
by Dr. Johnson, which suit the antithetical and 
mechanical regularity which they regarded as the 
highest refinement, but which soon palls upon the 
ear with mesmeric effect; and with respect to 
periods in general, good taste and understanding 
are satisfied where they are properly subordinated, 
harmoniously controlled, and expressive. 

249* To secure these objects in the mechanical 
construction of discourse and easy conveyance of 
thought, no period ought to be longer than the 
understanding can readily comprehend, nor any 
paragraph longer than the voice can gracefully 
deliver, and the memory and attention easily sustain 
in connexion with that which preceded it, and in 
reference to that which is to follow. Nevertheless, 
the extremes of elliptical and parenthetical periods, 
and of frittered or burthened paragraphs, are to be 
equally avoided, and perspicuity is the prime qua- 
lity of composition* In fact, to attain easy writing, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF JUDGMENTS. 115 

we must qualify it for easy reading and easy com- 
prehension, and neither compel the attentive reader 
to retrace his steps for certainty, nor to lose his 
way in sandy and barren variety. 

050. Yet it may be observed, as a general rule, 
avoiding extremes, that as three words or terms are 
essential to constitute a complete proposition, so a 
period of three propositions, and a paragraph of 
three periods, are sufficient to harmonious expres- 
sion and clear conception, just as the Painter's 
triple rule contributes to similar qualities in the 
composition of a Picture. In neither case, how- 
ever, is a monotonous, uniform, mechanical observ- 
ance of these rules to be followed, and if the 
propositions are clear, the whole composition may 
be varied to the full easy exertion of thought, and 
widest comprehension of understanding. 

251. Every Proposition is a whole of words, 
and every Argument is a whole (rf propositions, or 
a Period^ whereof Paragraphs should be constructed 
with like integrity in continued Discourse. For 
although an unbroken page is symmetrical to the 
printer's eye, and authors, affecting affluence of 
words, run their paragraphs into pages, it is an 
impediment to perspicuity, and laborious to the 
reader, who often lays down a book in despair of 
a resting-place, or without an inducement to return 
to it Hence the style and construction in writing 
are more logical in paragraphs than in imbroken 
pages. 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 philology: or, 

252. Propositions and Sentences, then, like 
words and letters, are sounds significant, or signs, 
and have, like these, a syntaxis and double refe- 
rence, the one principally to the understanding, 
which is logical ; the other, principally to sense, 
or the ear, which is rhetorical^ or prosodial, the 
science of which connects logical and philological 
science: for there can be no absolute beginning 
nor termination among correlative things. 



SECTION II. 

RHETORIC. 

253. Rhetoric and Prosody^ then, come in in- 
cidentally here, as a branch of Syntaxis or con- 
struction, intimately related to each other, and 
intermediate in Logic ; and they denote the science 
and art of literary composition, or of combining 
signification with sound, so as, by the association 
of agreeable or discordant words and conceptions, 
to affect and persuade the mind, through the media 
of the senses, passions, and affections, logically and 
philologically, and include Poetry in its widest ac- 
ceptation. 

254. Now, sound significant belongs to philo- 
logy universally, and we have seen that its matter 
or elements are letters. Intelligence is also con- 
nected with sound significant in sentences, or pro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF RHETORIC. 117 

positions, which are the matter and elements of 
Logic; and between these lie words and terms. 
Rhetoric extends, therefore, to the whole of 
Philology, — as literal it is prosaic and Philosophic, 
as verbal it is figurative and Poetic, and as discur- 
sive it is oratorical and Logical. 

255. Philology and Rhetoric diflfer, neverthe- 
less, in purpose; that of the former being by 
sounds and signs to convey ideas and thoughts, 
while the purpose of the latter is, by uniting 
sounds and signs with ideas or images, to excite 
feelings and sentiments ; the one refers principally 
to active intellect, the other to passive intellect. 

^Q. Rhetoric is the logic of bias, defined by 
Aristotle the art of persuasion in all subjects ; 
truth is, however, its ultimate object. In all other 
respects it is unworthy the attention of the logi- 
cian, who regards it as dialectical ; and it is pro- 
perly divided in triple reference to the Speaker^ 
the Subject^ and the Auditor or party addressed ; 
the latter again being either an Assembly, a Judge, 
or a simple Hearer: in which respect Aristotle 
again divides Rhetoric into three species, as De- 
monstrative^ Judiciary ^ and Deliberative ; — the 
first in reference to the present time, the second 
to the past, and the third to the future ; the proper 
object of the first is truths that of the second 
justice^ and that of the last good^ though they are 
employed also for their opposites, falsehood, in- 
justice, and evil. 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

257. Of the three kinds of Rhetoric the De*- 
liherative is for persuasion or dissuasion, — the 
Judicial for accusation or defence, — and the De- 
monstrative for praise or blame. Rhetoric is, 
therefore, a popular art and not a strict science, 
being a compound first of Analytics^ a part of 
logic, secondly of Ethical Politics^ and, thirdly, of 
shuffling, evasive argument, advocacy, or Sophis- 
/ry,* and thence liable to all the abuses of Debate 
and Oratory, and admirable only in aid or defence 
of Truth, Justice, and Good. 

258. What, then, should be said of the master 
in any art who should teach his scholars, instead of 
the accomplishment of great works, the tricks and 
subterfuges of art, and how to circumvent and 
destroy the works of others ? For such seem to 
have been the chief ends in the arts of the Rhe- 
torician and Logician. To overturn competitors 
is not to win the race. Yet the practice of the 
Greek Sophists has continued to infect modem 
advocates and administrations to the subversion of 
truth and logic. 

259- Although Rhetoric and Logic have a com- 
mon object, the matter of rhetoric is philological 
through sense, and adds persuasion to reason which 
is the matter of logic. Rhetoric also employs £n- 
thymems, or imperfect and immediate arguments, 
possible and probable, as Logic employs Syllogisms 

• Arist. " Rhet." ch. ir. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF RHETORIC. 119 

and perfect arguments, uninterrupted media and 
necessary truth; every way of attaining which is 
estimable, and the proper end of Rhetoric is to 
convey truth to uncultivated minds, as that of Logic 
is the conviction of reason. 

260. Words, thoughts, and things, are alone 
attributable to all subjects, and their Sciences are 
in virtue thereof solely of universal application ; 
and if Rhetoric, as an Art, differs from all others 
in this respect, and is thus also of universal re- 
ference, it is because it involves both the science 
of words and of thoughts, and is thus intermediate 
to and connects both Grammar and Logic. 

261. Aristotle analyses the art remarkably, in 
the platonic manner, through triple analogy. Thus 
he refers rhetoric proof, distinguishing the artificial 
from the natural, to the Orator^ the Auditor, and 
the Oration, upon each of which he enlarges, 
assigning to the Orator Actions, Manners, and 
Qualities, to the Auditor the Passions and Excit&- 
bilities, and to the Oration conviction through 
Ideas, Examples, and Enthymems ; in all of which 
truth is subjected to persuasion, and Rhetoric if 
shewn to be an offspring of Logic and Language, 
in political and ethical connexion. The Syllo- 
gism and Induction of Logic are converted into 
the Enthymem, and Example in Rhetoric, — the 
Enthymem being an imperfect Syllogism, and the 
Example a partial Induction, both resting on simi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

litudes which fall short of perfect Enalogy or 
parity of reason, which ought to he the estahlished 
hasis of all logical argument, and all rhetorical 
persuasion. Our object here is, however, only to 
mark the place of Rhetoric between Grammar and 
Logic, and its logical foundation — not to teach 
the Art, admirably unfolded by Aristotle with a 
grasp of intellect anticipating all subsequent at- 
tempts. 

262. The simplest rhetorical effects are those 
of Letters, or alliteration^ principally with regard 
to sound ; and there are three kinds of alliteration : 
one rhymicaly and in part rhythmical^ arising from 
the repetition of the same letter or sound; an- 
other, which springs from the melody of different 
letters or sounds succeeding appositely; and a 
third, which arises from the harmony and contrast 
of different, and even of discordant sounds : all of 
which are employed for the purposes of expression 
and persuasion. 

263. Most languages afford examples, and our 
own abundantly, of words expressively significant 
through natural sounds; such are, OI, Hiss, 
Whisper, Roar, Rough, Smooth, Harsh, Hard, 
Soft, Silk, and innumerable others. 

There are also words significant through natural 

figures^ of which the interjection O I and the words 

Zigzag, Serpent, &c., are instances. And some 

have traced the figures of letters to the forms of 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF RHETORIC. 121. 

the mouth in articulation, of which B is an illus- 
tration. All of which depends remotely on the 
same original elements. Words and names arise 
also through relation from the natural calls and 
cries of animals, as Neigh from the Horse, Low 
of the Ox, Bleat of the Sheep, Bark of the Dog, 
Mew of the Cat, Cackle of the Hen, &c., which 
are but abbreviate imitations of natural voices. 
Mimicry, Gesture, and Action, go far also in con- 
veyance of thought, and come even within the 
bound of argument by imputation and inference, 
whence Language and Logic are as wide as Sig- 
nification. 

264. Amid the infinite variety under which we 
view the universe, physical, sensible, and moral, 
there are an evident uniformity among its indi- 
viduals, species, and genera — an intimate and re- 
ciprocal relation — and a boundless and indivisible 
gradation; and this uniformity, relation, and gra- 
dation, are necessary, universal, and complete, con- 
stituting a grand and beautiful whole, whose parts 
are in strict accordance, or analogous, whence all 
the powers of rhetoric in sounds measure^ and 
figure: the two first of which address themselves 
principally to sense, and the latter to the under- 
standing. The chief power of rhetoric lies, there- 
fore, in giving figure to these similitudes of the 
universe; and in the justness of its figures, or 
rhetorical truth, so to call it, lies all its value in 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

exciting or determining the mind : but when its 
illustrations contain no analogy, no true similitude 
founded in nature, they are false, anti-logical, or 
sophistical, and lead to error only. 

Q65. The simplest rhetorical sign, the Meta- 
phor, expresses analogy, and almost the whole of 
Language is metaphorical, indeed the whole con- 
sistence of signification is analogous ; and as Logic 
is but a stricter regulation of discourse, so is it 
conclusive only through a strict Analogy. 

266. In fine, the universe is a Logical whole^ 
which, if we had but adequate signs or language, 
would appear as entirely and infinitely analogous 
as Number, and perfectly related and constituted 
throughout, physically, metaphysically, and mathe- 
matically, by its Divine Author — arithmetically, 
geometrically, and mechanically — in number, 
weight, and measure — time, space, and motion — 
in Unity. 

267* It is this Universal Analogy which enables 
the Poet to form figures of speech, to construct 
metaphors and allegories, with such beautiful and 
corresponding consistency between the symbol and 
the thing symbolised, and to give them all the 
force and distinctness of contrast by antithesis — 
the light and shade of figure and sentiment. It 
was this also which enabled the antients to animate 
every part of nature with like characteristic con- 
sistency, and to constitute them Gods; and it is 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF RHETORIC. 123 

this, again, which renders their whole mythology 
so poetical, and so applicable to all the invocations 
and allusions of the Poet. 

The same Analogy gives effective wisdom to 
fables : — 

" Whence ev'ry object of creation 

Can furnish hints for contemplation," — 

affords signification to the symbols and figures of 
fine art, — supplies moral power to proverbs, — and 
legalises the inferences of Logic. 

268. The figures of Rhetoric, or tropes, as they 
are called, are comprehended under three general 
forms — the Metaphor ^ Hyperbole^ and prosopopoeia 
or Personification^ which are severally related to 
the three chief Disciplines; metaphors to words^ 
hyperboles to quantities, and personifications to 
images^ or figures of thought: all of which are 
employed to elevate or degrade^ through quality, 
quantity, or relation, the prime categories or uni- 
versals of logic with which rhetoric is immediately 
conjoined. 

269. We might here expatiate upon a branch 
of our subject, so naturally and artificially replete 
with our peculiar regimen as Rhetoric is ; there 
being no subject more capable of being cast into 
system analogically, and none with more advantage 
to its existing state, abounding with distinctions, 
the irrelevancy of which has subjected it to the 
reproof of the satirist, — that 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 philology: or, 

" A Rhetorician's rules 
Teach nothing but to name his tools.*' 

270. Rhetoric refers to letters, words, and lan- 
guage universally, and therefore, in its widest 
sense, comprehends grammar, poetry, and oratory ; 
and it may he called painting with words, and, like 
painting with the pencil, is distrihutahle into dis- 
position^ or grammatical composition — elocution^ 
or poetical colouring, the " Opej^um color es^ of 
Horace — and delivery^ or oratorical expression. 
A fourth division, common to all arts and dis- 
ciplines, and belonging equally to painting and 
rhetoric, is invention. 

9rf\. Again, of this distribution of rhetoric, dis- 
position or composition divides into an exordium^ 
or introduction — a narration^ or argument — and 
a peroration^ or conclusion ; a beginning, a middle, 
and an end, which have similar subdivisions. The 
first particularises and defines, the second gene- 
ralises and argues, and the third universalises or 
includes, in logical relation. 

272. So, Elocution comprehends contrast and 
harmony in the words and colouring, correctness 
of composition^ and embellishment of tropes and 
figures ; and, finally, delivery with expression con- 
sists in emphasis or strength, character or manner, 
and pathos or passion : for the efi^ect of fine com- 
position depends upon delivery, and that is written 
well in vain that is not well read. Each and 
every of these involves somewhat of the others. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF POETRY. 125 

273. The middle station of Rhetoric in the 
logical Trivium adapts it to sensual relations, 
whence Oratory is sesisoned analogously with the 
elements of gustatory sense, Sweet, Acid, and 
Bitter; — Sweet in soothing praise or panegyry, — 
Sour in pungent sarcasm and keen satire, — Bitter 
in denunciation ; and these also in endless com- 
mixture, and variously affected by men. 

274. To illustrate, not to prove, and to excite 
the mind by true feelings and sentiments, is, upon 
the whole, the proper office of Rhetoric. To de- 
monstrate and convict belong to Logic ; but since 
these powers of speech are often engaged with 
great force in misleading the mind, and rhetoric 
is the common resort when reason fails, verbal 
eloquence is ever to be entertained with a sus- 
picion proportioned to its floridness. Its most 
legitimate office is to animate the fictions of the 
Poet. 



SECTION 111. 

POETRY. 

275. Poetry is a rhetorical art, the purpose 
of which is to delight. In this art more especially, 
words involve, with signification, rhythms, harmony, 
and melody ; whence verbal quantity ^ or time and 
rhyme ; epithet^ or quality ; and also metaplioric 
similitude^ or relation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 philology: or, 

276. To verbal quantity, or cadence, belong 
the rhythmus of verse ; and this is determined by 
Accentj Emphasis^ and Measure. 

277» Rhyme marks the verse and distich, or 
double verse. A stop generally marks the he- 
mistic, or half verse ; which, again, is bisected by 
accent, which marks the feet and distinguishes the 
time — the arsis, or rise, from the thesis, or fall* of 
which they are constituted. 

278. The fact, that accent and emphasis are 
even more essential to logical signification than to 
sound, has been overlooked by writers on prosody 
and orthoepy, who attach them to the harmony of 
language in measure and period only. 

279. As to the melody of BhymeSi whether 
single, double, or triple, they are unisons merely, 
whence the multitude of poets ; and the easy pow^ 
of rhyming, to even a common ear, indicates how 
few the number of radical sounds must be which 
constitute a language: and it would probably be 
found, upon thorough investigation, that the num- 
ber of rhymes of well-distinguished sounds therein 
hardly exceeds the letters of its alphabet. 

280. Accordingly, the first book of the " Iliad," 
as translated by Pope, the most eminent of English 
rhymists, consisting of 780 verses, contains only 
about thirty rh}anes of distinctly difiering sounds, 
founded upon the following monosyllables, singular, 
plural, or inflected, in three classes, as made vocal 
by I, O, or A, as follows : 



Digitized by 



Google 





THE ANALOGY OF POETRY 


• 






hie 


, ee. 






View, 




Sight, 






Reign, 


Reveal, 




Fire, 






Rest;— 


Wise, 




Sprin 


?» 






0, 


oo, ou. 






A) ea» 


Bow, 


Mourn, 






Man, 


Share, 


DOWD, 


Strove, 






Stand, 


Grace* 


Doom, 


Store, 






Heav'n, 


Day, 


Wrong, 


Cloud, 






Spread, 


Rage, 


Son, 


Broke ; 


— 




Slave, 


Art ;— 



127 



which occur with continual interchange. 

281. The adaptation of homotonous words to 
each other, or rhyming, therefore, draws little upon 
the powers of either memory or sense in our lan- 
guage ; and it is capable of being reduced to a very 
simple art, founded on a tabular arrangement, upon 
the plan of the preceding Alphabet, of which, also, 
the primary vowels may be the roots ; and it would 
become a useful adjunct of English prosody. 

28S. This is a relation of rhyme that may 
merit the attention of the Harmonist or Musical 
Composer, no less than of the Poet As to dis- 
syllabical, compound, or double rhymes, it is doubt- 
ful if there be any such in use, or if the correct 
ear can tolerate them: thus, one of Shakspere's 
characters humorously complains that Borhy is 
the only rhyme to Lordy^ and Sil-ver is a perfect 
double rhyme to Pilfer ; to render them admis- 
sible, however, the second syllables, by and dy^ ver 



Digitized by 



Google 



128 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

and ^^9 which are redundant, should not rhyme, 
hut must he identypical: thus, Milton, 

*' Straight mine eye bath caught new plea-^ure^, 
Whilst the landscape round it mea-«ur65.*' 

UAllegro. 

Such are, therefore, more properly penultimate 
rhymes: 

283. Finally, the prosodial and rhetorical effects 
of sentences add to the properties of words, the 
period and poetic measure, and the heauty, variety, 
and significancy of the figures, or analogies of con- 
ception, called into action with all the play of 
thought. Thus, rhetoric and prosody run through 
the material and sensible to the intellectual and 
logical. 

284. Poetry and Prose are opposed as extreme 
forms of verbal composition or discourse ; the first 
of which merely symbolises knowledge, and is 
allowed to be more antient than prose, which 
liter alises it, just as hieroglyphics preceded letters ; 
hieroglyphs being of concrete, but letters of ab- 
stract signification. Hence, the first is more 
technical ; the latter, in both cases, is more scien- 
tific, logical, and philosophical. They, however, 
compound, in a middle style, between poetry and 
prose, which has, especially, the appellation of 
rhetorical. 

285. We accordingly find, that philosophy made 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF POETRY. 129 

little progress ere it was delivered in Prose; — 
that it was previously symbolical aiid mystic only, 
and Suidas, Laertias, and Theopompus, assert that 
Perecydes, the founder of the Italic school, was 
the first who treated of the Gods, and nature of 
things, in Prose^ and that preceding philosophers 
were Poets.* Nor was it till the descendants of 
this Pythagoric school gradually banished the Rhe- 
torical arts from Philosophy, that Logic was esta- 
blished in form and as a science, progressively 
from Zeno Eleates to Aristotle, There is less 
need, therefore, for any lengthened discussion of 
an art so remote from a logical purpose as Poetry 
is, and of which it is here simply requisite to mark 
the place and relation. 

5286. As Syntaxis comprehends the various li- 
teral, verbal, and sentential powers of words, in 
the several forms of composition, and the various 
manners of employing them in the communication 
of thought, denoted by the general appellation of 
Style or Diction^ but principally with regard to 
prose, this latter is a subject peculiarly belonging 
to this branch of philological science, and is of 
the highest importance as instrumental in Logic. 

? See Theop. Gale, rol. ii. p. 120. 



K 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



130 PHILOLOGY : OR, 




SECTION IV. 



STYLE, 



287. Style, or Diction^ involves both Rhetoric 
and Poetry, being the power and manner of com- 
municating or conveying thoughts through words^ 
and has, like the whole of philological science, a 
double reference, or two extremes; the one of 
which refers to signification^ or meaning only, the 
other which refers to sounds. The one designed 
to instruct, the other to delight ; the one perspi- 
cuous, the other florid; the first philosophical, 
the latter poetical ; this sensible, that intellectual ; 
in fine, the one belonging to thoughts logically, the 
other to words philologically ; the ultimate extreme 
of the one being poetical and rhetorical, and that of 
the other prosaic or literal. 

288. Accordingly, words, on the one extreme, 
are either expressive to the mind or harmonious to 
the ear, and in their use one or other of these must 
predominate; while Style, as it regards thought, 
on the other extreme, is either historical or me- 
morativet to record; poetical^ rhetorical^ or imor- 
ginativcy to delight ; or dialectical or ratiocinative, 
to convince : the extremes of which again coalesce, 
and may be distinguished conjointly as didactic. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 131 

289- These modes of diction or style, which 
are simple and generic, are, however, rarely called 
into strict and uncompounded practice, but mix 
according to the nature and relations of the sub- 
ject, and the endless variety which characterise 
and individualise the styles of different writers. 

290. Thus, on the loftiest of all subjects, the 
religious or theological style is compounded va- 
riously of the dialectical, or philosophic, the poetic, 
or rhetorical, and the historic styles; in which, 
nevertheless, the first of these should predominate 
and characterise its delivery; for the majesty of 
the subject is intellectually incompatible with the 
decoration of language, and becomes most sublime 
and impressive when delivered with simplicity un- 
adorned. Yet, in levelling this subject to the in- 
firmity of the human faculties, so as to penetrate 
the soul with truth through the heart, or to warm 
the heart through the mind, it may be sometimes 
necessary to resort to all the persuasions and charms 
of verbal eloquence. The like composition, regula- 
tion, and latitude of style, belong also variously to 
inferior subjects. 

291- From these principles it follows, that the 
style of literary and oral composition should be 
adapted to the design either to instruct logically 
or delight sensibly; if to delight or amuse only, 
then must there be a sacrifice of signification to 
sound and poetic beauty ; if only to instruct, then 
must all other things be sacrificed to logical per- 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 philology: or, 

spicuity — the eloquence of thought ; hut if, finally, 
the design he to persuade, and to hlend amusement 
with instruction, the delectahle with the profitahle, 
then must the style he more or less florid, or per- 
spicuous, according as the design may he more or 
less to delight, to persuade, or to instruct and 
convince. The first case will afibrd the poetic 
style ; the second, the logical ; and the last, the 
rhetorical^ eloqijtenty or oratorical; which, again, 
have each their extremes and mean : thus, the 
free style of oratory is a mean to the simple and 
the sublime^ and these may he variously com- 
pounded. 

292. If this distrihution he correct, there will 
he no diflSculty in forming a critical judgment of 
the propriety of style in any work, according to 
the design of its author; and, since readers are 
prone to amusement rather than to instruction, 
there will generally he found a corresponding 
failure in style on the side of floridness and 
tumidity. 

293. Of the poetic style^ which embraces the 
whole ground of literary amusement and elo- 
quence, which address themselves to the under- 
standing and passions through sense, and com- 
prehend, therefore, a wider sphere than either the 
philosophic or historic styles, which are didactic, 
and divide hetween them the simpler ground of 
instruction, we need not here much inquire, since 
it has little connexion with a logical purpose. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 133 

and will again fall under our notice. This style 
has also principally occupied the philologists, and 
has been amply unfolded in many celebrated works 
of the rhetoricians, while it has almost entirely 
usurped the ground of this science, to the exclu- 
sion of its correlative branches ; so that it is to be 
feared the poetic and rhetorical style has had too 
much influence in philosophy, and that, ere we can 
make any considerable advances therein, it will be 
necessary that our taste should be amended with 
regard to the style in which it is too commonly 
delivered. 

294. The Poetic style has been distributed 
by the most eminent Rhetoricians triply into the 
Sublimey the Moderate^ and the Plain, or the 
Lofty, the Level, and the Lowj and Virgil has 
been cited as affording examples of each distinc- 
tion ; of the first in his " jEneid," of the second 
in his ''Georgics," and of the third in his "Bu- 
colics." 

295. Poetry, in its practice, gives flexibility to 
language, and facilitates the employment of words ; 
it is, therefore, an excellent discipline, more espe- 
cially in blank verse, both epic and lyric. Without 
having had some exercise therein in rhyme, mea- 
sure, and the choice of words, few prose writers 
will excel in harmony of composition ; while the 
prose of the poet will be more apt to fail in the 
matter or thought, than in the manner or language. 

296. The illogical effect of this art upon prose 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

and didactic writing, is that of influencing thought 
by addressing the ear and imagination only ; for 
these are the qualities of the most successful pro- 
ductions of the muse. To play upon the borders 
of the higher faculties of the mind, without per- 
manently entering them, appears to be the chief 
aim of the poet's art; nevertheless, we do not 
assert this in any other than a relative sense : for, 
without some degree of higher intellection, ima- 
gination itself cannot be effected. 

297- The middle style in the present view, or 
the historic style^ though its main purpose is in- 
struction, partakes somewhat more of the eloquent, 
poetic, and pleasurable, than the philosophic style 
does. The first office of the historian is to record 
facts : if, therefore, he adopt the language of 
romance and poetry, he adopts the false medium 
of JtctioUf subjects his fidelity to suspicion, and per- 
verts the historic design. In the genuine historic 
style, therefore, poetic license should be subor- 
dinated to philosophic truth ; as, in the poetic 
style and oratory, truth is subordinated to ima- 
gination and fiction. 

298. The writers who make romances of his- 
tory are, therefore, story-tellers, and, however en- 
tertaining their fictions may be, are to be regarded 
as corruptors of history, who, by pampering a men- 
dacious taste, destroy the natural, healthy appetite 
for truth, and the moral and political regard which 
is the legitimate object of history. And although 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 135 

we tolerate its practice in a Shakspeare, a Homer, 
or a Hesiod, it TDust be because, without violating 
the chief facts of history, they characterise its 
individuals and generalise its moral truths for all 
ages. 

299. Yet such is the love of fiction, and such 
its popular regard, that the ablest literary pur- 
veyors are publicly encouraged, and rewarded with 
riches and honours, to debase intellect, and prosti- 
tute talent in corrupting and degrading literature, 
taste, and truth. 

300. Fact and fiction, history and poetry, truth 
and falsehood, harmony and discord, are analogous 
pairs of extremes, of each of which the intermedia 
constitute an infinite series; fact, history, truth, 
and harmony, are reciprocally relatives, and there 
is nothing absolute in their opposed extremes. 
Hence, as discord is defective, or redundant har- 
mony, so is falsehood defective, or redundant 
truth, and so of the rest ; for absolute falsehood, if 
it were possible, would obtain neither credence nor 
currency. 

301. And thus, also, poetry and history com- 
bine. Witness the ancient fables and tales of the 
East, which, in the garb of fiction, bring us ac- 
quainted with moral truths ; and the modem ro- 
mances and novels of the West, which envelope 
falsehood in the garb of fact, or falsify truth by 
fiction : the first, which excite the imagination to 
the reception of truth ; the latter, which fill the 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

mind with false representations of reality. So much 
for the middle, or historic style, hetween the poetic 
and philosophic. 

302. If, then, philosophy regard only truth 
and instruction, every species of poetic, or figur- 
ative language, must he either sacrificed, or sub- 
ordinated in a purely philosophic style^ the first 
essential of which is perspicuity. As perspicuity 
of expression is the chief essential of the philo- 
sophic style, so is perspicuity of thought the very 
essence of philosophy itself; and both these are 
promoted by brevity and simplicity. 

303. In the choice and combination of words 
for instruction, according to the true aim of phi- 
losophy, the most elegible are those which are 
most expressive or significant ; and of these, those 
also which are most generally understood: hence, 
the ordinary native terms and common construction 
of a language are preferable to those which are 
uncommon and exotic \ nor should a metaphorical 
word be employed in preference of one of literal 
signification, the equivocal being always in some 
degree obscure. 

304. It is, in this respect, particularly expe- 
dient to the advancement and unity of the sciences, 
that the technicals, which keep asunder related 
sciences, should be, as much as possible, assimi- 
lated or dispensed with ; and that the universal 
philosopher should employ the most analogous and 
comprehensive terms and expressions. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 137 

305. It is essential, also, to a clear conveyance 
of thought, that he who communicates, and he who 
receives, should understand words alike ; a paucity 
of ideas in the receiver may, therefore, become 
an insurmountable bar to the right understanding 
of the clearest composition or discourse : and those 
who are accustomed to apprehend through excite- 
ment of sense rhetorically, will not comprehend 
propositions and arguments addressed in precise 
language immediately to the understanding. 

306. The sum of Aristotle's doctrine concerning 
Diction is, that its excellence consists in perspi- 
cuity without meanness. To the unusual and 
metaphorical employment of words he attributes 
elevation of diction; to the common and literal 
use, meanness and perspicuity. To produce clear- 
ness without vulgarity depends on extensions, con- 
tractions, and changes; unusually, to give ele- 
vation, without deviating entirely from ordinary 
usage, to which clearness belongs. And in the 
uncommon use of words to observe moderation and 
propriety so as to avoid becoming ridiculous. The 
highest excellence consists in a happy use ofmeta- 
phor, a quick discernment of Resemblances being 
a certain mark of Genius.* Such is the Stagyrite*s 
doctrine on Poetic Diction so far as it is applicable 
to Prose. 

307. The three genera of style, as Historic, 

• ** Poetics," P. ii. sect. W, 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 PHILOLOGY : OR, 

Poetic, and Philosophic, have many intermediates 
and compounds adapted to every coincident variety 
of subjects, and requiring as great a variety of sub- 
ordination, and harmonising according to taste and 
judgment; whence the variety and peculiarities of 
style by which the compositions of writers are dis- 
tinguished. 

308. Such appear to be the analogous relations 
of Style or Diction in a philosophical view ; but, 
regarded logically and noologically^ they take a 
different relation ; and it was in these latter views 
that Aristotle held Poetry to be more philosophical 
and more excellent than History^ because Poetry 
is chiefly conversant about General truths, and 
History about Particulars^ to which we may add 
that Philosophy concerns Universals ; which ar- 
rangement is correct logically and rhetorically, 
and coincides noologically with the subordination 
and harmony of the intellectual faculties, of which 
Memory is principal in History, Imagination in 
Poetry, and Reason in Philosophy.* 

309. Whatever is ostentatious or artificial in 
thought or expression, is inconsistent with the na- 
tive simplicity of philosophy. Hence, all parade 
of learning and science is as destructive of the aim, 
as it is unworthy of the dignity of philosophy, or as 
affectation of mystery is beneath it ; nor is even 
redundance or change of terms, at the expense of 

• See Bacon, " De Au^mentis Scientiarum/* sect. 1. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 139 

perspicuity, however agreeable rhetorical diffuse- 
ness and variety of expression may be to the ear, 
to be tolerated in a style purely philosophic, the 
sparkling variety that tickles the fancy of the 
thoughtless trifles with the rational mind. 

310. In discursive composition both writers 
and speakers employ extreme terms, positive, ne- 
gative, and superlative, where they ought, in logical 
strictness, to use relative and comparative ones 
only. But these, though conventionally understood 
by readers and hearers, lead the uncritical into 
error, and the uncandid into controversy. 

311. From this excess springs a greater logical 
evil, whereby writers, and especially orators, affect- 
ing powerful argument, utter more than the truth 
that as miLch as is meant may penetrate ordinary 
minds and be understood ; whence the logical mind 
is compelled to understand less than is expressed^ 
for truth of apprehension ; — whence springs endless 
debate and disputations, sectarial, litigious, and 
logical. 

312. This logical vice is poetical, puerile, and 
barbarous, — is of Eastern origin, and early story- 
telling times; — an instrument still between igno- 
rance and imposture. To the logical mind hyper- 
bole is unprofitable lying, and an accurate style, 
governed by the precision of truth, is no less the 
aim of literary refinement than of morality. True, 
soul-stirring eloquence, is the eloquence of thought 
and truth, which, though independent of sensual 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 philology: or, 

emotion, harmonises naturally with pure, elegant 
expression, and is not inimical to the images and 
illustrations of poetry duly subordinated and under- 
stood. 

813. Eloquence is, in some measure, a natural 
faculty not unknown to savages, who often excel 
therein; fine writing is but this faculty ruled by 
art, and delivering itself by the hand instead of 
the tongue, to the eye instead of the ear. But 
eloquence is always allied to poetry and sense, and 
is thence an unfortunate faculty in logic and philo- 
sophy ; unless it be entirely subjected, or subordi- 
nated to intelligence, as distinguished from sense, 
and then, indeed, it sheds a grace upon philosophy 
which enhances its satisfaction to the mind. In 
philosophy, however, it is to be deplored that 
eloquence too commonly passes for science, being 
mistaken for logical acquirement; but truth alone 
is the just eloquence of philosophy, and without it 
the finest composition is, to the logician, but bab- 
bling and vaniloquence. 

314. We may venture further even to assert) 
that the genuine eloquence and poetry of language 
is philosophic truth (for the sublime, the grand, 
and the beautiful, all lie within the field of phi- 
losophy); but when we are unable to reach this 
perfection of truth and reality, we content ourselves 
with fictitious seeming, or poetic truth ; truth 
being essential to the mind, which rejects whatever 
comes without its appearance. Accordingly, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 141 

rude language of early society is highly figurative 
and poetical, while genuine philosophy is simul- 
taneous with accuracy of language and logical 
refinement of thought, for which poetry prepares 
the way. We need not instance this among any 
savage people, nor cite Ossian as an example : 
Homer and Hesiod were before Pythagoras and 
Plato; the latter of whom was called poetical be- 
cause he dramatised Philosophy, and decorated her 
with a fictitious garb. 

315. To think correctly, and deliver perspicu- 
ously in suitable terms, comprehend the whole 
excellence of writing ; and perspicuity is throughout 
the test of a logical and pure philosophic style. 
This is true, even to the very letter^ of which the 
most distinct is the best ; and in the pages of phi- 
losophy nothing ought to be admitted that has not 
a meaning in useful or necessary connexion with 
its matter, however it may be apparently justified 
by the prejudice of custom or authority : while, 
on the other hand, every possible aid, even of 
matter, mechanism, and graphic art, is to be 
adopted which may give clearness of signification, 
and facilitate the conveyance of thought. Yet 
hence all ornament, and whatever is multiplicious 
or superfluous, either in matter, form, or manner, 
are equally to be rejected in the recordings of 
philosophy and science, which thereby acquire sim- 
plicity and harmony, in place of gaudiness and 
complexity ; strength or power, in place of magni- 



Digitized by 



Google 



142 PHfLOLOGY : OR, 

tude or extent; and dignity in place of ostenta- 
tion. 

316. False taste and a propensity of writers 
and orators to hyperbole and bombast, have led to 
the employment of superlatives and sonorous words 
on trivial occasions, till it has become, by a return- 
ing tide, a maxim of good writing to use simple, 
obsolete, and colloquial language ; and it will be 
well, in this case, if fashion escape the extreme of 
coUoquism, the affectation of idiom and vulgarity. 

317. An opposite pedantry, exceedingly bar- 
barous in composition, and never practised by those 
antients whose works are distinguished as classic, 
and allowed to be the most perfect models of style, 
is the introduction of foreign words and phrases 
adverse to perspicuity. These, for the most part, 
violate time and place, interrupt the sense, and 
injure the harmony of composition, even to those 
who are acquainted with the languages introduced ; 
and to others they are just as absurd and more 
unmeaning than the text might be if such words 
were struck out altogether, and blanks were to 
supply their place.* Such practice reproaches the 
native language, is in bad taste, whether in writing 
or speaking, and ought not to be employed but 
from necessity, or as a cover for indecency. This 
practice, and those of quotation and annotation, 
will never, therefore, be indulged in ostentatiously 

? Arist. " Rhet." B. iii. c. 1. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 143 

by a chaste writer, nor employed in any case but 
as useful and expedient auxiliaries. Composition, 
to be good, like a good picture, must be free from 
every impertinence. 

318. To measure periods, to distribute words 
in due rhythmus and cadence, to harmonise ex- 
pression to the ear, by rendering the sound, as it 
were, an echo to the sense (and these with entire 
subjection to perspicuity), are perhaps the only 
licenses allowable in a pure logical and philo- 
sophical style. Naturally and happily, however, 
harmony of language and perspicuity of thought 
unite in favour of a philosophic style ; which coin- 
cides with this universal philological maxim — that 
a just and felicitous appropriation of expression is 
the essence of a good style, consisting, as defined 
by Dean Swift, of nothing more than proper words 
in proper places, and flowing, like Denham's 
Thames, 

** Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull ; 
Strong without rage ; without overflowing, full." 

Which is itself an eminent example, and has been 
felicitously attributed . to the diction of Plato. A 
good, or musical ear in the writer, is however 
indispensable, in all cases, to a harmonious and 
perfect style ; as a correct comprehension, feeling, 
and a good voice, managed in a high, low, or 
middle pitch, according to occasion, are to its 
perfect delivery in reading or speaking. 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 philology: or, 

319. Yet are not our precepts concemiDg the 
philosophic style, any more than are those of our 
philosophy itself, to he understood in an absolute, 
but only in a relative sense, because philosophy, 
however pure in its origin, form, and reason, has 
in all its developements some illustrative matter 
of a memorative and imaginative character, and 
therefore involves in its delivery something histo- 
rical and poetical. Hence, in every kind of writing, 
there needs some mixture and temperament of the 
three modes of style, and some call upon judgment, 
taste, experience, and practice, in adjusting them 
to each other harmoniously; nor ought the philo- 
sopher to reject, absolutely or contemptuously, all 
deference to custom and popularity : for beauty in 
itself, and even fashion, when they do not eliminate 
a higher purpose, are worthy to be regarded as 
objects of good sense and taste. 

320. We may, however, regard as maxims, that 
any employment of figurative language or ornament 
is illegitimate in the diction, when the matter to 
be conveyed is purely scientific, or philosophical; 
and that vice, in the philosophic style, is ever 
on the side of ostentation .and tumidity : nay, it 
is even here, as in things material and artificial, 
wherever we observe an ornament we may suspect 
a defect. Nor is it, perhaps, less than a law of 
good taste, that the only plausible use of ornament 
is for the purpose of hiding a deficiency, or dis- 
guising a deformity, whence the beauty of simplicity. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 145 

3^1. Rigidness of style or construction will, 
nevertheless, be avoided by writers of mature taste 
when strict argument, or demonstration, demands 
not undeviating signification, or sense, and when 
the severity of thought may be relaxed with ad- 
vantage by a judicious, chaste, and significant 
variation of style ; while extreme floridness savours 
of juvenility and effeminacy, as much as aridness 
and the total absence of the blossom do of age, 
unfruitfulness, and decay. 

322. But, after all, the writer who expends his 
powers too anxiously upon words and construction 
becomes exhausted for thought, and negligent of 
the logical matter of his work. Style is his 
matter, to captivate sense is his object, and he 
accomplishes his end without effecting, or reaching, 
the understanding of his reader ; hence embellish- 
ment of style, admitting all its attractions, is, and 
ought to be, last in the literary office of the true 
Philosopher, in whose class we include also the 
Divine. 

323. The logical and philosophic mind, fraught 
to the full with thought, delivers itself in a style 
brief and comprehensive ; on the contrary, a pau- 
city of ideas, or knowledge, is the foundation of 
a verbose and tumid style. Readers and Critics 
receive either with condemnation or applause, ac- 
cording to their powers, and betray the measure 
of their own minds in their judgments of the works 
of others. 



Digitized by CjOOQIC 



146 philology: or, 

324. The foregoing remarks are delivered 
solely with reference to what may be called the 
literary styles^ which branch into many yarieties, 
all of which are addressed by writers inyariably to 
the learned, in which the literary are distinguished 
from the colloquial styles^ which employ the current 
language of a people; between which there is a 
third, or ilUterary style^ adapted to the illiterate, 
the perfection of which consists in the clear and 
forcible delivery of common sense in coarse ex- 
pression ; and it is a style of great power and 
compass, equally comprehensible by all minds, 
whether high or low, learned or unlearned. 

*325. Of these styles the last, being of widest 
application and the lowest in its aim, is also pro- 
bably of easiest acquisition, and at the same time 
fittest, also, either for use or abuse. Its strength 
is hempen — the strength of coarseness, and not 
silken and refined : the perfection of language is, 
however, to be strong without coarseness, resem- 
bling the finest textures of the loom. The first 
and opposite style is the universal style of litera- 
ture, in which writers addressing the learned with 
all their learning, and aiming upward, are below 
their object; while in the other, and less erudite 
tiianner, which addresses itself to the illiterate, and 
with a downward aim, the position of the writer is 
comparatively more elevated, authoritative, and 
commanding. 

326. Such a style, addressed to the passions, is 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF DISCOURSE. 147 

of great force, and when delivered in a confident 
manner, becomes oracular and irresistible to the 
uncultivated, and ensnaring to the cultivated mind : 
for he who delivers falsehood with assurance, will 
obtain more attention and credence from the many 
than he who delivers truth with diffidence; and 
as confidence is generally assumed for maintaining 
error, and truth is usually attended by simplicity 
and diffidence, we have sufficient reason for the 
guard of correct logic against a confident eloquence 
of any kind: and as much so in literature as in 
oratory. 

327. To the sensual variety of style belong 
those of slang and levity adapted to banter and 
ridicule, which, however seasoned with humour 
and quaint wit, are to be regarded as sophis- 
tical degeneracies at variance with good taste and 
intelligence; and a judicious writer will equally 
avoid the degrading of his subject by a low style, 
as he will shun the ridiculousness of a false ele- 
vation. Words, like the current coin, are repre- 
sentative of value to the wise; to the ignorant 
they are value itself, whence the power of both 
over vulgar and mercenary minds. 

328. Upon the whole, it may be concluded, that 
the best general literary style is that which, without 
becoming either colloquial or quaint, taking a leve 
and middle aim between the pedantry of the one 
extreme and the licentiousness of the other, de- 
livers itself without excess of confidence, or of 



Digitized by 



Google 



145 PHILOLOGY, ETC, 

diffideDce, in a simple, unaffected, and pure dialect. 
The style, indeed, which best accomplishes the 
conveyance of the writer's thoughts and sentiments 
will ever be the most pleasing and the best But 
if we have dilated more upon this head than may 
seem consistent with the simplicity of outline, we 
could not well avoid some discussion of a subject 
so enticing, and essential to right teaching, logical 
thinkmg, and the communication of knowledge. 

329. To conclude: Language, which compre- 
hends the entire subject of this first part, has three 
respects, coinciding with the trivium of the schools j 
the first, to words and construction, which is gram- 
matical ; the second, to figures of speech, which 
are rhetorical ; and the third, to argument, or 
discourse, and this is logical : to the outline of 
which science we proceed. Every science and 
every subject is of triple reference to its matter, 
its means, and its end. The matter of Logic 
consists of signs and signification, of which we 
have treated: its means are the faculties and 
forms, or instruments of logic, to which we pro- 
ceed ; and its object and end, never to be lost sight 
of by the Logician, is Truth. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PART II. 



NOOLOGY: 

OR, 

THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC 
INDICATED. 



Digitized by vjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



NOOLOGY: 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 



CHAPTER !, 

Sect. L 

INTRODUCTION. 

330. NOOLOGY, or the Science of Mind*— 
the Subject of Logic — is co-equal with the Uni- 
verse, which is the Object of all Knowledge or 
Philosophy, following which we have traced the 
outline of Philology, or the science of Repre- 
sentation and perception, in our preceding Part; 
whence we proceed from the science of Words to 
that of Thoughts, and to develope the outline of 
Logic whereon all conviction of knowledge depends : 
for these three we have shewn to he co-essential, 
and that neither can greatly advance, much less 
attain perfection, independently of the other two. 

SSL In a former universal outline, we have 
regarded the system of knowledge, or Philosophy, 

* Melaphysically called Psychology, 



Digitized by 



Google 



152 NOOLOGY : OR, 

according to the natural habit of mankind, as 
external or objective.* In the present outline we 
regard the same system as subjective, or in re- 
ference to the mind, as internal; in which view 
we comprehend, therefore, the science of the human 
mind in its universal relations, or Noology, as the 
proper basis of Logic. 

332. But as in this change of position from the 
objective to the subjective, the relations of science 
remain the same under a variation of view only, 
it is merely expedient that we here advert briefly 
to the first genera of science unfolded in our 
St/nopsiSyf for the sake of connexion, and dwell 
more particularly on that branch which peculiarly 
refers to the mind, its faculties, and discipline; 
namely, the logical department of knowledge, in its 
common acceptation. 

333. The Mind with reference to knowledge 
is a power of conforming itself to ThingSy i. e. to 
another power out of, or external to, the mind, and 
they are correlative powers which concur in Sen- 
sation and Knowledge as Effects and Facts; and 
as these are attended by self-consciousness of the 
mindj and identify Things with Thoughts, we must 
by universal analogy conclude that the External 
Power is a Universal Self consciousness to which 
all mental and spiritual relation, all Knowledge, 



* ** Outlines of Analogical Philosophy." 

t ** Tritogenea, or Synopsis of Universal Philosophy." 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 153 

Being, and Sensation belong — which is the Subject 
of all Objects, and the Object of every Subject, 
for without this there could be no communion 
between them. 

334. But this is Ontological ground of uni- 
versal Noological reference, and upon this analogy 
all Physical and Logical, no less than all Moral, 
relations depend, — all Being and Truth, no less 
than all Good. 

335. The reflex act, by which the mind looks 
inward on itself, is later attained, and more difficult, 
than the direct act by which it regards outward 
things ; and hence the interpretation of its faculties 
and their relations is not only difficult of acquire- 
ment, but also difficult of significant conveyance ; 
for herein the subject^ being also regarded as the 
objecty the view becomes indistinct, and demands 
intent observation, reflection, and clear represent- 
ation. Had we, however, a true and entire ex- 
ternal Objective system, wherewith the internal 
Subject cannot but conform, these difficulties might 
be overcome ; and it is upon such an analogical 
view of the plan of knowledge universally that we 
essay to establish our logical outline. 

336. The primary genera of science, we have 
shewn, in our Synopsis of Philosophy, are On- 
tology ^ or the science of being ; Mesology^ or the 
science of knowing ; and Teleohgyy or the science 
of doing: and these, consequently, embrace all 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 NOOLOGY : OR, 

other denominations of science. But as all science 
is such only inasmuch as it refers to mind or in- 
tellect (of which to be, to know, and to do, are the 
sole comprehending attributes), and as being with- 
out CONSCIOUSNESS, knowledge without under- 
standing, and doing without volition, or will, 
have no meaning, so consciousness, understanding, 
and volition, constitute mind universally: Con- 
sciousness being pure intellect^ Volition the evolu- 
tion of active intellect, and Understanding the in- 
volution of passive intellect; the two latter con- 
curring in Consciousness, which is pure, active, 
and passive — intellectual cause. 

337. It may be added, in conformity with our 
analysis, that there belong three chief modes to 
each of the three primary faculties of the Mind, or 
subject; to Consciousness belong existence, sense, 
and conscience ; to Understanding, memory, ima- 
gination, and reason; and to Volition, or will, 
belong motions, or appetites, emotions, or passions, 
and motives, or inclinations; and that in a Lo- 
gical, or subjective view. Mind is universal, ge- 
neral and individv^al ; and that these severally 
refer to science, art, and nature, throughout all 
their relations. 

338. In short, so typically identical do we re- 
gard the Subjective and Objective Universe, that, 
without anomaly, both may be displayed upon the 
same ground in correlation. Thus: — 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 155 

8al:(|eetlTe 



CoDselotiAifln — Underatanding — Volttion 



, >^ 

Memory - Imagination-BeMon 

Phyilologleal-PliUoiogieAULogioia 

v ^^ / 



MoUon - Bmodon-MotlTe i 
M»tertal-8enaibl6 -Moral. ( 



^OntoIoBr M«M>log7 Totoology 



OliJ«etit«. 

339- Ontology thus comprehends all principles 
and powers, in reference to Being and Conscious* 
ness ; Mesology comprehends all relations in re- 
ference to Knowing and Understanding; and Te- 
leology, all purposes in reference to Volition and 
Doing. 

340. We infer, hence, that Nature, or exist- 
ence, and Consciousness, are identical in prin- 
ciple — that Science and Understanding are the same 
as means — that such, also, are Volition and Art, 
as purpose; — that these are the essentials of all 
known things, and coincide with the universal 
attributes of God — the essence of all — Omnipotent 
existence. Omniscient wisdom or understanding, 
and All-benevolent purpose, or good ; and that, 
finally, God, the all-comprehending Spirit, and 
the spirit or mind of man, are conformable ; and 
consciousness or conscience, in man, is the con- 
fession of his dependence and relation to God^ who 
formed him in His own likeness. 

341. In a subjective view, also. Ontology be- 
longs to amscununess ; Mesology to understand- 
ing ; and Teleology to voUtion or voiU^ principally : 
we say principally, for the mind cannot act in any 



Digitized by 



Google 



156 NOOLOGY : OR, 

way without some concurrence of the three, in 
which Consciousness is principaL And in all 
inquiries into the nature and operations of the 
mind itself, this suhject must he regarded as an 
Ohject, whence the chief difficulty of noological 
inquiries ; next to which is the necessity of regard- 
ing that which is relative and united as things 
distinct and absolute. 



SECTION II. 

342. If now we are asked. What is CON- 
SCIOUSNESS ? we reply, it is not so properly a 
faculty of the mind as it is Mind itself — tliefounda^ 
Hon of all faculties — common to all; neither a mere 
genus, nor a species, but universal. For the same 
reason we reply it is neither Understandings which 
is reflective of Consciousness, nor Volition^ which is 
conscious activity, but it is the essential ground of 
both these, and of all the subordinate faculties of 
the mind. 

343. Neither therefore is Consciousness eithef 
Sense, Memory^ Imagination^ or Reason, as dis- 
tinct, but it includes them all. In fine, therefore, 
it is nothing different from itself, but the founda- 
tion and necessary condition of all powers and far 
culties, nor can anything Be without Consciousness. 
It is the first and last, and to require anything 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 157 

prior to the first or ulterior to the last, involves a 
contradiction — an absurdity. 

344. Consciousness is therefore the power to 
know, or self-knowledge, the Logos in man taking 
the various forms of Intellect or Mind. Physically 
it is Conception, Ethically it is Conscience, and 
Logically it is Conviction. In Conviction we are 
intimately Conscious, and Logic is the science of 
Conviction, and its purpose is to convince, and to 
convey the convictions of one Consciousness to 
another, i.e. to unite Consciousnesses, or make of 
one mind. Consciousness is therefore the pre- 
siding faculty of mind, or, universally, Mind itself. 
Personality — the faculty to which all other faculties 
refer — the faculty of Truth. 

345. ** If Self,^' says a contemporary of Locke, 
"be both the Subject and the Object of Con- 
sciousness, Knowledge, and Perception, it is evi- 
dent that Consciousness must be the most intimate 
of all Perceptions. And, indeed, there is no 
imagining any Knowledge, or Sense, and Percep- 
tion, so truly and thoroughly intimate or so imme- 
diately present to the mind, and so much, as I may 
say, within itself, or so near and close to it, and as 
it were of a piece with it, as this is, wherein that 
which perceives, and wh^t is perceived, is one and 
the same thing."* 

346. We will, therefore, call Consciousness the 

• ** Essay on Consciousness," p. 149. Tonson, pub. 1728. 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Universal faculty of the Mind whereby it under- 
standsy wills, perceives, conceives, judges, &c. 
As a first and universal faculty it seems to have 
escaped the observation of the ancient Noologists 
and Philosophers, and to have been brought under 
notice by Ethical speculators concerning the moral 
and religious faculty of Coiisciencef whence the 
term Consciousness^ denoting it as a universal 
faculty, was superinduced : accordingly this author 
is, as far as we know, and as himself declares, the 
first writer who has treated expressly thereon. 

347. Logical Consciousness, the principle of 
Thought, is Subjective ; but there is also Objective 
or Ontological Consciousness, the principle of 
Existence, wherewith the Idealists have oppugned 
the vulgar conception of Matter, and assigned all 
external sensible things, with the whole visible 
Universe, to ideas of Individual Minds, with irre- 
fragable argument, which being transferred to On- 
tological Consciousness establishes it as the sole 
ground of all Reality and Existence, independently 
of the gross assumption, or petitio principii of 
another being — Matter. 

348. From the position of the Idealist there 
remains nevertheless the question. Have the sen- 
sible world and the things it contains no more real 
permanent existence than in the ideas, concep- 
tions, and perceptions, of individual minds ? and 
Consciousness replies, logically and ontologically, 
— Yes, in the Eternal Conception of a Universal 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 159 

Mind : whence it also follows that all Life^ or In- 
dimdibal consciousness^ is no other than a corre-- 
spondence with Universal Consciousness^ "in 
whom all live, move, and have their heing," 
whence the dogma of the Idealists of seeing all 
things in God ; and all the subordinate faculties of 
the mind are subject to Universal Consciousness, 
beginning first with the will of man. 



SECTION III. 

349. VOLITION, or Will, is active Conscious^ 
nessy therefore primary, and therefore spontaneous 
or free, the very term implying freedom ; for that 
can in no wise be a will that is not self-determined, 
and an involuntary will is self-contradictory. All 
disputation concerning this famous question is, 
however, Ethical, and our present inquiry is Logi- 
cal, in which view Will is the original active power 
of Consciousness, as Understanding is its passive 
power, directing, controlling, or concurring with it, 
but not as the principle of its power. 

350. Will and Understanding are the active 
and passive powers of Consciousness, both original 
and primary, and concurrent in its effects ; first, 
moraUy or objectively in respect to Will, seeking 
well or good; and secondly, logically ^ or sub- 
jectively, in respect to Understanding seeking 

Verity or Truth ; the first in regard to the liberty 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 XOOLOGY : OR, 

of the agent, the latter in respect to deliberation 
and reflection of the patient. They are equally 
active and passive powers — equally independent, 
although efficient in conjunction — reciprocally con- 
trolling each other, whence the so-called Moral 
necessity of Will, and its logical influence. 

351. The Will is also an active faculty be- 
tween, and correlative with the Sensitive faculty 
and Understandings both of which are passive in 
respect to Will. Hence its moral effects in con- 
currence with Sense are determined by Passion^ 
but with Understanding they are determined by 
Reason ; as its logical effects with Sense are 
Perceptions^ and with Understanding are Judg- 
ments. Thus although the faculties of Will and 
Understanding are, relatively to each other, active 
and passive, they are also, in self-relation, both 
active and passive, the first as determining, the 
latter as determined. 

35^. Hence the WilU or Active Intellect^ has 
been properly defined " the Causality of the Mind," 
in which view it has, however, been the subject of 
continual controversy concerning the moral respon- 
sibility of Man, terminable only through Analogy^ 
whereby we have shewn Cause to consist in Con- 
currence of Action and Passion, and that the Will 
as CaUrSCf is free in the first respect as activCy and 
subjected or determined in the latter as passive ; 
whence at once the liberty and necessity of the 
Will in reference to ethical science. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. l6l 

353. Tbe controversy which arose from re- 
garding the Will as Simple Cause has been one 
of the most lasting and momentous with which 
literature has been burthened and afflicted; and 
there is not a more important distinction, both 
moral and metaphysical, than this our Analysis 
of Cause^ and the evident consequence therefrom, 
that man has two WilU^ the one active^ the 
other passive ; by the first of which he is morally 

Jree or spontaneous, and by the latter necessi- 
tated or impelled, while, in Physics and Meta- 
physics, every Catise being active and passive, 
and these concv/rrent in every Effect, naturally 
sets at rest the sceptical question of the non- 
connexion of Cause and Effect. 

354. This Analysis of Caubse is not less im- 
portant in regard to the Will in Logic, wherein 
active Will is efficient in research and argu- 
ment, as passive Will is in reception and con- 
viction. Yet it is necessary to regard them as one 
Faculty, it being, as we have shewn, impossible 
to separate entirely the concurrent powers of Action 
and Passion, because they are infinitely correlative, 
so that each of the mental faculties is active and 
passive; whence it is necessary for the Logician, 
as well as the Moralist, to preserve the freedom 
or activity, not only of his Will, but of all his 
Faculties. There is, nevertheless, some difficulty 
to the unpractised mind in adapting conception 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 NOOLOGY : OB, 

and expression to the varying relations of these 
powers and faculties. 

355. The Will, or practical Intellect, has been 
regarded as merely Ethical or Moral, but this, 
though principal, is by no means the whole to 
which the faculty of Will extends, since it involves 
the whole science of Ends and the entire sphere 
of Art, or doing, whether by physical motion in 
Mechanic Art, through sensible emotion in Fine 
Art, or through Moral motive^ which is purely 
Ethical, as Understanding, chiefly with regard to 
Reason, is Logical. 

35Q. It is the End that governs the Will, and 
for the sake of which it acts; but of Ends the 
Will can have no notice but by the use of the 
other faculties, which are passive^ or necessarily 
determined, whether they be of Sense or of Rear 
son ; the office, and active freedom, of Will consists, 
therefore, in electing and determining between 
them. The Will is thus a supreme power, ruling 
according to Law, or, as Arbitrary, it is the agent 
of all Art. 

357. Although Volition, or Will, is thus prin- 
cipally a moral Faculty associated with Conscience 
or moral Consciousness, it is also of great Logical 
consideration, from the false power it is allowed to 
exercise in determining the Judgment and Under- 
standing, whose office it should be to instruct the 
Will. The Faculty of Will is therefore of great 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. l63 

negative importance to the Logician to regulate 
and control, since it is commonly determined by 
the Passions and Appetites which he should en- 
tirely subject to the Understanding for the freedom 
of Reason. 

358. But the natural Will, and Understanding, 
though inseparable, are opposed in power and 
office; Understanding being the ally and servant 
of Intellect^ but Will is allied to and often the 
slave of Sense; whence men are morally good or 
bad according to the ruling or predominance of 
their Reason or their Wills. 

359. The Will, by analysis, exhibits three 
powers, — a power of decision and determination 
especially called Willing^ — a power of rejection 
or denial and forbearance, properly called NilUing^ 
— and, between these, a reflex power of suspen- 
sion, indecision, or indetermination, which may, 
analogously, be named Shifting, or ShilUingy which 
is idiomatically expressed by the phrase Shilli- 
shalli, and the interrogative, Shall I? Thus, 
Election, Rejection, and S'z/^-pension, are various 
modes of Volition, comprehending the whole power 
and freedom of this faculty, of which to Will and 
to NiU are present, and to Shall or Skill is future, 
as tenses of the same verb, determining the gram- 
matical distinction of the term. Shall and Will, 
which, in practice, are often confounded. 

360. It is by the latter power of Suspension 
and Indecision, i. e. by Deliberation^ that the Will 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 NOOLOGY : OR, 

connects itself or concurs with Understanding and 
Inquiry; and as the office of Language consists 
in affirming and denying, interrogating and com- 
manding, there is a philological and logical Unity 
of Words and Thoughts, as of Thoughts and 
Things. 

361. It is this power that Locke, in reference 
to the Understanding, calls Rejection, and makes 
it the second source of Knowledge, the first being 
Sensation^ the source of natural, as the former 
is of arbitrary or artificial, knowledge; whence 
Reflection is to Thought what Experience and 
Experiment are to Sense, — the first being the ex- 
ertion of active, as the latter is of passive Con- 
sciousness, and incapable of total separation from 
each other. Thus Reflection is the Experiment 
of the Mind, or internal Experience, as opposed 
to external and physical Experience and Experi- 
ment. 

362. Hence the Will is of much more efficiency 
in Logic than is generally imagined, whence it has 
been commonly disregarded by the Logician, and 
consigned to the Moralist, in whose science it is 
the principal faculty, and we have so regarded it 
in connexion with Consciousness or Conscience. 
Yet the Will is the prime power in the Logic of 
Partt/y in all the Prejudices of the uncultivated 
Understanding, and in whatever Passion and Self 
can take a part; all of which are mighty in ope- 
ration against Reason, vitiate the current opinions 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC, 165 

of society, and are formidable in opposition to 
Truth and sound Logic. 

363. The whole Logic of Bias is accordingly 
more dependent on this usurping and enslaving 
Faculty of Will than on the defects of Understand- 
ing, concerning which the free and honest Logi- 
cian's care should be to examine how far the Will 
enters into any question, and to allow it only a 
negative voice in entire subjection to the Under- 
standing; — excluding it from every rational in- 
quiry, tolerating its apodictic authority only in 
legitimate command, and admitting its imperative 
propositions only where interrogative or enuncia- 
tive ones would be inefficient. 

364. Employing only imperative Propositions 
or Judgments^ the Will recognises no other logical 
forms than the argumentum baculinum^ and in- 
duction of physical forces^ to which rulers and 
men are but too much inclined, and eliminate all 
other Logic ; and by forcibly assuming the ground 
of merit, it often overrules and frustrates the 
objects of great talents. It is evident, neverthe- 
less, that it is a true logical faculty, inasmuch as 
it has the entire and not-to-be-neglected order of 
Imperative Propositions subject to it, the legiti- 
mate and moral use of which the Logician ought 
not to call in question, but to assign it a distinct 
department, which may be called Imperiologt/y 
or the Logic of Command^ especially on behalf of 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Military Commanders and Politicians, and well 
meriting a thorough investigation and regulation. 

365. Thus Logic is of two kinds, the Civil 
and the Military ; the first dependent on the Un- 
derstanding, the latter on the Will, which is the 
Military Faculty in man. But if Reason and Jus- 
tice, Truth, Beauty, and Good, are ever to flourish 
freely, and govern Man morally, politically, or 
religiously, it can he only hy subjecting his Mtli" 
tary to his Civil Powers and Faculties^ the true 
source of Civilisation^ or the former will suhdue 
Reason, Truth, and Good, morally and politically, 
and ultimately destroy Liberty and the Logos in 
man ; — while to render " Will the chief organ of 
Divine Truth," in men is diabolical. 

366. As there is thus a logical as well as 
a moral Will, which is properly the Logic of 
Authority or Command, all Authority belongs 
primarily to Reason, from which it receives its 
Laws and Appointment — to teach and discipline, 
to order and govern, and to enforce and com- 
mand. It belongs, therefore, especially to Parents 
and Masters — Tutors, Presidents, and Command- 
ers — to Emperors and Kings, — but, above all, to 
God, who only, having perfect Reason, is perfect 
in Authority — the Pattern for Man — the Universal 
Logos, who rules all by His Will with perfect 
Reason, Power, and Beneficence. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. I67 



ELECTION. 

367. Between the Noological, or knowing Fa- 
culties of Understanding and Volition^ or Will^ 
Aristotle placed a Faculty of ELECTION,— Pro- 
airesis* or Velleityj in which both Will and Un- 
derstanding are conjoined, which he defines "a 
judicious Appetition ;'* as Plato also does " a 
right Probation ;** and which may be called Deli- 
beration, — whence Liberty, which they make the 
same as Voluntariness, " a Rational Spontaneity,^* 
which has unfortunately been overlooked by pole- 
mics, and thrown aside by philosophers, divines, 
and moralists. 

368. As the Understanding is for Principles 
and Truth, and Volition is for Ends and Good, 
«o Election is deliberation both for Good and Evil, 
Truth and Falsehood, as Means for an End ; and 
thus Volition and Election concur in Velleity, 
opposed in harmony to Understanding and Reason, 
to which belongs Attention, as to Volition and 
Election belong Intention and Deliberation. 

369. The Noological distinction of the Facul- 
ties of the Mind is not absolute but relative, 
analogically. Mind being, like Body, a system or 
unity of action and re-action, and therefore bs 
the Elective or Deliberative Faculty is a compound 

• " Proc. Theol." vol. ii. p. 49^ ; Theop. Gale, ii, p. 390. 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 noology: or, 

or concurrent faculty of Will and Understanding, 
its existence may be questioned as an absolute and 
distinct faculty. In strictness, indeed, we have no 
absolutely pure faculty, but all are relative, and the 
Faculties may be multiplied by composition un- 
limitedly ; and Election being the simplest com- 
pound of Thought and Action, is expedient for its 
chief and great Ethical importance, wherein Aris- 
totle employed it; active in Determination and 
Self-denial, and passive in Forbearance and Forti- 
tude ; its objects being Means^ as that of Will is 
EndSj and that of the Understanding Principles^ 
although the faculty has been swamped by polemics 
in their lax prolations concerning " Free-will and 
Fate;'* whence an eminent writer on the faculty 
of the fVill took occasion to define the Will " that 
by which the mind chooses anything." * 

370. Election is important also as a Logical 
faculty, having, like the Understanding and Will, a 
distinct order of Propositions appropriate to it, 
whereon a distinct mode of Logic may be founded ; 
for Propositions, which are the matter of Logic, 
being either enunciative^ interrogativCj or impe- 
rative, and the Logic of Understanding employ- 
ing enunciative propositions, and that of the Will 
the imperative, as we have shewn, so does the 
Logic of Election or Deliberation employ inter- 
rogative Propositions, according to the Socratic 
Method. 

• Edwards " on Free Will," p. 1, sect. I. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 1 69 

371. The Logic of Election is properly, then, 
the Logic of Deliberation and Inquiry, of great 
value in Education and Investigation, both when we 
would learn or acquire anything, or when we would 
Lecture or Teach, meriting the Logician's attention 
for its importance, and as an untried discipline, 
extending while it determines also the analogical 
boundary of Logic, and settling the question of 
Liberty and Necessity, so long in dispute with 
incalculable mischief throughout Ethics. 

372, Hence it is highly expedient to restore 
this disregarded faculty to its true station in the 
Noological system, made manifest by Analogy and 
the master faculty of Consciousness, which assures 
us of the WiU and Understanding — our active 
and logical faculties — and is, therefore, sufficient 
authority for their intermediate or concurrent 
faculty of Election, by which we deliberate — 
librate or poise — doubt — suspend — debate — take 
counsel, and choose : in all of which this faculty 
is of the highest practical importance, and espe- 
cially so in the exercise of free moral agency; 
of which this optative faculty is the defence, at 
the same time that it restrains the paramount Will, 
which is ever self-active at a proportionate sacrifice 
of the Understanding. 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 noologt: or, 



SECTION IV. 



373, UNDERSTANDING, the third and 
principal faculty of Mind, is the true basis of Logic 
properly so denominated, although there is a Logic 
of Will and a Logic of Election, as we have seen. 
It is especially incumbent, therefore, that we deter- 
mine the meaning in which we employ the term, 
to which a new and corrupt signification, otherwise 
unknown to our language, has been given by Pro- 
fessors of the modem schools, as a mean for intro- 
ducing a new and celebrated, but infirm form of 
Neology.* Kant placed Reason as a power or 
faculty of the mind above Understandingj and Un- 
derstanding as a like power categorically including 
Sense ;f — and other Continental Philosophers, and 
their Translators, have adopted this part of his 
doctrine and signification. 

374. In English the word Understanding has 
two roots. Under and Stand, and is of their con- 
joint signification of Standing under, or support- 
ing, all knowledge; of which it is also the Sub- 
stance [^sub-stans'] and Subject; and such is the 
truly English sense in which it has been constantly 
employed by the best authorities in common with 
Bacon and Locke, according to whom it is the eye 

• See No. 53, p. 23. f " Critick of Pure Reason." 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. I7I 

through which the mind perceives all its ohjects, 
light, and knowledge. 

375. We deem it, therefore, important to pro- 
test against the ahove-mentioned corruption of the 
term, and no less so to disavow the new accept- 
ation of the word Reason as at variance with 
genuine Philosophy and Noology, contrary to cor- 
rect signification and usage, and hostile to Truth ; 
for since Understanding is the Oenus of which 
Reason is a Species^ whether regarded as a faculty, 
an energy, or an effect, it must he a corruption 
alike in Philosophy, Logic, and Language, to make 
Reason exclusive and inclusive of Understanding, 
the signification and intent of which is, we have 
seen, to Sub-tend and Sus-tain all truth and know- 
ledge. 

S76. Accordingly, the Understanding includes 
all Perception and Memory, which refer to all 
impressions or effects of Sense, — all Reason and 
Judgment, which refer to Conscience or Conscious- 
ness, — and their intermediate faculty of Imagin- 
ation or Conception, which refers to hoth Sense 
and Consciousness, and is all comprehensive. 

377* We deem it incumbent also to object 
against the recent fashion of prefixing the article 
the to the proper name of the faculty of Reason^ 
adverse to our English idiom, and to call it [ia 
Raison'} The Reason, which in English signifies 
the Argument or operation, and not the Faculty, 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 noology: or, 

it is therefore ambiguous, and a needless inno- 
vation. 

S78. Mind is essentially a Unity, and its parts 
participate its unity in Triunity. Hence the Un- 
derstandings and its correlative Faculties, are Uni- 
fying powers; — as Memory ^ it unites whatever is 
presented to it by Association and Accumulation ; 
as Imagination^ it unites by Construction and 
Figure according to Will and Conception; and 
as Reason^ it unites according to natural order, 
true relation, and Analogy. Thus there are co- 
essential to Understanding, 1. A Passive or recep- 
tive power of Memory ; 2. An Active or conceptivjB 
power of Imagination ; and 3. A Concurrent or 
comparative power of Reason, or judgment of 
Relation. 

379. The Understanding is, then, that faculty 
of the mind, or internal, which is distinguished 
from Volition and Consciousness, with which it con- 
stitutes three concurrent powers. Agent, Patient, 
and Efficient, of perfect Mind. And it has, in 
like manner, three distinct reciprocal faculties — 
Reason^ Imagination^ and Memory, — through which 
we understand, in subordination, Jacts, or effects, 
fictions, or figures of the mind, and relations, or 
ratios-; to which belong, in like order and subor- 
dination, three distinct sciences, namely, to Memory, 
Histories; to Imagination, Poetics; and to Rea- 
son, Dialectics : the last of which is of internal 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 173 

relation and principal in Logic, being the whole, 
indeed, to which the common acceptation of the 
term Logic extends. 

380. Thus, again, in Neology, or Subjective 
Philosophy, as in the Objective, there is an essen- 
tial triplicity of parts, and a system of correlation 
throughout ; so that not only whatever exists, but 
also whatever can be thought or known, is relative, 
and there is nothing absolute throughout the whole 
system of science. Hence true philosophy, though 
ever the same in plan, presents a different aspect as 
the view changes, under which a new order and 
new denominations of its relations arise ; so that, 
in all such changes, we do violence, as it were, to 
the original. Hence some dissidences in the details 
of Universal Philosophy — hence, also, the difficulty 
of attaining a perfect system, and the unavoidable 
confusion among arbitrary sciences and systems ; 
for all of which there is no other remedy than a 
perfect representative system; or, in other words, 
a system of Philology ^ or Language, perfectly analo- 
gous and conformable to perfect philosophy, both 
subjective and objective ; their advancement must, 
therefore, be reciprocal. 

381. When completeness shall be attained, there 
will be adequate means for conveying with ease and 
accuracy, as well as for conceiving truly, the entire 
arrangements of the universe, and of perfecting the 
plan of written science in conformity therewith ; till 
which arrive, the philosophic mind must labour 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 NOOLOGY : OR, 

with penetration and good-will, and with a flexi- 
bility of understanding that can bend the significa- 
tion of terms to the view ; nor can terms or signs 
be more absolute than the thoughts and things they 
represent. The want of this flexibility of mind and 
language obstructs the discoveries of Science, and 
occasions dispute, than which nothing can be more 
empty and puerile ; for if either the production of 
Science or Language be in error, the controversialist 
will be much more laudably and beneficially em- 
ployed in correcting them ; which is, indeed, the 
only object of just criticism to the rational mind, 
seeking truth and avoiding error. 

382. It is, above all, necessary to guard against 
confounding and perverting the functions of the 
mind. Of these the Will, as we have shewn, too 
often exercises uncontrolled and unsuspected power 
over the Understanding, — whence little reason or 
argument sufiices to convince the willing mindj 
while all the powers of ratiocination and of truth 
are cast away upon the unwilling ; and when the 
Will thus usurps the oflfice of the Understanding, the 
mind inevitably becomes the slave of Prejudice and 
Partiality, while the reasoning faculty withers through 
want of exercise. Hence the necessity, if we would 
preserve the mind sane, and free for the acquisition 
of truth, that we should subdue this mastery of 
Volition^ and engage it with honest Consciousness 
in the free service of Understanding* 

383. That man in community, as well as indi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 175 

vidually, is more determined by Will than by Reason 
or Understanding, is evident to the commonest 
observer. Were it otherwise, there would be little 
disagreement of mind, and no need of laws and 
treaties ; men and nations would then readily con- 
cur in acknowledging and doing only what is right 
and for each other's good ; for Reason and Right 
are one when not vitiated by Will, which is blind 
and obedient to passion and appetite, and all the 
persuasions of pleasure and pain allied to inclina- 
tion, affection, and sense, and to every evil motive 
of the mind : to bring all which imder the govern- 
ment of Reasoning or Understanding, for a good end, 
ought to be the chiefest aim in the cultivation and 
discipline of mind, individual and social, for such is 
the purpose of Logic. 

384. So fertile, in other respects, is the subject 
of the human Will, that volumes out of number 
have done little toward exhausting it. Our present 
purpose is simply logical, and we have already 
treated of the logical Will, shewing that the defi- 
nition which confines Logic to "the right use of 
Reason,** is too limited for a science of universal 
compass that includes every faculty and instrument 
of human cognition, no less than the exercise of 
Reason as an art. 

385. Then there is a logic of Sense to which 
we appeal in matters of Sense ; which extends also 
to the passions, feelings, and affections, which have 
their appropriate evidence in matters not sinply 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 noology: or, 

rational, and to which Reason has also a like limited 
appeal ; but it is a great logical error when these 
are employed in the office of Reason beyond their 
jurisdiction, in which way the many, neglecting the 
light and evidence of Understanding, argue from 
feelings, &c., which although for good or evil, as it 
may happen, are blind to every end but their own ; 
or, what is worse, they force Reason into the servi- 
tude of SensBj and make Understanding the slave 
of Passion and Party — the friends of Folly, False- 
hood, and Fraud, and enemies of Logic, Truth, and 
Honesty. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 177 



CHAPTER IL 

LOGICAL SCIENCE. 
SECTION I. 

386. Having shewn that the mind consists pri- 
marily of three powers, in conformity with the plan 
of the philosophic or ohjective system, and having 
spoken of them as distinguished, namely, of the 
^passive power of Consciousness^ the active power of 

Volition^ and the eflFective, or concurrent power of 
Understandingj to the latter of which Knowledge 
and Reason properly helong ; we may set apart the 
two former coessentials as distinguished from the 
latter, while we determine in what it consists, and 
its reference to Logic in particular. 

387. The universal rule hy which the objects 
of science are distributed according to their cor« 
relative relations, as internal, external, and medial, 
belongs also to the powers or faculties of the sub- 
ject or mind, in similar subordination ; and hence, 
again. Understanding, or the power of knowledge, 
has three subordinate faculties : first, principally 
related to the external, it has Memory ; in medial 
relation it has Imagination ; and in internal relation 

N 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 NOOLOGY :• OR, 

it has Reason ; and to these belong relatively the 
three genera of logical science, — Mnemonics, or 
History, to Memory ; Poetics^ to Imagination ; and 
Dialectics, to Reason : of which, setting apart the 
two former, we reserve the latter, to which more 
particularly belongs the science of Ratiocination, the 
art and discipline of Logic. 

388. Notwithstanding we thus set apart the 
consideration of the sciences to which the several 
powers of the mind are related, excepting only 
Dialectics, which belong principally to the power 
of Understanding, and its chief faculty ReasoUj it is 
evident, according to universal relation, that all 
these powers and faculties of the mind are vari- 
ously coessential to all its acts and effects : it is. 
expedient, therefore, in a logical view, that we 
extend our inquiry concerning them. 

389. AH knowledge is the eflPect of the con- 
currence of that which knows, or the subject, with 
that which is known, or the object; and, as man 
knows nothing more of objects than their effects, 
or facts, he having no power of transcending his 
system, so he is incapable of knowing any more of 
his own subject than its effects. 

390. Now, as the elements of objective effects 
are powers, or eflScients, which are either active or 
passive, the same also are the powers or faculties of 
the Mind or Subject, which are Memory, Imagina- 
tion, and Reason; from which spring the effects 
and energies of the subject, and such are Perception, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 179 

Conception^ and Judgment; and, finally, from effects 
and energies spring other effects or operations of the 
mind or suhject, and such are the modes or forms of 
argument. Logic involves, therefore, subjectively, 
the powers or Faculties^ effects or Energies, and 
acts or Operations, of the mind or subject, each 
active and passive, of which in order. 



SECTION IL 

391- First, of the LOGICAL FACULTIES 
of the mind. In analysing knowledge objectively, 
we discover an external object, matter — an internal 
object, mind or intellect — and a medial object, 
sense, each of which may be resolved into action 
and passion; and they are the ground of three 
primary corresponding sciences — the material or 
physical, the sensible or sesthetical, and the intel- 
lectual or ethical sciences ; . and with these the 
primary faculties and energies of the Subject, and 
the faculties and forms of Logic, must correspond 
or accord. 

39^. Hence the logical mind or subject, in con- 
currence with external or material objects, receives 
and retains perceptions, intuitions, or sensations, by 
its faculty of Memory, which is passive attention in 
receiving, and active thought or apprehension in 
recollecting, what has been received or thought; 
thus. Memory is the receptacle of the particulars of 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 NOOLOGY : OR, 

sense and reminiscence or recollection, which are 
the matter of thought ; it is therefore a particular^ 
ising faculty, the two extremes of which, reception 
and recolleciion^ are connected hy association as a 
subordinate or intermediate faculty of Memory, 
connecting it with Imagination* 

393. Again : by the concurrence of the logical 
subject with medial or sensible objects, which con- 
stitute the particulars with which Memory is fur- 
nished, are formed images and conceptions, by 
a generalising or comprehending faculty called 
Imagination ; which is passive in receiving or con- 
ceiving given images or ideas, as of a man or a horse; 
and active in reconceiving, associating, and com- 
posing them, as in the framing of the conception of 
a centaur, &c. 

394. Finally, by the concurrence of the logical 
subject with internal or intellectual objects are 
formed apprehensions, judgments, enunciations, and 
conclusions, through the conceptions associated by 
the Imagination from the particulars retained by 
Memory, by ^universalising faculty called Reason; 
and as Memory is active in recollecting its particu- 
lars, and the Imagination in reconceiving and 
combining or generalising them, so Reason is active 
in comprehending, judging, and concluding according 
to universal relations, and passive in receiving or 
comprehending with conviction* Hence, Reason, 
properly defined, is the faculty of the recognition of 
relations — the faculty which especially distinguishes 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 181 

logical man from the irrational animals, which take 
no cognition of relations or genera, although they 
perceive the distinctions of things and infer as 
they are impressed. 

395. As Reason is the highest and principal 
power or faculty of the logical mind, and is of 
internal relation, so Reason is more particularly 
an active faculty, and Memory a passive faculty; 
while Imagination is medial — equally active and 
reactive. 

396. Yet are these various attributes and dis- 
tinctions of the mind not absolute^ but relative ; for 
in every act and acquisition of the mind each of its 
powers and faculties is engaged ; the original 
powers of Will and Consciousness being essential to 
Understanding ; and of the subordinate powers of 
the latter. Memory to collect. Imagination, to 
apprehend, and Reason to compare and judge, are 
coessential conditions of every thought or energy 
of mind, and distinct only through analysis. 

S97, And, with respect to their concurrent, or 
conjoint active and passive functions, which all 
these variously possess, it is to be remarked that 
these principles concur inseparably ; for that which 
is passive acts or reacts^ and that which is active 
suffers from the patient ; whence not only the su- 
perior, but also all the subordinate faculties and 
functions of the mind, involve the relations of 
action and passion, analogically; to well-conceive 
and understand which identity in diversity and 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 NOOLOGY : OR, 

indissoluble co-essentiality of principles and rela- 
tions universally, is the highest office of intellect, 
and the most conducive to knowledge and science. 

398. Thus, there are three diffierent habits of 
thought to which it is important to direct the 
attention for the legitimate exercise of the logical 
faculties, by one of which we exercise thought 
through Associations, by another through Ima- 
ginations, and by a third we do this through 
Relations. 

399. In the first. Memory is the ruling faculty, 
and although it associates realities principally, its 
associations are for the most part arbitrary, and 
often absurd ; but in this way men retain and recall 
knowledges through repetition and associations, 
and many ingenious, arbitrary, and unsound systems 
of knowledge have been raised, and supported upon 
no better foundation than the associations of 
thought or ideas, the natural ground of which is 
physical. 

400. In the second. Imagination is the pre- 
vailing faculty which combines even more arbitrarily 
and indiscriminately not only realities, but things 
the most fictitious, heterogeneous, and absurd ; and 
men of lively imaginations do not scruple to seek 
knowledge upon this ground, and some of the most 
elegant and ingenious theories and systems have 
been raised upon no better foundations than fancy. 
The basis of this mode of thinking is ssthetical and 
its legitimate office is poetical. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 183 

** Her secret stores let Memry tell ; 

Bid Fancy quit her fairy cell 

In all her colours drest ; 
While, prompt her sallies to control, 
Reason^ the judge, recalls the soul 

To Truth's severest test." — Akenside. 

401. In the third mode of exercising thought, 
Reason is the governing faculty by which men seek 
and attain knowledge and science upon the ground 
of their true relations only, according to the 
Universality of Nature. No true system can have 
any other foundation, and no other is truly logical 
or philosophical. 

402. We do not mean to assert that either the 
associations of Memory, or the constructions of 
Imagination, are to be totally discarded from the 
operations of the mind, but that they are only to be 
used as aids in subordination to the government of 
Reason and true relations in all things. It is their 
predominance and the fallacious ruling of these 
faculties in the offices of thought that leads to 
erroneous doctrines, and to consequent erroneous 
practice; — the subject is enormous, and fully to 
develope it would fill volumes. 

403. It is apparent that the associations of 
Memory i and ihe figures of Imagination^ are both 
best formed on the relations of Reason and Truth ; 
it is evident, therefore, that the right effective 
exercise of Memory and Imagination is through 
Nature and these Relations, and that the arbitrary 
use of both is to be avoided as habits, and therefore 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 noology: or, 

Artificial Mnemonics is an idle, irratioiial, and 
mischievous Discipline, often filling the capacity 
with the dross of knowledge and particulars. 

404. But so important is a just estimate and 
thorough knowledge of these Faculties to the 
Logician, that, without relinquishing their indivisi- 
ble correlation and analogy throughout Understand- 
ing, we will separately investigate them in their 
predominant relations, individually ; and, first, of 
Memory. From such investigation it will appear 
that a redundance of either faculty is not, as 
commonly regarded, a strength but a weakness of 
the entire mind — not a perfection but an incum- 
brance, and not to be had but at a double neglect 
and sacrifice of its other faculties ; whence the 
man of fiery imagination is of deficient reason, as 
he of asinine memory may want imagination ; the 
one may be a madman, and the other a fool, while 
that the man of reason and judgment may be de- 
ficient of memory and imagination, is also a fact 



SECTION III. 

405. MEMORY, which is the faculty of 
highest value in the vulgar estimate of Intellect, is, 
in a logical view, to be regarded as the lowest and 
least ; nevertheless, it is a necessary associate and 
valuable servant of the higher faculties of Mind, 
although unfit for rule. It is the faculty first 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 185 

developed, and to which precocity is chiefly indebted 
for its mimetic wonders smd admiration, whence its 
aptness to overcharge the mind with puerile and 
useless lumber, to the impediment of the superior 
faculties, when not subordinated, and its stores 
reduced to order by selection and generalisation. 

406. The grasping acquisitiveness of Memory, 
craving whatever is unknown, is an avaricious spirit, 
resembling the grasping avarice of money for its 
own sake; eager after everything unpossessed, 
regardless of its uses ; an avarice that degrades the 
mind in the one case, as it debases the man in the 
other. In both cases riches are accumulated which 
draw after them the envy and homage of meanness 
and ignorance, — the one rendering the unlearned as 
eager pursuers of mnemonic acquisitions as the 
other does the mercenary after the monetic. Many 
a blockhead, many a mechanical mind, and many 
a child, have been indebted to this faculty alone 
for vulgar admiration, false reputation, and worldly 
advancement. The parallel might be continued, 
but it concerns the Logical inquirer only to guard 
against being overcome by the false forces, glittering 
riches, and volubility of Memory. 

407. But Memory, as the valuable and necessary 
friend and servant of Imagination and Reason, is 
neither to be despised for its advantages, nor 
neglected, although it cannot pretend to Genius or 
Judgment. In due subordination, therefore, it 
merits regard, and is a valuable instrument of 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 NOOLOGY : OR, 

thought — a mean like money; — and to the mind 
not rich or strong in this faculty there arises a 
necessity for a mental economy highly favourable to 
the growth, exercise, and developemeut of active 
intellect and judgment, conducive to genius and 
philosophy. 

408. Yet there is no greater mistake in educa- 
tion than the over-exercise of this faculty, although 
the chief honours of scholastic discipline, and 
learned reputation, are often assigned to the mere 
acquirements of Memory : 

For '* he that is but able to express 

No sense at all in sev'ral languages, 

Will pass for learneder than he that's known 

To speak the strongest reason in his own." — Hudibras. 

Nor are those parents blameless who, for vain 
display of childish talent, burthen the young 
memory with any other than those necessary instru- 
ments of knowledge which are more likely in the 
end to realise the just ambition and aspirations of a 
parent. Inferior animals — even the stolid ass, is 
celebrated for the strength of his memory,* and it 
is remarkable in Idiots and the Insane. 

409- There cannot, however, be a doubt that 
every faculty is strengthened and improved by 
judicious exercise, as much as it is injured by 
neglect ; nor is Memory, which is the most mechan- 
ical of the mental faculties, exempt from this 
law. Still it is the facultv Intellect can best afford 

* Avicenna de Animal, p. 29. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 187 

to neglect, and from the deiSciency of which the 
higher faculties may even derive advantage. Thus 
in age, when the memory grows weak and judgment 
has become strong, wise minds renew their judg- 
ments on questions instead of flying to memory for 
their prior decisions ; — whence also aged judges 
are better qualified for judgment, and aged writers 
for revisions, by forgetfulness of their past decisions 
and compositions, and write and decide with more 
accuracy and solidity than the young and more 
memorative and imaginative minds. 

410. Nor is it unworthy the attention of Logi- 
cians and cultivators of mind that a balanced 
subordination of the faculties is the perfection of 
Intellect, and that an undue qualification of either 
faculty is to be attained only with some sacrifice of 
the others ; whence minds of strong Judgment are 
oft wanting in Memory or Fancy, minds of vivid 
Imagination are feeble in Judgment, and minds 
strong in Memory^ though rich in matter, are poor 
in Mind. The faculties of the mind, like those of 
the body, vary also naturally in difi^srent men, and 
are more or less prone to action. In youth, accor- 
dingly, they are all to be duly cherished, exercised, 
and encouraged, but in subordination, neither over- 
stimulated, over-fed, nor over-wrought. 

411. Possessed abundantly of the matter of 
speech, and the particulars of knowledge, Memory 
is the most important faculty in Verbal Eloquence ; 
whence men of strong memories, though defective 



Digitized by 



Google — 



188 noology: or, 

in judgment, are frequently fluent speakers and 
pour out their loose stores with an affluence that 
captivates the good- will and assent of weak minds ; 
while men, exercised in Thought, strong in Reason, 
and slow in Recollection, are often defective 
speakers, and unattended to, though rich and pro- 
found in knowledge. 

412. In thinking, the contemplative mind is 
said, metaphorically, to ruminate. Perceptions and 
Conceptions are the food of thought, and, to extend 
the metaphor. Memory is the receptacle, or first 
stomach, for accumulating the aliment of mind. 
Intemperate, it refuses nothing to the extent of its 
capacity ; hut it is the function of the assimilating 
faculties of Imagination and Judgment to prepare, 
digest, and secrete the vital a,nd excrete the morbid 
and impure matter from the healthy or diseased 
mind, — as it is of Reason to temper Memory and 
Imagination. 

413. The true system of nature and man is an 
universal allegory through analogy, to establish 
which truly is the office of Philosophy ; and a key 
to correct Art. It is by this universality of 
Analogy that the mind has been enabled either to 
allegorise or literalise at will every subject, to the 
clearing or confounding of Understanding, and the 
perpetuation of controversy on every subject ; — 
whence the necessity of a Universal Logic corre- 
sponding with Universal Philosophy for mutual 
support. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 189 

414. As Memory is the faculty of the mind 
first disclosed and perfected in youth, so it is the 
first to decay in age. To assist its powers of 
acquisition and retention — or, as it were, to take 
ideas into custody — many modes of Artificial Mem- 
ory have been proposed for surcharging this faculty 
in youth, and invigorating its repletion in age, 
which have given rise to the questionable science of 
Mnemonics. To us there appear three natural 
modes in which Memory may be assisted ; namely, 
by Reiteration^ Association^ and order or Arrange- 
ment The first is most germane to Memory, the 
second draws on Imagination, and the third is most 
indebted to Reason ; for neither of these faculties 
is independent of the others, but they are, as we 
have said, inseparable, and in every mode of arti- 
ficial memory the operation is doubled, however 
strengthened, by two things being posited for the 
retention of one. 

415. It was by moral and mental Mnemonics 
or Reiteration^ repeating or calling to mind every 
night whatever of moment had been done or learnt 
during the day, that Pythagoras taught his disciples 
to confirm the acquirements of this Faculty; and 
this it does in the reduplicate ratio of repetitions, 
and especially so before sleep which obliviates for 
its time, not only sense but recollection. A more 
artificial mode of Reiteration, more precise and 
permanent, and less burthensome to Memory, is 
that of written journalising of the most memorable 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 NOOLOGY : OR, 

thoughts and occurrences, which, while it confirms 
Remembrance for all minds, fixes while it releases 
the individual memory, and duly exercises this 
important faculty. The most distinguished minds 
have resorted to both these methods with individual 
and social advantages. 

416. By Association^ Memory with Imagination 
connects e\\her known Ideas or the unknown^ or 
the known with the unknown ; by which latter 
some new idea is attached to some figure of Ima- 
gination already conceived for confirming Memory, 
and this in the most arbitrary ways without end ; 
as, when we would remember the name or thing 
new or unknown, we couple it with a known name 
or thing similar in sound, or signification, or figure, 
&c. : and this mode and that of Association with 
numbers and symbols have afforded bases for se- 
veral plans, of artificial memory, or Mnemonics. 
The whole principle by which these associations 
are effected is that Universal Analogy, by which 
the world is filled with similitudes, and linked in 
unity in an infinite variety of ways j they are 
otherwise arbitrary and partial methods only, not at 
all philosophical, nor logical. 

417« Association of Ideas is also a natural 
process by which Imagination forms pictures or 
groups of ideas, and assists Memory by trains and 
combinations of words and thoughts through ana- 
logy ; to which belongs also the negative power of 
Dissociation^ or separation and distinction of ideas. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC, IQl 

Association and Dissociation are, therefore, equal 
processes of the logical mind, — the Synthesis and 
Analysis of active Imagination, which necessarily 
precede or accompany Memory. 

418. This Association of Ideas consists in the 
bringing of ideas into some sort of relation or suc- 
cession, and the more natural, analogous, and true, 
such trains and relations are, the easier, iSrmer, and 
more valuable will be their association ; but should 
they be arbitrary trains or false relations, they will 
require Reiteration, and their permanence will be 
proportioned to the frequency of repetitions, which 
Memory never refuses. To this mode of Mnemonics 
belong the Triads ofBa/rdism. 

419. Such briefly is the philosophy of the As- 
sociation of Ideas, or relations formed arbitrarily 
and without rule by Imagination in aid of Memory ; 
or better framed according to the invariable natural 
regulation of Reason, which is itself the faculty of 
the recognition of real relations founded in Uni- 
versal Analogy. 

420. The philosophy of the Association of Ideas 
was an original ingenious doctrine of Hobbes and 
Locke, which from its novelty excited and charmed 
the curiosity of inquiring minds, and was eagerly 
adopted by writers as a chief principle of the Science 
of Mind and of human action, whence have sprung 
various moral and noological systems. 

421. The mnemonic habit of reproducing by 
association and reiteration may be regarded as ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 noology: ok, 

tending alike to the bodily, sensible, and intellectual 
faculties, and assisting the disciplines of Art and 
Sdence. Thus the fingers strike keys and chords, 
&c., simultaneously and successively at the instance 
of the will in reproducing the most difficult passages 
and performances of music, painting, and the pen ; 
thus establishing by reiteration, manual and mental 
dexterity, the modulations of sense, and the rapid 
calculations and combinations of intellect; and thus 
every faculty belongs to, and participates the entire 
man with unlimited potentiality : even the invo- 
luntary motions of the animal structure, if not the 
whole organism of vitality, seem subject to the 
same law, and all physiology may be reduced to the 
regulation of the most physical of the noological 
faculties analogically. 

422, The order in which Memory stores its 
acquisitions gives rise to associations which afford 
the clues by which it finds them when required. 
To secure right associations and trains of thought 
is of high importance to man, for to such he 
is indebted for principles of action, good and evil 
disposition, peculiarity of character, prejudices, 
party-spirit, love and hatred, bigotry and intole- 
rance, superstitious hopes and fears. To this power 
of the mind we owe the casual rise and flow of suc- 
cessive thought, the recollection of a song, a cir- 
cumstance, a tale, or a tune, from the recital of a 
few words or notes, and it greatly assists meditation 
or voluntary thought. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 193 

423. But mental associations being quite as 
accidental and arbitrary as the combinations of 
Matter, although not without relations or analogy, 
proceed on such as are too remote and incongruous 
to afford true scientific and universal principles. 
The doctrine of Association has, nevertheless, ope- 
rated favourably, while attaching the mind in its 
inquiries to partial and arbitrary analogies, by 
preparing it for such as are natural, connected, and 
Universal. 

424. The remaining auxiliar of Memory is 
order or Arrangement ; as when articles are as- 
sorted in the mind, and deposited for recollection in 
a preconceived cabinet distributed into comparts 
ments, lettered, numbered, or figured, in alpha- 
betical, numerical, or geometrical order, in modes 
of imagination and art, which have also contributed 
plans of Topical Mnemonics^ much celebrated by 
the ancients. Or, finally, and best of all, by Ra- 
tional Arrangement according to the distribution 
of Truth and Nature, whereby the particulars of 
knowledge and Memory are classed and generalized 
so as to enlarge the sphere and capacity of the 
mind to the extreme of all knowledge, and retain 
its acquisitions in order when called for. And this 
is the true, natural, and scientific, as well as most 
effectual aid of Memory, according to the genuine 
forms of Logic, and true Universal Analogy. But 
the greatest and most salutary means for strength- 
ening and extending the memory, as of all the 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 NOOLOGY : OR, 

faculties of the mind and man, are those of practice, 
reiteration, and wholesome exercise in due subor- 
dination ; for to be well-regulated rather than over- 
stored is the proper elevation of Intellect, — a well- 
ordered mind. 

425. In every mode of artificial memory there is 
a surcharge of the mind ; for the whole human mind, 
and especially Memory, is very properly termed a 
Capacity^ and notwithstanding it varies in degree 
in its subjects, it differs probably more in the 
quality than in the quantity of its contents, and has 
hardly attained its full growth ere it has become 
full to the brim. Admitting it, therefore, to be a 
limited capacity, and knowledge or ideas to be the 
matter with which it is filled, the flowing in suc- 
cessively of new matter does but displace the old, 
with very little enlargement . probably of the ca- 
pacity itself. If, then, this intellectual casket has 
a limited capacity, it behoves its possessor to avoid 
repletion, — to store it with that which is most 
valuable, and in exchanging its riches to give not 
bulk for hulk^ but bulk for valvs. 

426. Particulars are the copper coin, the base 
metal, though useful currency of Memory, and he 
who would store his Capacity with intellectual 
riches will exchange his Particulars for Generals^ 
which are its sterling gold ; and this is the ofiice of 
true Imagination. By these means he will open 
and enlarge his mind to new acquisitions and ex- 
changes of higher value, and will ultimately possess 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 195 

himself of those Universals which are the richest 
jewels of the mind ; hut for these he must apply to 
Reason, the highest faculty of Understanding, and 
guide of Imagination. 

427- Expectation of the future, is the antagonist 
to Memory of the past ; and as Memory elicits Ex- 
pectation, so Expectation renews Memory ; and from 
these elements springs actively a present sense of 
past and future in Imagination, shewing the con- 
nexion and co-essentiality of the faculties of the 
mind, and their bearing in Memory and Expectation 
on the senses and passions. Thus the " Pleasures 
qf Imagination*^ are suggestive of the *^ Pleasures 
of Memory i** as the latter are of the *' Pleasures of 
Hopej' which have successively inspired three poets 
with themes for three poems of extreme popularity 
and effect. A loftier and a greater theme^ if poetic 
judgment fail us not, still remains untouched by the 
poet, — The Pleasures of Reason^ the scope of 
which transcends sense and rises to happiness. 



SECTION IV. 

428. Again : IMAGINATION is the medial 
faculty of Understanding, whereby the others ener- 
gize ; and it operates most effectively when Memory 
supplies the matter of Imagination from nature and 
facts, and Reason regulates its figures, forms, and 
combinations, according to analogy and truth. A 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 NOOLOGY : OR, 

vigorous Imagination, thus supplied and controlled, 
becomes an organ of works emulous of perfection, 
and eternal as nature, — the stimulant of immortal 
genius, — but, unsupplied by Memory and uncon- 
trolled by Reason, the true office of Imagination in 
forming images, ideas, or conceptions according to 
nature and analogy is corrupted, and exaggeration, 
empty tumult, and extravagance, hurry genius 
onward to insanity. 

4S9* But science has been anticipated here by 
a genius of another order, who himself exemplifies 
and illustrates our position, in ** thoughts that 
breathe, and words that bum," — words that need 
no praise, and figures which come- so home to com- 
mon consciousness that endless repetition cannot 
injure them ; which also supply an accurate and ex- 
quisite description of this faculty, at once poetically 
beautiful and philosophically true : — 

" Lovers and Madmen have such seething brains, 
Such shaping Phantasies that apprehend 
More than cool Reason ever comprehends. 
The Lunatic, the Lover, and the Poet, 
Are of Imagination all compact. 
One sees more devils than vast Hell can hold ; 
That is the Madman, The Lover, all as frantic, 
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt. 
The Poefs eye in a fine phrenzy rolling, 
Doth glance from heav'n to earth, from earth to heav'n, 
And as Imagination bodies forth 
The form of things unknown, the Poet's pen 
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing 
A local habitation and a name." — Mid, NighCs Dream, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 197 

430. The genius of Shakspeare was universal, 
and the analogical philosopher cannot fail to re- 
mark how succinctly and completely he here uni- 
versally analyzes and exhausts his subject. The 
phrenzy of the lunatic is physical^ that of the lover 
is sensibley but that of the poet is an intellectual 
phrenzy ; and besides these there is no other but 
their compounds. Shakspeare here calls Imagina- 
tion " the poet's eye," in Hamlet he as consistently 
calls it " the mind's eye.** 

431. We learn hence that Imagination, however 
essential to thought, is a phrenetic faculty dangerous 
to the sanity of Understanding, when uncontrolled 
or unguided by the logical faculty of Reason sup- 
plying genuine analogies ; and even when accom- 
panying and taking the lead in the inquiries of 
Reason, Imagination is prone to conduct into errors, 
often irretrievable. And it has been the giving 
license and supremacy to Iitiagination to conduct 
Reason enthusiastically that has led learning so often 
into mysticism and error in religion and philosophy. 

432. It was this that overlaid the learning of 
Baron Swedenborg, and converted his Reason, 
Scripture, and Philosophy into a Fantasticism re- 
plete with beautiful poetic truths, which have con- 
verted some otherwise rational men to Mystics^ and 
others to Fanatics; and through imaginative doc- 
trine which, though meriting cautious study even 
for its Philosophy, requires the unyielding strength 
and sanity of Reason to analyze. 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 noology: or, 

433. The darkness of Mystery is at utter va- 
riance with the light and truth of Reason and 
Science ; so that any use or affectation thereof 
justly subjects the learned man to suspicion and his 
professions to distrust. Inasmuch even as truth is 
not clear it is of little more value in science than 
ignorance is, nor is it even so favourable as igno- 
rance without prejudice is, in search of knowledge. 

434. When we will admit undefinable and un- 
conscious premises and assertions, any madman 
may argue us into convictions of utter absurdity. 
Reason, therefore, rejects whatever is Mystical or 
Fantastic, and it is only through indolence, su- 
pineness, or passive will that the mind gives uncon- 
trolled license to Imagination, or suffers it to usurp 
Logical authority. The highest oflBce of Imagina- 
tion consists in storing Memory with real, analogous, 
and poetical images of natiu-e and art, and of re- 
fining and freely combining them in the productions 
of wit and genius. 

435. The inventive power of Imagination in 
forming ideas and images, whether poetical or phi- 
losophical, is entirely due to the analogy of all 
natures, whereby every thing correctly thought is 
related to all others. 

There is, instinct in mind, a feeling of this ana- 
logy which prompts us to transfer the relations of 
one thing to some other, and when such are remote 
or unusual, and connected felicitously and fitly, it is 
by an effort we call Genius, ?'. e. Nature working 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 199 

for herself independently of Art and Teaching, or 
in happy conjunction therewith ; hence Imagination 
is a faculty of constructing analogically, and of con- 
ceiving analogies and relations. 

436. In art and literature Imagination is as 
useful in condensing and abridging as in aug- 
menting ideas, enabling us to put a part for the 
whole : — 

** For much imaginary work was there, — 
That for Achilles' image stood his spear 
Grasp*d in an armdd hand ; himself behind 
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind." 

Shakspeake — Tarquin and Lucretia, 

4*97. Analogy is the source and substance of 
fVitf which is condensed sense or signification, 
whether it be the wit of wisdom in the Apophthegm 
of the philosopher, or the degenerate wit and Pun 
of the humourist which evokes a double meaning ; 
for the first discloses some deep or valuable corre- 
lation, and the latter supplies a double meaning or 
relation, which when true excites admiration and 
warms reason, and when false or absurd, provokes 
mirth and laughter, and between these lie all de- 
grees of wit, which, belonging to Imagination, is 
rhetorical, and not logical. So much more, indeed, 
does Wit depend on words than on thought, that it 
can only be imperfectly translated from one language 
to another. 

438. Hence, also, the antagonism of Reason and 
Admiration, with Mirth and Laughter ; for though 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Laughter is opposed to Reason, yet to none but the 
rational animal Man is the faculty of laughter 
given, — the consciousness of absurdity being as es- 
sential to the conviction of truthj as shade is to 
light, — the physical analogue of truth and reason. 

439* Hence, also, the scope and object of 
Reason and Laughter are triply coincident ; for 
Laughter is physical through titillation of the 
nerves and muscles, it is sensible through sympathy 
from seeing others laugh, or it is intellectual and 
logical from conviction of absurdity. To subdis- 
tribute, or to dilate on which, belongs to an especial 
treatise. 

440. Imagination, which draws its materials 
chiefly from the world of sense, plays back upon 
sense and gives relish to all the appetites ; drawing 
also on all the faculties of mind it re-acts by pre- 
judices upon the judgment and understanding, and 
is thence an object of especial caution to the 
logician. 

441. The power of Imagination in pursuing 
the succession and subordination, or series of nature 
and particulars, and of storing memory, appears to 
have no bound. We cannot conceive anything so 
small or few but Imagination can represent that 
which is smaller and fewer without end, nor any- 
thing so numerous, large, or distant in time or 
space, but that there is something conceivable 
beyond it ; and, what is yet more wonderful, the 
more minutely or extensively we investigate the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 201 

Universe by the senses, the more they justify this 
process of Imagination, which is at once the tele- 
scope and microscope of the mind. 

442. Astronomy exhibits the planets in systems, 
these in system with the sun ; the mind is carried 
on to believe this but part of a wider system, and 
so on ; and observation has justified the suppo- 
sition. Taking an opposite course, Fancy has 
represented the earth as a hollow ball containing a 
central fire, — the light, if you will, of an interior 
system, the continent of other systems; darting 
hence with the rapidity of thought to the sublimest 
extreme, in an instant we imagine, with magic ease, 
that the infinite celestial expanse with all its 
systems, — the hosts of the Heaven that contains us, 
is but the interior of another world, yet infinitely 
too small to hold or circumscribe the imagination 
of little Man's infinite, exhaustless, interminable 
capacity ! 

443. What then I Is there no resting-place for 
the busy human mind ? Yes. Turn its contem- 
plation from the Objective to the Subjective^ — from 
Particulars to Universals, — from Sensibles to Intel- 
ligibles, and the mind will rest satisfied that that 
which objectively is immeasurable and innumerable, 
is subjectively bounded and one ; that Mind is all- 
comprehensive, Sense short-sighted and confined ; 
that Sense particularizes with Imagination, turns 
her course outward, subjects everything to the 
license of fancy and boundless hypothesis, and that 



Digitized by 



Google 



202 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Intellect with Reason points the mind inward, sub- 
jects it to the function of generalizing, and thereby 
restrains Imagination to the proper office of assisting 
the Judging faculty in generalizing the materials 
with which Memory is stored, and placing know- 
ledge on its categorical basis, the original form of 
all intelligence, the one sole ground of all truth, 
understanding, and comprehension. 

444. But Imagination has not only the synthetic 
office of fancifull}i and infinitely positing and com- 
posing, augmenting and diminishing *, it has also 
the analytic power of negating, separating, and dis- 
tributing, which is called Abstraction, which if it 
be a distinct faculty of the mind, as some have 
supposed, is a faculty between Imagination and 
Reason, in which both are engaged : for, in truth, 
the mind has no absolutely independent faculty. 
We learn hence that abstract ideas represented by 
general terms are relations of Imagination, and not 
real things, and that to the Imagination or con- 
ceiving faculty belong the operations both of Ana- 
lysis and Synthesis. 

445. The elements of Mind are analogous to 
those of Matter, active and passive. Reason^ as 
the solid Earth, is passive ; Memory^ as the ocean of 
knowledge, flowing and liquid; and ImaginatioUy as 
the elastic air and fire of intellect, expanding and 
contracting, is active j and Man must employ each 
set of elements with similar caution if he would 
avail himself of their powers with advantage. Ima- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 203 

ginatioD, like wind and fire, when uncontrolled, is 
destructive of truth and good j but, duly regulated, 
is salutary, efficacious, and true. Memory, like 
water, aboimding, overwhelms and suffocates in- 
tellect, which in its due employment it irrigates and 
fertilizes ; and Reason, which Imagination calls 
dry, like the earth, is the solid basis of under- 
standing and truth. The metaphor might be easily 
extended ; and the universe, truly understood, is a 
system of metaphoric analogy to the poet, and of 
rational relation to the logician. 

446. To conclude ; it is not sufficient that the 
ideas of Imagination may he true ; to become 
science, or logical, they must he true. It is such 
insufficiency, and the admission of facts and figures 
unsupported, that have justly subjected phrenology, 
mesmerism, and numberless doctrines at different 
times, to discredit. Nevertheless, if such are^&e, 
it is neither necessary nor expedient to oppose them, 
since they are already dead to Reason ; and if they 
are true^ they will live in spite of all adverse 
authorities. Therefore Reason will not even make 
merry with false doctrines, because that would give 
some consequence to follies, but it will allow them 
to die a natural death. 

So much for Imagination. 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 NOOLOGY : OR, 



v^:^^ SECTION V. 

447. Finally, REASON, the third, principal, 
and presiding faculty of the Understanding, whereby 
it cognizes relations universally, is especially logical, 
connecting general relations within the universal, 
and particular relations within such as are general, 
philosophically uniting the finite with the infinite, 
and all things in one harmonious system of eternal 
truth and intellect. Reason is, therefore, the fa- 
culty of recognition, — the identity of mind, indi- 
vidual and universal. 

448. We regard the term Reason [ratio] and 
Relation as, if not of one etymon, at least of the 
same import in logic ; here signifying the faculty 
by which the mind becomes cognizant of truth, or 
the relations of thoughts and things, which, being 
universal, are first principles. And as the office of 
Imagination is to compose images, conceptions, or 
idea^y so it is that of Reason, assisted by Ima- 
gination, to disclose notions by abstraction and 
comparison, which are more properly truths and 
knowledge. 

449. Truth is thus the satisfaction, fulfilment, 
or harmony of Reason, and unity of Relation ; and 
Reason is not merely a uniting and cognizing, but 
also a systematizing and universalizing faculty, — 
presiding in Understanding, participating its other 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. S05 

faculties, and logically determining according to its 
three acts or assents, — of Perception received by 
Memory, Apprehension conceived by Imagination, 
and Judgment convinced by Reason, all of which 
are coessential to logical ratiocination and con- 
clusion : but as Reason is circumscribed by the 
truth of Relations, we need circumspection in its 
use, that we may not transcend its authority amid 
false relations and on imaginary ground. 

450. Reason is thus the highest faculty of the 
Understanding, and nearest to pure Consciousness; 
but although it is therefore justly regarded by 
logicians as superior to its other faculties, it does 
not follow that it is to be placed above its com- 
prehending faculty, the Understanding, as we have 
abeady shewn. 

451. In every act of the Understanding all its 
faculties are engaged in triune indivisibility, ren- 
dering their separate investigation difficult, and 
their analysis only partly possible according to 
relation, even in the most familiar offices of Under- 
standing. Take, for example, any object of the 
external sense : of sight, a building or other iBgure, 
in which perception will present to Memory a 
picture never extending to more than half the 
surface, and to none of the solid contents of such 
opaque object ; but these are supplied by conception 
of Imagination, and the whole idea or object com- 
pleted by a judgment or recognition of Reason. 
Or, inversely regarded, the whole complex of an 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 NOOLOGY : OR, 

object is supplied by a judgment of Reason formed 
from previous perceptions of Memory conceived by 
Imagination : as of a stack of com from a few 
protruding ears, wherein the whole Understanding 
is active beyond sensation in its simplest perceptions. 

452. It is the same in the analysis of the 
judgments of Reason as in the conceptions of 
Imagination and the perceptions or receptions of 
Memory and Sense, the distinctions of which are 
but the analogical Relations of individual Under- 
standing and Consciousness, under various subor- 
dination in individual minds, influenced by the 
various predominances of character and circum- 
stances. And in such way all the powers of the 
Understanding are variously engaged according to 
unerring relations, in whatever way the mind may 
operate ; nor is this an entirely novel position. 

" The Memory, the Will, and the Intelligence, 
are all distinct, yet one. Though each be separate, 
they are perfectly united. I perceive that I per- 
ceive, will, and remember ; I will to remember, 
perceive, and will ; and I remember that I have 
willed, perceived, and recollected.'** 

4f53. Thus the whole mind is variously connected 
by action and passion, or reaction in each and all of 
its faculties ; in which sense action and passion are 
figurative according to external power, but may be 
regarded internally as impression and expression : 

• Albini Opera, p. 773. Shar. Turner, " Hist, Angl. Sax." 
vol. iii. p. 450. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 207 

terms with regard to mind also figurative, or bor- 
rowed from externals. Thus all the Passivities of 
the Mind, whether of Memory, Imagination, Rea- 
son, or Will, are impressions thereof, and all its 
Activities are expressions thereof; and the term 
Discourse applies equally to the expression of words 
or of thoughts, whence the Greeks used the same 
name [Xoyoj] to denote both fVord and Reason^ or 
*^ Rational Speech;" and Hobbes has remarked 
that the Latins called accounts of money Rationes ; 
accounting, Ratiocinatio ; and items of account 
they called Nomina^ or names. 

454. The office of active Reason is pre-emi- 
nently called Thinking, and is variously denoted 
by the terms Reasoning, Reflecting, Reckoning, 
Abstracting, Deliberating, Distinguishing, Weigh- 
ing, Communing, Comparing, Judging, &c. And 
Reason, Ratio, Relation, Analogy, Comparison, 
Judgment, and Inference, as acts of the Under- 
standing, are synonymous ; whence to compare, and 
judge between things compared, to shew the analogy 
and relation of one thing with another, and to 
exhibit the rate, ratio, and Reason of things com- 
pared, are precisely of the same signification. 

455. All arguments abound in Comparison ; in 
the syllogism there is a double comparison at least, 
and there is no reason without comparison, reason 
being the faculty of comparing and concluding. 
Now there is no other comparing than through 
correlation or Analogy ; the universality of Ana- 



Digitized by 



Google 



208 NOOLOGY : OR, 

logy must, therefore, be admitted, with its logical 
importance, throughout intellect and discourse. It 
is by the strength of Analogy also that in the office 
of judgment we decide between opposite arguments. 

456. Reason being both Active and reactive or 
Passive, as are all the faculties of Intellect, operates 
either from its internal forms or Conceptions to its 
external Perceptions Analyticallyy or from the 
latter to the former Synthetically ; for the external 
and internal are Antithetical^ analogous, correlative, 
and concurring powers, on which depends the 
logical faculty of Reason, which distinguishes 
thoughts through Truth and Falsehood as the eye 
distinguishes things by Light and Shade. 

457. Yet the mind may consider abstractly 
these concurring powers, and regard either the 
internal or the external as distinguished, and build 
thereon distinct sciences, the first of which are 
called Abstract, the latter Experimental, or of 
experience ; the first regarding subjects and the 
relations of thoughts, the latter respecting objects 
and the relations of things. 

458. To recapitulate; Con5CiOM5/z655, the ground 
of all Relation and Existence, we have placed at 
the foundation of all cognition, or Volition and 
Understanding, each of which is Active and Passive, 
or Concurrent modes of Understandings of which 
Memory, Imagination, and Reason are varieties, as 
Appetites, Passions, and Motives or determinatives, 
are of Volition or Will. Reason we have found to 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 209 

be the Consciousness of Relation in Judgments, 
Imagination the same in Conceptions, and Memory 
also in Perceptions, &c. 

459. Mind is a principle of Unity, and its 
faculties are an inseparable series of united and 
uniting powers throughout Consciousness. In an 
indefinite series there may be relative distinctions, 
but no absolute divisions or separations, and to 
unite and distinguish, or distribute according to 
Relation, include all the offices of mind. 

460. Similar analogy holds in respect to lite- 
rature and art ; for Memory is an Historic faculty, 
of which variety and succession are the matter 
and mechanism ; but Imagination, is a Poetic 
faculty, of which unity in variety, a figured whole, 
are the elements ; and Reason is a Logical and 
Philosophical faculty, of which simultaneous unity, 
integrity, truth, are the essence. So that Ima- 
gination is a medial faculty connecting the variety 
of Memory according to the unity of Reason, and 
their works and ends are accomplished through 
these attributes. 

461. If, therefore, there be any obscurity in 
these distributions and descriptions, it is the same 
throughout cognition ; for knowledge, which con- 
sists variously of the hidden and the brought-to- 
light, is the chiaro-scuro of mental objects, in 
perfect analogy with the chiaro-scuro of sense, — 
the light and shade, the agent and patient, upon 
which depend all the eflFecfs, forms, and objects of 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 noology: or, 

the sense of vision ; and the perceptive and cog- 
noscitive powers of mind and sight belong to an 
analogous, inseparable correlation, whence Truth 
and Light are mutual metaphors ; and all know- 
ledges distribute and disturb the pure unity of truth 
and intellect according to relation or analogy, as all 
colours are disturbances and distributions of the 
pure unity of the principle of light according to 
analogous relations also. The whole universe is 
a like infinite variety in unity according to one 
Universal Analogy, of difficult interpretation only 
through defect of Language. 

462. The chief office o{ Reason rs distinguished 
from the subordinate faculties of Understanding 
is, then, Judgment of Comparison or JtelatioTif 
wherein its logical power consists, and whereby it 
logically determines the relations of thoughts and 
things according to Universal Consciousness and 
Analogy, to which it appeals in all its inferences 
and convictions, and, therefore, conclusively. The 
first determination of every logical process is, ac- 
cordingly, a Conclusion of Reason ; and hence, 
again, logical arguments are called Ratiocinations^ 
and their adducements take the name of their 
faculty, and are called Reasons. 

463. The having Reason or the want of it 
are sufficient grounds for the asserting or denying 
anything, but if neither the one nor the other can 
be made apparent, it will become the proper ground 
for Suspense of Judgment, as concerning facts of 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 211 

which we have neither knowledge nor true tes- 
timony. He who argues with Reason^ argues with 
Truth, i. e. the light and strength of Oody and, 
therefore, irresistibly. Yet against those who in 
their judgments use their wills or prejudice instead 
of Reason, there is no argument of conviction. 

464. It is this highest faculty of reflective 
Reason that principally distinguishes man from 
hrute animals, which, in common with himself, 
have sensible Ideas of JactSt hut not intellectual 
Notions of truths ; which have sight, perception, 
and instinctive reason, but cannot abstract and 
compare with consciousness. 

It is this faculty also that enables man to con- 
struct languages or general signs, the chief instru- 
ment of thought, to invent arts, to disclose sciences, 
and to attain to the moral and religious source of 
Intellect Himself. But the brute and dogmatic 
mind cannot distinguish between Truth and Fact, 
between facts which are particular and absolutCy 
and truths which are general^ relative^ and Ana- 
logical. 

465. It has been often argued and asserted 
that beasts and other animals have Instinct to guide 
their actions^ but that Reason is the attribute of 
man only. 

But may we not assert and argue, what is 
equally well ascertained on the opposite analogical 
extreme, that the acts and Reasons of man are 
Instincts^ since, under like circumstances, in all 



Digitized by 



Google 



^212 NOOLOGY : OR, 

times and places, the arts, institutions, laws, opinions, 
and judgments of men are uniform ; shewing the 
difference of Instinct and Reason to be degrees of 
the same Omniscient Reason who directs the whole, 
which is all we can understand truly by Instinct 
and Inspiration ? Nor does this inference degrade 
man, but elevates all creation, and sympathises all 
living creatures ; but if we assume two principles 
in nature where one is sufficient, we detract from 
the divine wisdom, simplicity, and power; and if 
the identification of Reason with Instinct be a 
sacrifice of human pride, it is, nevertheless, a con- 
cession due to humanity and truth. 

466. Nor, if our argument be correct, are human 
Inventions and works of Oenius any other than 
the calls of invariable Intellect and eternal Reason, 
under requiring and inspiring circumstances, at 
various times, in various countries, and often va- 
riously or alike by different minds at the same time 
and place, so as to produce controversies, emulations, 
and competitions, by which they have been carried 
forward and accomplished as designings of the uni- 
versal inspiring Providence who administers in all 
things ; which the ancients figured poetically as 
Destiny and Fate, and modem minds have trans- 
figured into Predestiny. To argue the reverse of 
this is to invest man with the attribute of a creator. 

467« That Reason is a universal and divine 
faculty is apparent throughout nature and creation 
by the evident fitness and sufficiency, individually 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 213 

and relatively, that accompanies every part and 
every complex of the work of God ; and it is suh- 
ordinately the same in his chief performance, man. 
He is, therefore, grossly ignorant, or wilfully blas- 
phemous, who reproachfully condemns or opposes 
this highest faculty of the divine spirit of God in 
man, — the sole foundation and support of all faith 
and truth. 

'* He that made us with such large discourse^ 
Looking before and after, gave us not 
That capability and God-like Reason 
To rust in us unused/' — Shakspeare. 

So much for the Faculties on which Logic is 
founded, distinguished in a different view from 
their Energies as acts or effects of their concur- 
rence ; of which next. 



SECTION VI. 

468. The effects or Logical Energies of the 
suhject correspond, we have seen, with their 
faculties ; namely. Perception^ with Memory, — 
Conception^ with Imagination, — and with Reason, 
Judgment ; not purely, indeed, hut proximately, 
agreeahly to the universal plan of philosophy, and 
the method of nature. We distinguish that Energy 
only hy the term Perception, in which Memory 
predominates ; that by the term Conception, in 
which Imagination is principal ; and that in which 



Digitized by 



Google 



214 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Reason has the ascendancy, we distinguish by the 
term Judgment, or perception of relation or ana- 
logy, and as such it is regarded by logicians, who 
have defined Judgment the perception of the con- 
currence or coincidence of two ideas, or the want 
thereof. 

469. Perception differs according to Sense and 
Matter, Conception according to Thought and 
Form, and Judgment according to Relation and 
Effect ; and they are all modes of intellection, and 
all unifying processes, — particular, general, or uni- 
versal, in which the particular is principal in Per- 
ception, the general in Conception, and the universal 
in Judgment. Thus Thought, universally, is a 
logical act, particular, general, or universal, and 
Logic is the science of thought exercising these 
forms or relations of unity, as Individual Species or 
Genera^ and Universum. 

470. The result or produce of every act or 
Energy of thought is hence a unity, by whichever 
of its Faculties it may be effected. Thus, Per- 
ception of Memory unites particulars in succession ; 
Conception of Imagination unites and generalises 
them unconfined ; and Judgment of Reason unites 
them according to the established laws of universal 
order and relation, categorically. The whole of 
mind is inseparable unity, and the whole of its 
various faculties are unities in subordination, as we 
have shewn. Each of its Energies also mutually 
penetrates the others, whence there is not only a 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 215 

Judgment of Reason which is logical^ but there are 
also a Judgment of Imagination and Conception, 
called TastCy and a Judgment of Sense and Per- 
ception, which belongs to Memory, and is called 
Experience. 

471. In every Energy or act of thought there 
is a Cognition of Analogy, or Consciousness of 
Relation. Thus, .in Perception we distinguish^ in 
Conception acknowledge^ and in Judgment comparej 
similar and dissimilar j according to Analogy ; so 
that Distinguishing, Acknowledging, and Com- 
paring are only degrees or varieties of the act of 
thought 

472. Thus, in every distinction there is an act 
of Judgment that affirms or denies one thing of 
another, and therefore is this Energy of the mind 
inseparable from every Sensation and Thought, and 
the variety of the Faculties and Energies of the 
mind are distinctions of Relation or Analogy only, 
and not absolute differences, as commonly regarded : 
for Mind, we repeat, is a principle of unity and 
identity, of which Logic is the science, and its 
Energies and Faculties are coincident therewith. 

473. As the logical Faculties and Energies are 
correlative and inseparable they are degrees of the 
same subject ; and Perception, Conception, and 
Judgment being inseparable, we properly define 
Judgment the Perception of Relation, as we also 
call Reason, Relation altogether ; and it finally 
follows that the logical Organs or Operations of 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 NOOLOGY : OR, 

mind are, according to the like essential Analogy, 
degrees of the same intellection, and inseparable, 
and that Logic altogether is the science of Reason 
or Relation of the same subject, and the Mind 
every way a Unity. 

474. Thus there is a commerce of the Faculties, 
Energies, and Operations of the mind, from which 
new Co7npound Distinctions arise, through which 
Volition enters into all the Active offices of the 
mind, and Consciousness into all its Passive offices ; 
and they conjoin in Understanding in all its Effects. 

475. Hence Volition acting with Memory be- 
comes Attention, a new logical distinction which 
may be defined Continuous Will, which, like constant 
bodily action, soon tires ; but Volition wanting 
passive power cannot will oblivion, whence the 
Willing to forget a thing is to confirm its remem- 
brance, for Attention begets retention. It is thus 
also that the Will converts Consciousness into 
Moral Conscience^ which would willingly forget but 
cannot. 

476. Attention^ falsely treated as an original 
faculty, is farther compounded with the passive 
powers of Understanding and the active Will, inter- 
mediate and connective, of both. In Reception it 
is Passive Volition, and in Rejection it is Active 
Understanding ; more common in its Passive office 
of Reception through the senses, and from the 
works of others, than Active in operating with its 
intellectual faculties on the Truth of Things, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. ^217 

original and sole satisfactory source of knowledge ; 
the former being useful guides only to the original 
objects of study an4 Attention, the discipline of 
which, as a habit, is of the utmost logical impor- 
tance when kept free for all faculties under the 
superior guidance of Reason and Understanding. 

477- This commerce of the Faculties is not 
confined to the mind alone, but connects those of 
both mind and body in natural analogy, and has 
influence even on language. Thus the Conceptions 
of the mind are the begettings of sense, like those 
of the body, and the term applies to both through 
analogy, and to Imagination, which is the faculty of 
mental conceptions, to which has ever been attri- 
buted the power of influencing the conceptions of 
the body, while parental likeness stamps the off- 
spring of both, and identifies physical with logical 
Analogy. 

The great Harvey has made admirable use of 
this analogue in accounting for parental likeness in 
physics, and has applied it in elegant illustration of 
Art.* 

• 478. The same reciprocation that pervades the 
principles and relations of the objective, prevails 
also in the subjective and logical systems : hence 
Perception, which is principal in Memory, is pre- 
dominant in all the faculties ; Conception, which is 
principal in Imagination, is predominant in all the 

? See Dr. Willis's ** Harvey," pp. 166, 578, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



218 NOOLOGY : OR, 

Energies ; and Judgment, which belongs to Reason, 
is predominant in all the operations or modes of 
argument which are principal in Logic and Dia- 
lectics ; to which we proceed. 



SECTION Vlf. 

479. Lastly, in the Logical Operations or 
Organism of the mind, or the instruments, modes, 
or forms of argument, Reason, the highest faculty, 
and Judgment, the highest energy, are principal ; 
and Reason, the most active faculty by its energy. 
Judgment, combines and arranges the conceptions 
formed by Imagination from the particular per- 
ceptions received by Memory, according to universal 
Subjective forms, which concur with universal Ob- 
jective nature in the production of knowledge. 

480. Now, universal Objective nature, we have 
seen, is, according to its relations, External^ Me- 
dialf and Internal^ as the matter or objects of 
knowledge ; and these correspond with the Par- 
ticular y Oeneraly and Universal^ as forms or relations 
of knowledge, which, being predicated of things, 
denote them Individuals^ Species, or Oenera, the 
first logical distinctions of things, and the ground of 
all ratiocination, the science of which is Dialectics ; 
which involves also^rm^ and matter j to the first of 
which belong tlie logical organs or modes of argu- 
menty and to the latter the topics or subjects of 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 219 

inquiry^ which extend to all the distinctions of 
knowledge and science. 

481. Ammonius remarked* that among the 
ancient philosophers, the Stoics treated Logic as a 
part of philosophy, the Peripatetics as an organ 
only ; but Plato made it both an organ and a part 
of philosophy. Aristotle called it an organ, as a 
key to all science, — an instrument of all philosophy.t 
Bacon regarded it also as an organ ; but the organs 
and operations of Logic are as various as the 
faculties and energies of the mind to which they 
are conformable, and it belongs to Dialectics to un- 
fold them, and to display their uses as instruments. 

• On the Catog. p. 8. t Gale, ii. pp. 303, 377. 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 NOOLOGY : oil. 



CHAPTER III. 



DIALECTICS. 



SECTION I. 



482. As knowledge, or science, is the result of 
a correspondence and conformity of relations be- 
tween the subject and the object, and as, throughout 
objective science, or Philosophy, there is a unifor- 
mity of relations, so must there also be throughout 
subjective science, or Noology, and the science of 
ratiocination, Logic, or Dialectics in particular, 
a corresponding uniformity of relations by which 
ratiocination or logism is rendered possible. 

483. Accordingly, in the acts or operations 
of Reason and Logic there are three organa, or 
instrumental processes ; the first of which is 
a mode or form of argument or ratiocination 
through particularsy which is called inductive, 
and might also be called historical ; and its 
produce is some general truth. This operation 
may be called generalogical, or a Generalogism, 
because it generalises, rising from individua to 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 221 

genera, &c. This is the Epagoge psrayAT^] of the 
Greeks, or Induction of Aristotle and Bacon. 

484. This mode, or organ, applies principally 
to that department of science which belongs to the 
external most particularly, namely, Physics, and 
depends principally upon that faculty and energy 
of mind which corresponds also to the external, 
physiological, and objective, namely, memory and 
perception ; and it is chiefly synthetical, ascending 
from particulars to the general, and through gene- 
rals to the universal, whence its universality as an 
organ or instrument, applicable to the Logic of 
Particulars and Individua. 

485. Secondly, there is a mode or form of 
argument, or ratiocination by generals or media, 
which is called syllQgistical, and its organ and 
operation a Syllogism. This mode is adapted 
principally to that department of science which 
corresponds to the medial and representative, 
namely to the philological and discursive, with 
which it is usually associated ; and this mode 
depends upon conceptions which belong to the 
faculty of imagination, which corresponds also to 
the medial. It is antithetical, connecting the 
universal and particular by a general or mean; 
whence, its universality as a mode of argument, — 
instrument, or organ applicable as the Logic of 
Generals or media. 

486. And, thirdly, there is another organ, 
mode, or form of argument or logism, dependent 



Digitized by 



Google 



NOOLOGY : OR, 

upon universal relations, which mode may he 
called analogical, and its operation an Analog ism ; 
and this mode is principally applicahle to those 
departments of science which relate to the internal 
and suhjective, namely, to the logical and ethical ; 
and it depends upon the judgments of the highest 
faculty of the mind, Reason ; and it is chiefly 
analytical, descending from the universal through 
the general to the particular, whence, also, its 
universality as an organ of universal Logic, or the 
Logic of Universals. 

487. Without such a logical mode, there could 
be no adequate premises for philosophy, the uni- 
verse, or God ; in a word, there is no other way 
in which can be demonstrated those universals or 
categories upon which the validity of all logical 
conclusion must ultimately depend ; and the pro- 
foundest metaphysical researches without this 
process can produce only paradox, subtile and in- 
genious visions, or imperfect and sterile philosophy, 
devoid of genuine science. 

488. Of these three modes or organs the chief 
distinctions as operations are, that Syllogism ope- 
rates by illation or inference from inclusive pre- 
mises ; Oeneralogism by induction or deduction of 
included premises ; and AnaJogism by equation of 
correlative or coinclusive premises. Ideas, Pro- 
positions, and Syllogisins or ratiocinations, have 
been called the three Operations of Logic ; but if 
one mode of ratiocination is an Operation, so must 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 223 

the two others be also ; and as such we have, 
therefore, distinguished the Analogisnty and Genera- 
logism^ or Induction. 

489. These three modes or forms of argument, 
logism, or ratiocination — the generalogicaU or in- 
ductive ; the syllogisticalj or scholastic ; and the 
analogical, or universal, comprehend all dialectical 
operations, consonant in plan and relation to the 
faculties and energies before enumerated upon 
which they depend. 

490. But although there are thus various 
modes of ratiocination, there is but one Reason ; 
and hence, that which is proved in one of these 
modes may often be argued and proved in the 
other : there being, however, no perfect conclusion 
in any case without a universal subsumption by the 
premises. It does not follow, therefore, that each 
of the modes is on every occasion equally proper or 
equally prompt in conducting to true conclusions j 
and herein lies the use of Logic in directing us how 
and on what occasions to apply the several modes 
of argument and inquiry ; while, by instructing us 
in the various forms and powers of ratiocination, it 
enables us also to analyze and test the arguments 
of others. 

491. It is to be noted, also, that these dis- 
tinctions of modes are by no means absolute, 
neither of them being independent of the others : 
hence, they reciprocate and compound ; and it is 
to this reciprocation (to express which language is 



Digitized by 



Google 



224 NOOLOGY : or, 

inadequate, owing to the want of true analogy in 
the significations of words), that we are to attribute 
the difficulty of conveying, and, in some measure, 
of conceiving, this systematic ubiquity, in which no 
part is absolute, but all is relative. It is sufficient, 
however, for the present, if the foregoing has 
evinced the conformity of Logic with Science in 
general. 

492. The three organs or modes of argument 
being convertible reciprocally, every subject may be 
investigated and treated analogically, syllogistically, 
or.generalogically ; accordingly, the induction or 
generalogism may be exhibited as a chain of minor 
syllogisms, and vice versd^ as the analogism may be 
also ; and both syllogism and generalogism may be 
shewn to be analogically constructed. 

493. It does not follow hence that the use of 
these organs is indifferent for all subjects ; for 
there is a natural affinity by which the Induction 
or Generalogism is best qualified for physical opera- 
tion, the Syllogism for mathematical calculation, 
and the accurate, sensible sciences, and the Ana^ 
logism for moral and metaphysical investigation; 
while a diversified use of the three, according to 
experience, taste, and judgment, is suited to a 
mixed inquiry. 

494. They err injuriously to science who refer 
all logical determination to either organ singly, as 
the disciples of Aristotle do who acknowledge the 
Syllogism only, and the followers of Bacon, Locke, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 225 

and NewtoD, who will hear of no other logic than 
Induction, whence late writers on Natural Theology 
and Cosmology have physicized these inquiries with 
great disadvantage to genuine Ethics; and hence 
some have repudiated Logic altogether, and trusted 
inquiry solely to the natural sagacity, common 
sense, prejudice or passion fi*om which spring all 
the errors that enslave and corrupt the heart and 
mind of man. 

SECTION II. 

495. Propositions are the matter of each 
OrgaUj and of all ratiocination or argument ; and of 
these we have shewn the philological construction, 
hut which, as logically constituted, are acts of 
Judgment, disclosing and denoting particular re* 
lotions called Judgments, which, when connected in 
general relations^ hecome Discourse, Argument, or 
Operation of Reason, and are then judgments of 
Judgments, or general jvdgmentSj as simple pro- 
positions are particular judgments. 

496. As every philological proposition or par- 
ticular judgment is constituted of three words, a 
suhstantive and adjective connected by an affirm- 
ative, so is every logical or general judgment con- 
stituted of like terms or ideas, a Subject^ a Predicate 
of that subject, and a Copula by which they are 
connected ; whence they are logically and philo- 
logically coincident 

Q 



Digitized by 



Google — 



226 NOOLOGY : OR, 

497* There are three ways m which Terms are 
logically united in the formation of Judgments and 
Arguments : firstly, by reciprocal Relation^ and 
this constitutes the Analogical Judgment ; secondly, 
by Inclusion^ and this is the Syllogistic Judgment, 
or Proposition ; and, thirdly, Identification^ and 
this is the Generalogical, or Inductive Judgment ; 
all of which denote Relations, — Correlation, Con- 
tinence, and Simulation. 

498, Whatever we can know must be either 
Experience of fact, or Sense ; Inference of Reason, 
or Analogy 9 that is. Relation of Consciousness \ in 
correspondence with which there can, therefore, be 
but three principal modes of Ic^cal Conviction ; 
first, a Oeneralogismt or Induction of facts ; se- 
condly, a Syllogism^ or Subsumption of Reason \ 
and, thirdly, an Amdogism, or Consciousness of 
Relation ; and this latter may have been the sense 
in which the Epicureans held Anticipation to be 
the principle of Demonstration, so that nothing is 
capable of demonstration of which the mind has 
not Precognition^ or notice revivable by argument 

499. "In the common logic,'* says Bacon,* 
** the labour is principally bestowed upon Syllogism, 
while the logician scarce thinks of Induction ; but 
touching it slightly, passes on to the forms of dis- 
putation : whereas we reject the demonstration by 
Syllogism as confused, and letting nature slip 
through the fingers whilst we take Induction for 

* De Augmentis Scientiarum, § ii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ANALOGY OF LOGIC. 227 

that form of demonstration which guards the senses, 
presses nature close, and rules over Works/' But 
the method of Induction asserts the Particular 
facts of nature, experience and practice, as the 
method of Syllogism does Oeneral media^ both of 
which escape the true logical foundation of Unu 
versal Reasons^ which belong to Analogism. 

500. Had not the logician a power of de* 
scending Analogically through Consciousness from 
the Universal correlations to particulars and indi- 
viduals, Analytically, he would want the power of 
ascending Oeneralogicalh/f or by Induction from 
Individual and Particular relations to Genera and 
Universal relations. Synthetically. In the first he 
descends from Internal Correlations to External 
Phenomena, and in the other he ascends from 
External and Particular Effects to Internal and 
Universal Cause. They are converse and extreme 
Processes, and are correlative and concurrent in 
the Syllogism, Antithetically ; denoting Universal 
Cause as Intellectual, and Individual Effects as 
Natural. 

501. Thus, there is a like reciprocation of the 
logical Organs and Operations that pervades the 
Faculties and Energies on which they depend, 
giving to each the same regulation and intimate 
correlation that renders their independent consi- 
deration difficult, while it multiplies the variety of 
ways in which Logic may be investigated and 
treated as Syllogistical, Inductive, or Analogical, — 



Digitized by 



Google 



228 NOOLOOY, ETC. 

Synthetical, Analytical, and Antithetical or Com- 
posite. 

502« As the premises of the Analogism are 
intuitiye, or immediately from Consciousness, and 
have the character of Necessity^ while those of 
Syllogism are from Reason^ artificial genera and 
Demonstration, and those of Induction helong to 
Mxperience of Sense, it is very evident that these 
Operations rank in the order here assumed, and 
that Conviction from Necessity is pure, categorical, 
and more authoritative than that from either Ratio- 
cination or Experience ; we are hound, therefore, 
to give precedence in Logic to the Analogism^ to 
the investigation of which we proceed, although we 
thereby invert the common course wherein Logic is 
built up from Sensation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 229 



CHAPTER IV. 

ANALOGISM. 

SECTION I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

503. The whole history of human intellect bears 
witness that, whatever be the nature and subject of 
its speculations, Scepticism ever is the extreme to 
which Philosophers and the learned fly from the 
opposite false extreme and course of dogmatical 
Credulity. 

504t. But Scepticism is the resort of ineffectual 
endeavours, as Credulity is of supineness ; and if 
Scepticism is, as has been said, the nerve of the 
strong mind. Credulity is the lassitude of the weak 
or indolent mind, and they are as opposed to just 
logical conviction as they are to each other, for such 
conviction leaves neither room for active Scepticism 
nor passive Credulity. 

505. It was indeed the discordances of these 
extremes that first forced Philosophers in search of 
a Logical mean of conviction — a criterion and 
canon of Truth — an organ whereby to adjust and 



Digitized by 



Google 



230 ANALOGISM. 

harmonise their diflferences ; in the endeavour after 
which the speculative intellect of the Greek Logi- 
cian carried him to the metaphysical and ideal ex- 
treme, as the practical mind of the Briton carried 
him to the opposite extreme of the physical or 
material and real. 

506. Although, therefore, a happy release 
through Logic from the extreme consequences of 
Dogmatism and Scepticism has marked the pro- 
gress of intelligence, it yet appears that learning 
has rushed into extremes in Logic analogous to 
those which obstructed the peace and progress of 
Philosophy, and that there is no other escape from 
the false extremes and failures of either than the 
disclosure of the true Analogical mean of reconci- 
liation in and between the extremes of both ; and if 
Logic is to supply this mean to Philosophy, then it 
is first necessary that Logic should establish the 
true connecting mean of its own extremes, the one 
of which is Syllogistic and the other Inductive. 

5(yy. For although the science of Logic is 
especially founded on Intellect, and gives law to 
Understanding, it has been adapted principally 
to Mathematical and Physical inquiries, which be- 
long to Matter and Sense, by its two most eminent 
authorities, who have been therein implicitly fol- 
lowed by succeeding Logicians \ so that in fact we 
have had only a Logic of Sense and signs, and a 
Logic of Matter ; but a Logic of pure Intellect 
and universal relation has been hitherto wanting. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 231 

notwithstanding the acknowledged importance of 
such a Logic, and a loose recognition of the mode 
of Analogy which leads to it, by Logicians who, 
at the utmost, have regarded Analogy as an indi- 
rect method of reasoning, as they did Induction 
also before the time of Bacon. 

508. Every instrument is for good or evil ac- 
cording as it may be employed, and Analogy, as 
an instrument, is capable of both. The ancient 
Poets employed it indifferently in the construction 
of figures ; but when they mythologised with it by 
carrying the physical into the intellectual world, as 
when they identified the Sun and Apollo, through 
analogy of Light and Truth, and formed of them a 
God, visible and tangible to the sensual and igno- 
rant multitude, and intelligible only to the initiated 
few, they employed Analogy in behalf of falsehood, 
for the sake of power, and so far as an instrument 
of evil. The abuse is, however, not that of the in- 
strument, but of the agent and the artifice, for 
Christ, " who was the Truth and the Light,*' em- 
ployed their perfect analogy logically and openly for 
perfect good. 

509. But there are Analogies of nature which 
are facts, and there are Analogies of fancy which 
areJigtMres, and there are Analogies of reason which 
are truths or axioms ; and these latter relations are 
more especially Logical, though each species is 
variously subordinate to reason. 

510. The constant struggle of Philosophers after 



Digitized by 



Google 



232 ANALOGISM. 

absolute principles or grounds of knowledge, has 
run all their systems into paradox, because man can 
have no knowledge but of Relations. Hence, 
from whatever point of inquiry the Philosopher de- 
part, it may be resolved into a relation to which he 
must by the law of consciousness, or order of his 
intellect, assign correlates ; but these are not abso- 
lute things, since by investigation they will be found 
to be correlate relations also ; and if the analysis be 
continued to the end, it terminates in an identical 
relation, of which the one correlate is the I, or 
conscious Individtudy and the other the Universal 
Consciousness^ which is all in all. Thus the 
Universe is a System of Analogy^ beyond which 
Philosophy cannot penetrate, however we may di- 
versify and complicate inquiry ; and to this we owe 
that the Logical Universe is the subjective form of 
the Philosophical Universe, and that Analogism is 
the Universal Organ. 



ANALOGISM. 

511. That an organ so obvious as the Analo- 
gism should have Iain dormant in Logic is to be 
attributed to this dogmatical and absolute cast of 
thought, to the devious paths of Analogy, the easy 
grasp and comparative facility of the other logical 
organs, the apathy of mind to pure inward specu- 
lation, and promptness to outward sensuous opera- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 233 

tion, whereby Analogy has been consigned to 
imagination, employed in construction of symbols, 
rhetorical and poetical allusion, or common illus- 
tration by example, and excluded from strict ratio- 
cination and science, except partially in the Mathe. 
matics. 

512. This long exclusion of the Analogum 
may also have been the same that rendered Logic 
altogether the successor of other sciences. Man 
began to make partictUar and practical observa- 
tions before general ones, and the latter before 
he had thought of principles and the universal^ 
to which the force of Analogism especially belongs ; 
and, in the uncultivated state of his mind, to 
analogise rhetorically through similitudes or par- 
ticular parities, was probably a later refinement 
of unlettered man, the natural logical course being 
from dogmatical inductions, through syllogisms of 
sense, to universal Analogism. 

513. The Universe of Things and of Thoughts 
is a unity or universality coinclusively, and this 
unity of things is Universal Nature to which Phi- 
losophy belongs, as the Unity of Thoughts is Uni- 
versal Reason to which Logi4) belongs ; and these 
great primary unities are entirely correlative or 
Anahgousj whence the mind is empowered to 
Reason of Things. And as Universal Nature 
includes every Thing, every Class and every Order 
up to the highest, so Universal Reason includes 
every Genus, Species, and Individual under it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



234 ANALOGISM. 

which arrangemente coincide logically through 
Analogy, for without recognitions of similitudes 
there could be neither induction of similars, com- 
parison, nor general or universal inference, or any 
Logic. 

514. As the Things of Nature and the 
Thoughts of Reason concur in Signification 
through Language, so Philosophy and Logic con- 
cur through Philology, the Science of Language; 
and as the Things of Nature afford the Subjects 
of Logic, and the Thoughts of Reason its Predi- 
cates or Attributes, so do the verbs or Relatives 
of Language afford the CopulcPy by which they 
are connected in Propositions and Discourse; and 
thus Logic, Philology, and Philosophy, are one 
System. 

515. These Analogies supply also the universal 
elementary matter of Logic, and confirm the prin- 
ciple and canon of all ratiocination and inference, 
viz. that whatever is inclvded in any Species^ 
OemiSf or Universal^ partakes of its attributes and 

predicates ; whence whatever i^ true of any whole 
is true of all its partSf is valid also throughout 
every mmde of ratiocination, and is derived or 
modified, and variously expressed by Logicians, 
from Aristotle's Dictum de omniy which affi/rms 
alike of the Genus, its Species and Individuals, 
and his Dictum de nullOf which denies in like 
manner, whence whatever is predicated of a term 
distributed, [t. e. in its universal or utmost ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 235 

tent,] may be predicated of everything under it.* 
" Whatever agrees with a Genus or Species must 
agree with all the Particulars contained under such 
Genus or Species ;**t " If two Terms agree with 
the same Third term, they agree also with each 
other;** J "Whatever is predicated universally 
of any class of things, may be predicated likewise 
of anything comprehended in that class ;"§ " Two 
things agreeing or disagreeing with a Third agree 
or disagree with one another.** || 

516. On these Principles, or Principle, depend 
the Rules of Logic, as well for proving as for con- 
futing of Arguments, — ^if the first, we must shew 
that the inference or conclusion is contained in 
the premises ;** and if the latter, that the con- 
clusion is not contained in the premises. And 
this law or canon well understood and observed, 
will prevent our being deceived, or deceiving our- 
selves, and deceiving, or being deceived by others, 
whatever be the form of argument employed. It 
is apparent, therefore, that the common argument 
by which the greater is inferred from the less, 
although it may be true with uncertainty, is always 
illogical through defective and exclusive analogy, 
and is rhetorical and illustrative only. 

517. This Logical Principle of Agreement and 

• Whateley, p. 74 ; Tatham, i. p. 16, &c. 

+ Wolfius, p. 76. X Whateley, p. 75. h Ibid. p. 31. 

II Picquot, p. 84. ** Ibid. p. 102. 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 ANALOGISM. 

Union in a Third thing, and of inferring a third 
from such agreement, is that of Universal Ana- 
logy^ and holds good for all subjects. Every 
Cause is a union of Action and Passion concur- 
ring or agreeing in an Effect, and every Pair 
of Extremes is connected by a Mean, and all Media 
have Extremes. 

This is the principle of logical Assent and 
Dissent, equally, but contrarily conclusive in Affir- 
mative and Negative arguments ; whence also the 
logical Principle of Contradiction^ whereby it is 
impossible for the same thing at once to be and 
not to be. 

518. Analogy is thus the foundation of the 
Negative principle and axiom of Contradiction or 
Identity, whereby a proposition cannot be at once 
both true and false^ and the same truth cannot at 
once be affirmed and denied of the same thing; 
whence whatever is i^, and cannot not he. And 
this principle is that of all Logistic and Mathe- 
matical demonstration, and gives authority also 
to the Rule of Contraries^ whereby what is truly 
affi/rmed of anything may be as truly denied^ or 
its contrary affirmed of its contrary. 

51Q. In like manner the Positive^ or Affirma- 
tive Principle of sufficient Reason, or that nothing 
happens without a Reason, why it should be so, 
and not otherwise,* is also founded on Analogy, 

* Leibnitz*8 *' Theodice/' and Papers with Clarke, p. 21. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 237 

for every reason is a correlation. And this prin- 
ciple holds throughout Physics and Ethics. 

520. These principles, the former of which 
Leihnitz distinguished as the principle of the Iden- 
tity of Indiscemibles, he called the two Great 
Principles that give to Metaphysics real and de- 
monstrative science.* And Logical Demonstra- 
tion in every mode resolves into clear apprehension 
and consciousness. 

521. AU Logic, and especially that of Analogy, 
seeks the agreements and not the differences of 
things ; and he who argues for truth seeks points 
of reconciliation in a divided question, and not, 
as polemics do, for points of difference, which 
widen disagreement, and raise douht, hy disturb- 
ing the unity upon which truth and conviction 
depend. 

522. It is to the disunion and discordances of 
assumed relations, the want of agreement or simi- 
larity in things arbitrarily forced into comparison 
and false analogy, that we owe the vulgar pro- 
verb, ^^Comparisons are odious,*' when in truth 
they afford the images that most enlighten and 
delight the mind when formed on true perspi- 
cuous analogy. 

523. There is then a Principle of Unity that 
makes of all things a Systematic Universe, Logical 
and Philosophical, whence every Individual therein 

• Leibnitz's " Theodice," and Papers with Clarke, p. 94. 



Digitized by 



Google 



238 ANALOGISM. 

is a Unity, and every Whole the Sum of all 
its Parts. Every Science, therefore, whether re- 
garded Analytically or Synthetically, is a Whole 
founded on the simplest Unity ; thus Philosophy 
itself, which is the first and greatest Science, the 
Science of Science, or Science of the Universe, 
assumes as a first position, or elementarily, the 
Unit Man, or Mind, or the Universal Being, the 
Individual Identity or Unity, or the Universal 
Identity that Unites all. Such also are all Cafe- 
goricalf First Truths and Final Truths. 

524. In like manner every subordinate science 
proceeds either from an elementary Unit or an In- 
elusive. In Arithmetic, the Science of Time, it 
is called a Unit or instant In Geometry, the 
Science of Space, it is a Poini or position. In 
Mechanics, the Science of Motion, it is a PuUe, 
impulse, push or moment, and throughout the 
Mathematical Sciences, which are by way of emi- 
nence called Exact, or Logical, this principle of 
Elemental Unity prevails. It is the same in the 
jEsthetical or sensible Sciences, all Beauty, Pro- 
portion, Symmetry, and Harmony are Unity. In 
the Physical, all Classes and A£Snities are Unities ; 
and throughout Ethics, Moral, Political, and Reli- 
gious, the first and pervading principle is Unity, 
Individual or Universal. 

59S. But above all, if there be any predomi- 
nance in this respect, is Logic the Science of 
Unity, and claims it as its first position and chief 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 239 

attribute. Mind is a principle of Unity, thought 
is a Unifying process^ all Argument and Discourse 
is an Identification. By Memory we Identify, by 
Imagination Unify or combine, and Reasoning is 
identification of Relations and demonstration of 
Unity. Thus Unity is the Logos^ the Reason, 
of all Logic^ the pervading principle of all Dis- 
course ; as it is the Word and Wisdom that framed 
and holds together the Universe; and this Unity 
is the Principle of Aruilogy. 

526. Thus all Logical Processes resolve into 
Universal Analogy. The first and simplest of 
these is Definition^ which unites and exhibits the 
Genus and Individuality of a Term, by its rela- 
tions of Sameness and Difference in a Proposition^ 
which is a judgment or second and intermediate 
process uniting Terms in relation as Subject and 
Predicate, by a Copula, relative or connective; 
and also a third and final process or Argument 
in the various Organs and Operations of Logic, 
which are different modes of proof, or forms of 
demonstration, or conviction by Identification, or 
Unity in the Relation of their Premises, whether 
Analogical, Generalogical, or Syllogistic. 

5S7« Yet must we distinguish these forms or 
modes of Argument as Instruments of Demonstra- 
tion and exposition of proof only, and not as Argu- 
ment itself — the reason, or Logos, and matter, or 
substance of conviction of consciousness — for all 
such argument, reason, and conviction, consists in 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



840 ANALOOISM. 

equation — relation of Analogy — or correlation^ 
whatever be the form or instrument employed ; and 
for such matter Logic must appeal to Philosophy, 
Logic consisting in regulation only, according to 
Genera, Species, and Individua. 

528. Accordingly, every degree of evidence is 
a degree of analogy, so that there is neither ^o^n- 
bHity nor necessity, nor any probability but of 
Analogy, and all dependent on that Uniformity of 
NaJtwre which the human mind has ever recognised, 
and on which it has relied in all its thoughts, acts, 
and expectations, and such is Analogy, physical, 
sensible, and logical. 

529. All Unity is such relatively to Variety- 
ascending or descending ; it has, therefore, MtnifiKi, 
Maxima, and Media. The Minimum of Logical 
Unity is Individuality or particularity, — the Maxi- 
mum of Logical Unity is Universality, and their 
medium is special Generality, all of which are 
correlate logical unity having each an appropriate 
Organ and Process. 1st A Process from Minima 
which identifies or unites many particulars into 
Genera and Universals inclusively ; and it, and its 
Organ, is called an Induction or Oeneralogism ; 
2d. A Process from a Maximum or Universal, 
which demonstrates categorically, by Medium of 
some Genus, a Particular conclusively ; and it, and 
its Organ, is called a Syllogism ; and, 3d. A 
Process from equal Media identifying in universal 
correlation, Individua, Genera, and Universals, 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 241 

coinclusively ; and this process and its Organ is 
Analogtsm, and comprehends the other two. 

530. The premises of the Oeneralogism or In- 
duction are always less than the genus, or category 
of the question ; and those of the Syllogism are 
always limited by its predicament; but the pre- 
mises of the Analogism are absolutely unbounded, 
are greater than the Universe, and include its 
Author; its unity is infinity, and its infinity in- 
finite, so that wherever it can find or imagine a 
paradigm, or parity, or maintain an equation, it can 
attain a logical conclusion. 

531. It is this sublime quality of the Analogism 
that has principally betrayed it in Logic, and con* 
signed it to desultory Rhetoric and Poetry. It is, 
nevertheless, the sole means of Theological and 
Divine argument, in which the antient and modem 
Mystics have also employed it, so fallaciously and 
so contrarily to the sobriety of ordinary reason and 
judgment as also to have discredited it in Logic. 

532. Hence the principal danger from Ana- 
logism is the giving itself up to the license of Ima- 
gination instead of the government of Reason, on 
account of the infinity of its relations which con- 
stitute the Universe ; and although it exists under 
a perfect and divine subordination, it requires the 
guidance of reason to conduct it free from error. 

It is this misdirection of the Analogism by 
Imagination that has repudiated it in the ordinary 
Logic. 



Digitized by 



Google 



242 ANALOGISM. 

533. These influences were in operation before 
the time of Aristotle, and led that eminent genius, 
who enterprised in all knowledge, to consign both 
Analogism and Induction to Rhetoric, and to admit 
the first as Comparison or Paradigm* only in his 
Logic ; building solely on the categorical ground of 
the Syllogism, with such wonderful acumen and 
completeness however, that succeeding Logicians 
have only ventured to abridge or vary, but not to 
add to, or depart from it, with the partial exception 
of Bacon, who rescued Induction from Rhetoric, 
and thus established the Generalogism imperfectly 
in the more confined area of Physics, wherein 
nevertheless it has produced such prominent eflfects, 
and inspirited such wonderful achievements for the 
world, that sober lookers-on stand aghast I — al- 
though, in a more elevated view, it has accomplished 
nothing for the Moral Sciences, but has degraded 
the tone and tenor of intellect. 

534. We are far from blaming its great Author 
for this, since it was the only escape for Philosophy 
at the time from the thraldom of the Scholastic 
Disciplines, which obstructed all advancement in 
science and the progress of civilisation. A reform 
ordained doubtlessly by the Divine Inspirer of 
Wisdom, that knowledge might not stagnate, nor 
his great design for the gradual developement and 
growth of intellect stand still. 

• Tatham, vol. i. p. 57. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 243 

535. Philosophy, in the early ardency of Intel- 
lect, had first preceded Logic, and overshot its 
basis ; checked then for a time by Logic, and now 
again pursuing its rapid way with insufficient 
guides, it is approaching a position from which 
it will have to commence a new career by a new 
reform of Logic. 

536. To qualify Analogism for this, it will be 
necessary to control the expansible power founded 
in the natural constitution of the mind, whereby it 
is urged to extremes, and led to seek beyond the 
legitimate boundary of knowledge the Cause of 
Causes, the Condition of Conditions, the Element 
of Elements, and to lose itself in interminable in- 
quiries and endless suppositions and oppositions. 

537. It is first incumbent, therefore, to deter- 
mine the boundary of its authority, which reason 
tells us must be that of knowledge, whence the 
range of Logic and Philosophy is the same, and all 
employment of Analogism or the other modes be- 
yond this is invalid. Now such boundary are the 
philosophical categories of Relation and Existence, 
of which we have shewn the Identity ; and hence 
it is plainly the first and universal Principle of 
Logic and Philosophy, that there can he no rea- 
soning or logical inference where there is no es- 
sential or existing Relation^ Material, Sensual, or 
Intellectual, and that all such relations are Ana- 
logical or Correlative. 



Digitized by 



Google 



<244 ANALOGISM. 

538, There is hardly a page in any work of 
argument wherein Analogy has not been employed 
in aid of Reason; yet have Logicians strangely 
excluded the Analogism as an accredited organ 
from Logic, —and a late eminent logician, although 
freely employing analogical reasoning, and illus- 
trating the syllogism both grammatically and che- 
mically, does not acknowledge the Analogism as an 
Organ of Logic, in which use and neglect of Analogy 
he does, however, but agree with his predecessors 
and existing schools. 

539. He remarks concerning Analogy : — " 1st 
When two persons are said to have the same qua- 
lity, &c. what we predicate of them is evidently a 
certain resemblance^ and nothing else. One man, 
e. g. does not feel another's sickness, but they are 
said to have the same disease if they are precisely 
similar in respect to their ailments. 2d. Such 
qualities as are entirely relative^ — which consists in 
the relation borne by the subject to certain other 
things, — in these it is manifest the only resemblance 
that can exist is resemblance of relations, i. e. 
Analogy. When it is said, therefore, of two 
courageous men, that they have both the same 
quality ; the only meaning this expression can have 
is, that they are, so far, completely analogous in 
their characters, having similar ratios to similar 
objects. In short, as, in all qualities, sameness can 
mean only strict resemblance, so in those which 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 245 

are of a relative nature, resemblance can mean only 
Analogs/." * The whole of which amounts in sub- 
stance to admitting that there are Analogy oflden- 
tity and Analogy of Relation, and that these are 
the same differently^ or in degrees. 

540. Thus Analogy, as it is commonly under- 
stood and interpreted by Logicians, signifies only 
resemblance among objects, although it is strictly 
significant of real Relations; as of kindred in 
Father and Son, &c. — as of concurrence in Agent 
and Patient — and of all the afiinities and correla- 
tions of nature and the universe. And it is upon 
this direct, immediate, and necessary Analogy, that 
the indirect and remote Analogies of similitude and 
parity depend. Hence the logic of Analogy is in 
the latter respect only rhetorical illustrative, and 
of little force or evidence, while, in the former, its 
inferences are strictly logical and conclusive, as 
well as the sole ground of logical evidence, — and 

Jrom every relate we infer irresistibly its correlate. 

541. Analogy is, therefore, the common name 
of all true natural relations universally, — the bond 
both of thoughts and of things, — the connective of 
nature and truth through which the Logical and 
Philosophical Universe is identified and made in- 
telligible ; and in fine, without such universal Ana- 
logy, there could be neither genuine philosophy, 
nor logic, nor communicable knowledge. Hence 

? Whateley's " Logic," 3d edit. p. 275. 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 ANALOGISM. 

the prime importance we have claimed for this 
neglected logical mode. 

542. Nothing can be significant but through 
natural or conventional Analogy ; for even asso- 
ciations and arbitrary signs are conventional ana- 
logies ; and it afibrds an inevitable presumption of 
the universal nature of this principle that the earliest 
language of mankind^ and the most powerful elo- 
quence of refined thinkers, are alike metaphorical 
through analogy, — substituting the relations and 
similitudes of one object, or class of objects, for 
another ; and that we can no otherwise express our 
most definite and metaphysical notions than through 
similitudes and relations analogically. The uni- 
versal relation and systematic subordination of 
things, upon which their universal Analogy depends, 
enable us to allegorise and poetise every subject 
with an efiect of seeming reality. 

543. Yet the Analogism, like the Syllogism and 
Induction, is liable to error and of difiicult use, 
from the boundless amount of defective premises 
presented to it, demanding adequate discriminative 
powers and capacity in the Logician, and a strong 
guard against superstition and mysticism, to which 
remote analogous premises are liable to conduct, by 
constructing false and arbitrary relations, and un- 
natural and false unities rhetorically arid fancifully ; 
but as genuine philosophy advances by means of 
Analogy, it will reciprocate support and confirm the 
logical foundation of Analogism. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 247 

544. The Pythagoreans, and the Philosophers 
their descendants, have dealt greatly in Analogies. 
The harmony of the spheres, which Pythagoras 
deduced from the analogy of the harmonic proper- 
tions which the planetary orbs bore coincidently 
with those of the Monochord, he only could have 
called Music metaphorically, although grosser minds, 
or the poetically imaginative, have literalised it as 
real, to the edification of satirists who find in me- 
taphors and allegories food for ridicule. 

Such analogies are indeed remote, but not with- 
out some genuine foundation ; and though incon- 
clusive like defective inductions, have conducted 
such minds as Moses, Kapila, Pythagoras, Plato, 
Kepler, Harvey, Tartini, Columbus, and Shak- 
spere's, to noble inspirations, inventions, and dis- 
coveries ; Analogy, although abounding with devia- 
tions, being the broad way of science, mere natural 
similitudes afibrding the foundation for comparative 
anatomy, and the chief instrument of improvement 
in Physiology. 

545. Thus Harvey argued platonically from the 
conceptions of Ideas ofmind^ by a beautiful appli- 
cation of Analogy, to the Conceptions of the hody^ 
as patterns begetting likeness in each case, and 
from the Conception, or gi'So^, of Art to its Analogue 
the Conception of Nature, thus reaching the other- 
wise unattainable notions of a universal Seminal 
and Generative principle,* Animal and Vegetal, 

• Willis's " Life and Works of Harvey," pp. 155, 578. 



Digitized by 



Google 



S48 ANALOGISM. 

wherein the Active and External impressions are 
masculine, the Passive and internal Conceptions 
are feminine, and these united or concurrent in the 
ovum or seed. 

. 546. Newton, in a similar course, established 
his system of Gravitation on the principle of Ana- 
logy, for his experiments extended hardly beyond a 
small portion of the earth's surface, and he trusted 
to Coincidence of the Relation of quantity for a 
conviction amounting to relative certainty. But the 
relations of Quantity are Analogous. We have no 
evidence from the demonstrations of the Mathema- 
ticians to the experience of the Chemists, and the 
reasonings of the Moralists, but through Analogy. 
It signifies not, however, by what term we denomi- 
nate our process, the test of evidence is the clear- 
ness of conviction in approach toward consciousness, 
whether such evidence be Mathematical, Analogical, 
Syllogistical, or Inductive. " There is nothing to 
observe in the things we think of,'* said Hobbes, 
" but either in what they be like one another or 
similar, or in what they be unlike, or dissimilar"* 
And daily observation goes to prove that the whole 
physical Universe is connected throughout in one 
system of dependent analogies. 

54*7 • ^^ our judgments of the acts, inclinations, 
tastes, motives, and determinations of other men, 
under every variety and combination of circum- 

• " Of Human Nat." ch. viii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. i249 

stances, we infer Analogically from our own mo- 
lives, inclinations, tastes, and determinatives, in 
full reliance on the uniformity and analogy of na- 
ture, using our experience of ourselves for judgment 
of others, and correcting our errors therein by ex- 
perience of others according to the variety in unity 
or convert analogy of nature. So also in the public 
judgments of the acts, motives, and circumstances 
of nations by statesmen and politicians, inference 
is taken by analogy from experience of the acts 
and determinatives of other nations ; and all our 
knowledge of human nature is referable to such 
analogy, and all our judgments therein are ana- 
logical ; but the actual experience of men is too 
brief and narrow for judgment and inference with- 
out the aid of analogy. 

548. Logic is the evidence of things not seen, 
whence all Faith* belongs to Reason, — and all such 
evidence is Analogous, — inferring, according to 
uniform laws, uniform consequences through Ana- 
logy or Relation ; and this is especially the Logic 
of Theology, wherein St. Paul establishes the Rea- 
son of Faith — the evidence of things not seen — 
through which we understand that the Universe 
was framed by the Logos, Word, or Reason, and 
Wisdom of God, so that things which are seen are 
not made of things which do appear — whence the 
Invisible things of Him from the creation of the 
world are clearly seen, being understood by the 



Digitized by 



Google 



250 ANALOGISM. 

things that are made, even His Eternal Power and 
Godhead. 

549. Thus also are all Parahles, hoth sacred 
and secular, and those especially of Christ, true 
analogical reasonings and arguments ; and the pro- 
per caution only in the use of such, as throughout 
logic, is to establish correct premises, so that the 
relations or analogies we employ should be natural, 
coincident, exact, and true. 

550. That the best things are misapplied, and 
ever most liable to be abused, can hardly need 
illustration ; and such, we repeat, has been the fate 
of Analogy which extends to all things, and re- 
quires an especial guard against misapplications, 
principally from defective relations and far-fetched 
allusions wherever visionary doctrines have been 
founded, or others equally ridiculous and horrible ; 
whence some minds have taken fright at such terms 
as Analogy and System. 

551. Analogy is, nevertheless, the foundation 
of that strength of concurring circumstances that 
often exceeds direct testimo7iy in establishing truth 
and conviction ; for the latter may be true or false, 
but the former involving intricate relations in iden- 
tity, is of great and logical force, removes doubt, 
and is the strong port of religion and law whence 
our lawyers and judges determine both law and jus- 
tice by case and precedent ; L e. by Analogy, the 
ground of equity, rather than by legislative ordi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 251 

nances or interpretation of laws ; and our divines 
appeal through analogy of nature to Deity in aid of 
Revelation and the Scriptures. 

552. As every just argument and logical infer- 
ence must be founded on some true Analogy, so 
must every false judgment and inference spring 
from some apparent but false Analogy; whence, 
truth being but one, and falsehood and error infi' 
nite, a vulgar prejudice has arisen against Analogy, 
It is hence evident how essential it is to establish 
the philosophy of Analogy universally for the per- 
fecting of truth and logic. 

553. To grasp truth of things and thoughts as 
material or spiritual Substances is comparatively 
easy; but to grasp truth in Relations requires a 
nicety of poise that is difficult to the undisciplined 
mind. For if truth and knowledge be, as they 
are, nothing else than correlation of Analogy, 
then to lean on either of the correlates as an 
absolute ground, is to miss the relation and the 
truth. 

554. It is no wonder, therefore, that men in 
seeking truth in the absolute so constantly fall short 
of or overshoot it ; nor that the progress of reason, 
which is truth of relation only, makes slow ad- 
vances, and that Analogy, which is relation of rela- 
tions — truth of truths — has not found many advo- 
cates in the ordinary run of minds, either as idealist 
or materialist, as dogmatic or sceptic, nor at all as 
egotist. 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 ANALOGISM. 

555. Men seek the solidity of truth — a relation 
— in an absolute substance, ideal or real ; but 
"God hangeth and balanceth the world upon no- 
thing." Mind is a process altogether, and the 
knowledge it has of truth is the relation it pro- 
duces. It does not energize things, but relations, 
and these it connects through Analogy, or relation 
of relations, while the Absolute is altogether beyond 
its sphere — a relation above it. 

55Q. Hence, again, nothing can be known but 
relations, for though we acknowledge their corre- 
lates, these, being the conditions of the relation and 
knowledge, must be for ever unknown. Just as the 
positive and negative correlates of Electricity 
remain totally unperceived until as conditions they 
are brought into new or varied relation, and ren- 
dered sensible in spark, shock, sound, taste, or 
smell. But these physical and metaphysical condi- 
tions into which whatever is, or can be known, may 
be resolved, are analogous and identical in intellect, 
and substantially referable to universal and Divine 
intellect and being, who Is — all in all — and every 
where always I and however the prepossessed mind 
may struggle for other foundations suited to false 
intents, or gross prejudices, it will only flounder 
from one difficulty to another ; and all the inquiries 
of the sincere and adequate intellect must terminate 
in the humble confession that man can know nothing 
finally but himself and God, and these only through 
necessary Analogy — a logical equation which, when 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 253 

fully wrought, will disclose his physical and sensible 
relations, and his moral and religious interests and 
.obligations. 

557. As to False Analogies, they are of easy 
solution, being in general false inductions — infer- 
ences from single instances and individual exam- 
ples, defective through remoteness or absence of 
true relation or analogy. False Analogy is, there- 
fore, properly called Anomaly^ not only philologi- 
cally but logically. And to become logically autho- 
ritative and unerring. Analogy must be founded on 
direct, real, natural, conscious, and true Relations ; 
and although it may be illustrative, it can be of no 
other authority when fictitiously assumed or untrue. 
So much by way of introduction : we proceed to 
more strictly regard the Analogism as a Logical 
OrgaUj which, although not hitherto admitted by 
logicians as a lawful organ, has been most con- 
stantly and remarkably employed by them on all 
occasions as a spurious weapon and persuasive. 

558. Before the time of Aristotle every mode of 
argument, and the whole of Logic, was rhetorical ; 
but he having assigned induction to rhetoric, and 
confined logic to the syllogistic form, as Bacon did 
to the inductive, they both consigned Analogism to 
Rhetoric ; notwithstanding it is allowed to be theo- 
retically perfect in mathematical proportions, and 
that discursive Analogy is practically and philoso- 
phically essential in Physics. 

559. The term Analogy was accordingly first 



Digitized by 



Google 



25i ANALOGISM. 

and principally employed in its logical sense by the 
mathematicians, with whom it signified Proportion 
and Ratio;* from them it passed to the architects, 
and supplied their laws of symmetry as employed in 
the Ark of Noah and the ancient temples, from that 
of Solomon to those of Augustus, as remarked by 
Vitruvius ; and from these it was taken hy the 
artists as deduced from the human figure, till, 
finally, it was corrupted into the symbols of masons 
and similitudes of poets and rhetoricians. 

To reclaim its true signification, and extend its 
use as a logical organ, is our main object, fraught, 
as we conceive it to be, with the most important 
interests of science, religion, and law. 



SECTION H. 
ANALOGISM. 

560. Having in a previous chapter determined 
the position of Logic, and marked the Faculties and 
Energies upon which its Operations, modes or 
forms of logism or ratiocination depend, we proceed 
to investigate these latter more particularly; and 
first and principally the Analogism or Analogical 

• See the fifth book of Euch'd, which has been justly pro- 
nounced a master-piece of human reason, cpncerning Analogy ^ 
on which the whole of the mathesis rests with Algebra, which is 
the art of Resolution and Fquation through Analogism. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 055 

process, or logic of universals, since it is the basis 
of the other modes, and appears to have been 
hitherto iinattempted, and to be a third organ re- 
quisite to the entirety of the science, discipline, and 
practice of Logic: for the reception of which we 
have endeavoured to clear the ground. 

561. By Analogy ['ArnXoyai?], we here under- 
stand equality or reciprocality of reason, ratio, or 
relation, for reason and relation are the same ; or 
in fewer words, Analogy is parity of reasons or 
relations ;* and by the term Analogism we denote 
a form of logism, or mode of ratiocination, from 
equal reasons, reciprocal relations, or equation ; 
through which we descend in subordination from 
universal relations, through the general to the par- 
ticular, transcendentally and analytically ; and do so 
upon this principle, law, or canon of all Logic, and 
of the Analogism first and especially, that no Rela- 
tion IS conceivable without Correlatives, 
whence the correlations or reasons of the Universal 
and Genus are inclusively also the correlations or 
reasons of the Species and Individual analogically 
throughout Logic. 

562. Upon this depends all ratiocination ; for if 
there were not such fundamental Analogy or uni- 
versal relation and subordination in the nature and 
constitution of both thoughts and things separately 



• See '* Tritogenia," p. 46, n. 5 and note 1. Arist. Nichom. 
Ethics, V. b. 



Digitized by 



Google 



256 ANALOGISM. 

and reciprocally, in vain should we attempt to 
reason or inquire concerning them ; because without 
such co-ordination all would be confusion of thoughts 
and confounding of things, or a chaos of thoughts 
and things : and Words being the representatives of 
thoughts and things^ ought also to have the same 
Analogy. 

563. Hence the validity of the premises in all 
the modes of ratiocination depends upon their ex- 
hibiting, in adequate terms, the true relations of 
words, thoughts, and things ; and hence it becomes 
a universal logical axiom, equally applicable to each 
of the modes, that the conclusion is no farther valid 
and true than are its premises^ and proves no more 
than they truly contain or imply. 

564. To conclude and to include are, therefore, 
logically synonymous; thus, in the judgments of 
necessary relation, or Analogy, there is a reciprocal 
conclusion of the correlatives ; as the conception of 
father and son mutually include, and therefore con- 
clude, each other reciprocally ; nor have we a single 
idea or thought that stands alone or independent of 
relations, and we may in all cases assert truly such 
essential relations, and conclude logically whatever 
the admitted or given premises truly include, and 
no more ; and this, although attained in a different 
course, comports with the loile of Aristotle, which 
attributes to the species whatever is predicated of 
its Genus. It does not follow, nevertheless, but 
that true conclusions mav be drawn from false 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 257 

premises, if the latter are wide enough to contain 
them ; although it is the admirable pi'operty of 
truth that falsehood (which owes all the force it 
ever has to some sort of connexion with truth) 
does not spring from it in any case. 

565. If, therefore, to Infer means to bring into 
or under, then does it denote inferiority; and as 
Conclusion signifies Illation or Inference in Logic, so 
to conclude is to include in an argument, and the 
premises of an argument or ratiocination are supe- 
rior to the conclusion or Inference which is infe- 
rior or comes under it. It is, therefore, we repeat, 
the very essence of logical conclusion to infer some 
thing inferior to or included in the premises^ and 
not to disclose or generate, as some imagine, new 
and extraneous truths, for this is the office of philo- 
sophy. It may seem otherwise in the induction or 
Generalogism, which from particulars infers Genera 
of greater extent, and appears to generate truths ; 
but it^ conclusions are nevertheless invalid beyond 
the particulars premised, and are liable to assume 
false as true. 

56Q. It follows that no organ or operation of 
Logic can have the power of generating or be- 
getting truths, but merely of displaying the truths 
involved in their premises according to the uniform 
regulation of all nature ; it being not the object of 
Logic to beget truth but conviction^ truth being 
nothing else than Logical relationy or agreement 
of Words, Propositions, Arguments, and Things, 



Digitized by 



Google 



258 ANALOGISM. 

and signifying trowed or tri-edj i.e. proved or mea- 
sured by a third or mediate. 

567. Truths Proofy and Demonstration^ words 
so constantly employed to denote the determinations 
of Logic and the Sciences, through reason and 
experience, are alike dependent on, and consist 
in, the perfect accordance of things or thoughts 
brought together or compared ; which accordance 
is some parity, similarity, sameness, or identity, or 
reality ofrelatioUy and is consequently denoted by 
the terms truth, &c. Hence the perfect accord- 
ance of anything with, or within that wherewith it 
is compared constitutes all logical proof, and re- 
solves into Conscious Relation, Analogy^ and 
Reality ; and thus all reason is relation, and all 
relation consists in partial or perfect identity, 
sameness, or similitude, and finally all ratiocination 
resolves into the circle of Identity or Analogy com- 
prehending variety in unity. 

568. Thus, when we prove any number from 
its elements : as 4 from 4 x 1, or 2 x 2, &c., there 
is a perfect accordance of the whole with its parts 
or elements, and this is mathematical demonstra- 
tion. Or when we conclude that twice two is equal 
to four times one, because they are both equal to a 
third thing which is four, there is a perfect accord- 
ance and Logical proofi or when we prove the 
same by a like number of pebbles, we have ocular 
demonstration. And, again, when we exhibit the 
perfect accordance of the various Relations of co- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM, 2^9 

lours, sounds, &c., with their Primary triads 
through their intermediates or thirds^ we have 
perfect Physical and Sensible Demonstration ^ ana- 
tomically ; and so also universally through Analogy^ 
which is Identity in Diversity. 

569. The sole principle of Logical inference, 
whatever be the mode or instrument employed, is 
the connecting two or more extremes by a third or 
mean, and thereby producing a Logical Unity or 
Identification. When, therefore, we aim at proof 
by Analogism, Similitude, or Comparison, we esta- 
blish two extremes between which a true connecting 
mean is alone required to perfect a Logical con- 
clusion, well expressed by the mathematical symbol 
and term .". therefore ; and such mean is the cor- 
relative of the extremes compared, resembled, or 
Analogised. The failures of this mode are ac- 
cordingly principally referable to the remoteness of 
the extremes whereby the identification or relation 
of the mean is weakened in proportion to the de- 
gree of remoteness ; and it is the same throughout 
Logic. 

570. All the inferences of Reason, by which 
from two or more known things we justly conclude 
a third or other things required, are, therefore, 
without exception, inferences of necessary Relation 
or Analogy, including every true and perfect de- 
duction of Reason, whether Physical, Mathematical, 
or Moral ; and as to their validity, it de-pends on 
that of Reason itself, the etymology of which. 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 ANALOGISM. 

traced through Ratioy from the past participle of 
Re-riy to Think or Reflect^ makes it synonymous 
with Re-soundf Ue-signifyy or Reciprocate. 

571. There is hence no other foundation for 
Reason and reasoning than universal Analogy ; for 
what do we do in all our reasonings and conclusions 
but produce or determine a Unity, which is to shew 
by an equation that this thing is the same as that, 
or that these things are one, or Analogous f Every 
unity or whole is the sum of its Relations or 
Parts. 

572. As, however, Truths in the abstract and 
universally, is relation of Analogy ^ and as there 
may be, and are, arbitrary and artificial relations^ 
so there may be and are, artificial truths and arti- 
ficial Analogy^ or accommodation of one thing to 
another, — and hence that may be true and analo- 
gous in one respect which is false and irrelative in 
another — the foundation of all discordance in rea- 
soning among men ; but as all propriety in Art is 
referable to Nature, so is the remedy for all clash- 
ing opinions, and reasonings from artificial rela- 
tions, to be referred to those natural^ true, and 
analogous relations which are admitted and exist 
fundamentally, the artificial ground being thereby 
removed. 

573. The logical truth of any thing is its iden- 
tification with Consciousness. If it be of simple 
Consciousness it is truth of reason ; that is of con- 
scious relation, or subjective truth. If it be of any 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 26l 

thing out of Consciousness it is truth of sense^ that 
is objective truth — an effect — a fact or philosophic 
truth. And thus the phases of truth vary with the 
phases of Consciousness and Science. 

574. Hence, all logical evidence rests originally 
upon that Analogy, or universal Relation, where- 
in the Subjective, Significative, and Objective 
systems coincide and concur, and thereby render 
knowledge uniform, consistent, and conclusive ; and 
thus the Analogical process is at the foundation of 
the other modes. 

575. It is not, however, to be wondered at that 
this process should not have been early unfolded ; 
nor ought we to expect its perfect developement in 
the commencement, because it depends primarily 
upon a perfect developement of the universal Ob- 
jective system, of which, at the same time, it must 
be the principal means ; whence it depends, als#, 
upon a like perfect developement of the universal 
Subjective system, or of mind, no less than also on a 
perfectly significative system, or a perfectly ana- 
logous Language ; and these may serve to explain 
why a thing so evident as reaso?iing by analogy^ 
and so common in its discursive form, should yet 
have produced no attempt to discover its laws, and 
reduce it to science, in the manner of the other 
modes, which had, like most things, imperfect be- 
ginnings. Something will nevertheless be accom- 
plished, in the disclosing of a principle and making 
a right beginning ; for these, as the first and 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 ANALOGISM. 

greatest of logicians has remarked, are not only 
the chief, but the most difficult parts of a per- 
formance.* 

576. Although the analogism is hardly in any 
form recognised as a mode of Logic, and not at all 
as a legitimate organ, it is nevertheless of the com- 
monest use, all the illustrations of argument and 
discourse consisting in comparison and analogy; 
and it is owing, perhaps, to this very reason, that 
it is not so regarded. On the other hand, the syl- 
logism, which is of all the modes the least natural, 
and is a disclosure of extreme art, has been gene- 
rally regarded as the almost sole instrument of 
logic ; yet the essential diflference of analogical 
reasoning from the syllogistical and the inductive 
has been universally admitted by logicians ; we, 
therefore, innovate little in logic by treating it as 
» distinct organ. 

577* Analogy, as a manner of reasoning, could 
not escape the penetration of Aristotle,^ nor the 
sagacity of Bacon, who have, accordingly, each 
just noticed and named it ; not, however, in its 
correct and universal sense, for which an adequate 
basis was wanted, but regarding it, not as neces- 
sary and demonstrative, but as fictitious and illus- 
trative, both these and succeeding writers and 
logicians have employed the term rhetorically, and 
not logically, in the confined acceptation of Example 

* Aristotle, at the end of his ** Soph. Elcnchi.** 



Digitized by 



Google 



CATEGORIES. 268 

or Similitude. Accordingly Aristotle has asserted* 
that conviction in every case is founded upon either 
Syllogism or Induction, and has omitted Example 
or Analogy. 

578. Aristotle was undoubtedly aware, also, of 
the necessity for a universal basis to the validity of 
the syllogistic process, although he overlooked its 
Analogical foundation, and accordingly attempted 
to found it upon the Categories^ predicaments, uni- 
versal genera, or philosophical arrangements of the 
Pythagoreans. Nor is such a basis less essential to 
confirm the conclusions of the generalogism or in- 
duction of Bacon, since that also owes its entire 
force to the degree of universality in the assemblage 
of its members or particulars ; some inquiry con- 
cerning it is, therefore, pre-essential to all logical 
process. 



SECTION HI. 
CATEGORIES. 

579. As Reason is a Universalizing Faculty, 
which gives laws and unity to thought, its first and 
highest function consists in determining what are 
those Universals by which thought is authorized 
and regulated, and which have received the ap- 

• " Prior Analytics," ch.,23. 



Digitized by 



Google 



264f ANALOGISM. 

propriate name of Categories, or Universal terms. 
These, as anciently collected and arranged by Ari- 
stotle, and as applied by Kant in our time, are 
arbitrary arrangements, rather than necessary 
logical and universal elements, into which, never- 
theless, they are resolvable. 

580. The Categories, as collected by Aristotle, 
and delivered at the beginning of his " Organon,** 
or logical treatises, are 1. Essence [Syn. Entity, 
Existence, Substance, Subsistence, Substratum, 
Matter, and thing absolute] ; 2. Quantitt/ ; 3. 
Quality ; 4. Relation ; 5. Space [place, and 
where] ; 6. Time [when] ; 7- Position [posture, 
situation, figure] ; 8. Possession [to have, or 
habit] ; 9* Action ; 1 0. Passion [reaction, resist- 
ence] : and their genealogy may, perhaps, be cor- 
rectly exhibited in the following analytical table : — 

I. ESSENCE— 
2. QUANTITY — 3. QUALITY — 4. RELATION — 



^ ^ ^ ^ 

5. Space — 6. Time 7- Position — 8. Possession 9. Action — 10. Passion. 



581. Essence or Substance, and Qualities, 
have both been used to drive each other out of 
being, by arguments which, either make Substance 
everything and Qualities nothing, or, vice versa, 
make Qualities Substances and Substances Quali- 
ties. In pure Substance there is Passivity only — 
and Activity only in Qualities ; and as one of these 
cannot be without the other, or Action without 
Reaction, they arc Correlatives, of which Analogy 



Digitized by 



Google 



CATEGORIES. 2()0 

supplies the Logical mean, or connecting third. 
Space and Ti7ne have the same Analogy, and 
Quantity is their connecting mean or Genus. So 
Position and Possession are Analogous Qualities^ 
and Action and Passion are prime Relations. 

582. Time and Space^ ahout the nature and 
attributes, and reality of which, common sense has 
no difficulty, have been called the stumbling-blocks 
of the Philosopher, and have been very variously 
interpreted. Aristotle truly regarded them as Cate- 
gories or Universal Principles, with whom some 
have regarded them as Ideas of the mind, and 
most others as Perceptions of Sense ; but none 
have satisfactorilv determined their true nature and 
relations. 

583. Analogical Philosophy determines them to 
be universal Ontological Principles, Time being 
the most general or universal form of Activity or 
Action — Space the most general form of Passivity^ 
Receptivity or Reaction^ — that they are Correlative 
Extremes, of which Motion is the correlate Mean 
and Measure; and assigns to them three Correla- 
tive Disciplines or Instrumental Sciences ; viz. 
Arithmetic or the Science of Times, Geometry the 
Science of Space, and Mechanics the Science of 
Motion. 

584. Thus the Categories and Post-Predica- 
ments are analogically resolved through all Exist- 
ence and Consciousness, from Relations of Action 
and Passion into Quantities of Time and Space, 



Digitized by 



Google 



26(5 ANALOGISM. 

and Qualities of Possession and Position, whence 
the Correlate Universality or Identity of Mind. 

585. It follows as a Corollary, from the fore- 
going analysis of the Categories, that whatever 
Exists is either Quantity^ Quality^ or Relation. 
The most universal Relation is that of Action and 
Passion ; the most universal Qtmlities are those of 
Possession and Position ; and the most universal 
Quantities are Time and Space. 

586. And this distribution of the Categories is 
authorized by the Stagyrite and his followers, who 
regard Essence, or Substance, as first and chief 
among the Categories, and Quantity, Quality, and 
Relation, as of secondary importance; the others 
are consequently subordinate to these. 

587- It is to be remarked, however, that the 
Essence^ or primary matter of things and thoughts, 
as the necessary condition of knowledge, must be 
in itself unknowable, and that Quantity and Quality 
are Relations ; and upon these the other Categories 
depend. Hence relation and essence, or the rela- 
tive and the absolute^ are the most universal, or 
first categories — the matter and manner of all 
knowledge. 

588. Things may, therefore, be considered as 
known^ or as existing ; and since nothing can be 
known but relations, or the manner of being in 
things, the next universal genera of things (or pre- 
dicaments) arc those universal relations to which 
they may be referred in our knowledge : we err, 



Digitized by 



Google 



CATEGORIES. 267 

therefore, when we regard knowledge as compre- 
hending the absolute in things, notwithstanding this 
is an error more vulgar than that of regarding as 
real the apparent or relative diurnal motion of the 
sun. It follows, hence, that all our conceptions of 
things as ahsolutey or independent of the mind, are 
but figurative or ectypal, through analogy ; and that 
all our real and Archetypal conceptions belong to 
the mind as analogous Relations. 

589. Space we have defined the most general 
form of Passivity or Passion, and Tims the most 
general form of Activity or Action; whence Uni- 
versal Passivity or Space is the Universe^ and Uni- 
versal Activity or Time is Eternity. Each may be 
proved by analysis or synthesis, and both are corre- 
lative through antithesis, each hieing the measure of 
the others through number and motion. Finally, 
being universal, they are Categories^ conjointly 
expressed by the term Existence. 

590. Hence, if we generalise every special and 
particular Passivity we universalise them into 
Space. * If we also generalise every special and 
individual action we also universalise them in 
Time. And, as every eflfect resolves into Action 
and Passion, so all Existence resolves into Time 
and Space. Finally, as Space and Time resolve 
into Passion and Action, which never subsist apart, 
so the latter unite Knowledge as the prime Gate- 
goryy Relation. Thus exhibited in the following 
Table :— 



Digitized by 



Google 



2()8 ANALOGISM. 

591. 

RELATION, 



External — Medial — Internal. 



Patient— Effect — * Agent,' — Effect -- * Patient,' — Effect — Agent. 

V / V ^ 

Material — Sensible — Intellectual, 



EXISTENCE. 

The term Existence may be substituted by that of 
Cause, which has precisely the same generic rela- 
tions and principles ; as we have shewn that enery 
Cause comprises an Agent and Patient in its 
Effect^ — that in Material cause and effect its Pa- 
tient is External or Material, its Agent Medial or 
Sensible, and the Fact External, — that in Se?isible 
Cause and Effect the Agent is External, the Pa- 
tient Internal and the Effect Medial, and that in 
Intellectual Cause and Effect the Patient is Medial, 
the Agent Internal, and the Truth or Nome Inter- 
nal ; the whole of which strictly coincides with the 
above arrangement. 

592. It is apparent, then, that the Categories 
are no other than Genera or Universal Relations 
of Being or modes of ExistencCy and that if the 
External, Medial, and Internal, are the most Uni- 
versal Relations of Existence, and that the Relation 
of Quantity is External, that of Quality Medial, 
and that of Relation itself Internal, then has 
Aristotle justly regarded these as Prime Categories, 
of which the others are species, and we are justified 
in the Analogical distribution we have given them. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CATEGORIES. 269 

Further, agreeably to which Quantity is the chief 
Category of Discipline^ as Relation is of Science^ 
and Quality is of Art ; Art including Figure and 
Habit, as Science does Relations, and as Disciplines 
do Time and Space. 

593. That Aristotle regarded his own collection 
of Categories as incomplete is evident from the 
addition he made of his Post-Predicaments of 
PrioTy Subsequent^ . Opposite^ Simultaneous^ and 
Motion^ and that they have been so regarded by 
others is also apparent from the additions and 
variations they have received from succeeding 
writers.* 

594. JErigenOy or John the Irishman, a dis- 
ciple of the Venerable Bede, and friend of Alfred 
the Great, a man of vast intellect and learning, 
and author of many works, in his treatise " De 
Divisione Naturce** which was adjudged to the 
flames by Pope Honorius III., and its possessors 
excommunicated, establishes that none of the Cate- 
gories, except that of Relation^ are in any case ap- 
plicable to the Universal Being, God, and that only 
figuratively, or by Analogy.! And this with logi- 
cal strictness ; for how should either of the cate- 
goric Genera adequately apply to the Absolutely 

* See our Introduction, p. 25 ; and Harris's ** Philological 
Arrangements," p. 31 to 36, and Index. 

+ See Sharon Turner's " Hist, of the Anglo-Sax.** vol. iii. 
p. 416. 



Digitized by 



Google 



270 ANALOGISM. 

Universal Beings except that alone of Relation^ 
which comprehends them all ? 

595. To the Post-Predicaments Aristotle also 
superadded the Universal term Cause, involving all 
other categories, and variously distinguished it as 
Material^ Formal^ and Finals to which numberless 
others have been added ; and in modem times this 
category of Cause has taken precedence of all other 
predicaments, and conducted to a fallacious scep- 
ticism, only resolvable through Analogy by the uni- 
versal fact that Cause consists in Concurrence: 
for Effect being the correlative or Analogue of 
Cause, and an Agent and Patient being co-essential 
to every Effect, all Cause becomes resolved into 
Action and Passion^ or re-action, which are the 
primary Analogical Correlatives of Existence and 
Relation universally, and as the foundation of all 
causes and categories, material, sensible, or intel- 
lectual. 

596. Altogether it is evident that Being and 
Relation, or the absolute and the relative, are the 
only perfect subjective universal or Categories^ 
comprehending all others ; and they are necessary, 
universal, coequal, and correlative conditions of 
knowledge, analogically demonstrated; and they 
coincide with the objective philosophical universalsy 
Existence and Knowledge or Insistence^ as it 
might be called; in the one, Existence or Being 
is the prime category, as in the other. Insistence^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



CATEGORIES. 271 

Knowledge or Relation, by which they are con- 
nected, is. 

597* This agreement of the objective and sub- 
jective systems extends also to the representative 
system ; for the Philological universals, or first 
genera of words or signs, are the Substantive and 
the Relative, or attributive ; and thus words, 
thoughts, and things coincide and concur cate- 
gorically in all our knowledge. 

598. And these Categories or Universals, Be- 
ing and Relation, have coequal and corresponding 
Ends or purpose ; which, again, coincide with 
our philosophical universals, and also with the first 
position of our philosophy, in which we define a 
system to be a united variety of parts or principles, 
co-ordinate or related to some end or purpose. 
With these, also, the subject, predicate or attri- 
bute, and conclusion, and the three terms, major, 
minor, and consequent of logic, correspond. 

599. In what other manner these Categories 
comprehend the universe, has appeared also in 
our first chapter, together with the genera and 
species dependent upon them ; namely, the Ex- 
ternal, or Physiological; the Internal, or Nouo- 
logical ; and the Medial, or Philological, &c. : nor 
is there any end to their coincidences. 

600. Further, if Quantity be of material or ex- 
ternal reference, Quality, of sensible or medial re- 
ference, and Relation, of intellectual, or internal 
reference, as before remarked, then do we also 



Digitized by 



Google 



272 ANALOGISM. 

agree with the Ancients in their subordinate cate- 
gories; for Time and Space comprehend all ex- 
ternal or material quantities, as Position and 
Possession do all medial or sensible qualities, and 
Action and Passion all internal or intellectual 
relations: and, notwithstanding the equivocalness 
of the ancient categories, this appropriation is so 
suitable and easy, that we may reasonably consider 
them as the relics of a more ancient and similar 
philosophy, 

601, At all events, the true source and gene- 
alogy of the Categories have been unnoticed, and, 
as far as appears, were unknown to Aristotle him- 
self, who is said to have borrowed them from 
Ocellus Lucanus, and Archytas the Tarentine; 
who, again, founded them upon the Decalogue of 
Pythagoras, called also the Table of Alcmaeon : and 
as Pythagoras drew his philosophy from the Egyp- 
tian and Eastern sages, and modem researches into 
the ancient literature of India and the East have 
disclosed doctrine consonant to the Categories, 
there is reason for referring them to a time and 
country more ancient and remote than Greece. 

602. It is held to be contrary to logical rule 
to argue from one Category to another, and that 
Reason even fails altogether when we quit the 
category of any inquiry; but this is not entirely 
true, since one category contains others, and there 
is, in strictness, but one absolute Category — a single 
Analogical Universal only. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 273 

60s. It is the same when we argue from one 
Species to another, and still more so in arguing 
from Genus to Genus under any Category, the 
relations becoming weaker and weaker as they be- 
come more remote ; but still there is Analogy and 
true ground in each case, and throughout. This 
law of Logicians is therefore to be held with limi- 
tation, and it is still contrary to just argument to 
quit the Category unnecessarily, or to call in the 
remote instead of the immediate or near at hand ; 
but it is perfectly lawful to strengthen the final 
judgment universally for perfect conviction. 



SECTION IV. 

604. Having thus shewn the necessary, uni- 
versal, analogical basis of all ratiocination^ and the 
manner in which these universals coincide with, 
and comprehend, the Categories upon which Aris- 
totle rested the validity of the Syllogistic process 
(for the hypothetical and disjunctive syllogisms 
resolve into the categorical), we may proceed in 
our attempt to develope the instrumentality of the 
Analogism, the fundamental organ of logic. 

605. Since, then, all reasons are analogous re- 
lations (which are the sole matter, or substance of 
logic), and since correlatives demonstrate each other 
immediately, or by necessary inference, and imply 
equality or reciprocalness, analogism concludes 



Digitized by 



Google 



274 ANALOGISM. 

from tlie equal reasons or relations of things im- 
mediately and essentially^ or from known relatives 
deduces their less known correlatives. 

606. And as Universal Relations comprehend a 
subordination of Particular Relations^ so the Uni- 
versal Analogism comprehends a like subordination^ 
both of which are unfolded by analysis. We there- 
fore distinguish analogisms as Universal and Par- 
ticular ; and these, again, we divide into single or 
simple^ and general, plural or compound. Such 
are the distinctions of the Logical Analogism 
founded on the immediate parities of Reason, as 
distinguished from the Rhetorical or Philological 
Analogism^ which belongs to the remote Simili- 
tudes of nature and imagination, both however 
resolving into the same Universal Analogy. 

607. As the premises upon which the first dis- 
tinction of the Logical Analogism is framed are 
necessary and universal, and those of the second, 
or particular, may be in themselves arbitrary or 
granted, the first are Categorical^ and the latter 
may be called Hypothetical; between which lies 
the popular or general analogism, which is Rheto- 
rical and Philological, and concludes from parallel 
relations and similitudes: and this maybe called 
Disjunctive and conjunctive. 

608. In this the Analogism resembles the Syl- 
logism, that it is either Categorical, Hypothetical, 
or Disjunctive; and it resembles the Syllogism 
herein, also, that the two latter of these, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



ANALOGISM. 275 

Hypothetical and Disjunctive, resolve into the first, 
or Categorical; and they both terminate in the 
identification of Relations, i. e, in Analogy. 

609. And, in their application, the Categorical 
Analogism is Theoretical^ and principal in Intel- 
lectual and Ethical science; the Hypothetical 
Analogism is Practical and principal in Material 
and Physical science ; and the Disjunctive Analo- 
gism is Discursive^ and principal in Sensible and 
jEsthetical science, including the Philological and 
Rhetorical. 

610. Further, the three Modes or Forms of the 
Analogical Organ are severally distinguishable into 
Analogisms of Reason and of Fact^ — the first 
d priori, the latter a posteriori ; — the one express- 
ing the Relations of Active and Passive Intellect, 
the other the Affinities of Nature through Sense. 

611. Thus the Primary triad of Colours is a 
categorical Fact a posteriori, and that of Sounds is 
another, whence may be analogized and inferred all 
the Relations of Chromatic and Harmonic Science ; 
and, in like manner, every Science has its elemen- 
tary categorical Fact or Reason, to which it en- 
tirely refers for its Relations, and whence it may 
be wholly deduced, and also connected with the 
whole of Science, logically or categorically, through 
Universal Analogy. 

612. As the Categorical Analogism compre- 
hends all necessary relations, i, e. relations of rea- 
son or of fact, traceable to universality, all necessary 



Digitized by 



Google 



^7^ ANALOGISM. 

relations, whether universal, general, or particular, 
a priori or a posterioriy are, by reference, cate- 
gorical: so the Hypothetical Analogism^ formed 
upon assumed, or possible relations^ may be either 
universal, general, or special ; and so also the Dis- 
junctive Analogism, which argues from parity of 
reason, or probable relations^ lies between the cate- 
gorical and hypothetical analogisms, and may also 
be universal, general, or particular, for of these 
distinctions there are no definable limits. 

613. Hence, we analogize categorically only 
on necessary relations ; hypotheticaUy on assumed, 
real, and probable, or conditional relations; and 
disjunctively and discursively upon parity of reason, 
or possibility of relations, or by similitude. 

614. Yet Analogy, to become logically conclu- 
sive, must be between things of the same nature, 
or homogeneous: thus, for example, we cannot 
conclude through any real parity of reasons, from 
the doctrine of sounds produced by vibrations, that 
colours, or other objects of sense, are also produced 
by vibrations, because these things differ in nature 
or are heterogeneous : but parities of relation or 
analogy in things of the same genus are conclusive 
and certain. 

615. Of these three forms, we will speak first 
of the two Logical Forms, the Categorical, or 
theoretical Analogism, and the Hypothetical, or 
practical Analogism ; and finally, of the Disjunct 
tive, or discursive Analogism, which is Philological 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 277 

or Rhetorical. And these forms coincide with the 
matter of Logic or Propositions, the Categorical 
Analogism being imperative, the Hypothetical in- 
quisitive, and the Disjunctive Analogism assertive. 



SECTION V. 

616. The Categorical or Theoretical Ana- 
logism, is apodictical, and from two evident co- 
equal relations, or extremes, infers logically, or 
concludes their equal mean ; and again, by ana- 
lysis, it takes, of the concluded mean, two other 
equal extremes in evidence of another included 
mean relation — thus descending from the universal 
and general through the less general to the par- 
ticular; and as the extremes and media in this 
process are in equal relation, or strictly analogous, 
and therefore reciprocal and simultaneous, either 
of the three terms may become extreme, or mean, 
to the others reciprocally. Hence this Analogism 
is a triple syllogism, comprehending three syllo- 
gisms, or particular conclusions, under a general 
and universal dependence, and is hence of irre- 
fragable strength. 

617. Thus, for example, the Subject, or that 
which perceives or sees, and the Object, or that 
which is perceived or seen, are equal terms, or 
extremes, and have the relation of antecedent and 
consequent reciprocally, and require no common 



Digitized by 



Google 



278 ANALOGISM. 

term to unite them in a judgment, but they imply 
or include the perception, or VieWy in which they 
concur ; and these three, — the Subject, the Object, 
and the View, are co-essential, and by implication 
and logical inference, conclude each other recipro- 
cally. They argue in a universally coincident 
circle, as major, minor, and consequent: they in- 
clude, and therefore conclude, as irresistibly as the 
most perfect syllogism, each depending upon cor- 
rect premises. And this may serve as example of 
the simple universal analogism. Further, — 

618. Between the Philosophic Mindj as subject, 
and the Philosophic Universe, as object, lies Phi- 
losophy or Science, as View, in like reciprocal rela- 
tion and coincidence. Take, now, either member 
or premiss, of this Analogism, for example. Phi- 
losophy or Science, and separate its extremes, 
namely Physical and Intellectual Science, between 
which, according to the same Universal Reason, or 
category of relation, lies sensible science, as a mean ; 
and so on, again, with either of these terms and 
their subordinates, in search of particular know- 
ledge, or Science, 

619. And this is an example in the first stage 
of the Compound, or plural Analogism, which may 
sufficiently indicate the Categorical or Universal 
Analogism, in this place. 

620. Of the power of this process in the esta- 
blishment and rectification of principles, we have 
cited as an example the Analogism by which we 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 279 

proved the duality of cause, primarily and univer- 
sally, from effect, producing the necessary logical 
mean in triple Correlation and Analogy, thereby 
annulling the sceptical argument founded on the 
latency of the logical connective or third : for aU 
Cause consists in Concurrence of an Agent and 
Patient united in Effect, the three being coinci- 
dent, simultaneous, and reciprocal media to each 
other as extremes, in universally necessary connexion. 

621. But all Categorical Analogisms are axio- 
matic, the fruitful source of Principles and of 
Science. The logical Principle, that two things 
equal to the same third thing are equal to each 
other J and all of them reciprocal^ is an analogism 
of reason, as well as an axiom in mathematics, as 
complete in correlation as that of father^ mother j 
and offsprings or the Agents Patient, and Effect of 
Causation, or the Subject, Object, and View of 
sensible and mental vision. Each is a compre- 
hending triad of extremes and mean, as conclusive 
as the most perfect syllogisms and convertible into 
them. Such analogical correlations are so simple 
as to be overlooked, or so evident as to be admitted 
without question, or are axioms worthy of authority 
on credit, although they appear inexplicable. 

622. Analogism is a test of axioms by analysis, 
and whatever truth of fact is incapable of analysis 
is fundamental, — a first truth, and categorical 
foundation for Analogism by synthesis — which 
goes to the root of knowledge. Berkeley, with 



Digitized by 



Google 



*280 ANALOGISM. 

irrefragable argument, shewed that, as it stands 
alone, we know nothing of an External World 
of Matter; and Hume by an easy eflFort turned 
the force of the argument against its author, and 
shewed that we have no better knowledge of the 
Internal World rfMind or Spirit^ thereby setting 
up a scepticism that ousts the world altogether, 
and from which there is no escape but by the in- 
tervention of Analogism establishing a mean of 
necessary connexion of its three terms through 
universal relation or reason. 

623. If, therefore, there is a medial world of 
knowledge, internal and external — of Mind, Mat- 
ter, and Sense, — a categorical Analogism will be 
established on necessary reason. Beyond which 
the only shift of scepticism is to question the exist- 
ence of knowledge, and therewith that also which 
knows and that which is known, which terminates 
all argument in Nihilism and absurdity. Thus the 
Philosophic Universe — the World of Knowledge — 
is essentially founded on Categorical Analogism, all 
following which is a chain of Logical Relations 
through Analogisms, universal, general, or par- 
ticular, [in agreement with reason and sense, so 
that Nature has neither deceived nor sported with 
our faculties. 

624. Hence our analysis of the Category (^ 
Cause dissolves the dispute between the Material- 
ists and Idealists by an Analogism also, the 
question at issue being, whether man knows and 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 281 

understands Passively through his sensations and 
impressions, or Actively^ through his imaginations, 
or the activity of his mind in producing ideas, — 
neither of which opinions is correct, nor entirely 
true or false ; for to all internal Effect, — Under- 
standing and Knowledge — Action and Passion are 
as coessentiaT or analogous as they are to external 
effects, and we can know nothing hut the relations 
and correlations of anything, 

625. Thus is Philosophy reconciled to Piety, 
which regards materialism with horror, as sub- 
stituting a sensual and atheistic spontaneity and 
mechanism for the Being and operations of Wis- 
dom and Deity, and points at idealism with deri- 
sion as fantastic, contrary to revelation, and un- 
worthy of God ; OT Philosophy is forced for con- 
sistency into the more degrading errors of scep^ 
ticism, or the credulity of those who, according to 
Solomon, want understanding and are in darkness. 

C26. It is only by Analogism that we can truly 
understand Time and Space, Time being the cate- 
gory of Action or activity, every act being gene- 
rated in time, and being in the abstract nothing 
else ; Space, again, being the like category of Pas- 
siON or passivity, or, if admissible, spacivity or 
receptivity, every passion being generated or re- 
ceived in space, and being, in the abstract, space 
only : they are thus the first principles of all effects 
and causes, and are concurrent in Motion, their 
analogon. Thus Time, Space, and Motion, are 



Digitized by 



Google 



382 ANALOGISM. 

correlatives, inexplicable, nonexistent, and incon- 
ceivable apart ; they are, therefore, co-relattonSf 
the foundation of the whole Mathesis or science of 
Measure, the science of Time being that of Num- 
ber or Arithmetic^ that of Space being Oeometrt/^ 
and that of Motion being Mechanics^ the genera of 
innumerable sciences.* 

627. By the same process that settles the ques- 
tion of Berkeley and Hume, may be decided the 
most inveterate controversies of philosophy and 
science. In Ethics, the celebrated principle of 
Hobbes, which has still its partisans and opponents, 
that all men have original right to all things, is a 
false extreme, the opposite extreme of which is that 
no man has exclusive right to anything, both of 
which are equally false extremes, the analogical 
mean of which is reciprocal, that the universal 
right of men is a right of property in Partnership 
or Brotherhoodyf which is true, and decides the 
questions of controversy, while it establishes a new 
developement and true principle of Moral and Po- 
litical Ethics. 

628. Of all knowledge the mathematical, the 
most accurate and least disputed, is entirely based 
on first truths of Analogy. It has three correlative 
sciences, founded categorically on Number, Figure, 
and Motion, each commencing with an unanalysable 

* See " Anal. Phiios." vol. i. p. 250. 
t This Christian principle is adverse to that fraternity and 
communism which has recently broken out in Europe. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 283 

first truth and axiom tested by Aoalogisin. Arith- 
metic commences with a Unit, and the simplest 
formula 1 + 1 = 2+1=3, &c., founding the science 
on pure consciousness, to which all arguments are 
referable for ultimate proof and logical validity ; 
coinciding with which an especial computation has 
been called Logistics, and all logic is true mental 
computation, correlation, and Analogy, and Arith- 
metic is a purely analogical science. So, again. 
Geometry sets out from a like fundamental unana- 
lysable position, the Pointy which generates the 
Lincy Anglcy and Curve, the first truth analogi- 
cally of another infinite science, the whole relations 
of which are traceable through Analogisms, as is 
the whole doctrine of Proportion, Arithmetical, 
Geometrical, and Harmonical, and dependent on 
original consciousness imperatively.* 

629. On the same ground every science and 
every sense has its universal elementary principle 
and first truth traceable to primary consciousness 
through Analogism. Thus, in Visual Science, 
Truth and Light are coincident, and its first truth 
is Light and Shade, its elementary duad, whence 
its triad of colours is traceable through Categorical 
Analogism, and the infinite relations of Chromatic 
Science. It is the same in every Sense and 
throughout all Science.t Such is the true logical 

* See our Analysis of these Sciences, " Anal. Phil." vol. i. 
p. 235; and Euclid's " Fifth Book." 
t See our ** Synopsis." 



Digitized by 



Google 



^84 ANALOOISM. 

ground of knowledge and science, hitherto neg- 
lected or confounded with the arhitrary analogies 
of poetical and rhetorical similitude, affording spu- 
rious and amusing illustrations only. 

630. Whatever Mind can conceive, Genius in- 
vent, or Art accomplish, has ever been divinely 
contrived, and all that philosophers and inventors 
have to do is to translate from the Book of Nature 
— the original of all originality. And although 
there has not hitherto been any Art or Science of 
Discovery established, it is a correct inference 
from the truth of these premises that the means 
of such art and science can be no other than the 
developement of the System of Nature, and this can 
be anticipated only through Universal Relation or 
Analogy: whence penetrating minds, struck even 
by incidental analogies, have been led to eminent 
discoveries. 

631. That Analogism under Logical regulation 
has wider and more certain effect in conducting the 
inquiring mind to particular inventions and dis- 
coveries, that may have been overlooked for their 
obviousness or simplicity, we can in some measure 
testify by examples from our own experience. Op- 
ticians, from the time of Ptolemy to the present 
day, have regarded Optical Glasses, called Lenses, 
as of Plane and Curved figures only ; but of these 
Angular figure is the analogical third, and of the 
three all possible lensic figures are composed ; and 
although modem opticians have employed the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 



285 



Angular Prism as an Optical Glass, it had not 
occurred to them to construct Prismic or Angular 
LenseSf to which we were led by reflecting on the 
forms and offices of the Prism and Lens, and by 
regarding Plane and Curved Lenses as Analogical 
Extremes, of which the Angular or Prismic Lens, 
or Lensic Prism, is the Logical and Geometrical 
Mean, afibrding a new instrument in Chromatic 
Optics, whereby we have raised a Science of Colours 
from elements entirely Analogical and extensively 
illustrated and exemplified the Analogism.* 

632. Again, the ancient Greek artists held that 
the figure of a well-formed man, with the limbs 
spread and extended, will be exactly included in a 
Circle^ of which the centre will coincide with the 
navel, as in fig. 1 ; and Vitruvius, and other 
writers, have from the same source shewn that a 
like figure erect, with the arms extended, will be 
similarly included in a parallelogram, or Sqiuire^ 
as in fig. 3. Conducted in the preceding manner 
by Analogism, and regarding these forms as ex- 
tremes, of which there is a third, or mean, we 



Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 





• See our ** Chromatics," c. xiii. No. 362. 



Digitized by 



Google 



286 ANALOGISM. 

discover that the figure of a man similarly ex- 
tended^ taking the crown of the head, the palms 
of the hands, and the soles of the feet as the true 
and natural extremities, will be included accurately 
in an equilateral Triangle; thus extending the Ana- 
logy to the three figures which are the sole ele- 
mentary forms of Geometry ; and by trisecting this 
triangular plane, the principal divisions of the body 
will be found ; and by further trisecting these sec- 
tions, in like manner will be found the subordinate 
parts of the body, &c., thus afibrding a scheme 
which discloses a perfect Canon of the Human 
Figure: e.g. 

Fig, 3. 




&33. Again : Archimedes was, it is said, espe- 
cially delighted to have discovered that the Sphere 
and Cylinder were reciprocally of sesquialteral pro- 
portions. With similar satisfaction did the eminent 
Tacquet discover that the Cone coincided with them 
in like proportions and reciprocal ratios, — and their 
inquiries were enlarged by the celebrated Bishop 
Berkeley.* Analogism again steps in, and we are 



* In his <' Miscellanea Mathematica.*' 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 



287 



led to the further disclosure of the coincident pro- 
portions and correlation of the Prism with the 
three figures ; but the Cylindery the Coney and the 
Prismj are the sole secondary elements of Geo- 
metrical figure, and the sphere is the reciprocal 
measure of the three : whereby the general question 
is carried throughout, universally, and may be ex- 
tended to other theorems infinitely, demonstrating 
the Analogy of Geometrical figure universally. Of 
this coincidence the following figures denote the 
plan, 1 ; and elevation, 2. 



Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 





Attributing, however, the discoveries of these 
great Geometricians to the inspiration of Genius, 
while associating our consequent deductions there- 
with, we claim merely the application of a Logical 
mechanism suggested by their disclosures ; yet hold 
that whatever is unknown and possible to man may 
be discovered and contrived through his assiduity 
and research, guided by an Analogism that will con- 
duct him throughout the universe. 

634. Our conviction is accordingly that the 
great questions which have wasted philosophical. 



Digitized by 



Google 



S88 ANALOGISM. 

delectable, and religious speculations in hostility of 
sect, sesthesis and schism, have arisen from the 
maintenance of Absolute Extremes while overlook- 
ing their Analogical Media, and are to be resolved 
by the logical instrumentality of Analogism ; such 
as the questions concerning Cause and Effect, 
Beauty and Deformity, Liberty and Necessity, — 
the nature of Wealth, — and whatever have divided 
Parties and Polemics : nor is there an opinion that 
cannot be tested by the touchstone of Analogism, 
which, however it may make Criticism unpalatable, 
will make it just, and open a new way to improvement. 
635. Nor is it necessary we should confine our 
examples of the use of the Analogism to the highest 
objects of opinion and science, since it descends 
«with complei^ effect through the refined inquiries 
of Taste and Sense to the trivial utilities of Art ; of 
which we could supply many such instances as the 
following. Regarding the Nail and the Screw of 
the Joiner as Extremes, the one of which is driven 
by the percussion of the Point in a Right Line^ the 
other forced by a Circular motion, it became appa- 
rent that there is between them a Mean, or Angu- 
lar and diagonal form and motion, whence we were 
led by the suggestion of Analogism to twist a flat, 
square, or triangular Nail, whereby its edges were 
converted into spiral threads^ and such Nails re- 
volved, in manner of a Screw, while driven into 
wood by a hammer, so as not to be withdrawn.* 

* This plan has been since patented, and applied to boat- 
building, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANALOGISM. 289 

636. Agaiuy in a more extensively useful in- 
stance, we were desirous of expediting artificial Fil- 
tration of fluids ; — looking therefore to the opera- 
tions of nature, 1, by simple gravitation in air ; % 
by negation, or exhaustion of air ; 3, by impulsion, 
or pressure of air, as atmospheric extremes and 
mean in natural filtration, we were led to the con- 
trivance of the Percolator, wherein, by exhaust- 
ing the space of air beneath the filter, we could lay 
the weight of the atmosphere in any degree required 
on the filtering fluid ; or by injecting air thereon to 
expedite the filtration by its elastic pressure^ or by 
both combined, in a manner analogous to the opera- 
tion of nature in springs, and in the animal economy, 
in which respiration^ vascular filtrationy and that 
circulation which immortalised the name of Har- 
vey, are carried on. And this analogy of the Per- 
colator has proved eminently useful, and fruitful of 
improvements in various arts, and a source of many 
patents.* 

637. A great variety of other instances of the 
inventive and suggestive eflScacy of Analogism might 
be adduced,; but the chief function of this organ is 
universal^ and that alone whereon the interpi'etation 
of all knowledge and science can be established upon 
a single principlcy according to a system of uni- 
versal correlation and consistency, as a foundation 
for all Logic ; and this therefore we have attempted 

* For sugar-refining, purifying water, in printing, paper- 
making, pharmacy, dyeing, and the dairy, &o. 

U 



Digitized by 



Google 



290 ANALOGISM. 

in our "Outlines of Analogical Philosophy,'* and 
" Synopsis ;" in which, whether we have succeeded 
in any degree or not, we may claim to have pointed 
out a way for its attainment, and indicated that 
unity of conception which is alone worthy of that 
Universal Being who has formed and sustains the 
Universe, and is Unity itself — the Fountain of all 
Reason and Truth — the Logos of all. 

Such is the chief object of the Analogism, the 
general neglect of which method may serve as an 
excuse for our autological illustrations of its utility* 

638. Every Natural and Logical Analogism 
consists of two Extremes and a Mean, or Media. 
In some cases this is obvious and applied, in which 
the Mean is real and principal, as that of a Mort- 
gage to a Mortgagor and Mortgagee ; but in most 
cases the Logical Mean is to be sought; and in 
either case the three members of an Analogism are 
essential to complete inference and knowledge. 

6.^9. There are cases of Analogism, however, in 
which the mean is apparent, and the extremes are 
obscure, remote or occult, as we have seen in the 
relation of Cause and Effect, the extremes of which 
are latent or concealed, being Action and Passion, 
the coessential extremes of this relation, coincident 
and hidden in the term Cause, on account of its 
correlation with Effect. And hence has arisen 
much misunderstanding throughout philosophy, 
wherein EflTect has been referred to Cause as 
extremes without a mean, although Action and Re- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEORETICAL ANTALOGISM. 291 

action, or Passion, are coessential to every Effect, 
and constitute its Cause: whence Hume, not per- 
ceiving the mearij denied their logical connexion. 

640. As the Analogisra, to be perfect, must 
consist of parts, members, or premises, which, taken 
together, contain neither more nor less than the 
whole of their subject ; and, as it requires co-equal 
extremes in evidence of an equal mean, it is prin- 
cipally applicable to intellectual science and uni- 
versals, in which these complete and necessary 
relations are principally found. And the highest 
and most important of all the applications of the 
universal form of the Analogism is that in which, 
it rises to subjects purely intellectual and divine, 
to subjects purely ethical and theological — the 
spirit of man and the Spirit of God, — subjects 
concerning which the Analogism can alone afford 
satisfactory logical conclusions. 

641. Yet the Analogism descends with propor- 
tionate degrees of evidence to the minutest par- 
ticulars of nature and science, of which we have 
given extended examples synthetically in our 

" Chromatics :*' the Analogism is, however, chiefly 
analytical. And as Generalogism, or Indtiction, is 
the artijicial procedure toward theory or science 
synthetically y so is Analogism the true scientific 
procedure in the researches of practice^ or art^ 
analytically^ and the readiest and most efficient 
means of invention : whence our next distinction of 
this Organ. 



Digitized by 



Google 



29^ ANALOGISM. 



SECTION VI. 

642. The Hypothetical, or Practical Ana- 
LOGiSM, is an inquiry in which we assume two 
extremes, real or imagined, in search of a required 
mean, or particular. It diflfers from the Cate- 
gorical Analogism in this, that its extremes or 
premises are not universal or necessary, but con- 
ditional or arbitrary, and it is applicable to all 
kinds of topics and subjects. In every such Ana- 
logism the Extremes must be limited to determine 
tbe analogical Mean. Thus, if the question be 
concerning the best literary composition, clearing 
the ground from pedantry and fashion, which dis- 
guise the Subject, the best words are those, 1st, 
which convey the Signification best, and, 2dly, most 
agreeably^ as Extremes: but some writers think 
only on the Meaning in the choice of words, and 
they compose without Grace on one extreme, and 
others regard only the Agreeable, and these com- 
pQse without Sense or Signification on the other. 
To unite Qr ace with Sense is therefore the 
perfection of Composition — its rational Analogic 
Mean. 

643. The Hypothetical Analogism may be prac- 
tically exemplified in the adjustment of proportions : 

for example, let us assume, or determine, the terms 

4 A 1 A . 

¦p-g and j-g ill a chemical compound to be the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRACTICAL ANALOGISM. 293 

extremes of a required mean^ or effect; then, in 
search of such a perfect mean, try the following, 

Proportions — 



4 A 2 A 1 A 1 A 

IB IB 2 B 4 B 



2A 
1 B 




1 A 

2 B 


Approximate Extremes. 
New Media — 


3 A 
2 B 


1 A 
1 B 


2 A 
3B 



and so on to other media, if the particular sought 
be not yet attained. 

644. If a more perfect individual or mean be 
required than either of the new media affords, pro- 
ceed, in like manner, with the two nearest to it as 
new extremes to the mean, or particular sought, 
and so on till it be attained ; or, if the required 
mean lie toward either of the original extremes, 
then pursue the same course with that and its 
approximate term; and so on to the particular 
or end required. 

645. It is here evident that the hypothetical^ or 
practical Analogism^ treads upon the opposite limit 
of Induction or Generalogism ; in further illus- 
tration of which, and of the practical application 
and advantages of this mode, suppose it be required 
to accomplish any new purpose, or improve any 
process of art, we first generalise or generalogise 
the particulars and means our knowledge of nature 
and art may afford toward such end, and assume 



Digitized by 



Google 



294 ANALOGISM. 

the most eminent means or process induced, as 

the basis of our analogical procedure, designated 

by A, fig. 1, &c. 

Fig. I. 




We then vary the adopted process in its extremes 
and mean B B B, fig. 2, &c. The same with the 
most successful of these terms, setting apart the 
rest, as C C C, fig. 3. This, again, we analogise in 
like manner, and so on. The same with every 
particular of the process. 

Fig. 2. Fig. 3. 





If we fail in every ramification of this branch, we 
return to our first position, and upon new ground 
pursue a similar course, A % fig. 4, and so on till 
we succeed in accomplishing our purpose. 



Fig 


4. 


/ST 


/ 


.^. 


-V 


/\y^ 


V 



646. Thus we may survey with accuracy the 
entire ground of our subject by an inductive 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRACTICAL ANALOGISM. 295 

Analogy^ wherein, knowing the bearings as we go, 
there is neither danger of running repeatedly over 
the same ground, nor of wandering in a labyrinth, 
as he does who operates at random; and if, in 
the search of a particular or individual in infinity, 
this procedure proves sometimes tedious, it is, not- 
withstanding, ultimately the shortest and surest, 
provided we take our ground according to the full 
breadth of our subject; and, that we may not 
waste our time and powers in the unnecessary 
breadth of our survey, demands knowledge con- 
cerning universals, and also, as in the Induction, 
experience vriith regard to particulars. 

647. Thus also. Experience, and the processes 
of Experiment^ are in all cases logical investiga- 
tions, or Tri-als ; for to try is to tri^ or prove by a 
thirds or comparative mean, any matter in question ; 
just as all Truth is logical relation or agreement of 
words, propositions or things, and signifies trow-edi 
or <rf-ed : t . e. proved or prolated by a thirds 
mediant or measure: and thus natural etymology 
confirms the traditional. 

648. Notwithstanding the practical Analogism 
resembles the Generalogism or Induction in the 
assemblage of its members or particulars, that is, 
in its matter, it is essentially difierent and dis- 
tinguished therefrom in its form, which consists 
in seeking a particular or individiuiU among a 
variety ; while, in every induction, a general is 



Digitized by 



Google — 



296 ANALOGISM. 

predicated of or deduced from particulars : these 
modes are therefore antithetical, or opposed. 

649. Nevertheless, this mode may reciprocate 
light with the method of Bacon, and especially on 
those parts of the " Novum Organum^ of which he 
delivered the titles, but omitted the details, so far 
as they may be adequately understood : viz. 1. The 
Helps of Induction ; 2. The Rectification of In- 
duction ; 3. The Method of varying Inquiries ; 4. 
The Prerogative Natures for Inquiry ; 5. The Li- 
mits of Inquiry ; 6. The Reduction of Inquiries to 
Practice; 7* The Preliminaries to Inquiry; and 
8. The Ascending and Descending Scale of Axioms, 
—commented on by Dr. Shaw; to all which sub- 
jects the Analogism may contribute and apply. 

650. The Hypothetical Analogism will afford 
also perfect conclusions in the determination of 
mathematical ratios and analogous quantities or 
proportionals, which are justly considered by Bar«- 
row as " drawn, not from any induction^ but from 
a universal discursus^* without determining what 
process or discursus, although it is evident it is not 
syllogistical. 

651. Of such, among other examples, and much 
to the purpose of our argument, he gives us the 
following: — "Let there be a circle whose centre 
is Z (fig. 5\ and two angles at the centre, A Z B 
and M Z N, standing upon the arches A B and 

* Malh. Uclures, p. 394. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRACTICAL ANALOGISM. 297 

M N ; let any multiple of the arch A B, suppose 
the triple A D, he assumed, and let Z D he con- 
nected. It appears, from the third element, that 
the angle A Z D is also triple the angle A Z B. 
Then let any multiple of the arch M N he taken, 
suppose the douhle M O, and let Z O be connected. 
In like manner it appears that the angle M Z O is 
douhle the angle M Z N. But if the angle A Z D 
exceed the angle M Z O, from what is demon- 
strated in the third element, the arch A D will 
also exceed the arch M O ; and if that equal that, 
also this will equal this ; and if a defect he there, 
also a defect will be here. Therefore it is shewn 
that the said condition agrees with these quantities 
by a certain universal [analogical] demonstration^^ 
i. e. by parity of reason, ratio or relation. 

Fig. 5. 



652. The like reasoning holds in numbers, 
motions, and in every homogeneous subject. Thus, 
in arithmetic, the rule of three, commonly called 
the golden rule, depends in all its variety upon 
this species of analogy, and its results or con* 
elusions are, for the reasons given, logical and per- 



Digitized by 



Google — 



298 ANALOGISM. 

feet ; indeed, the whole of arithmetic^ inasmuch as 
it is a science of ratioy depends upon this mode. 

653. We may also demonstrate, through Ana- 
logism, that all Triangles and all Equi-angular and 
Right-lined Figures, whether Linear, Surfacial, or 
Solid, are composed of and resoluble into like 
figures to infinity, as exemplified by a bisected 
Line, Triangle, Parallelogram, &c. : thus : 



/l/tw 









-J- 



Thus, the harmonic parallelogram, often employed 
by architects for its pleasing proportions, of which 
the sides are to each other as the diagonal of a square 
to its sides, being bisected by a line parallel to its 
shortest side, each segment will be a similar figure, 
and if these segments be bisected in Uke manner, 
their halves will, from the same analogy, be similar 
rectangles to the original, and so on to infinity ; 
and their sides will be analogous proportionals. 
But the learned Barrow has shewn, that such pro- 
portionals are not properly fpom any Induction, but 
from a Universal Reason or Discursus, of which 
he perceived the logical want, and of which the 
Analogism is the form and organ. 

654. That Geometry is Analogical, not only in 
its first principles, but in its demonstration, is 
vndely apparent ; the science is, indeed, essentially 
Logical, and there cannot be a better illustration to 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRACTICAL ANALOGISM. 



299 



the eye and the mind of a perfectly constructed 
argument in each of the three modes, Analogical^ 
Syllogistical, and Genealogical, than the celebrated 
forty-seventh Proposition of the first book of Euclid. 
That of every right-angled triangle, the square of 
the hypothenuse is of equal quantity to the square 




























26 



























of the other two sides. Thus there is a perfect 
reciprocal relation, or ratio of the sides, angles, and 
squares Analogically. Again, 9 is included in 16, 
as 16 is in 25, or as a Particular is contained in a 
General, and a General in the Universal Syllogis- 
tically ; and, finally, 25 is induced from the parti- 
culars, 9 and 16, QenerahgicaUy. Harmonically 
they consist of 3 threes, 5 threes, 8 threes, and a 
temperamental unit.* 

* See the whole Book v. of Euclid. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOO ANALOGISM. 

655. The conclusion from the agreement or 
identification of two things with each other, by 
reason of their agreement in some third thing, ac- 
cording to the logical maxim, yariously repeated, 
" Gonsentientia uni tertio, consentiunt inter se" is 
strictly analogical, as we have shewn; and every 
inference drawn from such premises is conclusive to 
reason ; and the three terms in every such case 
constitute an Analogism, being reciprocally iden- 
tified in agreement 

656. All Comparisons are questions of Resem- 
blance, Similitude, or Analogy, and all Judgments 
and Arguments are founded on and consist in Ana- 
logical Comparison. To find out the Logical agree- 
ment or Analogy by which two things may be Re- 
lated, we Compare them with some Third thing with 
which they are in mutual Relation or Analogous ; 
in doing which we Compare and Syllogize ; whence 
the above logical maxim coincides with the mathe- 
matical axiom, that things that are eqiml or un^ 
equal to a Third things are equal or unequal to 
one another : i. e. that things that are Related or 
Analogous to a Third thing are similarly related 
or analogous to each other; and Locke correctly 
attributed all Reasoning to the Comparison of two 
ideas by the Medium of a Third. 

657. A simple Fact is known through Sense, 
and can only be Reasoned about, or Judged of, by 
Comparison or Analogy with another, or others ; 
therefore Facts are distinguished from Reasons, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRACTICAL ANALOGISM. 301 

one belonging to Sense and Particulars a posteriori^ 
the other to Intellect and Genera a priori ; whence 
all Facts are traceable to Reason through Universal 
Analogy. That the three angles of a triangle are 
equal to two right angles — that the angles of inci- 
dence and reflection are equal — and other axioms 
of Geometry and Physics, &c., are Analogical even 
as Facts. 

658. Regarding, therefore, the same universal 
Analogy as established internally and externally — 
physically and logically ; and throughout Science, 
we thus analogised from the one to the other by 
conveying the two Colours of a compound hue se- 
parately into the sensorium, and thereby produced 
their intermediate third experimentally, 1st By 
throwing them into the Visual organs from the Solar 
spectrum, apart but simultaneously ; and afterwards 
repeating the experiment with simple light through 
coloured glasses. By thus conducting Yellow light 
into one eye and Blice into the other, we induced a 
Oreen to the Mind ; and again, by varying the 
extreme Colours, we realised and generalogised, 
all the Thirds, Contrasts, and Unities, of Chro- 
matic Science, through Sensible Analogism^ in Lo- 
gical and Physical Coincidence. 

Q5Q. We might expatiate on the extent and 
variety of the practical Analogism, of which our 
applications in other places may serve as illustra- 
tions; but our present design is not to par- 
ticularise, but to distinguish the Analogism as a 



Digitized by 



Google 



309 ANALOOISM. 

universal mode : it should, however, be remarked, 
that the hgfpotheticaiy or practical Analogisnij is a 
mode not so much of reason as of experience, and 
therefore its logical evidence is proportionately less 
perfect and less logically conclusive than that of 
the categoricalf or theoretical Analogismt upon 
which it is founded, and which belongs primarily 
to reason, and concludes necessarily. Between 
these, as extremes, may be inferred an infinite 
analogical series, varying in degrees of evidence, 
and variously dependent on reason, and sense, or 
experience. Nevertheless, the premises of the 
Practical Analogism being unigenial, or the same 
in kind, its conclusions are of great logical force. 
Of the importance of this mode we have abundant 
evidence and illustration in the fifth and sixth 
books of Euclid, which are entirely grounded 
thereon. 

SECTION VII. 
DISCURSIVE ANALOGISM. 

660. Finally, the DISJUNCTIVE OR DIS- 
CURSIVE ANALOGISM which lies between 
the Categorical and Hypothetical modes, argues 
from Parities and Similitudes, which it enunciates 
or asserts, and which are dependent on the original, 
systematic, universal Relations or Analogy of 
things. 



Digitized by 



Google 



DISCURSIVE ANALOGISM. 303 

661. The Discursive or rhetorical process is 
SO common under the phrase of reasoning hy Ana- 
logy^ that it needs not an example ; and it is the 
mode in which the logic of Analogy has been alone 
recognised, and to which it has been almost ex- 
clusively confined ; being a form of ratiocination 
extremely popular, and of vast rhetorical use ; for 
the analogies and similitudes of things, owing to a 
latent sentiment, or consciousness, of universal 
relation, which belongs essentially to the mind, 
become delightful to the imagination, and flattering 
to the judgment which recognises them, when, in 
the same case, the induction would prove laborious, 
and the syllogism dry. 

662. It has, however, been urged, that the dis- 
cursive Analogism illustrates without proving ; but, 
since it depends onginally upon universal relations, 
it proves in proportion to the intimacy of relation 
it discloses in the premises : hence this mode is 
conclusive when the relation of comparison, or 
analogy, lies in nature, and is sophistical, or illus- 
trative only, when such natural relation is wanting. 
It is, accordingly, of greatest force when the sub- 
jects or premises compared are homogeneous, or 
lie near together in the system of things ; and it is 
proportionately of less force, or null, when the 
relations of its subjects lie more remotely, or not 
at all in nature, and authorise the negative maxim, 
omne simile non est idem. The Analogism is, 
therefore, only perfectly conclusive when the coin- 



Digitized by 



Google 



304 ANALOGISM. 

cidence it discloses can be traced to universality in 
things of the same nature. 

663. This mode of Analogism includes the 
Paradigm of the Greeks, with every kind of 
Example^ Comparison^ Simile^ Metaphor^ and 
Parable^ and every species of Metonymy^ Trope^ 
and Figure, each of which is significant through 
analogy of nature or relation ; and the parable was 
the chief form of teaching adopted beautifully and 
eflPectively by the Saviour of mankind, whereby He 
brought eternal things home to the business and 
bosoms of His followers ; and this with the most 
natural and rational propriety, for this mode affords 
a first step to the logical understanding ere it is 
trained and qualified for the strict operations and 
apodictical conclusions of reason. Hence also it 
afforded the logic and ornaments of the poets and 
inventors of fables^ the first teachers of mankind 
through imagination, ere reason had established its 
authority. 

664. With homogeneous and forcible analogy 
did Alfred the Great, in his paraphrase of Boetius, 
answer the question concerning Free-willf origin- 
ally, naturally, and with sublime grandeur, as a 
monarch and a man, on the principle of human and 
divine Dignity; regarding it as contrary to the 
dignity of God to be served by Slaves, and that, 
therefore. He had made man Free. And, guided 
by this sublime paradigm and its analogy, Alfred 
constantly asserted the Liberty of Man, and con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



DISCURSIVE ANAL06ISM. 305 

stituted his government and people Free ; thereby 
confirming his own royal and philosophical great- 
ness, and his claim to the gratitude of mankind.* 

665. The Disjunctive Analogism, neither build- 
ing immediately upon universal relations, as the 
Categorical Analogism does, nor borrowing its pre- 
mises from induction of sense or experience, like 
the Hypothetical Analogism, but arguing from 
similitude, occupies the ground between the two 
latter modes, whence its vast application and ex- 
tent j and hence the reason why it has been re- 
garded as exclusively analogical. Lord Bacon's 
doctrine of conformable instances may serve as an 
illustration of this mode or form of Analogism,t 
which in following a triadic distribution resembles 
the Dialectic of Zeno Eleates, employed by Plato. 

666. The most familiar illustration of the Logi- 
cal Relations of Analogy in general may, perhaps, 
be taken from human pedigree or genealogy, which 
is perfect in father, mother, and oflPspring, is strict 
also in the first remove of uncle, aunt, and cousin, 
in both of which the mean of Logical and Natural 
Relation is apparent, as it is also in a second re- 
move with an added mean, and so on in declining 
series to the remotest remove with multiplied 
media. If we seek the cross or collateral and con- 
ventional relations, analogy and affinity become 
obscure and complex in proportion to remoteness ; 

? See Sharon Turner's " Hist. Anglo-Sax." vol. iii. p. 64. 
t See •* Novum Organum," Part ii. sect. ii. aph. 27. 

X 



Digitized by 



Google 



306 ^ ANALOGISM. 

and although family likeness remains apparent, and 
resemblance extends even to a nation or a people, 
an entire Logical Pedigree requires in all cases a 
long demonstration ; i?hence in remote relations of 
Persons and Things we content ourselves with Re- 
semblances and Similarities in place of Logical 
Proofs and unbroken genealogies, and denote them 
by the rhetorical term Analogy y or likeness. 

667. It is the same in the relations of things 
universally, which are strict and identical in their 
original parents or first principles and early off- 
spring, — abound with Similitudes of Sense and 
Resemblances in their remotest Relations, which 
indicate, only, their genuine intermediate kindred 
and true universal Logical Analogy, through which 
they are connected as a family of families, or 
sciences, of which the pedigrees and parities, when 
truly unfolded, display a Universal System. 

668. In such complication of Natural and Logical 
Relations, it is not astonishing that the understand- 
ing becomes confounded and lost to strict Logical 
Genealogy, the only adequate remedy for which is 
to retrace the System of Knowledge and Science 
from its origin ; tracing individuals into families, 
and families home to the first parent, — or the 
whole through Analogy from its first principle and 
beginning. 

669. It is from conviction of this universal 
Relation and Dependence that we rely on the uni- 
formity of Nature and Providence, and conclude 



Digitized by 



Google 



DISCURSIVE ANAL06ISM. 307 

with confidence that whatever has occurred under 
one order of circumstances will recur in all similar 
cases, and infer from Cause to Effect, and from 
Effect to Cause. It is hereby that men are deter- 
mined in all the ordinary acts of life, and in pre- 
paring themselves for all its events. This Ana- 
logical dependence is the Logical basis of the 
Natural and Experimental sagacity by which they 
are chiefly governed; and although it sometimes 
disappoint expectation, it corrects their judgment, 
of which it is the source, and is of unbounded 
utility. 

670. We judge of things present and past, both 
by Analogy and Inductions of experience, but we 
can have no other judgment of future things than 
entirely through Analogical Inference^ which is 
also the chief instrument for the discovery of un- 
known truths, physical, sensible, and moral. For, 
having discovered identity of Relations in Indi- 
vidual things, we may rise thence to their more 
General Relations, and finally mount synthetically 
to the Categorical Relations of Universal Analogy 
of the whole ; since the Identity of Relation, which 
is Truth in the Individuals, is Truth also in Gene- 
rals and the Universal. Hence the Analogism, 
though principally Analytical, is also of Synthetical 
authority, in coincidence with the Generalogism or 
Induction. 

671. Tycho Brahe, infiuenced by a common 
prejudice, cautioned Kepler against his fanciful 



Digitized by 



Google 



308 ANALOGISM. 

hypotheses, as he called those Harmonic Analogies 
which led to the discovery of the true planetary 
orhits, and verified the Copemican System. Fol- 
lowing those pre-eminent Analogists, Kepler, Co- 
pernicus, and Pythagoras, it was also that the 
greatest of natural philosophers, Newton, adopted 
the above laws of Cause and Effect, and founded 
his sublime Astronomy on the Analogy of the phe- 
nomena of projection and gravitation with the 
Planetary Motions. If, therefore, the phenomena 
of External Nature may be thus satisfactorily ex- 
plained by the remote relations of the Discursive 
Analogism ; how much more capable must the 
intermediate and necessary Relation of the Cate- 
gorical Analogism prove in the interpretation of 
the internal phenomena of the Mind and the entire 
Relations of the Universe.* 

672. But Experiment is for External things, 
the ground a posteriori of Material Science ; and 
is little capable of Intellectual Science, neces- 
sarily Internal and a priori^ — founded on a first 
and given condition, — an irrefragable position or 
hypothesis, which cannot be attained Synthetically 
or by Induction, but only through Correlation or 
Analogy. 

673. The Discursive Analogism^ founded on 
Similitude or Resemblance, is a devious argument 
and concludes by preponderance. Thus, in the 

? See Tatham on Truth, vol. i. p. 163. 



Digitized by 



Google 



DISCURSIVE ANALOGISM. 309 

Sculptures and Architecture of an unknown race 
in ancient Mexico, lately explored and illustrated 
by Messrs. Stephens and Catherwood, there are 
distinct resemblances of like works of two other 
ancient Peoples, the Egyptians and Hindoos, 
and a similarity of ornaments with those of two 
other Peoples respectively connected with the for- 
mer, namely, the Grecian and Chinese, but pre- 
ponderantly with the Hindoos and Chinese; we 
have Reason of Analogy therefore to infer some 
connexion between the ancient races of Hindostan 
and Mexico : and as there was authentic intercourse 
between ancient Egypt and Hindostan, we have 
augmented Analogy and Reason for concluding the 
unity of relation anciently among all these peoples, 
amounting to probability, but neither Induction of 
fact, perfect Syllogism^ nor Categorical Analogism. 
674. Yet the Discursive Analogism draws too 
much on imagination to afford perfect ratiocination, 
or conclusion beyond probability or possibility. If 
we allow, as we must, that the Earth is a Planet, 
the abode of rational beings progressively im- 
proving in knowledge ; other planets may also have 
similar inhabitants of similar, more diversified, 
more advanced, or more eminent powers ; whence, 
by a reverberating Reason, or propagation of Ana- 
logy, although Man have neither the knowledge nor 
power requisite for visiting other planets, it by no 
means follows that the inhabitants of the Earth may 
not be visited hereafter by Beings of super-human 



Digitized by 



Google 



310 ANALOGISM. 

powers from other Heavenly Bodies: nor would 
civilised men be less surprised and alarmed at such 
a visit, than the American Indians were at the 
visitation of Cortes or the visit of Columbus, nor 
even Atheists, if there be such monsters^ unlikely 
to fall down and worship. Yet must we not infer 
the probability, nor hardly admit the possibility of 
such an issue, although we cannot deny this form of 
Analogy. 

675. Of the three modes of Anaiogism, the 
Categorical infers from necessary, real, and iden- 
tical Relations, — the Hypothetical Analogism con- 
cludes from assumed Relations of any Genus, — 
and the Disjunctive or Discursive Analogism^ 
argues from one Category, Genus, Species, or In- 
dividual to another, or others, through remote, 
disjointed, real, or assumed Relations. It is ap- 
parent also, that these modes engage variously the 
different faculties of the Mind, — that the Caie* 
gorical mode depends on the Rational faculty, 
while the Discursive engages the Imagination, either 
literally, metaphorically, or mystically ; whence the 
common reasoning by Analogy frequently misleads 
the judgment: and although it is often extremely 
ingenious, it has, by confounding relations, brought 
discredit on analogical reasoning in general, and 
frustrated the disclosure and introduction of its 
genuine and strictly logical modes into science. 

676. Having thus briefly distinguished the 
primary forms and regulation of the Analogism, 



Digitized by 



Google 



DISCURSIVE ANALOOISM. 31 1 

we might subdivide these as variously as the other 
modes have been by logicians. It is, however, 
highly expedient in the commencement of every 
science and every discipline, to preserve simplicity, 
and, regarding aU arbitrary, remote, irrelative, 
and trivial distinctions, as subversive of science, to 
employ such only as are founded on nature and 
universal analogy : otherwise 

'' T\a3jierce Abridgement 
Hath to it circumstaDtial branches, which 
Distinction should be rich in." — Cymbeline. 

We proceed, in the next place, to a brief analysis 
of the Syllogism, already more than amply detailed 
in the justly celebrated " Analytics" of Aristotle, 
and the commentaries and compilations of other 
logicians. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



PART III. 



MODERN 



AND 



SCHOLASTIC LOGIC, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN 



AND 



SCHIOLASTIC LOGIC. 



CHAPTER I. 

Sect. I. 

INTRODUCTION. 



677- Having, in the precediog part, sketched 
our outline of the Analogism, as the initiate Organ 
of Logici we proceed to give brief analyses of the 
Organs of Aristotle and Bacon as dependent there* 
on, and as the essentials of an entire system, of 
which Logic has been hitherto deficient; whence, 
in a great measure, has arisen the neglect and 
failure of this most fundamental and important of 
all the Disciplines, notwithstanding the zeal and 
tenacity with which it has been maintained in our 
schools, in its primitive form, without prospect of 
advancement, much less of entire renovation or 
completion; whence the Baconian Logic has re* 
mained Extnuscholastic^ while that of Aristotle 



Digitized by 



Google 



316 MODERN AND SCHOLASTIC LOGIC. 

has obtained exclusively the appellation of Sc/w- 
lastic : into which latter we proceed to inquire 
briefly, and to analyse analogically. 

678. Aristotle distributed all Knowledge or 
Philosophy into Physics and Metaphysics, which 
latter has three functions, which he distinguished 
as Practicj Poetic^ and Theoretic^ having three 
objects, Material, Sensible, and Intellectual, and 
three ends, Good, Harmony or Beauty, and Truth. 
The third, or Theoretic, he again distributed, 
according to Analogy, into three Genera, Physic^ 
Mathematics and Theologic* 

679. From the middle or MatJiematic Oenu^, 
Aristotle suspended the Syllogism, or summing, as 
the Logic of Demonstration, but he erred in making 
it universal, to the exclusion of the other methods ; 
whence Bacon attached Induction, or Generalo- 
GiSM, to the Physical OervuSj leaving the Theologic 
or Ethic Oenus^ to which the Analooism is ap- 
propriate, unoccupied, although it is specially fun- 
damental, and a Universal Logic, and consigning 
Theology to Divines.t 

680. Aristotle's Logic t makes Demonstration § 
consist of SyUogism^W Proposition^^ sad. Terms.** 

* Aristotle, ** Metaph.*' lib. vi. cap. 1. 
t Aug. Scient. Table, &c. 

I See Ammonius's '' TreaL on the Categories/' pp. 15-17. 
§ Treated of in his ** Latter Analytics." 

II In his " Prior Analytics.*' 
f In his ^* Interpretations.*' 
•• In his " Categories." 



Digitized by 



Google 



MODERN AND SCHOLASTIC LOGIC. 317 

Its plan is, 1. Objective or Material; and, 2. Sub- 
yecft>?e or Formal. As Material, it includes, 1. Pre- 
dicamentSy or simple Notions ; 2. Propositions^ or 
complex Terms ; and, 3. SyllogismSy or compound 
Propositions. As Formal, it includes, 1. Definition 
for clear Apprehension, Division for clear Distinc- 
tion,and /S^//og7sw for clear Conclusion; and, finally. 
Method to regulate the whole. 

681. Such is also the general scheme of Logic 
which Science has retained to this day, with little 
alteration, or improvement of the Matter and Method 
of Aristotle's Org anon ; wherein he constructed 
a partial whole of the Syllogistic Logic from the 
imperfect use of the instrument by his predeces- 
sors; as they had employed it in Demonstrations 
from the Mathematical School of Pythagoras, who 
established Axioms of Quantity on behalf of the 
Mathematics, and the other prime Genera or Cate- 
gories and Universals, without which there could 
be no Syllogism. Such Genera and Universals are 
derived from Generalogism and Analogism ; and 
as Analogism is the Logic of Universals, de- 
scending to Particulars, and Oeneralogism is the 
Logic of Particulars ascending to Generals, so 
Syllogism^ uniting Particular and Universal by 
means of Genera, is the Logic of Generals or 
Media, and therefore lies between the two other 
Modes. 

682. Thus things of greatest importance, as 



Digitized by 



Google 



318 MODERN AND SCHOLASTIC LOGIC. 

Aristotle has remarked, arise commonly from small 
beginnings: such was the course of Syllogism till 
established fully by himself, and such that of In- 
duction till the time of Bacon ; and that such also 
will be that of Analogism, ere that and Logic 
become established on a solid basis, as an entire 
Whole, we cannot doubt; but it will not be long 
delayed when society and the learned are prepared 
for its reception. 

683. As the triple distribution of the Theoretic 
of Aristotle into Physic^ MathematiCy and Theo- 
logy ^ coincides with the general distribution of the 
Greek Philosophy into Physics^ Logic, and Ethics, 
so are the three Logical Organs conformable to 
the like arrangement ; viz. the Induction to Phy- 
sics, the Syllogism to Mathematics, and the Ana- 
logism to Metaphysics, including Ethics and all 
purely intellectual Philosophy : if, therefore, we 
rank these organs accordingly, the Analogism will 
be of as much more importance than the Induction 
and Syllogism, as Ethics are than Physics and the 
Mathematics; and although last to take its place 
among the logical organs, is every way entitled to 
precedence. 

684. In proceeding to treat of the Syllogism 
our object is not to teach the Syllogistic Logic as a 
distinct science, to which there are already sufficient 
helps, but to analyse and place it on its analogical 
foundation, in connexion with the whole of Logic as 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 319 

the counterpart of Philosophy. Of the mmor parts 
of the Syllogistic Logic we have already treated in 
a preceding part, in suhordination to our general 
plan of Logic; it remains only therefore that we 
treat hriefly of the Syllogism itself. 

685. Our intention, in this outline of the Syllo- 
gistic Organ, being to attain its true estimate, and 
to illustrate its Principles^ without especial re- 
ference to Practical LogiCy to which, nevertheless, 
they are the most essential aids and corrections, we 
need not enter minutely into the technical distinc- 
tions of the Syllogistic Art, but refer the practical 
inquirer to the works of its Great Originator, and 
to the best preparative for its study with which we 
are acquainted, in the '* AHis LogiccB Riulimenta, 
with Illustrative Observations." 



SECTION II. 

SYLLOGISM. 

686. The SYLLOGISM, or middle process of 
Logic, demonstrates hidden or remote relations, by 
a mean or medium common to them as extremes / 
or, in other words, it shews that some particular is 
comprehended in some universal, because it is 
comprehended in some general, or medium, which 
is also comprehended in the same universal; as 
two things related to some third thing must also 



Digitized by 



Google 



320 SYLLOGISM. 

be analogously related to each other : or, quanti- 
tatively, as fractions are contained in any integer 
by the media of the units which compose it. 

687* Accordingly, every perfect syllogism con- 
sists of three members, which logicians distinguish 
by the terms major, minor, and middle, which 
three terms [a, b, c] are interchanged in pairs, 
in the three propositions of every syllogism. 

688. For example, we may conclude syllogisti- 
cally that the great Aristotle was fallible, thus : 

Major — All men [b] are Fallible [a], — Universal extreme, 

Minor — Aristotle [c] was a Man [b], — General medium, 

Consequent — Ariitotle [c] was Fallible [a], — Particular extreme. 

Or, what [b] is, is [a] ; and what [c] is, is [b] ; therefore what [c] is, is [a] 
also ; whence [a, b, c,] are identified, or collected under the same universal. 

689* The predicate of the conclusion, or con- 
sequent [fallible, a], is denominated the major, 
or universal term; the subject of the conclusion 
[Aristotle, c] is the minor or particular term ; 
and the middle^ or general term [man, b], connects 
the major and minor in the consequent, or con- 
clusion. 

690. The major proposition is so called because 
it contains the major term ; and the miner propo- 
sition is so called because it contains the minor 
term. Some ambiguity arises hence, because the 
middle term and the middle proposition are not 
usually coincident : we consider it preferable, 
therefore, to distinguish terms and propositions 
respectively as universaU general^ or particular : 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 321 

more especially so, because any error in the argu- 
ment depends upon the irrelation of these, and 
becomes immediately apparent in reference to them. 

691. The consequent of the above syllogism 
may be concluded of all the particulars and media 
comprehended under its universal proposition, ac- 
cording to the axiom, that whatever is affirmed or 
denied of the genus may be affirmed or denied of 
its species and individuals also. Thus ; 

I All men are fallible , 
Philosophers are men, 
/ Philosophers are fallible^ 

I General /The Peripatetics are philosophers, 

/ [^ The Peripatetics are fallible ^ 
Particular . . . . / Aristotle was a Peripatetic, 
( Aristotle was fallible. 

The above is an example of the parenthetical or 
compound syllogism^ or variously as the prosyllo- 
gtsm, episyUogism^ and sorites^ as the former is of 
the simple syllogism. 

692. The elliptical syUo^m^ or enthymemCf is 
that in which either the universal term or the 
medium is implied, though not expressed: as, for 
example. 

Since all men are fallible, 
Aristotle was fallible. 

There are thus in every syllogism three proposi- 
tions, enunciations or judgments; a universal, a 
general, and a particular, expressed or understood ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



322 STLLOGISM. 

and each of these propositions is in like manner 
constituted of three terms, or conceptions of rela- 
tion, similar to the ahove, and called the Subject^ 
Predicate^ and Copula. For example : 

Subject, — all men — universal ; 
Copula, — are — general; 

Predicate, — fallible — particular: — 

the same of the others also. 

693. That which is true universally is true 
also of the Genera — that which is true genericaUy 
is true also of its Species — that which is true spe- 
cifically is true also of its Individuals. The greater 
in each case is the Major to the Lesser or Minor 
under it, and consequently the Least may be con- 
cluded of the greatest by medium of the Minor. 
Thus, in the Compound Syllogism preceding, uni- 
versally. All men are Fallible, Major ; Generically, 
Philosophers are Men, Major also; Specifically, 
Peripatetics are Philosophers, Minor ; Individually, 
Aristotle, the Peripatetic Philosopher, is Fallible, 
Consequent ; however many Media. 

Syllogism, therefore, cannot properly be called 
Deduction, or taking from, for we do not draw the 
Conclusion from the Major and Minor, but infer it 
through them by a universal Colligation or Sub- 
sumption. Deduction applies in any other sense to 
all the modes. 

694. If we descend the last step of logical ana- 
lysis — that is, to the analysis of words or concep- 
tions which constitute the propositions of which the 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 32«S 

syllogism is constructed^ or, in other words, to the 
definition of terms — we must also disclose their 
particular reference to the general and universal / 
or what (in the language of Plato, Aristotle, and 
the Logicians) is the same thing, we must deter- 
mine their genus and specific difference respectively. 
And, finally, descending to the signification of in- 
dividual Words, these also vary in each as of Uni- 
versal^ Qeneral^ or Particular signification, upon 
which their logical power and value depend. 

695. According to this analysis of the Syllo- 
gism, it is an argument which consists of three 
propositions^ each composed of three words or 
termSf as distributed on the three sides of the three 
inscribed triangles of the following diagram : 




•aiamvi- 



1. Men are FALLIBLE, — universal; 

2. Bacon was a MAN, — general ; 

3. BACON was fallible,— par/tcif/ar. 



Digitized by 



Google 



324 SYLLOGISM. 

And thus all thought, logically analysed, is essen- 
tially triadie. 

696. Hence the syllogism is a compound propo- 
sitionj or judgment, in which the particular is in- 
cluded in the general, and both these together are 
included in the universal ; which accords wijth Aris- 
totle's Dictum de omni et nullOf according to which 
what is predicated of a class universally may be 
predicated also of everything comprehended there- 
in. Or, more technically, whatever is predicated 
of a distributed or universal term, may be pre- 
dicated of all under it. And we have here traced 
the syllogism to its elements, which are terms and 
propositions logically, as we before ascended 
to it from their elements philologically ; the only 
difference here is, that that which was a name or a 
proposition with respect to words, is a term or a 
judgment with regard to thoughts. The proposi- 
tion and the syllogism both denote relation, or 
necessary analogy ; the proposition or judgment 
being a sentence which expresses a simple relation 
between at least two words or terms, as a syllogism 
is the expression of the compound relations among 
terms and propositions, nor can we otherwise infer 
one thing of or from another or others than through 
comparison, i. e. Analogy. 

697- The above is the sole principle of the 
Syllogism ; and to it each of the three Figures and 
their modes, into which syllogisms are distributed, 
are reducible; the variety of the figures depends 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 325 

upon the transposition of the subject, predicate, 
and medium, which are the three essential terms 
of the syllogism, as they are also of the simple 
proposition. 

698. It follows from this analysis of the Syllo- 
gism, and the universal law on which it is founded, 
1, that no Particular inference, or conclusion, can 
be obtained unless there be a General or Generical 
term including it in the Premises ; 2. that no Ge- 
neral conclusion can be inferred truly unless there 
be, in like manner, a Universal Premis ; nor, 3. 
can there be a Universal conclusion unless the 
Premises be entirely Universal ; in which case the 
Syllogism becomes an Analogism ; e. g. 

Of whatever we kuow we are Conscious ; 
Whatever we are Conscious of Exists ; 
Whatever we Know Exists. 

But the Premises may be reciprocally asserted, and 
are therefore Analogical^ and Universal. 

699. AH the rules of Syllogizing, and the whole 
structure of artificial Logic are subject and re- 
ducible to the above law, and an attention to the 
clear relation of Universal, General, and Parti- 
cular or Individual, will render needless all the 
regulation of Distribution of Terms, and other 
complicated machinery with which Practical Logic 
is overlaid; it cannot, therefore, be too often or 
variously repeated and inculcated. 

700. Finally, in every mode and figure of the 
Syllogism there are, expressed or implied, essentially 



Digitized by 



Google 



SS6 STLLOOISM. 

two terms or extremes with a thirds mean, or middle 
term of comparison in eqjialj i.e. analogical^ re- 
lotion to both ; and there can be no syllogistic in- 
ference, or final conclusion, unless one of the 
terms be universal, and ultimately categorical; 
which we have seen has a purely analogical basis. 

701. The simple proposition^ or judgment, is 
also distinguishable into figures and modes, accord- 
ing to the manner of its including the subject in 
the predicate, or of excluding it from the predicate, 
as displayed in most treatises on Logic. On the 
other extreme, the compound syllogism, prosyllo- 
gism, or sorites, might also be similarly distin- 
guished ; and these are the three members of 
discourse. 

702. Hence, the three^^wr^^ and their m^ides 
consist only of the several possible interchanges of 
the three terms and their propositions ; and this is 
common to them all, that the minor and major 
terms, though variously excepted in the premises, 
are posited uniformly in the conclusion : all of 
which is very mechanical, and of greater curiosity 
than use, except in the way of illustration of the 
analogy of Reason, and the exercise of the logical 
faculty. 

703. And this variety of distinctions in propo- 
sitions and syllogisms is of very little either theo- 
retical or practical importance, and resolves wholly 
into the analogical principle of comprehension, sub- 
sumption, or inclusion in the premises, upon which 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 327 

all ratiocination is founded ; for the truth of a pro- 
position, syllogism, or train of reasoning, depends 
upon the subordination of relations in the subject 
and predicate throughout 

704. The principle of comprehension or inclu- 
sion and exclusion^ is the same in effect as the 
Dictum de Omni et NvMOy given as the principle 
of the first Figure, and is that also by extension of 
the other Figures, whence arises the power of re- 
ducing the other figures to the first form of which 
they are only more or less compounded. A correct 
understanding of this principle will afford a suffi- 
cient test for any argument, in which the first in- 
quiry is the real question, distinguished by its 
logical subject or subjects, predicate or predicates, 
and middle term or terms, and will shew whether 
they are duly subsumpted or included, so as to 
afford a cogent and perspicuous conclusion, or the 
want of it. 

705. To perform this syllogistically requires an 
acquaintance with Technical Logic and some exer- 
cise in its discipline, but by a knowledge of this 
principle or rule alone we may form a correct 
judgment of the validity, invalidity, or degree of 
value in every argument, whether it belong to the 
Syllogism, Analogism, or Generalogism. As, how- 
ever, Analogism is the logic principally of thought^ 
and Generalogism is that of things^ so Syllogism is 
the logic principally of words and signs, and is 
therefore dialectical and discursive ; hence its philo- 



Digitized by 



Google 



3S8 SYLLOGISM. 

logical, rhetorical, and grammatical alliances, as the 
middle member of discourse ; and hence, also, its 
mathematical connexion. 

706. Since the syllogism is no further stable 
and conclusive than . are its premises, we may go 
on questioning the premises, and the premises of 
the premises, till we arrive at that which is abso- 
lutely primitive or universal — the because, relation, 
or reason of the whole ; and if such universal basis 
is not to be found for the premises, the conclusion 
falls of course, and the syllogism becomes a sophism. 
Or, to speak as a logician, the fallacy of a syllogism 
is generally in the universal, or major proposition ; 
for if it be either in the minor, or middle propo- 
sition, it is easily detected. 

707. As the Syllogism is a form of Logic be- 
tween the Analogism and Induction, so have these 
modes their intermedia, partaking of each other 
through Analogy, although they have been usually 
regarded as irregular Syllogisms. Such is the 
SoriteSy which subsumpts many Particulars and 
Media under a Universal ; and the Induction itself 
is an endless Sorites. And on .the other hand the 
Enthymeme is a Syllogism of which one of the pre- 
mises is suppressed, the Conclusion being evident 
through necessary relation or Analogism. Thus of 
this Enthymeme^ — a Father is the benefactor of his 
Son ; therefore a Son owes duty to his Father : 
because Duty is due to all Benefactors, which uni- 
versal major premis is suppressed, and the relation 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 329 

l)etween duty and benefit — Father and Son, is 
Necessary and Analogical. And of the Soritesy — 
all Flowers are Beautiful — [the Rose, the Tulip, 
the Jasmine, the Lily, &c. are Flowers], — therefore 
the Rose, &c. [each and all] are beautiful — by 
Induction or Generalogism. 

708. It has been questioned whether every Syl- 
logism is not sophistical, under the class of petitio 
prindpiiy since it takes that for granted in the uni- 
versal which is to be proved in the particular. 
Hence so long as the true universals upon which all 
syllogistic conclusions depend are wanted, will the 
science of syllogism combat with nearly equal force 
in favour of truth or falsehood. To establish these 
is the office of philosophy, and was the aim of Aris- 
totle in his treatise on the " Categories," of which 
we have already shewn the relations and dependence 
in another place; the analytical table of which, 
with our synoptic table, may serve as illustrations of 
the prosyllogism in extended forms. 

709. Syllogisms are not only divided into the 
\^ree figures^ and their many modes j and into per- 
fect Syllogisms, Enthymemes, and Sorites ; they are 
also distinguished as categorical, hypothetical, and 
disjunctive. They are yet more eminently distin- 
guished as affirmative and negative ;t between which 

* Aristolle admits only three figures ; Galen added a fourth, 
which other logicians, again, have disputed. 

t These terms are relative and convertible ; for that which 
affirms implies a negation, and that which denies affirms ; rela* 
Hon is therefore concurrent with affirmation and negation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



330 SYLLOGISM. 

is the relative, which suhdivide into particular and 
universal; to which, for completeness, should he 
added the general : * which three latter are denoted 
by the articles or signs, on&, somSf all. There are 
yet other distinctions ; into all which we need not 
enter, since it is of practical reference only, and 
amply unfolded in the "Organon** of Aristotle, 
and the works of other logicians. 

710. We have thus indicated the general and 
distinct nature of the Syllogism, and rapidly trod- 
den back the synthetical path of the Stagyrite; 
who treats first of Terms^ in his treatise on the 
"Categories" — then of Propositions^ enunciations, 
or judgments, in his " Book of Interpretations" — 
and, thirdly, of Syllogisms^ in his " Analytics,*' to 
which we refer. 

711. Yet the synthetical plan, however neces- 
sary and well suited to the design of Aristotle as a 
practical discipline, is always obscure in point of 
doctrine; and though it may conduct upon solid 
ground, it leads us, notwithstanding, in the dark. 
Analysis, on the contrary, encompasses and en- 

* The terms, particular, general, and universal, have been 
strangely confounded ; Particular (which properly expresses an 
individual part) having been employed to denote also a general 
or comprehending nature ; and the term general (properly sig- 
nifying a united plurality, or that which comprehends several, or 
many particulars or individuals) having been used to express 
<ill'ComprehendingnesSf or universality ; which, again, has been 
employed to express any general unity — a corruption to which 
these terms have been subject, in common with other corre- 
latives. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 331 

lightens its whole subject, and is the true doctrinal 
method. 

712. As universals can alone be proved ana- 
logically (for universal by induction is impractic- 
able, if not impossible, and it cannot be concluded 
syllogistically), and as particulars belong to gene- 
rcUogism or induction, syllogism lies between the 
other two modes in equal dependence upon them ; 
accordingly, the validity of the foregoing syllogisms 
depends upon an ultimate analogism, proving the 
major — that all men are fallible;* and an induc- 
tion, proving the minor — that philosophers are 
men: and if such basis is wanted to either, the 
conclusion falls of course. 

713. The propositions of which the syllogism 
is composed partake of the same relations, depend- 
ing equally upon induction or experience, and 
analogism or reason ; but Aristotle, regarding syl- 
logism and induction as opposites in ratiocination, 
overlooked the analogism as the extreme opposed to 
induction, and syllogism as their mean. See his 
" Prior Analytics." 

714. Now, there are three degrees of convic- 
tion, or mental satisfaction, through, 1. possibility^ 
2. probability^ and, 3. necessity or certainty ; the 

* Men are fallible, inasmuch as they are capable of pro- 
ceeding contrarily to the true reasons or relations of things; 
they would otherwise be infallible. The predicate fallibility 
belongs, therefore, to the universal predicament or category 
relation^ which is proved by analogism. 



Digitized by 



Google 



332 SYLLOGISM. 

first and last of which are extremes without remis- 
sion ; and the second is their mean, of which the 
degrees are indefinite. A thing is possible, or it 
is nothing; and that which we call necessary is 
irrefragably so, or it is null. 

715. The Syllogism, then, as a mode of ratio- 
cination depending on premises which require proof, 
appears, even when most perfect, to fall short of 
necessity or certainty, while it proves, in general, 
beyond mere possibility; its evidence lies, there- 
fore, in the various degrees of probability between 
the extremes of possibility and certainty. 

716. To the foregoing Rules of Illation or 
Logical Conclusion may be added the following, 
which coincide in the same Universal Reason and 
application, although adduced principally in regard 
to the Syllogism. 

(1.) No Term or Signification can be more ex- 
tensive in the Conclusion than in the Premis. 

(2.) Two Things or Propositions compared, which 
agree with a third, agree also with, and may be 
affirmed of each other. 

(3.) Two Things or Propositions, of which one 
agrees, and the other disagrees, with a third, will 
disagree with, and may be denied of, each other. 

(4.) Nothing can be inferred or concluded from 
two Negative Terms, or Propositions. 

(5.) There can be no agreement of things com- 
pared but through Analogy. 

717* Many other rules are to be found in 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 333 

works of Logic, but they are either evident to com- 
mon sense, or resolve into the foregoing, and do but 
burthen attention superfluously. Such especially 
are those for the formation of Syllogisms in figure 
and mode, which, though held of much importance, 
are resolvable into the Rule of Analogy, whereby 
the Particular is contained in the General, and 
both are included in the Universal ; whence the 
Particular inferred in the Conclusion must be con- 
tained in one Premis, and shewn to be so contained 
by the other. And both the Proof and Compu- 
tation of syllogistic Conclusions, as of all Logical 
Illation and Inference, depend simply on being 
contained, included, or not included in the Pre- 
mises. Nothing can render the triflingness, if not 
uselessness, of most of the distinctions, divisions, 
and rules of common Logic more apparent than the 
absurdity of the examples by which they are usually 
illustrated. Such may, however, afford exercise for 
minds that require it. Our object is to investigate 
Principles only. 



SECTION 111. 

718. We have here traced the Syllogism in a 
subjective, or logical view, to the first category. 
Relation ; and Digby has performed the same 
with so much perspicuity in an objective, or philo- 
sophical view, from the correlative category, Ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



334 SYLLOGISM. 

isTENCE or being, which is cognised by Reason as 
relation, that we will subjoin an abstract of his 
doctrine.* 

719. The notion of Being or Existence, is of 
all the most universal, the simplest, and most 
deeply rooted in man ; whence it is evident that 
the conjunction of signification, or terrns, or union 
of apprehension by the means of being, is, in truth, 
an identification of them : for unity, being a nega- 
tion of multiplicity, it follows that what is one is 
the same : and this identification is truly and 
naturally expressed, by saying that the one is the 
other.t 

720. The most complete knowledge we can 
have of anything, is of such propositions as in 
the schools are called identical; as if one should 
say, John is John, or, a man is a man. In these 
we may observe, that evidence of truth arises out 
ofthe plain identification of the extremes that are 

Affirmed of each other. 

721 • This Identification is, in fact, the Prin- 
ciple of Arithmetic, the most strictly logical of the 
sciences: whence, conversely, Logic is intellectual 
computation, a science of Calculation, or Summing 
according to Rules. Thus when, by Addition or 
Multiplication, we assert, that iunce one is two, 
we have but proposed the logical Identity that two 
is two, by a universal affirmation; and when, by 

• Treat. " Body and Soul." Paris, fol. ed. p. 366. 
t Sydenham's "* Plato." Banquet, p. 213, N. 186. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 335 

Substraction or Diyision, we separate these Ex- 
tremes, we have done the same arithmetically and 
logically by Universal Negation. Thus logical 
certainty is a true calculation, of which the Prin- 
ciple is the Analogy, Relation, or Identity here 
denoted. 

722. Now, affirmative propositions do, by their 
form, import an identification of their extremes 
(for they all agree in saying the one is the other, 
or this is that) ; yet they are not all alike in the 
evidence of their identification, for in some it 
shews itself pliainly, without needing help, as in 
all truisms, and such identical sayings we just 
now gave for examples; others require a course, 
or discourse, somewhat further about to prove the 
analogy or identification of their extremes. 

723. Now, the scope of such Discov/rsey or 
Argument, is to compare such propositions to some 
third thing with which each of them apart is iden- 
tified ; since those which agree with the same thing 
must also agree with each other. 

724. When identity between two or more 
things presents itself to our understanding, it 
produces knowledge (or acknowledgment) in the 
mind ; whence it is manifest that the same power, 
or mind, which in a single apprehension, or term, 
is possessed with the entity or unity of it, is that 
very power, or mind, which, applied to an enuncia- 
tion or proposition, knows, acknowledges, deems, 
or understands ; since knowing is nothing else but. 



Digitized by 



Google 



336 SYLLOGISM* 

the recognising or apprehending of manifest identity 
or correlation in the extremes of a proposition. 

725. The natural perfection of the mind or 
understanding is to be fraught with the whole uni- 
verse ; that is, to have the knowledge of all things 
that are (agreeably to the Platonic dogma, that 
the mind knows all things virtually). Truth re- 
siding only in the assents and judgments of the 
mind, wherewith it enriches itself with the rest of 
the world; and these being framed by the dis- 
covering of an identity between two things, which 
is expressed by affirming one of them of the other ; 
it follows, that nothing can be true or false but 
where there is a composition of two extremes, 
made by one's being affirmed of the other ; which 
is done only in enunciations or judgments, while 
single apprehensions assert nothing, and therefore 
settle no knowledge or relation in the mind. 

726. Having shewn how two apprehensions* 
joined together make a judgment, the next thing 
will be to shew how three of those thoughts or 
judgments, well chosen and duly ordered, compose 
the most simple of perfect arguments, which logi- 
cians call a Syllogism ; whose end and effect is to 
gain the knowledge of some relation before hidden 
and unknown. 

* The copula, or apprehension of union and relation, is not 
enumerated here, because it is alike in all propositions. The three 
terms, or apprehensions, are nevertheless essential members of 
every proposition or judgment. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 337 

727. The means whereby this is accompb'shed 
is as follows : by the two first judgments we join 
the extremes of the proposition we desire to know* 
to some third thing, and then, by observing that 
they are both one third thing, and that one can be 
but one, we come to discover that truly one of 
them is the other ; so that the identity which first 
made an identical proposition to be known and 
acknowledged, and afterwards caused the like 
assent to those propositions whose identification 
was immediately apparent, now, by a short circuit, 
and bringing in of a third term, or medium, makes 
the two first — the identification of which was ob- 
scure and hidden while we looked upon the terms 
themselves — appear to be truly but one thing or 
relation. 

728. The variously combining and disposing of 
these three terms in the two first propositions beget 
a variety in the syllogisms that are composed of 
them, which consists in this — that the assumed 
third term, to which the other two are interchange- 
ably joined, is either said of them, or they are said 
of it ; or it is said of one of them, and the other is 
said of it. 

729. Neither is there any deeper mystery than 
this in the three figures so much talked of by logi- 
cians, which being brought into rules to help the 
memory in the ready use of this transposition of 
terms, if we spin our thoughts thereon into ever 



Digitized by 



Google 



338 SYLLOGISM. 

SO fine threads, and thereof weave too intricate 
webs, without reflecting on the solid ground and 
relations within ourselves whereon these rules are 
built, we may spend our time in trivial and useless 
subtilties, and at length confound and misapply 
our natural reason with a multitude of precepts 
drawn from artificial logic. 

730. Under this primary threefold variety is 
another of greater extent, growing out of the va- 
rious combinations of the three terms, as they are 
qualified by affirmation or negation, and by uni^ 
versality or particularity ; for that unity which the 
two terms, whose identification is inquired after, 
must have by being joined with the third, becomes 
much varied by such applications. This affirm- 
ation and negation of Syllogisms resolves into the 
maxim mentioned by Cicero, according to whom 
the ancient logicians established ^* that in all pro- 
positions wherein Yes or No is required, one of 
them must be true,"* which Democritus attempted 
stupidly to answer, by denying the necessity of these 
terms. 

731. From hence arises that multitude of kinds 
of syllogisms which logicians call modes; all of which 
we have thus particularly expressed, that we may 
observe how this great variety depends upon the 
sole principle of identity and entity ; or, to express 
the same thing in other words, upon universal 

• " Nat. Deo," I. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 339 

relation and existence ; for all logic depends, as we 
have shewn, subjectively upon the prime categor)' 
relation^ and objectively upon that of existence. 



SECTION IV. 

732. As Analogism is the form of ratiocination 
principally applicable to the intellectual sciences 
and universals; as the generalogism is, in like 
manner, to the material sciences and particulars; 
80 is syllogism the form principally applicable to 
the Mathematics and the sensible sciences, and 
partakes of their intermediate relation. The first 
of these forms belongs to the category of relation ; 
the second, to that of quality ; and the last, to that 
of quantity : and since quantity and quality are 
relations, analogism comprehends syllogism and 
generalogism fundamentally. 

733. Syllogism is not, however, the sole mode 
or form of quantitative and mathematical reasoning, 
but only its principal organ, since we find examples 
of the other modes therein ; accordingly, the first 
principles of all the pure mathematical sciences are 
proved analogically, as are also harmonics and pro- 
portionals. Generalogism is also of frequent occur- 
rence in mathematical questions, or the two latter 
modes may be compounded. Nor do we need any 
example to prove that the syllogism does not be- 
long exclusively to the mathematics, but extends to 



Digitized by 



Google 



340 SYLf-OGIBM. 

all intellectual and material subjects ; in . which 
respect it coincides with the other modes. 

734. Some, indeed, found Logic altogether upon 
the mathematics, and call it the science of ratio, 
&c. ; but in truth the mathematical disciplines draw 
their accuracy, and are deducible rather from ratio, 
or reason, and an accurate logic, applied to the 
homogeneous relations of quantity. 

735. The mathematician defines his terms — 
establishes universal axioms and postulates (which 
are the categories of the mathematician) — con- 
structs theorems and problems, or theoretical and 
practical propositions — and finally demonstrates 
sylhgistically ; all of which is exactly according to 
the scholastic or Aristotelian logic. 

736. The clear light and truth of mathematical 
reasoning depends upon the homogeneity of its 
matter and the correctness of its premises; and 
other sciences are capable of the same precision, 
in proportion as they are divested of the hetero- 
geneous ; while the mathematics themselves lose 
their cogency when applied to subjects unconnected 
with, or remote from, the category of Quantity^ to 
which they belong. Barrow has demonstrated this 
affinity of logic and the mathesis with a masterly 
mind, and he has been followed therein by Tschim- 
hausen and Wolfius in their logical works. 

737. The want of perspicuity in subjects of 
argument is extremely increased by the equivocal- 
ness of words or terms, whereby they are taken in 



Digitized by 



Google 



SYLLOGISM. 341 

different senses in the various members of a ratio- 
cination ; so that there arises a real discordance 
with a seeming agreement between the premises 
and the conclusion, of which men either take ad- 
vantage designedly, or are thereby betrayed into 
sophisms. 

738. It has been shewn that the Syllogism is a 
mode and process intermediate to, and dependent 
on, Analogism and Generalogism as extremes ; and 
that the Analogism is the mode of intellectual and 
ethical science, as the Generalogism, or induction, 
is of material and physical science, to which the 
sensible or esthetical science is intermediate; it 
may, therefore, be asked, if syllogism is the mode 
of esthetical science ? 

739. We reply, that as induction or generalo- 
gism supplies the evidence and demonstration of 
physical and material things, and analogism does 
the same of ethical and intellectual things, accord- 
ing to our analogy ( the evidence and demonstra- 
tion of esthetical things are sensible^ and that in 
matters peculiar to sense, sensation must ultimately 
determine. 

740. Thus, colours admit only of ocular demon- 
stration : the relations of sounds require auricular 
demonstration ; and, in all matters of sense, feeling 
must demonstrate and determine, according to its 
own laws and relations. There is hence a Logic of 
sense or esthesis^ which has its own universal 
and specific organs, laws, and regulations. Syl- 



Digitized by 



Google 



342 SYLLOGISM. 

logism is not, therefore, appropriate peculiarly to 
esthetical or sensible demonstration, but is a middle 
mode, uniting the logical extremes of analogism 
and generalogism, or the universal and particular, 
and is thence peculiar to no department of science ; 
whence Aristotle appears justly to have regarded it 
as an exclusive and universal mode. 



Digitized by 



Google 



GENERALOGISM, OR INDUCTION. 343 



CHAPTER II. 

GENERALOGISM, OR INDUCTION. 

Sect. I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

741. It has happened, naturally, in the various 
progress of knowledge, that philosophy has taken 
the lead, and that the sister science of logic has 
generally received little countenance from philo* 
sophers, while it has heen scorned by the rest of 
mankind. Not, indeed, that it could be altogether 
dispensed with by either; but, being used as an 
instrument, it has not been valued for itself; or, 
being austere and erroneous, it has lain in dis- 
repute : while philosophy, unsupported by a correct 
logic, or misled by a false mode, has run into error 
and confusion. 

742. Among the many circumstances and ob- 
jections which have arrested the progress of logic, 
may be enumerated its apparent unprofitableness, 
since it supplies little positive knowledge — that it 
may be regarded as needless, since reasoning is a 
thing which lies so close to the nature of man that 



Digitized by 



Google 



844 GENERALOGISM, OR 

he seems to possess it as a faculty without art — 
that it is not to be trusted, because it has been 
more employed to confound and fetter than to 
enlighten and free the understanding — more for the 
purposes of falsehood than of truth; — and, above 
all, that its difficulties as a science, its few honours, 
and its many failures, have deterred adventurers : 
so that, for every single system of logic promul- 
gated, the world has received a hundred in philo- 
sophy. Nevertheless, the improvers of logic are 
among the greatest benefactors of mankind ; since, 
by rendering men more reasonable, they render 
them more able, just, and happy. 

743. Without logical regulation, men are, during 
one-half of their lives, slaves to their passions, and 
during the other half to their prejudices, mistaking 
license for liberty, or subjection for law j from 
which obliquities of youth and age reason alone 
can release them. Hence the man who is subju- 
gated by his senses cannot be much better than a 
beast, nor he who is governed by his prejudices 
become much superior to a fool — alas! for him 
who is enslaved bv both. 

744. Men have deemed it necessary to the due 
exercise of their inferior faculties to educate or cul- 
tivate them ; but, by a strange anomaly, they have 
come even to despise Logic, the tutor and trainer 
of reason, and put the self-sufficiency of the faculty 
in its place. The whole mistake does not, how- 
ever, lie with reason, but partly with the imper- 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 345 

feetioD of Logic, exemplified as it has been in 
treatises better qualified to entangle than to release 
reason, rendering it doubly incumbent on Logicians 
to repair or reproduce the instruments of a sound 
Logic. 

745. Those who assert the sufficiency of Na^ 
tural Logic, know also that men can walk and leap 
naturally, although not without practice ; but they 
cannot march as soldiers, nor dance artificially, nor 
anyhow move gracefully or orderly in community, 
without regulation and discipline : and so it is, in 
precise analogy, with the use, practice, and disci- 
pline of natural and artificial reasoning in respect to 
Science and Art; whence the difierence between 
a disciplined army or rational assembly, and a mob 
or a rout — or that between skilful sword and rifle- 
men, and combatants with sticks and stones, is not 
greater than that between the untaught reasoner 
and the well-qualified logician. There are, how- 
ever, vicious extremes in all things ; and in Logic 
he who totally disregards its art and discipline, and 
he who uses it only for parade and triumph, are 
equally in mistake and error ; and so it is through- 
out science. 

746. Although logic can neither furnish a man 
with faculties nor alone store the mind with infor- 
mation, it gives power and value by regulation to 
both, and is the touchstone of science and truth ; 
nor is a valuable instrument to be rejected because 
it may have been unworthily or mischievously 



Digitized by 



Google 



346 GENERALOGISM, OR 

employed. And if logic, for these reasons, has of 
all sciences been the least cultivated and the most 
abused, it is, nevertheless, of the first importance, 
and the more calls for support, since the fidelity of 
inference, the force of conviction, and the legiti- 
macy of every conclusion, depend upon an accu- 
rate logic: it is, therefore, indispensable, not 
only throughout all science, but in all the great 
afiairs of life. Nor ought the chief of all disci- 
plineSy and that which lies at the root of all 
intellectual culture, to be deemed itself unworthy 
of cultivation. 

747* It must be admitted, nevertheless, that 
literature, without excepting even the great works 
of Aristotle and Bacon, has not hitherto produced a 
work deserving the title of a universal logic, since 
Syllogism is, for the most part, strictly conclusive 
only in the homogeneous relations of mathematical 
quantity, and fails almost entirely, or altogether, in 
physics and ethics ; while the logic of induction, 
or Oeneralogisnij however useful in natural philo- 
sophy and the common affairs of life, or however 
necessary in judicial investigations, is unfruitful in 
pure ethics and the mathematics. 

748. It is at the bar, and in the senate, that 
this latter form of argument has been chiefly and 
necessarily resorted to, owing to the very hetero- 
geneous nature of judicial evidence and affairs of 
state; but it was considered as too loose and in- 
conclusive for the stricter purposes of science till 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 347 

Bacon, influenced by the bent and practice of his 
profession, the habit of which he had carried with 
hito into retirement, judiciously, and with discrimi- 
nate sagacity, introduced the logic of the courts 
into physics, hoping thereby to build up the whole 
of philosophy, physiologically, upon the legal ground 
of a solid universal induction. 

749. To Induction, accordingly, we are in- 
debted for an important reform in the study of 
Nature or Physics, and for the means of adding 
greatly to the natural knowledge, numbers, and 
corporeal comforts of mankind : it has, notwith- 
standing, been either useless or injurious in morals, 
wherein induction is of no theoretical, and of little 
other practical use, than to teach us how to coun- 
teract the fraud of others, and become ourselves 
expediently honest ; while by placing conviction on 
experience, and multiplying objects of power, plea- 
sure, and contention, it loosens the bonds of society, 
and robs man of reliance on religion. 

750. And although Induction brought reform 
into Physics, it did little for universal Philosophy, 
and as little toward universal Logic. The judicial 
bent of Lord Bacon's mind, and his habits, were 
unfavourable to an entire logical system by giving 
his judgment a bias from the uniform relations 
and concurrent testimony of nature, to the hetero- 
geneous, diverse, and adverse evidence of men at 
variance with genuine universal logic, and adapted 
to specialise it as a science, and to found convic- 



Digitized by 



Google 



348 GENERALOGISM, OR 

tion on loose circumstances, rather than on strict 
logical consequence ; and although induction has 
thus succeeded in physics and particulars, it has, 
from want of generic principles, effected nothing in 
suhjects of taste or Esthetics, and has failed alto- 
gether in Ethics ; except in the practical judgments 
in law and legal equity, by skilfully unfolding 
the disguise in which cases are clothed with cir- 
cumstances, a skill more dependent on experience 
than reason. In fact, therefore, the remark made 
by the great Harvey, who was Bacon's physician, 
''that he wrote philosophy like a lord chan- 
cellor,"* may be extended also to his logic. Yet 
Dr. Willis has justly observed, that "had Bacon 
written his 'Novum Organum' from Harvey's 
work as a text, he would scarcely have expressed 
himself otherwise than he has done;'*t nor can a 
better example of Bacon's inductive process be 
cited than that of Harvey on the motion of the 
heart and blood in animals : nevertheless Harvey 
did not confine his logic to induction, but em- 
ployed the Analogism with admirable taste and 
skill in his more abstruse inquiries. 

751. Thus, while modem philosophers, by the 
aid and example of the great Verulam, have cor- 
rected the errors by which the ancients founded 
physics upon a basis entirely speculative, and have 
thereby wrought a great and obvious reform in 

* Willis's ** Life and Works of Harvey/' p. 83. 
t Id. p. 40. 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 349 

every department of natural philosophy, they have 
themselves erred equally, and with an influence 
infinitely more mischievous, hy consigning moral 
and intellectual science to induction ; so that, 
should a check not he put to its course, there is 
danger that empiricism may usurp the dominion of 
mind. 

752. This impulse of induction was, undoubt- 
edly, determined by the abuse of the syllogistic 
process during the middle ages, and the absurd 
contentions of polemics, properly enough termed 
wrangling, in which the strength of argument was 
made to consist in resistance of evidence and a 
fruitless logomachy ; and also by the vain attempts 
of philosophers to establish the speculative, as well 
as the experimental sciences, upon syllogism, the 
force of which lies principally in words and a 
connexion with philological science. 

753. Yet has the logic of induction, coupled 
with a tasteless rhetoric, been hardly less abused 
in the courts of law, and in politics, than was that 
of the syllogism in the schools ; in both of which 
natural reason has been subjected to artifices more 
successfully employed in defending falsehood than 
in disclosing truth. 

754. It is apparent, therefore, that in the most 
important concerns of moral and intellectual science, 
neither of the established organs suffice, and that 
they leave man without an authority for his judg- 
ment therein, or a rational guide for his conscience; 



Digitized by 



Google 



350 GENERALOGISM, OR 

whence the lamentahle uncertainty and discordance 
which prevail in religion, morals, and metaphy- 
sics : upon which, perhaps, depends the too evident 
neglect of intellectual philosophy, and moral, politi- 
cal, and religious duty, notwithstanding our high 
state of civilisation, and advancement in the phy- 
sical sciences and arts. The moral necessity of a 
true universal Logic will not, therefore, be dis- 
puted, the more especially since there is a third 
organ peculiarly suited to moral science, the basis 
of all true ratiocination, and hitherto untried by 
logicians. 

755. To raise logic upon its basis by the in- 
strumentality of this third organ, is the principal 
design of the present outline, however insufficient 
it may prove, or however little attention it is likely 
to receive, while literary taste lies in an opposite 
direction. But since fashion revolves with seasons, 
the time approaches in which this subject, and the 
philosophy connected therewith, will recover popu- 
larity. We do not hesitate, therefore, to claim for 
this outline the attention of those who do not mea- 
sure by magnitude alone, nor estimate that by its 
fashion or finish only, the true value of which is 
intrinsic. 

756. The principal mistake of logicians appears 
to have been that of leading us into the particulars 
and labyrinths of logic before they had mastered 
the general plan, or universal ground of the science. 
Aristotle, the father of logic, whose "Organon" is 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 351 

undoubtedly one of the greatest efforts of human 
intellect, is not free from this error. His genius 
and subtilty are unquestionable ; but his readers 
require the powers and acuteness of the master to 
penetrate the mighty maze of thought into which 
his developcments conduct, without having clearly 
demonstrated their foundation. Nor are we aware 
that any near approach has been made toward so 
desirable an end by either or all of the twelve 
thousand Commentaries which Patricius computes 
to have been written upon that work at the close 
of the sixteenth century — a fact alone sufficient to 
prove its insufficiency^ no less than the interest and 
importance of the question. 

757. Bacon, too, following his great prototype, 
in his "Novum Organum,** has led us into intri- 
cacies without having well established the ground- 
work of his method. It has proved too often an 
impediment to the progress of science, when ex- 
tensive works have been established by eminent 
men, prematurely, upon partial and imperfect 
foundations ; for such have been made standards 
to all future accomplishments, to question the au- 
thority of which, or to seek science upon other 
ground, has been stigmatised as unpardonable 
heresy: nor has it happened in such cases, till 
error has propagated itself into absurdity, that 
reforms have been accepted ; and such has been 
the impendent feite of Logic. 

758. Seduced by the example of Aristotle, 



Digitized by 



Google 



35Q GENERALOGISM, OR 

Bacon ran his Logic into divisions and distinc- 
tions as intricate and numerous as those of the 
great *' Organon," but his distribution was not so 
complete and exhaustive as that of the Stagjrite. 
The simplest forms and regulations are, however, of 
most importance in Logic for understanding and 
practice, and the diffusion and complication of 
cases can only be of puerile use for exercise and 
discipline ; for logic being of boundless grasp and 
diversity, is especially obnoxious to confusion. 

7^9* Bacon having treated of Induction in his 
" Novum Organum,** independently of the syllo- 
gistic method, may have led to the opinion that he 
opposed these modes with intention to supplant the 
latter, and that he did not bring Induction in aid 
of the common logic. Nevertheless, his design 
appears, even from his title, to have been princi- 
pally to introduce a new hand or instrument, which 
he meant, had he lived, to finish and attach to the 
body of Logic, whence the works of these great 
men are properly to be regarded as parts of a 
whole. 

760. Plato, the master of Aristotle, employed 
the Logic of Induction, morally and metaphysically, 
on behalf of intellectual images, — iJga/, or ideas — 
as Bacon employed the same instrument on behalf 
oi physical forms ; and although neither of these 
philosophers succeeded in establishing either their 
ideas or forms, which have nearly the same signi- 
fication, both representing intellectual objects, yet 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 353 

has the Logic of Induction proved infinitely more 
efficient from the hand of Bacon in Physics, than 
from that of Plato in Metaphysics, because it is the 
irvie physical Organ. 

761. Aristotle, who saw this insufficiency of 
Plato's Dialectic, attempted to remedy it for all 
science by an instrument of his own, and substi- 
tuted his Syllogistic Logic as a universal Organ, 
but which is, in strictness of reference, unsuited 

•both to Physics and Metaphysics, and properly 
belongs to the Mathematical Disciplines wherein it 
originated. Nor did Ramus succeed any better in 
his attempt to connect the Dialectic of Plato with 
the Logic of Aristotle. 

762. Attempts have been made to extend the 
Forms of Bacon, and to restore the Ideas of Plato, 
as keys to intellectual knowledge, but without suc- 
cess ; and Logic is still deficient of an appropriate 
intellectual Organ, since the many modem attempts 
to found moral and metaphysical Sciences and Dis- 
ciplines on Induction have also failed. 

763. Yet cannot Logic, whatever its failures or 
misappliances, be dispensed with, nor cease to in- 
fluence mankind, for reasoning is as natural to the 
mind as exercise is to the body ; and since thought 
governs action, by some kind of logic must the 
practices of men be ever prompted ; and as philo- 
sophy is governed by the prevailing mode of 
thought, and the SyUogisUc art forged fetters for 
the mind, while the Inductive Logic that still pre- 

A A 



Digitized by 



Google 



354 GENERALOGISM, OR 

vails has turned the mind downwards, and freed it 
even to licentiousness, we may reasonably expect a 
beneficial change if it should be hereafter in the 
power of another organ to give a new direction and 
regulation to the mind. 

764. Every art and science requires adaptation 
to the state and progress of the human mind, and 
to this we owe the changes of logic, both antient 
and modem ; and although precedence in Syllo* 
gistic Logic must be conceded to Aristotle, and 
that of the Generalogical or Inductive Logic to 
Bacon, for by them they were distinctly established ; 
yet the first borrowed Syllogism from the Rhetori- 
cians and Mathematicians, and the inductive pro- 
cess was not exclusively the discovery of the latter ; 
his ancestor. Friar Bacon, is even supposed to have 
laid the foundation of his attempt in his '^ OpiLS 
Majus!^^ Socrates, however, according to his dis- 
ciple, Plato, whose "Dialogues** afford still the 
best examples of the Generalogical Process, though 
misapplied, appears to have been the first and 
greatest master of the mode, nor was it unknown 
or unnoticed by Aristotle; but the Induction of 
Bacon differed from that of Socrates, and chiefly in 
this, that Bacon adapted it to the discovery of 
Physical truths, and Socrates applied it to the 
confutation of Moral errors. 

765. But it detracts nothing from the reputa* 
tion of Bacon and Aristotle to affirm that neither 

? Sec Hallam's «* Hist, of the Mid. Ages." 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 355 

the one was the discoverer of Induction, nor the 
other of Syllogism, hoth of which belong to the 
Mind ; for nothing True is New, but Eternal, and 
to this imputation all inventors are obnoxious. And 
to the great Verulam was reserved that application 
of Induction which has been so. effective in the 
Physical Sciences, and of such practical advantages 
in the utilities of life, that the epoch of Logic and 
Philosophy, as modem, will be assigned to him and 
his time by true historians. 

766. Bacon was, perhaps, led to adopt this mode 
as much by his judicial habits, in which Induction, 
as the Logic of Legal Evidence and Circumstances, 
is indispensable, as he was by the bent of his 
genius j and although it is known that he left his 
great work, the ^^ Novum Organvm^^ unfinished, 
and very incomplete, we are not aware of any ade- 
quate attempt to perfect the Logic of Generalogism 
since his time. The Abbe Jurain has, however, 
treated on this branch of Logic, in a small volume, 
well worthy of attention, entitled, " La Logique 
dSgag6 de la Dialectique^^ sect. i. c. 2 ; and Dr. 
Shaw has thrown out valuable hints for its im- 
provement in his edition of the ^^ Novum Or- 
ganumy Dr. Todd, Professor Whewell, and Mr. 
Mill, have more recently contributed treatises on 
the subject. 

767. Syllogism confirms only Single Proposi- 
tions, and carries them down to Individuality^ but 
it neither bears out nor establishes any General 



Digitized by 



Google 



356 GETNERALOGISM, OR 

doctrine, much less the Universal. Hence the 
Aristotelian Logic hroke up and frittered every 
suhject of human science into trivial distinctions 
and Individualities. In remedying this, the Ba- 
conian Logic has done enough to shew clearly that 
the progress of Philosophy is dependent on and 
coincident with that of Logic, and the Logic of 
Induction, which is Oenerahgical, aims at carrying 
up Individuals to Species, and Species to Oenera, 
although it accomplishes these empirically and im- 
perfectly. 

768. But for the complete progress of human 
knowledge and attainments a Universal Organ is 
still necessary, and the only other is Analogism, 
which developes the mind universally. And if such 
organ has not yet found a place in Logical Science, 
it may have been from the narrowness and vagueness 
of philosophic conception embracing no complete 
Universality, and few correlative lofty Generalities, 
or from the infinitude of Reason and diversity of 
its methods and objects ; but more than all from 
the arbitrary looseness and range of thought 
throughout the universe, whereby Imagination 
usurps the dominion of Reason and Philosophy, to 
which all Logic is accountable. 

769. Evidence is the matter of Logic, and of 
logical evidence there are two distinct kinds, — the 
evidence of Reason and Understanding, which is 
a priorii and the evidence of Sense and Experience, 
which is a posteriori^ which, although they are 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 3J7 

coDCurrent, are distinct and unconfounded, so that, 
in their proper elements, the one cannot interfere or 
be urged against the other, and these give distinc- 
tion to the two great parts of the logical system, — • 
the Philological with regard to Signs and the 
Senses, — and the Noological with regard to Reason 
and the Understanding, to which latter the modes 
of Logic have been mostly confined. To these may 
be added the indirect evidence of Testimony in both 
respects. 

770. The Logic of Reason being dependent on 
perfect relations is certain or conclusive, and deter- 
mines perfectly ; the Logic of Experience being 
dependent on affections which vaiy with the or- 
gans of Sense, is uncertain or Indicative; but as 
they coincide and concur in general. Experience is 
amenable to Reason, as human testimony is also 
to both Reason and Experience. 

77 !• The forms of Logic are Organs^ which 
are each applicable to the various kinds of matter 
or Evidence, so that we may Syllogise^ Generalo- 
giscj or Anahgise concerning either the Evidence 
of Experience or of Reason, or of that which is 
composed of both, viz. the Mathematical. 

772. Yet as the Evidence of Sense is that of 
Individuals and Particulars in relation, the Form of 
Logic best adapted thereto is that which investi- 
gates particulars, and such is the Oeneralogism or 
the Inductive form ; and the Evidence of Reason 
is that of Universals, to which the Analogical Form 



Digitized by 



Google 



358 GENERALOGISM, OR 

is appropriate, and its investigations are those of 
Universal Relations ; while the Evidence composed 
of Reason and Sense, a priori and a posteriori^ as 
is the Mathematical, has an appropriate organ of 
investigation and determination in the SyUogism, 
which identifies Particulars with Universals, and is 
Rational demonstration through General media. 

77s. The application of the latter Form, or 
the Syllogistic Organ, to the investigation of either 
Universal, or Individual matters, argues illegi- 
timately according to Evidence, and afibrds no 
certain conviction or conclusion. "Yet," says 
Harvey, " some weak and inexperienced persons 
vainly seek by Dialectics, and far-fetched argu- 
ments, either to upset or establish things that are 
only to be founded on anatomical Demonstration, 
and believed on the Evidence of the Senses. He 
truly desires to be informed of the question in 
hand, and whether the facts alleged be sensible, 
visible, or not, must be held bound either to look for 
himself, or to take on trust the conclusions to which 
they have come who have looked ; and indeed there 
is no higher method of attaining to assurance and 
certainty. By what reasoning should we give the 
blind from birth to know that the sun was luminous ? 
And so it is with the circulation of the blood, 
which the world has now had before it for so many 
years, illustrated by proofs cognisable by the senses^ 
and confirmed by various experiments.*' • 
? Dr. Willis's ** Harvey," p. 130. 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 359 

77^* There are also, in a philosophical respect, 
three kinds of Logical Evidence : 1. In reference 
to the External, there are Facts and Existences; 
2. In reference to the Internal, there are Reasons 
and Convictions ; and, 3. In reference to the Me- 
dial, there are Sensations and Feelings : and these 
are conformable with the three modes of Logic, and 
when perfect are all indisputable ; for of Facts and 
Sensations there can be no question of Reason, and 
against perfect Reasons there is no Fact or Sensa- 
tion ; nor, finally, has Sense any right to dispute 
either pure Reason, or Fact. 

775. All Proof or Evidence is ultimately Intel- 
lectual, and the difference in its distinctions, as 
Moral, Logical, and Physical, consists in their 
sources, the last of these being from Existence 
through Experience, the first from Relation through 
Consciousness, and the intermediate or logical 
proof is from the Understanding through Cognition 
or Thought. Now, as all Cognition is, we have 
seen, a Unifying Process, varying in the production 
of Particular, General, or Universal Unities, the 
proof of anything consists in Including or bringing 
it under some General or Universal, and this rule 
holds in the Oeneralogism as in each of the previous 
processes. 

776. Physical Facts are reducible to Mechanical 
Ratios, as these are reducible to Metaphysical or 
Logical Reasons } but it does not follow that all 
these are to be either necessarily or expediently 



Digitized by 



Google — 



860 GENERALOGISM, OR 

subjected to mathematical formulsB, or determined 
by common sense, although each is of sufficient 
reason, on its own ground, the base of the first 
being Material, that of the second Sensible, and 
that of the third Intellectual; whence it follows 
that Facts and Ratios are Subjects of Reason, and 
not Legislators to Reason, and that each has a 
distinctly appropriate Logic — the first belonging 
to Induction, or Indication by Instances in general 
concurrence. 

777. All confidence in the general inferences of 
Induction is founded on the uniformity whereby 
Effects are invariable as their Causes, and both 
conformable to an Eternal, Universal Analogy, of 
which none, however ignorant, doubt. Hence all 
mankind are determined thereby in all their 
acts and affairs, even to a secondary reliance of 
men on men and things, however arbitrary and 
conventional, under similarity of circumstances, 
altogether being based on an invariable original 
analogy. 

778. Some of the finest illustrations and ex^ 
amples of this Generalising Logic are those induc- 
tions upon which the Tables of Annuities and 
Insurances, &c., are constructed, continually im- 
proved, and never perfected, which consist in an 
equal mixture of Experience and Reasoning. 

Such also are those on which the whole Doctrine 
of Chances, as it is called, is founded; not only 
employed by gamblers, but of great use and abuse 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 361 

in the commonest affairs of life, as we have seen in 
the various public speculations, or bubbles, which 
have either succeeded beyond Induction, or failed 
from its insufficiency ; and it descends to the private 
undertakings and commerce of life, all of which are 
made upon Instances, Indications, and Inductions, 
well or iU computed, of profit and loss, and the 
advantages and disadvantages in which false gene- 
ralisations and balances of reasons so frequently 
betray the adventurers, as no appeal to gazettes need 
enforce, widely demonstrating the importance of 
correct Logic throughout the judgments and affairs 
of men. 

779- The previous remark respecting our Ana- 
lysis of the Syllogistic Logic may equally well apply 
to the following outline of the Generalogical Logic, 
our design therein being not to teach it fully as a 
Method of Science, but to illustrate and establish 
its Logical and Analogical relation and foundation, 
and to expand it to its entire boundary, while con- 
fining it to its legitimate function, and subor- 
dinating it to a systematic whole ; still referring the 
Logician to the fountain of inductive science in the 
^^ Novum Organum^ of Bacon, as we have done 
for that of the Syllogism to the •• Organon'' of 
Aristotle. 



Digitized by 



Google 



362 GENERALOGISMy OR 



SECTION IL 
INDUCTION. 

780. The last of the three modes, organs, or 
forms of ratiocination^ is the Generalogism or 
Induction, which is a colligation or generalising 
process from particulars, and is the logic of instances 
and individuals ; and it argues synthetically from 
the particular, or partial relations, to the genera, 
or general relations of things : it is, therefore, the 
extreme mode of logical science opposed to the 
Analogism, which argues analytically from univer- 
sal, entire, or perfect relations, to species and parti^ 
cular relations. We have just before shewn that 
the syUogism lies between them, as a middle mode. 

781. The simple generalogism argues from a 
single instance, or individual, to a particular, a 
general^ or a universal. For example: 

Instance . . . CromwelVa usurpation succeeded. 



Particular 

General 

Universal 



Inferences 



Napoleon* 8 usurpation will succeed. 
Other usurpations will succeed. 
All usurpations will succeed. 



And these are Induction, or inference from Ex- 
amples, Similitude, Indication, or Instances, i.e. 
Analogy. 

782. Arguing fi'om a particular is precisely the 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 363 

weakest of all legitimate arguments, not at all 
allowable in the other modes, but very common in 
colloquial practice, though rather rhetorical than 
logical, since its evidence does not amount to pro- 
bability, but demonstrates possibility only. It is 
strengthened in proportion as we increase or add to 
the number of its analogous instances or examples, 
as it is, also, by extending its relations; and it 
then becomes a compound generalogism, or aggre- 
gate induction, the strength of which lies, also, in 
the extent and number of its related instances, 
and the paucity of its opposite or negating in- 
duction. 

783. The positive or affirmative logical prin- 
ciple of induction founded on the uniform rela- 
tions of nature is, that whatever holds for true 
in any and many instances^ holds also for true in 
every and all Similar instances^ and the negative 
or exceptional principle is that of Dissimilarity of 
instances ; so that, in fact, the induction is but an 
assertion or ascertaining of analogy between its 
members ; and if the case should involve both these 
positive and negative principles, the determination 
of such analogy will be according to the prepon^ 
derance of agreement or disagreement of either the 
affirmative or negative instances. And these prin- 
ciples are in accordance with those of the syllogism, 
De Omni et de NuUo^ which we have shewn also 
to be rules of Analogy. 

784. God is real, but with man all other reality 



Digitized by 



Google 



364 GENERALOGISM, OR 

is reality of relation only, t. e. of Analog^/ : hence 
all logical demonstration terminates in reality of 
relation, i.e. Analogy, and both are dependent on 
Universality of relation or unity. The General 
relations of nature are but the included parts of 
this Universality^ and in demonstrating them from 
the partial and particular realities of nature, 
through Inductions, we do but disclose this Ana^ 
logy ; as we establish also general rules. 

785. In every Induction, unless there be a real 
Relation or Analogy throughout its members, there 
can be no inference even of probability, much less 
of certainty, yet it is as common as it is fallacious 
to build arguments on mere mental associations of 
things, ideas, or even of prejudices, and to regard 
them as effects of causes, although, if such asso* 
ciations were real relations, they would amount only 
to the induction of a Particular. 

786. Thus men superstitiously infer good or ill 
fortune from certain days, &c., on or with which 
they may have experienced either } or they attribute 
worth, ability, or the want of them, to another's 
success or failure in a single instance ; or, as they 
infer that the Weather and Tides are caused by 
the Moon because their motions coincide — that the 
Doctor cured the Disease because the Patient re- 
covered—or that he died absolved, or with a good 
or ill conscience, because he departed with, or 
without, fear and trembling: in all such cases at- 
tributing cause to concomitance, although there be 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 365 

no real relation or analogy therein to justify the 
inferences. 

787. It is then a rule of Logical Induction, 
that it should include analogous or similar Parti- 
culars ; i. e. Similarity of Instances under a Ge- 
nerality Induced or Deduced. But in Inductive 
Descriptions of any Whole, of which the Particulars 
it includes are Dissimilar, such Whole is not Ge« 
neral but a Principal Particular, whence no Induc- 
tion or Generalogism ensues, but only a Synthesis 
or Analysis of a whole, or an Enumeration of Parts. 
This rule applies equally to the most complex and 
most simple subjects, the sole condition being that 
the instances adduced, however dissimilar, must 
concur as particulars in the general inference. 

788. Thus, for example of a Complex subject, 
men talk of Civilisation as they do of Truths sup- 
posing every one to have a definite understanding 
of the thing or idea signified, although it is a very 
Proteus, and to be generally defined only by a vast 
Induction ; wherein, if it be assumed from acknow- 
ledged instances, that Civilisation is tlie sway of 
Intellect^ this will appear in forms and shapes in- 
numerable : thus, intellect exercising moral reason 
in the abolition of slavery, civilises humanity. If 
absurd rites and unjust ordinances in religion or 
politics are abolished, it is by the operation of 
reason and the sway of intellect, and civilisation 
advances. When refined art, by Poetry, Music, 
Painting, &c., civilises mankind, it operates by 



Digitized by 



Google 



3(}6 GENERALOGISM, OR 

sense and mind — the sway of intellect. If by me- 
chanism and the hand, thought and learning be 
made permanent and spread throughout the world, 
the whole is the energy of intellect in the dviU^ 
sation of mankind. Are idle distinctions, empty- 
titles, pageantries of state, and the gauderies of sense 
and ceremony suppressed in practice, or confined to 
plays and pantomime, it must be by the higher 
appreciation of intellectual distinction — the pro- 
gress of civilisation. Should society in the end 
cease to estimate men and character, as they esti- 
mate pigs, by their market-value, breed and wealth, 
as they must do if civilisation advance, and worth 
becomes duly esteemed, it will be by the sway of 
intellect; to which the God of Intellect presses 
onward his creatures to the reign of truth and goodj 
true refinement, and civilisation. Thus is civUisa^ 
tion induced and defined, the sway of intellect 
through many concurring instances or particulars, 
and referred for confirmation to many more, against 
which there are no negative instances of any weight 
adducible to prevent a perfect Generalogism from 
being established universally through Analogy. 

789. As the world, viewed by reason or active 
intellect, is a universe, or whole, and its parts are 
unities, or lesser wholes, so, when viewed sensibly, 
or by passive intellect, things consist and exist in 
infinite variety; at the same time, active and 
passive intellect, or reason and experience, concur 
in reducing this variety to unity^ or order, on the 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 367 

one hand, and, on the other, in deducing generals^ 
or unitiesj from the varieties of particulars ; and 
this is the twofold office of the generalogism. 

790. There are, then, two species of the gene- 
ralogism, the materials of both which are parti- 
culars : by the first we class or arrange particulars 
under a general terrn^ and generals under the more 
general and universal; and, by the latter, we 
gather that which is general among a variety of 
particulars^ and ultimately that which is universal 
from generals. 

791. The first is properly an induction^ or pre- 
dication of Species and Genus, and determines the 
rank, or class of particulars, with regard to each 
other and to universal being ; and the latter a 
deduction thereof, and determines the most general 
or universal relation^ predicate, attribute, or form 
of a class of particulars : the one terminates in the 
category of Existence^ the other in that of Relation^ 
under which all knowledge is comprehended. 

792. Thus Universal Oeneral, Special^ and 
Individicaly are terms expressing Logical Relation 
and subordination, whereby the chief Premises x>( 
the Analogism are Universal, those of the Gene- 
ralogism or Induction are Particular and Individual, 
as Extremes of which the Syllogism is the Inter- 
mediate Organ, through General Media connecting 
the Particular and Universal as its chief or dis- 
tinguishing Premis ; the whole together founded on 
Analogism. 



Digitized by 



Google 



368 GENERALOGISM, OR 

793. No Individual negates or excludes its 
Species, no Species its Genus, nor any Genus its 
Universal ; but the Universal includes and affirms 
the General, and the General includes the Special 
and Particular through all orders ; without which 
universal relation there could be neither Logical 
Argument, Conclusion, nor Subordination of Na- 
ture : it has, accordingly, been admitted as a uni- 
versal principle by logicians and philosophers, and 
is the same for every method. 

794. In analysing and distributing the Cate- 
gories of Aristotle, we have shewn that they are 
entirely resolvable into two concurrent Universals, 
the one Logical and the other Philosophical — the 
first in respect to all Knowledge or Relation^ the 
other in respect to all Being or Existence^ and 
that they concur analogically throughout the Uni- 
verse^ and consequently comprehend the entire 
Analogy or Relation of Genera, Species, and Indi- 
viduals of all things. Analytically, Synthetically, 
and Antithetically, which Analogy is represented in 
the following Scheme,* of which the Universal and 
Individual are concurrent poles : — 

• See " Artis Logicee Rudimenta, with Observations," sect. 6. 
See also Brerewood's copious and curious volume of Analyses, 
'* De Praedicabilibus et Praedicamentis/* Tract iii. sect. 17, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 



369 



795. 



Universal. 





/ Being, ^ 










Summum^ 






Genus. 


Relation, 
or Bmmk, 


• Universa 


^ i 


/ 


1. 


i 


( 


• ^ 






Soul. 






Animal. 






S 


Q 






1 


1 






CO 


. 




Genera. 


Vegetal. 


General. 




A 


O 






1. 


1 






CO 








Mineral. 






Body. 




\ 


? ' 


/ r^ 


1 




Species 
Infima. ' 


Man. 
Matter. 


h Special. 




^ "1 


«. J 




1 


1. 


'2 


3 


d 


• \ 






N4 1 


1 




Individua. 


Socrates. 
Gold. 


-Individual 



Ibdividual. 



79fi. We may now proceed to distinguish the 
generalogism categorically into the Material Oene- 



BB 



Digitized by 



Google 



370 GENERALOOISMy OR 

ralogismj or induction of the matter, or logical 
subject ; and the Formal Oeneralogism, or deduc- 
tion of the form, or predicate. 



SECTION III. 

797. By the Material Generalooism, or gene- 
ralogism of the subject, we collect particulars or 
individuals; as, for example, Charles, Edward, 
Frederick, William, Mary, Georgina, Catharina, 
&c., and unite or class them under the predicate 
or general term, Man ; and again, we collect the 
general terms, Man, Horse, Dog, &c., and connect 
them under the more general term or genus Ani- 
mal ; again, we collect the higher genera, Animal, 
Vegetal, Mineral, under the most general term, 
MATTER ; finally, we collect the superior genera, 
Matter, Sense, and Intelligence, under the su- 
perlative, categorical, or universal term, EXIST- 
ENCE. 

798. Thus we induce, or determine, the rank 
or class of the subject, particulars, or individuals, 
Charles, &c., with respect to universal existence, 
by arranging them under the general natures or 
terms, Human, Animal, Material ; and this we call 
an induction of the matter, or subject : and though, 
by a series of generalogisms, we thus connect the 
extremes of universal and parjicular, the intermedia 
are infinite. Thus, between the terms Charles, 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 371 

Sec, and Man» lie European, AsiatiCf &c. ; and 
again, between Animal and Material lie the terms 
Terrestrial, Aquatic, Atmospheric, Planetary, Solar, 
Sidereal, &c., and so on intermediately without end. 

799. Again, by the Formal Oeneralogism^ or 
generalogism of the form or predicate (upon which 
the great Verulam founded his " Novum Or- 
ganum"), we investigate, for example, the parti* 
culars, Charles, Edward, Frederick, &c., and find 
in each a material strv^cture ; but this includes also 
Animals, Vegetals, &c. : we discover in each. Sen- 
saiion also ; but this yet includes all other animals : 
and, finally, we find, upon further investigation, in 
every man Reason ; and this, excluding all other 
things, is his peculiar attribute, characteristic, or 
most general predicate, or Form, under the uni- 
versal term, or category, RELATION. 

800. Such, briefly, is the formal Generalogism, 
or dedicction of the form or predicate ; wherein, 
also, the intermediate stations or distinctions are 
innumerable between the extremes of the lowest 
material and the highest rational, or relational 
nature of man. By these species of Generalogism 
we abstract the general or common nature of 
particulars, as by the foregoing we aggregate or 
congregate particulars by the general natures in 
which they agree j by both we generalise^ or gene- 
rahgise. 

801. Truth is established by Analysis when 
Individuals are induced sobsumptively under Ge- 



Digitized by 



Google 



37^ GENERALOGISM, OR 

neralS) and by Synthesis when general truths are 
deduced from Individuals presumptively. They 
are, therefore, converse methods, of which Induction 
is properly the direct process, and Deduction the 
inverse process, correlative in Generahgism. 

802. So much with respect to the Generalogism 
by way of outline. As, however, this mode has 
been little advanced by logicians since the time of 
Bacon, who confessedly delivered it imperfectly, we 
will endeavour, for the sake of research, to retrace 
it in another view. 



SECTION IV. 

803. The world around us consists, then, we 
repeat, of a universal variety of particulars and 
generals ; and this variety, philosophically viewed, 
is either Essences or Relations ; or, logically and 
philologically, it is a variety of subjects or pre-- 
dicates ; or, physiologically or physically, of suh- 
stances and qualities^ or properties, &c. : and of 
these the signification is the same under different 
views. We have already considered the Genera- 
logism in a logical view ; but as this mode is prin- 
cipally applicable to physics^ we will also regard it 
physically. 

804. As the term particular, or individual, 
physically and logically, like its correlations, general 
and universal, signifies a unity, it must be a unity 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 373 

ofpartSy or an integer ; there is, therefore, nothing 
in the universe absolutely particular or singular, 
and accordingly enery particular sensible things or 
subject^ consists of an assemblage of qualities^ or 
attributes ; and evert/ quality exists variously in a 
variety of subjects or things ; and this accords 
equally with reason and experience. 

805. The particulars or premises of a genera- 
logism may, therefore, be collected analytically as 
well as synthetically^ and it follows from the above 
that, by the analytical process, we either seek all 
the attributes or qualities of a subject or substance 
(as, for example, of Gold), or we seek all the sub- 
jects or substances of a quality or attribute (as, for 
example, of Heat), and from these we deduce the 
general nature of a subject or substance, or of an 
attribute or quality ; the first of which may be 
called a generalogism of the mattery the other a 
generalogi^m of the form ; and thus the generalo- 
gism takes the same distinctions physically as logi- 
cally. Of the synthetical process we have already 
given brief examples. 

806. As the particulars of the world may be 
regarded, first, as Essences, Subjects, or Substances, 
&c., or, secondly, as Relations, Predicates, or Qua- 
lities, &c., according to the category under which 
they are viewed, the distinctions of Subject and 
Predicate are reciprocally convertible or inter- 
changeable, both with respect to the syllogism and 
generalogism ; we may, therefore, generalogise of 



Digitized by 



Google 



374 GENERALOGISM, OR 

things either bb Subjects or Predicates, analytically 
or synthetically : as, for example, of Heat 

807. The terms, particular, general, and uni- 
versal, being relatives, and there being no particular 
that partakes not of a general or manifold nature, 
neither is there any general that may not be re- 
garded as particular. Hence, any general or 
aggregate may, by the analytical process just men- 
tioned, become the matter, or premiss, of a gene- 
ralogism. The same also holds with respect to 
universals ; the generalogism is, therefore, a uni- 
versal and infinite process. 

808. As the synthetical process ascends to the 
Genus, or to that in which particulars unite or 
agree, so the analytical process descends to the 
subordinate agreements and specific differences of 
particulars. Thus the variety of particulars, John, 
Thomas, Henry, &c. ; Lion, Horse, Dog, &c. ; 
Elm, Yew, Rose, &c. ; Nitre, Iron, Clay, &c., 
agreeing under the term material substances differ 
under those of Animal^ Vegetal^ and Mineral. 
Again, of the particulars, John, Thomas, &c., 
Horse, &c., agreeing under the term Animaly differ 
under Human, Quadruped, &c. ; and again, the 
particulars, John, Thomas, &c., agreeing under the 
term Hvman^ differ under those of Brown^ Fair^ 
&c., which latter are distinguishing differences of 
the Individuals, &c. 

809* The differences of the individual are the 
variety of which it is constituted, and being un- 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 375 

folded by analysis, become tbe matter of tbe 
generalogism before mentioned. 

810. In every species or form of the genera- 
logism — and it is that which distinguishes it from 
the other logical modes — there is, first, a collection 
of various particulars^ by synthesis or analysis ; 
and, secondly, a disclosure of a generality^ or 
agreement among them. To generalogise is, there- 
fore, to generalise ; and this may be done affirma- 
tively or negatively, by collecting or rejecting of 
instances and particulars, till the general, or uni- 
versal term or proposition, is confirmed. 

811. In fact, the induction rests upon the 
analogy of nature, by which we recognise its uni- 
formity and constancy, and conclude from causes 
to effects; inferring from similarity or analogy of 
causes, to similarity or analogy of effect, &c. : so 
that, in strictness, the analogical process is at the 
foundation of all logic. 



SECTION V. 

812. When, by analysis of a general or uni- 
versal, the Oeneralogism seeks the agreements and 
differences of things, it verges upon the Analogism ; 
so, in particularising, we have remarked that the 
latter mode verged upon the former synthetically ; 
at the same time these two processes concur in the 



Digitized by 



Google 



376 OENERALOOISM) OR 

Syllogism antithetically : these three modes, there- 
fore, reciprocate, and are also convertible. 

813. It is an essential distinction of the three 
forms of argument that the Analogism concludes 
immediately ; the Syllogism, mediately ^ or through 
a middle term; and the Generalogism, through 
many medioj or particulars, to universality. 

814. It is a further distinction of these forms 
that the categorical, or perfect Analogism, con- 
cludes and proves the whole amount of its premises ; 
the Syllogism, less than the amount of its premises ; 
while the conclusion of the Generalogism compre- 
hends in general more than its premises : whence 
the fallacies of this latter mode. 

815. The logical axiom — that no more can he 
strictly inferred or concluded from any argument 
than is contained or included in its premises — holds 
good not only in the Analogism and Syllogism, but 
also in the Generalogism. Without universal in 
the premises therefore^ there can be no universal 
or perfect conclusion ; but this is generally im- 
possible in the Generalogism, because particulars 
which constitute its matter^ or premises, are infinite 
throughout nature. In any case, however, in which 
all its particulars can be enumerated, a perfect in- 
ductive argument may be constructed; as, for ex- 
ample, in numbers, agreeably to the axiom that the 
whole is equal to all its pirts. 

816. The fofce and extent of evidence in the 
Generalogism is, consequently, proportionate to 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 377 

the number of parts, particulars, or media, it com- 
prehends or contains; and, if this fall short of 
universality or totality, its evidence (however suf- 
ficient it may be in general to satisfy inquiry) 
amounts only to some high probability, and not to 
certainty, perfect cogency, or necessity. 

8 17. The logical axiom, according to which 
" things that are equal to the same third thing are 
equal to each other^^ establishes also that the 
halves, or other proportional parts of such equal 
things, are also equal to each other; and these 
inferences are universally true from demonstration 
of reason or relation, without an Induction of aU 
the parts and particulars. 

818. The same is conclusive of all homogeneous 
particulars; but Induction of all the particulars 
of a subject is impossible in physical and sensible 
things, which are therefore incapable of entire and 
absolute demonstration. 

819- Induction forms, collects, and classes pro- 
positions and things according to their specific or 
individual relations; Syllogism connects them ac- 
cording to their Generic or General relations ; and 
Analogism discloses their chief or Universal Rela- 
tions ; but inasmuch as the offices of each organ 
or process is the disclosing of relations varying 
only in degree, they participate each other's nature, 
or reciprocate analogically at their foundation. 

820. It holds equally true in each of the three 
modes, or forms of logic, that there can he no con^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



378 OENERALOGISMy OR 

elusion out of the category of an argument ; tbat 
is, no arguing conclusively from one universal genus 
to another. In the strict logical investigation of 
any subject, it is then of chief importance to keep 
in mind that the premises and concltbsion micst be 
reciprocally homogeneous^ and that logic is modified 
by every subject 

8S1. Therefore, Essence and Relation being 
the sole categories, and the External, Medial, 
and Internal, the universal genera of knowledge, 
having each its appropriate evidence, we cannot 
conclude logically from one to the other; and as 
the evidence of the first of these three genera is 
matter of fact (such as are the testimony of witness, 
experience, and history), while the evidence of the 
second of these genera is sensations^ and that of the 
third is the pure and perfect relations qfreason^ we 
cannot conclude from the relative to the absolute, 
nor the contrary; nor from reasons to facts, nor 
the contrary; nor from either of these to sensa- 
tions ; nor, vice versd, from either. As, however, 
there is no absolute separation of the three genera, 
each may be used in aid, or illustration, of lihe 
others, although it will afford strict logical conclu- 
sions on its own ground alone. 

82^. Conviction through truth is the great end 
of logic ; and it is apparent that this, in matters of 
doctrine and science, can alone be adequately ob- 
tained through pure intelligence and reason, or 
relation, — that, in matters of taste, sense, and disci- 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDUCTION. 379 

pUne, truth and conviction are dependent upon 
sense, — that, in matters of fact and art, they 
depend upon external testimony and experience, or 
experiment ; and that, finally, in complex matters, 
truth and conviction must be sought through a 
compound testimony with all possible attention to 
homogeneity and genuine analogy. 

8^. We see, hence, why, in common phrase, 
" Facts are stubborn things** — why " Tastes are 
not to be disputed" — which may be asserted of all 
feelings and affections also ; and why the conclusions 
of genuine reason are not to be resisted. 

824. Were it otherwise, conviction might be 
obtained through physical force, which is the logic 
of Power, — the right of might, — and adapted to 
the irrational only, and to be employed only in 
those ofllces of authority in which reasoning would 
be either misplaced or absurd ; as in the disciplining 
of Children, the executing of Laws, or the com- 
manding of Armies, which, although they require 
to be founded on reason, dispense with argument, 
and give orders only, in practice. Between these 
several cases there are, however, many media. So 
much with regard to Dialectics, and respecting the 
first forms or operations of Logic. But Logic is an 
infinite discipline, and were we intent on an entire 
and practical developement thereof, it would be ne- 
cessary to shew in what manner these forms com- 
pound and vary according to the various relations 
and applications of discourse truly analysed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



380 GENERALOGISM, OR INDUCTION. 

825. It is more essential, in the first instance, 
to repress the false hopes and pretensions of Logic 
and Science, that time and powers may not be 
wasted in vain research ; for in vain do Physio- 
logists seek Seminal Principles through Induction. 
The great Harvey failed in this attempt In vain 
do the Chemists seek Material Elements by the 
same means, wherein Davy and our contemporaries 
will have also failed. And in vain also do the 
Metaphysicians, in like manner generalogise in 
search of Spiritual Essences, in which they must 
equally fail ; for in a System of Universal Cor- 
relation there can be no first or absolute principle 
knowable. 

826. Accordingly, when, by Physical Analysis, 
Solid Matter has been resolved into Liquid, liquid 
into Gas, and gas into ^thereals, their correlative, 
positive, and negative Elements are finally forced 
into Mind as active and passive principles imper- 
ceptible by Sense till reunited in electrical con- 
currence.* Thus the System of Nature terminates 
in an ultimate Analogism ; for by whatever pro- 
cess nature is urged to a final extreme, it is forced 
into mind, the abode of first principles, — the Mind 
out of us, — the Analogon of all Nature, and of the 
Mind within us : — whence it follows that the whole 
of Human Nature, Sense, and Soul, resolves into cor- 
respondence with the Great Intellect and Logos 
'* in whom man lives, moves, and has his being.'' 

• See Anal. Phil. vol. ii. p. 59. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX. 



CHAPTER I. 



METHOD. 



SQ!7' There remain for notice, according to the 
custom of logicians, somewhat concerning Method, 
as a mean for the discovery and promulgation of 
truth and science, and somewhat concerning the 
SophUtical Arts and Fallacies hy which logical 
truth is corrupted and perverted: and, first, of 
Method. 

828. Since, then, our object is not the art and 
practice of Logic, but the science and plan, we may 
briefly remark that Method signifies a way or 
regulation according to relation, and that our 
whole system aims at supplying the best possible 
method, namely, the Analogy of Nature, in which 
every subject may be considered and treated with 
reference to all other knowledge in the same uni- 



Digitized by 



Google 



382 APPENDIX. 

versal way — open till we have entirely examined 
and exhausted it, by first tracing and considering 
it in its nearest and most prominent, and ultimately 
in its remotest relations, analyticaUy and st/nthe- 
UcaUy^ or antitheticallt/f according to the subject 

829* This brings us to the two divisions usually 
assigned by logicians to Method ; namely, the me- 
thod of solution and distribution, called aoalytical ; 
and the method of composition and aggregation, 
called synthetical; between and connecting which 
lies an antithetical method, or method of comparison 
or analogy^ by which we systematise, put in order, 
and harmonise any subject 

830. Some obscurity of signification has, how- 
ever, attended the two former distinctions; ana- 
lytical and synthetical a priori^ being the contrary 
or opposite of analytical and synthetical a posteriori. 
So, again, physically analytical is the converse of 
morally or intellectually analytical. The sense, 
however, in which we have employed these terms, 
is that of the intellectual, or d priori. 

831. The author of " Vindicise Antiquse,** in 
quoting Dr. Campbell's " Philosophy of Rhetoric,*' 
has remarked that ''he appears to use the terms 
Analysis and Synthesis in a sense altogether un- 
warranted by the analogies of the Greek language, 
aod unsanctioned by use. Analysis universally 
signifies in philosophic language the Reduction of 
a whole to its component parts, so that by its 
means we never can ascend from particulars to 



Digitized by 



Google 



METHOD. 383 

universals, and it is equally impossible to descend 
by Synthesis from universals to particulars, for 
Synthesis always implies apposition^ and the for- 
mation of one out of many/'* Such also is the 
modem sense in which these terms are employed 
by the chemists, although frequently confounded 
in other subjects; — and agreeably to this sense 
the argument d priori^ or from the mind to pheno- 
mena, or from the cause to its effects, and that a 
posteriarif or frt>m effects to their cause, are identical 
with Analysis and Synthesis as thus distinguished. 

832. Of these methods^ the analytical is the 
true doctrinal method applicable to science and 
philosophy, of which the present work may be 
regarded as an example. The synthetical method 
is disciplined and applicable to the Disciplines and 
Arts ; as, 1st, to that of Philology, which, begin- 
ning with letters, proceeds to words and proposi- 
tions ; 2dly, to Logic, which, beginning with words 
or terms, proceeds to propositions and arguments ; 
and, 3dly, to the Mathematics, which, beginning 
with terms and definitions, proceeds upon axioms 
and postulates to propositions and demonstrations, 
&c. The antithetical metlwd is technical, at once 
theoretical and practical, and applicable to all the 
Arts : the three methods are nevertheless efficient 
in each respect ; and hence they have been variously 
applied and confounded therein. 

* Classical Jour. vol. xvii, p. 1'20. 



Digitized by 



Google 




384 APPENDIX. 

833. Accordingly, the first care in teaching an 
art is to make the disciple acquainted with its ma- 
terials and instruments, and with their right use or 
Discipline ; the next thing is to instruct him in its 
theory, regulative relations, and Science ; the last 
is to initiate him in producing their goods or ends 
practically, and with Art or skill, according to true 
natural and logical method; and, in accordance 
with the series of Causes (for art is cause), as enu- 
merated hy Aristotle, the material, the formal, and 
the final, which coalesce in the efllcient or pro- 
ducing cause of every art. 

834. The above method goes to the whole of 
every subject, and even distributes itself among 
each of its distinctions, as discipline, science, or 
art ; for Logic is a system of Co-relation through- 
out, and affects not, but rejects, the absolute. And 
as every Proposition consists of a Subject, Predicate, 
and Copula, and every simple Argument has three 

tions, a Major, a Minor, and a Consequent, 
so, finally, should every regular Discourse, whether 
a Treatise, an Oration, or a Poem, involve an 
Exordium, beginning or introduction, — a middle, 
argument, or Dialexis, — and an end. Peroration, or 
conclusion; and they must have truth or correct- 
ness, order and completeness, constituting a Unity 
or whole ; and each tripartition is a universal prin- 
ciple of arrangement for every work as a whole and 
throughout its parts. 

835. Logicians have been, as usually, fertile of 



Digitized by 



Google 



METHOD. 385 

divisions and distinctions under the head of Me- 
thod; we shall, however, be brief and adduce only 
the most obvious and useful. 

The three logical Rules of Division and the 
Distribution of the Whole are, 1. That the Members 
shall exhaust the fVhole^ or that the Division shall 
be entire ; 2. That the Members shall be correlated 
or opposed; and 3. That one member shall not 
contain or predicate another, or that the divisions 
shall be distinct ; therefore for the Divisions of any 
Whole to become distinct in difference, correlate in 
agreement, and entire as a whole, they must be 
distributed according to truth and relation analo- 
gically. 

836. Although distinctions in Science as in 
Nature are endless, the multiplication of distinctions 
is no mark of science ; because all distinctions of 
genera and species are relative, and there are no 
absolute divisions: that is, every individual, how- 
ever remote, still holds relation to every prior species 
and genus, whence the further we divide and distin- 
guish, the more we obscure and confound, and the 
only true distinction between Science and Nescience 
consists in the perspicuity and perspicacity of know- 
ledge by the former. Thus the first combinations of 
generic colours are clearly distinguishable species, 
the secondary combinations are also distinguishable, 
— after which the recombinations are distinct onlv 
to the disciplined eye, and the end of the process is 
in all cases indistinguishableness. If we reverse 

CO 



Digitized by 



Google 



,386 APPENDIX. 

the process and analyse the compound, we re-attain 
the generic distinctions, or primary colours, and 
exemplify the Antithetical Method. 

837. The whole of Logic is the Science of 
Method distributable according to the logical ope- 
rations into three kinds, the Generalogical, Syllo- 
gistical, and Analogical, which are nearly coinci- 
dent with those we have enumerated as the Methods 
of Composition^ Solution^ and Cojnparison^ the 
latter of which is the Analogical Method, and 
requires, first, that we define and analyse a subject 
to ascertain its various relations, and then deter- 
mine its antagonist extremes, whence we may attain 
the true mean of inquiry. 

838. Suppose, for example, the subject of in- 
quiry to be the popular one of Socialism^ which 
may be defined the association of men in families 
for a mutual object ; and having unfolded its va- 
riety by analysis from the association of the Den to 
that of the Monastery, including Owenism, of which 
forms we find the object on one extreme is **fo esta- 
blish sensual and social enjoyment at a maximum^ 
and to dispense with priests and religion,** and 
that its antagonistic, or opposite extreme, is Mono- 
chism, the object of which is ** the utter mortifica- 
tion of the sensual and social m^n, and entire 
devotion to religion and priestdom,** we may then 
more readily attain by comparison of their goods 
and evils — advantages and disadvantages — the true 
social mean, and may fairly conclude, that as men. 



Digitized by 



Google 



METHOD. 387 

in all stages and states of social union, are prone to 
degenerate to extremes of social and sensual enjoy- 
ment, it is salutary and expedient that they should 
cultivate and encourage in themselves and each 
other self-control and communion with God; but 
according to what method cannot safely be com- 
mitted to either Monks or modem Socialists to 
determine. 

839. Other Logical Methods are the well- 
known mode of St/Uogismf which proceeds by as- 
sertion and media ; and the no less celebrated SO' 
cratic or Interrogative Method^ which we have 
already noticed as proceeding by question through 
Induction to the end in view. To these we would 
add the Method of Concession^ computing through 
Analogism, by conceding the antagonist's position 
or positions, and carrying them to extremes, which 
involve the mean assumed in absurdity; and in 
this way every false assumption worked out confutes 
itself. ? 

840. Suppose, for example, that some politician 
shall assume the position that Universal Stiffrage 
is the constitutional right of the members of the 
community. Let it be conceded without distinction 
of sex, and he will allow that Women hare su>ch 
rightf and either give up his position, or grant that 
they ought also to vote. If the latter, concede it 
with the addition that Members under twenty-one 
years of age liave like right and often greater judg- 
ment than their elders, and that therefore Youths of 



Digitized by 



Google 



388 APPENDIX. 

both sexes ought to become suffragans without dis- 
tinction of age, &c., by which time he will suspect 
the absurdity of his position, and, without forcing 
further argument, yield you the expediency of a 
relative established mean. To this method most 
questions of party are obnoxious, and its force is 
increased by its conciliatory spirit 

841. Among the further variety of Methods, 
all of which are modes of Analysis, Synthesis, or 
Antithesis, the most entitled to attention are those 
of cause and effect^ the experimental method, and 
the chronological. All methods, according to 
Aristotle, require declaration of the subject-matter, 
and demonstration thereof. His rules are, 1st, in 
declaring, to define the subject-matter, and to begin 
well is the half of the whole ; 2d, to adapt the 
method to the matter ; and 3d, in demonstrating, 
to begin with principles m^st known, proceeding 
from causes to effects. 

842. Analogism requires us, in arguing from 
cause to effect, or vice versa, to note that every 
cause involves an agent and patient, and that 
every effect is produced from action and passion, 
or reaction. This refers to simple cause and effect ; 
but some effects are the result of many causes or 
concurrences, consequently such causes and effects 
are compound or complex, and are of more difficult 
analysis in proportion to their complexity. 

843. The Experimental Method is a mixed Lo- 
gic determined by the case, to which the laws of 



Digitized by 



Google 



METHOD. 389 

method are especially applicable ; and although this 
title has been given to the Induction, the proper 
office of which is to generalise^ it is more com- 
monly the opposite of Induction, by its seeking of 
particulars^ which is the office of the practical 
Analogism; this method is accordingly variously 
Analytical, Synthetical, or Antithetical, and is the 
most diffuse and practical of the whole, and much 
dependent on experience and circumstances. 

844. When many circumstances are brought to 
bear upon one point or particular^ they are ad- 
mitted to strengthen the proof thereof by a general 
agreement, which is also called Induction, and the 
wider and more abundant such concurrence is the 
more powerful is the proof of the question consi- 
dered. 

845. An extraordinary concurrence of many 
circumstances can only happen from a breadth of 
relation coinclusive of all the circumstances, and 
binding them in a logical identity that gives to the 
evidence a logical power beyond any human testi- 
mony, depending, as it does, on a Universal Ana- 
logy that ascends to the Source of Truth. The 
Method and Logic of Circumstances is, therefore, 
the proper resort of sagacity and experience, wher- 
ever simple and immediate logical evidence is un- 
attainable. Hence every ifiethod and all the modes 
of Logic are available in the experimental method 
and logic of circumstances. 

846. There is, finally, the Chronological Me- 



Digitized by 



Google 



390 APPENDIX. 

thodf proceeding according to dates, and essential 
to the recordings of the historian, without which 
facts are thrown into false relations, or posited con- 
trary to truth. This is the Historic Method fa- 
miliar to all men and dependent on memory, as 
the Poetical Method, using fictions, does on Ima- 
gination, and as the Logical and Philosophical does 
on Reason. 

847. The principal object of the Chronological 
Method is to avoid Anachronisms of Facts ; but the 
Anachronistns of Reason are not less common than 
Anachronisms of Sense ; nor is it less offensive to 
truth and understanding to see effects placed before 
causes, conclusions precede premises, or any how 
the posterior before the prior, than it is to see the 
course of facts and occurrences inverted. The true 
succession of words, thoughts, and things, is chro- 
nologicalf as their true relations are analogical or 
co-expansive; the one is a relation of time, the 
other a relation of place, internal or external. 

848. As to Topics or places^ which have also 
been called the fields and mansions of argument, 
and have been a principal division of Logic from 
the time of Aristotle, it properly belongs to philo- 
sophy, which is the system of all places and rela- 
tions, and it is a sequent to method, and no 
otherwise appertinent to Logic. 

To topics belong the subjects of inquiry, and 
we have shewn throughout in what manner and 
relation the instruments of Logic are appropriate to 



Digitized by 



Google 



METHOD. 391 

their principal genera and divisions ; for which, 
therefore, we refer to philosophy, of which Logic 
is the counterpart. 

849. Knowledge being a whole, which compre- 
hends the universe, every part and subject of which 
being also variously related to all other parts, the 
differences of Subjects and Things are differences 
of position^ and are so called, whence arises the 
variety of topics and subjects throughout the uni- 
verse of knowledge. 

850. Hence every subject or position that be- 
comes a universal question, being partially treated, 
must result in failure or fallacy^ — as has been ex- 
emplified in most questions of controversy, wherein 
polemics having run into confusion, succeeding in- 
quirers have discarded the simplicity of Universality 
for the simplicity of Particularity, that of breadth 
for that of narrowness ; and thus the question of 
Beauty has terminated in ascribing to an individual 
line or quality a relation that is Universal : and 
questions of even higher interest, such as those 
of Moral Good and Evil, Disinterestedness, Liberty, 
&c., have fared no better. 

851. There is, therefore, a primary necessity 
for a true universal system to the perfecting of 
knowledge, to which every topic and particular 
inquiry of man may have reference as a method 
and measure of its truth, or logical validity, and 
sufficiency, and this nothing but Universal Philo- 
sophy can supply. 



Digitized by 



Google 



392 APPENDIX. 



CHAPTER If. 



SOPHISTRY. 



852. Although the end of Logic is the attain- 
ment of truth, it has a negative purpose in the de- 
tection and confutation of error ; and as the rules of 
Logic are sometimes perverted for the sinister pur- 
poses of deceiving and contention, and there is also 
a misapplication of its organs which terminates in 
undesigned error, some examination of the grounds 
of Sophistry, or Logical Fallacy y may he justly 
deemed an essential appendage of logical discipline ; 
and as such it has heen regarded hy the principal 
masters of Logic. 

853. Under Sophistrj/j then, we comprehend 
all logical /rawrf^ ond fallacies which, as a suhject, 
traverses the whole logical universe. It is not in- 
cumhent on us, however, to develope all its ramifi- 
cations, since it will suffice to disclose the most 
general and hackneyed forms in which it embraces 
the chief organs of logic, as base art, or as ignorant 
inadvertence, the grounds of error, confusion, and 
controversy. The fallacies of sense and association 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 393 

are sources of false judgment, often carried as prin- 
ciples into argument sufficient to fill volumes, and 
a history of prejudices alone would be a history of 
mankind. 

854. Every folly, every vice, and every crime, 
every error and mistake of men, involves a logical 

fallacy^ and not unfirequently a regularly-constructed 
sophism adapted to self-deception or the deceiving 
of others. The habit of excuse-making is a regular 
art of such false logic. All orders and professions 
abound in such dehgy. It is the demon of man- 
kind. To resolve all the fallacies of Logic would 
be a greater task than those of Hercules, yet very 
much resembling the cleansing of the Augean 
Stables, and as detestable an office to intellect, but 
happily the progress of logical intelligence will, in 
its course, purify the mind from fallacies. 

855. All fallacies of the mind are logical, and 
as the mind is engaged in every voluntary act and 
thought of men, the boundlessness of the subject is 
apparent, but it is a fertile one wherein logicians 
have delighted to revel, and to which they have 
given needless attention and importance ; for as 
Truth and Fact, and not Fallacies, are the proper 
light and object of Logic, wherein falsehood dis- 
appears, the research oi fallacies and extrication 
of errors are little better than explorings in dark- 
ness. 

856. By this we mean no more than that the 
establishment of correct Logic must supply the 



Digitized by 



Google 



394 APPENDIX. 

laws of truth whereby fallacies become detected and 
resolved, as light expels darkness, or converts it 
into that oscuro which increases its brilliancy, and 
also to excuse us from entering further into a 
negative inquiry than inveterate errors may have 
rendered expedient for the correction of Logic, or 
chiefly as a guard against its perversion. 

857* Sophistry lies at the foundation of the 
faculties, whence other principal errors of men, and 
a chief source of fallacy in Logic, is the employment 
qftlie Will in place ©/'Understanding, attention 
to which is the more necessary, logically and 
ethically, because men are naturally disposed to 
employ their active faculties, of which the WiU is 
principal, to the suppression of their passive facul- 
ties, the chief of which is the Understandings the 
source of all regulation and just control, the errors 
of which, compared with those of the Will, are mere 
shadows ; whence vicious fallacies belong more to 
Ethics than to Logic. In the eloquence of Will, 
Passion, and Desire, men compromise their own 
Reason, and inveigle and betray the Understanding 
and Will of others ; and it is in this chief error, to 
which we have already adverted, that Sophistry may 
be said to precede and transcend Logic, the proper 
limit of which is Understanding; hence the Ignoratio 
Elenchij or mistake of the question, is an involun- 
tary source of fallacy which nothing but the reform 
of understanding can repair. 

858. It extends the bounds of logical fallacy 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 395 

that the yarious significations of a word give rise 
to ambiguities ; nor is there a fallacy of Logic that 
can be otherwise resolyed than by determining 
the genuine significations of the words and propo- 
sitions employed therein ; when any one of good 
understanding and experience, acquainted with the 
groundwork of Logic, will not be deceived even by 
the most specious fallacies. 

859. The Resolution of Sophisms requires, in 
aU cases, that we should reduce the question to its 
simplest terms, so as to resolve it into its logical 
and philological elements, and disclose its weakness 
or falsehood, which lies, most commonly, iajalse 
inductions^ assuming a Particular specifically, a 
Species generically, or a Genus universally, or one 
of these for the others respectively. In Syllogistic 
Sophisms the fallacy is usually found in the uni- 
versal or major proposition, which requires to be 
proved by Induction or Analogism. Rules in 
special cases are abundant in works of Logic for 
solution of fallacies which are accessible without 
art in the minor premiss. 

860. Analogism is even more capable of fal- 
lacies and fal^e applications than the Syllogism and 
Generalogism, and to this it owes some discredit, 
and the having hitherto failed to establish itself as 
a universal and legitimate organ of Logic, and its 
confinement to rhetorical use under a false accept- 
ation; whence a parabolical use of Analogy that 



Digitized by 



Google 



396 APPENDIX. 

produces fallacies that are to be carefully guarded 
against by the Analogist, who, in employing it, will 
be apt to paralogise, through Allegory, Metaphor, 
Simile, and to deceiye himself and others by rheto- 
rical, remote, false, and mystical analogies, in place 
of the logical and true. Such fallacies are, how- 
ever, easily resolved by carrying their premises 
home to reason and fact, distinguishing their 
poetical from logical truth, and verbal analogies 
from real ones. 

861. Sophistry, as an Art, has many wiles and 
practices, among which may be principally noticed 
the assumption of false principles, the substitution 
of terms, or of thoughts, or of things, or of either 
of these for the others ; through which the pre- 
mises and conclusions in each of the logical forms 
become vitiated. 

862. Another source of Sophistry and Fallacy 
is the innovation upon the premises, by the bring- 
ing in of new matter, or the leaving out of some- 
thing essential, in all of which there is a shifting of 
the position, or proposition ; and accordingly, the 
practisers of evasion in any way are, in vulgar lan- 
guage, called shifty. 

863. And although, in arguing on new ground, 
it may be sometimes expedient, or even necessary, 
to change the position, to rectify the premises, it 
is requisite, at the same time, to recommence or 
review the argument ; but these are more fre- 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 397 

quently artifices contrived to elude or confute 
an antagonist, than either for fair argument, 
or from inadvertence and self-deception, through 
false zeal or want of knowledge and skill : never- 
theless, if there were not such craft on the one 
hand, and such inadvertence and credulity on 
the other, this discipline might decay for want 
of exercise. 

864. To shift the argument from one genus or 
species to a different one more or less remote, the 
fijtrd^ouftg sig aXXo yivog of Aristotle, is rhetorical 
rather than logical, and, at best, when used in igno- 
rance only, is an argument of similitude merely 
metaphorical. Arguing from one category to ano- 
ther is a like fallacy. 

865. The tacit law of argument, that a parti/ 
can neither dispute nor retract a position he has 
advanced or admitted^ is itself illogical, and a rule 
only of expedience for terminating a debate without 
settling the question. But that which is advanced 
contrary to Reason may with reason be retracted, 
and ought to be so given up for the sake of truth 
and candour. 

866. Every fair logical argument is an experi- 
mental inquiry wherein positions are advanced or 
retracted till reason and truth are satisfied; for 
that which is fair for one litigant is fair for all 
others ; and if it is just for an opponent to annul 
his adversary's position with reason, it is fair also 



Digitized by 



Google 



398 APPENDIX. 

to annul his own, as it is, with like reason, for his 
adyersary to withdraw his. But this is the very 
contrary of the shifting of litigants j whereby they 
change their positions to escape Truth and Reason 
for the sake of Victory and Triumph, the common 
object of law advocates, partisans, demagogues, and 
cheats. 

867* The advocate does not argues but only 
seems to argue ; he does not yield to his Under- 
standings but subjects his Reason to his WiU ; for 
which purpose he must oppose all his strong points 
to his adversaries weak onesy mask his own weak- 
nesSj and elude his opponents strength. It is upon 
these vicious maxims and strategy of advocacy, 
that partisans and politicians pledge themselves 
and their opponents to consistency in errors and 
the opposite vicious extreme of shifting in favour 
of truth or falsehood. C. Celsus said, " An orator 
only aims at the semblance of truth ;" and, ** For 
it is not conscience but victory that is the reward 
of a lawyer." " Were that true," said Quinctilian, 
^' he must be the vilest of mankind who would 
arm wickedness and guilt with this powerful wea- 
pon, and lay down rules for the practice of 
viUany. But I leave Gentlemen to defend their 
own opinion."* 

868. The following clever specimen of l^al 

• B. ii. c. 16, 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 399 

sophistry^ from a recent Irish newspaper, deserves 
celebrity : — " Connelly, a vagrant of notoriously bad 
character, was arraigned for sheep-stealing at Gal- 
way Assizes, where he had often before been tried 
for that and other offences, committed so inge- 
niously that he was always acquitted for want of 
evidence. It was proved in this instance that he 
had sold legs of mutton in open market for six- 
pence a-piece, &c. &c. J. Lopdell, Esq., a very 
corpulent gentleman, was the prosecutor ; and 
Connelly, being called on for his defence, submitted 
to the court that all the evidence given on the part 
of the prosecutor must be construed in his favour — 
that the fact of his having been so often tried and 
acquitted clearly proved he must be an honest man 
— that no man is known till he is tried — the more 
frequently gold is melted in the fire to prove its 
genuineness, the purer it becomes, and so it is 
with character when tried. He further insisted, 
that the fact of his having meat in his possession, 
and going about the country to sell it at a moderate 
price, was a demonstration of innocence, and proved 
him to be a man of industrious habits, prosecuting 
his trade fairly : and, finally, he submitted, that 
his case was analogous to that of the Prophet 
Jonas, for when he escaped from the whale's belly 
he went forth an untainted character ; and so 
should he consider his escape from the clutches of 
Mr. Lopdell, who was to his mind very like a 



Digitized by 



Google 



400 APPENDIX. 

whale, and who sought to devour him. In sum, 
that the whole of the evidence proved him an ho- 
nest man, and it was impossible the jury should do 
other than acquit him." The eloquent, ingenious, 
and witty defence of this Hibernian Socrates, ad- 
mirably illustrates the logic of the Bar, inductive, 
syllogistic, and analogical, and the most approved 
maxims of advocacy ; nor can we well doubt of the 
natural qualification of this man for the most ele- 
vated attainments of the bar. 

869. The Advocate, Pleader, and Demagogue's 
practice was a regular art and artifice among the 
Greeks, from whom it descended, through the Ro- 
mans, to ourselves ; and Aristotle reduced the 
art of forensic attack and defence, as he found it 
in the treatises of Pamphilus and Calippus in his 
time, to a single principle founded on the rule of 
contraries, to this effect, that whatever inay he 
urged IN FAVOUR on the one party may be produced 
in ACCUSATION on the other ; and that whatever 
can be urged against the one^ will equally answer 

for the DEFENCE of the other.* Coincident with 
which is the maxim to turn the serious reasonings 
of an adversary into Jests 9 and oppose his jests with 
solemnities.f 

870. There is a mode of Sophistry which con- 
sists in the adapting of tJie premises to the con- 

• *» Rhetoric," B, ii. c. 24 t Ibid. B. iii. c. 18. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 401 

elusion^ as to the bold assertion of false premises, 
and thence arguing fairly to a false conclusion. 
This is a great ajid fundamental fallacy, common 
to writers on every subject, who have some inter- 
ested purpose or tenet to establish, and accommodate 
with principles, or an hypothesis, ingeniously fitted 
to their end. In this there is a petitio principiiy or 
begging of the question, and arguing in a circle, 
which is not seen, nor always used with design, but 
often with great simplicity and sincerity. 

871. As all confutation of argument ends in 
establishing truth, or reducing the argument to 
absurdity, and as absurdity is ridiculous, there is 
established thereon a mode of Sophistry, the ground 
of which is, that as ridicule is founded on absurdity, 
so may the absurdity of any question be established 
by ridicule. But this argument itself is absurd, 
and ridicule is essentially ridiculous in logic, having 
no pretension to reason, and being foimded alto- 
gether on the sensual regard to laughter and con- 
tempt ; and, if it be at all logical, it is the medium 
between reason and force, hardly a lawful remove 
from the logic of the fist, and preferable only as less 
violent, and little less degrading. 

872. Ridicule^ which throws the mind off its 
balance, as laughter and intoxication do the body, 
is, in an argument, principally allowable against 
itself; it being fair, in all contentions, to turn the 
delusive and unlawful weapons of assailants against 
themselves, whether they be instruments of ridicule, 

D D 



Digitized by 



Google 




402 APPENDIX. 

scurrility, irony, or iron ; and although " truth may 
hear all lights," as Lord Shafteshury has asserted, 
yet will it take the colour of the^light thrown upon 
it; and ridicule may cast upon truth a gleam of 
the ridiculous, although it cannot penetrate to de- 
stroy it. And although, like the diamond, truth is 
not injured hy casting dirt upon it, it may never- 
theless he therehy soiled and ohscured. The use of 
such weapons, in serious and honourable contest, is 
therefore the mark of a degraded and undisciplined 
mind, indigent of lawful instruments, and unskilled 
in exercise. 

873. The proper matter or object, and correlate 
of the Ridiculous, is the Absurd. The Absurd is 
the irreconcilable, being without ratio or relation. 
If the object be sensibly Ridiculous or Absurd, it 
provokes Laughter. Hence the Sophist turns 
Laughter or Ridicule to logical account, by putting 
the Effect for the Cause, and therefrom inferring 
Absurdity. But this is in effect a petitio principii 

ick proving nothing — a logical weapon of 
folly and falsehood. 

874. Satire is an illegitimate Logic of this kind, 
that confutes by debasing and confounding; and, 
however keenly sarcastic, or humorously witty, it 
produces neither logical conviction nor honest sym- 
pathy, and we may thus address him, — 



Who prone to satire, soon has cause to know 
The ball that strikes a ball receives a blow ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 403 

And true the law in nature — morals — art — 
For satire still re-acts upon the heart : 
You say 'tis proper punishment of evil ; 
But who'd be executioner or devil ? 

875. Nevertheless, there is an appropriate use 
of ridicule, in reproof of the palpable follies of man- 
kind; nor can there be any just objection against 
the limited use of mock argument, which negates 
itself, for the purpose of wholesome satire, in 
correcting of those vices and errors, which neither 
reason nor lawful authority are allowed to reach. 

876. When strong prejudice falls upon argu- 
ment, reason and ridicule are equally unavailing; 
and as in all false argument there is some preju- 
dice, the fairest, least offensive, and perhaps the 
most efficacious mode of confatatioriy is, in the 
method of concession, to grant the false positions 
and premises of the disputant, and to urge them to 
extremes, which never fail to terminate in ab- 
surdity : more vehement attacks are eluded, by this 
reductio ad ahsurdum^ and the antagonist falls by 
his own weight and impetus. There is also some- 
times a cutting and powerful reproof of this kind in 
silence. 

877* These exemplify the argumentum ad ho- 
minenti which employs an opponent's own argu- 
. ments, and turns a man's weapons upon himself, 
when the argumentum ad judicium is rendered 
useless by prejudice, on the one hand, and the 
argumentum haculinumy or knock-down argument, 



Digitized by 



Google 



404 APPENDIX. 

might be as dangerous as it is totally illegal, on the 
other : and these are the three celebrated and sole 
simple forms of natural disputation, as sensible, 
intellectual, and physical, from which others are 
deduced or compounded. 

878. As to controversial and contentious argu- 
ments, there can be no such things when words 
and terms are rightly understood, the premises 
truly laid, and the consequents justly deduced. To 
these objects, dissidents should direct their atten- 
tion ; for truth and justice cannot fail to agree but 
through want of knowledge or understanding, or of 
sincerity and honesty in the litigants. 

879. And as to scholastic tilting, wrangling, 
and debate, in particular, they are mere logodsedaly 
and quibble, or a war of words; which, though 
affecting to employ reason, puts the winning of the 
game or victory in the place of truth, and is alto- 
gether sensual, unknown to true philosophy, un- 
worthy of the logician, and may be properly con- 
signed, with all the logic of sophistry, factious 
clamour, and special pleading, to the abusers of 
reason at the hustings, the rostrum, and the bar. 

880. The most common Sophistry, as well as 
the most seducing, is that which appeals to the 
passions, affections, and tastes of men, which ad- 
dresses their hopes, fears, or interests, as ethical 
writers and orators, moral, political, and religious, 
do ; or even the Senses^ as all do who put glowing, 
flowing, graceful, harmonious language to the ear« 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 405 

and figures to the imagination in the place of 
Reasons^ and substitute a fine Style for just and 
legitimate Argument ; for these, however eligible 
as literary aids, are neither logical nor philoso- 
phical. Appeals to Common Sense, Opinion, and 
Prejudice, in matters of reason and fact, are also 
grossly sophistical and beneath the logician. 

881. There is not a more sophistical conduit to 
error than the natural proneness of men to run to 
extremes, regardless that truth is relatiye, and con- 
sists in a concurrent mean between erroneous ex- 
tremes ; whence the correct maxim, that the oppo- 
site of truth isjbhehood^ is converted into a perverse 
maxim, that the opposite of falsehood is truth ; but 
Unity is the attribute of Truth, as Duplicity and 
Diversity are of Falsehood and Error; and as 
Falsehood is usually an Extreme, so is its opposite 
commonly another extreme, a second Falsehood; 
whence it is a rule of Logic, that contrary judg- 
mentSi though they may be both false^ cannot be 
both true. 

88@. Hence we seldom fail to attain Truth by 
taking the side of an opponent, according to the 
method of concession before adduced, and pushing 
the question to its utmost extreme. If it gain 
strength thereby, we may acknowledge ourselves 
wrong; it will otherwise run into absurdity, and 
prove that we were right. We thus relinquish 
opposition to become acceptable partisans to the ear 
of our adversary ; in which way we seldom fail to 



Digitized by 



Google 



406 APPENDIX. 

attain a due limitation or true mean that settles a 
party question. 

883. Of sophistical dialectics, the autol(^cal 
assertion is the extreme and weakest. It is the 
royal argument, is imperial, and employs imperative 
judgments, and belongs to the Logic of the Will, 
of which we have before spoken. It is the royal 
road of Logic, and, like all the royal roads of 
science and art, is the easiest and most sought, 
though it leads to nothing. James IL ^^ asserted 
a proposition^ and as often as wiser people ventured 
respectfully to shew that it was erroneous, he as- 
serted it again in the same words^ and by so doing 
conceived he had at once, disposed of all objec- 
tions." Some have called it the ladj/s argument ; 
and " Marlborough said Queen Anne, who prac- 
tised it, had learned it from her father ;"• but it is 
far from exclusively feminine and royal. 

884. There are other fallacious arguments, 
which are admitted nevertheless for expedience. 
Thus if you argue with a Lawyer about /w^ft'c^, he 
may answer you by an act of parliament ; and if you 
argue with a divine of the truth of religion^ he 
may reply to you from tlie Scriptures ; or urge law 
to a military despot^ and he may answer you with 
the sword : neither of which is to be disputed, and 
each of whom, where allowed, will settle the argu- 
ment by physical force. But in a free state of 

• Macaulay's ** Hist." vol. ii. p. 62. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOPHISTRY, OR FALLACIES. 407 

mind and body, men will acknowledge and submit 
only to true logical autbority, wbich is that of Reason 
and God. . 

885. As to him who mistakes either laugh, 
smile, sneer, sarcasm, satire, scorn, pun, irony, con- 
tempt, rallying, ridicule, epithet, declamation, or 
eulogy, rank, riches, pedantry, or authority, as- 
sumption, invective, interrogation, contradiction, or 
assertion — either or any of these, or similar sensual 
forces — for argument or confutation, he is but a 
sorry and contemptible logician ; while he who dis- 
ingenuously resists truth and just argument is not 
merely a bad logician, but is dangerous, and not to 
be trusted. 

886. As confounding of the question by legal 
epichirema, long discourse, or otherwise designedly, 
is one of the endless subterfuges of sophistry; it 
should be kept in mind in all sincere argument, 
whatever be the mode employed, that there is a 
unity of truth and reason which is best promoted 
by simplicity: hence, there is. in every case a best 
argument ; and whatever is urged beyond it does 
in general but embarrass and enfeeble the question, 
often leaving that obscure in the end which was 
clear at the commencement. 

887. We have already enlarged, unnecessarily 
perhaps, upon the accidents of Logic ; and to treat 
further of the resolution of sophisms^ the many arte 
of proof and confutation, and the variety of topics. 



Digitized by 



Google 



408 CONCLUSION. 

is altogether needless to our design, they being also 
amply discussed in many principal works of the 
Logicians,* 



CONCLUSION. 

888. The main design of the foregoing outline 
of the logical sciences being to exhibit analogism 
as the prime organ of reason in the eviction of 
truth universally, and to vindicate reason as the 
presiding faculty and authority throughout Logic 
and Philosophy, should it seem that we have too 
zealously invested reason and analogism with un- 
warranted or misapplied powers therein, a brief 
retrospect of its principles may serve to justify our 
positions and objects. 

889. Inquiring into the nature and office of 
reason, we have seen that it is amenable to con- 
sciousnessj and that consciousness is of triple re- 
ference, being either of sense which is Physical, of 

? See Aristotle's " Soph. Elenchi ; " Stieri's «* Precepla 
Doctrince, Logicee," &c. ; Tract, iii. cap. i. ii. and iii. ; Waliis's 
'' Institutio Logicee," cap. xx.; '' Aldrichii Logicee," lib. ii. 
cap. I ; Whately's ** Logic," cap. iii. ; G. Bentham's " Logic," 
cap. XV. ; Mill's " Logic," Book v. &c. The logic of deception 
is also treated on almost exhaustively in Aristotle's " Rhetoric," 
Books ii. and iii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONCLUSION. 409 

reason which is Logical, or oi faith which is Ethical 
[S44] : but physics, logic, and ethics comprise the 
Philosophic universe. Consciousness regarded Lo- 
gically is also of like triple reference subjectively — 
to Conception, to Conviction, and to Conscience — 
in objective regard to physical^cfo, logical truths, 
and ethical goods ; and these in conjoint reference 
to conceptions of sense, convictions of reason, and to 
faith of conscience. 

890. It is apparent hence that the triple ground 
of conscious reliance is conceptions of external 
facts, internal convictions of truth, and practical 
conscience of good ; which latter is the end of all 
thought and practice, moral, political, and reli- 
gious, and the final object of faith and conscience. 

891. In this triple reference of consciousness to 
the external facts through sense and conception — 
to medial truths through conviction of reason and 
understanding — and to internal and moral goods 
through will and conscience or faith, reason is the 
presiding authority in triple alliance with/aith and 
facts ; for faith is subject to be influenced by fancy 
or imagination, and facts are liable to all the de- 
fects of memory and misapprehensions of sense, 
while reason or relation is invariable according to 
that universal analogy, wherein pure intellect 
identifies all faculties and energies. 

892. It results, therefore, as both correlate and 
corollary, 1, that the appeal of intellect is of triple 
regard, whereby facts lead to truths and truths to 



Digitized by 



Google 



410 CONCLUSION. 

good ; 2, thst^fiicts are incredible when opposed to 
truth and reason, and truths are untenable that are 
opposed to faith of conscience and good, although 
in their integrity these three agree in unity of in- 
tellect and end ; and 3, that good is of higher regard 
and purpose individually than truth, and truth of 
more authority than facts ; but that in the disagree- 
ment of either we have ground for suspense. 

893. We have cause, therefore, to doubt con- 
victions that are against pure conscience, and to 
doubt conceptions of sense that are against convic- 
tions of reason; as we have to yield facts in all 
cases to truth and every thing to good. Finally, in 
no case ought we to subvert certain good for the 
sake of apparent truth, nor to avert certain truth 
in favour of sensible things ; for truth and fact are 
subordinate to good, and there is ever something 
erroneous and wrong when fact, truth, and good do 
not harmonise ; or, in other words, when ends are 
not justified by reason and fact, or reason and 
fact fail to educe good. There is thus unity of the 
Logical and Philosophical — of the Noological or 
subjective, with the Physiological or objective Sys- 
tems of the Universe, which it should be the 
ultimate aim of logic and philosophy to establish 
ethically. 

894. Evident and admitted as such universal 
unity is, it is nevertheless of difficult developement 
and conception ; or, being conceived, is of infinitely 
greater difficulty to convey to other minds through 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONCLUSION. 411 

the entangled medium of language — to say nothing 
of that natural imperfection of things which is the 
principle of their union ; for, since imperfection in 
anything is want of or dependence on, something 
else, imperfection must he an essential condition 
throughout the natural universe, wherehy its parts 
and particulars are commutually supplied, connected 
and continued by its All-sufficient Author in one 
universal, dependent, and perfect whole. 

895. Much more, then, does imperfection be- 
long to the works and doings of men, who are 
dependent particles only of the creation, in want 
of all things, and in whose practice, accordingly, 
perfection is unattainable, although every art and 
practice has good for its end and aim. And if in 
their reason, the object of which is truth, men have 
higher pretension to perfection than in practice, it 
is a perfection theoretic and speculative only. 
Hence the aim at good should not be an aim at 
perfection, but at improvement or melioration : and 
the world is finding this out. 

896. We trust, therefore, that we have neither 
assigned undue authority to the logical faculties, 
nor misapplied their powers ethically; for, in a 
time when rights are held paramount to duties, 
and right of truth is made to precede right of good, 
it is important that a work bearing on these ques- 
tions should not be misunderstood through the in- 
adequacy of its details; for which we have little 
hope of approbation, and look for its objects only 



Digitized by 



Google 



412 CONCLUSION. 

to the natural development of the logical intellect, 
and the growing powers of the analogical organ. 

897. Our next attempt will be to apply the 
Logic of Analogism to the extension of our Outline 
of Ethics, as that branch of universal science to 
which it is most purely and especially related, and 
of most general interest and importance, including 
Morals, Politics, and Theology. 



THE END. 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 



The nnmbera refer to those of the ParagraphB. 



Abstraction, act of reason, par. 454, 457, 464 

Absurdity, falsely inferred, 873 ; a test of fallacy, 876 

Abuses of reason, 871, 879, 867 

Accentuation, 150, 167, 209 

Advocacy, 867 

^sthesis, 740 

Alfred the Great, the assertor of freedom, 664 

Alliteration, 148, 262 

Alphabet, characters of, 103; Magogian, 126; analysed, 103; 
the greatest of human inventions, 144 

Ambiguity, 192, 858 

Anachronism, 847 

Analogism, parity of reason, 60 ; a logical organ, 486 ; uni- 
versal, 641, 659, 502, 511, 541, 560, 768, 606 ; theolo- 
gical, 53 ] , 640 ; misuse of, 532 ; it and induction 
slighted by logicians, 533, 558,575, 713 ; its boundary, 
537 ; principle of, 540, 5C0 ; iU fallacies, 543, 557 ; 
defined, 561 ; the foundation of logic, 562, 604 ; distri- 
buted, 607 ; distinguished, 610; illustrated, 611, 617 ; 
categorical, 612, 616 ; axiomatic, 621 ; the true method 
of art, 641; its construction, 638; discursive, 660; 
powers of, 675 ; final, 826 

Analogists: Pythagoras, Plato, Copernicus, Kepler, Columbus, 
Newton, 671 

Analogy, 60; of letters, 122, 133, 141, 146; of words, 164, 
216; of signification, 172,210,215; grammatical, 216; 



Digitized by 



Google 



414 INDEX. 

of language, 219; logical, 264, 656 ; poetic, 267 ; rhe- 
torical, 269, 509 ; intellectual, 339 ; universal, 4 13, 478, 
600, 510, 628, 599; of wit, 437 ; powers of, 435; of 
the faculties, 460 ; of truth and light, 461 ; of body and 
mind, 477, 507; philosophical, 514; true and false, 
522, 557 ; of organs, 626 ; use and neglect of, 638 ; an- 
cient, 540, 544 ; modern, 546 ; abuse of, 550 ; legal, 
551 ; religious, 649 ; geometrical, 559 ; of sense, 667 

Analysis and Synthesis, 711, 801 ; terms misemployed, 830 

Anomaly the antagonist of analogy, 657 

Antanaclasis, 223 

A priori and d posteriori, 769 

Arabian logic, 29 

Argument, scope of, 723, 748 

Argumentunij 872 ; ad hominetn ad judicium : baculinunij 877 

Aristotle the prince of logicians, 25; his Organon, 67 ; his Logic, 
686 ; mathematical, 72, 677 ; his Philosophy, 678 

Art advanced by liberty, 2; Egyptian, Grecian, 2; useful, 635; - 
fine, 632 

Articles, 185; logically dbtinguished, 186; categorical, 193, 
196 ; logical powers of, 197 

Articulation, 135 

Association, mental, 414, 416, 422 

Attention, 368, 476 ; is a habit, 476 

Attributes, 199,230 

Authority, logic of, 683 

Autonomy, republican, regulated, 8 

Auxiliary verbs, 194; categorical, 195 

Axioms, logical, 563, 656, 815, 820, 823 

Bacon, founder of modern logic, 29, 43 ; his Induction, 32, 789 ; 
his followers, 41 ; his reform, 43 ; his Organ, 51 ; his 
logical writings, 76, 849 ; his conformable instances ana- 
logical, 665 

Barrow, Dr. a great logician, 50, 651 

Being, category of, 596 

Blood, Harvey's doctrine of, finally demonstrated, 36 

Brown, John, a disciple of Harvey, 36 

Brown, Bishop, an analogist, 50 

Butler, Bishop, an analogist, 60 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 415 

Ccesar's treatise De Analogia, 28 

Canon, of Epicurus, 27 ; of truth, 505; logical, 515 

Categories, grammatical, 170, 181; the basis of logic, 578; 
Aristotle's analysed, 580 ; whence derived, 601 

Categorical, unity, 198, 589, 602 ; argument, 603, 616 

Cause, analysis of, 352, 354, 595, 620, 624, 639 

Characters, symbolic, 97; Chinese, 98; alphabetical, 103; 

figures of, 136; compound, 139; universal, 143; mute, 

149; Mexican, 98 
Cheyne, an analogist, 50 
Christianity, the only logical religion, 20 ; purified or corrupted 

with logic, 21 
Chronological method, 846 
Compensation, universal, 10 
Composition, literary, 229, 642 ; chemical, 643 
Computation, logical, 721 
Conception, 344 

Concession, logical method of, 840, 876 
Conclusion, logical, 564, 700; categorical, 605; analogical, 

614 
Confutation by concession, 876 
Conscience, liberty of, 7 ; its relations, 889 ; the foundation of 

faith, 890, 344, 346 
Consciousness, 342 ; defined, 344 ; universal, 346 ; analogy of, 

347 ; triple, 389 
Consonants, 131 
Construction, 229, 235 ; logical, 247 ; mechanical, 248 ; rule 

of, 250 
Controversy, 48, 878 ; ethical, 627 ; resolved, 634 ; fallacy of, 

865 ; law of, 866 
Conviction, modes of, 498 ; analogical, 502, 517 ; logical, 566, 

714, 822 
Copernicus*s system, 671 
Correlation, universal, 338 
Credulity, vacillating, 16 ; dogmatical, 503 
Creeds, 16 
Criticism, 292, 323, 634 

Debate, rules of, 866 
Deduction, 791 



Digitized by 



Google 



416 INDEX. 

Definition, 240 ; logical analogy of, 241 ; classed, 242, 243 

De Jurain, a generalogist, 51, 766 

Deliberation, 360, 368 

Demonstration, modes of, 568 

Dialectics, 388, 482 ; of Zeno and Plato, 665 ; misapplied, 773 ; 

popular, 824 
Diction, 287 ; analogy of, 288 
Dictum de omni, et nullo, 699, 704 
Digby, 41 ; his logic, 718 
Dignity, 664 
Diphthongs, 128 
Discipline, primary, 93, 403 
Discourse, 229 ; elements of, 251 
Discoveries through analogism, 630, 633 
Discursive analogism, 660, 674 
Dispute, resolved, 634 
Dissection of the syllogism, 695 
Distinctions, logical, 701, 836 
Division, rules of, 835 
Dogmatism, 503 ; resolved, 623 

Education, logical, incumbent, 19 ; order of, 93 

Egyptian, arts of, 1 ; hieroglyphs, 100; learning, 103 

Election, faculty of, 367 ; logical, 370 ; analogy of, 372 

Ellipsis, 156, 233 ; logical, 692 

Elocution, 272 ; evils of, 313 

Emphasis, 151 ; not accent, 197 

Empiricism, logical, 647 

Energies, logical, 468 ; analogy of, 47 1 

English language, excellence of, 105 ; analogy of, 213 

Enthymeme, 692 

Epichirema, 886 

Epicurus's logic, 27 

Eregina, 594 

Ethics, 627 

Etymology, logical, 87, 221 ; of letters, 145 ; philosophical, 222 

Euphony, 131 

Evidence, of reason, 769, 776 ; of sense, 769 

Existence, category of, 589, 591 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 417 

Ex'parte logic, 748 

Expectation, antagonist of memory, 427 

Experimentalists, eminent, 51 

Faculties, of the mind, 391; analogy of/ 396, 460 ; subordina- 
tion of, 402, 404 ; discipline of, 403 ; balance of, 412 ; 
commerce of, 474 

Faith, of reason, 13, 18 ; of conscience, 891 ; analogy of, 548 

Fallacies, 850, 852 ; detection of, 706, 856 ; solution of, 859 ; 
analogical, 860 ; legal, 868 

False views of logic, 825 

Fiction, 301, 312 

Figures and modes, principle of, 697, 728 

Final analogism, 826 

Forms, of Bacon and Kant, 55, 762 

Freedom — see Liberty 

Genders, 176 

Genealogies, analogous, 666 

Grenera, universal, 821 

Generalogical scheme, 795 

Generalogism, or induction, 483, 741, 764; illustrated, 778; 

categorical, 794 ; formal, 799, 805 ; analogical, 811 
Genius, 435 ; inspired, 466, 633 

Grenus and species, relations of, 793 ; universal scheme of, 795 
Geometry, analogy of, 632, 65] j 654 
God, antient names of, 145 

Good, practical, 895; paramount to truth, 22, 892 
Grammar, logical, 73, 207, 211 ; rules of, 130; defined, 162 
Greek language analogous, 213 

Harmonic relations, 122, 147, 282 

Harvey, inductive discoveries of, 33 ; their coincidence with New- 
ton's, 34; his method, 37, 75; his anastomosis demon- 
strated, 35; an Hippocrates, 40; his analogism, 545; 
his circulation, 636 ; his defence of induction, 773 

Hieroglyphics, 103 

Hippocrates, eulogium on, 40 

Hobbes, a disciple of Bacon, 41 

Human figure, analogy of the, 632 

£ E 



Digitized by 



Google 



418 INDEX. 

Hyperbole, 268 
Hypothetical analogisiD, 642 

Idealism and materialism reconciled, 622 

Ideas of Plato, 762 

Identity, logical ,719; of terms, 719, 724 ; of propositions, 720 ; 

of syllogism, 727 
Illation, 565; uniyersal rules of, 716 
Imagination, 393, 400, 428 ; analogy of, 430 ; Shakspere's, 

429 ; dangers of, 428, 431 ; iu office, 434 ; its powers, 

441,443; logical, 444 
Imperfection a principle of union, 794 ; hereof, 76 
Induction, 780; of Plato, Socratic, 24, 760; of Bacon, 32, 

534, 749, 759, 770; slow progress of, 51 ; ite defecU, 

52, 782, 786, 818; analogical, 645, 784; writers on, 

766; universal, 775 ; illustrated, 778, 781 ; principle of, 

783, 787 ; complex, 788 ; of classes, 794 ; formal, 799, 

805; limits of, 816 
Inference, 565; principle of, 569; analogical, 614; rules of, 

716 
Instinct, 465 
Intellect, triune, 452 
Invention, 435, 544 ; art of, 630, 633 ; patents for, 635, 636 ; 

of logic, 764 

Jones of Nayland, an analogist, 50 

Judgments, 225 ; compound, 228 ; extremes of, 463 ; uni- 
versal, 472 ; formation of, 497 ; logical, 700 

Kant's philosophy logical, 53 ; noology, 54 ; his system, 55 ; 

apparent defects, 56 
Kepler's harmonic analogies, 67 1 
Knowledge, of triple relation, 107 

Lady's argument, 883 

Language, dignity of, 79; variety of, 80; universal, 81, 104, 
106; analogy of, 84; the English universal, 105; iU 
subject, 108; of nature, 109; of art, 110; its object, 
111 ; spoken and written, 112 ; how variable, 113, 219; 
its logical relation, 115, 118; elements of, 116; sym- 
bol of, 117; permanence of, 184; ite structure, 211,464 

Laughter, 438 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 419 

Law, logical, 7, 12, 516, 700, 817 

Learning, cherished by religion, 1 ; false position of, 85 

Lectures, teaching by, 95 

Leibnitz's principles, 520 

Lenses, 63] 

Letters, origin of, 96 ; progress of, 98, 120 ; vocal and visual, 
121, 123; harmonic, 122, 147; mute, 134; elementary 
forms of, 138; geometrical, 141; coincident in figure 
and sound, 141 

Liberty, perfective of art, 2 ; coincident with logic, 3,6; how 
licentious, 5 ; how regulated, 7 ; Milton its champion, 9 ; 
elicits law, 10 ; Christian, 20; Divine, 664; and neces- 
sity, 353 

Locke, a principal follower of Bacon, 41 ; his association of 
ideas, 420 

Logic, 386, 525 ; coincident with (iberty, 3, 6 ; the criterion of 
truth and right, 7; perfective of law, 12; of faith, 13; 
defined, 69; its importance, 15; its rise and progress, 
24 ; modem, 42 ; deficient as a whole, 59, 512, 747 ; 
coincident with philosophy, 53, 54, 767 ; its basis, 65 ; 
is a discipline, 67; its extent, 69, 390,537; of autho- 
rity, 364, 884; false, 748, 885; terms of, 171; philo- 
logical, 244, 246 ; of sense, 385, 507 ; faculties of, 387, 
391 ; of party, 748 ; abuses of, 752 ; founded on ana- 
logism, 574 ; scholastic and extra-scholastic, 677 ; Ari- 
stotle's, 680; neglect of, 741, 745 

Logicians, failures of, 49 ; celebrated, 50 ; cautions to, 191 
Logos of truth, 13 
Lunacy, 429 

Macrocosm and Microcosm, analogy of the, 34 

Man, figure of, illustrated, 632 

Material generalogism, 796 

Materialism and idealism reconciled, 622 

Mathematical analogy, 651 ; reasoning, 733 ; logic, 734 

Mathematics, analogical, 628 

Maxims, logical and philological, 200, 823 

Memory, 392, 399, 405 ; acquisitive, 406 ; training of, 408 ; 

artificial, 414; capacity of, 425 ; its riches, 426 
Mesology, the science of science, 336 
MeUphor, 268 



Digitized by 



Google 



420 INDEX. 

Method, 827 ; analytical and synthetical, 89, 831 ; of Aristotle, 
89 ; Socratic, 370, 839 ; of nature, 828 ; antithetical, 
832 ; distinguished, 832 ; of teaching, 833 ; Logic of, 
834, 837, 839 ; analogical, 838 ; of concession, 840 ; 
rules of, 841 ; experimental, 843 ; chronological, 846 

Metre, 152 

Mill, Mr. J. S. a generalogist, 50, 766 

Milton's logic, 9 

Mind, science of, 330 ; analogy of, 335, 445 ; synopsis of, 337 ; 
universal, 342 

Mnemonics, 414 ; Pythagorean, 415 

Modem logic, 43 ; its influence, 44 ; its failure, 45 

Modes of thought, 398, 454, 491 ; of demonstration, 568 ; lo- 
gical, 697 

Moods of verbs logical, 180 

Mutation of language, 1 89, 202 

Mute letters, 134, 149 

Mystery, 433 

Necessity and liberty correlate, 353 

Negation and affirmation, 205 

Neology, 218 

Newton's experimental induction, 34 ; an analogist, 546 

Nomenclature, scientific, 220 

Noology, Kanfs, 54 ; science of mind, 300 ; basis of logic, 331 ; 

analogy of, 333, 341 
Nouns, logical distinctions of, 1 82 
Novum Organum of Bacon, 51, 78, 649, 749 ; deficient, 757 

Object and subject, 889 ; logical, 566, 597 

One-sided logic, 748 

Ontology, ground of noology, 334 ; the science of being, 336 

Operations, logical, 479 

Optics, analogy of, 631 

Organs of Logic adapted to knowledges, 61 ; are instrumental 

powers, 62, 479, 481 ; three, 483 ; distinguished, 488 ; 

misapplied, 494; compared, 499 ; reciprocation of, 492, 

501, 679, 771, 812 ; subordination of, 732 ; their powers, 

814 
Ornament, technical vices of, 320 
Orthography, 161 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 421 

Parenthesis, 156, 231 

Parmenides, inventor of dialectic, 24 

Participle, 175, 203 

Particles, 181 ; categorical, 204 

Pedantry, 317 

Pedigree analogous, 666 

Percolator, 636 

Perfection, unattainable, 75, 895 ; its principle, 894 

Personification, 268 

Perspicuity, principle of, 249 ; its value, 315 

Petitio Principiiy unintentional, 870 

Philology, logical, 73, 77, 249; universal, 78, 106; relation of, 

83 ; the first discipline, 88, 92 
Philosophy and logic correlative, 11, 64, 74, 598, 618, 625, 

767 ; the basis of logic, 65 
Phrenesis, 428 

Physics, logical reform of, 750, 760 ; induction of, 803 
Physiology greatly advanced by Harvey, 33. 36 
Plan of this work, 75 
Plato's logic, 24, 665, 760 ; ideas, 762 
Poetry, 275, 284 
Powers, instrumental, 62 ; of English language, 105 ; of words, 

165, 197; of the verb, 178; logical, 197, 362, 675; 

intellectual, 336; of imagination, 441; of analogy, 

455, 646; of reason, 490 
Practical anaiogism, 642 
Predicables of Aristotle, 191 
Predicaments, 580 ; post, 593 
Prejudice, 362 

Premises, logical, 530 ; false, 863, 870 
Principle, of sufficient reason, 519 ; of identity, 520 ; of unity, 

523; of syllogism, 693, 697 

Principles, recapitulated, 889; Leibnitz's, 520; first, 524; of 

syllogism, 693, 697 
Propositions, grammatical and logical, 225, 227, 495 ; classed, 

236 ; analogy of, 237 ; conversion of, 239 ; imperative, 

364 
Prose, 284 

Prosody, analogical, 283 
Punctuation, 153 ; rhetorical, 159 
Pythagorean mnemonics, 415 



Digitized by 



Google 



422 INDEX. 

Qu€ubimutn of the schools, 94 
Question, confounding of the, 886 

Ramus's reform of logic, 29, 30, 9 

Reason, 377; faculty of, 394, 401, 447, 456; logical, 462; 

instinct, 465 ; Divine, 467 ; analogous, 571 
Reflection, 361 

Reform of logic, 43, 47, 534 ; political, 8, 895 
Relation, logical, 527 ; matter of knowledge, 556 ; universal, 

588, 591 ; distinction of, 613 ; complex, 668 ; of genus 

and species, 793 
Relative terms logical, 187 

Religion, nurse of learning, 1 ; essentially logical, 13, 20 
Resolution of sophisms, 859, 887 
Rhetoric, 252 ; extent of, 254, 270 ; its abuses, 258 ; Aristotle's, 

261 ; intermediate to logic and philology, 260 ; figures 

of, 268 ; analogy of, 269, 661 ; logical, 262, 270 
Rhetorical analogy, 577 
Rhyme, 279 
Rhythm, 276 

Ridicule not logical, 871 ; when lawful, 875 
Right, of truth, and good, 896 
Rights of man, theoretical and practical, 895 
Roots of language categorical, 188 
Rosses telescope discovery, 35 
Rules founded on analogy, 518, 842; of logic, 699; catego^ 

rical, 820 ; of division, 835 

Satire, false argument, 874 

Scepticism, 504 ; resolved, 623 

Scheme, of vowel sounds and figures, 123; alphabetical, 133; 

universal, 338 ; of genus and species, 795 ; of syllogism, 

695- 

Scholastic fallacies, 46 ; logic limited, 681 

Science, early, 2 ; analogy of, 336, 629 ; of unity, 525 

Semiotics, 158, 160 

Sense, logic of, 657, 667, 739 

Sensual, true signification of, 10; analogism, 658 

Sentences, compound signs, 225 

Shakspere, a scholastic reformer, 30 ; on imagination, 429,436 ; 
on reason, 467 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX. 4^3 

Signification, analogous, 265, 278 

Signs, logic of, 137 ; rhetorical, 265 

Similitude, analogy of, 678 

Socratic induction, 24, 764 

Sophism, resolution of, 859 

Sophistry, 852; art of, 861 ; legal, 867 ; its scope, 853 ; source 
of, 857 

Sophists, incited logic, 25 

Sorites, 691 

Sound, expression of, 263 

Space and time, analysed, 626 

Style, 286; analogy of, 288, 294, 319, 324, 307; religious, 290 ; 
poetic, 293, 295 ; historic, 297 ; philosophic, 300 ; Ari- 
stotle's doctrine of, 306 ; pure, 309, 328 ; its excellence, 
315 ; perfection of, 318 ; vices of, 320, 327 

Subject, and object, 389, 595 ; and predicate, 806 

Subordination, logical, 529, 683, 732 ; political, 6 ; of organs^ 
732, 819 

Syllogism, 485, 738 ; mathematical, 733, 679 ; its office, 686 ; 
exemplified, 687 ; analysed, 690, 694 ; dissected, 695 ; 
analogical, 698, 707, 712, 726; rules of, 699; varieties 
of, 709, 730; sophistical, 708; iu limiU, 715; philo- 
sophy of, 718; iu construction, 720; useless subtil ties 
of, 729 

Symbols, logical, 245, 663 

Synonymism, 223 

Syntax, 224 

Synthesis and analysis, 711 

Tatham, an analogist, 50 
Teaching, 833 : by lecture, 95 
Technical logic, 705 
Teleology, the science of art, 336 
Terms, logical, 171, 689 ; convertible, 17a 
Test, logical, 704 
Theological organ, 531, 548 
Time and space, 582, 626 
Topics, 848 
Trains of thought, 417 
Triads of Bardism, 418 

Triplicity, noological, 380 ; of consciousness, 889 ; of intellect,. 
892 



Digitized by 



Google 



424 INDEX. 

Triunity of mind. 378, 452 

Trivium of the schools, 70, 94, 273, 329 

Truth, tested, 14; subservient to good, 22, 896; logic the 
science of, 23, 329, 725; degraded, 872; contrasted, 
300; logical, 311, 449; poetic, 314; search of, 381; 
analogy of with light, 461 ; unity of, 521 ; analogical, 
553, 555, 567, 572 ; phases of, 573 ; its end, 822 

Tycho Brah6, 671 

Understanding, explained, 373 ; according to usage, 374 ; 

powers of, 378 ; its relations, 379 ; complexity of, 451 
Uniformity of nature, analogical, 669 
Unity, a universal principle, 523, 893 ; of mind, 459, 474 ; 

logical, 525, 571, 573 
Universal, logic, 59, 69, 76 ; analogy, 413 
Universals, logic of, 486, 513, 579, 67 
Universe, a logical whole, 266, 413,510 

Verb, the, 176; its powers, 178; construction of, 202 
Volition, 349 ; correlation of, 351 ; defined, 352 ; ethical, 355 ; 

relation of, to art, 356 ; logical, 357 ; analogy of, 359 
Vowels, analysed, 123; primary, 124; Aristotle^s distribution 

of, 125 ; ancient British, 126 ; Grecian, 127 ; secondary, 

128; variable, 129 

Wallace, Dr., distinction of sounds, 1 33 

Whately's, Bishop, logic, 50 

Whewell, Dr., induction of, 52, 766 

Will, defined, 352 ; correlation of, 350 ; freedom and necessity 

of, 353 ; active and passive, 354 ; powers of, 359, 362 ; 

logical and moral, 366 ; blind, 383 ; logic of, 384 
Willis, Dr., on Harvey's logic, 750 
Wit, analogy of, 437 
Words, composition and relation of, 163; analogy of, 164; how 

significant, 165; logical powers of, 166, 181 ; affinity of, 

168; distinguished, 169; relative, 174; terminals and 

prefixes of, 201 
Wrangling, 48, 879 

Zeno Eleates, the inventor of logic, 24, 665 



London :— Printed by 6. Barclay, Cutle St. Leioefter Sq. 



Digitized by 



Google 



OTHER WORKS OF THE AUTHOR. 



TRITOGENEA; 

OR, 

A SYNOPSIS OF UNIVERSAL PHILOSOPHY. 
New Edition. Octavo. 



OUTLINES OF ANALOGICAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Being a Primary View of the Principles, Relations, and Purposes 
of Nature, Science, and Art, in which tne Sciences are systematised 
and harmonised with Nature and Art universally. 2 vols. 8vo. 



CHROMATICS; 

OB, 

THE ANALOGY, HARMONY, AND PHILOSOPHY OF 

COLOURS. 

A New Edition. Octavo. 

THE SAME. Former Edition, with lai'ge coloured Diagrams. 
Royal Qnarto. 



CHROMATOGRAPHY; 

OR, 

)N COLOURS AND PIGI^ 
EIR POWERS IN PAINT 

An improved Edition. 8vo. 



OR, 

A TREATISE ON COLOURS AND PIGMENTS, AND OF 
THEIR POWERS IN PAINTING. 



GRAMMAR OF COLOURING; 

OB, 

RUDIMENTS OF THE PAINTER'S ART. 
12mo. 



'O A0r02; 

OB, 

THE WORDS OF CHRIST RECORDED BY THE 

EVANGELISTS. 

Being a Manual for all Christians. 



Ready for the Press^ 

ETHICS; 

OB, 

THE ANALOGY OF MORALS, POLITICS, AND 

THEOLOGY. 