AN 



ELEMENTARY TREATISE 



OK 



LOGIC; 



DESIGNED OHIEFLT FOB THE USB OF SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND PRIVATE 

GENTLEMEN, WHO WISH TO 
ACQUIRE A KNOWLEDGE OF THE REASONING SCIENCE. 



BY 



THE AUTHOR OF "ANTIDOTE TO INFIDELITT," &0.: "SHORT TREATISE 

ON THE SABBATH,*' fto.. &0. 



LONDON: 

JOHN CHAPMAN, 142, STRAND, 

GLASGOW: ALEXANDER HADDEN. 

1852. 



i 



£^4c, ^. '^^. 



PfiRRT, DAYIS, AMD 00., MAOBINB AND OBNERAL PRI^TBRS, 
BLBPHAVT AKD OASTLB, NBWINGTOIf BUTTS, SURREY. 



CONTENTS. 



Page. 
Introduction i.— xii. 

BOOK I. 
Operations of the Mind. Technicalities of Logic. 

Part I. 
1. Distinction. 2. Classification. 3. Division. 4. Definition . . 1—14 

Part II. 

1. Propositions. 

1. As to Substance. 2. As to Quality. 3. As to Quantity 

2. Affbotigns of Propositions. 

I. Subalternation. 2. Conversion. 3. Opposition . 15 — 20 

BOOK II. 
Mbtaphtsios of Looio. 

I. Logic of Judgment 21 — 27 

II. Logic of Induction 28 — 30 

III. Logic of Deduction 31—33 

I. Primoiplbs op thb Syllooisms. 

1. Its Maxims. 2. Its Rules and Axioms. 3. Its Moods 4. Its 

Figures 34—45 

Rbduction of Syllogisms. 

1. Direct. 2. Indirect 46—49 

II. Compound Syllogisms. 

1. Conjunctives. 2. Conditionals. 3. Disjunctives . . . 50 — 54 

III. Ibrboullar Syllogisms. 

I. The Enthymeme. 2. The Sorites. 3. The Epiohrema. 

4 The Dilemma 55—62 

IV. Fallaoibs. 

1 Fallacies of Intuition. 2. Fallacies of Judgment. 3. Fallacies 

of Induction. 4. Fallacies of Deduction .... 62 — 76 

Province of Logic 77—80 



INTRODUCTION. 



Thb tenn, " Logic," is primarily derived from the Greek word Logos^ but 
more immediately from the French, and signifies a word, or an idea em« 
bodied in language. But this signification has been at various times 
extended, so that the term in question has been frequently used to signify, 
not only a word, or simple idea embodied in language, but also a discourse, 
a reason in the sense of argument or proof, the re^LSoning power itself, and 
finally, the reasoning process. Hence, the name Logic has assumed a 
signification more or less extended, according to the views of the various 
writers that have treated upon this department of science. 

There are some writers who have included, under the Scientific Art of 
Logic, the whole range of mental philosophy ; in addition to this, others 
have included the art of rhetoric ; a third have restricted it to the single 
process of deduction, or of unfolding particular truths wrapt up in given 
premises ; while a fourth, would confine it to the mental process of 
induction. 

This diversity, in the application of the term, has given rise to much 
misconception and controversy. Not only has the name been misapplied, 
but the nature, design, and legitimate province of the science been mis- 
apprehended even by its friends ; and the greatest obloquy thrown upon 
it by its enemies, in consequence of the preposterous and extravagant 
claims advanced by the former in behalf of their favorite science. The 
result has been no less injurious to Logic in particular, than it has been 
detrimental to science and philosophy in generaL It would be fruitless 
to enter upon the particulars of these controversies, being generally of so 
trivial and absurd a natqre. It will be necessary, therefore, only to give 
such a general outline of the science, as will assist the reader in his efforts 
to master its principles. 

In treating of any science, one of the first things to be attended to, is 
to point out, in as few words as possible, its essential attributes, or to give^ 



-ttr- INTRODUCTION. 

what is usually called, a definition of it. This is, perhaps, more difficult 
in the case of Logic, than of any other in the whole range of existing 
sciences. The reason is ohvious, in as much as Logic must necessarily 
have to do with the whole field of human knowledge, and the universal 
range of human intelligence. It has been defined by some, the " theory 
or calculus of proof." This definition is hardly satisfactory. As it is con- 
nected with every process of the human judgment, perhaps, it might be 
defined " the scientific art which takes cognisance of inferential relations.*' 
With the immediate knowledge of the judgment or the senses, Logic can 
have nothing directly to do, but simply with that knowledge which comes 
to the mind through the medium of proof. As the latter species of know- 
ledge, however, is acquired by the mind in a threefold manner, the rea- 
soning science must naturally be considered under a threefold aspect : — 

1. The knowledge acquired of particular facts, from other particular 

facts. 

2. The knowledge acquired by inductive generalizations. 

3. The knowledge acquired by deductive inferences. 

Some will no doubt consider the above definition faulty, others that the 
reasoning process is the same, whether connected with judgment, induction, 
or deduction. It may be said, also, that it takes no notice of the cogniz- 
ance which Logic necessarily takes of language ; but, let it be observed, 
that Logic only stands in a secondary relation to human language. It 
takes cognizance of it only so far as it is the medium of human knowledge, 
human reasoning, and human communication. It stands to it in precisely 
the same relation, that the carpenter's tools do in reference to the scientific 
art of ship building ; but the philosophy of language, as siLchy belongs 
entirely and exclusively to grammar. 

In all reasoning whatever, certain signs or symbols must be used, by 
which other intelligent agencies may apprehend our inward cognitions. 
So far, then, as language is the external sign or symbol of the mind's 
conceptions. Logic, as a member of the great commonwealth of sciences, 
must necessarily feel a common interest in the common medium of our 
common nature. Nor is this all, for as there is no well defined science, 
but has its own peculiar or technical language for its own special use, so 
it is and ought to be the case with Logic. 

In every process of reasoning there are the means of proof and the thing 
proved ; or, what is generally called, the premises and the comlusion^ 
whether this mental process be : — 



INTRODUCTION. Ul. 

1. The judging process. 

2. The generalizing process. 

3. The syllogising process. 

Premises, again, are made up of propositions, and propositions are made 
up of terms. It may be further observed, that the terms joined, by what 
is called the copula, constitute a proposition. For example, the following 
terms : — 



But, 



Caesar, man, ambitious, miserable. 

Caesar was an ambitious man, or 
Caesar was a miserable man, 



are propositions ; yet, none of these, as such, contain a process of rea- 
soning, but simply an act of judgment. Of themselves, they do not constitute 
an argument, for every argument must consist of two things, the 7>roq/* and 
the thing proved. But, supposing we should ¦ say, " Caesar was ambitious, 
therefore, he was miserable," it would then be an argument. 

Arguments. 

1 This candle has burnt me ; therefore, J * 

That candle will bum me. j- Assoaatoon. 



2. John, Peter, and James are mortal, 

These are men ; therefore, } Generalization. 

All men are mortal. 



1 



3. All men are mortal, 1 

James is a man ; therefore, > Deduction. 
James is mortal. j 

These three arguments, as above expressed, show us the three modes in 
which the mind reasons. If, however, the above argument^ " Caesar was 
ambitious, therefore, he was miserable," should be objected to, that 
objection must either apply to the assertion made or the conclusion inferred* 
It may be denied that '* Caesar was ambitious," or it may be admitted, 
but that it does not necessarily follow that he was miserable. The major 
premise must, therefore, be first admitted, '' all ambitious men are miser- 
able," before we infer in the conclusion that Cceaar was miserable. The 
logic of deduction takes cognizance of inferences such as these, but is of 
no avail until we first obtain a major premise. It is here where the logic 
of induction comes into play, in order to supply what may be termed 
generalized premises not intuitive principles. How, then, are we to 



IV. QiTBODUOTION. 

obtain the major premise, /^ all ambitious men are miserable." If Logic 
had merely to do with mere deduction, its sphere of usefulness would be 
very limited, and comparatively of little value. 

The only way in wliich to obtain the generalized conclusion, that *' all 
ambitious men are mortal,*' is by induction only. True, there is a mental 
process prior to induction, this I admit. This is called, by logicians, sim- 
ple perception, observation, an act of judgment, &c., or what may be 
called the investigating process. But let it be observed, that even here 
Logic comes into full play, except merely in the case of the intuitive per- 
ceptions, whether arising from an internal or external condition, these 
being primary and fundamental elements of human knowledge with which 
the judgment has nothing directly to do. For example : — 



Objective. 



1. I see the table. 

2. I smell the rose. 



S. I tasted the wine. 
4. I heard the noise. 



5. I felt the blow. 



Subjective. 



1. I do exist. I 2. I am conscious. 

8. I think, reason, &c 

These are sometimes called acts of judgment ; but the judgment as 
such has nothing to do with them, and only commences its functions after 
the immediate knowledge of consciousness and the semes is supplied. Bat 
in what is called the investigating process, the element of reasoning is intro- 
duced, so as to discover sufficient hcts for generalizing. This generalizing 
process may be called a reasoning, but not a syllogistic or deciphering 
process. Thus, " Why do I believe that the sun will rise to-morrow,*' &€• 
Is it a simple inference ? I apprehend not. It is an inductive belief in 
the uniformity of sequences in nature, immediately based upon a mental 
generalization, occasioned by previous experience. It is from the want of 
giving sufficient attention to this generalizing element in human nature, 
that our modem logicians have so greatly misconceived^ and so grossly 
perverted the principles of this noble science. 

It has been already observed, that there are four mental processes con- 
nected with reasoning. 



INTBOBUOTION. ?. 

1. The perception of fietcts or ideas. 

2. The judgments of reason. 

8. The induction of generalizationB. 
4. The deduction of inferences. 

The first has strictly speaking to do with Metaphysics, and does not come 
within the legitimate province of Logic, though it is of the utmost importance 
to the logician to he thoroughly acquainted with the metaphysical principles 
upon which these mental operations are based. This perception of facts, 
cognition of principles, or passing of judgments, are, as we have already 
observed, occasioned by observation and experience. From thence the 
mind judges, generalizes, and infers. 

Judging Fbogess. 
Peter is mortal ; therefore, 
John is mortal. 

Genbbalizing Frocbss. Infebbxtial Prgcbss. 

Peter, James, and John are mortal,^ All men are mortal, 

These are men ; therefore, John is a man ; therefore. 

All men are mortal. John is mortal. 

The only way to guard against the errors of the first, is to examine 
those sources whence human error springs. The way to test an inductive 
syllogism, is different to that by which a deductive syllogism is to be 
tested. 

INDUCTIVE TEST. 

^' If one fact can be adduced, contradictory of the generalized conclusion, 
the whole argument falls to the ground." 

DEDUCTIVE TEST. 

'^ Whatever is predicated of a term distributed, may be predicated in like 
manner of any thing contained imder that term.** 

Having now given a short outline of what I apprehend to be the legitimate 
province of Logic, it will be necessary briefly to advert to the opinions of 
others in respect to this science. The theory of Aristotle is evidently that 
which confines the reasoning science to pure deduction. Watts includes 
within its range the philosophy of the mind, and the art of rhetoric. Dr. 
Whately perceived the error of Watts, and mshed to the opposite ex- 
treme. But, in seeug the mote in his neighbour's, he did not detect the 
beam in his own eye. He confines the province of Logjlc ^ ^^qsa. 



vi. INTRODUCTION. 

inference, or the deciphering process. Leechman follows in the wake of 
the learned Prelate. Mills strikes out a new path, but his theory is 
neither fish nor flesh. It is neither inductive nor deductive. If it be any 
thing definite at all, it is that all reasoning is from particulars to particulars. 
De Morgan has propounded some very refined speculations in connection 
with this science, but his work, as a Logical Treatise, is of no practical 
value. 

Theoribs on Logic* 

WnATBLT Reasoning from generals to particulars. 

Leechman do. do. 

Mills From particulars to particulars. 

c, ;¦ 1 • From particulars to particulars. 

Selves J 

2. From particulars and generals, to generals and 

universals. 

3. From generals and universals, to particulars, generals, 

and universals. 

Perhaps, it may be asked, what distinction exists between a general and a 
universal proposition ; the difference I apprehend to consist in the difference 
which exists between a genus and a species. Generalized conclusions, 
based upon the species, are what may be termed generals. Universalized 
conclusions, based upon the genus, may be termed universals. 

Examples. 

I. FROM PARTICULARS TO PARTICULARS. 

This candle burnt me ; therefore. 
That candle will burn me. 

II. FROM PARTICULARS AND GENERALS TO GENERALS AND 

UNIVERSALS. 

1. From particulars to generals, 
Peter, James, and John, have a power of beginning motion. 
These are men ; therefore, 
All men have a power of beginning motion. 

2. From generals to universals. 
Men, birds, beasts, &c., have a power of beginning motion. 
These are animals ; therefore. 
All animals have a power of beginning motion. 



INTRODUCTION. VU, 

III. FKOM GENERALS AND UNIVERSALS TO PARTICULARS, 

GENERALS, AND UNIVERSALS. 

1. From generals to parHculara,. 

All men have a power of beginning motion, 

Peter is a man ; therefore, 

Peter has a power of beginning motion. 

2. From universals to generals. 

All animals ha?e a power of beginning motion. 

All men are animals ; therefore, 

All men have a power of beginning motion. 

8. From universals to universals. 

Whatever has a power of beginning motion, has an individuality of existence, 

All animals have this power ; therefore. 

All animals have an individuality of existence. 

Having now briefly set forth the legitimate province of Logic, it will be 
as well to observe, that reasoning is not confined, as is generally sup- 
posed, to mere disputation. Mathematicians are constantly engaged in 
reasoning, though their propositions are based upon incontrovertible proof. 
The general theories of geometry are demonstrated by means of syllogisms 
founded upon the axioms and definitions. The form of syllogisms 
employed in geometrical reasoning, is of the simplest character. Every 
syllogism consists of three propositions, of which two are called the 
premises, and the third the conclusion. These propositions contain three 
terms, "the subject and predicate of the conclusion, and the middle term, 
which connects the predicate and conclusion together. The subject of the 
conclusion is called the minora and the predicate of the conclusion is called 
the major term of the syllogism. The major term appears in one premise, 
and the minor term in the other, with the middle term, which is in both 
premises. That premise which contains the middle term and the major 
term, is called the major premise ; and that which contains the middle 
term and the minor term, is called the minor premise of the syllogism. 
As an example, we may take the first syllogism in the demonstration of 
Prob. I. Book I. of Euclid, wherein it will be seen that the middle term 
is the subject of the major premise and the predicate of the minor. 



VIU. INTRODUCTION. 

McQor premise, — ^Because the straight line A B is equal to the straight 

line A C, and 
Minor premise. — Because the straight Hne B C is equal to the straight 

line A B ; therefore, 
Conclusion. — The straight Hne B G is equal to the straight line A C. 
Here, B C is the subject, and A C the predicate of the conclusion. 

B C is the subject, and A B the predicate of the minor premise. 
A B is the subject, and A C the predicate of the major premise. 
Also, A C is the major term, B C the minor term, and A B the middle 
term of the syllogism. 

In this syllogism, it may be remarked, that the definition of a straight 
line is assumed, and the definition, of the geometrical equality of two straight 
lines ; also, that a general theoretic truths or axiom, forms the ground of 
the conclusions. 

This is no less true in every other department of science and philosophy 
where reasoning is employed. Whether in grammar, history, poetry, 
geology, or divinity, if reasoning be at all employed, Logic takes cog- 
nizance of it. 

It has been a subject of dispute, both in ancient and modem times 
whether Logic be a science or an art. Some have considered it one, some 
the other. It is evidently both. As a science, it has to do with the laws 
and principles of reasoning itself whatever the subject matter may be. As 
an art, it lays down rules by which we are enabled to exhibit truth in all 
its clearness, and to detect the various errors that vitiate the legitimacy of 
our conclusions. As an art, it does more ; for it regulates language, the 
vehicle of human reasoning, in the various logical forms which it assumes 
in argumentation. To see its value let us take a few examples of fallacious 
reasoning. 

I. Association. 

J. The sun shines by its own light ; therefore. 
The moon shines by its own light. 

2. This rose has a sweet smell ; therefore. 
That rose has the same. 

3. This cigar smokes well ; therefore. 
That one will smoke well, &c. 

The only way to test fallacious reasoning from particulars to particulars 
is by experience or judgment. . If the fallacy springs from material quali- 
ties or the phenomena of nature, it is to be tested by the senses. If it 
springs from an assumed principle or relation, then it is to be tested by 
the judgment. 



introduction. ix. 

11. Induction. 

Bolingbroke, Volney, Paine, Voltarre, Eosseau, and Carlyle, were 

notorious for their gross immorality of conduct, 
These were modern infidel philosophers ; therefore, 
All modern infidel philosophers were notorious for their gross im- 
morality of conduct. 

The way by which to test this syllogism, is to ascertain if any fact can 
be found to contradict this generalised conclusion. Such a fact can be 
ascertained, for David Hume forms an honourable exception to this lot o( 
worthies. The argument, as such, therefore falls to the ground. 

m. Deduction. 

Light is contrary to darkness. 
Feathers are light ; therefore, 
Feathers are contrary to darkness. 

TAght is the middle term in this syllogism, which is ambiguous ; and 
therefore, there are virtually two middle terms in sense, though only one 
in sound. 

White is a colour, 

Black is a colour ; therefore. 

Black is white. 

The fallacy in this syllogism, lies in the middle term also. Colour is 
not distributed, or used in the whole of its extension, or to represent the 
whole of its significates in the minor premise, so that black was compared 
with one part of it, and white with another part. Again :— 

All men grow, 

A woman grows ; therefore, 

A woman is a man. 

This is similar to the former. Take, for example, the following falla- 
cious argument :— 

Every virtuous youth is attentive to his studies. 
This youth is attentive to his studies ; therefore. 
He is virtuous. 

Such an argument as this might easily be passed off as valid, especially 
in the heat of discussion. But so far as the validity of the reasoning is 
concerned, it is precisely the same as the following : — 



X. INTRODUCTION. 

Every man eats, 

A dog eats ; therefore, 

A dog is a man. 

Let us takft another example of fallacious reasoning ; — 

Every ambitious man is miserable. 

This person is not an ambitious man ; therefore. 

He is not miserable. 

This argument exactly corresponds with the following: — 

Every man has a power of beginning motion, 

A horse is not a man ; therefore, 

A horse has not the power of beginning motion. 

Or, again : — 

The dog barks, 

The dog is a star ; therefore. 

The star barks. 

From these specimens of sophistical reasoning the necessity will be more 
clearly seen, of having certain scientific rules whereby to detect the various 
fallacies that lurk in what may apparently be considered fair and legitimate 
argumentation ; and, though natural sagacity may enable a person to 
expose the more apparent fallacies, still how much more efficient would 
that natural sagacity be, if it were expanded and developed by the best 
principles of scientific truth. 

This LogTc professes to do, so far as reasoning is concerned. But let it 
be observed, that Logic of itself will never make a reasoner ; it will not 
supply the materials of knowledge. This must be acquired from every 
possible source : honey must be collected from every flower, and when the 
elements of knowledge are acquired, then will Logic assist us in presenting 
truth in her best and noblest form. 



LOGIC. 



L—THE JUDGING PROCESS. 



II.— THE INDUCTIVE PROCESS. 



IlL— THE DEDUCTIVE PROCESS. 



AN 



ELEMENTARY TREATISE 



ON 



LOGIC. 



33®a^lt s. 



OPERATIONS OF THE MIND. 

(connected with logic.) 



In every process of argumentation there are four distinct operations of the 
mind called into exercise :— 

1. The Intuitive. 3. The Inductive. 

2. The Judging. 4. The Syllogistic. 

By the Intuitive we gain our perceptions and ideas ; by the Judging we 
cognize their relations, and pronounce upon their agreement or disagree- 
ment ; by the Inductive we generalize these judgments ; and by the 
/Syllogistic process we unfold the particular principles wrapt up in these 
generalizations. To analyse the action of these powers, and investigate 
their phenomena, in so far as they are purely mental operations unconnected 
with argumentation, exclusively belongs to the science of metaphysics. It 
is only so far as they are employed ia judging, generalizing, bxA si/llogizingy 
that they come within the domain of Logic. The perceptions and ideas 
of Intuition embodied in language, are called terms ; the decisions of 
Judgment when expressed, are called propositions, or judgments ; the pro- 
cesses of Induction are called generalizations ; and those of SyUogism are 
called concltLsions, But these, however, are all liable to defects. Terms 
may be indistinct, vague, and indefinite ; propositions may be false ; general- 
izations incon^ect ; and conclusions Jcdlaciotto, It is the legitimate province 
of Logic to guard against these defects, by devising rules, based on scien- 
tific principles, so as to have terms distinct and definite ; propositions true ; 
generalizations correct; and conclusions based upon, and part of, the 
immutable principles of truth. 



ELEIIENTABY TREATISE 



LOGIC. 



I. 11. 

Reflective. Infeuential. 

1. Metaphysics of Logic. 1. Inductions. 

2. Judgments. 2. Deductions. 



TECHNICALITIES OF EEFLECTIVB LOGIC. 

Part I. — Terms. Part IL — ^Propositions. 

Part I. — Terms. 

In conducting the reasoning process, it has been found necessary to 
employ technical language in defining terms, explaining principles, and 
laying down rules. The first part of Logic, therefore, treats of terms. 
But terms may be vague, indistinct, and indefinite. Logic endeavours to 
guard against this as far as possible, by assigning them a clear, distinct, 
and definite meaning, by rules of : — 

1. Distinction. 8. Division. 

2. Classification. 4. Definition. 

These are sometimes called Logical Instruments. 

I. Distinction. 

1. Verbal Distinctions. — ^The nature of verbal distinctions comes more 
properly under the cognisance of the science of grammar ; however, as an 
example of them, we may select the term cause. Strictly speaking, there 
is but one catLse — the primary fountain of all being. It is, however, 
applied both to animate and inanimate objects in a subordinate sense. 
There is again distinctions in reference to subordinate causes, the principal 
of which are :— ^ 

1. The Efficient Cause... From which the effect proceeds. 

2. The Material Cause... Of which it is produced. 

3. The Formal Cause.... The mode in which it is accomplished. 

4. The Final Cause The object designed, or the end in view. 

Tnke the term Watch : — 

1. The man that made it. 

2. The materials of which it was made. 

3. The mode in which it is accomplished. 

4. The end in view. 

2. Modal Distinctions. — ^This refers to the manner in which words are 
employed. For instance, there are unwoccUy equwoccdy and analogmis 
terms. They are not however, be it observed, distinct classes of terms, but 
the same term used in either signification, at the option of the writerr 
Thus, the term "Lady" may be considered urdvoccU, because it is only 
applicable in the same sense to one class ; but it may be used as to give 
it a different meaning every time it is employed, hence it would very pro- 
perly be called egyivocoL When two objects bear a certain resemblance to 
each other, they are often similarly named : Thus, a crop of com and a crop 
of bayonets have a certain resemblance to each other, and are therefore 
said to be analogous. 



OK LOGIC. 



3. Real Distuictions. — Terms in which a real distinction obtains, have 
been arranged by logicians into the following classes : — 

1. Singular and Common terms. 

2. Absolute, Relative, and Correlative ierms. 

3. Opposite and Compatible terms. 

4. Abstract, Concrete, and Collective terms. 

5. Connotative or Attributive, and Non-Connotative or Non- 

Attributive terms. 

6. Positive, Negative, and Privative terms . 

7. Definite and Indefinite terms. 

8. Contradictory and Contrary terms. 

9. Categorimatic and Sun-Categorimatic terms. 
10. Mixed and Infinitive terms. 

1. Singular and Common terms. — A singular term stands for a single 
individual, as " Caesar," the " Thames ;" these, it is plain, cannot be said 
affirmatively of anything but those individuals resp3ctively. A common 
term stands for an indefinite number of individuals, or singular terms, 
which are called its significates, and can be applied to any of tliem as com- 
prehending them in its single signification, as many river, tree. 

2. Absolute^ Relativey and Correlative, — ^An Absolute term, is a term 
which is viewed as a wlhoU, without reference to anything of which it is a 
part, or with which it may be connected ; as " a livmg creature," " a 
human being." A Relative term expresses an object considered as part 
of a whole, viewed in reference to that complex idea. Correlative terms 
denote objects related to each other and viewed in that relation ; professor 
and student, master and servant^ are relative terms ; being regarded, each 
as a part of the complex objects professor and student, master and servant. 
But when terms are viewed under a correlative aspect, they are not only 
viewed as to what that relation denotes, but in reference to that relation 
itself. Thus, take the terms king, subject, servant. 

King Servant Not Correlative as such. 

King Subject Correlative. 

Between king and servant there is no direct relation as such. But, be 
it observed, the king may be viewed under three aspects : — 

1. King.... — ^-^_,__^^ 1 Subject. 

2. Master . . ^Il^^ f Servant. 

3. Man . . . . ^^-—-^""""^ ) Man. 

It will thus be seen that there is no direct relation between servant and 
king but simply an indirect one ; the direct one being from servant to 
master, the indirect one through the master to the king. Relatives, how- 
ever, are only opposite when applied to the same subject, as one may be 
both master and servant ; but not at the same time to the same person. 

3. Opposite and Compatible Terms, — Terms are said to be opposite when 
there are two views which cannot be taken of one single object at the 
same time. As, for example, a piece of paper could be black and white at 
the same time ; but it may be white and stovi, or white and bad, hence they 
are caUed Compatible, 

4. Abstract, Concrete and Collective Terms, — An abstract term expresses 
an idea or notion, without any reference to the subject with which it is 
connected. When conjoined with the object that occasioned the idea, it 
is then called concrete* Collective, << army, names of multitude, &c. 




4 ELElfBNTA.UT TREA.TISE 

1. Abstract, goodness, vice, folly. 

2. Concrete, good, viscious, foo^ or foolish. 

5. Connotative or Attributive; Non^Connotative or Non- Attributive, — 

When a noun is used, so as to bring some prominent attribute of it before 
the mind at the same time, it is said to be connotative. For example :-^> 

NON-CONNOTAXrVE. CONNOTATIVE. 

Bacon The Father of Liductive Philosophy. 

Aristotle The Father of Logic. 

Romulus The i^bumfer of Rome. 

Brewster The Inventor of the Kaleidescope. 

London The Capital of England. 

Here, as father of inductive philosophy you connote Bacon a certain 
attribute, not mvolved in the bare term Bacon itself, and so with the rest. 
It may be further observed, that every concrete oomrrum term is connotative, 
both in the adjective and substantive forms ; but not so with the abstract 
common term^ unless when some quality or condition is implied in the 
term, such as heroism, which may be considered as implying hope of mind 
or renown. 

SUBSTANTIVE. ADJECTIVE. 

Connotative Do. Non-connotative. 

Man Human Human Nature. 

Saint Holy Holiness. 

Triangle Triangular Triangularity. 

6. Positive, Negative, and Privative. — A Jerm expressing a certain view 
of an object as being actually taken of it is called Positive ; as a *• man 
walking,*' a term denoting that this view might concurrently be taken of it, 
but is not is Privative, as dmnbness, " a man dumb." A term which 
denotes that such a notion is not and could not be taken of it, is called 
Negative ; as a " dumb statue," a " lifeless carcase." 

7. Definite and Indefiyiite Tenns, — A privative or negative term, is 
called iiidejimte in respect to its not defining or marking out an object, the 
Positive being called Definite, because it defines or marks out the object, 
" Caesar" is called definite, " not Caesar" is called indefinite, 

8. Contradictory and Contrary Terms. — The most perfect opposition 
between terms, exists between any two when the particle not is attached 
to it. For instance, " inanimate," " not inanimate ;" " incorporeal," 
" not incorporeak" It is impossible for both these views to be taken 
at once of the same thing, it is also impossible but that one or other 
should be applicable to any object ; for as there is nothing can be both, 
so there is nothing can be neither. On the other hand contrary terms 
(those coming under one class), are the most different that belong to that 
class, such as " wise" and " foolish," " proud" and " humble." Those 
denoting mental habits are opposed, but in a different manner ; for, though 
both cannot be applied to the same object, there may be other objects to 
which neither can be applied. 

9. Categorimatic and Sun-categorimatic Terms, — The first is one that 
can enter into predication by itself. Adverbs, propositions, &c., also 
nouns in the oblique cases, are sun-categorimatic, i.e, can only form part 
of a term. 

10. Mixed and Infinitive. — A verb (except the verb to he) is a mixed 
word, being resolvable hito copula and predicate, vi\\k\\ is very often so 



ON LOGIC. O 

resolved in translating from one langtiage to another ; as ipse adest <^lie is 
present." But even the substantive verb to be itself can at times be so 
resolved. Troga fuit, " Troy is no longer in existence.'* ** Fmrmis 
Troes" " We are Trojans no longer." The infimlivey it may be observed, 
is never the predicate, except when an infinitive is the subject, " Not to 
advance is to fall back." '^ Not to be for us is to be against us." 

n. Classification. 

Under this head have been comprehended what have been usually called 
the Ten Categories, or Predicaments, and the Five Predicables. The 
former were given as a complete enumeration of every thing that could be 
expressed without composition and structure, and were intended to include 
all possible objects of thought, knowledge, and discourse. Each category 
was considered to be a summum genus of the most extensive generalization 
that can be drawn, there being, according to Aristotle, ten such in nature. 
These objects of thought were again sub-divided into five classes, accord- 
ing to their extension, so that any object of thought might be traced up 
through these five classes or predicables, until it was ultimately referred to 
its summum genus, which, as a matter of course, was one or other of the 
ten categories ; each step in the ladder of extension becoming more 
extended, or embracing more objects as a class within its bounds ; so that 
an object of thought would consequently loose at each step some of the 
peculiarities by which it was ranked in the less extended grades, on the 
basis of which it could only be merged in the higher or more extended. 
Hence the distinction between extension and comprehension. The less the 
extension the greater the comprehension ; for in ascending the ladder of 
extension you select a more general property of the object of thought than 
in the preceding, in which to rank it as a class. Thus, take for instance, 
the word animal : the generalized thought which this term represents is 
that of vitality ; hence all vitalized objects may be considered as ranking 
under it ; but if we take the term man, all living creatures do not come 
within this term, or stand for all its significates, but for the human species 
only. Let us illustrate this by the categories of substance and quantity :-^— 

THE TEN CATEGOEIES, OR SUMMA GENERA, 

Situation, Relation, Quality, Substance, Place, Time, Quantity, Possession, 
Action, Suffering. 

1. Genus Animal Square. 

2. Species Man Parallelogram. 

3 . Diffirentia Rationality All sides equal, 

i Square on diagonal 

4. Proprium o Progressive improvement -? equal to square 

( on one side, 

5. Accident, Separable f Born in London C First taught by the 

or Inseparable... (^Wearing white clothes ^ Greeks, &c. 

The student may trace any nameajble thing up to one or other of these 
categories, through the predicables as above. 

Li this way the student may trace up all objects of thought to a 
summum genus or category. But this does not explain all ; a genus may 
be again considered as 

A proximum genus, or a subaltern genus ; 

But this we shall illustrate hereafter. Let us for the present examine the 
categories a little further. 



ELElfENTAEY TEEA.TI8E 
THB CATEGORIES, BY ARISTOTLE. 



Substantia 


Substance. 


Quantitas 


Quantity. 


Qualitas 


Quality. 


Relatio 


Relation. 


Ubi 


Place — where ? 


Quando 


Time — when ? 


Situs 


Posture, or Situation. 


Habitus 


Possession. 


Actio 


Action. 


Passio 


Suffering. 



Some logicians resolve them all into substance and attribute. But it 
is evident that such a classification would not be adequate, and at the same 
time would be too vague and indefinite for any practical purposes. How- 
ever, it is quite clear that the above classification is far from being perfect. 
That, for instance, could not be a very comprehensive view of reUxtum, 
which would exclude action and local situation from that category. 
The same observation applies to the categories riln and quaiido ; wliile 
the distinction between the former and situs is merely verbal. Again, 
the incongruity of erecting into a summum genus the class which forms the 
eighth category is manifest. 

THE CATEGORIES, BY KANT. 

I. Quantity. II. Quality. 

1. Unity. 1. Reality. 

2. Multitude. 2. Negation. 

3. Totality. 3. Limitation. 

ILL Relation. IV. Modalitt. 

1. Substance and Accidents. 1. Possibility and Non-possibility. 

2. Cause and Effect. 2, Existence and Non-existence. 

3. Reciprocation. 3. Necessity and Contingency. 
This classification by Kant, it will be observed, is purely subjective. 
There are four Primary and twelve Sub-Categories. 

CATEGORIES, BY LOCKE. 

1. Substances. 2. Modes. 3. Relations. 

CATEGORIES, BY HUME. 
1. Ideas. 2. Impressions. 

CATEGORIES, BY MILLS. 

I. Feelings. II. Substances. III. Attributes. 

1. Sensations. 1. Minds. 1. Quantity. 

2. Thoughts. 2. Bodies. 2. Quality. 

3. Emotions. 3. Relation. 

OR, 

1 . Feelings, or states of consciousness. 

2. The Minds which express these feelings. 

3. The Bodies which excite those feelings, with their properties. 

4. Successions and Co-Existences, Likenesses and Unlikeness. 
Having now presented to the reader the classification of Categories, or 



OK LCOIO. 



all the uameablc things in nature, by various philosophers, we shall con- 
clude by giving one of our own. 



Substantia, Substance. 
Intellectiis, Intelect. 
Sensibilitas, Sensibility. 



Attributio, Attribution. 
Relatio, Relation. 

Conditio, Condition. 



THE PREDICABLES. 

A precUcable is a term whicli can be affirmed of several others. It is 
evident, however, that whatever is affirmed of another, must express some 
relation to that object. It either points out its whole essence, which is 
called its Species ; or the material part of, which is called its Oenus ; or 
its distinguishing characteristic, which is called its Diffirentia ; or some- 
tliing joined to its essence, either separable or inseparable, which is called 
its property, or accident. This has given rise to tne doctrine of the five 
Umversala or Predicables ; to wit — 

1. Genus. 4. Proprium. 

2. Species. 5. Accidens. 
8. Diffirentia. 

Several o^her classifications have been attempted, yet the Predicables 
have maintained their position to the present time. 

LooKE. Hume. 

1. Indentity or Simularity. 1. Resemblance. 

2. Relation. 2. Identity. 

3. Co-existence. 3. Relation of Time h Space. 

4. Real Existence. 4. Relation of Quantity and Number. 

5. Degrees of Quality. 

6. Contrariety. 
?• Causation. 

Locke's enumeration contains none of the ancient predicables, nor does 
that of Hume's, with two of Locke's left out. Locke, who declaimed so 
much against the Aristotelian logicj made but a very lame attempt to re- 
construct, what he so strenuously endeavoured to destroy. His classifica- 
tion is of no practical value, and is not worth consideration. Let us now 
examine more closely what is called the Predicables. It will be as well to 
observe here, that the distinction which obtains among the Predicables is 
not based upon a differei^ce in their meaning, that is, in the attribute which 
they connote, but in the class which they denote. They may be divided 
into two classes : — 

L The Substantive. 2. The Adjective. 

This will be illustrated in a subsequent table. 

1 . Oenus is the highest, or most universal class, comprehending under it 
two or more species ; thus, man, &c. are included under the genus animal. 

2. Species is a class comprehended under a higher class, and is com- 
posed of individuals. 

3. Diffirentia is that which distinguishes one species from another ; or 
is characteristic to the species but not to the genus. 

4. Proprium is some property peculiar to a species, and belongs to the 
whole of it ; but not its distinguishing characteristic. They are divided 



8 ELEMENTARY TREATISE 

under two heads, universal but not peculiar. Such as, to " breath air " is 
not peculiar to man ; but to be a poet is, though this might perhaps be 
more properly termed an accident. 

5. Accident is an attribute or condition, which may or may not be 
absent without destroying the nature of a species. " Hot " or " cold,** 
" rich " or " poor," " Frenchman " or " Scotchman,** are all accidents. 
They are either separable or inseparable. Clothed in black is a separable 
accident, a native of England is inseparable. 



The whole Essence 
of its Subject. 
i.e. the Species. 



Every Predicable denotes either 



Or part of its Essence. 



I 

Or something joined 
to its Essence. 



I Genus.— Diffirentia. | 



Property. 



Accident. | 



Universal but Peculiar but Uniyersal and I 

not peculiar. not universal. peculiar. | 

Inseparable.— ^Separable ^ 

The genus together with the diffirentia make up the species. Thus the 
genus " animal, ' together with the diffirentia "rationality, " makes up the 
species man, though we apprehend the true definition of " man," to be the 
only being that has the idea of God. 



ON LOGIC. 



9 



CO tor* 



CO kO ^ 
• • • 

e» C P» 



t 
at 



CO bs h^ 



•^^TlH 



6) 



&• 

« 



OB 



s 



as 

M 

? 



« «? ^• 

* "^ « rt 

n 
n 

o 



CO b»»^ 

• • 

'-' "^ O 

O a. O* 
en g: o 

2. s-5 

O P 
O p ^ 

^ e- 5 
p JL • 
5 ? 

n 



o 







s 

o 


3 



O 


c 

0» 



^ to 

o 

O 

w 
O 



go H* 



O 



V 



p 
5 



CO to ^-^ 



.«f 



O 
O 

CTi )- 3 

03 



14 



p. 6." ^ 

o «?. 9 a* 

P'o » 

« S S 

2 ** 
p p< . 

2. <t » 

" « S 

T P* 



P ••• o 
ff. 2 p 

d M {- 

§•¦§ 

O p 
3 P 



CO h9 r-' 

• • • 

3 EJ o 

o s- p 

• o 

g 






I 

5- 



2P 






(0 




o 


s 


r 
{» 


«• 


X 


O 


CO 


R 


M 


« 


ac 


<3 

09 


3 


• 


d 




t> 




a 




a 




>¦ 


M 


3 


? 


o 


K 


rj 


CO 


> 


o 


¦4 


»fl 


H 




*-', 


no 




ha 


Jig 


a 




TJ 


M 


S 


r«J 


• 


O 



d 

en 

H 



(O 



J 



[ 



09 



O 



a{ 



CO 



ba •— 






p 
n 

•-4 



W 

P 



P 

erg 



Et. O* 



0* 
(0 



S S 



CO 
o 



p 

OR} 








w 

s 

»< p 



6 



M 

o 

M 

O 

M 

4 



B 






CO 



bS •-• 



I—* 

5 



° s^ S's 

OPS. 
g ^ 5 

Scg| 
r* o e 



n 

t— • 

o 



OQ 

2 o 

01 "2 

« o 

n 

n 



> 



N 






o 
o 

•14 

o 

o 

H 

n 

H 



d 

e-t 

n 
o 

»— ^ 

> 



rf^ 






O 

s 

*^ o 

W O 
o to 

00 » 

II 



B. 



10 SLXICENTABY TKEATI8E 

A genus may be either a sumimum or subaUem genus. It is the former 
when it has no genus above it. Thus, a *^ substance " is a awmmium genu$ 
because it is not a species of a higher genus. A subaltern genus is both 
a species of a higher genus, and a genus in reference to the roecies into 
which it may be divided. Thus, ^* animal'' is a subaltern genus m reference 
to the higher genus ^^ substance,'' and at the same time it is a genus of 
** man," " bird, and every other species of Hving creatures. That genus 
which is the nearest that can be predicated of a species, is called its 
^'proximum genus," thus "juice" is the proximum genus of wine, ** liquid '^ 
being its more remote genus. A species which cannot be considered a 
genus, because including no other species, is called an " infima species." 

As was before observed, and as will now appear more evident, some of 
these predicables are more universal than others. This has given rise to 
what is taught in Logic respecting the extension and the comprehension of a 
term. By the former is meant the number of individuals of which the 
term may be predicated. The latter signifies all the simple ideas which, 
united, constitute what the term denotes. The term " animal" has a 
greater extension than "man," because it can be predicated of "man," 
" beast," " bird," and all living creatures. But " man " is more com- 
prehensive than " animal," because it includes not only the attribute of 
" animality," but all that belongs to the rational " animal, " man. 

In the same way the name of an " individual " is more comprehensive 
than a term denoting a species, but at the same time its extension is 
obviously less. " Caesar " can only be predicated of an individual, but it 
includes besides the common attributes of humanity, all that is peculiar to 
the individual himself. Hence, it is clear that the greater the extension 
of a term, the less its comprehension, and vice versa. 

in. Division. 

Division, as applied to Logic, is a metaphorical expression, signifying the 
separate enumeration of several things by one common term. It is of the 
utmost importance to remember, that logical and physical divisions are 
founded upon principles fundamentally distinct. A tree may be divided 
into root, trunk, branches, and leaves ; so that each of these members 
must be less than the whole tree. But in a logical division the element 
of extension and comprehension comes into play, which constitutes the 
fundamental distinction in question. Take for example the genus " tree," 
it may be logically divided into oaky elnhy ash, &c., and does not 
imply the destruction of organization. In a logical division the whole is 
distributed into its several parts, and those divisible parts consist of genera 
and species. The genus is distributed into its species, the species into its 
individuals ; but an individual itself is incapable of logical division, because 
it is simply one object. Be it observed, therefore, a logical division pro- 
ceeds upon the principle of the predicables, and not upon a physical prin- 
ciple. In order to aid us in such divisions, the following rules have been 
laid down :-— 

1. Each of the parts^ or any nun^ber of them short of ally must have a 
narrower signification than the thing divided, — Thus the genus " mineral" 
may be divided into the species " stones," " metals," &c. The species, 
" metal," again into ** gold," " silver," &c., because of each of these, or 
any number of them short of all, contains* less than the thing divided. 

2. All things together must contain nether mare nor less than the whole.'^ 



OK LOGIC. 11 

Thus, ** medicine" has been divided into the " means of preserving 
health/' and " tlie means of restoring health," because there is no other 
kintl except these two. It may be said that there are ** medicines," also, 
** for destroying health," but then they are not medicinea but poiaon. 
Every thing of which we have a conception must be either " animate*' or 
^'inanimate." Li this way a two-fold division may be made of any 
subject so as to extend iU To divide " minerals" into '^ stones" and 
^* metals" would be an imperfect division, because these parts together do 
not make up the whole. Under this rule may be given what is called 
Porphiy's tree. 

Porpiirt's Tree, 

CO 






5 3 

3 3. 

a. 



5 

1 & 



§ S 



3 

3 

o 



I 



¦a 
o 



5- 

P 



» 5 



o 



8L 



In this way the division might be carried on to any length. 

3. ITis parts must be opposed not contained m each otAir.— If " book" 
were divided into " poetical," « historical," « folio," « quarto," " French,'* 
" Latin," these pomts would be contained not opposed to each other ; 
because a poetical book might be a folio ; a quarto, French ; and a histo- 
rical book, Latin. Or again, if a division of anmcds were made into men, 
bipeds, quadrupeds, horses, asses, and ponies, the parts would be contained 
in each other m like manner. But men may be divided into " rich" and 
" poor," '• good" and " bad," " young" and " old," because the paxti are 
opposed to each other. 



12 ZLCMSMIA.BY TREA.TI8E 

4. The fuUural order shoM he observecl in arranging the several 
fnember8»^''i hus, " animal" may be divided into " man," " beast/' " bird," 
" fish," ** insect ;" but if we were to arrange them into^^, inaecty man, bird, 
beast, the enumeration would be faulty, because the natural order of 
things would not be observed. 

5. When a subject can be divided in several ways, toe should select the 
one best adapted for our purpose. — ^Thus " mankind** may be divided 
poUtically, physiologically, geographically, or theologically. 

1. Politically Lawyer, Merchant, Tradesman. 

2. Physiologically Wlute, Negro, Mulatto. 

3. Geographically European, African, American. 

4. Theologically... Christian or Pagan, Heathen or Mahometan. 

We must therefore determine at first which will best suit our purpose. 

Ill, Definition. 

The term definition literally signifies *' to lay down a boundary," and 
has been primarily applied to the separation of objects in nature. From 
this it has been borrowed, and adopted into the field of science and 
literature. By a logical definition it is not to be supposed, that we are to 
obtain a perfect conception of the thing defined ; it is simply intended 
as a fine of demarkation to prevent a term being used in two di£Perent 
senses in a process of reasoning. Definitions may be divided under two 
heads :— 

I. Nominal — (Grammatical or Etymological). 
IL Real — (Def. proper.) 

1. Essential, a, Physical or Natural ; b, Logical or Metaphysical ; 
2. Accidental. 3. Mixed. 

Aristotle has defined a definition *^ to be a certain notification of an 
essence ;" but, without waiting .to examine this nice point for the present, 
a definition may be considered a proposition declaring the meaning of the 
word or thing defined. 

L Nominal Definition. — ^This has been called the definition of the name, 
as it merely explains the meaning of a word that is not clearly understood, 
such as " decalogue," the " Ten Commandments ;" a " triangle," that 
which has " three angles." 

n. Real Definitions : — 

1. An Essential Defiidtion. — This has been called by logicians, the 
definition of the thing, a^ it explains a thing by pointing out its essential 
attributes. Thus, ^' a square is a figure which has four equal sides and 
four right angles." 

a. The physical or natural definition proceeds upon the principle of the 
parts going to make up the whole — as watch, consisting of balance, 
Darrel, spring, spiral, chain, fusee, &c«, &c. 

i^. A Logical Definition is made up of the genus and diffirentia of the 
thing defined; as ^' wine is the juice of the grape," <' man is a rational 
animal" 



ON LOGIC. 13 

^. Accidental Definition, — By this is meant a " description,'* or, as it is 
sometimes called, an imperfect dednition, wliich is merely an enumeration 
of the accidental properties or conditions belonging to the object which we 
wish to define. Such as a '^ landscape*' may be described as containing 
corn-fields and meadows, hills and dales, brooks and lakes, villages, 
houses, &c., all situated in such a manner as to distinguish it from 
other landscapes. 

In this way alone individuals can be defined. We must enumerate the 
accidents which distinguish one individual from another, and add the 
species^ and then they are accurately defined ; thus, <^ Philip was a man of 
Macedon, who subdued Greece." 

The principle rules for definition are the following :— 

1. A Definition must he Adequate. '^'By this is meant that it must 
neither be too extensive nor too narrow for the thing defined. Thus, if 
'* bird" were defined " an animal that flies," this would, in one sense, be too 
extensive, because it is applicable to insects, &c. When a definition is 
adequate it may be converted, such as, " the juice of the grape is wine," 
" wine is the juice of the grape." 

2. A Definition must be clearer than the thing defined. — It must be 
expressed in language as plain and simple as the subject will allow, and at 
the same time it must present it more clearly, and under a more definite 
aspect to the mind. 

3. It should he expressed in as few appropriate words as possible.'^Too 
much brevity must not be used, and prolixity must be guarded against. 
Obscure, equivocal, and vague terms should not be used, neither should 
figurative language be indulged in. But in a <' description," figurative 
language may be employed. 



14 



ELSHENTABY TREATISE 



o 



P 






§ 

<f 

I 

• ^^^ 

¦§ 

M 

o 
3 



cS 



O 



.a 

H 






5 g 

¦M '^ 

6 '55 



Ph 
O 

H 



0) 



a 



1 



:3 

ill 



(l4 



»o 



©^ 



00 



OK LOGIC, 



15 



PART II.— Propositions. 



. A Proposition is a judgment repressed in loords.^'lt has been defined 
logically as '^a sentence indicative," that is, a sentence affinning or 
denying, seritence being the genuSy indicative the dijirentia. A proposition 
consists of three parts expressed or understood ; the " Subject '' the 
" Copula," and the " Predicate." The subject is that concerning which 
something is affirmed or denied ; the predicate is that which is affirmed or 
denied of the subject ; and the copula is some part of the substantive 
verb " to be " (expressed or understood), connecting the subject and 
predicate, which are sometimes called the extremes of a proposition. 

Proposition. 
I. The subject stands first in the following propositions :— 



Sub. cop. pred. 

1. Time is precious. 

2. Csesar was a tyrant. 



Sub. cop. pred. 

3. He is absent. 

4. Not to advance is to fall back. 



II. The subject, however, does not always stand first, as in the follow- 
ing propositions, which may be considered as stated rhetorically, or the 
form in which to produce the most effect. 



Pred. cop. sub. 

1. Great is Diana of the Ephe- 

sians. 

2. Great is the work of life. 



Pred. cop. sub. 

3. Immense was the sensation pro- 

duced. 

4. Short will be his career. 



in. But neither does the subject nor predicate always stand first, as 
will be seen from the following : — 



Cop. pred. sub. 

1. It is criminal to put a man 

to death. 

2. It is impossible to stand such 
insults. 



Cop. pred. sub. 

3. It is glorious to die for one's 

country. 

4. It is proper to study Logic. 



IV. The copula is sometimes suppressed altogether. 



Pred. sub. 
1. I hope to succeed (is) not 
expressed. 
To succeed is what I hope. 



Pred. sub. 
2. I trust in Christ only. 

Christ only is he in whom I 
trust. 



V. Propositions are sometimes expressed in one or two words. 1 his 
is particularly the case in Latin. 



Vivo. 
Amo. 



Sub. pred. 
Ego vivo. 
Ego amo. 



Sub. cop. pred. 
Ego sum vivens. 
Ego sum amans. 



16 SliEMlSNIABT TREATISE 

The above will serve to illustrate what a proposition is, but it will be 
as well to observe that questions or commands arc not considered as propo- 
sitions, such as " Up guards and at them," or " Choose this day between 
God and Ball.'* Ihe next thing to be considered is the various aspects 
under which a proposition may be viewed. Propositions may be viewed 
under three aspects. 

I. As to Substance, or Nature. II. As to Quality, 

III. As to Quantity. 

1. As to Substance or nature, propositions (considered merely as 
sentences) are either categorical or hypothetical. 

1. Categorical Propos%tions.-^K proposition is categorical, when the 
sentence is expressed in an absolute or unconditional form, as '' Caesar 
deserved death ;*' " Croesus was rich ;'* " All men are mortal.*' 

2. Hypothetical Pro/jo^t^/ow*.— Propositions of this nature are ex- 
pressed under a condition or hypothesis, as, *' if Caisar was a tyrant he 
deserved death.** 

As to form, categorical propositions are considered either /^tird or modal. 
They are pure when they express merely the agreement or disagreement, 
between the subject and the predicate, as " Caesar was killed." They are 
modal when the proposition includes also the mode or manner in which 
the predicate is connected with the subject, as " Caesar was killed justly.** 
" Smoking is injurious to health'* is pure, but " smoking is probably 
injurious to health*' is modal. 

Hypothetical Propositions are either conjunctive or disjunctive. The 
difference between them is, that the former is expressed by ** if,** and such 
like, while the latter is expressed by " either'* and " or.'* 

II. As to Quality, — Propositions must be affirmative or negative. 
They are affirmative when the predicate agrees with the subject ; thus, 
" man is mortal.** They are negative when the subject and predicate do 
not agree ; thus, ** man is not a tree." It may be observed, that Aristotle 
introduces another quality here ; he considered them as to their matter. 
As to their matter it is the connexion between the extremes. Propositions 
are either impossible or possible ; necessary or contingent ; true or false. 

When the terms on which a proposition is expressed agree with the 
things signified, the proposition is true ; when they do not agree, it is 
'^ false.'* Hence propositions must not be ambiguous, for then it has 
more than one meanmg, and in reality not one proposition but many. 
«* Impossible' is when the two extremes constantly disagree ; thus, ** a bird is 
not a man.** " Necessary,'^when the two terms must agree ; thus, " birds 
have wings.'* Contingent matter is when the terms may or may not 
agree j thus, ** food is necessary to life ;'* " animals are not quadrupeds.*' 

III. As to quantity f propositions are considered either universal^ 
general^ particular^ or indeJinite,^A proposition is considered universal 
when the predicate is affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject ; so 
likewise in respect to a general proposition, the difference being that the 
first refers to genera and the latter to species ; thus, *^ all animals are 
mortal" is a universal ; " all men are mortal," a general proposition ; when 
it is affirmed or denied of a part of it only, it is particular. " Some 
men are just;" "some islands are fertile,** are particular proppsitions. 
Generals and universals are denoted by the words, " all,'* " none,** 



ON LOOIO. 17 

« every," and, particularly, " some," " many," " a few," &c. An tnrftf- 
Jinite proposition is one in which the subject is a common term, without 
any of the universal or particular signs expressed with it. Here the quan- 
tity is determined by the matter, u the matter be " necessary" or << impos- 
sible," the proposition is considered as '^ universal." In ^' ccmtingent** 
matter the proposition is " particular." 

Another class of propositions is that denominated singular. Those 
whose subject is either a proper name, or a common term with a singular 
sign, are thus called. They are considered univenalSf because in them 
we speak of the whole of the subject. If, however, any qualifying term is 
not inserted to indicate that the whole of the subject is not to be mduded, 
the proposition may be viewed as particular. 

The four letters A, E, I, O, are used to signify four different kinds of 
proportions. Thus :— 



A. Universal affirmative. 



I. Particular affirmative. 



£• Universal negative. 0. Particular negative. 

A includes I. E includes O. 

We have already spoken of the distribution of the subject being in 
every universal, but never in a particular. But the distribution of the 
predicate depends on the *< quality " not the << quantity " of the propo- 
sition. 

The rules here to be observed are : 

1. All universals but no particulars distribute the subject, t. e. use the 
subject in the whole of its extension, as ''man is mortal ;" man here stands 
lor all men, and mortal being more extensive than man, it distributes the 
subject man, that is, makes it stand for all its significates. 

2. All negatives but no affirmatives distribute the predicate. 

3. \\^hatever is universally predicated respecting any term distributed, 
may be equally predicated of any thing contained under that term. 

Affeotionb or P&ofobitionb. 

1. Subalternation. 2. Conversion. 3. Opposition. 

The affections are the relations of propositions, being that pro- 
perty by which they undergo various mutual changes. Propositions, 
be it remembered, are universal or particular according to quantity ; 
affirmative or negative as to quality ; and that the^ are denoted A, 
Univeisal affirmative ; £, Universal negative ; I, Particular affirmative ; 
and O, Particular negative. 



A. Every vine is a tree. 
E. No vine is a tree. 



I. Some vine is a tree. 
O. Some vine is not a tree. 



In reference to negatives in Logic, a negative proposition never 
implies that the contrary is affirmed. 

Particular denial does not imply the denial of what is not included 

in it. 

c 



18 ELBUENTASY TREATISE 



I. SUBALTERNATIOK. 



Subalternation is the substitution of a particular proposition for a 
universal, when they agree in quality ; thus — 

E. No tyrants are happy, 

O. Some tyrants are not happy. 



A. All men are mortal. 
I. Some men are mortal. 



In subalternation the universal proposition is called the subaltemans, 
and the particular, which is substiiuted for it, is called the subalterna. 
In this case the propositions differ in their quantity alone ; and the 
maxims laid down in reference to propositions of this manner are :-— 

1 . That the truth of the particular proposition is contained in the 
truth of the universal, 

2 The falsity of the particular in the falsity of the universal. 

3. Whether universal or particular, they may be either both tru^ 
or /alse, or the one true and the other false, 

11. CONVEBSION, 

The conversion of propositions is the transposing of their terms, 
so that the subject is made the predicate, and the predicate the sub- 
ject, thus : — 

Solomon was the wisest man : The wisest man was Solomon. 

When nothing more is done, this is called simple conversion ; 
but no conversion takes place, unless if be " illative** or legitimate ; 
that is, except the truth of the one is implied in the truth of the other ; 
or, as it is expressed, " the truth of the converse is implied in the truth 
of the original or exposita.^' We are not to suppose "illative** is used 
in reference to a process of reasoning ; it is, in fact, only modifying 
a proposition, or stating the same judgment in another form. Illative 
conversion can only take place when no term is distributed in the 
converse, which was undistributed in the *' exposita." Hence, since 
E 'distributes both terms, and I neither, these may both be illatively 
converted. But as A does not distribute the predicate, it cannot be 
illatively converted simply. 

All men are animals, but we cannot say all animals are men, as there 
would be a term distributed in the converse which is not distributed in 
the exposita. We must therefore limit its quantity from universal to 
particular, and the conversion will then be illative. This is called con- 
version per accidens, E may be thus converted ; but in O, whether the 
quantity be, changed or no, there will still be a term (predicate of the 
converse) distributed which was not before. You can therefore only 
convert it illatively by changing the quality, i «., considering the 
negative as attached to the predicate instead of being attached to the 
copula, and thus regarding it as I. One of the terms will not then be 
the same, but will be equipollent. This may be called conversion by 
negation or contraposition. Thus, in one of these ways, every proposi- 
tion may be illatively converted :— 

E, I. Simply. A, O. By Negation. A, E. By Limitation, 



ON LOGIC. 19 

1. Simple Conversiox. 

E. No virtuous mau is a rebel : No rebel is a virtuous man. 
I. Some boasters are cowards : Some cowards are boasters. 

2. CONTEHSION BY NeGA.TI0N. 

A. Every poet is a man of genius : He who is not a man of genius 
is not a poet. 

0. Some who possess wealth, are not happy : Some who are not 

happy, possess wealth. 

3, Conversion by Limitation. 

A. All birds are animals : Some animals are birds. 

E. No man is perfect : Something that is not perfect is man. 

III. Opposition. 

Two propositions are said to be opposed to each other, when having 
the same subject and predicate they differ in quantity or in quality, or 
in botji. There are four different kinds of opposition, 

1. The two Universals A and E are called Contraries, 

2. The two Particulars I and O are called Sub-contraries. 

3. A and I or E and O, Subalterns, 

4. A and O or E and I, Contradictories, 

In necessary matter it is to be observed, that all affirmatives are true 
and negatives false ; in impossible matter, vice versa ; in contingent 
matter all universals false, and particulars true. 

Examples. 

1. In necessary matter it is to be observed that all affirmatives are 
true, and negatives false. 

All islands are surrounded by water — true. 
Some islands are surrounded by water — true. 
No islands, or some, are not — false, 

2. In impossible matter all negatives are true and affirmatives 
false. 

» 

All birds are men — false. 
Some birds are men — false. 
No birds are men, kc, — true, 

3. In contingent matter all universals are false and particulars true. 

All islands are fertile — false. 

No islands are fertile — false. 

Some islands are fertile — true. ^ 

Some islands are not fertile — true. 

Here it will be evident that contraries will be both /alse in contin- 
gent matter, but never both true ; sub-contraries both (rue in contingent 
matter, but never both false ; contradictories always one true and the 
Other ya/f^y &c. 



CONTRADICTORIES. 

A. All men are mortal nee. true. 

O. Some men are not mortal nee- falH. 

A. All men have winge imp. false. 

O. Some men have not wings imp. true. 

A. All islands are fertile con. false. 

O. Some islands are not fertile con. true, 



» 2 £ 



g,^ S COSTBUin. 

I '1 I 

S S !• 




CONTRAEICTORIES. 



E. No men are mortal 

I. Some men are mortal 

E. No men liaTC wings 

I. Some men have wings 

£. No islands are fertile 

I. Some islands are fertile 



nee, false. 
nee. true. 
imp. true, 
imp. false, 
con. fUse. 
con. true. 



ON LOGIC. 21 



^iB(Q13i II. 



I.— R EFLECTIVE LOGIC. 



METAPHYSICS OF LOGIC. 



It is of the utmost importance to the logician to hare a clear percep- 
^on of the nature and sources of human knowledge, so far as they 
aare connected with the reasoning science ; it is also of no small im- 
portance to be well acquainted with the first or fundamental principles 
of truth ; though the consideration of these points does not form 
a direct or integral part of logic. That logicians, however, have 
practically recognised the importance of what we are about to con- 
sider, is evident from the fact, that they have invariably given a long 
list of fallacies &c., to guard the judgment against error, as bearing 
indirectly upon the science in question, and this too, notwithstanding 
their peculiar opinions respecting the legitimate province of logic. In 
addition to what they have done in a negative and indirect form, I 
purpose also doing under a positive and direct aspect. This I shall 
briefly do under the five following heads : — 

1. The sources of human knowledge. 

2. The nature of human knowledge. 

3. The relation between the subjective powers of man and objective 

relations. 

4. The various modes in which human knowledge is acquired. 

5. Some of the first principles of human knowledge. 

In accordance with this plan we are to consider— 

1. The Sources of Human Knowledpe.^^As it would be impossible 
to enter into the full consideration of the various hypotheses advanced 
in respect to human knowledge, I shall simply mention them without 
making any observations as to their respective merits. One hypo- 
thesis (that of Descartes) is, that human knowledge is to be ultimately 
traced to certain innate ideas of the mind ; a second (that of Hobb's) 
is that which traces it to sensation. 

He to the senses would all knowledge trace, 
And every vestige of a soul deface ; 
Throughout all nature could he but n^atter find, 
The brain and nervous system were his mind. 



22 ELEMENTiLBY TBEATISE 

A third (that ot Locke) to sensation and reflection ; a fourth to sen- 
sation^ reflectiony and intuition. I do not see the propriety of 
considering reflection a fundamental source of human knowledge, for 
the very term reflection pre-supposes prior knowledge; it implies 
not only a cognising power to reflect, but knowledge to reflect 
upon, and, according to Locke's theory, must evidently be based upon 
sensation. The same is true also in regard to experience, the 
empirical capacities imply not only cognizing powers, but likewise a 
prior knowledge of subjective existence. When I first smel^ a rose, 
or eat an apple, I afterwards say that I have experienced these sen- 
sations, and to the whole aggregate of my past s msations I give the 
name experience. My first consciousness, cognitions, &c. are intuitive ; 
and when the subjective mind becomes cognizant of these states of 
consciousness, along with my perceptions of an external universe, and 
I proceed to examine them, I give to the aggregate of these concep- 
tions the name of reflection. But it is evident that the conscious 
mind existed as a cognizing power prior to either. Consciousness 
evidently, therefore, is at ^the foundation of all human knowledge, and 
sensation and intuition are the mere primary sources by which the 
conscious mind developes its latent powers ; the latter being the sub- 
jective or direct, the former being the objective or indirect source. 
I confess that I do not like the term intuitive, as applied to the 
subjective source, because the objective source is just as intuitive 
in its nature, as the subjective source itself. The term intuition, 
therefore, properly refers not to the nature of the cognizing power 
itself, but to the mode of its cognition. I should, therefore, prefer 
to base the foundation of human knowledge upon : — 

1. PRIMARY SOURCES. 

Intuitive or f 1. Subjective Consciousness. . . .Direct. 
Immediate \^2. Sensational Consciousness .. .Indirect. , 

2. SECONDARY SOURCES. 

Mediate./^- Reflection | Experience. 
(^2. Observation ) ^ 

The senses are the media of sensational or empirical knowledge, 
the mental perceptions of which are the conditions upon which the 
judgment perceives fresh relations. But it is to be observed that con- 
sciousness as such is not to be considered a cognizing power, but sim- 
ply a universal condition of all intelligence ; the judgment undoubtedly 
being its primary power, and as such may be viewed under two aspects. 

1. Primary Judgment The Judgment, primary judgments* 

2. Subordinate Judgment . . .The Reason, reflections. 

It is not to be supposed that the judgment and the reason are two 
distinct powers, they are one and the same primary power ; the above 
distinction being based, not upon the subjective power itself, but upon 
its mode of develbpment. Under its primary aspect, the judgment 
grasps certain principles in virtue of the constitutional laws super- 
seded upon the mind by God, under its secondary aspect, the 
judgment receives an obj^ective development from external nature. 



OS Looio. 23 

and under that aspect this power may very properly be called the 
reason. As to personal identity it is generally supposed to spring 
from consciousness and memory. There is, I think, another element to 
be taken into consideration, that of intuition. Personal identity is 
an intuitive belief, strengthened by the intuitive capacity of memory, 
that I and no other person filled a certain sphere of relative existenee. 
The ultimate sources of human knowledge therefore, are : — 

1. Subjective Consciousness. .. .Intuitions. 

2. Objective Consciousness ...Sensations. 

But granting that these are the fundamental sources of human know- 
ledge, the question arises, ** Is the knowledge cognized by these sources 
relative or absolute ? " 

2. The Nature of Human Knowledge, — Is human knowledge relative, 
or is it absolute ? has been the great question upon which German 
philosophy merged into transcondentaiism. This question may be 
viewed under two aspects. 

1. Is human knowledge relative or absolute, in its own nature? 

2. Is it relatively or absolutely perceived by the mind ? 

The principles of truth, I apprehend to be both relative and absolute, 
subjective and objective, all the principles of which are in conformity 
to the Divine mind. 

{1. Subjective truth. .Kssence and relations "J 
2. Objective truth. .Essence and relations f » . . , 
3. Absolute truth . . Relations ( Principles. 

4. Relative truth. . . Relations j 

Divine Mimd. 

Subjective truths are those connected with mind and its operations. 
Objective truths are those connected with mattei and its phenomena. 
Relative truths have no objective existence when the laws and con- 
ditions that occasion them are withdrawn. Thus, supposing the laws of 
nature are withdrawn, the truths connected with them would fade out 
of being, and could have no further existence than the mere obstract 
conception of them in the Divine mind. But not so with absolute 
truths, they are and ever will be parallel with absolute intelligence 
itself. But the other grand question connected with this point is 
the mode or manner by which the mind perceives it ; is the perception 
relative or absolute ? 

3. The relation between the subjective powers of man and objective 
existence, — It has been already observed, that all truth is the aggregate 
of those relations in accordance with the divine mind. The question 
now is, does the human mind perceive the constituted relation of 
these truths as the divine mind does } or, has each mind a perception 
of them peculiar to itself.^ Thus, do all minds perceive that 3 and 3 
make 6, and nothing else ; and is this the Deity's own cunception of 
it ? I think that all alike have this perception, and that Deity himself 
has a similar perception. We know that these truths enunciated 
are alike, and if language be the outward embodiment of thought, 
then, these perceptions must be alike also. But it is to be observed. 



21 ELEBCENTABY lESATIBB 

that these are sabjective pereeptions and specially lelatinp: to the judg- 
ment ; and it is wonderful that thea^ conceptions, of which we haye 
an absolute idea, as if to show man his finite nature, should have 
indefinite bounds. But then, have we the same absolute idea of ob- 
jective perceptions ? Here I see before me a piece of paper which I 
call while, but what I see while does another see black; for, though 
we may similarly name these perceptions, they may, it is said, in 
reality be different, at all events we cannot prove that they are not. 
But, though I cannot perceive through another man*s senses the nature 
of his perceptions, I have a conscious belief that we both see alike, a 
belief as special and primitive as my nature itself; and no other sup- 
position has a constitutioiTal adaptation to my cognizing powers than 
that such is the case. I may suppose the contrary but cannot be- 
lieve it ; and if my primaiy and constituted convictions are wrong, all 
that I can say is, that they have been wrongly constituted. But may 
not this belief, it is said, be the result of experience, I believe that 
experience occasions and expands the range of this belief, but if it be 
the result of it I have never yet found experience of this nature deceive 
me ; my senses never gave me wrong information, and if it has been 
wrong in any case, it may be wrong in every case, so that con- 
'sequently all the inductive sciences may be thrown overboard. 
Kant says, that we cannot prove human knowledge to be absolute, 
and that we must consequently consider it as relalive. I apprehend 
the foregoing considerations must show the absurdity of such a sup- 
position, for, if what Kant says be true, there is no alternative but 
the nihilism of Hume. It is absolute knowledge or nihilism. And 
here, it may be observed, that the whole transcendentalism of German 
metaphysics, with all its boasted originality, is but a magnificent 
plagiarism of David Hume's speculations ; for what are the transcen- 
dental nostrums of Fichle^ but the ideas and impressiotis of the Scotch 
philosopher. Kant saw Hume's subtile reasoning in respect to cause 
and effect, as well as Held, and was at issue with Reid in respect to 
the foundations of human knowledge, but then he maintained that 
it was relalive, Reid that it was absolute. From this starting point 
of ** relalive knowledge," the transcendental coach of German philo- 
sophy started, a new phraseology was put into the mouth of the guards, 
but they travelled by the same rail and ended at the same terminus 
at which the immortal Hume, with less ostentation but with far more 
ingenuity and power of thought, landed years previously. 

4. The different modes by which human knowledge is acquired^--' 
There are two ways in which human knowledge is acquured, one 
by alternate succession of causes and effects. That they all ultimately 
hang upon one primary and fundamental cause I have attempted to 
prove in another place. The connexion between cause and effect^ it 
may be observed, is not so much a disputed point as to what the nature 
of our idea of it is. Some philosophers contend that we merely have the 
bare idea of antecedence and consequence ; others, that there is a power 
in the cause, adequate to the production of the effect. I apprehend 
that this difference of opinion arises from a fal»e or restricted concep- 
tion ; the idea is evidently complex and may be viewed under two 
aspects^— 

1, As involving a power to produce the effect. 

2. As antecedence and consequence. 



oir LOGto. 25 

The illttsttfttions of those philosophers who adopt the latter opinion 
are invariably taken from the phenomena of inorganic matter, in as 
much as illustrations of this nature are more favorable to their peculiar 
opinions. But if we take our illustrations from mind, or a principle of 
activity, the tables ate immediately turned. Cause being power in 
aGtion^ the illustration ought evidently to be taken from a principle of 
activity. Supposing a man sit down to dinner, he himself being the 
cause of eating that dinner, I would ask, has he not an idea of power 
within himself to do so ? But then there is another disputed question 
connected with this interesting point : did he acquire this idea from 
intuition or fi-om experience? The capacity of perceiving it is 
c^dentiy born with us, and experience is merely the occasion of its 
development. When an infant sucks its mother for the first time, it, 
as the cause, could not have acquired it. 

I. A direct way. 2. An indirect way. 

The first is by consciousness, the second by the senses. These two 
modes may again be viewed under a four-fold aspect : 

1 . By intuition — Consciousness. The senses. 

2. By Judgment 1 

3. By induction ^ Refiection. Observation. 

4. By deduction) 

tJnder the head of intuition, therefore, comes observation and 
experiment, the knowledge gained thereby being immediate, the 
knowledge acquired otherwise being mediate, that is, through the 
medium of proof, by reflecting, judging, and reasoning. The first 
may be considered as the fouiuiation of all knowledge and of all 
reasoning ; and it is only with the second that reasoning properly 
commences and logic in reality begins. As knowledge, however, is 
acquired in the four ways above-mentioned, we may easily see that 
there will be four species of fallacy or sources of error. 

1. The fallacies of intuition. 

2. The fallacies of judgment. 

3. The fallacies of induction. 

4. The fallacies of deduction. 

The consideration of fallacies being an evident method of guarding 
against error, they will naturally fall to be considered after we have 
examined the direct method, the one being tho ride the other the 
exception. Before I quit this head I shall briefly consider the nature 
of our idea of oauee and effect^ being one of the most important points 
within the whole range of mental philosophy ; because the whole series 
of mental operations and of mental phenomena are but the conscious 
perception that he has the power of doing so, however obscure it may 
be from his yet undeveloped capacities. But it may be asked, when 
the child has burnt his finger for the first time by the candle, had he the 
idea &f a power in the flame of the candle to produce this sensation ? I 
apprehend not. But it might be asked, with the same propriety, when 
a man first tasted arsenic, did he know before hand that it would 
poison him ? certainly not. To say that the child knew that the 
candle would burn him before it did so, would be to say that the 



26 BLBXXNTABT IBVATISS 

cbild knew it before it did know it. But this does not make the 
knowledge thus acquired the less intuitive; the first sensation was 
instantly perceived ; for it did not require a prior sensation to make 
the Jirst sensation to be perceived. These sensations are the occa- 
sions of human knowledge, the mind itself not coming in tlirect 
contact with the material qualities of external nature, but through the 
medium of certain sensational organs. Having thought much upon, 
this question, I have come to the conclusion, Uiat our idea of cause 
and efiect may be viewed under three aspects. 

1. That of antecedence and consequence. 2. That there is a power 
in the cause to produce the effect. 3. That in the absence of 
the cause we determine its nature by that of the effect 

5. Some of the first principles of human knowlege. 

I. THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF KECESSART TRUTH. 
I. Metaphysical first principles. 

1. That the qualities we perceive by the senses must have a sub- 
ject which we call body, the thoughts of which we are conscious, a 
subject which we call mind. 

2. Whatever begins to exist must have a cause which produced it. 

3. That design of the intelligence in the cause may be inferred with 
certainty, from marks or signs of it in the effect. 

II. Orammatioal first principles. 
1. Every complete sentence has a verb, &c. 

III. Logical first principles. 

1. Every proposition is true or false. 

2. None are true and falae at the same time. 

3. Beasoning in a circle proves nothing. 

4. Whatever is affirmed of the genus, may be affirmed of the 
species, &c. 

IV. Mathematical first principles. — See EvLcM. 
V. First principles of Taste, 

The fundamental rules of music, poetry, pamting, eloquence, &c., 
will be the same to the end of the world. 

VI. First principles of Morals, 

1. That an unjust action has more demerit than an ungenerous one. 

2. That a generous action has more merit than a merely just one. 

3. That no man ought to be blamed for what he cannot help. 

4. That we ought not to do to others what we would think unjust 
or unfair to be done to us in like circumstances. 



OH LOOIO. 27 

II. FIRST PRINCIPLES OF CONTINGENT TRUTHS. 

1. The existence of every thing of which I am conscious. 

2. The thoughts of which I am conscious, are those of an individual 
being which I call myself^ my nttW, my person, 

8, That these things did happen which I distinctly remember. 

4. My personal identity and continued existence, or that I and no 
other person filled a certian sphere of relative existence. 

6. That those things do really exist, which we distinctly perceive 
by our senses, and are what we perceive them to be. 

6. That we have a certain control over our actions, and the deter- 
minations of our wills. 

7. That the faculties by which we distinguish truth from error are 
not fedlaciotts. 

8. That there is life and intelligence in our fellow beings with 
whom we converse. 

9. That certain features of the countenance, sounds of the voice, 
and gestures of the body, indicate certain thoughts and dispositions 
of mind. 

10. That there is a certain regard due to human testimony in 
matters of fact, and even to human authority in matters of opinion. 

11. That there are many events depending on the will of man, in 
which there is a self evident probability, greater or less, according to 
circumstances. 

12. That in the phenomena of nature, what is to be^ will probably be 
like to what has been in similar circumstances. — Keid, on the Mind. 



28 ' UEMBNTAST TBEAXUB 



I. 



THE LOGIC OF JUDGMENT, 



OB 



RBASONINO FROM PABTICTJLABS TO PARTICULARa 



In affirming or denying one thing of another there is an immediate 
act of judgment. This act of judgment expressed in words is cs^Ued a 
proposition, and when two or more propositions are compared it is 
then a process of the judging power. But the doctrine of proposi- 
tions, as SHchy is not peculiar to any department of the reasoning 
science. 

A proposition may be one of :— 

Ii^tuitiou I see John. 

Judgment Thomas is kMd. 

Induction All men aire mortaL 

Deduction John is mortal. 

But let it be observed^ that there is a distinction between the 
judging act and the judging process ; with the judging act logic 
lias, strictly speaking, nothing to do, but only with the judging process. 

Judging act This candle burnt me; therefore, 

Judging process ...That candle will burn me. 

This process, as we have already observed, is of a threefold 
nature :— - 

The Judging process \ 

The Inductive process . ... | Logic. 
The Deductive process ... ) 

In the judging process we proceed from one proposition or act of 
judgment, to another proposition or act of judgment. In the act of 
judgment we pronounce two ideas, to agree or disagree ; with this act 
of judgment we proceed and apply this already affirmed act, to 
another object of a like nature, or that the same thing will be true or 
not true of the same thing again. In the judging act, it will be 
observed then, that we commence with two ideas, but that in the 
judging process we commence, not with a simple idea but with an act 
of judgment, e. y. 

Idea* ' Ide(u 
Finger .-...Candle Agree (to burn.) 



ov Lo&xo. 29 

This candle burnt the finger«<-4ict of jadgment; Uierefore9-*-proce88 
of judg^ent-^-Uiat candle will burn the finger. 

From what has been said, it will appear obvious that in the logic 
..of judgment all reasoning is from particulars to particulars t-* 

John has died ; therefore, 
Mary will die. 

Again:-- 

Peter, Mary, and Thomas haye died ; therefore, 
The whole family will die. 

From one or more particular facts, we reason to other particular 
facts, without reasoning through the medium of general laws, or 
Buppowd uniformity of sequences in nature. It will appear obvious^ 
upon a little reflection, that the great mass of the ignorant part of 
mankind reason from particulars to particulars, and on this score 
they may be put upon a level with children and the inferior animals. 
We only rise to generalities as we advance in intelligence. When 
the flre burns the child for the first time, he infers it wUl do so again, 
80 with the dog, if it bums him once he infers it will do so the second 
time; or, give him a piece of beef with mustard upon it, he will 
reason that it will cause him the same unpleasant sensation as before. 
The true distinction, therefore, between the reasoning of men and of 
animals is, that 

1. Animals reason from particulars to particulars only. 

2. Men from particulars, generals, and universals. 

It may be said that the dog reasons upon the principle of asso- 
ciation, that man does the same, so that there is in reality no dis- 
tinction between them. Man associates material qualities just like 
the animal, but how can he associate abstractions, generalizations, or 
first principles. They have no corresponding objective existence for 
the purpose of association, and to this the animal evidently cannot 
rise. And besides, it would be impossible for the lower animals to 
rise up to generals, universals, or the infinite, without general signs, 
that is, without language. It is here, then, where the manifest dis- 
tinction between reason and instinct lies — where the former terminates 
and the latter commences. 

In reasoning fi'om particulars to particulars, we are reasoning upon 
the confines of intuitive truth. I have really thought very often, 
whether, what we call acts qf judgment, be properly so called, and 
whether they be not sensational perceptions expressed in words. It 
appears to me that the judgment has really nothing to do with many 
propositions, and, that instead of considering them acts of judgment 
expressed in words, they ought to be considered sensational or 
intuitional perceptions, expressed in words. Thus, take the following 
propositions, which of course, according to the orthodox logic, are 
acts of judgment :— 

Mary stabbed me with a pin ; James knocked me in the eye ; 
Thomas is drowned ; Waller broke his leg ; John cut my hand ; the 
cannon shot frightened me ; the smell disgusted me ; the taste was 
nauseous. 



30 BLSMSKtl&Y tUSATIBB 

J would ask how many of these propositions are acts of judgment 
expressed in words. It appears to me, that they are all intuitive 
truths hased upon sensation ; and that in reality the judgment has 
nothing to do with them as such. Let us throw one of them into the 
syllogistic form. 

Whoever stahs with a pin ought to be punished ; Mary stahbed 
with a pin, therefore Mary ought to be punished. 

Supposing our principal logicians were sitting in a parlour, 
enjoying a chat with the ladies, and that by a previously concerted 
plan some of the mischievous young rascals agreed at the same 
moment of time to try an experiment with their pins upon the nether 
part of these venerable authors, I should like to know how many 
would consider such an experiment, expressed in tdords^ an act of 
judgment. But I may now be asked where lies the act of judgment i 
I unhesitatingly answer, that the act of judgment is the act of com* 
parison^ the process the procedure of inference. 

In reasoning from these intuitional propositions we must guard 
against extending the attribute of one object to that of a different 
object, thus — 

Sugar is sweet ; therefore, sand is sweet. 

In this case the only way is to deny the inference or existence of the 
attribute, and show intuitionally its fallaciousness. 

See first principles. 

1. Impossible matter 1 

2. Contingent matter > Propositions, which true or false. 

3. Necessary matter ) 



ON LOGXO. 31 



II. 

INFERENTIAL LOGIC. 



THB LOGIC OP INDUCTION ; 



OB, 



BBASONINO FROM PARTICULARS AND GBNBRALS TO 
GENERALS AND UNIYBR8AL8. 



¦.«¦«« 



Ths term induction is derived from the Latin verb tndueo, and 
primarily signifies a leading, arranging^ or gathering in of facts. It is 
also used in a secondary sense, to signify the inducing of the mind to 
believe in the uniformity of sequences that obtains in respect to the laws 
of nature ; this inductive belief being based upon the uniformity 
that it obtains in respect to the facts of its own experience. Induction 
in the former sense is synonymous with observation and experiment, 
but in that sense has nothing to do with the logic of induction, but 
with intuition, which we have already examined. Induction, there- 
fore, properly so called, is the inducing of the mind to a generalized 
conclusion, in conformity with the uniformity of sequences that obtain 
in the phenomena of nature. In order to have generalized conclu- 
sions it is necessary to have general terms ; but it is not to be supposed 
that these general terms represent general substances, they merely 
connote some primary attribute or attributes. 

TEST OF INDUCTIVE SYLLOGISMS. 

1/ one/act he found to contradict the facts upon which M# inductive 
tyllogism ultimately resis^ the whole argument falU to the ground* 

Peter, James, and John are mortal ; these are men, therefore. 
All men are mortal. 

Hence the inference is inductively drawn, the mind following the 
law or affirming the attribute that obtains respecting the facts, and 
extends it, in his belief, to all facts of a similar nature. It will be 
observed that the inference proceeds upon the basis, that the CQUise « 



3d SLElCBNTABIr IfRtATISB 

of nalure is uniform. But if one fact be found contradictory of the facts 
upon which the inference is based, the whole argument falls to the 
ground. 

Abistotle's Syllogism by Induction. 

Man, hors«, and muld si^e leng-lited* 
Man, horse, and mule are void of bile. 
The whole class void of bile are long-lived. 

According to Aristole the minor premise must be convertible. 

Thus :— 

Man, horse, mule are long-lived. 

fMan. horse, mule are void of bile. In i. j • 

¦ «*«", uv/*oc, iuu*c €Mo ysjLXM, VI i/«c 1 Converted minor. 

( Thmgs void of bile are man, horse, mule. J 
The whole class void of bile are long-lived. 

I apprehend that Aristotle would find few very such inductive syllo- 
gisms in nature, as' would require to enumerate all the facts in the 
minor premise. As to the truth of the above inductive syllogism, I leave 
Professor Holloway and the College of Physicians to decide, it is 
beyond my capacity. From Che above syllogism, I think it is obvious 
that Aristotle was not acquainted with what might be termed the 
" Baconian syllogism," or reasoning from particulars to generals or uni« 
versals ; but there is no wonder at this, from the age in which he lived, 
and the triumphs which his ereat genius achieved. But it is wonderful, 
to see with what tenacity his apostolic successors cling to the ortho- 
doxy of their great master, and how religiously they stick to the 
logical cut of their great logical tailor. 

It will be observed that induction implies not only reasoning from 
particulars to generals, but also from generals to universals. 

Sheep, oxen« deer, &€., ruminate ; these are different in upper 

cutting teeth» &c.; therefore, all such ruminate. 
Again,-— All men, beasts, birds, insects, fishes* &c.« have a power of 

beginning motion, these are animals ; therefore, all animals have 

a power of beginning motion. 

Take also, the following instances of the inductive syllogism : — 

Logic, metaphysics, mathematics, music, &c., deserve encourage- 
ment; these are useful studies, therefore, all useful studies 
deserve encouragement. 

Or again, — Iron, steel, silver, gold, &c., increase in heat in their 
degree of nearness to fire ; these are substances, therefore, all sub- 
stances will do the same. 

Again, — Peter, James, and Paul as witnesses, sufferers, and martyrs 
of a religion divinely attested ought to be believed ; these were 
apostles of a religion divinely attested, therefore, all apostles 
of a religion divinely attested ought to be believed. 



ON LOGIC. 33 

From these examples &c. the student will be able to understand 
what we mean by induction. It is to be observed, that the two 
premises are to be considered as minor premises, for there is no mqfor 
premise in an inductive syllogism, the object of induction being to 
generalize, or to get major premises. 

Minor premises, '^'Soeii, Moses, Socrates, Christ, &c. are wrong 
in what they taught ; these taught moral systems ; therefore, 

Conelusion,^-All moral systems are wrong that have been taught, 
except, of course, Mr. Robert Owen's. 

Major />remM0.— All moral systems that have been taught are 
wrong ; the moral system of Socrates was taught ; therefore, 
the moral system of Socrates is wrong. 

As all the paraphernalia of logic will be amply discussed under the 
logic of deduction, it will be unnecessary to enter upon it in this 
place.— -iS'M Introduction. 



E 



31 ELByEXTA^RT TREATISE 



III. 



THE LOGIC OF DEDUCTION, 



OB, 



REASONING FROM QBNBRALS AND UNIYBESALS, TO 
PARTICULABS AND GENERALS. 



Etxry deductive argument, when stated at full length, or j^ut into a 
logical form, is called a sj^Uo^wny which consists of three propositions, 
either expressed or understood, divided into two parts, the means of 
proof and the thing proved. 

r 1. All men are mortal^ 1 means of Droof 

Propositions J 2. John is a man ; therefore, J ^ 

( 3. John is mortal-»the thing proved 

The thing proved, before it is proved, is called the " question ;" 
but, after being proved, it is called the *^ conclusion*" When the 
means of proof are stated first, they are called premues ; but if 
stated last, the '* reason." The order generally observed in stating a 
syllogism, is first to lay down the premises and then draw the 
conclusion. 

All tyrants are miserable, \. Premises 

Csesar was a tyrant ; therefore f 
Csesar was miserable. — Conclusion. 

In every syllogism the propositions are not only confined to three 
in number, but the terms are three in number also. Take, for instance, 
the following syllogism : — 

All men are endowed with reason, John is a man ; therefore, John 
is endowed with reason. 

The three terms of the above are, *' men," " endowed with reason," 
" John," which, being syllogistically compared, form the three propos- 
itions in question. 

Endowed with reason. .The Major term. 

John The Minor term. 

Men The Middle term . 



ON LOOIO. 85 

The migor and minor terms give their respeclive names to the 
premises in which they are compared. The proposition in which the 
major term appears, is called the major proposition, or premise ; that in 
which the minor terra appears, is called the minor premise ; the major 
and minor terms being in the first place compared with the middle 
term in the premises, and then with each other in the conclusion, into 
which the middle term never enters. It will be as well to observe 
that the term compare, as used in Logic, is like many other metaphys- 
ical terms borrowed from the phenomena of matter. Thus, take 
any two objects in nature— two men — two horses— two muskets — 
two ships, &c., and they may be compared in various ways, as to size, 
strength, speed, power, beauty, &c. But the term as used in Logic, 
implies that a certain quality, attribute, or condition is affirmed or 
denied of a certain object, and according to the perceptions of the 
judgment is said to agree or disagree with each other. Thus, take 
the following syllogism : — 

All men are mortal, John is a man ; therefore, John is mortal. 

Here, the attribute of mortality is affirmed of all men in the 
major premise ; the attributes of humanity affirmed of John in the 
minor; iHd then, in the conclusion, the attribute of mortality is 
affirmed of John singly. In the above process, " men " and '' mortal, ' 
*' John " and ** man," are said to be compared with each other. 

No discontented men are happy, some rich men are discontented ; 
therefore, some rich men are not happy. 

Here, " discontented men " and " happy," are first compared, and 
then " rich men " and " discontented." That is, in the major premise 
the state of happiness is denied of " discontented men," in the 
minor premise, the state of discontent is affirmed of *' rich men," &c. 

It will be as well to observe, further, before we enter upon the strict 
analysis of the syllogism, that the logic of deduction takes no cog- 
nizance whatever of the truth or falsity of the premises ; it proceeds 
upon the assumption that the premises are either self-evident, or 
granted to be true. The question with which the logic of deduction 
has to do, is simply whether the said conclusion is legitimately 
drawn from given premises. If the premises be true, and a false con- 
clusion inferred, logic detects the error ; if, on the other hand, the 
premises are false, nevertheless admitted, and the conclusion legit- 
imately drawn, the error is beyond the cognizing range of the deductive 
logic. Take for instance the following syllogism :— 

All men have Wings, John is a man ; therefore, John has wings. 

If these premises be granted the conclusion must be admitted. 
The error in the above syllogism is beyond the sphere of the 
deductive logic, the detection of which belongs to another depart- 
ment of the science already treated of. 

PRINCIPLES OF THE SYLLOGISM. 



I. Its maxims, axioms, and rules. 
II. Its moods. 



III. Its figures. 

IV. Its reduction. 



86 SLEMENTABT TREATISE 

A syllogism is that form of reasoning in which every deductiye 
argument can be logically stated. It consists of three propositions, 
the major, minor, and the conclusion. These propositions again 
consist of three terms ^ the major, minor, and middle term; by 
the comparing of which terms with each other the propositions in 
question are formed : — 

Middle term. Major term. 
Every man has a soul. 

Minor term. Middle term. 
John is a man ; therefore, 

Minor term. Major term. 
John has a soul. 

I. The syllogistic maxim (or Aristotle's dictum). 

Dictum de omni et nuUo^ or whatever is predicated (that is afiGurmed 
or denied) of a term distributed (that is used in the whole of its exten- 
sion), may be predicated in like manner of every thing contained under 
it. Upon this maxim the validity of every syllogistic argument 
ultimately rests. -^ 

II. Its axioms, 

1 . If two terms agree with one and the same third, they agree with 
each other. Upon this axiom rests the validity of affirmative con- 
clusions. 

2. If one term agrees and the other disagrees with one and the 
same third, they disagree with each other. Ujpon this axiom rests the 
validity of negative conclusions. 

III. lis rules, 

1. Every syllogism has three and only three terms. 

2. Every syllogism has three and only three propositions. 

3. The middle term must be distributed once at least, and must not 
be ambiguous. 

4. No term must be distributed in the conclusion which was not 
distributed in the premises. 

6. From negative premises nothing can be inferred. 

6. If one premise be negative the conclusion must be negative. 

7. From a general proposition, with a specific predicate, you can 
only infer a particular or general conclusion. 

From the above rules it will appear evident :— 

Ist. That from two particular premises nothing can be inferred. 

2nd. That if one premise be particular the conclusion must be 
particular. 

3rd. A third is added by logicians, that we cannot always infer a 
universal conclusion from two universal premises. fSee Mule 7.) 



ON LOOIO. 37 



I. TfiB Syllooistio Maxim. 

WhaUver is affirmed or denied of a term distributed, may he affirmed 
or denied oj anything contained under it. 

All men are mortal, John is a man ; therefore, John is mortal. 

The term '* men, " in the major premise, is distributed in the above 
syllogism, of which '* mortal " is affirmed. The term '' mortal " being 
more extensive than the term *'men " consequently distributes, that is 
makes it stand for all its significates ; or, in other words, the whole of 
humanity. In the minor premise, the term **^ man '' is affirmed of 
*^ John," which of course is included as one of the significates of the 
term ^* men " in the major premise ; and in the conclusion the term 
** mortal " may accordigly be affirmed of *' John, " as one of the signi- 
ficates of '* men.*' The above rule may be ultimately applied to all de- 
ductive arguments, whose validity ultimately rests on their conformity 
thereto. * But it cannot be directly applied to all even of pure 
categorical syllogisms ; for the sake of brevity, therefore, some other 
axioms are commonly applied in practice, to avoid the occasional 
tediousness of reducing all syllogisms to that form in which the 
Arstotelian dictum is immediately applicable. 



CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS. 
II. — Axioms. 

1. If two terma agree with one and the same third, they' agree mth one 
another. 

All birds have wings, the lark is a bird ; therefore, the lark has wings. 

Here, " birds " and " wings " are compared and are said to agree with 
each other. Ihen the term "bird" is compared with 'Mark," which is 
likewise said to agree, so that birds agreeing with wings, and lark agreeing 
with birdf hence it will follow that " lark " and " wings " will agree. 

2. 2/ one term agrees, and another disagrees with one and the same 
third, these two disagree with each otJier. 

No man is happy before death, John is a man ; therefore, John is 
not happy before death. 

Here, " man " and " happy before death ** are compared in the major, 
and are said to disagree with each other ; so, disagreeing in the premises it 
naturally follows that they disagree in the conclusion. 

in. — Bulbs. 

1 . Every syllogism has three and only three terms ; these are the 
middle term, the major, and minor terms, or, as they are sometimes called, 
the extremes of the conclusion ; of these the subject of the conclusion is 
called the minor term, and the predicate the major term. In the premises, 



38 ELBMENTABY TBEATI8E 

the middle term is compared with the major and minor terms, and in the 
conclusion the major and minor are compared with each other. If, there- 
fore, there were two middle terms, the terms of the conclusion not being 
both compared at the same time, they could not be conclusively compared 
with each other. 

Light is contrary to darkness, feathers are light ; therefore, feathers are 
contrary to darkness. 

In the above syllogism there are virtually two middle terms in sense, 
though only one in sound ; and so in the following — 

White is a colour, black is a colour ; therefore, black is white. 

Here, " white " is compared with one portion of " colour, " and 
" black " with another portion of it. 

• 

2. Every syllogism has three and only three propositions. 1st. The 
major premise, in which the major term is compared with the middle term. 
2nd. The minor premise, in which the minor term is comparea with the 
middle term ; and 3rd. The conclusion, in which the minor term is com- 
pared ynih the major. 

3. TJie middle term must he distributed once at least in the premises. 
That is, it must either be the subject of a universal or the predicate of a 
major proposition. 

Some animals are beasts, some animals are birds ; therefore, some 
birds are beasts. 

Here, ^^ animals*' is not distributed or used in the whole of its extension. 
It is quite true, that '^ some animals are beasts ;" and it is equally true, 
that '< some animals are birds ;" but then beasts and birds are compared 
with a di£Perent part of the significates under the term animal. 

4. No term must be distributed in the conclusion which was not dis' 
tritmted in one of the premises. For in that case you would employ the 
whole of a term in the conclusion, when you had only employed a part of 
it in the premises, and by this means be really introducing a fourth 
term : — 

All bipeds are animals, a horse is not a biped ; therefore, a horse is 
not an animal. 

Here, the term " animal" is not distributed in the major premise but 
is distributed in the conclusion. 

Again : whatever is related in the Koran is unworthy of credit, 

Miraculous stories are related in the Koran ; therefore, miraculous 
stories are unworthy of credit. 

In the above syllogism, there is, what is termed, " an illicit process 
of the major term," because " miraculous stories," in the minor, is a par- 
ticular proposition, that is, " some miraculous," &c. All, therefore, that 
can be inferred in the conclusion, is simply, «* some miraculous stories are 
unworthy of credit." 

6. From negative premises nothing can be inferred. 



ON LOOIO. 89 

No man is happy before death ; no woman is happy before death — 
proves nothmg. A lion is not a biped ; a horse is not a biped—- 
proves nothing likewise. 

6. If one premise he negative the conclusion must be negative. For 
the middle term is found to disagree with one of the extremes, and in the 
other to agree with the other extreme, therefore, the extremes disagreeing 
with each other, it must be negative. 

No man is happy before death, John is a man ; therefore, John is not 
happy before death. 

7. From a general proposition with a specific predicate^ you can only 
infer a particular or general conclusion. 

All gold is precious, all gold is a mineral ; therefore, some mineral 
is precious. 

INFERENCES DEDUCED FROM PRECEDING RULES. 

1. HuU nothing can he inferred from two particular premises. 

Some men are sagacious ; some beasts are sagacious — ^proves nothing. 
Some animals are sagacious, some beasts are not sagacious ; there- 
fore, some beasts are not animals. 

. ^^ Animals" is distributed in the conclusion but not in the major pre- 
mium there is consequently an illicit process. 

2. I/'one of the premises he particular the conclusion muAt he particular. 

All who fight bravely deserve reward, some soldiers fight bravely ; 
therefore, some soldiers deserve reward. 

3. From two universal premises you cannot always infer a universal 
conclusion. (See Rule 7.) 

All gold is precious, all gold is a mineral ; therefore, some mineral 
is precious. 

These are evidently not universal premises. It will be seen that we 
have formerly drawn a distinction between general and universal proposi- 
tions. A '^ general proposition," we have stated to be a proposition of 
which a ^' species'' is the subject. In the major premise of the above 
syllogism, *' gold'* is a species, whereas, *< mineral' is a genus ; so that 
from a species as such (and particulary an infirma species) you can only 
infer something of the individuals contained under it. 

The above syllogism, taken from " Whately's Logic," fiilly stated 
would run thus : — 

All gold is precious, all gold is a mineral ; therefore, all gold (or some 
mineral) is precious. 

The worthy prelate has, therefore, evidently mis*apprehended the true 
nature of the above syllogism. The following proposition is precisely 
analogous : — 

All men are bipeds, all men are animals ; therefore, some animals are 
bipeds, or all men are bipeds. 



40 ELB1CENTABT TBEiLTISE 

The term *^ animals^*' in the conclusion, must stand for '' men ^ alone 
as it sigoificates, and cannot include any other species, in as much as it 
was only compared with men in the premise. The ** some animals '* may, 
therefore, be considered as identical with ^^ all men." 



n.— OF MOODS. 

The mood of a syllogism is the legitimate determination of these propo- 
sitions, in the order in which they stand, accoiding to their respective 
quantity and qmUty^ as indicated by their symbols, A. E, I, 0. 

There being four kinds of propositions. A, E, I, 0, and three proposi- 
tions in each syllogism, all the possible ways of arranging them will be 64. 
But this is merely a numerical calculation of their possible modes of combi- 
nation, without regard to logical rules ; for it will be found, on examination, 
that the great majority of these are inadmissible, and that all legitimate 
moods are confined to the narrow compass of eleven. 

1. Possible Moods. 2. Excluded Moods. 

3. Legitimatb Moods. 

L Possible Moods* 

Major, A, E, I, 0. Minor. A, E, I, O. Conclusion, A, E, I, 0. 
4 ^ 4 = 16 ^ 4 = 64. 

n. Excluded Moods. 

1. AI A and 7 more ._ 8 ... One premise par., not conclusion. 

2. A A E and 3 more -= 4 ... Neg. conclusion, no neg* premise. 

3. AE A and 11 more = 12 ... One premise neg., not conclusion. 

4. EE A and 15 more = 16 ... Both prem. neg., con. affirmatitve. 

5. 1 1 A and 11 more = 12 ... Both premises par. con. universal 

6. lEO •• 1 ... A. term distributed in con. not in 

— either premises. 

53 
64 — 53 = 11 remains. 

m. Legitimate Moods, 

AAA, AAI, AEE, AEO, All, AOO, EAE, EAO. 
EIO, lAI, OAO. 



n. OF FIGURES. 

CATEGORICAL SYLLOaiSMS. 



The figure of a syllogism consists in the situation of the middle term 
the premise, or in respect to the major and minor terms. 

All the possible moods of a syllogism are " four," and are designated 
by the figures, 1, 2, 8, 4. 



OK LOGIC, 41 

Ist jThi fint figure is thai m which the middle term is made the subject 
qftkiwki^f and ^ predicate of the minor premise. 

2nd. The second figure is that in which the middle term is the predicate 
of both premises. 

8rd. In the third figure the middle term is the subject of both premises. 

4th. The fourth figure is that in which the middle term is the predicate of 
the major and subject of the minor premises. 

Ist FlGUBE. 

Middle term subject of the major, predicate of the minor. 

middle term. 
A. Every principle of religion promotes human happiness. 

middle term. 

A. Benevolence is a principle of reUgion ; therefore, 
A* Benevolence promotes human happiness. 

This is the most dear and rational of all the 6gures, because to syllogisms, 
in this figure only, does the Aristotelian dictum at once apply. 

2nd FiouBE. 

Middle term predicate of both premises. 

A. Every virtue is praiseworthy ; 

E. Intemperance is not praiseworthy ; therefore, 

E. Intemperance is not a virtue. 

In this figure only " negative conclusions" can be proved, because one 
of the premises must be negative. 

3rd Figure. 

Middle term the subject of both premises. 

A. All flowers are beautiful, 

I. Some flowers are roses ; therefore, 

L Some roses are beautiful. 

None but particular conclusions can be drawn in this figure. 

4th Figure. 
Middle term predicate of the major, svbject of the minor. 

Every man is an animal, every animal is sentient ; therefore, something 
that is sentient is man. 

This figure is the most awkward of all, though a syllogism stated thus, 
if according to rule, would certainly be valid. It is only, however, a 
clumsy way of stating what could be more naturally expressed in the first 
figure, by transferring the premises and simply converting the conclusion. 

Thus, take the above syllogism : — 

Every animal is sentient, every man is an animal ; therefore, man is 
sentient. 



42 XLEMEirrABT TREATISE 

By applying the moods to each figure it will be found that each figure 
will admit six moods only, as not violating the rules against undistributed, 
middle^ and illicit process ; but of the moods thus admitted several are 
useless, as having a particular conclusion when a universal might be drawn. 
Of these twenty-four moods five are for this reason neglected, so that 
only nineteen remain. 



THE 24 MOODS. 

19 Valid. 

Fig.l. AAA, EAE, All, EIO. 

Fig.2, EAE, AEE, EIO. AOO. 

Fig.^, AAI, EAO, All, EIO, lAI, OAO. 

Fig.4t. AAI, AEE, lAl, EAO, EIO. 

5 Useless. 

Fig..\. AAI, EAO. 
Fig,2. EAO, AEO. 
Fig.^. AEO. 



CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS. 

1. Moods Possible 64. Excluded 53. Legitimate 1 L 

2. Figures, 1. 2. 8. 4. 
Middle term. — Sub. maj. Pred. maj. Sub. maj. Pred. maj. 

Pred min. Pred. min. Sub. min. Sub. min. 

3. Excluded Modal Figures, 

AAA from 3 figures ... I. From middle term undisfributed. 
AAI — 1 — ... 1st fig. excludes 2, I A I, OAO. 

AEE -^ 2 — ... 2nd fig. excludes 4, j^f/' At^' 

AEO — 2 — ... 4th fig. excludes 2, A II, AOO. 

All — 2 — ... H. Illicit process of major term. 

AOO — 3 — ... 1st fig. excludes 3, A EEr AEO, AOO. 

EAE — 2 — ... 2nd fig. excludes 1, O A O. 

I A I — 2 — ... 3rd fig. excludes 3, A E E, A E O, AO O. 

OAO — 3 — ... 4th fig. excludes 1, O A O. 

20 HX Illicit process of minor term. 

11 moods multiplied by 4 3rd fig. excludes 2, I A A, £ AEr 
44 subtract 20 = 24 4th fig. excludes 2, A A A, EAE. 

4. Moods that are useless. 

1st fig. AAI, EAO. 
2nd fig. EAO, AEO 
4th fig. A E O 



ON LOGIC. 43 

5. ModcU Figures, valid and useful. 

24 
5 

19 Valid and useful. 

It is worthy of remark that I E O, which is excluded from all the modal 
figures, is the only one of the fifty-three that is excluded, because it cannot 
be used in any one of the figures. 

m. Modal Figures. 

It will be observed, that out of the sixty-four possible moodSy eleven 
only can be used in a legitimate term, and that even these are not all allow- 
abk in the same figure, some being used in one and some in another. It 
win be also observed, that of the twenty-four legitimate modal figures, 
nineta^i only are vaHd and useful. To distinguish these moods, and the 
figoras in which they are found, and also to faciUtate their reduction, names 
have been devised and embodied in the following mnemonic lines, which 
the student ought to commit to memory. 

JFfg. 1. Barbara, Celarent, Don^ Feno que prioris 
Fig. 2. CeaarSy Camestres, Festtno, Baroko secundae 
F^, 8. Tertia Darapti^ Felopton, Dattstque 

cum Fen'son, Dtisomts, Bocardo 

sed dato quarto 
Fig, 4. Haec B/imonp, Camen^s, Dtmarts, Feslapo, Frestson. 

VALID AND USEFUL MODAL FIGURES. 
(The following numbers refer to the figures in which they are used.) 

AAA, AAI, AEE, AIT, 

1. 3. 4. 2. 4. 1. 3. = 7 
AOO, EAE, EAO, lAI, h 

2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 3. 4. = 7 
E I O, O A O, 

1.2.3.4. 3. =5 

19 

In order to facilitate the labours of the student, we shall give an ex- 
ample of each of the above in the following table. But it will be as well 
to remind him here, that in studying the above table, he must not only 
commit it accurately to memory, but that he must likewise test the various 
syllogisms in the different moods, so as to make himself perfect master of 
the principles upon which it is based. He will perceive that A can only 
be found in the first figure, in which also every other proposition may be 
found ; that the second only procures negatives (because the middle term 
being predicate in both premises, would not be distributed unless one were 
negative) ; the third only particulars. 

Let us, first, take one example in each figure. 

Fig. 1. Barbara. 



44 U^XMEMTURT TREATISE 

**A. He who possesses prudence possesses all ?btoe, 

A. He who possesses one Tirttie must possess pradeoce ; therefore, 
A. He who possesses one possesses alL" 

Aristotk's argument that the virtues are unirersaL 

Fig. 2. Camestres. 

A. ETety virtue is praiaeworthj, 

EL Dishonesty is not praiseworthy ; therefore, 

£. Dishonesty is not a virtue. 

It win he ohserved, that this figure only proves negative condusicms. 
The reason is ohvious, the middle term heing the predicate of both, the 
premises would not be distributed unless it were a negative. 

It is worthy of remark also^ that if you wish to establish an objeetitm, 
this is the foarm into which most of such arguments will naturally folL 
For exam[4e, if any one should argue against the existence of God, 
because he does not ** see" him, he may be refuted by the argument, that 
our thoughts are not seen by us^ though we nevertheless believe in tlieir 
existence. 

JF^. 3. Darapti. 

A. All gold is precious, 

A. All gold is a mineral ; therefore^ 

L Some mineral is precious. 

We wish the student to observe, in respect to the above syllogism, that 
some logical authors consider the major premise a tiimYrso/ propositicm. 
We omsider it only a general proposition, the subject of it bemg a species 
simply. We recommend, therefore, to the intelligent student, to study 
particularly the difference between specific and generic subjects, as also 
between specific and generic predicates, the former being general aflbma- 
dons, the latter universal affirmations or denials. 

Fig. 4. Camenes. 

A. Every Bar is despised, 

£. No despised person is happy ; therefore, 

E. No happy person is a liar. 



ON LOOIO. 



45 



ALL THE LEGITIMATE MODAL FIGURES. 



oo 



M>*H 



0*Hp4 



OOH 



H^H 



OO^ 



MN4^ 



»»? 



•-•?? 



? ?>« 



II 



lis 

II 

3 • 

I ^ 
I ? 



in 

!5i 



M 

Q 




? §P M 




A a <9 



g I a 

- g: s 
I I ? 



I* "3 



M 

Q 



9ft 

« A » 
b< >^ O 

ill 

i* 3 

f^ pi 




? 

« 
o 

o 

Q 



Q 

CO 



ri 



.s- 



M 

Q 



R. 



46 ELEMENTARY TREATISE 



ON THE REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISMS. 

The four moods of the first figure, (Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio,) 
as they are the clearest and most natural, are called perfect. The moods 
of the other figures are called imperfect ; in as much as the Aristotelian 
dictum cannot be directly and immediately applied to them. But as all 
deductive reasoning ultimately depends on this dictum, all the moods of 
the other three figures may be brought into some of the four moods of the 
first figure. When a syllogism has been thus resolved, it is said to be 
reduced from an imperfect to a perfect mood; and any argument that 
cannot be so reduced is not considered valid. 

Li studjdng the process of syllogistic reduction, the student should 
thoroughly master that part of Lqgic which treats of the affections of 
propositions, and particularly that of conversion, as it bears an immediate 
relation to the process in question. It will be as well to observe, that in 
the process of reduction, we are not allowed to change termSy or introduce 
new propositions. When the premises are laid down, and their truth 
granted, all that we are permitted to do is simply to connect or transpose 
them, so that they may become subject to the laws and conditions of the 
first figure. This may be done in two ways, 

I. By Direct Reduction. II. By Indirect Reduction. 

I. Direct Reduction, — In this species of syllogistic re«Iuction, we may 
convert the major or minor premise, and if necessary, to transpose the 
premises after being so converted ; and in this way the imperfect mood may 
be reduced to one of the four perfect moods. 

Thus :— 

Bramartip of the fourth. 

Every man is an animal, every animal is sentient ; something that is 
sentient is man : 

May be reduced to Barbara of the first figure, by transposing the pre- 
mises, the conclusion naturally following, according to the form of the first 
figure. 

Every animal is sentient, every man is an animal ; therefore, man is 
sentient. 

n. Indirect Reduction. 

By this we prove (in the first figure) not, directly, that the original 
conclusion is true^ but that it cannot he false ; that is, that an absurdity 
would follow from the supposition of its being false ; thus : — 

All true patriots are friends to religion. 

Some great statesmen are not friends to religion ; 

Some great statesmen are not true patriots. 

If this conclusion be not true, its contradictory must — 

An great statesmen are true patriots. 



ON LOGIC. 47 

Let this proposition^ then, be made the minor of the above syllogism 
and a false conclusion will be proved : — 

Bar All true patriots are friends to religion, 
ha All great statesmen are true patriots ; 
rot. AJl great statesmen are friends to religion. 



Or, 



All truly wise men live virtuously, 
Some philosophers do not live virtuously ; 
Some philosophera are not truly wise men. 



Take the contradictory of the above conclusion as your minor premise. 

All truly wise men live virtuously, 
All philosophers are truly wise men ; 
All philosophers live virtuously. 

This conclusion k the contradictory of the original minor premises, and 
must therefore, be fiEtlse, because the premises are always supposed to be 
granted. If this conclusion be false, then it necessarily follows that one 
of the premises from which it has been legitimately derived must be false 
likewise ; but the major premiaey being one of those originally granted, 
must be true ; the falsity must, therefore, rest with the minor premise. 
But die minor premise bemg the contradictory of the original conclusions, 
hence the origmal conclusion must be true. This kind of reduction, it 
may be ofaaerved, is seldom used except for Baroho and BokardOy which 
may, howater, be reduced directly by contraposition ; thus : 

Ba All true patriots are friends to religion ; 

ro Some great statesmen are not friends to religion ; 

ko Some great statesmen are not true patriots. 

This may be reduced to jpertb, by converting the major by negation, or 
contraposition. 

Whoever is not a friend to religion, is not a true patriot, 
Some great statesmen are not mends to religion ; 
Some great statesmen are not true patriots. 

So with Bokardo, which may be reduced to Darii, convertting the major 
premise by contraposition, and then transposing them. 

Some slaves are not discontented, all slaves are wronged ; therefore, 
some who are wronged are not discontented ; thus :— 

All slaves are wronged ; 

Some who arc not discontented are slaves ; 

Some who are not discontented are wronged. 

It will be necessary now to explain the use of the mnemonic lines, 
Barbara^ Celarent, Dariiy Ferio, ^c. The initial letters of all the moods 
are B, C, D, F. The first letter in every imperfect mood indicates that it 
is to be reduced to that mood of the first figure that begins with the same 
letter. Thus, every mood commencing with B, is to be reduced to Barbara; 
with C, to Celarent ; with D, to Darii ; with F, to Ferio. Besides these 
uiitial letters, there arc other consonants in the middle or end of the names 



48 XLEHEMTABY TREATISE 

of the different moods^ indicating the kind of reduction that is to be «n- 
ployed. These letters are 5, p, m, o. s, p, and c, refer to the vowels 
immediately preceding them^ that v^ to the propositions denoted hy these 
vowels, 

8* The proposition denoted by the rowtA before it to be simply 
converted. 

p. The proposition denoted by the vowel before it to be converted per 
accidens. 

e. Refers to indirect reduction; it shows that the proposition denoted by 
the vowel before it must be left out, and the contradictory of the conclusion 
substituted in its place. 

m. That the premises are to be transposed^ that is the minor part 
instead of the major, and the major instead of the mindr. 



ON LOGIC. 



49 



»4 U 

3. « 



c: 



if 




o o 




f p 



p 




o 



O 5J o 51 o 
i 3 S: f -8 



B 






rem. 
idire 


1 

• 


1 

• 


transp 
ct redu 


i 

• 




s 

• 


2. 


5* 


5' 


2 






p 9' 


•2 


•d 


• • 


9 


S 



• • 

2. "g "2 

•d • • 

p P 

o o o 

o n o 

r • 

BBS 

»^ •d "T^ 

3 SI 3 



P i B P B 



OB 



B B 
^ 2 



g 



P 



OB 

S. f 
•? § 

P 



s 

•8 

o 



B 
P ^X' 

•d *P 

§ § 

8 •« 

O O 



5 






w 



s 



B •? p 



s 



5 

o 
p 



o 

o 



5 



St B s? 



p •d 

P • 

(" o 

•P o 

o g 

s • 



•P g ns 

3 § S 
5 s 5 

•p 

O 
n 






S- 



« 
P' 



9 g? 



?«1 
Q 



M 

Q 
to 



Q 

CO 



Q 




S' 



S 

w 

o 



51 



GO 

09 

g 



c 
o 



!? 5^ ? w 

a. ST- g, 

I P 



SI. 3. 03 

p F- 






50 XLBMSHTABY TBSiLTISB 



n. — COMFODirD Stixogisiis. 

A compound syEogisin is defined to be two or more categoruxds united 
by a eojmla; the proposilions of which have been named from their 
respectiye oonjmietions. They may, however, be divided under three 
heads : — 

1. Conjunctive, 1 

2. Conditional, > Constructive or Destructive. 

3. Disjunctive, } 

f 

L CONJTJNCnVBS. 

In the case of omjunctive syDogisms, the condition expessed, is attached 
to OM of (he termSf and not to the premise as such, e. g» 

Every enthusiast is either a knave or fool, 
Loyola was an enthusiast ; therefore, 
Loyola was either a knave or a fool. 

Or, 

Every statesman is either a patriot or an adventurer, 
Caniung was a statesman ; Uierefbre, 
Canning was either a patriot or an advoiturer* 

IL CONDITIONALS. 

Li the case of the oonditiooals^ the reasoning rests on an hypothesis, the 
major being called the hypothetical, the miuOT the cat^orical premise. 

If the Tories are patriots they deserve the support of the country. 

The Tories are p^ots ; therefore. 

The Tories deserve the support of the country. 

In every conditional syllogism there are, what may be called, three 
terms — the Consequencey ArUeoedent^ and Consequent Their natural 
ord^ is as follows, though that is not of any very material importance^ as 
we frequently find them reversed. 

Conseqiience. Antecedent. Conseqnent. 

If — there is a Grod — he ought to be worshipped. 

Consequent. Consequence. Antecedent. 

The French are a wonderfol people — > tf — they are happy. 

Consequence. Consequent. Anteced^t. 

If — he knew his advantages — the young man would be prudent. 

In all propositions of this nature, if correct in point of form, the truth of 
the antecedent must necessarily imply the truth of the consequent; for other- 
wise, the proposition would be frdse, and ought not to be admitted into 
argumentation. 

If Christianity be from Grod, it ought to be embraced* 

In this case the antecedent and consequent are tme in themselves ; and 



OK LOGIC. 51 

the whole proposition is tirue likewise, because there is a real connection 
between them. 

If Christianity be an imposition, it ought to be abandoned. 

In this case both the antecedent and consequent ssejalse in themselves ; 
but the whole proposition is true, as the consequent legitimately follows 
from the antecedent ; i. e. there is such a connection between them, that 
if 70Q admit the one you must admit the other also. 

BULES FOB C0in>ITI0NAL SYLLOGISMS. 

!• If the antecedent is granted, the consequent may be inferred. 
^. If the consequent is denied, the antecedent may be denied. 

There are two modes of arguing in respect to conditionals ; the first is 
based upon the admmion or non-admission of the antecedent by the minor 
premise. 

In the first, we argue from the admission of the antecedent to the admis- 
sion of the consequent 

In the second, we argue from the removal of the consequent to the 
rmnoval of the antecedent. The first is the constructive^ the second is the 
destructiife form. 

There is another way of arguing, which is evidently inadmissible — ^from 
the admission of the consequent to the admission of the antecedent. The 
following rules must therefore be observed in conditional syllogisms :•— 

1. If the minor affirms the antecedent^ or denies the consequent, the 
condusion toUl be valid. 

2. If the minor affirms the eonsequenf, or denies the antecedent^ nothing 
can be iriferred. 

Antecedent. Consequent. 

If logic is useful, it deserves to be studied, ^ 

But logic is usejul ; therefore, > Constructive. 

It deserves to be studied. ) 

In the above syllogism the antecedent is affirmed in the minor premise, 
and is accordingly vaJid. 

If slavery be contrary to the laws of Christ, it ought to be abolished, 
«&H,«y « entrap, to His law,; therefore, 1 Constructive. 
It ought to be abolished. j 

Antecedent. Consequent. 

If Mormanism be of God it must promote virtue, ^ 

But Mormanism does not promote virtue ; therefore, > Destructive. 

It is not of God. 3 

The minor denies the consequent. 

Antecedent. Gonsequent. 

. If the season has been good com must be cheap, 1 
But com is not cheap ; therefore, > Destractive. 

The season has not been good. } 



52 ELEMENTA.RT TEEA.TI8E 

If Mormanism be of God it will flourish, 1 Inadmissible minor 

But Mormanism is not of God ; therefore, > denies the ante- 

It will not flourish. y cedent. 

If a stone is exposed to the rays of the sun, it will contract heat. 
But it has not oern so exposed ; therefore^ 
It has not contracted heat 

The reasoning in the above is evidently fallacious, because the stone 
might contract heat in some other way. It will be observed, the minor 
denies the antecedent. This species of reasoning is from the admission of 
the consequent to the admission of the antecedent, and is evidently inad- 
missible, for the same consequent may follow from other antecedents. 

If a stone be exposed to the rays of gas %ht, it will contract heat, 
But it has been so exposed ; therefore, 
It has contracted heat. 

Ill DISJUNCTIVES. 

When the major premise is disjunctive the syllogism to which it be- 
longs is called a disjunctive syllogism. In a disjunctive proposition it is 
implied, that at least some one of its members must be true ; if then, all 
except one be denied in the minor premise, the truth of this remaining 
one may be inferred in the conclusion. 

The world is either eternally self-existent, or the work of some finite, 
or infinite being. 

But it is neither self-existent, nor the work of a finite being ; there- 
fore, it is the work of an infinite being. 

In the minor premises all the predicates are removed except one^ and 
the conclusion must necessarily establish that one. 

It is either spring, summer, or autumn, 
But it is not spring, or summer ; therefore. 
It is autumn. 

The coin is either, gold, silver, or copper. 
But it is neither, gold nor silver ; therefore. 
It is copper. 

But some time after several of the categorical propositions are denied, 
there are more than one predicate remaining ; in this case the conclusion 
will be a disjunctive proposition. 

The coin is either gold, silver, copper, or brass, 
But it is neither gold nor silver ; 
It is, therefore, copper dr brass. 

In these examples it is impKed that any one of the categorical proposi- 
tions may be true ; and hence, if the minor affirms that proposition the 
rest must be denied in the conclusion, e. g. 

The coin is either gold, silver, copper, or brass, 

But it is gold ; therefore. 

It is either silver, copper, or brass. 



oy LOO 10. 63 



EBDTJOTION OF OOMFOUKD SYLLOGISMS. 

Though the mien already laid down are lufficicnt for ascertaining the 
validity of hypothetical argumentH, a« however all deductive reasoning 
may ultimately l>e tested by the AmtoUlian dictum^ we must now show 
how a com|>ound may be reduced, so that this test may at once apply. 

Ifi again, the major premiae bo hypothetical, and the antecedent and 
consequent happen to have the same subject, in this case the minor and 
conclusi(m are categorical, and may, therefore, be easily formed into a 
regular syllogism. 

If Civsar was a tyrant he deserved deatli, 
But Ctusar was a tyrant } therefore, 
He deserved death. 

In the above syllogism the major is hypothetical and the minor cat(»- 
fforicaL A conditional proposition may be legitimately converted^ by Uiking 
tne cofitradictory of the consecjuent for an antecedent, and the contradictory 
of the antecedent for a consequent. 

If Cmar was a tyranty he deserved death ; mpHeSt 
If he did 7U>t deserve death, Ctfisar was not a tyrant 

This corresponds with the conversion of a categorical j)roposition, by 
contraposition. Hence, every conditional proposition is, in fact, equivalent 
to a universal affirmative categorical proposition»-the antecedent answering 
to the svbjectf and the consequent to xXxa predicate* 

Lot us assume, then, as a major, the equivalent proposition, that 
<< all tyrants deserve death ;*' it is then reduced to a categorical syllogism 
in Barbara. 

All tyrants deserve death, 

But Cficsar was a tyrant ; therefore, 

Caesar deserved death. 

But the above method of reduction will not apply when the antecedent 
and consequent have not the same subject. The other method is to con- 
sider every conditional as a universal anirmative ]>ropoHition, of which the 
terms are entire propositions, the antecedent answering to the subject, and 
the consequent to the predicate. 

If the season is good, trade is likely to be brisk, 
But the season is aood ; therefore, 
Trade is likely to l)e brisk. 

Thus :— 

The moral confidence that the season will be good, is the moral con- 
fidence that trade will be brisk. 
The present confidence, is the confidence that the season will be good. 
The present confidence, is the confidence that trade will be brisk. 

Tlie above is a constructive conditional reduced to Barbara ; but it is 
not to be supposed, that such reduction alters the nature of a proposition, 
but simply its form. 



54 ELEICENTJLBY TREATISE 



DESTEUCTIVB CONDITIONAL. 



If trade is brisk, wages will be Iiigh, 
But wages are not high ; therefore. 
Trade is not brisk. 

Thus :— 

The cause (or supposition) of trade being good, is the cause of wages 

being high, 
The present cause is not the cause of trade being good ; therefore. 
The present cause is not the cause of trade being good. 

Or again :— 

To say that wages are high, is not true. 

To say that trade is go6d, is to say that wages are high ; therefore. 

To say that trade is good is not true. 

In some cases it is better to unfold the argument into two syllogisms. 

If Fillimore is a good president, America is likely to prosper. 
But Fillimore is a good president ; therefore, 
America is likely to prosper. 

Thus, 

Fillimore is a good president, 

The ruler of America is Fillimore ; therefore. 

The ruler of America is a good president 

Again :— 

Every nation governed by a good president is likely to prosper ; 
America is governed by a good president ; therefore, 
America is likely to prosper. 

REDUCTION OF DISJUNCTIVES. 

A disjunctive may be reduced to a conditional, by taking as an ante- 
cedent the contradictory of one or more of its members. 

It is either spring, summer, autumn, or winter. 

But it is spring ; therefore. 

It is neither summer, autumn, or winter. 

If it is neither spring nor summer, it is either autumn or winter ; 
But it is neither spring or summer ; therefore, 
It is autumn or winter. 

The student can easily manage the rest 



IRREGULAR SYLLOGISMS. 

We have hitherto been examining syllogisms stated in the logical form ; 
and now proceed to examine what are usually termed irregular syllogisms^ 
from the fact of their being stated in an abridged, or defective shape, but 



OK LOGIC. 56 

mtjr be easily expanded into regular syllogisms. Of these there 
are four nnds : — 



1. The Enthymeme. 

2. The Sorites. 



3. The Epichrema. 

4. The Dilemma. 



I. THE BNTHTMEME. 

This is an irregular syllo^m which is stated in two propositions, one a 
premise the other a conclusion. It will be at once seen from the following 
example that the other premise is suppressed. Thus : — 

NapokoQ violated the law of nations ; therefore, 
He deserved death. 

In the above instance we have the minor premise and the conclusion, 
and have, therefore, only to supply the major premise, in order to form a 
regular syllogism. 

Bveiy one who violates the law of nations deserves death. 
Napoleon violated the law of nations ; therefore. 
Napoleon deserved death. 

Again :— 

Every religion not based upon justice, benevolence, and piety, is not 

of Grod ; therefore, 
Mahometanism is not of God. 

In this case the minor premise is omitted 

Every religion not based on justice, benevolence, and piety, is not 

of God, 
Mahometanism is not based on justice, benevolence, and piety ; 

therefore, 
Mahometanism is not of God. 

In order to supply more readily the suppressed premise of an enthymeme, 
the following rules have been laid down :^ 

1. If the term, twice repeated^ be found in the subject of the conclusion, 
the* mqjor premise must be supplied. 

2. If the term, twice repeated, be found in the predicate of the con- 
clusion, the minor premise must be supplied. Thus : — 

Man is a reasonable being ; therefore, 
Man is accountable. 

Here the term twice repeated is ''man," and is the subject of the con- 
clusion ; hence the major premise must be supplied. 

Every reasonable being is accountable, 
Man is a reasonable being ; therefore, 
Man is accountable. 

Let us now illustrate the second rule. 

A free people must be happy ; therefore, 
The Americans must be happy. 



56 ELEKENTABT TBEATI8E 

The term twice repeated here is " happy," being the predicate of the 
conclusion ; hence the minor premise must be supplied. 

A free people must be happy. 

The Americans are a free people ; therefore, 

The Americans must be happy. 

It will be observed that in these cases the reasoning is purely syllogis- 
tic, and must accordingly be judged by the laws of the syllogism. 

II. THE SORITES. 

The Sorites is derived from a Greek word, signifying an accumulation 
or heap, being an abridged form of stating a train of arguments, whose 
several propositions are so arranged that the predicate of the first becomes 
the subject of the second ; and so on, in regular progression, till at length 
the last predicate is affirmed of the first subject in the ultimate con- 
clusion. 

Thus:— 

The soul is a thinking substance ; 

A thinking substance is spirit ; 

Spirit has no extension ; 

What has no extension has no organization ; 

What has no organization is indestructible ; 

What is indestructible is immortal ; therefore. 

The soul is immortal 

This series of propositions may be continued to any length, without 
weakening the ground on which the conclusion rests. This arises from 
there being as many middle terms as there are intermediate propositions 
between the first and last proposition. In order to reduce the above 
Sorites to syllogisms, take the second propositions for your major premise. 

1. A thinking substance is spirit. 
The soul IS a thinking substance ; 
The soul is spirit. 

2. The spirit has no extension. 
The soul is spirit ; 

The soul has no extension. 

3. What has no extension has no organization, 
I'he soul has no extension ; 

The soul has no organization. 

4. What has no organization is indestructible. 
The soul has no organization ; 

The soul is indestructible. 

5. What is indestructible is immortal, 
The soul is indestructible ; therefore. 
The soul is immortal. 

It will be observed, that the first proposition in a Sorites, is the only 
minor premise expressed; because each successive conclusion becomes the 
minor premise of the succeeding syllogism. Hence, the first and last pro- 
positions only can be particular, the intermediate must be major premises. 



ON LOGIC. 57 

It b obvious, also, that in a Sorites, there can ho onljr one negative premise, 
vis. the last in the series of four ; if the others were negative we should 
have a negative minor premise^ which is inadmissible in the first figure. 
It is further evident, that a Sorites may be formed of conditional as well 
as of jcategorical pro|[lositions. In the case of a conditional Sorites the 
consequent of the first shall become successively the antecedent of the 
next ; in which case, by establishing the antecedent of the first proposition 
we establish the consequent of the last ; or by securing the last consequent 
we reserve also the first antecedent. 

CONSTRUCTIVE CONDITIONAL SORITES. 

If free trade be the true system of commercial policy, it is sure to in- 
crease human labour ; 

If it is sure to increase human labour, it must increase human 
comforts ; 

If it increases human comforts, it must advance human happiness ; 

If it advances human happiness, it must advance the cause of human 
progress ; 

But it does advance the cause of human progress ; therefore. 

Free trade is the true system of commercial policy. 

In the case of a destnictive conditional Sorites, we must go back to tho 
denial of the last consequent and to the denial of the first antecedent. 

If the soul is material, it must have extension ; 
If it has extension, it must have organization ; 
If it has organization, it may be destructible ; 
If it be destructible, it is mortal ; 
But it is not mortal i therefore. 
It is not material. 

It is very easy for the student to resolve these examples into regular 

syllogiims, and to try their validity by the rules formerly laid down. I 

cannot help giving the following specimens of a Sorites before I conclude 

,this subject. The first is the merry argument of Themistoclcs, that his son, 

a boy of ten years of age, governed the whole world. Thus :— 

My son governs his mother, his mother governs me ; I the Athenians, 
the Athenians the Greeks ; Greece commands Europe, Europe the whole 
world ; therefore, my son governs the whole world. 

The next is from Qlcero ;— 

Quoniam Deos beatissimos sue constat ; 
Beatus autem nemo sine virtute esse potest ; 

Nee virtus sine ratione constare ¦ . 

I^ec ratio utquam inesse in hominis fignra. 
Homines esse specei Deos confidenduin est. 

All perfectly happy beings are virtuous. 
The gods are perifectly happy beings ; 
The gods are virtuous. 

All virtuous beings have reason. 

The gods are virtuous beings ; therefore. 

The gods have reason. 



68 ELIVENTABT TREATISE 

All who have reason, are in the human fomiy 
The gods have reason ; therefore, 
The gods are in the human form. 

The two following verses, from John L 4, 6, appelr to me somewhit to 
resemble a logical Sorites : 

" In him was life ; and the life was the light of men. 
" The light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness comprehended 
it not." 

ni. EPICHBBMA. 

This is a syllogism to one or both of whose premises the proof is 
immediately subjoined :— 

Those who waylay a man to kill him, it is lawful for him to kill; as is 
allowed by the laws of nature and of nations, and by the practices of 
the best of men« 

But Clodius waylaid Milo with that view, as] appears from his forming 
an ambuscade before his country house, his arms, his guards, &c ; 
therefore. 

It was lawfril for Milo to kill Clodius. 

The proof is sometimes attached to both premises, and sometimes only 
to the minor :^~ 

All useful studies deserve encouragement ; 

Logic is a useful study, because it assists us to detect error, and to 

reason accurately ; therefore, 
Logic deserves encouragement. 

In this case the major premise is self evident, so that the proof is 
attached to the minor. 

All useful studies deserve encouragement, 
Logic is a useful study ; therefore, 
Logic deserves encouragement. 

Wliatever assists us to detect error, and to reason accurately, deserves 

encouragement. 
Logic does this ; therefore, 
Logic deserves encouragement. 

Every thing is a blessing to men that leads them to prepare for eternity ; 
because, in so doing they act wisehr secure their present peace — and pro- 
mote their best interest. But afluctions often lead men to prepare for 
eternity, because it disposes to serious thought, draws them from the 
world, and leads them to attend to other things, therefore afflictions are 
sometimes a blessing to men. (See Pitt's Speech on the Slave Trade.) 

lY. DILEMMA. 

The true dilemma, appears to me, to be a conditional syUoffism, with 
several antecedents m the major and a disjunctive minor. The term itself 



OK LOOIO, 69 

is derived from the Greek, from the principal members of which such an 
argument consists. It is sometimes called the comatua syllogismaa^ the 
homed syllogism — Whence the horns of a dilemma ; it is also called the 
crocodoUnuu ayUogismuSy because the crocodile either leads such to the Nile 
as follow it^ or pursues such as fly to destroy them. Of dilemmas there 
are three kinds :— 

1. The Simple Dilemma. 2. The Dilemma improper. 

8. The Compound Dilemma. 

I. THE SIMPLE CONSTRUCTIVE. 

If the blest in heaven have no desires, they will be perfectly content, 
so they will if their desires are fully gratified. But they will either have 
no desires, or they will be fully gratified, therefore, in either case, they will 
be perfectly content 

DESTRUCTIVE. 

If this man were wise he would not speak irreverently of the Scriptures 
in jest, and if he were good he would not do so in earnest ; but he does it 
either in jest or in earnest, therefore he is either not wise or not good. 

DILEMMA IMPROPER. 

If the world were eternal, the most useful arts, such as printing, &c. 
would be of unknown antiouity ; and on this supposition there would be 
records long prior to the Mosaic ; and, likewise, the sea and land in all 
parts of the globe might be expected to maintain their same relative situa- 
tions now as formerly ; but none of these are the fact, therefore the world 
is not eternal. 

The above is simply two conditional syllogisms conjoined. 

It may be observed that the arguments generallv called dilemmas, 
differ very little from conditional syllogisms ; and in the following 
examples the one may be reduced to two destnictive conditionals, and 
the other to two constructive conditionals. 

If this man were prudent he would behave well for his own sake ; 
If he were benevolent, he would behave well for the good of others ; 
But he does not behave well for his own sake, or for the good 

of others ; therefore, 
He is neither prudent nor benevolent. 

Thus:— 

If this man were prudent, he would behave well for his own sake, 
But he does not behave well for his own sake ; therefore, 
He is not prudent. 

Again, 

If this man were benevolent, he would behave well for the good 

of others. 
But he does not behave well for the good of others; therefore. 
He is not benevolent. 



60 SLEMKJilABT TBKAIISB * 

The next is an example of the constructive dilemma reduced to two 
conditionals. 

If this spendthrift is rich, he is prodigal ; 
If he is poor, he is unjust ; 
But he is neither rich or poor ; therefore, 
Ue is either prodigal or unjust. 

If this spendthrift is rich, he is prodigal. 
But he is rich ; therefore. 
He is prodigal. 

Again ; — 

If this spendthrift is poor, he is unjust. 
But he is poor ; therefore. 
He is unjust. 

The following is another instance of the destructive dilemma. 

If ^schylus joined in the public rejoicings he is inconsistent. 

If he did not, he is unpatriotic ; 

But he either did join or not, therefore 

He is either inconsistent or unpatriotic. 

It may be reduced thus : — 

If ^schylus joined in the public rejoicings he is inconsistent. 
But he did join ; therefore. 
He is inconsistent. 

Again; — 

If ^schylus did not join in the public rejoicing, he is un- 
patriotic. 
But he did not join ; thirefore. 
He is unpatriotic. 

It may be observed that the dilemma is generally employed to prove 
the absurdity or falsity of some assertion. In order to this, we 
assume a conditional proposition, the antecedent of which is the asser- 
tion to be disproved, and the consequent is a disjunctive proposition 
enumerating all the possible suppositions on which the- assertion can 
take place. It appears then, if we deny each of the consequents the 
antecedent must be false. Thus, if we have such a proposition 
as this for the major premise, and the minor rejects the consequent, it 
is obvious that the conclusion must reject the antecedent assertion. 
When we have admitted truth to two or more conjunctive proposi- 
tions with the same consequent but different antecedents, and these 
antecedents are such that you cannot be sure of the truth of one of 
them separately, but are certain that one or other is true, then the 
dilemma is used. 

When we have a major premise having several antecedents, but 
only one consequent, «. e. one consequent to all, and these antecedents 
are disjunctively granted in the minor, then the conclusion infers the 
consequent common to all these ' antecedents. But the dilemma is 
not confined to the constructive form, but also takes the destructive. 
If the major premise has several antecedents, each with a separate 
consequent, and the minor premise disjunctively denies the consequents. 



ON LOGIC. 61 

the conclusion may disjunctively deny the antecedents. In order to 
preyent a dilemma being retorted by an antagonist the following rules 
should be observed. 

!• A full enumeration of parts. 

£. That the dilemma press the adversary alone, and the person who 
makes it be not liable to have it retorted upon him. 

In the course of my historical readings I have selected the following 
specimens, from celebrated authors, which I lay before the student 
for the exercise of his judgment. 

A lady wishing to dissuade her son from marriage, used the follow- 
ing dilemma :^ 

Either the woman you marry will be handsome or ugly^ 

If handsome, she will cau^e you jealousy ; if ugly, displeasure. 

Cicero uses the following beautiful dilemma, to prove that all pain 
is to be borne with patience. 

Every pain is either violent or light. 

If light, it will be easily borne ; 

If violent, it will be of short duration. 

The same orator used the following dilemma to prove that no mes- 
sengers should be sent to Antony. 

Legates decernitis ; si ut deprecenter,. contemnet ; 
Si ut imperltis, non audiet. 

Nor must we omit the beautiful dilemma of TertuUian, whereby 
he clears the Christians and accuses Trajan^ who forbade seeking them 
out, and yet ordered them to be prosecuted when found. 

** O sententiam necessitate confusam! negat inquircndos ut nocentes ; 
et mandat puniendos, ut innocentes ; parcit, suevit, dissimulat et 
animadvertit ! quid temetipsum censura circum venis? Si damnas, 
cur non et inquiris ? Si non inquiris, cur non et absolvis." 

The following is that of an ancient prophetess, dissuading her son 
from haranguing the people. 

'* Nam si injusta suaseris,' habebis deos iratos ; sin vero justa, 
iratos habebis homines." The youth thus retorted upon his mother, 
*'Imo" says he, '' Kxpedit ad populuqi verba facere, nam si justa 
dixero dii me amabunt; si injusta homines." 

This kind of argument was used by the opponents of Don Carlos to 
the throne of Spain. They say : — 

*' If a king of Spain has a right to alter the law of succession, 
Carlos has no claim ; and if no king of Spain has that right, Carlos 
has no claim. But a king of Spain either has or has not such a 
right, therefore (in either case) Carlos has no claim." 

I shall conclude with the following : — 

Euathlus, a rich young man, desirous of learning the art of pleading, 
applied to Protagoras, a celebrated sophist, to instruct him, offering a 



( 



62 ELEMENTABT TBEATI8E 

great sum as his reward ; one half of which was paid down, the other 
half to be paid as soon as he should plead a cause and gain it. 
Protagoras found him an apt scholar ; but, after he had made good pro- 
gressy he was in no haste to plead causes. The master, conceiying 
tiiat by this means he intended to shift off the second payment, took, 
as he thought, a sure method of getting the better of his delay. He 
sued Euathlus before the judges ; and, haying opened his case at the 
bar, he pleaded to this purpose : *^ O, most foolish young man, do 
you not see that, in any event, I must gain my point ? for, if the 
judges give sentence for me, you must pay by dieir sentence; if 
against me, the conditions of our bargain are fulfilled, and you have 
no plea left for your delay, after having pleaded and gained a cause." 
To which Euatiilus replied : ** O, most wbe master, I might have 
avoided the force of your argument, by not pleading my own cause ; 
but, giving up this advantage, do you not see that whatever sentence 
the judges pass I am safe ? If they give sentence for me I am acquitted 
by their sentence ; if against me, the conditions of our bargain are not 
fulfilled, by my pleading a cause and loosing it." The judges 
thinking the arguments unanswerable on both sides, put off the cause 
to a long day. 

FALLACIES. 

All fallacies are the negation of truth, so that in examining them 
we are really considering a species of negative logic. Fallacies may 
be considered, either intentional or unintentional, the latter being 
synonymous with superstition and incredulity ; the former (fallacies 
strictly so called) generally involve the element of intention, employed 
so as to effect some purpose. As we are all liable to be wrong 
a priori^ and as deceptive reasoning is still prevalent, it is of great im- 
portance that we should be acquainted with the doctrine of the 
fallacies, so as to be more able to detect error, under whatever guise 
it is presented to our minds. Aristotle divided the fallacies into two 
great classes, fallacies in the matter, and fallacies in the /orm ; the 
former he denominated fallacia extra dictumem, the latter, fallada 
in dictione. The division generally adopted by logicians now is the 
following: — 

1. Logical Fallacies. 2. Semi- Logical Fallacies. 

3. Non-Logical Fallacies. 

There are many grave objections to this division as not being sufii- 
ciently comprehensive, and I apprehend the following is much more 
perfect ; — 



1. Fallacies of Intuition. 

2. Fallacies of Judgment. 



3. Fallacies of Induction. 

4. Fallacies of Deduction. 



In accordance with this arrangement the fallacies of Intuition fall 
first to be examined. 

1. Fallacies of Intuition. 

These again may be subdivided into: — 

1. Subjective Fallacies. 2. Objective Fallacies. 



OK LOGIC. 68 

What has been tenned subjectiye fallacies are simply the fallacious 
tendencies of the human mind, and shall be examined under the head of 
induction. 

3. Objbctiye Faluloies of Intuxtiok. 

The principal fallacies, under this head, are /alse perQeptions, 
iUfisions, optwU deceptions^ and such like. To this may be traced 
ghost stories, hobgoblins, the tricks of jugglers, popish miracles, and 
illusions of reverie. Thus, supposing a person witnessed the feats 
performed^ by the Great Wizard of the North, his senses would be im- 
posed upon, just in the same way that a sophist would impose upon 
the judgment. We are very often deceived by the senses in 
looking at an object through mist ; but at no time is a person so 
likely to be deceived with such illusions as when false perceptions 
flash across the mind in a nervous state of excitement, or when the 
mind is lost in some reverie. 

2. Fallaoies of Judgbcent. 

Under this head fails to be considered what logicians have termed 
non-logical fallacies. 

1. Fallacia noh causae pro causa: 

2. Petetio principii. 
8. Ignoratio elenchi. ^ 

The fallacies now to be considered are to be found in the premises 
of an argument, and not in the connexion between them and the con- 
clusions; it is the judgment, therefore, that can alone detect and 
expose them. Each of the above assume various phases and are 
presented under diflerent aspects. 



I. Pbekises False ob Umsufpobtbd. 

1. The faUacy of causation (nun causse pro causa). 

2. Suppression of a doubtful premise. 

8. Bold assertions, or indirect assertion of an unsupported premise. 

4. Fallacy of references. 

5. Assumed parallelism (non tali pro tali). 

6. Undue probability. 

II. Unduly Assumed Pbemises. 

1. Begging the question (petetio principii). 

2. Premises virtually involving the conclusion. 

3. Premise and conclusion, meaning the same thing, though dif- 
ferently worded. 

4. Reasoning in a circle. 



i 



64 ELEMENTABY TREATISE 



III. Irbelevant Conclusion (ignoratio elenchi). 

1. Confasion of terms. 

2» Emotion or sentiment sought to be substituted instead of the 
real conclusion. 

3. Shifting ground. 

4. Fallacy of objections. 

5. Proving part. 

6. Suppressing conclusion. ^ 

The above I apprehend embraces the leading forms which the above 
fallacies assume. 

I. PREMISES FALSE OB UNSUPPORTED. 

1. The Fallacies of Causation, — This fallacy consists, as it is gen- 
erally expressed, in assigning an event to a wrong cause — an error 
into which men have always been prone to fall. It is, sometimes, 
•' non causse pro causa," or " non effectus pro effcctu." Many of the 
doctrines of ancient philosophy are reducible to this head ; as, for 
instance, when the Peripatetics gravely informed us, that *' nature 
abhorred a vacuum, and that this was the cause why water would not 
run out of a long tube if it were turned upside down." If a comet 
appears, or an eclipse of the sun or moon takes place, it is customary 
for them to look upon these phenomena as the fore-runners of war, 
pestilence, and famine ; and if a person has been guilty oi some 
crime, and shortly after meets with some temporal calamity, the one 
is ascribed to the other ; or if involved in afflictions, it is concluded 
that these are judgments come upon him for his iniquities. But all 
these conclusions are mere sophisms. It may also be observed, that 
many of the popular objections to Christianity are to be referred to 
this head. 



In analyzing the process that takes place in this fallacy we shall 
find, that that which chiefly distinguishes it is the assumption of one 
of the premises. This assumption will either be a pretended cause to 
establish a supposed effect, or 2i pretended effect to establish a supposed 
causSy or di pretended connexion assumed between two existing facts. 



Thus :— 

rAU cruel persons will be visited with some heavy 
Pretended cause J calamity, 

assumed j This person is cruel ; therefore, 

(^He will be visited with a heavy calamity. 

Or, again : — 

{All afflicted persons must have been peculiarly 
guilty. 
This person has been afflicted ; therefore, 
He must have been peculiarly guilty. 

Again : — 

^, - . . . ( All persons who take medicine are cured, 

xt\ ^\ -^^^ n I This person took medicine ; therefore, 
but that IS all. (He was cured. 



OK LOOXO. 65 

In the last syllogism the fallacy is obvious^ for, though the facts are 
admitted to a certain extent, that is all that we can say, the supposed 
connexion cannot be inferred. The best plan to detect such fallacies 
is to supply the supposed premise. 

Whenever a comet has appeared a war has taken place, 
A comet has appeared this year ; therefore, 
A war will take place. 

Another form of this fallacy is, that of ** bold assertions or indirect 
insinuations of an unsupported premise." This is particularly the 
case with infidel objections in respect to Christianity, such as Christi- 
anity is a foe to liberty ; an abettor of tyranny, &c. Therejis your 
Chrutian govimment ; there are your Christian parsons, &c. Another 
form which it assumes, is called a '* fallacy of reference/* For example, 
supposing YOU argue with an illiterate man, and vanquish him com- 
pletely, reference is made to such and such a champion of the cause, 
who would soon establish what he was advocating, &c. Another form 
of this fallacy, is what is called an " assumed parallelism," non tali pro 
talu This takes place when a person argues from a case not parsdlel 
as if it were parallel. Thus, from the circumstance that some persons 
have abused charity, it has been contended that to give alms in any 
case is improper ; or, because a person from a particular class of 
society, when raised to a station of trust and importance, has acted 
improperly, it has been argued that to raise any other of that class to 
the same station, must be attended with similar evil consequences. 
In the non tali pro taU the supposed premise is false, for it is in this 
premise that the parallelism is affirmed. And, in the " non vera pro 
vera," the expressed premise is false. 

The limit from which this fallacv assumes is that of *' undue proba« 
bility." This often takes place when, in a long chain of argument, 
we omit to calculate the probabilities in each successive step. Each 
step may have an excess of chances in its favour, and yet the ultimate 
conclusion may have a great preponderance against it. 

For example :— 

The reports which this author heard are probably true. 

This which he records is a report which he probably heard ; 

therefore. 
This statement is probably true. 

Suppose the majority of the reports he heard, B&y/our out of seven^ 
are true, and that he generally, say two in three times ^ reports faith- 
fully what he heard, it follows that of twenty-one of his reports only 
eight are true. 

II. UNDULY ASSUMBD FRBMISES. 

This fedlacy is generally known as the petith prinoipiiy or begging 
the question. One form of it is, that the premise virtually involves 
the conclusion, such as the celebrated metaphysical axiom of Descartes, 
** Ego cogito ; ergo, ego sum :" I think ; therefore, I exist. Another 
form of this fallacy is, when the premise and conclusion bear the same 

I 



66 fleme:?taby treatise 

meaning, though differently worded. Thus, the amusing doggrel in 
Mill's Logic : — 

" Mihi deraandatur, 
A doctissimo doctore, 
Quare opium facit dormire ; 

Et ego respondeo 
Quia est in eo. 
Virtus dormitiva, 
Cujus natura est sensus assoupire." 

Though, be it observed, it may be perfectly allowable at the com- 
mencement of an argument to take for granted a premise that is not 
more evident than the conclusion, or that may be disputed by your 
adversary, provided you engage fairly to prove that premise after- 
wards. It is also perfectly allowable in an argument to begin by 
deducing your conclusion from a premise which may be exactly 
equivalent to the one which is to be proved, provided that no undue 
advantage be taken in respect to the point in question. But in doing 
this, the sophist will endeavour to blink the question altogether, or in 
a flourish of words merely bring forward the same proposition, ex- 
pressed in synonymous terms. Thus, were the question in dispute. 
Whether ** Christian unity is preserved in the Roman Catholic Church 
alone;'* if a member of that Church were to argue as follows, he would 
be guilty of this fallacy : " Examine the Catholic Church in every age 
and in every country, and you will find it precisely the same. From his 
holiness the pope down to the meanest member of the true Church — 
from the days of the apostles down to the present time, a sacred 
unity has ever been preserved." This is obviously a mere fallacy, for 
what ought to be proved is boldly assumed. Tn order to answer 
a person, reasoning as above, he ought to be asked, In what does this 
unify consist ? Is it a unity of 

1. Intelligence. -j 3. Action, or of opinion. 

2. Love. I 4. Doctrine? 

If a unity of doctrine, is it meant by this that the Church always 
held the same dogmas ? If so, how is it that Pope Pius added 
another article of belief to the creed of the Church the other day at 
Gkieta, that of the immgculacy of the Virgin Mary, Is it a unity of 
intelligence ? certainly not. Is it a unity of love ? let the bloody 
wars of popish nations answer. Is it a unity of action or of opinion ? 
no. Let Jansenists and Jesuits answer. Is it a unity, or, rather, union 
of expediency ? yes ; and this for the express purpose of more effectually 
trampling on human liberty and every thing that is sacred to man. 

The last form of this fallacy is that of reasoning in a circle. The 
above Church has made unsparing use of this fallacy likewise, to support 
her pretensions. It is to be observed, that this species of reasoning 
takes place, when the same propositions are made alternately premises 
and conclusions. Thus, the Church of Rome has contended, that the 
Scriptures are so obscifffe and ambiguous, that, when left to themselves, 
they are more lik^y to generate error than truth, to foment division 
rather than to produce unanimity and agreement. To this objection 
it may be replied, " What is* the reason that the Scriptures may not be 
trusted alone ?'-' " Why," say our opponents, " they are liable to be 



ON LOGIC. 67 

misinterpreted und wrested to coimtenance the respective opinions and 
practices of different seels and parties.*' Granted; But what remedy 
can be devised to obviate this evil ? Is their use to be entirely pro* 
scribed ? •* No," say they ; but they must be invariably accompanied by 
another book, which may be considered in the light of an authorized 
Commentary. Then, are we to judge the Bible by the Commentary ? 
yes ; But how are we to judge of the Commentary ? It is to be read 
upon the authority of the Church. Yes ; But how am I to judge of 
the authority of the Church ? It is to be plainly seen in the Bible. 
Then I am, in the first place, to judge the Bible by the Commentary, 
then the Commentary by the authority, and then the authority by the 
Bible. So that, after all, my own reason is the ultimate judge of the 
Bible. Round this vicious circle, poor Roman Peter may be eter- 
nally lashed. 

III. IRRELEVANT CONCLUSION (IGNORATIO ELENCHI; 

This is the fallacy of an irrelevant conclusion; and it takes place 
when the proposition which you prove is not the contradictory of 
your opponent's assertion. Thus, if the advocate of a person con- 
victed of a crime in court, were to attempt to dispute the charge, by 
proving that the person had been greatly injured, — that he was a man 
of excellent character — that nothing of the kind had ever before been 
laid to his charge, and that he was highly connected, he would be 
guilty of this fallacy ; for none of these points was the matter under 
consideration^ and, they might be all true, while his guilt remained. 

One form which this fallacy assumes, is that of ** a confusion of 
terms." Thus, if a person should attempt to prove that the inha- 
bitants of a civilized country were noifree^ and, in proof of this, prove 
that they m%i,si be subject to such and such laws, he would be guilty of 
this fallacy. Anotlier form of this fallacy is, " that of substituting 
for the real conclusion an emotion or a sentiment." Popular orators, 
who expatiate on supposed national wrongs, are very often guilty of 
this fallacy; andl apprehend that the late Daniel O'Conneli's speeches 
would furnish a rich supply of these fallacious sophicisms, and, more 
paiticularly, that form of the fallacy under present consideration. 
Thus, instead of proving that the Irish was a nation of slaves, honest 
Dan would exclaim to poor Paddy : — 

" Oh, Erin, wer't thou free ! 
Urst flower of the earth ! ! 
Fitbt gem ol the sea ! ! ! ** 

A third form which this fallacy assumes is that of ** shifting the 
ground." When the sophist cannot maintain his point, he shifts 
the ground of the argument to some other view of the subject, which 
he can more easily defend. This he frequently does by substituting a 
particular for a universal term, or vice versa; or he may prove some- 
thing possible when he ought to prove it probable ; ox probable, when it 
ought to have been found necessary ; or he may prove it to be not 
necessary, when it should have been proved tiot probable, or improbable 
when he should have shown that it was impossible, A fourth form 
assumed by this fallacy is that of the " fallacy of objections." This 
form of the fallacy is practised, by showing that there are objections 



6$ SLEMBNT4RT TftSATISE 

against the point in dispi^te, and from thence infering that It ought not 
to he received. This is the fallacy most commonly hrought forward 
hy those who attempt to impugn the divine origin of the Christian 
religion. Jt may he assumed thus :-*Qranted that there are some 
parts of Christianity that cannot he satisfactorily explained ; hut, as 
the religion exists, this is the phenomenon : — If we reject it, we are 
hound to give some solution to this phenomenon, less open to objec- 
tions than we $nd from the adoption of it. We are bound in candour 
to adduce some hypothesis that will give a likely solution to the quejB- 
tion, connected with historical facts and all tbe circumstances of the 
case. That infidels have never done this, though they have had 2000 
years to try, amounts to a confession that no such hypothesis can be 
devised, which will not be open to greater objections than lie against 
Christianity. A fourth form of this fallacy is ** proving a point,*' and 
then drawing a conclusion as if the whole were proved or disproved. 
Nothing affords a better example of this fallacious mode of reasoning 
than the present system of reviewing works as they issue from the 
press. This is the case whether the review be favourable or un- 
favourable. The last form which this fallacy assumes is that of 
*' suppressing the conclusion." Here the sophist, instead of stating 
the conclusion, will try to suppress it altogether, and conclude the 
argument by merely stating ^' the inference is from this plain." Thus I 
' have fully established my point. ** The position of my opponent is 
completely overthrown," &c. 

III. Fallacies of Indttction. 

Under this head may be considered the Idola of Bacon. He has 
denominated the various causes of error, '* the idols of the under- 
standing," and arranged them into four classes. 



1. Idola Tribus. 

2. Idola Species. 



3. Idola Fori. 

4. Idola Theatri. 



To every false notion of the mind, Lord Bo^con has given the name 
of idol. By this figurative term, he elegantly distinguishes between 
false science and true. These erroneous notions are a specious of 
idols, which usurp the homage which the mind ought to render only 
to truth ; and are, therefore, designated as false doctrines which ought 
to be destroyed and to be abandoned. Of these causes of error, the 
first class includes : — 

THE IDOLA TRIBUS, OR IDOLS OF THE TRIBE. 

These have their foundation in human nature itself, without regard 
to any modifying circumstances ; and are, therefore, incident to the 
whole tribe or race of man. 

This head Lord Bacon illustrates in a very admirable manner, by 
showing how apt we are to reason on a mere assumption ; to regard 
our preconceived opinions ; to follow our imagination ; to expect too 
much from our limited capacities ; to trust too implicitly to the test* 
ing of our senses ; and to cherish an undue fondness for generaliz- 
ation. 



ov Looxo. 69 

In illuitration of these particulars. Lord Bacon observes, that the 
mind supposes a greater order and uniformity in things than is 
really the case. Tiiough many things are unique, and many thiuji^s 
extremely dissimilar, yet the mind is stiU imagining parallels, corres- 

SondencieSy and relatiyes that hare no real existence. Hence, the 
ction of Uie ancient astronomers, that ail celestial bodies more in 
perfect circles ; that there were only four elements in nature, &c. 

With regard to our preconceived notions, he observes, that when 
the mind is once pleased with certain things, it draws all others to 
consent and go along with them. Hence, in cases of superstition, of 
astrology, dreams, omens, and such like vanities, those who find 
pleasure in these things, always observe when the event answers to 
their predictions, but pass over, or but slightly notice, the instances 
in which their predications fail ; which generally are by far the most 
numerous. 

The passions and affections also lead us often astray. The light of 
the understanding is not a pure or dry light, but is drenched in the 
will and affections, hence, what men desire to bo true, they are most 
easily inclined to believe ; so that in numberless ways, and sometimes 
in a manner almost imperceptible, the affections and propositions of 
men tinge and affect their understanding. Too implicit confidence 
in the report of the senses, is also another fruitful source of error 
and misconception. Those things that strike the senses unjustly 
overbalance those that do not; and little or no regard is paid to 
objects that lie beyond the reach of physical examination. We are 
thus led to judge of spiritual natures as we do of material objects 
around us, and to invest the Supreme Being with a figure, and 
pourtray him with passion similar to man. Another fertile source of 
misconception is an undue fondness for abstraction, generalization, &c. ; 
all of which have their origin in the uniformity of the human mind, 
and to which all are alike liable. 

The second class in Lord Bacon's division is the 

IDOLA SFECIBS, OB THB IDOLS OF THB DEK. 

These are prejudices which have their foundation, not in the con- 
stitution of human nature, but in something peculiar to the individual. 
They arise from the peculiar organization of the individual, and are 
produced by the education, customs, pursuits, and other accidental 
circumstances that tend to form the human character. Hence, men 
are fond of some sciences and studies, either because they have be- 
stowed much pains upon them, or because they have been peculiarly 
successful in their prosecution. Their thoughts are thus confined to 
a certain tract, and, when they venture out of their beaten course and 
apply themselves to any new point, they generally endeavour to 
wrest and torture it so to agree with their preconceived notions. 
They judge of things by the maxims of their profession, and view them 
under the aspect and through the dark glass of former prejudice. 
As one instance in point, Mr. Locke mentions an eminent musician, who 
believed that Qod created the world in six days and rested upon the 
seventh, because there were seven notes in bittsic. A third class of 
prejudices in this division, is the-^ 



70 ELEMENTARY TREATISE 



IDOLA FORI, OB IDOLS OF THE MABKET PLACE. 

These have their ongin in the imperfection of human language. 
In all places of public resort, or wherever the general intercourse of 
mankind is carried on, words are used in a loose, lax, and capricious 
sense. This is, perhaps, of all the most prolific source of human 
prejudice, as misconceptions insinuate themselves into the mind from 
the associations of words and terms. The idols which words impress 
on the understanding are ranked under two heads, by Lord Bacon. 

1. The names of things that have no real existence. 

2. The names of things that do exist. 

Of the former he mentions the prtmum mobile, the orbs of the 
planets, the element of fire, and fictions of a like nature. Many 
terms of this kind exist at the present day, such as chance, fortune, 
nature^ luck, &c., which have nothing corresponding to them in actual 
existence, but which, from being used in a vague indefinite sense, 
often lead to serious eiTor, both in judging and in reasoning. 

The others are- those which have a corresponding existence in 
nature. As an example, the word moisture is selected by his lordship. 

Thus, moisture signifies that which is undeterminable of itself and 
cannot fix — that which .yields easily every way — that which readily 
divides and scatters itself — that which easily unites with itself and runs 
together — that which easily flows and is set in motion — that which 
readily sticks to another body and wets it — and that which is easily 
melted or reduced from a solid to a fluid. Now, when this term comes 
to be employed with an exception of some of the significations, flame 
will be moist ; with the exception of others, air is not moist ; with the 
exception of some others, fine powdered glass may be said to be moist. 
Hence, therefore, that the notion taken from this term has been incon- 
siderately taken from water and other common liquids, aud has not 
been truly verified or made to agree precisely with the thing which it 
signifies before it was adopted. 

The last class of prejudices contains those which Lord Bacon 
denominates Idola Theatri, These are the prejudices of fashion and 
of authority, which spring from great names, or from following a 
master, which arise from the systems we adopt, or the sects which we 
have espoused. These, like the representations of the stage, are likely 
to impose upon us, hence the approbation they have received. Pre- 
judices of this nature are not to be found in the nature of man itself, 
but are imposed upon us by false theories and perverted laws of demon- 
stration. Such theories have abounded in the philosophical, political, 
and religious worlds. Such, then, are the various sources of error 
which fill our minds with prejudices or idols, and pervert our judg- 
ments and reasonings, the necessity of dislodging which is obvious, 
and of seeking as much as possible to free the mind from their per- 
nicious influence, both in searching after truth and of communicating 
it to others ; or, in the language of Bacon, " These several sorts of idols 
are all of them to be solemnly and for ever renounced, that the under- 
standing may be thoroughly purged and cleansed: for the kingdom of 
man, which is founded in the sciences, can scarcely be entered other-. 



ON LOOIO. 71 

wise than die kingdom of God, that is, in the condition of little 
children," 

IV. Fallaoiss of Dbdvottok. 
Under this head will be examined what is generally termed 
I. Logical fallacies. II. Semi Logical fallacies. 

We shall first examine those that are considered primarily logical, 
or where the conclusion does not follow from the premises. 

1. Illicit process. 

2. Undistributed middle. 
8. Negative premise. 

4. Affirmative conclusion from negative premise. 
6. Negative conclusion from affirmative premise. 
6. More than three premises. 

11. Semi-Logioal Fallacies. 

I. FORMS A TERM AMBIGUOUS IN ITSELF. 

a. Fallacy of Etymology, (or of figurcD dictionia.) 

b, „ Interrogationum. 

c. „ Equivocationis. 

d, „ Amphibolise. 

II. AMBIGUOUS FROM THE CONTEXT. 

a. Fallacia Divisionis. 
&• » Z Compos! tionis. 

c. „ Accidentis. 

d, „ Substantias (secundum quid a dictum simplicter, 

vice versa.) 

What are called pure logical fallacies have been already illustrated, 
under the special rules for constructing the syllogisms, and it would be 
merely repeating what has been already laid down to illustrate them 
with examples. There is one mode of fallacious reasoning, however, 
which may be referred to this head ; the common error of supposing 
the conclusion false because the argument is unsound; or, of supposing 
the premises true^ because the conclusion is a truth. 

Thus:— 

Whatever is universally believed must be true. 

The existence of a God is not universally believed ;. therefore. 

The existence of a God is not true. 



73 ELEUENtABT T&XATI8B 

Thia syllogism is a pure fallacy, because there is an itUcit process 
of the major. The term '* true " is distributed in the conclusion, by 
being the predicate of a negative proposition ; while it is not distri- 
buted in the major premise, being then only the predicate of an 
affirmative proposition. 

Again :— 

Whatever is universally believed is true. 
The existence of God is true ; therefore. 
The existence of a God is universally believed. 

In this case we have the fallacy of an undistributed middle ; because 
the middle term ** true " is neither the subject of a universal, nor the 
predicate of a negative proposition. The argument is therefore in- 
conclusive. The fallacy of the following unsound argument, would 
not be very perceptible at first sight* 

Every rational agent is not accountable. 
Brutes are not rational agents ; therefore, 
Brutes are not accountable. 

The above syllogism is principally analogous to the following : — 

Every ass is an animal. 

Sheep are not asses ; therefore, 

Sheep are not animals* 

This is particularly the best way to refute such a fallacy. There is 
one syllogism, however, with which we have met, very difficult of 
solution, and which we shall leave to the ingenuity of the student 
to solve: — 

What is not praiseworthy is not virtuous, 
Some pleasures are not praiseworthy ; therefore, 
Some pleasures are not virtuous. 

II. SEMI-LOQICAL FALLACIES. 

In logical fallacies the extremes are compared with two parts of 
the same terms ; but in those now to be considered they are compared 
with two different terms; because the middle term is used in different 
senses in the two premises. 

1. A term ambiguous in itself. 

a. FALLACY OP ETYMOLOGY (FIGtJKaB DICTIONIS). 

This fallacy takes place when a term is introduced in an argument 
which resembles in sound the one for which it is substituted, but not 
in sense. 

Theorists are unsafe guides. 

This man has formed a theory; therefore, 

He is an unsafe gtdde. 



ON LOOIC. 73 

Honco the fallacy lies in insinuating, that he who forms a theory^ 
using tho term in its proper acceptation, must bo a theoristy every one 
who revels in tho airy fictions of his own imagination. 

Again, 

To be suspected of witchcraft is a presumption of guilt, 
This woman is so suspected ; therefore, 
Wc may presume that she is guilty. 

The fallacy here lies in supposing an exact correspondence between 
presume and presumption. This, however, is not the case. Presump- 
tion in the one premise, evidently means ** a slight suspicion;" 
whereas, ** to presume," is used to express absolute belief. Some- 
times thi.s fallacy arises from a word being used at one time in its 
customary y and at another in its etymological sense. 

h. FALLACIA INTERROGATIONUM. 

This fallacy consists in asking several questions, which appear to be 
but one, in such a way, that whatever one answer is given, being of 
course applicable to only one of the questions, may be interpreted as 
applied to some one of the others. Thus, if it be asked, '* Are virtue 
and vice desirable ? ** Whether you reply yes or no, you are equally 
entangled. If, however, you reply to each question separately, you 
detect and expose the fallacy. Thus, virtue is desirable, vice is not. 
But, if several questions that are proposed together, are accordingly 
brought forward as distinct questions, there is no fallacy in the case. 
Thus, Christ put two questions to the Pharisees respecting the baptism 
of John: — 

Was the baptism of John from heaven ? 
Or, was it of men ? 

The above questions are perfectly legitimate. It will be observed, 
that the poor Pharisees were put upon the horns of a dilemma by 
these questions, for whatever answer they gave was equally detrimental 
to them. Hence they viewed the *' horns," and kept at a respectful 
distance from them. 

e, FALLACIA EQUIVOCATIONIS. 

This fallacy takes place when one of the terms in an argument has 
in itself, from its own equivocal nature, two meanings. 



Thus :— 



Or:— 



The dog barks. 

The dog is a star ; therefore. 

The star barks. 



Walking is healthy. 

This man is walking ; therefore. 

This man is healthy. 



74 ELEMEMTAHY TREATISE 

d. FALLACIA AMPHIBOLIAE. 

This fallacy takes place when a sentence employed in reasoning is 
capable of two meanings, not from any double sense of any of the 
terms, but from its admitting of a double construction. The heathen 
oracles of old afford us many examples of this ambiguity ; thus, the 
response given to Croesus, king of Lydia, previous to his going to war 
with Cyrus : 

*' If Croesus goes to war a great empire shall be overthrown." 

The oracle might safely predict this, because battles in those days 
generally decided the fate of empires. Poor Croesus thought this 
referred to Cyius, whereas it so happened that it was his own empire 
that was overthrown. Similar to this is the witch prophecy in 
Shakspeare : 

*' The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose." 

This may either signify that the duke lives who shall depose Henry, 
or whom Henry shall depose. Under this fallacy comes the famous 
logical puzzle of Achilles and the tortoise. The argument is, let 
Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet, if the tortoise has 
the start, Achilles will never overtake him. 

Hobbes hinted that the fallacy lies in the tacit assumption, that what 
is infinitely divisible is infinite. The following solution is given to 
it in " Mill's Logic." The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as 
fast as the tortoise, yet, if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never 
overtake him. To suppose them to be, at first, separated by an interval 
of 1,000 feet, when Achilles has run these 1,000 feet, the tortoise 
would have got 100; when Achilles has got those 100, the tortoise 
will have run 10, and so on for ever ; therefore, Achilles may run for 
ever without overtaking the tortoise. 

Now, " for ever,*' in the conclusion, means for any length of time 
that can be supposed ; but in the premise, " ever" does not mean any 
length of time, it means any number of suhditistons of time. It means, 
that we divide 1,000 feet by 10, and the quotient again by 10, and so 
on as often as we please, that there never will be an end to the sub- 
divisions of the distance, nor, consequently, to those of the time in 
which it is performed. But an unlimiied number of subdivisions may 
be made of that which is itself limited. The argument proves no 
other infinity of duration than may be embodied in five minutes. So 
long as the five are not expired, what remains of them may be 
divided by ten, and again by ten as often as we like, which is 
perfectly compatible with there being only five minutes altogether. It 
proves, in short, that to pass through the infinite space requires a time 
which is infinitely divisible, but not an infinite time, the confounding 
of which distinction Hobbes had already seen to be the gist of the 
fallacy. 

II. TeBMS AllBIGTJOnS FBOli THE CoNTEXT. 

a. FALLACIA DIVISIONIS. 

This fallacy takes place, when we affirm of it only in a divided 
sense, what is only true of it ccUectively^ For example : — 



ON LOGIC. 75 

Five is one number. 

Three and two are five ; therefore, 

Three and two are one number. 

Again : — 

The members of the Houses, Upper and Lower, constitute the 

British Parliament, 
Lord Brougham and Joseph Hume are members of the Houses, 

Upper and Lower ; therefore, 
Lord Brougham and Joseph Hume constitute the British 

Parliament. 

Or, again : — 

These persons can lift ten tons, 

This man is one of these persons ; therefore. 

This man can lift ten tons. 

This fallacy very often turns on the ambiguity of the word ** all," 
which may, however, be dispelled by substituting for it the word 
" every** or ** each,*' where that is its true signification. 

ft. FALLACIA COMPOSITIONIS. 

This fallacy is the reverse of the former, and takes place when we 
assume that to be true collectively which is only true distributively. 

Thus :— 

Two and three are an equal and an unequal number, 
Two and three are five ; therefore. 
Five is an equal and an unequal number. 



Again : — 



Three and two are two numbers. 
Five is three and two ; therefore, 
Five is two numbers. 



In these examples the ambiguity of the middle term is obvious, 
being used in the major premise diatrihuiively^ and in the minor 
collectively, 

c, FALLACIA ACGIDENTIS. 

This fallacy takes place when a person argues for or against anything, 
from what is merely accidental, instead of what is essential to the 
subject. This fallacious mode of reasoning must also be referred to 
an ambiguous middle. This middle term is used, in one premise, to 
signify something considered as to its essential properties ; in the other 
premise, it is considered as implying that its properties are taken into 
account with it. 



Thus :— 



What is sold in the market is food for man. 
Undressed meat is sold in the market ; therefore. 
Undressed meat is the food of man. 



76 £LEH£NTABT TREATISE 

In the above instance the middle term, in the major premise, is ' 
understood as to its essential properties^ and in the minor to its acci- 
dental circumstances. 

Again : — 

Christianity existed from the days of the apostles, 
Protestantism did not exist from the days of the apostles, but 

only from the time of Luther ; therefore, 
Protestantism is not Christianity. 

The fallacy here lies in the error of insinuating, that, what is true of 
any subject considered simply in itself, must be true likewise of it in 
all its particular modifications. The absurdity of the above popish 
argument will become apparent, when an analogous one is brought 
forward. 

Lord Derby existed last century. 

The present First Lord of the Treasury did not exist last century, 

but only from the time of his appointment to this high office ; 

therefore. 
Lord Derby is not First Lord of the Treasury. 

By bringing forward a parallel case all such sophisms may be, in a 
popular manner^ triumphantly refuted. 

d. FALLACIA SUBSTANTIAB (SECUNDUM QUID AD DICTUM 

AUT VICESSIM). 

This fallacy is very nearly allied to the preceding, and takes place 
when any person argues for a thing in an absolute sense, when it is only 
true in a restricted sense, or the contrary. 

Opium is poison, secundum quid. Physicians proscribed it ; 
An Ethiopian is white as to his teeth ; therefore, 
He is white. 
A man acted prudently in certain particular circumstances ; 

therefore, 
He will so act under ^11 circumstances, or vice versa. 

Or thus : — 

Prodigies and omens are not to be believed, 

Livy, in his Roman History, describes omens and prodigies ; therefore, 

Livy, in his Roman History, is not to be believed. 

Again : — 

All men have a right to their personal liberty, 

A madman is a man ; therefore. 

He has a right to his personal liberty. 

All these fallacies can be easily solved by showing that a thing may 
be true in some respects, while it is not so in others ; or that it may 
be true considered simply in itself, while it is not so viewed under 
other circumstances. 



ON LOGIC. 77 

We have now gone through all the divisions of Logic, and unfolded 
the principles and laws of sound and sophistical reasoning, and shall 
now proceed to examine briefly the views of others in respect to the 
legitimate province of this science. 



THE PROVINCE OF LOGIC. 

From the peculiar views lately propounded by some of our first 
logicians, in respect to the legitimate province of the reasoning science, I 
purpose briefly to advert to the opinions of Whately, Leechman, and Mill, 
they being the only modern logicians from whoso writings the student is 
likely to derive any practical advantage. It will be remembered, that the 
above writers have been already referred to :— 

Whately All reasoning from generals to particulars. 

Lbbchman ^o. do. 

Mill From particulars to particulars. 

o 1 ^* From particulars to particulars. 

2. From particulars and generals, to generals and 

umversals. 

3. From generals and universals, to particulars gene- 

rals, and universals. 

According to Dr. Whately, all reasoning is deductive, or from given 
premises admitted or assumed, we draw a certain conclusion. In the 
drawing of the conclusion consists the reasoning process, which, as a matter 
of course, is to be tested by the Aristotelian dictum. In the following 
syllogism the learned prelate attempts to reduce the inductive to that of the 
deductive process : — 

The earth, Mercury, Venus, &c., move round the sun in an elliptical orbit, 

These are planets ; therefore, 

iSome planets move round the sun in an elliptical orbit. 

The natural inference here would be, that, " all planets move round the 
sun in an elliptical orbit," which would be false, out it will be obvious to 
any one who examines the above syllogism, that there is no inference in 
the conclusion at all ; and if the natural conclusion, even though true, 
were drawn, that "all planets move round the sun," &c., then there would 
be inferred in the conclusion what was not involved in the premises, a con- 
tradiction which th^ deductive logicians have never yet cleared up. It is 
evident, therefore, that the worthy prelate has entirely misapprehended the 
legitimate Province of Logic. Uad he taken more into consideration the 
generalizing element in the human judgment, he would not have fallen into 
this egregious error. As has been already observed, " all planets move 
round the sun," &c., would have been the natural inference. But this, as 
the learned prelate observes, would have been false ; so it would, just as 
false in inference as your lordship's logical theory is false in principle. 
A nd besides, if any attempt be made to reduce the inductive to the deduc- 
tive, it is only by assuming from the particular facts a generalized conclusion, 
though the use of the assumption is not admitted. 1 he worthy prelate, in 



78 SLEMEKTABY TREATISE 

such an attempt, can only be compared to the boy, who pretended to throw 
a rope from the gromid through an aperture at the top of a steeple, wh3e 
he, at the same time, innocently and unconsciously, made use of a convenient 
ladder in order to effect his purpose. It is no less amusing to see how 
Mr. Leechman, who may be viewed in the light of a logical chaplain to the 
learned archbishop, makes use of the same ladder (which might be termed 
the ladder of generalization). In page 185 of lus very useful Work on 
Logic, he says, that induction \a & " process of enquiry ; " that it is " by 
investigation that premises are obtained." Now, is it by investigation or 
enquiry that we obtain the major premise of the following syllogism : — 

All men are mortal, 
John is a man ; therefore, 
John is mortaL 



In the same page, after stating that the legitimate Province of Logic is 
exclusively connected with the reasoning process, or the drawing of conclu- 
sions, he goes on to state, ** that this process must, therefore, ever remain a 
distinct operation from the collecting of facts, or the la3dng down of pre- 
mises." Are we to understand from this, Mr. Leechman, that collecting of 
facts, or laying down premises, are one and the same operation ? To collect 
facts is one thing, to lay down premises quite another thing. Observation 
and experience give the facts, induction generalizes them, or supplies the 
premises. I cannot help quoting the following passage from the succeeding 
page. '^ But if we look at the other process which takes place in induction, 
that of deducing inferences from the facts already obtained by observation 
and experiment, we shall find that this is a process of reasoning, capable of 
being syllogistically expressed." It would appear from this, that Mr. 
Leechman includes, under the head of induction, the investigating and 
generalizing processes, the latter of which " is capable of being syllogis- 
tically stated ; " and that we are, in such cases, employing a syllogism 
in Barbara, with the major premise suppressed. For example, "the 
approach of a hot body increases heat according to the degree of nearness, 
and the case is the same with light, for the nearer an object is placed to the 
light the more visible it becomes." The first is thus syllogistically stated :^ 

Bar Whatever belongs to these particular instances, belongs to that class 

in which they are included, 
ha In these particular instances, the nearer the approach of a hot body, 

the greater is the degree of heat ; therefore, 
ra. In all instances the approach of a hot body increases heat according 

to the degree of nearness. 

Now I should Uke to see Mr. Leechman reconcile the sixth general rule 
for the construction of syllogisms, with his minor premise and the conclusion 
drawn from it. For pray, how can " all instances" be inferred from " these 
particular instances ; " upon the syllogistic principle, that nothing can be 
inferred in the conclusion which was not previously admitted in the premises. 
In the first place he generalizes in the major premise, but giving this 
advantage, the minor and conclusion can never be reconciled to the Aris- 
totelian dictum. It must be obvious that the minor of the syllogism is a 



ON LOGIC. 79 

particular proposition, clothed in a verbiage of words to deceive the Judg- 
ment. The sixth general rule of the construction of syllogisms is that, " if 
one of the premises be particular the conclusion must be particular." In 
the above we have a particular minor and a general conclusion. If this be 
denied, then let it be shown how the minor of the above syllogism involves 
the conclusion. 

The next writer who merits attention, and who stands pre-eminently con- 
nected with this science is Mr. Mill. It is hardly possible, however, to 
get at this writer*s real or definite opinions ; for in his anxious endeavours 
to reconcile the friends and foes of the syllogism, he proceeds unsparingly 
to the work of demolition on the one hand, and of reconciliation on the 
other. If he has any definite views at all, they appear to be, that all 
reasoning ^s from particulars to particulars. Take for example the following 
syllogism : — 

All men are mortal, 

The Duke of Wellington is a man ; therefore, 

The Duke is mortal. 

But how, Mr. Mill asks, do we get the general conclusion that " all men 
are mortal ? " We conclude, says he, from the death of John, Thomas, 
and Co. (or any other person we have heard of), that the Duke of 
Wellington is mortal like the rest. 

Induction. 

John, Thomas, and Co., are mortal. 
These are men ; therefore, 
All men are mortal. 

Deduction. 

All men are mortal. 

The Duke is a man ; therefore. 

The Duke is mortal. 

But, says Mr. Mill, the inference is not in the deductive process, for 
when we infer that all men are mortal, we include Wellington among the 
rest ; in the deductive process it is but a deciphering of our notes. 
Mr. Mill would have us, therefore, take a short cut, and not travel on the 
high road of generalization at sJl. In fact he would have us infer that, 
because John, Thomas, and Co., are mortal, therefore the Duke is mortal. 
Without noticing the contradiction in which Mr. Mill involves himself here, 
in reference to his previous statement, that when we inferred that '^ all men 
are mortal'' we include the Duke among the rest, it may be asked, can we 
have inference at all, in many cases, without a previous process of general- 
ization ? I apprehend not. For, though the particular facts be the ultimate 
basis of otu: major premise, as the gold in the Bank of England is the 
ultimate basis of its credit for the notes issued, we must generalize before 
we can infer anything of these particular facts, except what is true of these 
facts themselves. Let us take the example given by Mr. Mill himself : — 

John, Thomas, and Co., are mortal ; therefore. 
The Duke is mortal. 



80 ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON LOGIC. 

But it will appear abvious, upon the slightest reflection, that we cannot 
infer from John, Thomas, and Co., the mortality of the Duke. All that 
we can infer or decipher is, simply, the mortality of John, Thomas, or any 
other individual of that Co. For instance, 

John, Thomas, and Co., are mortal, these are men ; therefore, 

John is mortal, or 

Thomas is mortal, or 

Any other person of the said Co. is mortal. 

We cannot decipher from our * 'notes'* what is not in them. This can 
only be done from notes in which the Duke is included. From this it is 
obvious, that there can be no inference in many cases without a preceding 
act of generalization, either assumed or expressed. It is rather singular 
that Mr. Mill, who is probably one of the first metaphysicians of the age, 
should have overlooked the natural frmctions of one of the primary elements 
of human nature. In conclusion, however, it may be observed, that no 
student of Logic should be without his masterly production on that science. 



London, H2, Btravd, 

Sept. 6th, 18£f2. 



A LIST 



OF 



Jr. €|apans 




ttblicatbtts. 



y.B, — Persona remitting the amount of the adverdaed prices of 

worke cU Sa, cmd uptva/rda, wiU recewe them in cmy 

pa/rt cfthe kingdom, postage free. 



Histoire des Crimes du Deux Decembre. 

Par Victor Schoblcher, Repr6sentant du Peuple. Poet 8yo, 
cloth, la, 6d, 



The Village Pearl: 



A Domestic Poem, with Miscellaneous Pieces. 
ford Wilson. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 3^. 6d. 



By John Craw- 



2 MR CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

Cj^eologp anti Btliltcal Crtttctdm. 

A Brief Exposition of the Gospel of St. 

MaUhew. By Bev. R K R Maclellan. 12mo, cloth, 3s. P. 6d.* 



Popular Theology tested by Modern Science. 

In a Series of Letters to a Friend. By a Well-wisher' to Soci^. 
16mOy cloth, 1«. P. GJ. 

The Church in Danger ; 

Or, a Warning Voice to Protestants. 16mo, cloth, 2«. P. 6dL 

A Review of Trinitarianism^ 

CThiefly as it appears in the Writings of Pearson, Ball, Waterland, 
SSierlock, Howe, Newman, Coleridge, Wallis, Wardlaw, Ac By John 
Barling. Post 8to, cloth, ^. P. M. 



God in Chi'ist: 

Three Discourses delivered at New Hayen, Cambridge, and Andover. 
With a Preliminary Dissertation on Language. By Horace BoshneU. 
Post 8vo, cloth, 58, P. 1«. 



>^ *» J" 



Popular Christianity i 

Its Transition State and Probable Development. By Frederick 
Foxton, A.K,.fprmerly of Pembroke Collie, Oxford, and Perpetpal 
Corate of Stoke-Prior and Docklow, Herefordsbire. Post SVo^ doth. 
Original price, %s. ; redaced to 5s. P. M, 



Sermons of Consolation. 

By F. W. P. Greenwood, D.D., Boston, U.S. Third Edition, Post 8vo, 



cloth, Zs. P. M. 






* The letter P. (tft^r the 'price of each work, throughout this Catalogue, is 
intended to sign^ Fostagx ; the east of iransmiiting ike hooks by post being, 
in nearlg all cases, indicated. 



THEOLOGY AND BIBLICAL CRITICISM. 3 

The Creed of Chn^tendom t 

Its Foundations and Superstructure. By WilKam Bathbone Greg. 
8vo, clotb, lOtf. P. U. 



An Inquiry concerning the Origin of 

Chriatmnity, By Charles C. Hennell. Second Edition, 8vo, cloth. 
Original price, 12*. ^ reduced to 10*. P. 1*. 



The Decay of Traditional Faith^ and Be- 

EstabUahment of Faiik v/pon PhUoaophy. Two Lectures by H. 
lerson, M.A. Post 8vq, paper cover, Xa, P. 6c?. 



Rational Faith. 

Three Lectures by H. lerson, M.A. Post Svo, paper cover, 1* P. M. 



An Introduction to the Religion.qf N^ipur^. 

Being the two preceding together, paper cover, 2a, P. 6c?. 



Religious Scepticism and Infi4^lityi .^r\ 

Their History, Cause, Cure, and Mission. By J. A. Langford. Post 
8vo|, cloth. Original priees, d*.; reduced to 2a. 6d. P. 6 J. 




By James Martineait. 

Contents: — ^The Life, Character, and WorkB of Dr. Priestley; the Life and 
Correspondence of Thomas Arnold, D.D. ; Church, and State ; Theodore PjirHer's 
Discourse of Religion ; Phases of Faith ; the Ohuroh of England ; and tihp,Baltle 
of the Churches. 

Post 8vo, cloth, 9». P. 1». 



Lectures, 

Forming part of a Series Preached in Answer to a Course of- Lectures 
against Unitarianism by Thirteen Clergyman of ttie Church t>f 
England. By James Martineau; ' 8vo, doth, 7«. ^d, P. la. 



4 . MH. , CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

The Rationale of Religiom Inquiry f 

Or^ the Qnestion stated, of Reason, the Bible^ aud the Church. By 
James Martineau. Third Edition. With a Critical Lecture on 
Rationalism^ Miracles, and the Authority of Scripture, by the late 
Rev. Joseph Blanco. White. Post 8yo, paper cover, 4«.3 doth, 4«. Qd, 

P. 6(3?. 



Endeavours after the Christian lAfe. 

Discourses by James Martineau. First and Second Series. I^mo, 
cloth, la, 6d. each. P. 6c?. each volume. 



Hymns for the Christian Church and 

Home, Collected and Edited by James Martineau. Sixth Edition, 
12mo, cloth, 3«. 6c?. P. la. 32mo, roan, \a, Sd,; 32mo, cloth, 
la. 4d. 



Christianity^ the Deliverance of the Soul^ 

cmd Ua Life, By W. Mountford, M. A. Fcp. 8vo, cloth, 2«. P. Qd, 



The Soul: Her Sorrows and Her Aspird- 

tiona. An Essay towards the Natural Hidt^ry of the Soul, as the 
Basis of Theology. By Francis William Newman, formeriy Fellow 
of Balliol College, Oxford, and Author of " A History of the Hebrew 
Monarchy." Post 8vo, cloth. 6a, P. la, ¦ '^ 



Phases of Faith; 

Or, Passages from the History of My Creed. By Francis William 
Newman, Author of " A History of the Hebrew Monarchy," " The 
Soul : Her Sorrows and Her Aspirations." Post 8vo, cloth, Os. P^ M, 



A Discourse of Matters pertaining to 

BeUgian, By Theodore Parker. New Edition, Post 8vOy cloth, Aa, 



THEOLOGY AND BIBLICAL CRITICISM. 5 

History of the Hebrew Monarchy ^ f^dt^ 

the AdmvmstrtUion of &amwl to the BahiflAyrmk Ca/pfMJbyl By 
Francis William Newman, formerly Fellow of Balliol College^ Okford, 
^nd Author of '* The Soul : Her Sorrows and Her Aspirations/' &c. 
3vo, doth, lO^J P. 1«. ' 



The Life of Jesus ^ Critically Examined. 

By Dr. David Friedrich Strauss. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth. £1 16«. 
P. 28, ^d. 



Christian Aspects of Faith and. Duty.: m 

Discourses hy J. J.Tayler, B.A. .Post 8vo, cloth. Is. P. 1& , 



Lectures. , 

Forming p^rt of a Series Preached in Answer to> Cotirae of Leetur^' 
against Unitarianism by Thirteen Clergymen of the Church of 
England. By J. H. Thomi 8vo, cloth, 6«. 



. Pau^^s Epistles to the Corinthians t 

An Attempt to convey their Spirit and Significance. . J3y the Bev.. 
John Hamilton Tl^opi. Post 8yo, cloth. Original price, 9^. ; reduced 
to 7«. P. \8. . ^ 



I 

Worship of Genius^ and the Distinctim 

Cha/racter cmd Essence of Gh/risticmity. Post 8vo, cloth; 2«. P. ^, 






Unitarianism Defended : . ^ 

Being Lectures delivered by James Martineau, J; H|. Thorn, and 
Henry Giles. 8vo, ploth, 15«. 



The Memory of the Just. 

By Charles Wicksteed. 8vo, cloth, 3«. 6c/. P. M, 



6 . MR. CHAPMAN^ PUBLICATIONS. 

CMiolicity^ Spirittial and Intellectual! 

An Atien^t at Yindicatiiig the Harmony of Faith and Kno^dedge. 
A Senes of Discourses. By T. Wilson, M.A., late Minister of St. 
Peter's^ Mancroft, Norwich, Author of " Travels in Egyjyt wad Syria," 
&c. 8yo, cloth, 58, P. ^d. May be had separately. Is. each, paper 
cover. 



> 

AbsoluHonand the Lord Bishop of Exeter. 8vo, 6d. 
Andresen (-4.), Luther Revived. 8vo, Is. 
Catechism of the Old Testament. 18mo, stiflF, Sd. 
Grawfurd {A. Q. G.\ Thirty -nine Reasons: 12mo, Is. 
Dawson^ Hymns and Songs. 32mo, 9d. 

. 6d. 

Maccall {W^)y Sacramental Services. 12mo, 6d« 

¦ ¦ ¦¦¦ ' — i -— Doctrine of IndividuaUty. 12mo, 6d. 

— — — Individuality of the Individual. 12mo, 6d. 

Lessons of the Pestilence. 12mo, 6d. 

- '" > ^ '- i" ! '¦ - > ' Unchristian Charcu^ec of Commercial Be^ 

strictians. 12mo, 34* 

Mackay (R. W.)^ Intellectual Religion. 8vo, Is. 6d. 
Madge {Thoraas\ The Dedication 6f the XJhristidn T)smple 

to the Worah/^ cmd Service of God, 8vo, 6d. 

Martineau (/.), The Bible and the Child. 12mo, 6d. 

Pause and Retrospect 8vo, Is. 

Ireland and h^r Famine. 12mo, 6d. 



PAMFHLBTIS; > .' 7 > 



Martineau (/.), The God of Revelation his.oum Interpreter. 

12ra©,- paper, IBc/. ¦ ¦ ^ ^ • | 

Peace in JMvmotii 12mo, Is. 

• r- Five Points of Christian Faith. 12mo, 2d. 

Watch Night Lamps. 8yo, Is. 



Minister of Christ. The Christian Sabbath. 12mo, 6d. 
Straitss {D. F.)^ Soliloquies on the Christian Religion. 8vo, 2s. 
Tayler (J. J.\ Value of Individual Effcyrt., 12mo, %d. 

¦ Religion; its Kpot in Gtm^n Nature. 12mQ, 6d. 
'¦¦ Mutual Adaptation of Human Nutute and 



• • 



ScripPwre, 12mo, Id, 

The Bible owr; StrnMing-Uock* \ 8vo, Is* ' x • V - \i^ 
The Hebrew Cosmogony and Modem Inte>*pretations* Bvo, 

sewed, 1«. P. 4 J. . ' . 

Three Discourses at the Dedication of Hope-street Chapely 

Liverpool, October, 184t^,'by the Kevds. Thoimw Mddgd, Jiones Mar- 
tineau, suid Cliiurles IVicksteed. 8vo, Is. 6d. 

The Truth Seeker in Literature and Philosophy. In Nine 

Parts. 8vo. Edite^ by Dr. Lees. 

TTiom (J, H.)^ Spiritual "Blindness and Social Disrup- 
tion. i2mo, Qd, 

— Prev^n^ve Justice and PaUiative Charity. 

12mo, 6d. 

Claims of Ireland^ 12mo, 6d. 



« s 



I - • • J -¦ • • . 

Wickst^pd {Charles)^ The General Assembly and Church 

of the Fi/r$tbom, 8vo, 6d. : 



8 MR CHAFMAITS PUBLICATIONS. 

^peculattbe, illoraU anti foetal 

The Rise and Progress of National Edvr 

caiion in England; its ObsUdes, Wants, and Prospects. A Letterto 
Richard CobdeD, Esq., M.P. Bj Bidiaid Ghnrdi. 8yo, paper oo¥er, 
2s.6(L T.6d. 



The Principles of Nature^ her Divine Be- 

velations, and a Voice to MankimL By and tiiroagh Andrew Jadraon 
Davis. 2 Tolfl., Syo, doth. Original price, 18t.; reduced to 15#. 
P. 2s. 

Memoir of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. 

By William Smith. Second Edition, enlarged. Post 8to>, doth. 
Original price, 4«. &! ; reduced to 4«. P. 6dL 



The Vocation of the Scholar. 

By Johann Gottlieb fidite.. Translated firom the Germai^ by William 
Smith. Post 8yo^ doth, 2«. ; paper oover, \$, 6d, P. 6€L 



On the Nature of the Scholar^ and its 

MamfesUUions, By Johann Gottlieb fichte. Translated from the 
German, by William Smith. Second Edition. Post 8yo, doth. 
Original price, Zs. 6d,; reduced to 3«. P. 6dl 



The Vocation of Man. 

By Jdiiann Grottiieb Fichte. Translated frx>m the German, by William 
SmitL Post 8yo, doth. Original price, 4«. 6c/. ; reduced to 4«. P. 6«f. 



The Characteristics of the Present Age. 

By Johann Grottlieb Fichte. Translated from the German, by William 
Smith. Post 8yo, doth. Original price, 7^. ; reduced to 6<. P. M. 



SPECULATIVE, MORAL, AND SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY. 9 

TJie Way towards the Blessed Life; 

Or, the Doctrine of Religion. By Johann G. Fichte. Translated by 
William Smith. Post 8vo, cloth. Original price, 6«. ; |;educed to 68. 
P. 6d 

The Popular Works of J. G. Fichte. 

2 vols. Post 8vo, cloth. Original price, £1 4«.; reduced to £1. 
P. 28. 



Lectures on Social Science and the Organi- 

zation of Lahov/r. By James Hole. Demy 8vo, stiff cover, price 
28. 6c?. P. 6fl?. 



The Elements of Individualism. 

A Series of Lectures. By William Maccall. PostSvo, cloth, 7«.6g?. P. 1«. 



The Agents of Civilization. 

A Series of Lectures. By William Maccall. 12mo, cloth. Original 
price, 3«. 6c?. ; reduced to Is. Gd, P. 6d, 



The Education of Taste. 

A Series of Lectures. By William Maccall. 12mo, paper cover. 
Original price, 2«. 6c?.; reduced to 1^. P. 6c?. 



The Progress of tlie Intellect ^ 

As Exemplilied in the Religious Development of the Greeks and 
Hebrews. By R. W. Mackay, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth, 24«. P. 2$, 



Intellectual Religion : 

Being the Introductory Chapter to " The Progress of the Intellect, 
as Excmi»liiied in the Religious Devolo[>uieut of thu Giccks and 
Hebrews. ' Hy 11. W. Mackay, M.A. ^vo, paper cover, U. i)d. 



10 MR. CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

Money and Morals : 

A Book fr»r the Times. Containing an attempt to explain the natore 

of Mon<^ Capital, and the probable effeeta of the New €rf>ld on Com- 

merce. Incomes, and public Morals ; with some snggestionB rdatire 

to the Agricultural Interest, the Condition of Towns, and the National 

Defences. Bj John Lalor. 8to, cloih, lOs. P. la. 

ConsBTB: — Part L Dascebs. — 1. The Probiem — 2. Mooejf — 3. Money 
Capital — 4. Money Inoome — 5. The Bevolution of Capital and Inoome — 6. 
Pricen and Currency^r. The Mon^ Market'—S. The B^uik of England— 9. The 
Kew Gold — 10. Sohition of the rroUan. Pirt IL Precadtiosb. — 1. Po- 
litical Economy and its Prejudices — 2. Taxation — 3. Roral IsSr and its Empkiy- 
meat*— 4. AcricuHnnl Loans — 5. Loans tot Colffliisation and Eraigialion — 
6. Loans Cm" ue Improvement of Towns — 7. Working Partnerships — 8. England 
aoMmg the Nations — 9. National Defences. Part Il£, Path to the Rkkbdt. — 
1. Theories of Social Progress — 2. National Decay — 3. Groonds of Fear and 
Hope in England — i. Reconciliation of the Churches. 

" Neither Apsirty nor a superficial production. Mr Lalor is well versed in aD 
the writings of the ecobomists, and not only in them, but in much other litera- 
ture ; and he poun out his stores with great facHiij, and in a very graeeftd 
manner. Essentially, the book is politico-economical, but it is also social, moral, 
and literary, treating many of the topics of the day, but treating them on scien- 
tific principles. If a temporaiy circumstance have given birth to the book, the 
materials for it have been gathered through years of study, by much reading and 
reflection. " — Ecorumiut, 

" A very able and luniinons treatise on the important questions of capital, 
currency, credit, and the monetary ^stem generally. Ihe author is singularly 
dear and accurate in his definitions oi the various branches of what is commonly 
called money, or, as he more precisely defines it, ' purchasing power ;* and places 
before the r^uier, in as simple terms as the subject will permit, a picture of the 
mode in which income and capital reciprocally create and augment each other. 
A person with a very elementary notion of ike principles of political economy 
and monetary science may readily follow and ccnnprehend his arguments, and as 
be go6s on, will be enabled to appreciate the merits of the author's deductions. 
The sutpect is one of deep interest, and, though not concurring in all the views 
it cotttams, we can fiuriy pronounce t^e work to be a valuable contribution to 
the study of the science on which it treats.*' — Momitu/ Ad/rertiter. 



Lectures on Political Economy. 

By Francis William Newman, Author of " Phases of Faith," " His- 
tory of the Hebrew Monarchy,** Ac. Post 8vo, cloth. Original price. 
Is. 6d.; reduced to 58. P. Is. 



Letters on the Laws of MavUs Nature and 

Devdapment. By H. O. Atkinson and Harriet Martineau. Post 8vo, 
cloth. Original price, 9». ; reduced to 58. P. \8. 



SPECULATIVE, MORAL, AND SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY. 11 

Philosophy of Human KnomUdge. 

By J. J. Osborne. 8vo, cloth, 4«. 



A Treatise on Logic, 

By J. J. Osborne. 18mo, sewed, 1». 



The Purpose of Existence, 

Popularly considered, in relation to the Origin, Development, and 
Destiny of the Human Mind. Crown 8vo, cloth. Original price, 
7«. ^d. ; reduced to 3«. 6c?. P. 1«. 



Social Aspects. 

By John Stores Smith, Author of " Mirabeau, a Life History.*' Post 
8vo, cloth. Original price, 6s. ; reduced to 2«. 6c?. P. Is, 



Social Statics; 

Or, the Concfitions Essential to Humiiii Happiness' Bpedfi^d, and ihe 
First of them Developed. By Herbert Spencer. Svo, doth. Original 
price, 12«. ; reduced to 10«. P. 6c?. 



A Theory of Population^ 

Deduced from the general law of animal fertility. By Herbert Spencer, 
Author of '^ Social Statics." Bepublished from the Westminster 
Review, for April, 1852. 8vo, ps^er cover, price Is. 



General Principles of the Philosophy of 

Natwe: with an Outline of some of its recent Developments among 
the Germans. By J. B. Stallo, A.M. Post 8vo, cloth, 6!?. P. Is. 



12 MB. CHAFMAITS POBUCATIONflL 



Historical Sketches of the Old Painters, 

Bt the Auttwr of "The Log dUn." Post 8to, doth, 3*. P. 6d: 



Italy: Past and Present, 

Or, Greneial Nvrm oS its Histoiy, BdigiMi, Politics, Litentme, and 
Alt. By L. Mariotti. 2 vols. Post 8to, doth, 10& P. 1«. 6d. 



The Life of Jean Paid Fr. Riehter, 

ComfMled from yarious aomces. Togetho' with his Aatobiognyhy, 
translated from the Gremiaii. Second Edition. lUustnted with a 
Portrait engrared on SteeL Post Syo, doth, 7 s. 6dL P. U. 



Ristoire des Crimes du Beux Becembre. 

Par Victor Schceldier, Bq»€9entant dn F^a^. FbsiSTo, cL 74l &/. 



lAfe and Letters of Judge Story ^ 

The eminent American Jurist, Associate Justice of the Supreme 
Court of the United StiO^ and Dane Professor of Law at Harvard 
University. Edited by his Son, William W. Stoiy. With a Portrait. 
2 Tols. 8vo, doth. Original price, £1 10«.; reduced to £\. P. Zs. 



The Life of the Bev, Joseph Blanco Wliite, 

Written by Himself. With Portions of his Correspondence. Edited 
by John Hamilton Thorn. 3 vols. i)06t Svo, doth. Original price 
XI 4«.j reduced to 15«. P. 28, 



POETRY AND FICTION. 13 

Historical Analysis of Christian Civiliza- 
tion. By Professor De Vericour. Post 8vo, cloth. Original price, 
10*. 6 J. ; reduced to 65. P. 1*. 



The History of Ancient Art among the 

Greeks. By John Winckelinann. From the German^ by G. H. Lodge. 
Beautifully illustrated. 8vo, cloth. Original price, 128. ; reduced 
to Gs. P. la. 



^oetrp anil JTictton. 

Essays^ Poems, Allegories^ and Fables, 

By January Searle. 8vo, 4«. 



Poems by R, W, Emerson. 

Post 8vo, doth, 4«. 



The Nemesis of Faith. 

By J. A. Froude, M.A., late Fallow of E:)cater College, Oxford. Post 
8vo, cloth, 6». P. 6«?. , 



Noricaf 

Or, Tales of Nuruberg from the Olden Time. Translated from the 
German of August Hagen. Fcp. 8v6, oi^amental binditig, suitable 
for j)resentation, uniform with " The Artist's Married. Life." Original 
price, Is. Qd. ; reduced to /)«. P. ^ 



U MR. CHAPMAN'S PUBUOATIONS. 



Hearts in Mortmain^ and Corn^lia^ 

A Novel, in 1 voL Post 8vo, cloth. Original price, 10«. 6J.; re- 
duced to 58. P. M, 



The Siege of Damascus; 

An Historical Bomance. By James Nisbet. In 3 vols., post 8vo, 
cloth. Original price, £1 11*. M, ; reduced to 10«. P. 1«. 6^. 



Peter Jones; 

Or, Onward Bound. An Autobiography. I2mo, price Zs. P. Qd. 



Bever derations. 

Part L, la. Part ^I., 2$. Ecp. 8vo, paper cover. 

The Artisfs Married Life; 

Being that 6( Albdit' Durer. Tmm^al^ froA thelG^orman of IcQQ|)9ld 
Schefer, by Mrs. J. R. Stodart. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo, ornamental binding. 
6«. P. 6(3?. 



The Bishop* s Wife: ' 

A Tale of the Papacy. Translated from the German of Schefer, by 
Mrs. J. R. Stodart Fcp. 8vo, doth gilt. Original price, 4*. ; reduced 
to 28. P. 6(1, 



^ ^ < I > « > » » 



Three Eooperiwents of Living: 

Within the Means. Up to the Means. Beyond the Means. Fcp. 
8vo, ornamental cover and gilt edges, 1*. P. Qd, 



• \ 



The Yillage F earls 

A Domestic Poem. With Miscellaneous Pieces. By John Crawford 
Wilson. Fcp. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6e/. 



MR. CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 15 

An Analytical Catalogue of Mr, Chapman^ s 

PvUicadons, Price la. P. 6fl?. 

*^* To enable the reader to judge for himself of thd merits of Mr. OHAniAifll 
publications, irrespective of the opinions of the press — whether laudatory or 
otherwise — an Analytical Catalogue has been prepai^d, which contains an 
abstract of each work, or, at least, such an amount of information regarding it 
as will furnish him with a clear conception of its general aim and scope. At 
the same time, from the way in which tne Catalogue is drawn up, it comprises a 
condensed body of Ideas and Facts, in thems^ves of substantive interest and 
importance, and is therefor^, intrinsioallyy well worthy the attention of th« 
Student. 



Cheap BookSj and how to get them. 

Being a Reprint, from the Westminster Review for April, 1852, of 
the article on "The Comnierce of Literature;" together with a Brief 
Account of the Origin and Progress of the Recent Agitation for Free 
Trade in Books. By John Chapman^ To which is added, the judg- 
ment pronounced by Lord Campbell Second Edition. Price 1^. P. 6J- 



A Beport of the Proceedings of a Meeting 

(consisting chiefly of Authors) held May 4th, at the House of Mr. 
John Chapman, 142, Strand, for the purpose of hastening the remoyal 
of the Trade Restrictions on the Commerce of Literature. Third 
Edition. Price 2d, 



Two Orations against Taking Away Human 

Life, under wrvy Cvreumatcmces ; and in Explanation and Defence of 
the Misrepresented Doctrine of Non-Resistance. By Thomas Cooper, 
Author of "The Purgatory of Suicides." Post 8vo, in paper cover, Itf. 
P. M. 

William von Humboldfs Letters to a 

Female Friend, A Complete Edition. Translated from the Second 
German Edition. By Catherine M. A. Couper, Author of " Visits to 
Beechwood Farm," " Lucy's Hal^Crown," &c. 2 vols., post 8vo, 
cloth, 10*. P. la. 



16 MR; CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

Stories for Sunday Afternoons, 

By Mrs. Dawson. Square 18mo, cloth, 1». Qd. P. 6<2. 



Essays by Emerson, 

Second Series, with Preface by Thos. Carlyle. Post 8vo, cloth, 3». 6c?. 
P. M. 

The Beauties of Channing, 

With an Introductory Essay. By William Mountford. 12nio, cloth, 
28. &d. P. U. 



Local Self Government and Centralization / 

The Characteristics of each, and its Practical Tendencies as affecting 
Social, Moral, and Political Welfare and Progress : including compre- 
hensive outlines of the English Constitution. By J. Toulmin Smith. 
Post 8vo, cloth. Original price, 8«. %d,\ reduced to 5«. P. 1«. 



Bible Stories, 

By Samuel Wood. 2 vols. 12mo, cloth, 3». P. Qd. 



The Duty of England,' 

A Protestant Layman's Beply to Cardinal Wiseman's "Appeal. 
8vo, 1». P. Gd. : 



The Critical and Miscellaneous Works of 

Theodore Parka: Post 8vo, cloth, 6». - P. 1«. 



Para Bellum, War and Invasion, 

8vo, \s, 6d. 



MISCELLANEA. 17 



Counsels and Consolations, 

By Jonathan Farr. 18mo, cloth, 28. 



Commercial and Banking Tables; 

Embracing Time — Simple Interest — Unexpired Time and Interest — 
Interest. Account Current, Time, and Averaging — Compound In- 
terest — Scientific Discount, both Simple and Compound — Annual 
Income and Annuity Tables, equally adapted to the Currencies of 
all Commercial Nations. The True or Intrinsic Value of the Gold 
and Silver Coins, and the Standard Weights and Measures of all 
Conmiercial Countries. Also, American, English, French, and Ger- 
man Exchange. Together with the Exchange of Brazil, and the 
Importation of Rio Coffee. Arranged with reference to the har- 
monizing of the Accounts and Exchanges of the World, the whole 
upon an Original Plan. By R. Montgomery Bartlett> Principal of 
Bartlett's Commercial College, Cin., 0. One Volume, Royal Quarto, 
handsomely bound in russia, 51. 



* « 
* 



This Work w Copyright. 



Calico Printing as an Art Manufacture. 

A Lecture read before the Society of Arts by Edmund Potter. 8vo, 

sewed, 1«. 

1 — 

The Cotton and Commerce of India^ 

Considered in Relation to the Interests of Great Britain ; with Remarks 
on Railway Commimication in the Bombay Presidency. By John 
Chapman, Founder and late Manager of the Great Indian Peninsular 
Railway Company. 8vo, cloth* , Original price^ 12^.; reduced to 6^. 
P. U. 

The Temporalities of the Established 

Chv/rdify as they a/re and as tlwy miglU be; Collected fron\ authentic 
Public Records. By William Beeston, an Old Churchman. 8vo, 
paper cover, Is, P. id. 



18 MR. CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 



C))apman*si i^if)rar^ Cor tl)e people* 

Uniform. Post 8yo, ornament^ paper cover. 

Sketches of Ihiropean Capitals. 

By William Ware, Author of "Zenobia; or, Letters from Palmyra," 
"Aurelian," &c. la, P. 6c?. 

II. 

Literature and Life. 

Lectures by £. P. Whipple!^ Author of " Essays and Reyiews." Is. 
P. U. 

in. 

Representative Men. 

Lectures by B. W. Emerson. 1^. 6c?. P. 6c?. 

IV. 

The Third Edition of 

The Soul} Her Sorrows and Her Aspirations. 

An Essay towards the Natural History of the Soul as the true Basis 
of Theology. By Francis William Newman, fiurmeily Fellow of 
Balliol College, Oxford. 2«. P. 6<;. 



V. 



Christian Theism. 

By C. C. Henncll. [Neourly ready. 



19 

THE WESTMINSTER REVIEW. 

Price Six Shillings per Number. 

AmmciSub$oHption,tiAenp(ndto theFiMia^ orifthe 

work be ddwered by post, £1 is. 



CONTENTS OF No. HI. — JULY, 1862. 



I. Secular Education. 
II. England'a Foraotien Worthies. 
III. The Future ofGeolooy. 
rv. Lord Jefiriy and the Edinburgh 

Review. 
V. The Tendendet of England. 
VI. inie Lady Novelists. 
YII. The PoUtioal life and Seothnents 
of Niebuhr. 



Vni. The Reetoration of Beliefl 
IX. Sir Robert Peel and his Policy. 
X. Contemporary Literature of Eng- 
land. 
XI. Contemporary Literature of Ame- 
rica. 
XII. Contemporary Literature of Ger- 
many. 
XIII. Contemporary Literature of France. 



CONTENTS OP No. H. — APBIL, 1868. 



I. The Government of India. 
II. Physical Puritanism. 

III. Europe : its Condition and Pro- 

spects. 

IV. A Theory of Population, deduced 

from the General Law of Animal 
Fertility. 
y. Shelley and the Letters of Poets. 
VI. The Commerce of Liteitbture. 



VII . Lord Palmerston and his Policy. 
Vm. Early Quakers and Quakerism. 
IX. Contemporary Literature of Eng- 
land. 
X. Contemporary Literature of Ame- 
rica. 
XI. Contemporary Literature of Ger- 
many. 
XII. Contemporary Literature of France. 



" We had occasion to speak of the promise of the Westminster under its new 
management, and the second number entirdy confirms our favourable judgment. It 
would be difficult to find anywhere, now-a-days, so much originality, iu>ility, and 
sincerity, in the same number of pages." — Dadlv News, 

" The Westmmster Review, under its new editorship, seems destined to achieve a 
veiy distinguished position as a critical Titan, and to become a powerful agent in the 
mental and moral progress of the age." — Weekly Dispatch. 

" The current number of this periodical is one of unusual merit. ? ? # # ? 
Must be ranked among the very best that have been given to the world since the 
first publication of the Westmvaster cmd Foreign QiwiHerhj."* — Observer, 

** The present is altogether an excellent number of the Westmi/Mt^.** — Leeds Times, 

" Without enumerating the articles, we are safe in giving them credit for solidity 
and ability." — I%e Scotsmom, 

** The number presents a more than usually rich and varied programme." — Qkuffow 
Citizen. 

** The present number of this able oigan of progress is, upon the whole, superior to 
the last."— -6!2eu|70to Sentinel. 

*' The Westminster holds on bravely in the career started under its new editorial 
r^ffime, grappling in an intrepid and uncompromising spirit of inquiry with what may 
be called the organic, socisd, political, literary, and philosophical questions of the 
age." — Liverpool Mercurif, 

*' The articles exhibit a well-selected variety of topics, and their treatment is 
characterise by largeness of view, independence of thought, and maiiied ability." — 
Bristol Mercv/ry. 

'* The manifest improvement and infusion of new life and spirit into this Quarterly, 
which markcil the first number of the new series, arc well kept up." — Stmiford 
Mwowry, 



20 MB. CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

" These \tide fields for discussion are treated in a masterly iBanaer by tbe writers 
now engaged upon this important seriaL" — JReading Merewry. 

** Our previous opinion of the Westmmater Review, under the new management, is 
folly borne out by the present number, which contains e^dence of unquestionable 
originality, great ability, and unaffected heartiness in the cause of progress.'' — Sheffidd 
Free Press. 

" It is almost impossible to select a paper, and say that it bears the palm. * * * 
One is unable to say which most recommends itself to his notice by its philosophy, 
its clearness, the knowledge which it communicates, or the language with which it is 
adorned."— <S?icr6orw€ Journal, 

" The second number of the Westminster, under its new management, eyidences all 
the freshness and force which characterized the first number, with a full measure of 
that comprehensiveness which especially characterizes the most original and far seeing 
and philosophic of the Quarterlies." — C&oentry Herald, 



CONTENTS OF No. I. — JANUARY, 1852. 



T. Representative Reform^ 
U. SheU Fish: their Ways and 
Works. 

III. The Relation between Employers 

and Employed. 

IV. Mary Stuart. 

V. The Latest Ck>ntineiita1 Theory of 

Legislation. 
VI. Julia von Kriidener, as Coquette 

and Mystic. 
VII. The Ethics of diristendom. 



VIII. Political Questions and Parties in 
France. 
IX. Oontemporary literature of Eng- 
land. 
X. Retrospective Survey of American 

Literature. 
XI. Contemporary Litei-ature of Ame- 
rica. 
XII. Contemporary Literature of Ger- 
many. 
Xlir. Contemporary Literature of France. 

*' iTiis number is perfectly satisfactory." — DaUy News. 

" Exhibits a very effective coalition of independent minds." — Olobe, 

** When we compare the two Reviews, (Qwarterly and WestminsteTf) and point out 
the greater merits of the Westmrnster, we try it by a very high standard, and pass on 
it a very high eulogium. The new life it has received is all vigorous and healthy^"— 
Ecwiomist. 

** Contains some of the best and most interesting articles which have ever graced a 
'Quarterly.'*' — Weeikly Dispatch. 

" Its principles remain the same as of yore, though enforced with for more vigour.** — 
Observer. 

" Distinguished by high literaiy ability, and a tone of fearless and truthful discussion 
which is fiiU of promise for the future." — W^ly News* 

" The variety and ability of the articles are great, and the general tone of the Review 
is unequivocally the expression of matured thought, and earnest and devated con- 
victions." — Inquirer, 

** We congratulate Mr. Chapman on the high tone and spirit of superior enterprise 
manifest in the Review." — Cowrt JowmoL 



The " Westminster Review" is designed as an instrament for the 
development and guidance of earnest thought on Politics^ Social Philosophy, 
Religion, and General Literature ; and is the organ bf the most able and 
independent minds of the day. 

The fundamental principle of the work is the recognition of the Law 
of Progress. In conformity with this principle, and with the consequent 
conviction that attempts at reform — though modified by the experience of 
the past and the ctmditions of the present — should be directed and 
animated by an advancing ideal, the Editors seek to maintain a steady 
comparison of the actual with the possible, as the most powerful stimulus 
to improvement. Nevertheless, in the deliberate advocacy of organic 



THE WESTMINSTER REVIEW. 21 

changes, it will not be forgotten, that the institutions of man, no less than 
the products of nature, are strong and durable in proportion as they are 
the results of a gradual devdopment, and that the most salutary and 
permanent reforms are those, which, while embod3ring the wisdom of the 
time^ yet sustain such a relation to the moral and intellectual condition of 
the people as to ensure their support 

In contradistinction to the practical infidelity and essentially destruc- 
tive policy which would ignore the existence of wide-spread doubts in 
relation to established creeds and systems, and would stifle all inquiry 
dangerous to prescriptive claims, the Review exhibits that untemporizing 
expression of opinion, and that fearlessness of investigation and criticism, 
which are the results of a consistent faith in the ultimate prevalence of truth. 

Aware that the same fundamental truths are apprehended under a 
variety of forms, and that, therefore, opposing systems may in the end 
prove complements of each other, the Editors endeavour to institute such 
a radical and comprehensive treatment of those controverted questions 
which are practically momentous, as may aid in the conciliation of divergent 
views. In furtherance of this object, a limited portion of the work, under 
the head of ** Independent Contributions,*' is set apart for the reception of 
articles ably setting forth opinions which, though not discrepant with the 
general spirit of the Review, may be at variance with the particular ideas or 
measures it will advocate. The primary object of this department is to 
facilitate the expression of opinion by men of high mental power and 
culture, who, while they are zealous friends of freedom and progress, yet 
differ widely on special points of great practical concern, both from the 
Editors and from each other. 

The Review gives especial attention to that wide range of topics which 
may be included under the term Social Philosophy. It endeavours to form 
a dispassionate estimate of the diverse theories on these subjects, to give 
a deflnite and intelligible form to the chaotic mass of thought now preva- 
lent concerning them, and to ascertain both in what degree the popular 
efforts after a more perfect social state are countenanced by the teachings 
of politico-economical science, and how far they may be sustained and 
promoted by the actut J character and culture of the people. 

In the department of politics careful consideration is given to all the 
most vital questions, without regard to the distinctions of party; the only 
standard of consistency to which the Editors adhere being Uie real, and not 
the accidental, relations of measures — ^their bearing, not on a ministry or 
a class, but on the public good. 

In the treatment of Religious Questions the Review unites a spirit of 
reverential sympathy for the cherished associations of pure and elevated 
minds with an uncompromising pursuit of truth. The elements of ecclesi- 
astical authority and of dogma are fearlessly Examined, and the results of 
the most advanced Biblical criticism are discussed without reservation, 
under the conviction that religion has its foundation in man's nature, and 
will only discard an old form to assume and vitalize one more expressive 
of its essence. While, however, the Editors do not shrink from the ex- 
pression of what they believe to be sound negative views, they equally 
bear in mind the pre-eminent importance of a constructive religious phi- 
losophy, as connected with the development and activity of the moral 



22 MR CHAPMAN'S PUBLICATIONS. 

nature, and of those poetic and emotional elements, out of which proceed 
our noblest aspirations and the essential beauty of life. 

In the department of General Literature the criticism is animated bj 
the desire to elevate the standard of the public taste, in relation both to 
artistic perfection and moral purity; larger space is afforded for articles 
intrinsically valuable, by the omission of those minor and miscellaneous 
notices which are necessarily forestalled by newspapers and magazines, and 
equivalent information is given in a single article showing the course of 
literary production during each preceding quarter. The Foreign Section of 
the Review is also condensed into an Historical Survey of the novelties in 
Continental and American Literature which have appeared in the same 
interval. 



THE PROSPECTIVE REVIEW 

SL dknmtxlisi ^umal of W^tolo^ av^ lUtetature* 

Price 2s. 6ef. per Number. 



CONTENTS OF No. XXXL- AUGUST, 1862. 

I. Begal Home. 
II. The Gift of Tongues. 

III. Memoirs of Chalmers. 

IV. Heresies about Inspiration. 
V. Oxford. 

VI. The Eclipse of Faith. 

The " Prospective Review" is devoted to a free theology, and the 
moral aspects of literature. Under the conviction that lingering influences 
from the doctrine of verbal inspiration are not only depriving the primitive 
records of the Gospel of their true interpretation, but even destroying fsMh 
in Christianity itself, tlie work is conducted in the confidence that only a 
living mind and heart, not in bondage; to any letter, can receive the living 
spirit of revelation; and in the fervent belief that for all such there is a true 
Gospel of God, which no critical or historical speculation can discredit or 
destroy. It aims to interpret and represent Spiritual Christianity in its 
character of the universal religion. Fully adopting the sentiment of 
Coleridge, that " the exercise of the reasoning and reflective powers, 
increasing insight, and enlarging views, are requisite to keep ahve the 
substantial faith of the heart," — ^with a grateful appreciation of the labours 
of faithful predecessors of all churches, — it esteems it the part of a true 
reverence not to rest in their conclusions, but to think and live in their 
spirit. By the name, " Pkospective Review," it is intended to lay no 
claim to discovery, but simply to express the desire and the attitvde pf 
Progress ; to suggest continually the duty of using past and present as a 
trust for the future; and openly to disown the idolatrous conservatism, of 
whatever sect, which makes Christianity but a lifeless formula. 



Ci)e Cat))olit jetted. 



1. 
Sermons of Consolation. By F. w. p. 

Greenwood, D.D. Zb, doth. 

3. 

Self-Culture. By Wm. Ellert Chan- 
Niifo. Paper covers, 6d, ; 1«. cloth. 

8. 

The Rationale of Religious Inquiry; 

or, the Question stated, of Reason, the 
Bible, and the Church. By James 
MASTiJnAXJ, Third Edition. With 
a Critical Tjecture on Rationalism, 
Miracles, and the Authority of S(n4p- 
ture, by the late Rev. Joseph Blanco 
White. 4«. paper cover ; is. 6d. cloth. 

4. 

The Critical and Miscellaneous 

Writings of Theodore Ftixker. CI. 68. 

6. 

The Philosophy of Art. An Oration 
on the Relation of the Plastic Arts to 
Nature. ByF. W. J. vonSohellino. U. 

6. 

Essays. By R. W. Emerson. 

(Second Series.) With a Notice by 
Thomas Carlylb. 8«. 

7. 

Memoir of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. 
By William Smith. Second Edition, 
enlarged. Cloth, is. 

8. 

The Vocation of the Scholar. By 

Johann Gottlieb Pichte. Cloth, 28. ; 
paper cover, 1«. 6d. 

9. 

On the Nature of the Scholar, and 

its Manifestations. By Johann Gott- 
lieb PiOHTB. 2nd Edit. Cloth, 8«. 
10. 

The Vooation of Man. By Johann 

Gottlieb Fichte. Cloth, is. 



11. 

The Characteristics of the Present 

Age. By Johann Gottlieb Fiohtb. 
Cloth, 68. j2. 

The Way towards the Blessed Life ; 

or, The Doctrine of Religion. By 
Johann Gottlieb Fiohtb. Traiuh 
lated by William Sbhth. Cloth^ Ss, 

18. 

Pomdar Christianity: its Transition 

State and probable Development. By 
Fbedeeiok Foxton, A.B. Cloth^ 68. 

14. 

The Life of Jean Paul Fr. Bichter. 

Compiled from various sources. Toge- 
ther with his Autobiog^phy, tranfr- 
lated from the German. Second 
Edition. Illustrated with a Portrait, 
engrared on SteeL Cbt^, 7#* 6dL 

15. 

William von Humboldt's Letters to 

a Female Friend. A Complete Edi- 
tion. 2 vols, cloth^ 10«. 

16. 
Representative Men. Seven Lectures. 
By Ealfh Waldo Emerson. CI. U. 6d. 

17. 

Beligious Mystery Considered, oi. 2«. 

18. 
God in Christ. Discourses by HOBACS 
BusHNELL. In 1 voL doth, 68. 
19. 

St. Paul's Epistles to the Corin- 

thians: An Attempt to convey their 

Spirit and Significance. By the Rev. 

. John Hamilton Thom. 1 vol. cloth, 78, 

20. 

A Discourse of Matters pertaining 

to Religion. By Theodore Pabker. 
Post 8vo, cloth, is. 



" The various works composing the * Catholic Series,* should be known to all lorers of Hterature." 

Morning Chronicle. 

" Without reference to the opinions which they contain, we may safbly say that they are genetMj 
such as all men of free and philosophical minds would do well to know and ponder." — Noncor^formitt. 

" A series of serious and manly publications.** — BconomM. 

** This series deserves attention, both for what it has already given, and for what it promises." 

TaiTs Magazine. 

** A series not intended to represent or maintain a form of opinion, but t6 bring together some of 
the works which do honour to oar common nature, by the genius they display, or by tnelr ennobling 
tendency and lofty aspirations.** — Inquirer. 

*< It is highly erediti^Ie to Mr. Chapman to find his name in connexion with so much well-directed 
enterprise in the cause of German literature and philosophy. He is the first publisher who eeeme to 
have proposed to himself the worthy object of introducing the English reader to the philosophic 
mind of Germany, uninfluenced by the tradesman's distrust of the marketable nature of the ardele. 
It is a very praiseworthy ambition ; and we trust the public will Justify his confidence. Nothing 
could be more unworthy than the attempt to disoonrsge, and indeed punish, such unselfish enterprise, 
by attaching a bad reputation for orthodoxy to everything connected with German philosophy and 
theology. This is especially unworthy in the ' student,' or the * scholar,* to borrow Fichte's names, 
who sl^ould disdain to set themselves the task of exciting, by their friction, a popular preijudice and 
clamour on matters on which the populace are no competent judges, and have, indeed, no Judgment 
of their own,— and who should feel, as men themselves devoted to thought, that what makes a good book 
is, not that it should gain its reader's acquiescence, but that it should multiply his mentalexperlence i 
that it should acquaint him with the ideas which philosophers and scholars, reared by a training 
different from their own. have laboriously reached and devoutly entertain ; that, in a word, It should 
nlarge his materials and his sympathies as a man and a thinker."— Pro^Ml^ Review. 



e 



FREE TRADE IN BOOKS. 

MR. JOHN CHAPMAN, who originated the agitation for free trade 
in books, which has recently been brought to a successful termination, 
invites public attention to the liberal terms on which he is now enabled, 
by the dissolution of the Booksellers' Association, to supply books of all 
kinds. 

MISCELLANEOUS ENGLISH BOOKS. 

Mr. Chapman will allow, for Cash, a discount of One-sixth^ or 
twopence in the shilling^ from the advertised prices of all 
new books which are published on the usual terms. Works issued by 
those publishers who, in consequence of the recent change, determine 
to xeduce the amount of discount allowed to the trade, will be supplied 
at relatively advantageous rates. 

Periodicals and Magazine^ supplied on the day of publication, at a 
discount of 10 per cent, from the published prices. 

Orders for Old or Second-hand Books carefully attended to; and 
Binding executed in all varieties of style. 

AMEBIGAN BOOKS AT GBEATLY REDUCED PRICES. 

The retail prices of American Books have hitherto been much higher 
than needful in England, in consequence of the practice of allowing a 
large discoimt to the trade ; Mr. Chapman begs to announce that he will 
in future supply the English public with American Books^ at 
the cost price of importation^ with the addition only of 
a emaU revwwneraUve commission. 

The prices attached (in English currency) to all Lists of American 
Books that may henceforth be published by Mr. Chapman, vjith the exception 
o/Feriodiccds cmd Magtudnes, will be the IiOWest If ett Prices^ 
from which, therefore, no discount can be allowed. 

Mr. C. INVITES ATTENTION tO his EXTENSIVE AND CAREFULLY-SELECTED 

STOCK OF American Books, a classified Catalogue of widch, at the 
OREATLT-REDUCED PRICES, may Tlow be had, groitisj on application, or by 
post in retwm/or two stamps, 

f^r Pv/rdva/sers a/re espedoMy reqtiested to transm/it their orders Jbr 
Am£rica/n Books, a>ccompamed by a remittance, or reference in Town, 
directly to Mr, Chapmxin, who wiU promptly execute them, and Jbrtmrd 
the Books, by Post or otherwise, as desired. 

LONDON: JOHN CHAPMAN, 142, I^TRAND. 