AN INTRODUCTION 
TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

IN TWO PARTS. 

INTENDED ESPECIALLY FOB THE USE OF STUDENTS 

IN UNIVERSITIES. 



IN PAET SECOND 18 CONTAINED 



A PARTICULAR INaUIRT INTO THE NATURE AND 



VALUE OF THE SYLLOGISM. 



BY GEORGE RAMSAY, B. M. 

AUTHOE OF " AN ESSAY ON THE DISTBIBUTION OF WEALTH,' 
"ANALYSIS AND THEORY OF THE EMOTIONS,'* 
" A CLASSIFICATION OF THE SCIENCES," 

ETC. ETC. 



EDINBURGH: ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK. 

LONDON : LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS. 

RUGBY: CROSSLEY AND BILLINGTON. 

M.D.CCC.LIII. 



^^^> a., a/. 



L'homme n*est qu'un roseau le plus 
faible de la nature, mais c'est un roseau 
pensant. 

Toute la dignity de rhomme 
est en la pens^. — Pascal. 



PREFACE. 



The attempt made in the following pages to 

determine the meaning of some of the principal 

terms employed in Philosophy, may, to some, 

appear an ambitious undertaking ; while, to 

others, it may seem merely a verbal affair. If 

to emulate the " Great of old" be ambition, to 

that the author must plead guilty; for Aristotle 

himself composed a Philosophical Vocabulary; 

and, on the other hand, that the object of such 

a work is useful and dignified, will be allowed 

by those who are best acquainted with the 

difficulties of Philosophy. I may mention in 

particular two distinguished philosophers of the 

present day, who have thus expressed themselves 

on this subject. 

A 3 



VI PREFACE. 

Dr. Whewell observes, that "Discussions and 
speculations concerning the import of very ab- 
stract and general terms and notions, may be, 
and in reality have been, far from useless and 
barren. Such discussions arose from the desire 
of men to impress their opinions on others, but 
they had the effect of making the opinions much 
more clear and distinct. In trying to make 
others understand them they learnt to understand 
themselves. Their speculations were begun in 
twilight, and ended in the full brilliancy of 
day."* 

Again, Mr. Mill remarks, that "Although ac- 
cording to the views here presented, Definitions 
are of Names only, and not of Things, it does 
not follow that definition is an easy matter. 
How to define a Name, may not only be an 
inquiry of considerable difficulty and intricacy, 
but may turn upon considerations going deep into 
the nature of the things which are denoted by 
the Name. Such, for instance, are the inquiries 

* ** Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences," Part II. 
Book xi. Chap. 2. 



PREFACE. YU 



which form the subject of the most important of 
Plato's dialogues* ****** 
It would be a mistake to represent these diffi- 
cult and noble inquiries as having nothing in view 
beyond ascertaining the conventional meaning 
of a Name. They are inquiries not so much to 
determine what is, as what should be, the meaning 
of a Name; which, like other practical questions 
of terminology, requires for its solution^ that we 
should enter, and sometimes very deeply^ into the 
properties, not merely of names, but of the things 
named." * 

The part of the work likely to meet with 
the most opposition is that wherein are discussed 
the nature and value of the Syllogism. The 
importance of correct opinions on this subject; 
the long, and still fondly cherished errors, as I 
conceive, concerning it; the great names, from 
Aristotle down even to the present day, arrayed 
against me; the authority and teaching of one 
venerable University; all induced me to devote 
patient and oft repeated thought to this question. 

* System of Logic^ Book 1. Cbap. viii. Sec. 8. 



VUl PREFACE. 



Well pleased, indeed, should I be, could I 
have arrived at a conclusion supported by some 
of the first men of our times; and sorry above 
all am I to oppose the deep convictions of one 
EMINENT MAN, "whom I rejoicc to call a friend: 
but, my apology shall be given in the words of 
his favourite author, Aristotle; words adopted as 
his own ; namely, " That a philosopher, a lover of 
wisdofHy is bound in the cause of Truth, to refute 
all error, be it the error of himself or of his 
friends ; for though friends be dear, it is still his 
hallowed duty to give the higher reverence to 
Truth." To that sentiment I fully subscribe; 
and I feel confident that nothing here said will 
interrupt for one moment that friendly intercourse 
which has so long subsisted between us, and 
which, by me, has ever been considered as a 
pleasure, a profit, and a privilege. 

Rugby, November, 1852. 



CONTENTS. 



Part First. 
PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULAEY. 

I. Substance : 

Mind or Spirit, Body or Matter . 1 

II. Quality ..... 6 

III. Quantity ..... 14 

IV. Eelation ..... 27 
V. Power, Cause and Effect . .40 

VI. Law ..... 65 

VII. Law of Nature: 

Explanation of Phenomena . . 68 

VIII. Principle ..... 65 

IX. A Heason . . . .73 

X. Science and Philosophy ... 76 

XI. Hypothesis and Theory . . .95 

XII. Metaphysics, Logic, Grammar : 

Their respective provinces . . 104 



CONTENTS. 



Pakt Second. 

I. The Categokies . . .131 

II. Peoposition, — ^The Peedicables . 145 

1. Definition of a Proposition . . 145 

2. What things abe signified by the 

teems of a proposition . . 151 

3. What we affirm or deny concerning 

these things . . : 161 

m. Keasoning . . . . . 176 

1. Eeasoning in general . .177 

2. Demonstrative Keasoning . 179 

3. Probable Eeasoning . . .184 

Inductive and Deductive Keasoning 184 

Plain Keasoning . . . 219 

4. The Syllogism . . 220 

5. Different Relations traced by 

DIFFERENT SORTS OF KeASONING . 254 

6. General Principles of Keasoning 257 



AN INTRODUCTION 



TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 



PHILOSOPHICAL VOCAEULAKY. 



SUBSTANCE. 



Substance is a word applied to two things, 
apparently as different as any can be, namely, 
Matter and Mind, or Body and Spirit. But in 
spite of this great difference, there must be some 
resemblance, however faint ; otherwise a common 
name would hardly have been given to them. 
What, then, is this circumstance belonging to 
both, on account of which each is called a Sub- 
stance? This, it would appear, is nothing but Per^ 
man^nce— permanence amid innumerable changes 
or modifications. Matter may undergo very 
great changes; from a solid it may become a 
liquid; from a liquid, an air or gas; or two 
gases may unite, and in so doing may lose their 
own properties ; or acids, with alkalis, may form 
neutral salts ; but something still remains con- 



J PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

stant. So the Mind may pass through an innu- 
merable variety of conditions — far more than 
we can express in words ; such as Sensations, 
Thoughts, Emotions, which comprise vast classes 
of phenomena; but, through all this variety, 
there is something fixed or permanent. It is on 
this account we conceive that the term Sub- 
STAN CE has been applied to both Mind and Body. 
A Substance, then, may be defined as something 
permanent or constant amid innumerable modifica-^ 
tions. 

From the above it appears that, widely dif- 
ferent as the Substances, Matter and Mind, un- 
doubtedly are, there are still things more diflferent. 
Such are Mind, and the modifications of Matter 
or its qualities ; Matter, and the modifications or 
qualities^ and the phenomena of Mind, for these 
have not even the common property of per- 
manence or constancy; and consequently they 
have no common name. 

Substance is a genus comprehending two 
species^ Mind or Spirit, and Body or Matter. 
So far as each is a Substance they have some- 
thing in common ; but by what differences are 
they separated? 

Matter has sometimes been defined as the 
outward and unknown cause of our Sensations ; 
but when we come to enquire what is a Sensa- 



SUBSTANCE. 



tion, we say that it is a Mental phenomenon, of 
which the cause, or at least the invariable ante- 
cedent, is some change in the state of our body. 
Hence Matter, or*Body,is defined as the cause of 
Sensation, and Sensation as the Effect of Body, 
or we define in a circle. Let us then see whether 
we have not some less vague notion of Matter. 

Matter certainly gives occasion in us to in- 
numerable sensations, and notions consequent 
thereon ; and there are a few of these sensations 
and notions which we never fail to experience 
whenever Matter is present, and on which, there- 
fore, we have fixed as serving to distinguish it 
from other things. But in this case it is not on 
the sensations that we fix, but on the notions 
thence derived; the former being quite over- 
looked. 

Thus, first J all Matter gives us the notion of 
Exiensioriy and therefore we say that all Matter is 
extended, and thus we distinguish it from Spirit. 
Secondly^ all Matter gives us the notion of So- 
lidity or Impenetrability; which means that it 
fills space, or that two bodies cannot occupy the 
same space at the same time. Thus is Matter 
distinguished from simple Extension. 

Now, our notion of Matter always compre- 
hends these two notions, together with the notion 
of Substance before stated ; and from these we 



4 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

cannot doubt that it originated ; and we think 
from these alone, and not from colour, sound, or 
taste. As for the two latter, we can conceive 
Matter without them at all ; and, indeed, there 
are not a few born deaf who yet know Matter ; 
and we cannot suppose that a mere want of taste 
would be attended by a total ignorance of the 
world without. Nay, there have been children 
born deaf, dumb, and blind, who yet were ac- 
quainted with Matter. If this be so, the notion 
of Matter does not necessarily embrace colour, 
and was certainly not derived from it, though 
those who enjoy sight may not, from constant 
association, easily abstract colour from Matter. 
The power of conceiving a thing without another 
thing is a proof that the conception of the former 
is independent of the conception of the latter ; 
but our inability to conceive the one without the 
other is no proof that the two conceptions are 
necessarily inseparable ; for the inability may be 
owing to long continued association. 

From the above it follows that Matter may be 
defined to be an Bartended Solid Substance. Spirit, 
on the other hand, is supposed neither to be ex- 
tended nor solid, but its existence is known to us 
from the various mental phenomena of which we 
are conscious, — Sensations, Thoughts, Emotions. 
Amid the constant and rapid succession of these 



8UBBTANCE. 



phenomena, we cannot help believing that there 
is something permanent, which is therefore a 
Substance, and which I call Self. The existence 
of this substance is more intimately known, is 
brought more home to us; in other words, is 
known more immediately than that of Matter, for 
the former is known by phenomena which are 
states of its own being ; the latter through the 
medium of those mental states, called sensations, 
which are totally distinct from matter itself. 

From all this it appears that spirit may be 
defined to be a Substance, neither extended nor 
solidj but susceptible of Sensations^ Thoughts, and 
Emotions. 

Here it is not said that the word Spirit, or 
Mind, implies a Substance which at all times 
thinks or feels, for it is a disputed point whether 
or not there be always some consciousness, as in 
deep sleep, or in a swoon ; but we should never 
give the name of Mind to that which either had 
never been conscious, or which had ceased to be 
capable of consciousness. It is then the capa- 
bility which the term implies, and not the con- 
stant exercise of that capability. 



PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 



QUALITY. 

The word Substance, simply signifying perma- 
nent existence, seems to be one out of a very 
small number of terms which are strictly non- 
relative. Not so Quality, which is synonymous 
with Power, and implies the relation of cause 
and eflfect All our knowledge of Matter is derived 
from its effects upon us ; that is, from our sensa- 
tions ; and all our knowledge of Spirit is obtained 
from its own sensations, thoughts, and emotions ; 
and though these sensations, thoughts, and emo- 
tions, be ever changing, yet we believe not only 
that there is something permanent which gives 
rise to them all, and which in the one case we call 
Matter, in the other Mind, but also that each sen- 
sation, thought, and emotion, has a peculiar per- 
manent cause, either external or internal, material 
or mental ; and this we call a Quality. But as our 
experience tells us that outward objects, as well 
as our own minds, undergo, in the course of time, 
considerable changes : we do not attach the same 
degree of permanence to a Quality as to Matter 
or Mind itself. The Quality, however, is nothing 
distinct from Matter or Mind : it is one or the 
other in a certain state ; — in other words, it is a 



QUALITT. 7 

modification of either, less constant than Sub- 
stance — more so than a mere phenomenon. When 
I experience a sensation of redness, I say that the 
object before me is red, or has the quality of red- 
ness ; meaning that I believe that the cause of the 
sensation is an outward object, and that the object 
which now affects me thus will always affect me 
in like manner (ray eyesight and my distance from 
the object remaining the same) ; and not me only, 
but all persons similarly situated. I can clearly 
distinguish between the passing sensation of red- 
ness and the cause, which I believe to be perma- 
nent, and which for a thousand years may arouse 
similar sensations in successive generations of 
men. But wind, rain, or other casualties, may in 
time change the colour from red to black, or en- 
tirely alter the figure, or even the intimate nature 
of the object ; and it is conceivable that our sen- 
sations from the same object may vary; and 
consequently a Quality has not necessarily the 
permanence of simple substance. Substance has 
been defined to be something permanent among 
innumerable modifications Now these modifi- 
cations are either qualities or phenomena, and the 
former are permanent as compared with the latter. 
But were all animated nature at once destroyed, 
there would be an end to the qualities of matter, 
(zs we comprehend them ; because Quality supposes 



8 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

two things — an outward object and a percipient 
mind ; though there might still be Substance. 

This account of Quality agrees perfectly with 
the doctrine of Locke, contained in the following 
passage. And I am the more desirous of quoting 
that passage, because the opinions of Locke have 
been so much misrepresented, and this subject in 
particular has been so much mystified by suc- 
ceeding writers : — " Whatever the mind perceives 
in itself, or is the immediate object of perception, 
thought, or understanding, that I call Idea ; and 
the power to produce any idea in our mind I call 
Quality of the subject wherein that power is. 
Thus a snowball, having the power to produce in 
us the idea of white, cold, and round, the power 
to produce those ideas in us as they are in the 
snowball I call Qualities ; and as they are sen- 
sations or perceptions in our understandings, I 
call them ideas ; which ideas, if I speak of them 
sometimes as in the things themselves, I would 
be understood to mean those qualities in the 
objects which produce them in us." — Essay con- 
cerning Human Understanding^ Book ii. chap. viii. 
sec. 8. See also sec. 2. 

Had Locke written nothing more on the 
subject of Quality than this section, it seems 
impossible that his opinions could have been mis- 
understood ; and we can attribute the disputes 



QUALITY. y 

which have arisen with respect to him, only to 
some unguarded expressions in the remainder of 
the chapter, and in particular to his observations 
on primary and secondary dualities. ^* From 
whence I think it is easy to draw this observation, 
that the ideas of primary qualities of bodies, are 
resemblances of them, and their patterns do 
really exist in the bodies themselves, but the 
ideas produced in us by these secondary qualities 
have no resemblance to them at all. There is 
nothing like our ideas existing in the bodies 
themselves. They are, in the bodies we denomi- 
nate from them, only a power to produce those 
sensations in us ; and what is sweet, blue, or warm 
in idea, is but the certain bulk, figure, and motion, 
of the insensible parts in the bodies themselves, 
which we call so." Sec. 15. 

This distinction does not seem well founded. 
The ideas of primary qualities no more resemble 
the qualities themselves, than the ideas of se- 
condary qualities resemble these. The quality, 
the cause, is always external ; the idea, the effect 
resulting from it, always internal, and the one 
can bear no resemblance to the other ; the former 
appertaining to Matter, the latter to Mind. The 
secondary quality is quite as real as the primary, 
and we have quite as much reason to believe the 
one as the other* Either both exist outwardly, or 

c 



10 PHIfX>80PHICAL VOCABULARY. 

neither. We are as firmly convinced that there 
exists something without, the cause of the sen- 
sation of blueness, as we are that there is an 
outward cause of the sensation of resistance. 

Nevertheless, there is a good distinction be- 
tween the primary and secondary qualities of 
Matter, and it consists in this, that the former 
alone are sufficient to constitute what Locke calls 
the Nominal Essence ; in other words, sufficient to 
our notion of matter; so that wherever these 
qualities exist, there we say is Matter, and 
wherever these qualities exist not, there we say 
is none. The primary qualities, then, are those 
to the union of which we have given the name 
Matter, and the statement of them is the defini- 
tion of this term. Of course then they must be 
inseparable from matter, under all its modifica- 
tions, for were they not present, we should not 
apply the name. When we say that they consti- 
tute our notion of Matter, we imply that they 
are inseparable from it ; and afterwards to state 
that they are so, is a truism, and nothing more. 

What those qualities are which are sufficient 
to induce us to give the name of Matter, we have 
already seen. They are Extension and Solidity, 
or Impenetrability. AH other qualities are se- 
condary, for they do not of necessity enter into 
our notions of a material substance. Bodies may 



QUALITY. 1 1 

be without colour, as in the dark ; without sound' 
as in a vacuum ; without smell, without taste, but 
still they are Matter. 

It is, no doubt, very difficult, for us who see, 
to conceive Matter without colour, but this is 
only the result of constant association, for we 
know that those born blind are acquainted with 
colourless Matter. A druggist or apothecary 
cannot easily conceive senna apart from its pur- 
gative effect ; but a botanist is wholly taken up 
with the marks which determine its class, order, 
genus, and species, and thinks not at all of its 
medicinal virtues. Facility or difficulty of con- 
ception, then, proves only frequency or infre- 
quency of association, and is no test of what is 
required and alone required : in other words, of 
what is sufficient or essential to our notion of 
that thing to which we give a name, whether it 
be Matter or any other. 

There is another division of Qualities which 
deserves to be attended to, viz., that into Simple 
and Relative. The Simple Qualities of bodies 
are those which affect our senses, without chang- 
ing other bodies, as redness, blueness, hardness, 
softness, roughness, smoothness, &c., smells and 
tastes, &c. 

The Relative Qualities are such as first change 
other bodies, and then operate anew upon our 



12 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

senses, as an acid, which changes a vegetable 
blue to red, or by mixing with an alkali, produces 
a new substance, a salt ; or as fire, which melts 
lead, or causes the explosion of gunpowder. 
Though this distinction be well founded, yet we 
must not suppose that Simple dualities involve 
no relation. They certainly imply a relation 
between the outward object and the percipient 
mind, for when we say that blood is red, or has 
the quality of redness, we mean that it is a sub- 
stance which rouses in us a sensation of redness. 

* 

But Relative dualities imply no less than four 
relations. To take the case of an acid uniting 
with an alkali to form a salt : there is first the 
simple relation between the acid and our per- 
cipient mind ; secondly, the relation between the 
alkali and our mind ; thirdly, the relation be- 
tween the acid and the alkali, resulting in a 
mutual transformation ; which third relation is 
known to us by a fourth, that between the new 
product, a salt, and our mind which perceives it. 
Therefore, there is a well-marked distinction be- 
tween Simple and Relative Qualities, and the 
names seem sufficiently well chosen for the pur- 
pose ; the one set of dualities being so much more 
simple than the other. 

The word Attribute seems to be nearly, if 
not quite, synonymous with Quality, only it is 



QUALITY. 1 3 

not so often used in reference to Body, being 
mostly confined to Spirit, and often applied in 
particular to that Great Spirit which created and 
governs the universe. 

Attribute of mind, like duality of body, means 
something less constant than Simple Substance, 
more so than a mere phenomenon, and yet not 
distinct from substance any more than phenome- 
non is ; but only that substance existing, not in 
any state whatever, for then it would be simply 
substance ; nor yet in a fleeting state, for then it 
would be merely phenomenon; but in a state 
which may be called habitual, being apt to recur, 
and to continue for some time. An Attribute 
may, therefore, be defined as an habitual state of 
mind. The assemblage of the moral Attributes is 
called the disposition . 

*" For other meanings of the word Attribute, and in particular 
the distinction hetween the logical and the metaphysical sense, see 
the article on the Categories. Part ii. Art. 1. 



14 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCADULARY. 



QUANTITY. 

The word Quality necessarily implies Sub- 
stance, mental or bodily ; for a quality is nothing 
but a substance, existing in such a state as to 
render us conscious of its existence, whether by 
means of sensation, as in the case of body, or of 
any mental phenomenon whatsoerer, as in the 
case of Mind. Quality, then, is inseparable 
from Substance ; but not so Quantity : for 
time and space have Quantity, since we under- 
stand what we say when we talk of the length of 
a mile or of a day, and neither time nor space 
necessarily imply Substance. And though Quan- 
tity belongs to all Bodies, yet is it not peculiar to 
Body ; for neither time nor space is material. 
To know, then, what is meant by Quantity, we 
must consider it where it exists with the least 
possible complication with other things. 

Since Quantity belongs to both space and 
time, these have something in common. But 
what is that something ^ Time and space agree 
in this, and in this only, that they have parts, 
and are capable of increase or diminution, by 
the addition or the subtraction of the parts; 
and this addition or subtraction may go on to 



QUANTITY. 1 S 

infinity, in other words, without any limit which 
we can assign. Who can set bounds to the 
multiplication or division of miles or of years ? 
Quantity, then, being that which is common to 
space and time, means this capability ? When a 
thing can be increased or diminished ad infinitum^ 
by adding or subtracting similar parts, there is 
Quantity ; but where it cannot be so increased or 
diminished, there we have Quality, which admits 
of Shades^ or degrees, not accurately fixed, and 
that soon find a limit. Thus we talk of degrees 
of excellence in tastes, degrees of hardness and 
softness, the shades of colour, or of good and 
evil, &c. &c. 

In all these we soon reach a limit, beyond 
which if we attempt to go, we change the Quality 
into something else. What is whiter than snow ? 
Do we attempt to produce greater whiteness, we 
change it altogether. 

Quantity, on the contrary, has no Shades^ be- 
cause one Quantity is perfectly distinct from 
every other, and no limit. Shades suppose 
gradual and insensible approximation, and hence 
indistinctness ; but one is as distinct from two as 
from two thousand. 

This is the reason why the relations of Quan- 
tity alone admit of demonstration. Here every 
difference is distinct ; whereas, in other things, 



16 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

each difference is not distinct. Therefore Mo- 
rality does not admit of demonstration, as Locke 
supposes. The shades of action are innumerable, 
and indistinctly marked. In questions respecting 
Quantity there is but one alternative, — either a * 
thing is, or it is not; but in all other subjects 
there may be a middle term, or many middle 
terms, partaking of the character of the two op- 
posites. Either the two angles of a triangle are 
equal to two right angles, or they are not : but 
who shall say that one form of government is 
always good, another always bad ; that one line 
of policy, or one mode of action, is invariably the 
best, another always the worst? These very 
words, best and worst, suppose many intervening 
degrees of goodness. Cluantity, then, is the sub- 
ject of demonstrative. Quality of probable rea- 
soning ; because the differences of the one are 
determinate, of the other indeterminate. 

Quantity is particularly interesting and im- 
portant, as forming the subject of the only perfect 
science we possess — Mathematics. From what 
has been above said, it follows that if pure Mathe- 
matics be really the science of Quantity, as is 
universally allowed, then that science is alto- 
gether independent of Matter. The definitions of 
Euclid prove the same thing. A point, we are 
told, is that which has position, but not magni- 



QUANTITY. 17 

tude. A line is length without hreadth. But in 
the material world there are no such points and 
lines ; therefore pure Geometry is not a science 
of Matter. Is it, then, a branch of Mental 
Science ? Certainly not, in the general accepta- 
tion of that term ; for Quantity has nothing to 
do with Mind or Spirit, either with the Substance 
thereof or the phenomena. Who ever heard of 
half a soul, or of two-thirds of a sensation, 
thought, or emotion ? But if pure Mathematics 
be neither a material nor a mental science, what 
can it be ? for that division seems to exhaust 
the subject. We answer that it is the science of 
Quantity, under its three modifications of Space, 
Time, and Number. Arithmetic is the Science 
of Number ; Geometry, of Extension, whether of 
one, two, or three dimensions; while Algebra 
comprehends Number, Extension, and Time ; for 
letters may apply to any of these. Such is pure 
Mathematics ; which ought to be classed apart, 
in a comprehensive division of the sciences, and 
not to be confounded either with mental or with 
material or physical science, with which last it is 
commonly joined. It is a science strictly sui generis, 
or a summum genus^ embracing three species, Arith- 
metic, Geometry, and Algebra. According to this 
view, science would embrace three leading di- 
visions, Metaphysics, Physics, and Mathematics.** 

•* See Ramsay's '* Classification of tbe Sciences." 



18 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Belonging to this subject there is a very in- 
teresting question, as to the foundation and 
nature of Mathematical certainty. Since that 
science treats neither of Mind nor of Matter, it 
follows that its certainty depends not upon the 
existence of either of these. Let the earth be 
dissolved, and all that live thereon, still the truths 
of Mathematics will remain. Whatever exists as 
Matter or as Mind may change, or cease to be, 
and therefore the science thereof may fail ; but 
we must alter or set bounds to time and space 
before we can change the certainty of Mathe- 
matics. 

It has been said by an exceedingly able writer 
of the present day, (See MilVs System of Logic, 
Book ii. chap, v.) that the certainty of Mathe- 
matics is merely hypothetical ; that its propo- 
sitions are true in the sense that they follow 
irresistibly from an hypothesis, and in that sense 
only. Thus, when a line is defined as length 
without breadth, or a triangle as a figure with 
three sides and three angles, we are told that the 
tacit assumption is made, ^^ and such a thing 
exists." On this assumption, and others simi- 
lar, it is said, rest all the demonstrations of 
Mathematics. When we define a line as 
above, do we then really mean to imply that 
such a line exists in the world of matter? 



WHO^RmBH 



QUANTITY, 19 

If we do, then we enounce, at the very be- 
ginning, a notorious falsehood ; and no con- 
clusions drawn from it can be worth attending 
to. The boasted science of Mathematics be- 
comes like the ravings of a madman, who first 
fancies himself a king, and then reasons well 
accordingly. 

But if what we have above said, as to the na- 
ture of Quantity, be correct, then Mathematical 
demonstration is quite independent of Matter; 
and consequently we do not assume that the 
points, lines, triangles, circles, &c. as defined in 
books of Geometry, have any existence in the 
material universe. No doubt it was by the ma- 
terial world that we first became acquainted with 
points, lines, triangles, &c. approximating to those 
defined ; but having once got these ideas, through 
our sensations, we can afterwards detach them 
from Matter, and consider them as modifications 
of pure space. Look at the arch of a bridge. 
Without the stone and lime which form the arch 
I might never have conceived a curve ; but, having 
once seen a curve in Matter, I can imagine one 
immaterial. What is included between the arch, 
the piers, and the water below, forms a definite 
figure in empty space, the air being invisible. 
From constant association with Matter it is, no 
doubt, difficult, if not impossible, to avoid think- 

D 2 



20 PHIIX)60PHICAL VOCABULARY. 

ing of Matter when we wish to think of figure 
only, and sensible diagrams are even put before 
US; but in framing or following the reasoning, 
we can attend so little to what is material, as not 
to be at all disturbed thereby in our calculations. 
I have, then, a notion of a Mathematical line, 
triangle, circle, &c., and a notion sufficiently clear 
to conduct me through the longest chain of rea- 
soning without any confusion; and what more 
cani wishf 

But, if such points, lines, and circles, &c., 
exist not in any material object, and if spirit he 
altogether inconsistent with extension and figure, 
can these points, Unes, and circles, be said to 
exist at all ? and if not, is the science purely 
imaginary ? The only answer to this is, that if 
space can be said to exist, then do the figures of 
Geometry. They rest upon the same foundation, 
they must stand or fall together ; and if Space 
and Time be not imaginary, neither is the science 
of Mathematics. Surely no one will say that the 
terms. Space and Time, have either no meaning 
at all, or mean what exists only in fancy, as the 
words Centaur, Mermaid. The same exactly may 
be said of the lines and figures of Geometry. 
That these terms have a meaning is evident, for 
otherwise how could we reason about them? 
and if they have a meaning, then we have notions 



QUANTITY. 2 1 

corresponding to them, for these are but di£Ferent 
phrases for the same thing. And will any one 
pretend that those notions are fanciful, like the 
notions of Centaur and Mermaid? We have 
then notions, and notions which are not fantastic, 
what more can we desire for Truth ? 

With all respect for the abilities of the above- 
mentioned author, I cannot but think that his 
doctrine, with respect to necessary truths^ is 
fundamentally erroneous. Certain it is that phi- 
losophers have long made a distinction between 
necessary and contii^ent truth, a distinction 
which Mr. Mill would confound. Hume clearly 
marked out the di£ference, under the names of 
relations of ideas, and matters of fact, the latter 
known by experience, the former not. Dr. 
Wheweirs account of this, as quoted by Mr. Mill, 
is as follows : ^' Necessary truths are those in 
which we not only learn that the proposition is 
true, but see that it must be true ; in which the 
negative of the truth is not only false but im- 
possible, in which we cannot, even by an effort 
of imagination, or in a supposition, conceive the 
reverse of that which is asserted. That there 
are such truths cannot be doubted. We may 
take for example all relations of number. Three 
and two, added together, make five ; we cannot 
conceive it to be otherwise ; we cannot by any 



22 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

freak of thought imagine three and two to make 
seven."*" 

From this passage Mr. Mill deduces that^ ac^ 
cording to Dr. Whewell, a necessary truth may 
be defined to be a proposition, the negative of 
which is not only false, but inconceivable. Start- 
ing from this idea, Mr. Mill goes on to show 
that as the power of conception depends very 
much upon association, and as many things 
formerly supposed inconceivable, are now not 
only conceived but believed ; for instance, the 
action of bodies on each other at a distance ; of 
Matter on Mind, &c., he thence infers that incon- 
ceivability of the contrary is a very poor test of 
truth, and that what is called necessary truth 
rests, like every other, solely on experience. 

Is there then no difference in the evidence on 
which these two propositions rest ? The sun will 
rise to-morrow ; the three angles of a triangle 
are equal to two right angles. Are they both 
contingent, or both necessary"? Do they both rest 
upon experience ? Consult your own mind. Why 
do we believe that the sun will rise to-morrow ? 
Because as far as I know personally, or can learn 
from the testimony of others, alive or dead, it 
always has in time past. But can you see in that 
any irresistible reason why it should rise to- 

" Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Part i. Book i. Chap. 9. 



QUANTITY. 23 

morrow? Must you not allow, that, for aught 
you know, the sun may be dissolved, and scat- 
tered throughout boundless space before another 
day ? Ere you can say positively it mil not, your 
knowledge must be far far more extended than it 
is at present, it must approximate to the know- 
ledge of Him who created the sun and all things. 
But why do you believe that the three angles of 
a triangle are equal to two right angles ? Because 
I have seen it demonstrated ; that is, starting 
from some self-evident truth, I have followed a 
chain of reasoning, each link of which was an 
irresistible inference from the preceding, until I 
arrived at the conclusion, which was the last 
irresistible inference. The demonstration finished, 
I can no more doubt the truth in question, than 
I can doubt the existence of that feeling of 
which at the moment I am conscious. I see 
clearly that the conclusion holds good, and always 
will hold good ; in short, that it must be true. 

But how do you know that ? All I can answer 
is. that I see it to be so. I assert that to me the 
first proposition is self-evident, and that the in- 
ferences flow from it irresistibly, even to the con- 
clusion. If you deny this, I can only bid you to 
study the theorem. Should you still persist in 
your doubts I can say no more, for I cannot give 
a demonstration of a demonstration. What is 



24 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

self-evident not only requires no proof, but ad- 
mits of none ; and if the inferences from the first 
proposition be not directly felt to be irresistible, 
no arguments remain to make them so. 

Having read and mentally followed the theorem 
in which the above conclusion is established, 
can any man doubt its truth? If he cannot, 
then the truth is necessary, not contingent. And 
if he cannot doubt its truth, then is it not derived 
from experience; for experience tells us only of 
the past ; and we can always doubt whether what 
we have experienced in the past shall happen 
again. 

If this be correct, it is absurd to ask for any 
test of self-evidence, or of demonstrative inference* 
You either see it, or you do not. A necessary 
truth is that which is either evident at once, or 
becomes so by means of a demonstration. The 
criterion is not that the opposite is a contradic- 
tion in terms, for I see no contradiction in sup- 
posing, previous to enquiry, that the three angles 
of a triangle are greater or less than two right 
angles; no contradiction to the definition of 
triangle. It is not as if I said that black is white. 
Neither is inconceivability of the contrary a cri- 
terion ; for, beforehand, I can just as well conceive 
that those three angles are unequal as equal to 
two right angles. But Dr. Whewell having made 



QUANTITY. 25 

use of the word conceive, Mr. Mill has founded 
thereon a supposed refutation of the doctrine 
that there are truths, necessary truths, which 
we know for certain, but not from experience. 
No doubt when truths are seen to be necessary, 
the contrary is inconceivable ; but it is not be- 
cause they may be inconceivable that we deem 
them necessary. 

When we say that a truth is necessary, we 
imply that the contrary is impossible, the one in- 
volves the other ; and if we require a criterion of 
necessity, so do we of impossibility. But neither 
admits of any that can be stated in words : the 
mind alone supplies it. 

The distinctions between Quantity and Quality 
may be here summed up. 

1. Quality varies by insensible shades or de- 
grees ; whereas one Quantity differs from another 
by a fixed or determinate difference. 

2. Quality generally, but not always, admits 
of a contrary, as black is the contrary of white, 
wetness of dryness, hardness of softness, vice of 
virtue, ugliness of beauty: but Quantity has 
never a contrary. One Quantity may be double, 
triple, four times, another quantity ; but in all 
these there is no opposition ; but only more or 
less of the same thing. 

3. Qualities are like or unlike ; but Quanti- 

E 



26 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

ties are equal or unequal. This last distinction, 
however, is comprehended under the first; for 
where the degrees of difference are insensible, 
there will be likeness or unlikeness ; and where 
the diflFerences are fixed, there will be equality or 
inequality. 



RELATION. 27 



RELATION. 

In treating of Quality we have been led, un- 
avoidably, to mention Relation ; but this word 
now demands a separate head. 

In classifying the phenomena of Mind, Rela- 
tions are opposed to Conceptions, and they are 
thus distinguished : Conceptions being those in- 
ward phenomena which do not necessarily imply, 
or at least do not evidently imply, the existence 
of two things ; while Relations do manifestly sup- 
pose more things than one. I look at a horse pre- 
sent before me, and admire his form, colour, and 
activity, without thinking of any other horse ; and 
I have a Perception of him, which, in his absence, 
may suggest a Conception. I consider him along 
with a pony, and I compare them ; in other words, 
I am conscious of a Relation between them. And 
this state of mind which I experience is quite dis- 
tinct from the Perception or the Conception, either 
of the horse or of the pony ; though but for those, 
it never would have arisen. It is a state more 
removed from Sensation, in the order of time, 
than either Perception or Conception, of which it 
is the consequence. 



28 PHILOSOPHICAL yOCABULARY. 

So far the distinction between Conception 
and Relation seems very clearly marked ; though 
when we examine the matter more deeply we 
shall find that there are but very few concep- 
tions which do not at least imply, that is suppose 
in a covert way, the existence of more things 
than one. Thus, all the qualities of Substances, 
even those which we have called Simple, as op- 
posed to Relative, suppose not only that there is 
an outward or material object, but also a per- 
cipient mind. A blue object is one which rouses 
in me the sensation which I call blueness, and 
therefore there is a relation between that object 
and myself. Still, there is a difierence between 
this case and that of a Relation, commonly so 
called ; a di£Ference on which we have enlarged, 
in treating of Quality. Besides the more com- 
plex nature of the Relation in the latter case, it 
is also manifestly /i?/< ; whereas in the former, it is 
discovered only by those who study the subject 
metaphysically. No one, generally speaking, 
when looking at a green field, thinks of the field, 
then of his sensation, and lastly of the Relation 
between them. It would be a bad use of meta- 
physical subtlety to confound distinctions re- 
cognized by the common sense, as well as the 
common language, of all mankind. The words 
blueness, redness, hardness, softness, wetness, 



RELATION. 29 

dryness, suggest no Relation to ordinary men ; 
but those of father, mother, brother, sister, 
cousin, tutor, governor, servant, slave, cannot be 
heard by any one without calling up the notion 
of two persons somehow connected. A Relation, 
then, considered as a mental phenomenon, is an 
inward state of mind, which manifestly supposes 
the existence of two things at least, having some- 
thing in common ; and according to the nature 
of that something, there are dififerent kinds of 
Relations. 

But do Relations exist only as mental phe- 
nomena ? Have they no existence outwardly ? 

Objects there are, we allow, having an indepen- 
dent existence without ; but it would be palpable 
nonsense to say that a Relation exists as Matter 
exists. That it is, however, something more 
than a mere state of mind, every one is con- 
vinced. When I think of a mare and her foal, I 
am conscious that there exists a connection be- 
tween them, (the nature of which every dolt 
knows as well as the wisest of men), consisting of 
a long series of material changes in which the 
two participate ; but if you ask me to put my 
finger on the Relation as on a lump of Matter, 
then I am quite at a loss . I must allow that the Re- 
lation exists not as the mare and her foal exist — 
objects which can be seen and touched. Must 



30 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

I then be driven to confess that the Relation be- 
tween them is a mere state of my Mind? But this 
conclusion is as opposed to the universal sense of 
mankind as the other. How then can the Rela- 
tion exist if it be neither material merely nor men- 
tal merely? This is a question which I will 
answer when any one shall inform me how Space 
and Time exist. 

Having explained, as far as we are able, 
the nature of Relation, let us see what are the 
different kinds thereof. 

There is one distinction among Relations which 
is very well marked. Some Relations suppose the 
things related to exist simultaneously or together ; 
others imply that they exist in succession : con- 
sequently the latter do, and the former do not, 
necessarily involve the notion of time. We have, 
therefore, Relations of co-existence, and Rela- 
tions of succession ; these always supposing time, 
while those may or may not suppose space, ac- 
cording as the objects related are outward and 
material, or inward and mental. The following 
are the principal relations of co-existence. 

1. Relations of Position. I stand on a moun- 
tain commanding an extensive prospect. I descry 
hills, dales, woods, towers, steeples; I remark 
how they lie one with another, east, west, north, 
or south; some nearer, some farther oflF; some 



RELATION. 31 

above, some below ; and I am conscious that they 
are related in space, related by position. This 
relation is the foundation or subject of Geography 
and descriptire Astronomy ; of Zoology, so far as 
the mere collocation of parts, as known by 
Anatomy, is concerned ; of Botany also to a con- 
siderable extent ; and of Geology likewise in part, 
one object of which is to determine the relative 
position of strata. 

2. Relations of Comprehension. I look down 
from the top of St. Paul's, and I see a vast city, 
which in a certain sense I consider one, but which 
embraces or contains within it an immense num- 
ber of 9treets» squares, houses, churches, &c., and 
I am conscious of a relation between the whole 
and the parts, between things existing in space, 
a Relation of Comprehension. This is the subject 
of all those sciences which are properly called 
analytic, or which investigate the constitution of 
things, such as Analytic Chymistry, which searches 
after the hidden ingredients of material objects, 
and Analytic Metaphysics ; though in this case the 
things related, viz., the compound feeling, and 
the simple feelings which it comprises, cannot be 
said to have any existence in space. 

3. Relations of Quantity. Quantity being, 
as we have seen, that which hath parts, and which 
may be increased or diminished without limit, by 



32 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULilRT. 

adding or subtracting parts, it would seem to foU 
low that, as in this sense, both time and space 
have Quantity, therefore the Relations of Quan- 
tity ought to be classed, some as co-existing, others 
as successive. But in reality it is not so. As for 
the theorems of pure Geometry, these are evidently 
concerned with the Relations of things in space, 
for they may be represented to the eye, though 
with some imperfection. And though the num- 
bers of Arithmetic and the letters of Algebra may 
apply to the divisions of time as well as of space, 
yet while making our calculations, while feeling 
the Relations in question, the Quantities are sup- 
posed to co-exist. While we are conscious that 
2 : 4 : : 4 : 8, all these numbers exist together, 
and though we may afterwards insert the word 
himrs^ and say that 2 hours : 4 hours : : 4 
hours : 8 hours, yet this insertion cannot change 
the nature of a Relation previously felt. 

Relations of Quantity, then, and the science 
of those Relations, viz., pure Mathematics, do 
not, in any case, involve the notion of Time."* 

^ Since writing the above, I am glad to find my opinion con- 
firmed by that of Mr. Mill. '' The laws of number,'* says he, 
'< are common to synchronous and successive phenomena." Again, 
*' the laws of number, though true of successive phenomena, do 
not relate to their succession. "-^See Mill's System of Logic, 
Book iii. Chap. 5. 



RELATION. 33 

4. Relations of Indeterminate degree. I look 
upon two tulips, and pronounce one to be more 
gaudy than another ; upon two geraniums, and 
perceive that the one has the more brilliant co- 
lours ; upon two horses, a racer and a cart horse, 
and am conscious that the former is the more 
finely formed ; upon two women, and am sensi- 
ble that the one is much more beautiful than the 
other. 

So, I partake of two loaves of bread, and am 
aware that they are of different degrees of good- 
ness, or of different qualities, as the phrase is. 

All these are Relations of Indeterminate de- 
gree ; for by what standard can we measure them ? 
We may be sure that one thing surpasses an- 
other in brilliancy of colour, in beauty, in taste, 
or in nutritive power, but who can say how 
much? The qualities or properties compared 
must, of course, be similar, for between different 
qualities, as between colour and taste, beauty and 
nutritive power, there can be no comparison. 
True it is that the word Quality is sometimes 
used to signify degree, as when we speak of 
different qualities of bread or meat, meaning 
different degrees of goodness, as to taste and 
nutrition ; and in this sense diverse qualities or 
degrees may be compared ; but this is a popular, 
not a philosophical sense of the word. And as 

F 



34 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

the word degree is often used to express Relations 
of Quantity, as in the ease of the degrees of a 
thermometer, therefore it is necessary to distin- 
guish the Relation now in question by the phrase 
Indeterminate degree. 

In popular language the word Quality^ in the 
sense of Degree^ is very commonly opposed to 
Quantity ; as when we say that the food of the 
poor is both deficient in Quantity, and bad in 
Quality; that is, inferior either in taste or in 
nutritive power to the food consumed by the rich. 
But we must be careful not to confound this sense 
of the word Quality with the philosophical one. 
In the philosophical sense, different Qualities or 
Properties, as Taste, and Nutritive Power, cannot 
be compared together ; but in the popular sense 
different Qualities may be compared, because 
Quality then signifies degree of a common Pro- 
perty ; as the degree of excellence in food as to 
the common Property Taste, or else as to Nutri- 
tive Power. 

Here we again see the difference between 
Quality in the strict or philosophical sense, and 
Quantity ; the former admitting of Relations of 
Indeterminate degree, and of those only; the 
latter of Relations only of determinate degree. 
This distinction is of the utmost importance, as 
it at once separates Mathematics, or the Science 



RELATION. 35 

of Quantity, as susceptible of demonstration and 
certainty, from all other Sciences, which admit 
only of probability. 

Some dualities are much more determinate 
than others. Thus Justice is much more so than 
any other duty ; and consequently, the Science of 
Law is the most exact department of Moral Philo- 
sophy. 

These four are perhaps the only orders of 
Relations which are always between things co- 
existent. The second class, or Relations of Suc- 
cession, is divided into two orders, according as 
the sequence is invariable or casual. The former 
is the important relation of Cause and Effect, 
which will be treated at length by and by. 

How important to Philosophy is a right notion 
of Cause and Effect, may be judged from the fact 
that this is the object of Philosophy properly so 
called, as distinguished from simple Science. 
And what wandering in the dark do we find 
among philosophers from not knowing what they 
were seeking! To trace the sequences of Cause 
and Effect is one object, but to mount up to 
General Causes or Principles is the highest scope 
of philosophy. The whole is comprised in two 
words — Causation and Generalization. 

The second order of successive Relations is that 
of casual succession, one of little importance, be- 



S6 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

cause, as the name implies, it cannot be calculated 
or foretold. 

But though not important in itself, it has never- 
theless been the occasion of most of the errors in 
philosophy as well as in daily life. As I have 
elsewhere observed, so great is the tendency to 
connect things as Cause and Effect, that with 
children, and ignorant adults, one instance of 
sequence is enough to create the belief of invaria- 
bility ; and nothing but a wider experience can 
correct this tendency. There is perhaps not a 
man, however experienced, who does not still 
make such mistakes; though certainly he will 
not believe that Tenterden Church Steeple was 
the cause of the Goodwin sands, because it was 
built just before their appearance. We must not 
confound casual succession with accident, for 
the latter implies a real sequence of Cause and 
Effect, but one which could not have been fore- 
told, owing to the great complication of causes in 
the world, and our ignorance of most of them ; 
whereas in Casual Succession there is no con- 
nection of the kind between the two events, no 
more than between Tenterden and Goodwin. 
The one simply precedes, and the other follows, 
on a single occasion, and that is all ; and ten 
thousand things, as well as the one in question, 
may have preceded the latter. How many events 



RELATION. 37 

must have immediately gone before my act of 
writing these lines on paper ! 

Besides these two classes of Relations, the 
co-existent and the successive, there seems to 
be a third class, comprising Relations, some of 
which are co-existent and others successive. This 
may be called the mixed class. To it belongs 
but one order, exceedingly comprehensive, the 
Relations of Resemblance. 

Resemblance may be felt either between things 
co-existent, as between two horses, or two sheep, 
placed side by side, or between two sequences of 
phenomena ; as when two billiard balls are each 
impelled by another; or as when two salts are 
produced, in the one case by mixing sulphuric 
acid with potash, in another muriatic acid with 
soda. Here not only the products of the chemi- 
cal action are alike in some important particulars, 
but the actions themselves are very similar. So 
we say that there is a striking resemblance be- 
tween the revolutionary changes which took place 
in England, in the seventeenth century, and those 
which occurred in France, in the eighteenth and 
nineteenth; meaning not only that the results 
were alike, but that the events succeeded each 
other in a like order. 

No Relation is more generally felt than that of 
Resemblance. Though we frequently say of two 



38 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

things, that they are not the least alike, yet this 
is only in comparison with others that are more 
like ; for, strictly speaking, almost all things have 
something in common ; some one point, at least, 
of resemblance. 

To determine important Resemblances is one 
grand object of Science. All classification is 
founded on Resemblance, and in many Sciences 
classification is everything. When we shall have 
classified all the objects of the animal, vegetable, 
and mineral kingdoms, according to their resem- 
blances, descriptive natural history will be com- 
plete. In Mental Science also classification of 
the phenomena of mind is an important part. 
But more than this, all our reasonings from ex- 
perience, all induction, as it is commonly called, 
is founded on this same relation ; for the funda- 
mental axiom of inductive reasoning is that 
nature is uniform in her operations ; that like 
causes will be followed by like effects, and that 
things which have constantly co-existed, will 
always co-exist; for instance, that a creature 
having the outward appearance of a man, will 
always have a heart, liver, lungs, &c., formed like 
other men, whom we have actually examined. 
The grand object of inquiry then, becomes, to 
detect in any new case sufficient similarity with 
an old case, that is sufficient to warrant us in in- 



RELATION. 39 

ferring similar co-existence of things, or similar 
succession of phenomena, without actual obser* 
vation. Resemblance, then, and Causation are 
Relations of the utmost importance in Science 
and Philosophy. 

It seems scardely necessary to add that the 
study of Resemblances belongs as well to the 
Poet as to the Philosopher. How much of the 
charm of the fine arts depends upon the likeness 
between their creations and those of nature! 
And are not the finest parts of poetry the 
similes ? For the sake of beauty, a simile must 
be neither very near nor very far fetched; for 
in the one case it is indifferent, in the other 
ludicrous. A simile scientifically correct would 
be about as bad in poetry as one that is absurd.^ 

" Relations of Resemblance may be considered either as a 
class distinct from those of co-existence, and those of sucession, 
or the Resemblances of co-existence may be looked upon as an 
order of the former class, and resemblances of succession as an 
order of the latter. This however would be not at all a logical 
arrangement, for then we should separate the species of the genus 
resemblance, and place them under different classes. 



40 PHIT/)60PHICAL VOCABULARY. 



POWEE, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 

Though we have made mention of Cause and 
Effect under the head of Relation, yet, as this is 
the most important of all relations, and probably 
the least understood, it seems necessary to con- 
sider it now at large under a separate head. 

Power is the word which expresses that pe- 
culiar relation which a Cause bears to its Effect, 
the nature of which we are now to investigate. 
What then is the notion which we actually have 
of Power*? 

In the first place it is evident that by Cause 
we mean something which precedes something 
else, which something else we call Effect. The 
relation between them then, or Power, is a rela* 
tion of antecedence and consequence, in other 
words, of Succession, involving the notion of 
Time ; and the order of this succession is uni- 
form, the Cause being the antecedent^ the Effect 
always the consequent. But ten thousand things 
may precede any change, only one of which we 
look upon as the Cause of that change. There- 
fore, a Cause is not a mere antecedent ; an Effect 
not a mere consequent 



POWER, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 41 

When we have determined the cause of any 
phenomenon, we believe that it will be followed 
by that efifect, not only once, not only several 
times, not only most times, but always ; and if per- 
chance we be deceived, and at any time the cause 
appear without the effect, we draw one or the 
other of the following conclusions. Either we 
were altogether wrong in the supposed cause, or 
the one now before us differs in some respect 
from that which we formerly observed ; or, 
what is nearly the same thing, there are other 
counteracting causes at work which we wot not 
of. But, however we may account for the 
failure of the effect, we never for a moment sup- 
pose that there is any want of uniformity in 
Nature, or that causes really alike in all respects 
will not always be followed by like Effects. A 
man who should hazard such an opinion would 
be considered out of his mind. So far then we 
tread upon indisputable ground; and we can 
pronounce, without doubt, that Power involves 
the notion of Invariable Antecedence and In- 
variable Consequence. 

But is this the whole of the Relation, as 
some philosophers assert, particularly Thomas 
Brown ? That acute metaphysician, treading 
in the steps of Hume, wrote a book to prove 
that all we know, or ever can know, of Cause 

G 



42 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULABT. 

and Effect, is, that the one invariably precedes, 
the other invariably follows. Events, as Hume 
observed, are conjoined, but as far as we can 
trace, unconnected. Nothing seems to bind 
them together. They succeed each other, some 
invariably, others casually, but we never can 
say why any order prevails, why fire warms 
or cold freezes, why acids and alkalis combine 
to form salts. Pursue your investigation as far 
as you can, says Brown, try and find out some 
connection between any cause and its effect, 
and if you seem to succeed, what will you have 
learnt ? Simply this : that between the two there 
is a link, (if we may so call it), formerly unknown, 
a change previously undiscovered ; so that instead 
of A followed immediately by C, we have A 
followed by B, followed by C, a sequence more 
full, but merely a sequence, and quite as incom- 
prehensible as before. The only difference is, 
that A is no longer considered the Invariable 
and Immediate Antecedent of C, but simply an 
Invariable Antecedent, while it is the Immediate 
and Invariable Antecedent of B. 

This doctrine may be true, but it must be al- 
lowed that it sounds strange in the ears of untu- 
tored men, and at first, at least, appears unsatisfac- 
tory to all. That a Cause is something more than 
an Invariable Antecedent, an Effect than an In- 



FOWEB, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 43 

variable Consequent, we cannot help believing, 
though what it can be may transcend our limited 
intelligence. But if the above be the only defi- 
nite notion of Power which we possess, we ought 
not to find fault with the doctrine because it 
openly acknowledges our ignorance. Is it how- 
ever certain that we have no other notion of 
Power ? The general sense of mankind would 
induce us to think that we have, for these who 
cannot refute the above doctrine are still unsatis- 
fied, and though silenced, are not convinced. But 
where interest or passion does not intervene, 
truth, though long undiscovered, when once 
pointed out is apt to seize upon the mind with 
the force of intuition. This is particularly the 
case with metaphysical truth, which is known to 
us ultimately by consciousness. To the mind of 
each individual must we appeal, as to the highest 
tribunal, in all questions relative to mental phi- 
losophy ; and this tribunal seems to decide that 
the above doctrine of Cause and Effect is not 
altogether satisfactory. 

This general consideration may make us 
suspect the doctrine of Brown, but, to refute 
it, some definite objection is necessary. And 
this objection has been furnished by Reid, 
who remarks that if a Cause be merely an 
Invariable Antecedent, an Effect an Invariable Con- 



44 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

sequent, then, as no two events have more con- 
stantly succeeded each other than day and night, 
night and day, it will follow that day is the 
Cause of the succeeding night, night the Cause of 
the succeeding day. Nor does it seem easy to 
answer this ohjection. It is quite conceivable 
that a common cause, or union of causes, as in 
this case the existence and fixity of the sun, com- 
bined with the rotation of the earth, may give 
rise to a series of changes, succeeding each other 
invariably, though unconnected as Cause and 
Effect The very power of conceiving such an 
occurrence proves that there is no inconsistency 
in the notion of invariable succession without 
causation, and here we produce a case where 
such a succession actually takes place. We must 
then conclude that the doctrine of Hume and 
Brown, as to Cause and EfiFect, is, to say the least, 
incomplete. That invariable antecedence belongs 
to a Cause, invariable consequence to an Effect, is 
undoubtedly true ; but it is not the whole truth. 
Mankind seem to be generally convinced that 
there is what they call a necessary connection be- 
tween Cause and Effect. But what is meant by 
this phrase ? The only sense which I can here 
attach to the word necessary is that of indispen- 
sable. When we say that the truths of Mathe- 
matics are necessary, we mean either that they 



POWER, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 45 

are self-evident, or that they follow irresistibly 
by reasoning from self-evident truths. This ne- 
cessity the mind sees intimately ; it sees that the 
truths are not contingent, not liable to change 
now or hereafter ; unchangeable even by omnipo- 
tence. The same can be said of no matters of 
fact. The world and all that it inherits may 
change in the twinkling of an eye, for aught that 
we can see to the contrary^ and, therefore, in this 
sense of necessity we can see no necessary con- 
nection between any two successive events. 
This, however, we do find out by experience, that 
in the present state of existence^ at any rate, and 
until some grand change shall ensue, certain 
events are indispensable to certain others ; in 
other words, unless the former occur, the latter 
will not follow. The one we call Cause, the other 
Effect ; and we say that the one has Power to 
produce the other, meaning that it is an indis- 
pensable condition of its existence. A Cause, 
then, is not a mere invariable antecedent, but it 
is an invariable and indispensable antecedent; 
and as the word Indispensable evidently includes 
invariability and something more, the word In- 
variable becomes unnecessary ; and we may define 
a Cause to be an Indispensable Antecedent^ an 
Effect, an Unavoidable Consequent. 

Having determined the nature of Cause and 



46 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Effect in general, that is to say the general notion 
which we have of the relation between them, it 
remains to be seen whether Causes may not be 
divided into different species. Aristotle mentions 
four kinds of Causes — the Material, the Formal, 
the Efficient, and the Final; but we need not 
long be detained with these, for most of them 
would not now be regarded as Causes at all/ 

What he calls the Material Cause, is the sub- 
stance of which a thing is made, as the material 
cause of a silver spoon, is the metal silver ; and 
if the substance be a compound one, as brass, 
then the material causes thereof are the simple 
bodies or elements, in this case copper and zinc. 
This, then, is not a cause in our sense of the 
word. Again, the Formal Cause, as the ancients 
understood it, is purely imaginary; and the 
Final Cause is properly not a cause, but an effect 
which we see, an useful effect, the foresight of 
which, as we presume, induced the Great Creator 
to provide means suitable to the end in view. 
It is only as offering a motive to the mind of the 
Deity that an end in view, an effect anticipated, 
becomes a Cause. Of the four Causes of Aristotle 

' These four Causes were very neatly expressed in Greek, by 
four prepositions. The Material Cause was the i^ oi (out of 
which) ; the Formal, the %a6 o (according to which) ; the Effi- 
cient, the vq>oi (by which); and the Final, the 8ia o (for which.) 



POWER, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 4/ 

there remains then only the Efficient which we 
should recognise as such ; the principle of motion, 
the inxlispensable antecedent of any change. 

The first and most obvious division of causes, 
is that into Immediate and Remote. Since causes 
form a lengthened chain, reaching from visible 
eflFects up to the great First Cause, it follows 
that some are nearer to the efifect, others farther 
oflf. Properly speaking there is but one immediate 
cause, and all the others are remote, though in 
different degrees. 

Often do two men differ as to the causes of 
any phenomenon, but both may be right ; for the 
cause hit upon by the one may be more remote 
than that assigned by the other, and each may 
exist in its order. Thus, while some maintain 
that value and price are regulated by the demand 
and supply, others insist that cost of production 
is the determining cause. Nor is there here any 
real opposition, for cost of production regulates 
the demand and supply, and these again regulate 
price. 

Causes are also divided into Proximate and 
Ultimate. Judging by Etymology or the deriva- 
tion of the words, we might suppose that Proxi- 
mate and Ultimate mean exactly the same thing 
as Immediate and Remote ; and such is the un- 
certainty in the use of words that we cannot 



48 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

affirm that they never are so employed; but 
generally speaking the sense is very different. 
For Immediate QXid Remote refer to the real* order 
of succession of phenomena in causation, (one 
after another), whereas Proximate and Ultimate 
relate to the order according to which we arrive 
at the knowledge of causes. Thus Proximate 
corresponds to palpable or apparent ; Ultimate, to 
hidden or real. For the real causes of change 
are not always manifest, often far otherwise, 
being enveloped, and so hidden from view, by 
masses of inert matter. As a remedy for ague 
the value of bark was known for ages, but of late 
years only has it been discovered that the whole 
virtue resides in a very small portion of the mass, 
in a substance that can be separated from the 
rest, and which is called Quinine. So the whole 
narcotic virtue of opium has been found to reside 
in Morphia^ and the poisoning property of nux 
vomica in the alkali Strychnia : and bark, opium, 
and the nux vomica, are the Proximate or pal- 
pable causes ; quinine, morphia, and strycknia, the 
Ultimate, hidden, or real causes. 

Proximate and Ultimate, then, refer not to the 
order of succession among the phenomena of 
causation, but to the order in which we discover 
them. The compound substance bark is not 
nearer in time to the effect, viz. the cure of 



POWER, CAUSE AND EFFECT. 49 

ague, than is the simpler substance quinine ; but 
the whole eflfect, as we find by experience, is 
owing to the latter, and the former deprived of 
this contributes nothing. If anything, the woody 
matter rather hinders than promotes the good 
result. Bark is indeed still a cure for ague ; but 
it is so only because it contains the alkali 
Quinine. The rest is merely the covering of the 
real cause, the garment which conceals it from 
view. 

The grand object of philosophy, mental or 
physical, is to trace ultimate causes, to ascend 
to them, as the phrase is, from the proximate and 
palpable causes which lie upon the flat before us. 
It is therefore of the utmost consequence clearly 
to understand their nature. This, it is hoped, 
will in part appear from the above remarks. The 
examples derived from chemistry are particularly 
valuable as illustrations, because the proximate 
and ultimate causes of change can there be ac- 
tually exhibited as substances. But it is not so in 
all sciences. Very frequently the ultimate causes 
of change are not substances but tendencies; 
tendencies inseparable from mind or matter, but 
not to be seen or felt, and known only from the 
result. Thus we attribute the motion of the 
earth round the sun to two Tendencies at present 
supposed ultimate, a projectile rectilinear, or tan- 



50 PHXUieOPHJCAL VOCABULARY. 

gential force, and the force of gravity. These 
tendencies being given, we can from their union 
account for the motion of the earth as their 
common result ; though the latter only is strictly 
proved, the former being only hypothetical. 

Whatever may be the point which we have 
reached in the progress of our enquiry, whether 
the causes already discovered be the most general 
and simple that can be traced by man or not, for 
the time at least they are ultimate causes ; like 
those fifty or sixty bodies which chemists call 
simple, because they have never been analyzed. 
But is it not often said that man can discover 
proximate causes only, ultimate being beyond his 
ken '? When this is asserted, it must mean that 
the Deity is not only the great first, the original 
or remote cause of the phenomena of the uni- 
verse, but also the real or ultimate cause of 
every event ; that nothing takes place, not only 
without his permission, but without his direct 
agency. 

This may be the case, and it may be that God 
is thus the one ultimate or real cause of every 
change, but the question is clearly beyond the 
sphere of human intellect ; and whatever opinion 
we may adopt on this point, we are justified in 
distinguishing between those causes which lie 
more open to view, and those more hidden ; and. 



POWEB, CAUSE ANP BFFRCT. 51 

speakiug comparatively, we may call the former 
proximate, the latter ultimate^ though these may 
not be strictly such, not ultimate even to our 
limited capabilities, but so only provisionally. 

The words Proximate and Ultimate, as here 
explained, exactly correspond in meaning with 
the use of them in analytic chemistry. What 
are called the proximate principles of any com- 
pound are those constituent parts which meet us 
first in the order of analysis, they being them- 
selves compounded of the ultimate principles or 
elements, and much more like to the compound 
than are those elements. Thus the proximate 
principles of animal substances — -of muscle, cel- 
lular tissue, serous membranes, nerves, blood, 
lymph, &c., are found to be fibrin, gelatin, gluten, 
&c., all which principles are made up chiefly, if 
not entirely, of four elements — Carbon, Oxygen, 
Hydrogen, and Nitrogen or Azote, in different 
proportions. 

Another division of Causes is that into Pri- 
mary and Secondary. As immediate and remote 
relate to the real order of succession, and proxi- 
mate and ultimate to the natural order of 
discovery, so primary and secondary refer to 
the order of importance. Since few, if any 
events, are owing to one cause alone, a dis- 
tinction is made according to the degree in 



52 PHIL06OPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

which causes are supposed to contribute to- 
wards the common result, and one is called 
Primary, while others are styled Secondary or 
Auxiliary. In this sense Gibbon professedly uses 
the term Secondary in his celebrated chapter on 
the Propagation of Christianity; though the 
writer insidiously endeavours to instil into his 
readers that his five causes were sufficient to 
account for the marvellous effect, that in short 
they were primary, not secondary causes. Since 
secondary causes are often subsequent in the 
order of time to the primary, they may be at 
once auxiliary and immediate, and the word 
secondary may be sometimes used in one sense, 
sometimes in the other ; being now opposed to 
primary or principal, now to remote or original. 
Thus, when we talk of the secondary causes of 
moral sentiment, we may mean to distinguish 
them from primary, in the sense of original, or 
in the sense of principal or chief; and as the 
same causes which are secondary in the one sense 
are so likewise in the other, neither the reader 
nor the writer may be always aware in which 
sense the word is used. The Original Causes of 
moral sentiment, which are also the most impor- 
tant^ are certain tendencies deeply and indelibly 
seated in the human mind; whereas the se- 
condary or subsequent causes, which are likewise 



POl^ER, CA.n8B AND EFFECT. 53 

of less consequence, are such fluctuating circum- 
stances as Education, Passion, Local Utility, &c. 
The word Circumstance is commonly used to ex- 
press a secondary or auxiliary cause, which, along 
with others of the same sort, is supposed, as it 
were, to stand around the primary or principal 
cause. 

What is called an Occasion is nothing but a 
secondary or auxiliary cause. Thus, I say that 
it was on occasion of my being in London that I 
went to see the British Museum ; meaning that 
this circumstance went along with the principal 
cause, which undoubtedly was my desire to see 
the curiosities therein contained. But had this 
desire been very strong, I might have gone up to 
London on purpose. So we pray against all 
" occasions of evil ;" that is, all outward circum- 
stances which may help to stir up the great source 
of mischief — our own bad propensities. 

An Opportunity is also an auxiliary cause, 
one that facilitates the acquisition of any object 
which we are supposed to have previously desired. 
The keener the desire, the quicker generally is 
the intellect in seeing opportunities, and the 
greater the readiness in seizing upon them. The 
grand art of life is that of perceiving and profiting 
by opportunities. "Ideas come again, convictions 
perpetuate themselves, opportunities never recur." 



54 PHILOflOPHICAIi VOGABULABT. 

There is another distinction which deserves to 
he mentioned ; one dwelt upon chiefly hy medical 
writers, viz., the division of causes into Predis* 
ponent and Exciting. 

Two men go out together and are exposed to 
the same weather ; with the same precautions, or 
want of precautions, both get wet to the skin, 
return home, and both immediately change, or 
not, as the case may be ; but the one catches only 
a slight cold, and the other falls ill and dies of 
consumption. Here medical men would say that 
the one had the seeds of consumption undeveloped 
in his frame, before he was exposed to the exciting 
causes of cold and wet, the other not ; or that the 
former was predisposed to that fatal malady. And 
assuredly there are great diversities of constitu- 
tion — original tendencies to different diseases in 
different persons, or we never could account for 
the diverse effects of the same outward causes. 
But those tendencies may be long hidden, or even 
may never be known, in the absence of any out- 
ward or exciting cause ; as a consumptive habit 
may never actually fall into consumption, if fatigue, 
cold, and wet, be carefully avoided. Therefore 
the division of causes into Predisposing and Ex- 
citing is not only very useful, as a guide to the 
medical practitioner, but it may lay claim to no 
small degree of philosophical accuracy. 



LAW. 55 



LAW. 

What is a Law "? 

A Law, in its most general sense, means a 
General Rule, proceeding from an intelligent being. 
Now Laws are of two sorts— Speculative and 
Practical. Speculative Laws, often called the 
Laws of Nature, are those general rules or plans 
which we suppose to have been present to the 
mind of the Deity, or great First Cause, before 
he formed the universe, and according to which 
he afterwards did form the same. To us, these 
laws are in the first instance merely an object of 
speculation ; though the knowledge of them may 
subsequently be turned to the most important 
practical purposes. To discover these laws is the 
grand object of Natural and Mental Philosophy. 

When we talk of the laws which govern the uni- 
verse, or any department of the universe, we must 
remember that though in one point of view these 
laws are causes, yet in another they are themselves 
effects, and therefore requiring explanation quite 
as much as the phenomena which they help to 
explain. Therefore these laws only remove the 
difficulty a few steps, and to a great self-existent 
cause we must have recourse at last. Laws then. 



56 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCADULARY. 

after all, are but God's deputies ; and their 
government is only delegated.* 

A PraeticarLaw, on the other hand, is a general 
rule proceeding from an intelligent being or 
beings, whereby something is commanded to be 
done, or not to be done, under the sanction of 
reward or punishment. This law may be written 
or unwritten, expressed or understood, partial or 
universal, temporary or eternal. Practical Laws 
are also divided into the Ethical and the Political. 

In an Ethical Law, or as some call it, a Natural 
Law, (because the knowledge of it is obtained by 
the use of natural, i. e. our common or ordinary 
faculties, without any peculiar study), the rule is 
supposed to proceed from all men, or what comes 
to the same thing, from God; for whatever is 
held by all men, at all times, must be derived from 
unchangeable principles of human nature, which 
we must suppose implanted in us on purpose by 
Him. The rule, then, which here is a command, 
proceeds from all men, or from God, and the 
sanction is fear of punishment, or hope of reward, 
from man or from God ; from man individually, 
not from men united in a body politic or common- 
wealth. The principal sanction of man indi- 
vidually is approbation or disapprobation, moral 
love, or moral indignation, and their consequences. 

' For a further account of Law of Nature see next article. 



LAW. 57 

These Laws may admit of some modifications, 
according to times and circumstances, but no fur- 
ther than the nature of man himself for whose use 
they are framed^ is liable to change. As compared 
with those which follow, they may therefore be 
called immutable and eternal. 

A Political law is a general rule, whereby the 
sovereign of a state or commonwealth commands or 
forbids something, under the sanction of reward or 
punishment. Laws of this sort may vary very 
widely according to the will of the sovereign, either 
in the same country at diflferent times, or in 
different countries at the same time; though it 
follows directly from what is above said, that a 
Political ought never to be contrary to an Ethical 
Law.* 

*^ The term Political, m here need, means the law of the State in 
general, and compnses, not only oonstitutional or organic law, but 
the criminal, as well as what is particularly called the civil law. 
All laws, in short, made by the governing power of a State, I call 
Political, 



58 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCiLBULART. 



LAW OF NATURE. 

EXPLANATION OF PHENOMENA. 

Few phrases are more used in Philosophy, and 
few are more imperfectly comprehended than Law 
OF Nature. This then requires a separate article. 

A Law of Nature may be defined to be a 
General Ej^ect, or Tendency to an Effect^ of which 
the Cause is unknown. 

From this it follows that a Law cannot be ex- 
plained ; it can only be stated, not accounted for. 
But this general effect or tendency must in the 
course of nature be a cause of other phenomena; 
and consequently, though itself unaccountable, it 
may serve to explain other things. 

There is then no absurdity in assigning a Law 
in explanation of any Phenomenon ; for though in 
one view it is an effect inexplicable, in another it is 
a cause. Nay, a law is the ultimate explanation 
of any phenomenon, in other words, the ultimate 
cause^ so far as we know, the most simple and 
general that can be pointed out by us; always 
excepting the first Great Cause of all, which alone 
is really ultimate. Once more, to explain a 
phenomenon is to assign the cause thereof. But 
the cause first observed may be only proximate or 



LAW OF NATURE. 59 

palpable, containing the simple and general, or real 
cause, along with other things of no moment ; and 
when we have separated these last we have detached 
the ultimate cause, which, if it be a tendency 
and not a substance, is called a law of nature. 
Therefore, in this sense of the word Law, explana- 
tion by assigning a cause, and explanation by 
pointing out a law, are not different in kind^ and 
not opposed; but explanation by cause compre- 
hends two species, explanation by proximate causes, 
and explanation by ultimate causes or laws. 

A complex effect may be explained by pointing 
out the simple or elementary causes or tendencies 
from what it results ; as the motion of the earth 
and other planets round the sun is explained on 
the supposition of a rectilinear projectile, or 
tangential force, combined with the tendency to the 
centre. We know that two such tendencies would 
produce such an effect ; and as we have proofs of 
the one, we allow the other. But the elementary 
tendencies themselves cannot be explained, they can 
only be ascertained to be real, and to be generally 
diffused ; and when a case of them occurs, as when 
a stone falls to the ground^ all we can say is, that it 
is a particular instance of a general tendency, not 
an isolated fact. Here we generalize, but we do 
not assign a cause. These tendencies, which can- 
not be determined to be the result of more general 



60 PHILOeCVHICAL VOCABULARY. 

causes, are sometimes called ultimate facts, as 
well as laws, and they are properly inexplicable^ 
i. e. they cannot be unfolded and shown to be com- 
pound results of more simple tendencies. Such 
are Cohesion, Gravity, and the three Laws of 
Motion. 

We have shown that the division of Causes into 
Immediate and Remote, differs from that into 
Proximate and Ultimate. Accordingly, there is 
another way of explaining by causes ; and instead 
of ascending in the scale of generalization from 
compound and palpable causes to simple and 
concealed, we may trace the order of the former, 
from the last effect up to the most remote cause, 
in other words, the sequence of causation. Thus, 
starting from the movement of the hands on the 
dial-plate of a watch, we may follow the series of 
motions through wheels and other mechanical con- 
trivances up to the first power, the spring. So, the 
process of digestion in the animal frame may be 
traced from the mastication of the food in the 
mouth, till it is converted into chyme and chyle, 
and finally lost in the blood. 

But, when with a wish to enlarge our knowledge, 
we enquire what is the cause of motion in all 
watches, or in all clocks, we find that, in the one 
case, the general cause is that tendency in certain 
bodies which we call elasticity, in the other gravity : 



liAW OF NATUBB. 61 

while, as to digestion and nutrition, the general 
causes of these results are, as yet, involved in much 
obscurity ; though the series of sensible changes, 
the uniform sequence of phenomena, can be traced 
throughout. 

These different modes of explanation agree in 
this, that they assign a cause of one sort or another. 
But the word explanation is sometimes used when 
no cause at all is pointed out. It is so used when 
we profess to account for some effect by means of a 
general law of which it is merely a particular 
instance ; as when we think to explain the fall of a 
stone, by saying that it is owing to gravity. This 
is a case of gravity certainly; and if so, it cannot 
at the same time be the effect thereof. But this 
sense of the word explanation is very common in 
works of philosophy, though it cannot he considered 
a proper one, for it differs essentially from the other, 
and so leads to much misconception. No doubt, 
even in this way of explaining, a great truth may be 
enounced ; for instance, that the fall of an apple from 
a tree is an effect not singular in nature, but a 
particular case of a tendency common to all matter. 
This was the grand generalization of Newton. To 
explain the tendency itself, he supposed the 
existence of a fluid called ether; but this conjecture 
has met with little favour,' and gravity is still an 

^ The hypothesis of the existence of elher has been revived of 



62 PmLOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

ultimate and unaccountable fact. It is not however 
a barren fact ; for though itself an effect inexplicable, 
it is also a mighty cause, which helps to account 
for the more complicated phenomena of the universe, 
for the movements of a common clock, as well as 
the revolutions of Jupiter and Uranus. 

Though Newton failed in discovering the whole 
cause of the grand tendency, gravitation, yet he 
may be considered as having made some approxima- 
tion towards it, when he determined the circum- 
stances which regulate the force of the tendency ; 
for he proved that the force varies directly as the 
quantity of matter, and inversely as the squares of 
the distances. Therefore the quantity of matter and 
the distance being given, the resulting force may be 
determined. So far the cause of gravity is known ; 
and this knowledge may lead to the most important 
discoveries. This it was which led Adams and Le 
Verrier to the grand discovery of the new planet. 
It was from the perturbations of Uranus that those 
profound inquirers not only suspected the existence 
of a planet beyond, but even assigned its position, 
magnitude, and distance from the sun, before it was 
seen by mortal eye. For those perturbations im- 
plied a disturbing force, and this force implied as 
the cause a certain quantity of matter at a certain 

late years in order to explain light, which upon this supposition 
consists in Vibrations of Ether. 



LAW OF NATURE. 63 

distance, in other words, a planet of a determined 
mass, removed from Uranus by a determined space. 

The law of the proportions in which bodies com- 
bine, or, as it is now usually called by chemists, 
the Atomic Theory, is another grand instance of a 
general effect, or tendency to an efifect, of which the 
cause is unknown; though an attempt has been 
made to account for that effect also by means of an 
hypothesis. To have discovered that when one 
body enters into combination with another in 
different proportions, the greater proportions are 
always exact multiples of the smallest, was certainly 
a grand step in the science of chemistry ; but this 
is only a general effect ; to explain which, that is 
to assign a cause for it, Dalton hit upon atoms, as 
Newton imagined ether to account for gravitation. 

Before concluding this article, we may remark 
that the phrase. Law of Nature, is often employed 
in a more extensive sense than the one here given, 
being used to signify any general fact, any general 
uniformity of succession, whether the cause be 
stated or not ; or even, as it appears, any uniformity 
of co-existence. Thus the laws, as they are called, 
of Kepler, tell us nothing concerning causes ; they 
merely state some general facts with respect to the 
motions of the planets ; for instance, that they move 
in elliptical orbits, without pretending to explain 
them. These and others similar are sometimes 



64 PHILOaOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

called Empirical Laws/ In tiiiis sense the perpetual 
recurrence of day and night, of night and day, may 
be called a law of nature. 

Lastly, were we to say that it is a law of nature 
that all warm blooded animals have internal lungs, 
we should be thought to use no unwarrantable lan- 
guage; though here we state mere uniformity of 
co-existence, without any reference to motion or 
change, much less to causation. 

It is necessary, therefore, to bear in mind that 
Law^ Law of Phenomena^ and even Law of Nature^ 
are frequently used to signify any uniformity, 
whether of succession or of co-existence, and whether 
a cause be apparent or not. 

And we must remember that the word explanation 
is not always used in its proper sense of assigning 
a cause, but often where there is generalization only, 
where a fact is classed as a particular instance of 
one more general, or of a Law in its widest sense. 
Thus, when Kelper deduced from the observed 
positions of the planets, that they move in elliptical 
orbits, he mi^t be said to explain those positions ; 
though the explanation amounted simply to this, 
that the observed positions were particular points of 
the general figure ellipse, which embraced them all. 

' By Dr. Whewell they are called Laws of Phenomenay and 
as such, are distinguished from the Causes of Phenomena. — See 
*' Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences/* Book xi. chap. 7. 



PBINCIPLE. 65 



PRINCIPLE. 

What are we to understand by that word of so 
frequent occurrence, Principle? 

One meaning of principle certainly is a General 
or Ultimate Catise^ as when we talk of the principle 
of heat, of magnetism, of electricity, meaning thereby 
the unknown cause of certain well-known phe- 
nomena, such as expansion, a peculiar sensation, 
the attraction of iron, a violent shock to the frame, 
&c. So we art wont to talk of the principle of life, 
the thinking principle, &c. 

In chemistry, the word principle is sometimes 
used in its proper signification of general or ultimate 
cause, as when we speak of Tannin or the tanning 
principle; morphia or the narcotic principle; 
quinine or the anti-febrile principle. In these cases 
we can actually produce the cause as a substance, 
and operate therewith. 

But in chemistry, the word principle is more fre- 
quently used in another sense, as when we mention 
the proximate principles of animal and vegetable 
fiubstances,'^such as gluten, gelatin, albumen, &c. 
Here the word Principle means constituent part or 
ingredient J that which serves to make up the more 
compound substances, muscle, cellular tissue, 

K 



66 PHILOSOPHICAL TOCABULARY. 

and the rest. Constituent parts or ingredients, 
when we can analyze them no further, are called 
ultimate principles or elements, as the metals, 
oxygen, hydrogen, and chlorine gases. 

Though these two senses of the word Principle 
are not the same, yet it is evident that the same sub- 
stance may unite the two characteristics, that it may 
be at once a cause and a constituent part. Thus 
morphia is a constituent part of opium, and likewise 
the cause of its narcotic efiFects. So with quinine, 
strychnia, &c ., which are chemical ingredients of 
bark, and nux vomica, and also the sources of their 
medical virtues. 

In pure metaphysics generally, and in moral and 
political sciences very frequently, the word Principle 
is used in its proper, primary, or original sense. 
Thus, when Montesquieu maintains that virtue is 
the principle of democracies, moderation of aris- 
tocracies, honour of monarchies, he means that such 
are the causes which preserve each of these sorts of 
government, or, which are essential to their pros- 
perity and continuance. So when we talk of liberty, 
activity, variety, and contrast, as principles of human 
happiness, we mean that they are general causes of 
the same. In a like sense we say that division of 
labour is a principle favourable to the increase of 
wealth. The discovery of such principles is the 
highest object of philosophy. 



PRINCIPLB. 67 

But in religion, morals, and politics, principles 
are sometimes distinguished into speculative and 
practical; the former relating to the existence of 
things as they are, the other to things as they may 
be, or ought to be. When we say that moral senti- 
ment springs from sympathy and reason, we state a 
speculative principle, but when we affirm that 
moral sentiment ought to be regulated by views of 
far-sighted and comprehensive utility, we lay down 
a practical principle, as it is often called, or rule of 
action. 

In this case, the rule is a moral one, that is, it 
tends to regulate the emotions so as to produce 
happiness : but there may also be rules for directing 
the understanding, or logical rules. What is 
essential to a rule is, that it point out something 
whereby practice may be improved ; meaning by 
practice, not merely outward actions, but also the 
play of emotions, and likewise the exercise of the 
intellect, 

A rule then acts, or is intended to act, either on 
the understanding or the emotions, pr rather on the 
understanding always in the first instance, and then, 
if it be a moral rule, on the emotions. 

In this sense. Principle is not synonymous with 
General Cause, but with general reason. And as 
all rules are stated in the form of general pro- 
positions, a practical principle or rule may be 
defined to be — 



68 [ ^ PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 



fc 



A general proposition^ intended to direct the 
understanding J or the emotions^ or hath. 

In this sense, we talk of a man of liberal prin- 
ciples, or of religious principles, meaning that the 
rules which direct his understanding, his emotions, 
and probably his actions, are of the kind designated 
by these epithets. 

Sometimes any general proposition, supposed to 
be pregnant with consequences, is called a Principle. 
Thus Locke begins his essay with an account of 
what he calls speculative principles, such as " it is 
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be ;" 
but the proper name is Axiom. In a like sense, the 
major premiss of a syllogism, according to Arch- 
bishop Whately, is sometimes called the principled 

This meaning of the word as well as the pre- 
ceding, seem to have arisen from a supposed 
analogy between the relation of a general cause to 
its particular eflfects, and that of a general proposi- 
tion to the particular conclusions that may be drawn 
from it. But these are very difiFerent relations ; and 
the use of the same word to express both is apt to 
lead to great confusion. 

From the above detail, it appears that the word 
Principle may mean either an ultimate cause, or a 

^ Elements of Logic, Book i. Sec. 2. But the able Reviewer 
of Whately's Logic, Edinburgh Review, No. cxv., says, that the 
major premiss is often called the Proposition, never the Principle. 



PRINCIPLE* 69 

constituent part, whether proximate or ultimate, of 
any compound, that which helps to make it up ; or a 
rule to direct us ; or even a general proposition of 
any kind, from which consequences logically flow. 
In this latter sense, we talk of the principles of a 
science, as the principles of morals, of political 
economy, &c. ; meaning the most important, the 
fundamental propositions, from which the rest may 
be deduced. Though it is vain to suppose that we 
can accurately limit the sense of words in daily use, 
yet in philosophy we may be more precise, and 
ought to be so, for without precision of language 
there is no science. I would therefore exclude 
principle from a philosophical vocabulary, in the 
sense either of rule, or axiom, or general proposition 
of any kind, from which particular consequences 
flow. 

Omitting, for the present at least, these significa- 
tions as improper, we shall then find that the term 
Principle, besides the notion of generality, always 
has a reference to origin, and hence implies priority; 
for though we certainly cannot prove that the 
elements of any compound existed before the com- 
pound, yet we suppose so, and having first the 
elements, we can in many cases unite them so as 
afterwards to obtain a new product ; as when from 
copper and zinc we obtain a new substance, brass. 
Where then Principle does not mean cause, in the 



70 PHIL080PHICAI* TOCABULABT. 

proper sense of the word, or the indispensable 
antecedent of some change, it at least means that 
which is essential to the being of any thing, that 
which is supposed to have preceded Uie existence of 
something else, and without which the latter could 
never have been. It is on account of this supposed 
priority, that the term Principle is applied to the 
elements of bodies, as well as to the causes of 
manifest changes in matter or in mind. This notion 
of priority then belongs essentially to Principle. The 
two notions then essential to Principle, are generality 
and priority ; and accordingly it may be defined to 
be that from which many particular things originate^ 
or at least are supposed to originate ; that without 
the prior eanstence of which many particular things 
could not he. 

In this sense, Principle comprehends two species. 

Active Principle or Cause, and Constituent 
Principle. 

Now were we to allow the word Principle in the 
sense of general proposition leading to particular 
conclusions, what analogy could we find between this 
and the other signification just given ? Generality, 
no doubt, belongs to both, and even priority, 
in a certain sense^ inasmuch as a general proposition 
is a premiss from which conclusions follow. But it 
is evident that this is a very diflFerent sort of priority 
from the real priority of a cause to its effect ; it is 



FRINCIPLB. 7 1 

in technical language, a Subjective, not an Objective 
priority; or, in plain words, it is a priority in reference 
to our view of it, while the other is a real priority 
in the phenomena themselves. We must first see 
the general proposition, before we can draw the 
inference, and in that sense it is prior, and in no 
other. 

This distinction must be kept in mind, in case 
we persist in using the word principle to signify a 
general premiss. If that sense be retained, though 
generality and even priority in a certain sense may 
still be the characteristics of a principle; yet 
we must draw a line between the genera, which 
will be two in number ; namely, 

I. A general and ultimate cause, from which 
many effects follow; or else, an elementary body 
from which compounds result. 

II. A general proposition from which, as 
premiss, particular conclusions follow. 

The first is either a purely metaphysical or a 
physical Principle, as the case may be ; the latter is 
a logical Principle. 

Lastly. A Principle, whether metaphysical or 
physical, comprehends, as we have seen, two species : 

1. Active Principle or Cause. 

2. Constituent Principle: while a logical 
Principle is either speculative or practical, otherwise 
called rule, according to the division of Locke. 



72 PHIIX)flOPHiCAI« TOCABULART. 

Those Principles or general propositions which ex- 
pressly direct our tiioughts, emotions, and actions, are 
called practical ; while those tiiat do not are specu- 
lative : in other words, speculative principles relate 
to the existence of things as they are, practical, to 
things as they may be or ought to be ; as before 
illustrated by the case of speculative and practical 
principles of morals. 



A REASON. 73 



A REASON. 

What is called a Reason is a cause of a pecu- 
liar sort, a cause suited to act on the understand- 
ing, so as to produce conviction, or a lower degree 
of belief. The question, why do I approve of 
such an action? may mean either what is the 
cause that actually rouses my sentiment of appro- 
bation, or else, what is the reason (or cause) 
which on reflection fixes my conviction of the 
worthiness of the actor, and hence tends to rouse 
emotion in his favour ? • It certainly may happen 
that these two causes coincide, but they also may 
differ. 

Why did Caesar overthrow the constitution of 
his country? Through ambition or desire of 
power. Why was Tiberius a tyrant ? or why do 
you call him a tyrant ? Because he perpetrated 
arbitrary and cruel acts. The former is evidently 
a cause, usually so called ; the other a reason, or 
a cause of my opinion. The one sort of causes 
may be called physical, or metaphysical, as the 
case may be ; the other logical, being addressed 
solely to the understanding. Another classifica- 
tion would be to divide causes into the physical, 
and the mental or metaphysical ; and then to sub- 

L 



74 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

divide the latter into pure metaphysical and 
logical causes, otherwise called Reasons. But it 
is more agreeable to the real distinctions of things, 
to divide causes into causes proper, and reasons, 
or logical causes ; the former being subdivided 
into the physical and the mental or metaphysical. 

Sometimes, however, a reason means the final 
cause, or purpose. Why, or what is the reason 
that the eye has a lens, means this. But final 
causes, as we have seen, are, in reality, effects ; 
and they are called causes only because the fore- 
sight of such effects is supposed to have created 
a motive in the mind of the Deity to provide 
means adapted to the end in view. Therefore 
final causes, if they be entitled to be called causes 
at all, are of the nature of reasons ; they are the 
supposed reasons of the Deity for such and such 
creations. 

Having determined that a Reason generally 
means that which acts on the understanding, and 
produces belief, it is easy to see that this, when 
expressed in words, must be a proposition ; for 
propositions alone are addressed to the intellectual 
faculties. And as those are supposed to influence 
the understanding, therefore they partake of the 
nature of causes. But they must be carefully dis- 
tinguished from causes physical, as well as from 
causes purely metaphysical. Now a proposition 



A REASON. 75 

from which we draw an inference, is called, in 
logical language, a premiss ; and hence we see 
that a reason expressed in words, and a premiss, 
are the same. 

Were we to adopt that distinction before 
pointed out, between the objective and the sub-- 
jective, then causes, properly so called, would be 
objective, and reasons subjective ; for the former 
relate to the being of things in themselves^ the 
latter to our way of knowing them. In short, a 
cause physical, or one purely metaphysical, is the 
indispensable antecedent of any event; a cause 
logical, or reason, is the indispensable antecedent 
of our belief of that event. 

Though the above be, as we conceive, the 
proper use of the word Reason, yet we cannot 
assert that it is the only one ; for reason is often 
put for cause physical or purely metaphysical. 
Thus one might ask, without any flagrant de- 
parture from the common use of words, what is 
the reason that Sirius twinkles and Jupiter not 9 
meaning, what is the physical cause ? But it is 
vain to attempt to tie down the common use of 
words, all we can hope to do is to fix their 
philosophical sense, and to shew that a certain 
analogy runs through all the senses, though it 
may be far-fetched. Thus, in the present instance, 
we have shewn that a reason, after all, is a cause 
of a peculiar sort. 



76 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 

Science diflFers from other knowledge, in this, 
that it is the knowledge of general jacts^ i. e. facts 
common to many individual existences. Civil 
history, and geography, so far as mere topography, 
are not sciences, because the knowledge they give 
is particular; the history of one kingdom not 
being the history of another ; the geography of 
this country not being the geography of that. 
The history of Rome is not the same as that of 
Greece ; nor the geography of England as that of 
Italy. This is the reason why civil history and 
geography are so lengthy. A man may read his- 
tory all his life, and still have very much to learn. 
No doubt, sciences, such as physical geography in 
its general bearings, and politics, may be founded 
on these, but in themselves they are not sciences. 

Natural history, however, is science, because 
the facts of which it treats are general, or com- 
mon to innumerable particular existences. When 
we describe and class a horse, or an elephant, we 
describe and class all horses, or all elephants." 

^ Hence we see the great imperfection of Bacon's classification 
in this particular ; for he considers natural history as no science 
at all, as requiring only an effort of memory, and he arranges it 
along with civil history as a species of the same genus. The 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 77 

Natural history, in all its branches is principally 
a science of description and classification ; and 
therefore it does not come up to the dignity of 
philosophy. For all science is not entitled to the 
name of philosophy, though all philosophy be 
science. 

I. What then, are the peculiar objects of 
philosophical enquiry ? 

In order to answer this important and difficult 
question, let us consider that everything in nature 
may be regarded in two points of view ; as exist- 
ing with or without reference to what went before 
or what will come after ; that is, with or without 
reference to time. In the one case, the objects 
of inquiry are considered as co-existing, in the 
other as successive ; there we wish to know them 
as they are at the present moment, without 
change; here, as preceded or followed by other 
phenomena. 

Agreeably to this well marked distinction, and 
according to what was said above, that science 
treats of general truths, we find that the object of 
all science is two-fold, viz: — 

To discover uniformities of co-existence and 
uniformities of succession in nature* 

common use of language seems to have led him into this mistake. 
There may be some analogy between civil and natural history, 
according to which they have, in ordinary language, been classed 
together, but this analogy is not sufficient for an exact classification. 



78 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Commencing 'with uniformities of co-existence, 
or in other words, the constitution of nature, we 
shall find that these uniformities are of two sorts, 
the palpable or apparent, and the latent or hidden. 
The former we may discover by our senses, with 
or without artificial assistance, including proper 
instruments, while the latter can be ascertained 
only by reflection, or by a peculiar agency called 
chemical, which operates upon the insensible 
particles of matter. Thus the difiierent tissues 
and the different organs of a horse or a dog can 
be separated by anatomical skill, and seen by 
anybody, as may the parts of a rose or a tulip ; 
but the intimate composition of these parts and 
organs can be detected only by a power which 
shall resolve them into their elements. Now, 
though it is the object of science in general to 
trace both these sorts of co-existence, yet we 
conceive that to philosophy alone, properly so 
called, it appertains to determine the intimate 
composition of things. But natural history treats 
of palpable co-existence alone, and therefore, so 
far at least as co-existence is concerned, it is a 
branch of science, but not of philosophy. To 
philosophy, then, belongs the knowledge of the 
intimate composition of things. 

But things are of two grand sorts, mental and 
bodily, or spiritual and material. Therefore one 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. J9 

grand object of philosophy is the discovery, by 
analysis, of the intimate composition of things 
existing, whether bodies or mental phenomena." 

The sciences employed upon this object are 
pure mental science, or metaphysics, and chemis- 
try ; the one having reference to mind, the other 
to bodies or material substances. Thus, we find 
out by chemistry that the air we breathe is com- 
pounded of three elements, oxygen gas, nitrogen 
or azote, and a very small quantity of carbonic acid 
gas : while by metaphysical analysis we discover 
that love, and some other passions, are made up 
of various elementary feelings. 

II. The next grand object of science is to 
determine uniformities of succession, or in other 
words, the course of nature. Now, in treating of 
cause and effect, we remarked that there are some 
uniformities of succession in which the events are 
connected together as cause and effect, and others 
in which they are not ; and we instanced the suc- 
cession of day and night, night and day, as one 
quite uniform, but not a case of causation. Many 
other cases are there where the successive changes 
may depend in some degree one upon another, as 
cause and effect, though we know not in what 
degree ; but the probability is, that like the suc- 

" So far as bodies are concerned, this is called by Bacon the 
Latens Schematismus. 



80 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

cession of day and night, they depend chiefly upon 
one or two general causes, modified by circum- 
stances, that is, by auxiliary or secondary causes, 
such as the palpable changes immediately preced- 
ing. Thus, the growth of man from infancy to 
childhood, from childhood to youth, from youth 
to manhood, is a long series of changes, uniform 
in all ; of changes every one of which may be 
indispensable to the next following, but still 
contributing to it only in a small degree; the 
principal cause of growth being hid far from 
our view. In tracing the changes that go on 
during digestion^ we follow the food from the 
mouth to the stomach, where it meets with the 
gastric juice, and is changed into Chyme; from the 
stomach to the smaller bowels, where it meets 
with the bile and the pancreatic juice, and be- 
comes Chyle; from the bowels to the lacteal 
vessels, by which it communicates with the 
blood, when digestion is completed. The whole 
of these changes constitutes the process of diges- 
tion. So, the discovery of Harvey consisted in 
tracing the blood from the left side of the heart, 
into the great vessel, the aorta ; from the aorta 
by perpetual subdivision into innumerable small 
arteries ; from these back again by veins, at first 
numberless and minute, but at last all uniting 
into one, and pouring their contents into the 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 81 

right side of the heart From this right side, 
Harvey again traced the blood, issuing in one 
great trunk, to be subdivided in the lungs into 
ten thousand branches, which afterwards re-unite 
and discharge the fluid by one vessel into the 
left side of the heart. Thus is the circulation 
completed. In these and similar instances, it 
will be observed that there is no attempt to trace 
general causes ; there is only a history of successive 
phenomena. 

Let us now take an instance from chemistry. 
When we are introduced for the first time into a 
chemist's laboratory, we are surprised at the various 
changes that ensue on his mixing different sub- 
stances together, but we feel to have no knowledge 
until he has explained to us the latent process. He 
shows us a fluid now clear as water, into which he 
pours another fluid equally clear ; when suddenly 
an inward commotion is perceived ; bubbles of gas 
rise to the surface, and at last there is found at the 
bottom of the glass a solid substance. Then he 
informs us that the original liquid contained, in 
solution, a salt, compounded of carbonic acid and an 
earth or oxide ; that the other liquid was a stronger 
acid, which combined with the earth or oxide, and 
forming an insoluble compound, fell to the bottom ; 
while the carbonic acid, being set free, ascended 
through the liquid and mixed with the atmosphere. 

M 



82 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Now we feel to know something, for the latent 
process, or sequence of phenomena, has been laid 
open to us. Still, in all this there is no attempt 
to trace general causes. No doubt, in knowing 
this sequence we do know something of causa- 
tion, inasmuch as we know some change indis- 
pensable to the next following ; but this change 
is but the proximate, not the ultimate or general 
cause. 

Now, the knowledge of the uniform sequences 
of phenomena is an important part of science, 
whether these be sequences of causation or not. 
Sometimes, as in the case of the succession of 
day and night, there is no relation of power be- 
tween the two successive events ; at other times 
there may be some relation, the preceding change 
being a secondary or a proximate cause of the 
following change ; but be that as it may, the 
knowledge of uniform sequence is interesting 
and important, though it be not the highest 
object of science. The sciences which treat of 
these sequences are natural history and concrete 
chemistry, so far as they treat of sequence at all ; 
for, as we have seen, another object of these 
sciences is to trace the constitution of bodies, 
apparent and latent. Natural history, then, treats 
of the apparent or sensible constitution or struc- 
ture of bodies, as well as of the sensible pro- 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 83 

cesses or changes which they undergo, without 
tracing these to general causes; while concrete 
chemistry investigates the hidden or insensible 
constitution of bodies, and likewise the latent 
processes which they go through when dififerent 
substances are brought into contact. Thus, 
natural history consists of two parts, one of 
which describes the sensible constitution or struc- 
ture of bodies, and arranges them accordingly 
into classes, orders, genera, and species; while 
the other traces the sensible changes which they 
undergo, and, at most, the proximate causes of 
those changes. On natural history, as its foun* 
dation, arises the philosophy of natural history, 
which attempts to trace general causes. 

The philosophy of zoology is commonly called 
physiology ; of botany, physiological botany ; of 
mineralogy, and physical geography, of fossil 
zoology and fossil botany, geology is the philo- 
sophy ; of descriptive astronomy, physical 
astronomy. 

The differences in the outward form and 
colour of animals are of much less importance 
than differences in their inward structure ; 
and they are also more variable in the same 
species. But the former are visible to all, and 
are therefore remarked ; while the latter can be 
known only by dissection and patient examina- 
tion. Often, with a striking difference in outward 



84 FHILOSOPmCAL VOCABULARY. 

appearances, we can connect no sensible differ- 
ences in the inward structure. How different in 
appearance is a pug dog from a Newfoundland, 
a Shetland pony from a race horse ; much more 
a horse from an ass, a sheep from a goat ; but we 
can trace no difference in anatomy. There is 
then a loose distinction in descriptive zoology be- 
tween the strict and the popular; the former 
treating of the sensible though inward structure 
of animals, and of the sensible though inward 
changes which they undergo; while the latter 
dwells chiefly upon their outward form and colour, 
their movements, their habits of life, their rela- 
tions with other animals, &c. Thus, the Regne 
Animal of Cuvier contains only a short charac- 
teristic description of each animal, founded on its 
anatomical structure, and sufficient to distinguish 
it from all other species ; while the great work 
of Buffon is an amusing literary production, em- 
bracing all that he knew about animals, their 
modes of life, instincts, and dispositions. Such, 
also, is Goldsmith's Animated Nature. Works of 
this kind, though not very exact, may still be 
called works of science, inasmuch as they treat of 
general facts— facts common to all species, or 
at least to the greater number ; though they have 
no pretension to the name of philosophy; for 
they investigate neither the concealed elements, 
nor the hidden causes of things. 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 85 

Here it may not be out of place to consider 
from what analogy, civil and natural history have 
been classed together as species of the same 
genus, not only in common language, bdt even in 
the arrangement of Bacon. 

Simple civil history, or annals, consist of a 
narrative or relation of particular facts, either 
successive in the same place, or contemporaneous 
in different places, with as little reference to 
causes as may be ; for it is scarcely possible to 
relate events without some suggestion concerning 
their causes— their palpable or proximate causes 
at least. The tracing of the hidden or ultimate 
causes of events belongs to the philosophy of 
history. 

Natural history, on the other hand, relates 
general facts, facts common to whole classes, 
orders, genera, or species at the lowest; facts 
either simultaneous, as the parts of an animal or 
a plant shown by dissection, or else successive, as 
the circulation of the blood and the process of 
digestion. The knowledge of simultaneous facts 
is one of position only, not of causation at all; 
and even the knowledge of an uniform sequence 
may give us little insight into causes, at least into 
general causes. These last are the object of the 
philosophy of natural history, of physiology, 
geology, and physical astronomy. Such is the 



86 PHIIX)60PHICAL VOCABULARY. 

analogy between civil and natural history, and 
such the diflference. Both, when properly called 
history, relate facts, simultaneous or successive, 
as simply as possible, without tracing hidden 
causes ; but the facts in the one case are par- 
ticular, in the other general. Therefore, the one 
is science, the other not. Let us take two in- 
stances to illustrate the above distinctions, the 
one from civil, the other from natural history. 
No historian, no mere annalist, can relate the 
events which preceded the great American war 
without mentioning the stamp act and the duty 
on tea, as causes of the outbreak. These are 
causes which strike every one, even the least 
clear-sighted ; they are then palpable or proximate. 
But the philosophic historian will stop his narra- 
tive for a moment to inquire into the more hidden 
causes of the war, the causes which predisposed 
the American mind to so decided a step ; and this 
he will probably determine to be the yearning of 
a people, now no longer in infancy, for indepen- 
dence and political importance. This, then, was 
the ultimate cause, and it is also a general one, 
not confined to this particular case, but operating 
among different nations at different times. 

Again, in tracing the process of digestion, it 
is easy to see that the teeth, the saliva, the gastric 
juice, the mascular motion of the stomach, the 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 87 

bile, and the pancreatic juice, all produce certain 
changes in the food^ changes evident to the senses, 
and universally attributed to the above as causes, 
to a certain extent at least ; for without them the 
same changes would not ensue; but we cannot 
doubt that there are more hidden causes at work, 
upon which the vitality of all these agents, and 
the peculiar eflfects of each depend. The former 
causes are palpable or proximate, and a subject 
merely for history ; the latter, hidden or ultimate, 
and they belong to the philosophy of the science, 
that is, to physiology. 

Here it must be observed, however, that as 
classes nearly related are apt to run one into 
another, so, simple or descriptive natural history 
of animals for instance, and physiology, cannot 
always be clearly distinguished. So far as natural 
history treats of structure only, of what is sim- 
ultaneous and not successive, it is quite distinct 
from the philosophy of natural history, which 
investigates general causes. But when natural 
history relates uniform sequences of phenomena, 
it cannot always avoid mentioning causes of some 
sort; and here, therefore, it will sometimes be 
confounded with philosophy. Uniform sequences 
then are the ground where descriptive natural 
history and philosophy meet. The more apparent 
sequences would by all be attributed to the for- 



88 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

mer, such as the outward changes which animals 
undergo from their birth to maturity, from ma- 
turity to old age ; their different movements, their 
modes of life, and their relations to each other ; 
but the inward and more concealed changes, such 
as take place in digestion, may be said to belong 
to physiology. Indeed, they generally are so 
considered, though when related as known facts 
without any theory, without reference to general 
causes, they belong more properly to history. 

Physiology, then, as generally understood, 
comprehends more than what can well be called 
philosophy. It is the science of function, as 
opposed to structure, and treats of the actions or 
uses of all the organs of the body, from the most 
apparent to the most concealed, from the con- 
traction of the muscles^ to the very obscure 
agency of the brain, nerves, and ganglia. It 
treats of causes of all kinds operating within the 
frame, whether they be palpable and proximate, 
such as the saliva which softens the food, the 
gastric juice which dissolves it, the bile which 
changes it still more, the synovia which moistens 
the joints, &c. &c. ; or whether they be hidden 
and ultimate, such as the general causes of the 
heat of the body, of nutrition, motion, and sen- 
sation. These last form certainly one of the most 
difficult subjects for human inquiry. 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 89 

The highest, that is, the most important and 
the most difficult object of science, is the dis- 
covery of hidden^ ultimate, or general causes, for 
all these words apply to the same thing ; and to 
the search after such causes, the name of Phi- 
losophy has always been given. These causes 
never present themselves open and naked before 
us ; they are always surrounded, as it were, by a 
thick veil, which hides them from our eyes. To 
pierce this veil, to tear asunder this covering, is 
then our grand object, and our grand difficulty. 

The proper name for these causes, as we have 
seen, is principle^ or active principle, to distinguish 
them from the hidden elements of things, con- 
sidered merely as component parts, to which we 
have given the name of constituent principle* The 
knowledge of principles, then, in both these 
senses, is the object of Philosophy as distinguished 
from other Science. We have already illustrated 
the meaning of principle, by reference to quinine, 
morphia, and strychnia, which are, at one and 
the same time, component parts of bark, opium, 
and nux vomica, and the real or hidden causes 
of their medicinal effects. We may now also 
mention bitter almonds and bay leaves, the 
poisonous influence of which depends upon a 
minute quantity of prussic acid present in those 
substances. No science affords us illustrations 

N 



90 PHIUMOPHICAL VOCABDLABT. 

better adapted for our present purpose than that 
of chemistry. Chemical science is generally 
divided into two parts ; the first treating of aU 
the particular substances in Nature, their intimate 
composition, and the hidden changes which they 
undei^o when brought into contact with each 
other, in other words, the kUentes schematiswiiy 
and the latentes processus; the second, investi- 
gating the effects of certain general principles 
or causes, widely diffused throughout nature, 
such as caloric and electricity. These principles 
are known from their effects, but we cannot 
arrest and examine them by themselves ; and it 
is even disputed whether caloric be a peculiar 
matter, or merely a modification of ordinary 
matter. 

Some of the greatest discoveries consist not 
in the detection of any new principle, but in 
generalising and diminishing the number of 
principles or causes already known, or rather in- 
ferred ; for often from their effects alone we know 
them. When Franklin drew down lightning from 
the clouds, he did not discover the existence of 
any new principle ; he proved that the phenomena 
of lightning and those of electricity excited by 
our machines, depend upon one and the same 
cause; yet this is looked upon as one of the 
greatest discoveries of modern times. So, should 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 91 

philosophers succeed in establishing the identity 
of the principle of electricity and that of mag- 
netism, this also would be a great discovery. 

From these examples, drawn from the material 
world, we may judge what is meant by general 
causes or principles in the world of mind. Since 
tiie beginning of authentic history, we every- 
where hear of the poverty of the mass of the 
people. The prophecy, **the poor shall never 
cease out of the land," has amply been fulfilled. 
Poverty has existed, more or less, not only in 
cold climates, but in the warmest and most 
genial ; not only in barren countries, but in the 
most fertile ; not only under despotic sway, but 
under free and constitutional governments; not 
only among barbarous nations, ignorant of the 
arts of life, but among the most polished and 
civilized, well acquainted with implements and 
machinery to facilitate the production of wealth ; 
finally, not only among indolent people, but even 
among the mrat industrious. Poverty is known 
among the hard-working, population of Man- 
chester, as well as among the wild inhabitants of 
Connemara. These facts had been present to 
man for a long series of ages ; and though some 
may have guiessed the real cause of the mischief, 
it was reserved for Malthus to prove, that the 
principle of population, that is, the tendency of 



92 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

population to increase faster than subsistence, is 
the grand general cause of the poverty and 
misery of the people. Surely such a man ought 
to be considered as great a benefactor to man- 
kind as the most sublime mathematician and 
astronomer that ever lived. 

Though this principle is not an ultimate one, 
for it can be traced to more general principles ; 
yet it is not the less valuable on that account, 
and it forms a good illustration of the remark of 
Bacon, that principia media are often more fruit- 
ful than principia generalissima. 

The ultimate object of philosophy is the dis- 
covery of the general laws of nature ; that is, as we 
formerly explained, of general effects, or tenden- 
cies to effects, which, as such, cannot be traced to 
any cause, being themselves the most general 
causes, that we know, of the other and more com- 
plicated phenomena of the universe. Such are 
gravitation, cohesion, and the three laws of mo- 
tion. All these are inexplicable, at least for the 
present, that is, we know not their causes, but 
they are themselves causes acting universally. 
Thus, at length, after all our labour, we arrive at 
facts which we cannot explain, except upon a 
supposition of a self-existent, first cause. It is 
like the world supported on a tortoise, the 
tortoise on an elephant, the elephant on a whale ; 



SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY. 93 

but what supports the whale? There we are 
stopped short. We are as far from a satisfactory 
explanation as ever. 

Taking this into consideration, what shall we 
think of the wisdom of those philosophers, those 
famous physical astronomers, who think, when 
they have found out a general law, that there is 
no longer any occasion for a law giver? Do 
they not perceive that their boasted law is itself 
an effect requiring explanation as much as any 
other ; and that the only rational questions are, 
first, whether any cause thereof be traceable by 
us; and secondly, whether ultimately we must 
rest on a material or a spiritual first cause ? in 
other words, whether matter arranged itself into 
the most beautiful and beneficial order, or 
whether this was the work of mind ? Do not 
these philosophers see that the law which they 
have discovered, far from weakening the proofs 
of an intelligent first cause, decidedly strengthens 
them ? for a law supposes order, and order argues 
design, and design a designer ; so that unless the 
law made itself we must have recourse to Deity. 

But so natural, so unavoidable, is the idea of 
a Great Intelligent First Cause, that those who 
deny the same in words have been obliged to 
admit His existence, though in a covert manner. 
For this purpose, the term Nature has been 



94 PHIIiOeOPHICAL TOCABULART. 

found convenient; and instead of saying that 
such and such phenomena are the work of God, 
they pronounce them the work of Nature, thus 
substituting a metaphorical person for a real ; for 
the word Nature properly means the very eflFects 
to be explained ; which are thus put for the one 
great and unseen Cause of all. 

In concluding this article^ I may observe that 
whether the sense I have given to Philosophy, as 
distinguished from other Science, be generally 
approved or not, yet the statement as to the 
objects of all Science will not be thereby affected. 
That statement may be correct, whatev^er more 
limited sense we attach to the term Philosophy. 



HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY. 95 



HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY. 

As no words occur more frequently in phi- 
losophy than these, it is necessary to fix their 
meaning, if possible, with accuracy. 

Hypothesis and Theory agree in this, that they 
both pretend to explain phenomena, in other 
words, they assign a cause or the causes thereof. 
We cannot, therefore, be surprised that those 
words should occur so often in philosophy, which 
has for its special object to discover the causes 
of things. And as causes, as we have seen, are 
of different sorts, so there may be as many 
hypotheses, or as many theories corresponding, 
relative to the immediate, or the remote, the 
proximate, or the ultimate cause. 

Secondly, Hjrpothesis and Theory agree also 
in this, that both imply more or less of uncer- 
tainty as to the accuracy of the explanation ; for 
when the investigation is thought complete, and 
all doubt is at an end. Theory is changed into 
Fact. Theory is not distinguished from Fact by 
the circumstance that the one enounces a cause, 
the other not ; for though a fact may imply no 
cause, yet it frequently does imply one. Thus, 
when I say that I can move my arm when I will. 



96 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

I state what every one would call a fact, though 
this fact implies that my will is the cause of the 
motion. So when I affirm that heat and moisture 
are causes of vegetation, I state what all will 
allow to be facts, just as much as when I inform 
any one that the heart of man contains four 
cavities, and that the chest is separated from the 
abdomen by a muscle called the diaphram or 
midriff, facts relative to structure only, not to 
causation. Hypothesis and Theory differ then 
from Fact in this, that they imply some uncer- 
tainty with respect to the causes assigned, while 
Fact supposes none. 

Thus far Hypothesis and Theory agree ; but, 
wherein do they differ ? 

There is no very definite distinction between 
Hypothesis and Theory. The distinction, such as 
it is, turns entirely upon the degree of evidence 
possessed by each respectively; for an Hypothesis 
is only a doubtful Theory ; and, on further in- 
vestigation, and by means of new evidence, the 
former may be raised to the dignity of the latter. 
Thus, as we pass from Theory to Fact involving 
causation, so do we pass from Hypothesis to 
Theory, according as the cause in question is 
doubtful, probable, or certain ; Hypothesis being 
at one end of the series, and Fact at the other. 

From the above it follows, that in many cases, 



HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY. 9? 

it may be difficult to say whether the term Hypo- 
thesis or the term Theory be most applicable. 
But in other cases there can be no doubt. Where 
the existence of the supposed cause, in the case 
in question, rests only upon some faint analogy, 
and still more where such a cause is not known 
with certainty to exist in any case, there we have 
only an Hypothesis. Thus the Vortices of 
Descartes were hypothetical, because though 
some sort of Vortices, as whirl-pools, were known 
to exist, yet the analogy between these motions 
and those of the earth and planets was very far- 
fetched. So the nervous vibrations of Hartley, 
to which he attributed the phenomena of sensa- 
tion, were purely hypothetical ; for what analogy 
is there between a nerve and a musical chord ? 
In like manner, some physiologists have attributed 
all the phenomena of life to mechanical causes 
known to exist, others to chemical alone ; as if 
the human frame were either a mere machine, or 
a mere laboratory. Nay, such has been the wild- 
ness of Hypothesis, that the world itself has 
sometimes been supposed to be an animal, some^ 
times even a God. 

In other instances, a cause not known with 
certainty, or even with probability, to exist in any 
case, is supposed, in order to account for some 
phenomena. Thus, Newton imagined that the 



98 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

phenomena of gravitation might be accounted for 
by the impulse of an unknown substance, which 
he called Ether; and some philosophers in the 
present day attribute the phenomena of light to 
the vibrations of the same mysterious fluid. But 
as the existence of Ether in any case has never 
been shown by the proper proofs, by the only 
proofs by which we can in the first instance ascer- 
tain the existence of any body, namely, by the 
senses ; as no one has ever seen, touched, smelt, 
heard, or tasted Ether, we have a right to say 
that it exists only h3rpothetically. The proper 
evidence of the existence of matter, in the first 
instance, is sense, or more correctly, perception ; 
that of the existence of spirit is consciousness. 
We believe in the existence of our own spirit, 
and of other spirits around us, and above us, 
which we have not seen ; for spirits cannot be 
seen or touched, and there are other proofs of 
their existence; but we are not justified in be- 
lieving implicitly in any species of matter which 
no one has ever descried by the senses. 

For the same reason, the existence of caloric 
and electricity, as distinct sorts of matter, is hypo- 
thetical. They are called Imponderable; but 
what kind of matter can that be which has no 
weight ? For a long time, sensation and muscular 
motion were attributed to animal spirits, a fluid 



HYP0THBSI8 AND THEORY. 99 

remarkably rare and yolatile, which was supposed 
to be always flpng about between the brain and 
the organs of sensation and motion ; but as no 
one has been able to detect this fluid, its existence, 
which was always hypothetical, is now disbelieved 
altogether. In the present day, atoms find more 
favour, and on them is founded a famous Theory ; 
but as no one has seen or touched such particles, 
we may be allowed to doubt their existence, and 
call it hypothetical. 

In these and similar instances, we see a 
marked distinction between Hypothesis, Theory, 
and Fact ; for no one could compare the Theory 
of gravitation with the Hypothesis of ether ; or 
the Fact of muscular motion simply by means of 
nerves, with the supposition of animal spirits. 
That muscular motion is performed, some how or 
other, by means of the nerves, is an established 
Fact involving causation ; that all bodies tend to 
each other, is a Theory ; that the cause of this 
tendency is the impulse of a subtle fluid, Ether, 
is an Hypothesis. But the only difference be* 
tween these three consists in the degree of 
evidence on which our belief is founded. 

Though Hypotheses be in their nature doubt- 
ful, yet are they far from useless. The use of 
Hypothesis is not to terminate, but to direct 
inquiry ; for our inquiry must have some object, 



100 PHILOSOPHICAL TOCABULABT. 

something to prove, or disprove, and therefore 
a supposition or provisional solution may be 
necessary. We assume something to be true, 
and then observe, make experiments, and argue, 
to determine whether it be true. If our observa- 
tion and experiments tally with the assumption, 
or if no absurd inferences follow from it, our 
H3rpothesis may be raised into a Theory. 

Though Hypotheses, properly so called, have 
no place in pure mathematics, which treat only 
of things co-existent, and not at all of causation, 
yet provisional assumptions are made, and the 
accuracy of them tested afterwards. Thus in the 
sixth proposition of Euclid, it is assumed, in the 
first instance, that the two sides which subtend 
two equal angles of a triangle, are not equal; 
and then, arguing on this supposition, we arrive 
at the absurd conclusion, that the less triangle is 
equal to the greater ; whence we infer for certain 
that our assumption was false ; and as there can 
here be but two suppositions, the other must be 
true. In mathematics, this mode of proof is 
quite satisfactory, because only two suppositions 
can be made, but in questions which admit of 
many solutions, where the boundaries of truth 
and falsehood are not strictly defined, there the 
disproof of one alternative proves not the other. 
Thus, were we to say that Cromwell was either 



HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY. 101 

an impostor or an enthusiast, and having proved 
him not to have been wholly an impostor, were 
we to conclude that he must have been wholly an 
enthusiast, our conclusion would not be certain, 
for he might have been partly the one, partly the 
other. We ought, therefore, in subjects which 
admit only of probability, always to distrust those 
arguments which are stated with mathematical 
precision, as in this form, either such a thing is, 
or is not; for generally there is a third alter- 
native, which thus is kept out of sight. 

Some may be unwilling to allow, that the only 
difference between Hypothesis, Theory, and Fact 
involving causation, consists in the degree of 
evidence on which they rest respectively. But 
if there be any other difference, I should like 
to know what it is. Theory, it may be said, is 
used to explain facts, to account for them ; but 
what is meant by these phrases ? To explain a 
phenomenon or fact, or to account for it, properly 
signifies, as we have seen, to point out the cause 
thereof; and the cause, when proved, must be 
another fact, or, until fully proved, a theory. Cer- 
tainly, our speculative knowledge is thus enlarged, 
and possibly the cause may be one which we can 
apply to practice; but we are not to suppose 
that the fact explained is one whit less mysterious 
than before. It may be less anomalous, more 



102 FHIUWOPHICAI. TOCAVUI«AST. 

akin to facts formerly known, but it is not the 
less incomprehensible. 

Suppose it proyed that gravitation is owing 
to impulses of ether, what do we learn bjr the 
discovery? We learn that gravitation is the 
effect of impact, that, therefore, it is a fact similar 
to others with which we are well acquainted, 
instead of being dififerent from them. Thus, we 
simplify our knowledge, we reduce two modes of 
motion to one ; but impulse, though more fami* 
liar, is quite as incomprehensible as attraction. 
It seems to us, no doubt, less mysterious, because 
it is more familiar ; but this is a mere delusion, 
and the effect of custom. Why does one billiard 
ball, when put in motion, drive another before 
it ? Could we have predicted such a result bad 
we never seen it ? Can we give any reason why 
it should be so ^ Or, if we could give a reason, 
what would it amount to ? It would amount to 
this, either that some change intervenes between 
the impact of the one ball and the motion of the 
other, a change before unknown, a new fact or 
link in the chain of causation ; or, that the real 
or ultimate cause of the motion is not impact, but 
something involved in the act of impact, some- 
thing hidden from our sight, as morphia is hidden 
in the substance of opium. But whatever the 
explanation, the why^ of impulse may be, it can be 



HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY. 103 

only the statement of some other fact as a cause ; 
and not at all a reason, such as the reasoning of 
mathematics consists of, whereby we see, by the 
mind's eye, without actual experiment, that the 
angles at the base of an Isosceles triangle are 
and must be equal. All facts then involving 
causation are incomprehensible in this sense, that 
we can never see any Reason^ properly so called, 
why any cause should produce any eflfect, or why 
it might not have produced one altogether dif- 
ferent. 



104 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAR, 

THEIR RESPECTIVE PROVINCES. 

It is not a little remarkable, that, although so 
much has been said and written on the subject of 
Logic, from the days of Aristotle downwards, yet 
few branches of knowledge are so ill defined. 
By some, Logic is understood to embrace a very 
extensive territory, while by others, it has been 
restricted to very narrow limits. Thus, accord- 
ing to Watts, ^^ Logic is the art of using Reason 
well in our enquiries after truth, and the com- 
munication of it to others." And in a note to 
this, we are told, " The word Reason, in this place, 
is not confined to the mere faculty of reasoning, 
or inferring one thing from another, but includes 
all the intellectual powers of man." 

Against this definition, as too extensive and 
too vague, Archbishop Whately rebels ; and says 
that ^^ Logic, in the most extensive sense which 
the name can with propriety be made to bear, 
may be considered as the science, and also as the 
art of reasoning." According to this definition, 
which the author considers sufficiently extensive, 
several important subjects usually considered as 
belonging to Logic, are excluded from it, for 



METAPHYSICS^ LOGIC9 GRAMMAR. 105 

instance, all appertaining to conceptions and 
names, to judgments and propositions, to defini- 
tion and classification; though it appears from 
the work itself, of which the ahove is the opening 
sentence, that the author considered these sub- 
jects as comprised within the province of Logic. 
The definition, however, does not say so ; and 
accordingly, this may be taken as a specimen, not 
of an enlarged, but on the contrary, of a very 
narrow definition, as that of Watts is of a very 
extensive one. Between these two extremes, a 
proper definition of Logic will probably be 
found. Moreover, Archbishop Whately seems to 
contradict what he had before laid down, when 
he says, that Logic is entirely conversant about 
language^'' thereby lowering Logic to the level of 
Grammar, and breaking down the distinction 
between them ; whereas, in the introduction, he 
had said that the ^'most appropriate office of 
Logic is that of instituting an analysis of the 
process of the mind in reasoning." 

The third book of Whately's Logic treats of 
Fallacies ; and a considerable part of it is taken 
up with what the author calls non-logical Fal- 
lacies. Why then, it may be asked, are they 
treated of in a work professedly on Logic ? The 

° See Whately 's Logic, Book II. Sec. 2, note. 
P 



106 PHIU>SOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

truth is, that the author is obliged to include 
more under Logic than he is willing to allow. 

But if Whately*s definition of Logic be narrow, 
that given by Barth^lemy Saint Hilaire, the 
translator of Aristotle*s Organon, is still more so. 
According to Saint Hilaire, Logic is a science, 
not an art, and the object of that science is 
demonstration. To justify this definition, the 
words of Aristotle at the commencement of the 
Prior Analytics are quoted. "First we shall 
mention the subject and the end of this study ; 
the subject is demonstration ; the end is science 
demonstrated.** 

Having first shown that Logic is a science, 
Saint Hilaire then inquires, what is the object of 
that science? To this question, Aristotle replies, 
'*it is demonstration." "Nothing," says Saint 
Hilaire, "more simple nor more true than 
this answer.'* 

If this be so, the limits of Logic are indeed 
narrow. For demonstration is to be found only 
in Mathematics, the science of quantity ; therefore 
Logic treats only of Mathematical reasoning. 
But this is not true of any system of Logic with 
which we are acquainted. No writer on Logic 
confines himself to Mathematical reasoning ; con- 
sequently demonstration is not the sole object of 
Logic, as universally understood. Reasoning, in 



I 



METAPHYSICS^ LOGIC^ GRAMMAR. 10/ 

general, not cU'.monstratiye reasoning only, is 
always included under Logic. But we must not 
suppose that the above is really given by Aris- 
totle as a complete definition of Logic. It is the 
opening sentence of the Book, entitled Prior 
Analytics, and professes to state nothing more 
than the subject and end of that and the following 
Book, the Posterior Analytics, which treat indeed 
of Logic, but not of all Logic. We cannot, 
therefore, blame Aristotle for having given too 
narrow a definition of the whole science. Nay, 
further on, (Prior Analytics, Chap. IV.) Aristotle 
says expressly that the work on which he is 
engaged will comprehend more than demonstra* 
tion ; that it will contain the whole doctrine of 
the syllogism, which, says he, ^^is more general 
than demonstration, which is only a sort of 
syllogism, whereas every syllogism is not a 
demonstration." Hereupon he enters upon the 
syllogism, purporting to b*eat of demonstration 
afterwards, as he actually has done in the 
Posterior Analytics. 

Of late, other definitions have been given of 
Logic, and by high authority. The very highest 
of all, on this subject, has defined Logic to be 
"The science of the formal laws of thought." 
With all due deference to that authority, I cannot 
but remark, that this definition, were it even cor- 



108 PHITX)SOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

rect, could not answer the purpose of a definition 
to others, to the unlearned at least ; because the 
definition is more obscure than the thing defined. 
It contains a word, one of the most ambiguous in 
all Philosophy, the word formal;^ and though 
most men have some idea of Logic, the great 
majority know nothing at all about form, except 
in the popular sense ; so that to them the above 
definition would only be a bewilderment and a 
puzzle, rendering their previous conception not 
more clear, but more confused. Another able 
author, adopting this definition, explains formal 
to mean necessary or essential ; so that according 
to him, Logic is the science of the Necessary 
Laws of Thoughts, and so he has entitled his 
Book. How then, it may be asked, is Logic dis- 
tinguished from Metaphysics? Surely, Meta- 
physics treat of the necessary laws of thought, 
as well as of the laws of sensation and of emotion. 
Logic, then, is not a science distinct from Meta- 
physics, but only one part of it. Such a con- 
clusion we can by no means admit, and therefore, 
the above definition must fall to the ground. 
But, if by the term formal, reference be made to 
words, and words be styled the forms of thoughts, 

^ For some account of the various senses in which the term 
Form has heen used, see Thomson's " Outlines of the Necessary 
Laws of Thought." Introduction, section 5. 



L 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAR. 109 

then, whether the above definition be full and 
adequate or not, it is at all events correct as far 
as it goes; for it points out one distinctive 
feature of Logic, namely, the alliance of thought 
with words. For Logic treats not of language 
merely, for then it would be Grammar; nor of 
thoughts only, for then it would be a branch of 
Metaphysics ; but it treats of thoughts combined 
with words, or expressed in words. Thus, while 
letters, words, and sentences, belong to Grammar ; 
conceptions, judgments, and reasonings, to Meta- 
physics ; names, propositions, and arguments, are 
the subject of Logic. 

Names suggest, or are meant to suggest things, 
whether material, as trees and stones, or imma- 
terial, as sensations and conceptions; proposi- 
tions express the relation of things ; while argu- 
ments are propositions as inferred from other 
propositions. 

According to this sense of the word formal^ 
the definition of Sir William Hamilton would 
mean, that Logic is the science of the laws of 
thought in alliance with language. In this sense, 
I consider it correct, as far as it goes. Whether 
it be full and adequate is another question : as 
also, whether it be not too obscure for ordinary 
comprehension. 

When Logic is styled the science of the 



110 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

neoessary laws of thought, there is a sense that 
might be given to the words which would ex- 
actly explain the object of one branch of the 
science, Logic proper or pure. Did these words 
imply, that the peculiar object of Logic was to 
teach us as much of the laws of thought as is 
necessary to maintain consistency in thinking, 
then the statement would be quite accurate. 
Consistency in thinking, as we shall see presently, 
is the especial object of simple Logic, not truth 
or agreement with the nature of things, which 
appertains to mixed or applied Logic. All the 
laws of thought belong not to Logic, but those 
only which maintain consistency in thinking. 
Thus Logic knows nothing of association, so im- 
portant among the laws of thought. 

Logic seems to hold a middle place between 
Metaphysics and Grammar. Metaphysics treat 
of the human mind and all its phenomena, which 
are comprised in three words, sensations, thoughts, 
and emotions; Lc^c treats only of thoughts 
combined with words, or expressed in words; 
while Grammar treats of words, all words, of 
which there are several sorts, — nouns, adjectives, 
verbs, adverbs, conjunctions, &c. Thus Logic 
agrees with Metaphysics, inasmuch as it treats of 
thoughts; but it differs in omitting sensations 
and emotions, and in treating of thoughts only 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAB. I 1 1 

in connection with words ; while it agrees with 
Grammar in considering thoughts combined with 
words; but, whereas in Logic thought is the 
subject, and words are regarded only as subsidiary 
to thought ; in Grammar, words are the subject, 
and thought is considered only as subsidiary to 
words, that is as necessary to determine that a 
word is truly a word, meaning something, and 
not a mere sound, or a mere number of letters 
thrown together, and also to fix of what sort any 
word may be, as noun, verb, or adverb. 

The definition of Logic, as the science of the 
laws of thought in alliance with language, agrees 
with these views. But though accurate as far as 
it goes, in one respect at least it appears deficient, 
inasmuch as no allusion is made to Logic as a 
mixed science, combining speculation with prac- 
tical application. On the contrary, by that defi- 
nition, it would appear to be a science of pure 
speculation, like Metaphysics. But assuredly 
such is not Logic as generally understood. 
Whatever difference of views may be entertained 
as to the exact province of Logic, on one point, 
at least, almost all are agreed, namely, that Logic 
has a direct practical end in view, the. improve- 
ment of our intellectual faculties, either in whole 
or in part. Now, though men may give any 
meaning to words they please, provided they 



112 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

explain their meaning, yet there is seldom any 
advantage in taking a well known word in a sense 
very diflferent from the usual. At least, it ought 
to be done with great reserve. In the present 
instance, we see no sjafficient reason for departing 
from the established meaning of the word Logic^ 
and consequently we can by no means accept of 
the above definition as a full and adequate one, 
omitting, as it does, an essential element of the 
subject. At most, if Logic be divided into two 
parts, pure and mixed, that definition may suffice 
for the former, but it cannot embrace the whole.*^ 
We have, therefore, still to seek a full and ade- 
quate conception and definition of Logic; and 
for this purpose we must take a general survey of 
the mental sciences. 

Those sciences, the subject of which is the 
human mind, may all be classed under one or 

"^ Mr. De Morgan has written a treatise on Formal Logic, 
thereby implying that there is a Logic not formal; and Mr. 
Thomson, who considers Logic as the science of the necessary 
laws of thought, still divides it into pure and applied Logic. 
Sahit Hilaire, in the preface to his translation of Aristotle's 
Organon^ says^ at one time, that Logic treats only of the form of 
thought; but he afterwards allows that there is such a thing as 
applied Logic^ which treats of something else than form. There- 
fore, by his own showing. Logic, in its generic meaning, is not a 
mere science of form ; pure Logic may be, but not atl Logic ; 
otherwise there is a contradiction. 



METAPHYSICS^ LOGIC^ GRAMMAR. 113 

Other of the following heads: — I. Pure Mental 
Science. II. Mixed or Applied Mental Science. 
To the former, the term Metaphysics properly 
belongs, to the latter no common term is attached; 
but should we extend the meaning of the word 
Metaphysics, so as to comprise all mental science, 
then the one class would be pure, and the other 
mixed or applied Metaphysics. At present, how- 
ever, for fear of ambiguity, we shall use Meta- 
physics in its more usual and restricted sense of 
pure mental science. This treats of the human 
mind, as it is^ without any reference to direction 
and improvement. It is, therefore, purely specu- 
lative, and comprises : — I. The Analysis and 
Classification of the Mental Phenomena. II. The 
Theory of the origin and succession of the 
Mental Phenomena.' 

The second class of the mental sciences is of 
a mixed nature, combining speculation with 
practical application. These sciences rest not 
in the knowledge of the human mind, as it 
is, but they have a further object, namely, 
to direct it, to direct thoughts, emotions, and 
through them, outward actions. This great class 
naturally divides itself into two, agreeably to 

' As a specimen of Pure Mental Philosophy, I may be 
allowed to refer to my own " Analysis and Theory of the 
Emotions." 

Q 



114 PHIIX)0(^H]CAI« VOCABULABT. 

those two grand departments of the mind, Thb 
Understanding, and the Emotions. To the 
latter^ which has for its object to direct the Emo- 
tions in the pursuit of happiness, the term Moral 
Philosophy may be applied, taken in the most 
extensive sense in which it can properly be used* 
In this sense, it includes not only Morals, strictly 
so called, or Ethics, but Politics in all its branches, 
as well as the science of Taste, of all which, the 
emotions of the human mind are the subject. 

But what name belongs to the former branch 
of the mixed mental sciences, viz: that which 
professes to direct the understanding ? Has it a 
name, or must we invent one ? I confess that I 
see no occasion for a new term when an old one 
readily presents itself; and here the word Logic 
naturally occurs. This sense of the word may 
be very extensive, very vague if you will, but 
some word is required for this class of sciences, 
and whatever may be hit upon, the same objection 
may be made, which after all is no valid objec^ 
tion, for an extensive class must have a co-exten- 
sive name The only serious questions are two : 
are there sufficient grounds for the formation of 
a class of sciences, opposed to moral philosophy, 
and having for its object to direct the under- 
standing, as the other has to direct or regulate 
the emotions ; and if so, by what name shall we 



METAPHTSICa^ LOGIC, GRAMMAB. 115 

call it? Supposing that we adopt our known 
friend Logic, shall we he employing the term in 
an unwarrantahle or very unusual sense ? I think 
not. At least, the great father of modern phi- 
losophy, the immortal Bacon, has employed it in 
a sense no less extensive, for in his glorious work, 
the De AugmeniiSj he divides all the sciences 
which treat of the uses and objects of the mental 
faculties, into the two great classes of Logic and 
Ethics. The former of these he subdivides into 
the arts of discovering, judging, retaining, and 
communicating truth. Here, then, we have the 
word Logic used in a sense as extensive as that 
which I propose. Supported by so great an 
authority, I shall not scruple to define Logic, 
taken in its most comprehensive sense, as the 
science which directs the understanding in the pur- 
suit of Truth. 

Thoughts, then, are the subject of Logic, 
Truth the Object. 

II. It must be allowed that Logic, as thus 
defined, comprehends a great deal, and, therefore, 
it will probably admit of several subdivisions. In 
tracing these subdivisions, we shall best discover 
what it comprises. 

We must observe, in the first instance, that 
there is a branch of philosophy which seems to 
occupy a middle place between Metaphysics and 



116 PHirX)60PHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Logic, comprising, as it does, the first principles 
of human knowledge, principles, some of them 
strictly self-evident, others not strictly self-evident, 
nor yet capable of proof, which, nevertheless, 
must be taken for granted before we can advance 
one step. Of the first kind, are the axioms 
of mathematics, such as, things which are equal 
to the same thing are equal to one another ; two 
straight lines cannot enclose a space ; all right 
angles are equal to one another, &c. Of the 
second kind, are the following articles of belief :-^ 
1 • Belief in our own personal identity. 

2. Belief in the faithfulness of memory ; or 
in other words, trust in memory. 

3. Belief in the existence of the external 
world. 

4. Belief in the uniformity of nature. 
Now, there is a branch of philosophy which 

has for its object to determine what are, and what 
are not, first principles, and on what ground they 
must be received. This, as I have observed, 
seems to hold a middle place between Metaphy- 
sics and Logic; but it belongs rather to the 
latter. If treated speculatively, as a matter of 
mere curiosity, it may be a branch of Metaphysics ; 
but, in such a case, pure speculation without re- 
ference to application is hardly possible ; and as 
the solidity of all our subsequent knowledge must 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAR. 117 

depend upon the goodness of the foundation, and 
nothing can be raised without a foundation, there- 
fore, the science which treats oi first principles 
must be closely connected with that which treats 
of secondary principles, and the advancement of 
knowledge. For these reasons, we shall divide 
IjOgic, in the first instance, into Primary and 
Secondary Logic ; the former being entirely de- 
voted to the settlement of first or fundamental 
principles of belief. This may be otherwise 
called Philosophia prima. 

III. We come now to the subdivisions of Se- 
condary Logic. This, to which, by many, the term 
Logic would be confined, may be divided into two 
parts, the one of which we shall call pure, the other 
applied Logic. But though in reference to the 
latter, the former may well be called pure, yet it 
is not strictly a pure or unmixed science, like 
Metaphysics ; for Metaphysics treat only of the 
phenomena of the human mind, whereas pure 
Logic treats of the phenomena of thought in 
connection with words. Moreover, as we shall 
see presently, even pure Logic has a direct prac- 
tical object, which Metaphysics have not. It is 
called by some Formal Logic, words being con- 
sidered as the forms of thought. 

Pure or formal Logic is usually divided into 
three parts, which treat respectively, not of pure 



118 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULART. 

conceptions, judgments, and reasonings, as Meta- 
physics would treat, but of these united to words, 
that is, of names, propositions, and arguments. 
The former tl^en are Metaphysical, the latter 
Logical terms. Pure Logic considers not how 
far names and the conceptions they raise corres- 
pond with the reality of things, nor yet whether 
propositions be true or false, nor even whether 
the conclusion of any argument be sound : but it 
determines what a name in general is, and what 
different sorts of names there may be, as singular 
or proper, and common or general, generic and 
specific, abstract and concrete ; it analyzes a pro* 
position, and shows of what parts all propositions 
are composed, and it also enumerates various 
kinds of propositions, such as categorical and 
hypothetical, affirmative and negative, universal 
and particular ; and lastly, it analyzes the process 
of reasoning, points out different species thereof, 
and shows in what cases the conclusion does, and 
in what cases it does not follow from the 
premises, either demonstratively or prol^bly. 
Thus the name Centaur answers to nothing in 
nature, but we have a conception thereof; the 
proposition, Agamemmm slew Hector y is false, but 
still, as a proposition, correct; the reasoning, the 
mind of man is material^ therefore^ like other matter^ 
it mil enter after death into other combinations^ emd 



METAPHYSICS^ LOGIC, OaAMBCAB. 119 

perish^ as mind, is correct, for the conclusion is 
fairly drawn, though it he false, because the 
premises are false. The words true and false, as 
applied to propositions and conclusions, do not 
belong to pure Logic; and instead thereof, we 
have correct and incorrect, consistent, inconsistent, 
and contradictory. Neither do the words real and 
imaginary, as applied to conceptions, appertain to 
Logic; instead of them, we have clear and con/used. 

According to the above view of the province 
of pure Logic, it may be defined as the science 
which contains the rules of consistent thinking, as 
in/erred from the verbal expression of thought. 
Grammar, on the other hand, contains the rules 
of correct eospression, as inferred from the common 
use of language. 

Pure Logic and Grammar have both, then, a 
direct practical object, as implied by the word 
rule; the object of the one being consistent 
thought, of the other correct expression. Now, the 
rules of Grammar, though derived from the daily 
use of words, and liable to considerable varieties 
in different languages, have yet something com- 
mon to all languages, and therefore, we may be 
sure, derived from the fundamental laws of 
thought. Consequently, there must be an inti- 
mate alliance between consistent thought and 
correct expression, between Logic and Grammar. 



120 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Both Logic and Grammar, as containing rules, 
partake of the nature of an art as well as a 
science. Pure Metaphysics, on the contrary, 
contains no rules, laws only ; for it pretends not 
to direct, but simply to state what the mental 
phenomena are, to analyze and classify them, and 
to trace the general order of their succession. 

IV. Applied Logic is opposed to pure, and 
forms the other part of secondary Logic. This is a 
much more comprehensive, as well as a less exact 
science than the former, for it applies the know- 
ledge of the human mind and its processes, 
derived from Metaphysics and pure Logic, to the 
acquisition of objective truth, that is, the truth in 
all objects which the mind contemplates. Pure 
Logic contents itself with ascertaining that con- 
ceptions are clear, propositions correct, and not 
inconsistent with each other, and conclusions ac- 
curately drawn from premises ; but applied Logic 
wishes to determine whether conceptions be agree- 
able to the reality of things, whether propositions 
and conclusions be true. Thus, the whole field of 
science is open to applied Logic, and consequently 
its scope is very extensive. 

Though the sphere of applied Logic be so 
comprehensive, yet it does not seem to admit of 
any exact Logical division. But we can enume- 



METAPHYSICS^ LOGIC^ GRAMMAR. 121 

rate the principal subjects that fall within its 
province, which are as follows : — 

1. A statement of the real object or objects 
of philosophy and science, and wherein these 
diflFer from other knowledge. Under this head, 
the words cause and law of nature must be ex- 
plained. 

2. A general account of the means whereby 
the sciences may be advanced, viz. experience, 
(including observation and experiments) and 
reasoning. Here the different sorts of reasoning 
must be mentioned, demonstrative and probable, 
inductive and deductive, and some general prin- 
ciples laid down, whereby it may be known what 
sort of reasoning is most applicable to any 
branch of science, and what degree of certitude 
it admits of. Here also an account should be 
given of the different methods used in scientific 
inquiry, such as the analytic and the synthetic. 
But the principal object of this department 
should be to trace the laws of induction, those 
of deduction belonging more particularly to pure 
Logic' 

3. An account of the various predisponent 

* Mr. Mill has treated the suhject of indaction at length in his 
excellent work on Logic. The same suhject had previously 
engaged Dr. Whewell in his great work, " the Philosophy of the 
Inductive Sciences," 

R 



122 PHILOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

causes of error or idola which beset the human 
mind. 

4. An enquiry into the nature, use, and 
abuse of language, that great organ of human 
knowledge. 

5. A general classification of the sciences, 
showing what sciences exist, how they are re- 
lated, and pointing out new ones to the curiosity 
of mankind. 

The first Book of Bacon's Novum Organum, 
and the fourth Book of Locke's Essay, may be 
taken as specimens of the art of attaining truth 
in general ; while the second Book of the Orga- 
num contains special rules for induction ; and 
the De Atigmentis Scientiarum comprises a gene* 
ral classification of the objects of knowledge. 
The third Book of Locke, on the other hand, 
which treats of words, is for the most part a 
discourse on pure Logic, and perhaps the most 
valuable that ever was written on Names, the 
first division of the science. Indeed, the great 
work of Locke comprises pure Metaphysics, as 
well as Logic, in both its branches. The first and 
second Books, which treat of the mental phe- 
nomena, or ideas, as Locke calls them, their 
origin, nature, and succession, are purely Meta- 
physical; great part of the third Book, of Words, 
is pure Logic; and the fourth, of Knowledge 
and Opinion, is applied Logic. 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAR. 123 

Mr. Thomson, in his Outline of the Necessary 
Laws of Thought, has divided Logic into pure 
and applied, and has well pointed out the dif- 
ference between them. The distinction is im- 
portant. Formerly, as Mr. Thomson observes, 
applied Logic was treated of under the name of 
method, as a fourth branch of Logic in general ; 
and classed along with the three branches of pure 
Logic. 

The distinction here insisted on has been dis- 
regarded even by the best writers. Thus, Arch- 
bishop Whately considers all Logic as pure or 
formal, and makes no account of applied Logic. 
So does Sir W. Hamilton, who defines Logic to 
be the science of the formal laws of thought. 
Even Mr. Mill, in his great work, alludes not to 
this distinction. His division of the subject into 
ratiocinative and inductive Logic might seem 
indeed to point to it, were it not that under the 
former he treats of some things which do not 
belong to pure Logic. Watts makes a jumble of 
pure and applied Logic, for, after treating of 
Propositions logically, he has a chapter on Pre- 
judices. Now, pure Logic treats indeed of 
sophisms, but knows nothing of the predisponent 
causes of error, idola, or prejudices. Even Bacon, 
in his De Augmentisy makes no distinction between 
pure and applied Logic. 



124 PHITiOSOPHICAL VOCABULARY. 

Though the distinction between pure : and 
mixed Logic be well founded on principle, yet we 
must not suppose that it is always easy to keep 
them separate in a logical treatise. The subject 
of Fallacies in particular shows how the one runs 
into the other. Though these have been distin* 
guished into two sorts^ fallacies in Dictione, and 
fallacies ea^tra Dictionem, according as the sophism 
is supposed to lie in the expression or in the matter^ 
yet there occur some which may be classed 
either with the one or with the other, or more 
properly with neither. These are when the mid- 
dle term is ambiguous in sense^ and they are 
called by Whately semi-logical fallacies. 

V. Closely connected with applied Logic are 
the arts of retaining and communicating truth. 
These, indeed, have been classed by Bacon under 
the general name of Logic, and treated of accord- 
ingly;^ but as this may be considered as too 
wide and vague a sense of the word, we prefer to 
consider these arts, not as integral parts, but as 
appendages of Logic. 

Concerning the art of retaining truth, little 
need here be said. I shall observe only that it 
mainly depends upon three things, — Attention, 
Repetition, and Association. 

* See the De Augmentis Scientiarum, Lib. V. Cap. 1, and 
Lib. VI. Cap. L 



METAPHTSICSy LOGIC, ORAMMAB. 125 

In these three words nearly the whole art is 
comprised. 

The art of communicating truth may be sub- 
divided into three branches : — 

1. The general art of Teaching. — 2. Gram- 
mar. — 3. Rhetoric. 

It is proper, in a logical point of view, as well 
as highly useful, that the art of teaching should 
be considered as a separate special branch of 
knowledge, requiring a particular education, and 
not an art which any one may exercise who has 
acquirements, whether he have learnt how to 
communicate them or not. This is a principle 
which now seems recognised by the general 
adoption of training schools. We train school- 
masters for our village schools ; but we have not 
yet begun to train them for schools of a higher 
order. If a man have taken a high degree at 
Oxford or Cambridge, if he be a good scholar, it 
is thought that he must needs be a good school- 
master. A great mistake ! The general art of 
teaching must give an account of the various 
modes as well as methods of teaching, th^ir 
advantages and disadvantages : such as 

1. Discourses written or unwritten, read or 
heard. 

2. Questionings viva voce, or written : compos- 
ing in prose or verse : learning by heart. 



126 PHILOeOPHICAL VOCABUIiABY. 

3. Ocular representations, such as pictures, 
maps, &c. 

4. Experiments in mechanical philosophy and 
chemistry 

5. Dissections and demonstrations, as in 
anatomy. 

6. Simple exhibitions of specimens, as in 
natural history. 

Such are the modes of teaching. As for the 
methods^ they are either public or private, solitary 
or simultaneous, magisterial or mutual; self-depen- 
dent for the most part, or dependent on assistance 
from others ; between which last the difference is 
highly important. 

We may also distinguish different systems of 
teaching ; that for instance which tends to unity, 
simplicity, and concentration; and that which 
tends to multiplicity and diffusion; the former 
being the system of our ancestors, the latter that 
of the present day : the one calculated to make 
deeply learned and thoughtful students; the 
other to rear up imposing talkers and showy 
men of the world. 

The second branch of the art of communi- 
cating t^uth is Grammar, or the art of using 
language correctly; language being the grand 
organ of communication. Of the connection 
between pure Logic and Grammar, as well as of 



METAPHYSICS, LOGIC, GRAMMAR. 12/ 

the difference between them, we have already 
spoken. 

The third branch of the art of communicating, 
is Rhetoric, or the art of using language 
effectively^ as Grammar is the art of using it 
correctly. Here we come to the very verge of 
our proper subject, if not beyond it; for the 
object of Logic and its attendant arts is simply 
truth ; while that of Rhetoric is to render truth 
effective^ that is acceptable or agreeable to those 
whom we address. Thus, Rhetoric speaks not 
only to the understanding, but also to the emo- 
tions, and therefore it really holds a middle place 
between Logic and Moral Philosophy. 

To sum up all in a few words. The object of 
pure Logic is consistency in thought ; of applied 
Logic, truthy or agreement of thought with the 
nature of things; of Grammar, correctness in 
language ; of Rhetoric, effect. 



INTEODUCTION 



TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 



PART SECOND. 

COMPBISINO : 

I. THE CATEGOEIES. 

II. THE PROPOSITION. 

III. REASONING. 



S 



Ce n'est pas Barbara et Baralipton qui forment le raisonne- 
ment. II ne faut pas guinder Tesprit ; les mani^res tendues et 
p^nibles le remplissent duDe sotte pr^somption par une elevation 
^traDg^re et par une enflure vaine et ridicule, au lieu d'une nourri- 
ture solide et vigoureuse.— Pascal. 



THE CATEGORIES. 



Having completed our Philosophical Vo- 
cahulary, we are now better prepared for the 
consideration of the Catbgoribs. The term 
Categories, or rather the Categories, has been 
applied especially to the famous classification of 
Aristotle, under which he professed to include 
every object of human thought, every thing 
capable of being named. In other words, the 
Categories were the Summa genera^ or highest 
classes, under which all things might be compre-* 
bended, all things of which we could think, or to 
which we could give a name. The Categories of 
Aristotle were the following: — 

1. Ov<ria SUBSTANCB, 

2 ndaov Quantity. 

3. IIolov Quality. 

4. 11/309 Ti Relation. 

6. riov Where or Place. 



132 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

6. IToTe When or Time. 

7. Keiadal SITUATION. 

8. "Ex^tv Having, Holding, or Possessing. 

9. Uotelv Action. 
10. JTacri^etv Passion. 

Such is the celebrated classification of Aris- 
totle ; which, for the time when it appeared, may 
be considered as not unworthy of that great 
philosopher, though to us, at the present day, it 
appears very far from perfect, erring, as it does, 
by omission, as well as by redundancy. 

First, as to omission. Among these Categories 
we look in vain for some things which have 
received names in all languages under the sun, 
things which are present to us during all our 
waking hours, and often even when asleep, which 
alone are intimately and immediately known to 
us, and by means of which alone we become 
acquainted with all other things. Such are the 
various sensations, thoughts, and emotions, which 
together make up our consciousness. Of these, 
which we may call in general mental phenomena, 
we find no mention in the above classification. 
Quality and Relation may no doubt apply to 
mind as well as to body; but sensations, emo- 
tions, and conceptions, are overlooked. This is 
the one great omission. The other faults are 
faults of redundancy. 



THE CATEGORIES. 133 

Allowing that the first six genera are well dis- 
tinguished, what can we think of classing Action 
and Passion as genera distinct from Relation? 
Both action and passion mean the relation of 
power, or of cause and effect, only with this 
difference, that action refers particularly to the 
cause or antecedent, passion to the effect or conse- 
quent ; both being names of relation. Consequently, 
the ninth and tenth Categories must be expunged 
as redundant, being included under the fourth. 

The fifth and sixth Categories, or Place and 
Time, are quite distinct ; but how does Situation 
differ from Where or Place ? Situation, Position, 
and Place, all mean the same thing ; all relate to 
space, and to something existing in space, con- 
sidered in reference to something else so existing. 
These somethings, being not named, must be 
supposed included under one of the other Cate- 
gories, as Space is included under Place or Where. 
Consequently, the seventh Category may be ex- 
punged as redundant. 

And surely the eighth, Having, Holding, or 
Possessing, can have no pretence to a Summum 
genus, expressing, as it does, not a simple thing, 
but something very complex, the elements of 
which must be comprehended under the other 
Categories, Therefore, the eighth Category may 
also be expunged. 



134 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Aristotle's chapter on the eighth Category, on 
Possession, is rather curious. It resembles more 
an article in a dictionary, giving the various 
senses of the Greek word ^'Ex^i'V^ than a chapter 
in a scientific work. Thus, we are told that '^Ex^cPi 
to have, is variously used: — 1, First, as a mode of 
being, a disposition or habit, as when we say 
that a man has science or virtue. 2. As quantity* 
for instance, the height we have. 3. As having 
what surrounds the body, a garment, a cloak. 
4. Having in or on a part of the body, as having 
a ring on one's finger. 5. Or, in relation to a part 
of the body, as having a hand or a foot. 6. Con- 
taining any thing, as a cask has wine. 7* Possess- 
ing, as having land or houses. 8. Having, as a 
wife or a husband. There may be some faint 
analogy between all these significations, but none 
sufficient to establish a definite meaning of the 
word, fit for scientific purposes. Indeed this 
chapter is quite unworthy of Aristotle.* 

From the above examination it appears that, 
of the ten Categories of Aristotle, four must be 
expunged as redundant; while one must be 
added to render the list complete. The amended 
classification will then be the following: — 

1. Mental Phenomena. 

* Categories, Chap. XV. 



\" 



THE CATEQORIfiS. 135 

2. SuBSTANCB, divided into two species, 
Mind or Spirit, and Body or Matter. 

3. Quantity. 

4. Quality, also divided into two species, 
Mental Quality, and Bodily Quality. 

5. Relation. 

6. Place, or more simply Space, Place in- 
volving a Relation. 

7. Time. 

This new classification must be allowed to be 
an improvement upon the old ; but we may far- 
ther inquire whether it may not be rendered still 
better. It is clear that if Space and Time be 
allowed to stand distinct from Quantity, then we 
must add to these Number, for otherwise it will 
not be included under any Category. Therefore, 
to the above seven Categories we shall add 

8. Number. 

Two questions, however, still remain to be dis- 
cussed : first) whether Time, Space, and Number 
should be classed distinct from Quantity; and 
secondly, whether Relation should be separated 
from Quality. 

We have seen in the First Part, the Philoso- 
phical Vocabular}', that Quantity belongs not 
only to Material Substance, but to Time, Space, 
and Number, considered without any reference 
to Substance. With all these, Quantity is in- 



136 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

separably connected ; that is, wherever Material 
Substance, Time, Space, or Number exists, there 
is Quantity. Still, Quantity does not necessarily 
suppose Substance, for 'there may be Quantity of 
Time or of pure Space; nor does Quantity 
necessarily suppose Time, for there may be 
Quantity of Space ; nor does Quantity necessarily 
suppose Space, for there may be Quantity of Time 
or of Number ; nor finally, does Quantity neces- 
sarily suppose Number, for there may be Quantity 
of Time or of Space. Therefore, Quantity is 
something which is neither Substance, nor Time, 
nor Space, nor Number, and therefore it is pro- 
perly classed apart. 

With respect to the second question, whether 
Relation should be classed apart from Quality, it 
may at first appear that such separation is incor- 
rect, because we have seen in the former part, 
the Philosophical Vocabulary, that at bottom 
every Quality does suppose Relation of some 
kind or other. But at the same time we re- 
marked, that there was a real difference between 
Qualities, commonly called Simple, and Relative 
Qualities, inasmuch as the Relation in the former 
case, though it may be discovered by Meta- 
physical analysis, is commonly not attended to, 
our thoughts being centered, sometimes on the 
cause, sometimes on the effect, not on the Re- 



' THE CATEGORIES* 13/ 

lation between them. This is one reason why- 
Relation should be classed apart from duality ; 
but there is another more satisfactory. 

Though, strictly speaking, there is no Quality 
without some Relation, yet, in the case of Quantity, 
there is Relation without Quality. The Relations 
of Quantity in Space, Time, and Number, are the 
subject of pure Mathematics ; the Relations of 
Quantity in Body, of mixed Mathematics ; and 
these are quite distinct from Quality. Therefore 
Quality and Relation ought not to be classed 
together.** 

Some there are who class Quality, Relation, 
and Quantity, all together,under the common name 
Attribute ; but this classification must be purely 
verbal, unless it can be shown wherein these three 
agree ; and for my own part I can see no agree* 
ment, nor do I find that Logicians have been able 
to define Attribute so taken. Mr. Mill allows 
that Logicians have not given any satisfactory 
account of Attribute when taken to comprehend 



b 



The difficulty of distinguishing between Quality and Relation 
was well seen by Aristotle; for after some discussion on the 
subject, he ends by saying '' After all, if the same thing may be 
at the same time a Relation and a Quality, there is nothing absurd 
in classing it under both genera." — Categories, Chap, VIII, — 
In this case there certainly would be a Logical imperfection, for 
no one genus should over-lay another. 

T 



138 INTBODUCTION TO MENTAL PmLOSOPHT. 

Quality, Relation, and Quantity. (System of Logic 
Book I. Chap. iii. s. 6.) Another Author, and one 
of very high authority, classes Quantity, Quality, 
and Relation, under the common head Ens per 
accidensy in opposition to Ens per se or Substance ; 
but I do not see that Ens per accidens admits of 
any better definition than Attribute.'' 

Attribute is generally supposed to belong to 
Substance, and to be inseparable from it, as when 
we talk of a Substance and its Attributes ; but 
then, Quantity is not an Attribute, for Space, 
Time, and Number have Quantity, though they 
are not Substances. So Space, Time, and Number, 
have Relations quite independent of Substance, 
which Relations cannot therefore be Attributes. 
Therefore, in the vocabulary, I have restricted 
Attribute to the sense of Quality alone, and more 
particularly to one species of Quality.* 

Moreover, the word attribute is liable to am- 
biguity, for it has two senses, a Metaphysical and 
a Logical. When we divide things into Sub- 
stances and Attributes, it is clear that we speak 
metaphysically; and the division is incomplete, 
for Time, Space, and Number, are not Substances, 
nor Attributes of Substances. But when we talk 

*^ See notes to Reid*s Brief account of Aristotle's Logic, p. 688 
of Reid's works, edited by Sir William Hamilton. 

^ See article Quality. 



\ 



THE CATEGORIES. 139 

of Subject and Attribute, then we speak Logically, 
and Attribute becomes synonymous with Predi- 
cate: whereas in the former sense it corresponded 
to Quality or Property. To avoid this ambiguity, 
the word Accident^ or Ens per acddens^ has been 
substituted for Attribute, in the metaphysical 
sense. 

Upon the whole, until a better division be 
pointed out, I must be satisfied with the eight 
Categories given above, for I cannot see that they 
err either by omission or by redundancy. It 
appears to me that all the objects of thought, all 
that may become the subject of science, can be 
classed under one or other of these Categories. 
But in order fully to ascertain this point, let us 
consider first our various mental Phenomena, 
and their Objects, and secondly the various 
Sciences. 

Since the above professes to be a complete 
enumeration of the elementary objects of thought, 
there should be a thought, or, in the language of 
Locke, a simple idea, corresponding to each of 
these objects, and to none besides, while all other 
or complex ideas should be made up of these 
simple ones. This ia only to say that thoughts 
and the objects of thoughts must correspond. 
Let us then see whether the former do tally with 
the enumeration above given of the latter. 



140 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

All the Phenomena of Mind may be divided 
into two great Classes, the one of which may be 
called the Class of Outward, the other that of 
Inward Phenomena ; not that the former are less 
mental than the latter, but that it is by those 
alone we become acquainted with the world 
without. Outward Phenomena may be divided 
into two genera, Sensations and Perceptions. 
Inward Phenomena are divided into two orders, 
Intellectual Phenomena, or Thoughts, and Emo- 
tions, which are distinguished from each other by 
the absence or presence of Feeling^ in the strict 
sense of the word, that is of Pleasure or Pain, 
Happiness or Misery. Thoughts, again, are sub- 
divided into Conceptions and Relations, according 
as they do not, or do, necessarily suppose two 
things compared together. Conceptions are either 
simple or compound, the latter comprehending 
conceptions of Substances and their qualities, 
and conceptions of Modes, or modifications of 
things independent of Substance ; while Relations 
are either of co-existence, of succession, or of re- 
semblance. Such, in short, is a classification of the 
Mental Phenomena, made without any reference 
to the above classification of Things or Categories, 
the same in fact which appeared some years ago in 
my Principles of Human Happiness, and diflFering 
little from that of the late Dr. Brown. Let us 



THE CATEGOBIE8. 141 

then see whether the two classifications agree* 
To begin with the Phenomena of Mind gene- 
rally; these find a place, the first place in the 
Categories. It is clear that the Phenomena of 
Mind may themselves be objects of Thought. 

Sensations, in the strict sense of the word, 
have no Objects, we are conscious of them, and 
that is all ; for they do not suggest their causes 
directly, but indirectly, through our perceptions. 
Now the objects of our Perceptions are the 
Qualities of Matter, and these find a place among 
the Categories. Among the Inward Phenomena, 
Emotions, like Sensations, are felt, as pleasurable 
or painful, but they also have no proper objects ; 
for what are called objects of desire are known 
to us not by our Emotions, but by our perceptions 
or conceptions, which inform us of things suited 
to rouse Emotion. The other order of Inward 
Phenomena is that of Thoughts, divided into Con- 
ceptions and Relations. These last are also 
among the Categories. They are divided into 
Relations of co-existence, of succession, and of 
resemblance, a classification which holds good, as 
we have seen, whether Relation be taken in the 
restricted sense of a Mental Phenomenon look- 
ing to two other mental phenomena, or gene- 
rally, of something common to two other things. 
Now, of the Relations of co-existence, some 



142 INTRODUCTION TO BIGNTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

necessarily suppose Space, as Relations of Position ; 
others Number, as the Rules of Arithmetic ; and 
both of these Quantity ; while Relations of Suc- 
cession necessarily suppose Time. But Space, 
Number, Time, and Quantity, are among the 
Categories. 

Lastly, Conceptions are either simple or com- 
pound. Our knowledge of the former is obtained 
by analyzing the latter, which are divided into 
Conceptions of Substances, with their Qualities, 
and what I call Conceptions of Modes, or modi« 
fications of things which do not necessarily 
suppose Substance, namely, of Space, Time, and 
Number. From the conceptions of individual 
Substances, and different species of Substances, 
with their respective qualities, we rise to the 
conception of Substance in general, which alone 
remained to complete our eight Categories. 

Thus it appears that all the eight Categories, 
and as far as we can see, no others, have Mental 
Phenomena corresponding to them. Phenomena 
of which those are the Objects ; and if so, the 
correctness of the above enumeration of Cate- 
gories is confirmed. 

Let us now compare the various Sciences with 
the Categories above given. For this purpose I 
shall take that Classification of the Sciences 
which I published some time ago, and which had 



THE CATEGORIES. 143 

engaged my attention for years, long before I 
thought of these Categories. According to that 
Classification, the Sciences are divided into the 
Mental^ the Physical, and the Mathematical, or 
Metaphysics, Physics, and Mathematics. The 
Mental Sciences treat either of the Substance 
Mind, or of its dualities. Relations, and Phe- 
nomena, all of which are included in the Cate* 
gories ; while the Physical Sciences treat of the 
Substance Body, its Qualities and Relations, 
which also are contained in the same. Lastly, 
Mathematics treat of Quantity, whether of Space, 
Time, or Number, and these make up the rest of 
the Categories. 

The Book of Categories, divided into fifteen 
chapters, forms the first part of Aristotle's great 
Work on Logic — The Organon. Notwithstanding, 
an eminent Logician of the present day, and 
at the same time a great admirer of Aristotle, 
maintains that the doctrine of the Categories 
belongs not to pure Logic, because it treats of 
Things. It cannot be denied, however, that the 
doctrine of Names appertains to pure Logic, and 
if so, the classification of names. Therefore the 
Categories of Names, at least, belong to pure 
Logic. But the Categories of Names are the 
same as the Categories of Things, and in classify- 
ing the one, we classify the other also. A Name 



144 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

without a thing corresponding to it, is a contra- 
diction. Mere Articulate sounds, expressed by 
letters and syllables, such as Fanfarom^ are not 
Names^ for they stand for no Thing. Con- 
sequently the Categories do belong to pure Logic. 
Indeed, the doctrine of the Categories belongs 
to that branch of Philosophy which I have called 
Philosophia prima^ as well as to pure Logic. It is 
the connecting link between them. Philosophia 
prima, or Primary Logic, treats, as we have seen, 
of the first Principles of human knowledge, the 
fundamental Principles of belief; and it must 
also include the Elements of all knowledge, the 
Categories of things. Pure Logic, on the other 
hand, begins with Names, and in classifpng them 
classifies Things also. Thus the two Sciences 
meet. 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLES. 145 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLES. 



The doctrine respecting Proposition has been 
involved in some obscurity, from a want of atten- 
tion to three fundamental distinctions ; for there 
are three important questions which ought to be 
discussed separately. The first, what is a Pro- 
position ? What is the definition of a Proposition 
in general ? 

I. A Proposition may be considered under 
two points of view. We may look more par- 
ticularly to the mind which frames it, or else to 
the form of words in which it is expressed. For 
every Proposition supposes a mental act, and a 
verbal expression. Or what comes to the same 
thing, we may attend chiefly to the mental opera- 
tion necessary to a Proposition, or else to the 
formal result. The first belongs to the province 
of the pure Metaphysician, the second, to that of 
the Logician and Grammarian. It appertains 
then to pure Metaphysics to determine the nature 

u 



146 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

of those faculties necessary to form a Proposi- 
tion ; while to Logic, and Grammar, belongs the 
result, viz. the Proposition itself. Now, as Con- 
ception and Judgment are universally allowed to 
be indispensable to the framing of any Proposition, 
and as the latter of these faculties supposes the 
former, as, moreover, there is no Proposition 
without words, it follows that, metaphysically, a 
Proposition may be defined a judgment expressed 
in words. 

This, though a correct metaphysical definition, 
will not be of any use until judgment itself be 
defined; and therefore we must adopt another 
method of ascertaining the nature of a Proposi- 
tion. While the Metaphysician analyzes the 
phenomena of mind in order to determine the 
nature of judgment, the Logician must analyze 
Propositions themselves. As examples take the 
following : — 

1. Man is mortal. 

2. The Elephant is long lived. 

3. The Lion is carnivorous. 

4. The Hare is timid. 

5. Courage is admired. 

6. Virtue is esteemed. 

7. Generosity is beloved. 

8. Deer are not carnivorous. 

9. Cowardice is not respected. 



PROPOSITION, THE PRBDICABLES. 147 

10. Napoleon was not a saint. 

1 1 . Washington was not an usurper. 

12. Brutus killed Caesar. 

1 3. Antony loved Cleopatra. 

14. Alexander conquered Darius. 

15. The three angles of a triangle are equal 
to two right lines. 

16. Any two sides of a triangle are together 
greater than the third side. 

17. The French Convention treated Louis 
XVI. cruelly. 

18. The Chamber of Peers condemned Ney 
to death ungenerously. 

19. Italy may be free. 

20. No one can say. 

2 1 . Napoleon might have conquered Russia. 
All these, however different, will be universally 

allowed to be Propositions, and if so, there must 
be something common to them all. 

In the first place, they are all composed of 
words, and of words which, taken together, make 
perfect sense, one of them being a verb. In short, 
they are all sentences. But, there are sentences, 
such as a question, a prayer, a command, .which 
are not Propositions. Secondly, each of these 
Propositions has two extremes or terms, as they 
are called, such as Man and Mortal, Generosity 
and Beloved, Brutus and Killed Ccesar, three 



148 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

angles of a triangle and equal to two right 
angles, &c., one of which is called the Subject, 
the other the Predicate. Thirdly, these two 
terms are connected by means of a verb, which 
is sometimes the simple copula or sign of affir- 
mation is^ at other times a word of a more com- 
pound signification, such as killed, loved^ conquered, 
which involves an affirmation, and may be ana- 
lyzed into was the killer of, was the lover of, was 
the conqueror of. Sometimes to the verb is added 
the sign of denial not; sometimes other words 
which modify the sense, such as equal to, and 
greater than, cruelly, ungenerously; or some mo- 
dification of the verb is used, as may be, can say, 
or might have. From all this it follows that a 
Proposition may be defined to be a sentence, or 
combination of words with meaning, whereby some- 
thing is affirmed or denied of some other thing, 
either simply, or with some modification. 

This is the proper Logical definition of a 
Proposition ; the Metaphysical definition of the 
same being as above stated, a judgment expressed 
in words. 

The Logical definition might be expressed 
more shortly, but rather obscurely, as a sentence 
declaratory or enunciative. DiflFerent modes of 
declaration are called in Grammar, Moods, as the 
Indicative, Subjunctive, Potential, Optative. The 



PROPOSITION, THE PRBDICABLBS. 149 

close connection between Logic and Grammar 
everywhere appears. 

From the above we see that every Proposition 
must have two terms at least. But there are 
sentences which all allow to be Propositions, 
though they seem to have only one term, such as 
it rains, it snows, it thunders, and God is, the 
Lion exists, &c. With respect to the first class 
of these, we may observe that the indefinite word 
it refers to some subject or other understood, 
though it does not at once appear to what subject, 
whether sky, cloud, or air. The pronoun it came 
to be used, either for brevity, or because the 
proper subject was doubtful, but it evidently 
points to something ; and the phrase, it rains, is 
exactly equivalent to the sky rains, or the cloud, 
or the air rains. Again the word rains is an 
abbreviation of is raining^ and the one may be 
substituted for the other, without the least in- 
accuracy. Therefore, at full, the sentence it rains 
becomes, the air^ or sky^ or cloud is raining, which 
is a Proposition in due form. 

As to the second class of Propositions, ap- 
parently incomplete, God is, the Lion exists, &c., 
we must remember that the word is has two 
distinct meanings. Sometimes it is a mere copula, 
the sign of affirmation, connecting the Predicate 
with the Subject, as when we say a triangle is a 



150 INTRODUCTIOM TO MENTAL PHILOBOPHT. 

three sided figure ; but at other times it compre- 
hends besides this the notion of real existence. 
Thus, the sentence God is, means God eofistSy or 
at full, God is eaisting, which is a regular Proposi- 
tion. In like manner, the Lion exists, is equivalent 
to the Lion is existing; and so with all other 
Propositions of the sort in which real existence 
is predicated of something, whether by means of 
the verb to be, or of the less ambiguous verb to 
exist. 

As there are some Propositions which seem to 
contain less than two terms, so are there others, 
or Compound Propositions, which contain more 
than two ; but these can . all be resolved into 
simple ones. Thus, the compound proposition, 
Brutus and Ccissius waged war with Octamus and 
Antony, comprehends the following simple propo- 
sitions : — 

Brutus waged war with Octavius. 

Brutus waged war with Antony. 

Cassius waged war with Octavius. 

Cassius waged war with Antony. 
Those two together waged war with these two 
together. 

This example may suffice to show how Com- 
pound Propositions may be analyzed. Here we 
see that the first particle and replaces one entire 
proposition, the second and two propositions, the 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLE& 151 

two taken together one more; so that this one 
compound proposition contains five simple. 

XL Having determined the nature of a Pro- 
position, and having seen that it is always 
composed of two terms at least, connected 
together by an affirmative or negative copula, the 
second principal question presents itself, viz. 
What things may be signified by those terms "? 

Now, whatever may be of itself an object of 
Thought, and as such can receive a fully signifi- 
cant name, may be the subject or predicate of a 
Proposition ; for of such an object something or 
other may be affirmed or denied, or that object 
may itself be affirmed or denied of something 
else. Therefore, the terms of all Propositions 
must correspond to one or other of the Cate- 
gories of Things, which we have already deter- 
mined. 

With reference to Things compared, there 
must then be at least as many sorts of Pro- 
positions, as there are Categories. Thus, we 
may have Propositions where Mental Phenomena 
are compared with Mental Phenomena, Spirit with 
Spirit, Body with Body, Quality with Quality, 
Relation with Relation, Quantity with Quantity, 
Space with Space, Time with Time, and Number 
with Number. 

This only we must remember, that, while the 



152 IMTBODUCnOH TO MKHTAL VHnJOBOPHY. 



subject of a Propositioii may be either a general 
or a singular Name, as, Man is a religious being ; 
Socrates was a Moral Philosopher ; die predicate 
must be general, for predication means that 
something common to many things is affirmed or 
denied of one or more. No proposition then 
can exist without a general term. We can make 
no proposition out of proper names alone, but 
only the unmeaning form of, Socrates is, or was, 
not Solon. 

When we consider attentively these various 
sorts of Propositions, we shall find, however, that 
they may be reduced to a smaller number. All 
Propositions relative to Mind and its Phenomena 
may be properly considered as forming but one 
class, that of Mental Propositions ; all relative to 
Body, its qualities and relations, another, under 
the name of Physical Propositions; while those 
which relate to Quantity, whether of Space, Time, 
or Number, may be called Mathematical Proposi- 
tions; a classification exactly corresponding to 
that of the Sciences. 

According to this view, the above eight Cate- 
gories might be reduced to three, Mind, Body, 
Quantity, under one or other of which all things 
might be comprehended. In this view, under 
the term Mind, would be comprised not only the 
permanent thing, or substance, Spirit, but also 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLE& 153 

its qualities, and its fugitive phenomena ; under 
Body, not only the substance Body, but all its 
qualities and relations; while all the relations 
of Space, Time, and Number, would be compre- 
hended under Quantity. 

But whether we adopt this classification of 
Categories or not, as preferable to that before 
given, the division of Propositions into Mental, 
Physical, and Mathematical, seems agreeable to 
the nature of things, as well as to the natural 
division of the Sciences, which are made up of 
Propositions, and of nothing else. Other Propo- 
sitions, no doubt, there are, of a mixed nature, 
such as all those relative to the influence of 
Mind on Body, or of Body on Mind; where 
the things are widely different, though there be a 
relation between them. These may be called 
mixed Propositions, the terms corresponding to 
things belonging to different Categories. 

We see from the above the futility of those 
discussions which have so much occupied Lo- 
gicians, respecting the terms of a Proposition, 
whether they correspond to Ideas, to Things, or 
to Names. Some Propositions, it is clear, relate 
to Ideas, others to things different from Ideas. 
In the proposition, " ambition is a more durable 
passion than love," it is quite evident that the 
terms Ambition and Love stand for Emotions, 

X 



154 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

which are Feelings, or Mental Phenomena. But 
in the proposition, ''gold is heavier than lead," it is 
no less evident that the terms gold and lead 
stand for material substances, which all mankind 
believe, whether with or without reason, to have 
an independent existence without the mind. 
True it is that gold and lead are known to us 
only through our Sensations and Perceptions, 
and that we can form no Proposition respecting 
them, but through the notions of our mind. 
But, the common observer, as well as the physi- 
cal enquirer, does not stop to analyze the notion, 
as the Metaphysician does, but he passes on at 
once to the material object ; of that he thinks, 
concerning that he forms an opinion, and makes 
a proposition. Can any one really maintain that 
there is no difference in the terms of the two 
propositions above stated, that gold and lead, no 
less than love and ambition, stand for Ideas or 
Mental Phenomena, and nothing else? Surely 
common sense is sufficient to settle this question. 
Without entering upon the grounds of our con- 
viction, it is certain that, in speaking of gold and 
silver, we speak of things which we believe to be 
distinct from the mind and its phenomena. 

One very celebrated Metaphysician *" has main- 
tained that in all Propositions the terms of com- 

" Hobbes. 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLE8. 155 

parison are Names, and nothing but Names. 
Let us examine the meaning of this statement, 
and see how it applies. To suppose that in the 
Proposition, ^^ ambition is a more durable passion 
than love," all we assert is that the name ambition 
is more durable than the name love, is an ab- 
surdity too palpable to be maintained by any one. 
Do we then compare the meaning of the names, 
and do we assert that the meaning of the name 
ambition is more durable than the meaning of 
the name love ? This also is an absurdity. We 
must assert then that the name ambition means 
something which is more durable than what is 
meant by the name love. The question then 
comes to be, do we here assert that the name 
ambition, in the proper, that is in the usual 
signification of words, implies a passion more 
durable than love, as a part of its definition? 
or, do we assert a new fact not supposed to be 
included in the common sense of the word ? If 
the former, then our Proposition is one relating 
to the meaning of a word, or verbal ; if the latter, 
then our Proposition is real, where one thing is 
compared with another thing, not a name with a 
meaning or thing. For this is a verbal Pro- 
position, where the two terms are a name, a mere 
name, and a thing ; and the assertion is that the 
one is, or is not* generally employed to mean the 



156 INTBODUCnON TO MENTAL PHIL060PHT. 

other. To which of these kinds of Propositions, 
"ambition is more durable than love'* belongs, 
the reader will at once determine ; and if this be 
a real Proposition, then all Propositions are not 
verbal. 

Though all Propositions be not verbal, yet 
some are. A verbal Proposition, as we have said, 
is one where one of the terms is a mere Name, 
and the other a Name or Names suggesting a 
Thing ; so that even in verbal Propositions one 
of the terms is a Thing. Thus, in the verbal 
Proposition, " a triangle is a figure with three sides 
and three angles,'' the assertion is that the word 
triangle^ either in ordinary discourse, or else in 
books of Science, means the thing here described. 
The word triangle may be supposed to convey no 
meaning at all before one meets with this Pro- 
position ; it is a collection of letters, an articulate 
sound, but it may be nothing else. This Pro- 
position makes it a true word, that is, gives it a 
meaning which it had not before, states a Thing 
to which by convention it is applicable. Such is 
a verbal Proposition. 

Though some verbal Propositions are alto- 
gether trifling, the bane of science, and the source 
of endless and unprofitable disputes, because 
they are not at once seen to be verbal ; yet we 
must not suppose that all verbal Propositions are 



PROPOSITION^ THE PBEDICABLE8. 157 

vain and futile. On the contrary, some of the 
most important Propositions are strictly verbal. 
Such are all definitions. The object of a defi- 
nition, such as that of a triangle above given, is 
to give a meaning, a definite meaning, to a word 
before supposed either to have none, or one un- 
certain and fluctuating. Consequently, a Name, 
a mere Name, is one term of the Proposition, and 
a Name or Names which stand for Things is 
another. Now, in order to determine to what 
Things a Name should be applicable, we must 
have clear notions of the nature of Things, their 
resemblances, and differences ; for to things simi- 
lar we give a common name, to things different, 
different names. Therefore, a good definition 
often requires a long and painful investigation 
into the nature of Things, and ought to be not 
the beginning but the end of our inquiries, the 
summing up of all that we have learnt. Thus, it 
appears that definitions, though verbal Proposi- 
tions, are not inferior in importance to real. 

Some verbal Propositions.are evidently so, but 
not all. Where one of the Names is a new 
word suggesting nothing, then any assertion con- 
cerning it must be seen to be verbal ; but where 
both are old and well known, we are apt to think 
that neither requires definition, and therefore 
that whatever is said of one of them must be a 
fact not referring to the meaning of the Name. 



158 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOfiOPHT. 

Since verbal Propositions are so insidious^ it 
becomes very desirable to have some ready 
criterion^ whereby we may discover them. As 
one criterion, I may mention the employment 
of a definition. If a dispute be at once termi- 
nated by a definition, then we may be sure that 
the Proposition contested is purely verbal. Sup- 
pose the question to be, whether Prudence be a 
virtue. Define Virtue, and the dispute is settled 
at once ; therefore the question is verbal. 

I may suggest another criterion. Since the 
simple copula is is alone employed in definition, 
and alone necessary, wherever we find a Proposi- 
tion containing that copula as the only verb, there 
we should be on our guard. Substitute for the 
verb 19, the word means, or the words means same- 
thing comprehended under the meaning of, and if 
the Proposition then make sense, we may be 
sure that it is verbal. 

Thus, in the Proposition, ^^ a triangle is a figure 
with three sides and three angles," substitute 
means for is, and the sense is the same. So in 
the Proposition " prudence is a virtue," substitute 
the other phrase, and we have '^ prudence means 
something comprehended under the meaning of 
virtue," which is also sense. Both these then are 
verbal Propositions. But substitute either of 
these phrases in the Proposition, ^^ ambition is a 



PROFOSITIONy THE PREDICABLES. 159 

more durable passion than love," and the result 
is nonsense. This, therefore, is not a verbal Pro- 
position. Ambition may be a more durable 
passion than love, but certainly that is not the 
meaning of the word ambition. 

Wherever the Predicate contains the whole of 
the definition, there the copula is or means is em- 
ployed ; but where it contains only a part of the 
definition, there the longer form of words must 
be used. Thus in the Proposition, "a triangle 
is^ or means, a figure with three sides, and three 
angles," the Predicate is a complete definition ; 
while in this, '' prudence is a virtue, i. e. means 
something comprehended under the meaning of 
virtue," the predicate is only a part of the defini- 
tion, the genus, of which prudence is a species. 

We must here observe that the distinctions of 
Propositions into Mental, Physical, and Mathe- 
matical, into real and verbal, are Metaphysical, 
not Logical distinctions ; for they relate to the 
nature of Things which the terms stand for ; 
whereas piu'e Logic looks only to the Form or 
Expression. Thus, in pure Logic, Propositions 
are divided into Categorical, and H3rpothetical, 
according as they enounce absolutely, or under 
a condition ; as, '* man is a rational animal," is 
Categorical ; " the boy may learn," Hypothetical. 
Propositions are again divided, in pure Logic, 



160 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

into Affirmative and Negative, Universal and 
Particular, words which explain themselves. These 
distinctions need not here be dwelt upon, as they 
are found in all books of Logic: but what is 
necessary to attend to, is the difference between 
the Logical and the Metaphysical nature of Pro* 
positions. It is the latter of these that I here 
treat of. 

It was necessary in the first instance to 
determine the nature of a Proposition, both 
Metaphysically, and Logically, and to define it 
accordingly : but the rest of this article relates 
to Propositions considered Metaphysically. The 
Logical divisions of Propositions, and the Logi- 
cal Predicables also, as we shall see presently^ 
must not be confounded with the Metaphysical 
divisions and the Metaphysical Predicables. 

Here it may not be out of place to remark, 
once for all, that the word Metaphysical is used 
in three different senses at least, which may be 
determined by the context. We shall know the 
meaning of the word, by considering to what it is 
opposed. When Metaphysical is opposed to 
Physical or Material, it means Mental. In this 
sense. Metaphysics is sometimes called Psychology. 
But when Metaphysical is opposed to Logical, 
then, as, on the one hand. Logical refers to con- 
sistent thinking^ Metaphysical, on the other, relates 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLES* 161 

to the correspondence between our thoughts and 
the nature of things. In this sense, Metaphysi- 
cal and Real are synonymous. Logical truth is 
sometimes called subjective, as confined to the 
subject who thinks, and Metaphysical objective^ 
as relating to an object, either really distinct^ or 
considered for the time as distinct from the sub- 
ject. Lastly, Metaphysical sometimes means 
nothing more than ewact, and Metaphysically true 
is exactly true. Thus, Mr. James Mill, in his 
Elements of Political Economy, says, " the objec- 
tion is not only practically immaterial, it is 
metaphysically unsound." 

II L Having determined the nature of a Pro- 
position in general, and also having seen what 
the two terms of a Proposition stand for, what 
things they are meant to represent; it now 
remains in the third place, to ascertain what it is 
which we affirm or deny concerning these things. 
This is the doctrine of Predication, or of the 
Predicables, as it is commonly called in books of 
Logic, an acquaintance with which will complete 
what is here necessary to be known with respect 
to Propositions. We have seen that in every 
Proposition there are at least two terms, and that 
the thing suggested by one of these terms is 
affirmed or denied of the thing suggested by the 
other. But this we cannot do with meaning, 

Y 



162 INTRODUCTION TO MEI^TAL PHILOSOPST. 

unless we see that there is, or is not some relation 
between them. The feeling of relation is dis- 
tinguished from conception by this, that it 
necessarily implies three mental states, two con- 
ceptions, and the relative feeling which connects 
them. So, the objects which correspond to those 
conceptions are considered, either each alone and 
separate^ or else as bearing one upon the other, 
as somehow connected, or related. Now what a 
Proposition sets forth in words is^ that such and 
such a relation does or does not subsist between 
two things which are named. In short, there are 
two things, and not one alone mentioned, and an 
assertion is made concerning these two things, 
that they have or have not something in common. 
Consequently, what is asserted, or predicated, is a 
relation. 

This being determined, our task may be con- 
sidered as nearly accomplished, for we have 
already considered the subject of relation, and 
the various kindS thereof. Relations, we have 
seen, are either of Coexistence, of Succession, or 
of Resemblance, and consequently, if Predication 
mean the affirmation or denial of a relation, then, 
in every Proposition, what we affirm or deny is, 
that some coexistence, or some succession, or 
some resemblance, subsists between two things. 
Such is the nature of Predication ; and these are 
three Predicables. 



PROPOSITION^ THE PREDICABLES. 163 

Are these then the only Predicables? If all 
propositions contained two terms respecting two 
things really different, and not one and the same, 
then every affirmation or denial concerning them 
would be the predication of some Relation, which 
would be one either of coexistence, of succession, 
or of resemblance. But there are some proposi- 
tions, regular in form and real as to matter, in 
which the two terms stand for one and the same 
thing. When I say, '* this is the man whom I met 
yesterday," I state two propositions, both regular, 
and taken together instructive ; though the terms 
of the first stand for the same thing, the same 
individual man. But between an individual and 
the same individual there cannot be, properly 
speaking, any Relation, for relation supposes two 
things and not one only. Therefore, to meet 
such cases as this, we must allow another Pre- 
dicable, distinct from those above mentioned, viz. 
that of Identity, or Sameness ; meaning by this, 
real sameness, and not merely close resemblance, 
as the word often signifies. Propositions pre- 
dicating identity may no doubt be verbal, but 
they are not so necessarily. When I say, '^ this 
is the man who won the prize," the proposition, 
or rather the propositions, are real ; but when I 
state that '^Setubal and Saint Ubes are the same," 
what I affirm is that the proper names, Setubal 



164 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

and Saint Ubes denote the same place, an affirma- 
tion evidently verbal. 

We must not confound propositions predicat- 
ing identity with those which have been called 
identical propositions; such as ^^a square is a 
square," "a man is a man," "an elephant is an ele- 
phant,'* wherein a term is affirmed of itself. These 
are the very perfection of trifling, for they give us 
no information, even as to the meaning of names. 
But it is unnecessary to add one word to what 
Locke has written on these frivolous propositions. 

There is still another sort of propositions, 
where we look in vain for any proper relation 
between two things. This is the case where ex- 
istence alone is predicated. "God is," is assuredly 
a proposition, and one of vast importance, though 
in form it be so simple ; it is, as we have seen, 
equivalent to "God exists," or "is existing," or 
" is an existing Being ;" a proposition, in which it 
is not easy to trace any coexistence, succession, 
or resemblance. If " God is" were equivalent to 
** God is one of existing beings", then it might be 
said that the proposition stated a resemblance be- 
tween God and other beings, a resemblance in 
their common existence, though this would be far- 
fetched ; but " God is," does not seem to refer to 
any other being ; it is, as far as possible, an abso- 
lute Proposition. Therefore, to those Predicables 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICADLES. 165 

before mentioned we must now add that of Ex- 
istence. The complete list of the Predicables 
will then be, Relation, whether of Coewistence, 
Succession, or Resemblance, Identity, Existence. 

Is it possible to explain what we mean by 
Existence, or is our notion thereof too simple to 
admit of analysis ? With the word Existence is 
often joined the word Real, as if Real Existence 
were different from Existence simply. Real 
Existence then may admit of analysis, though 
Existence do not. By Real Existence, I conceive 
we mean Substantial Existence, Existence as a 
substance, that is, as something permanent 
among innumerable modifications. Now sub- 
stances are of two sorts, Spirit and Body; and 
therefore Real Existence means Existence as a 
Spirit or as a Body. 

Simple Existence seems to me to defy analysis. 
Many things are allowed to exist which have 
no Real or Substantial Existence, such as the 
thoughts which flit across our mind. Even Time 
and Space are said to exist; though, wherein 
empty space differs from nothing no one can 
tell ; and if time and space exist, then do their 
modifications exist, and the figures of Mathe- 
matics exist, though not bodily. On the other 
hand, we can conceive things which no one now 
allows to exist, as centaur, mermaid, land unicorn. 



166 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

These are said to exist only in idea or in imagina- 
tion ; that is, the idea exists, but nothing corres- 
ponding thereto, absolutely nothing. But when 
we say that mathematical triangles and squares 
do not exist, all we mean is, that they do not 
exist bodily ; we allow that they exist somehow, 
though how we cannot tell ; we do not look upon 
them as chimeras, centaurs, and unicorns, which 
have no sort of existence* 

When existence is predicated of any thing, 
real existence is almost always meant. Thus '^ God 
is," means, God exists as a substantial or per* 
manent Being, endowed with innumerable attri- 
butes. The question whether time and space 
exist, may be regarded as, at bottom, but verbal, 
or a question as to the applicability of the word 
exists ; though, like many other verbal disputes, 

it touches hard upon things. For if, by denying 

« 

that space and time, and the figures of Mathe- 
matics, exist, we are led to infer that the science 
of Mathematics has no base, a question that 
might seem but verbal, becomes raised to one of 
real importance. 

These, then, we propose as a list of the Predi- 
cables, of all that can be affirmed or denied of 
any thing. When we affirm that " the wild rose 
has five petals," we state a Relation of Co- 
existence; when we say "opium causes sleep,'^ 



PROPOBITIONy THE PREDICABLES. 167 

we bring forward a Relation of Succession, in 
this case, of Cause and Effect ; when we assert 
that " a bat is like a bird/* or that " blue is like 
green/' we enounce a Relation of Resemblance ; 
when we say ^^ this is the same man who kept the 
inn ten years ago,'* we declare Identity; and 
lastly, when we conclude from the innumerable 
proofs of design in the universe, that " there is a 
God,*^ we proclaim His real existence. 

2. I shall conclude this subject with a few 
remarks on some former lists of Fredicables. 
The most ancient, and the most celebrated of 
these, is contained in "Prophyry's Introduction 
to the Categories," which for many ages was 
adopted by Logicians as the standard work on 
this subject, adopted as of equal authority with 
the Organon of Aristotle, to which it was prefixed. 
According to this famous classification, all that 
could be predicated of any thing was, its 

Genus, 

Species, 

Specific difference, or differentia. 
Some Property, 
Or some Accident of the same. 

When I say, *'a triangle is a figure,'* I pre- 
dicate the Genus to which triangle belongs; 
when I state, ^' a triangle is a figure with three 
sides and three angles/' I enounce the Species; 



168 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

when I affirm, ^^a triangle has three sides and three 
angles/' I mention the Difference which distin- 
guishes it from Other species of the same genus. 
Figure; when I declare that **in every triangle 
any two of the sides are together greater than 
the third side," I assert a Property ; and when I 
observe, "this triangle is large," I state an 
Accident. 

Now what first strikes us with respect to this 
famous classification, is, that three of these Pre- 
dicables are applicable only to verbal Propositions, 
i. e. to Propositions concerning the signification 
of names* The first three are all about definition, 
and nothing else. In saying that a triangle is a 
figure, I so far define a triangle as to distinguish 
it from a host of other things which are not 
figures, and in stating farther that it is a figure 
with three sides and three angles, I complete the 
definition by mentioning how it differs from other 
figures. But in all this, the question is merely 
as to the meaning of the word triangle, as to 
what it is used to represent. So when I say that 
a man is an animal, or a rational animal, I state 
only what the name man generally means, what 
it is supposed usually to suggest ; I affirm nothing 
more. In short, the Genus is a part of the defi- 
nition^ the Specific difference is the other part, 
and the two together make up the complete 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLES. 169 

definition of the Species, so that one and all give 
only the meaning of names, and their place in 
the scale of classification as Genus or Species. 
Therefore, these three ought to be excluded from 
a list of real Predicables, whereby some informa- 
tion is afforded not comprised in the received 
signification of a name. In opposition to the 
latter, the former may be called verbal Predicables. 
Real Predicables belong to Metaphysics, verbal 
to Logic. 

The case of Property is different. A Pro- 
perty supposes something not contained in the 
definition of the name; though it constantly 
accompanies the thing signified. That any two 
sides of a triangle are together greater than the 
third side, is always true ; but the truth is not 
comprised in the meaning of the word triangle; 
nay, three previous Mathematical Propositions 
are required to prove it. So, when we say that 
heat causes expansion, we state a Property of 
heat, certainly not comprehended under the usual 
meaning of the word. 

Thus, as we see, there are Properties of two 
kinds, one where Uniform Coexistence, another 
where Uniform Succession, or Causation is an- 
nounced. The Property of triangles, above men- 
tioned, is a case of the former sort ; that of heat, 
of the latter. Property then, taken in its largest 

z 



170 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHIL060PUT. 

sense, comprehends the relation of Uniform Co- 
existence, as well as of Uniform Succession. 

Lastly, as to Accident. Accidents are divided 
by Logicians into Inseparable, and Separable. An 
Inseparable Accident is something which, so far 
as we have observed, always attends a subject, 
but which we could conceive to be wanting, 
without the loss of the characteristics peculiar 
to the subject, or of any Properties thereto be- 
longing. Thus, we may have never seen, nor 
heard of, any but white swans; but we can 
conceive birds similar in all other respects to 
swans, and having all the properties of the same, 
except whiteness. There is nothing evidently 
absurd in the line of the poet, 

*' Rara avis in terris nigroque simiUima cygno," 

as there would be if whiteness were either in- 
cluded in our definition of swans, or supposed to 
be of necessity inseparable from them. 

From this it appears, that an Inseparable 
Accident is nearly allied to a Property ; and in 
many cases it would probably be difficult to 
distinguish the two. At all events, the Accident, 
like a Property, is something supposed^ at least, 
to be uniform, whether it be so actually or not, 
generally some uniform coexistence, as of the 
colour whiteness, with the other properties of 
the swan. 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLES. l/l 

A Separable Accident^ on the other hand, is 
not always found, even within the limited range 
of our experience, not in all the individuals of a 
species, not even in the same individual at all 
times. There is a flower called Lychnis dioica^ or 
bachelor's button, some specimens of which in the 
wild state are red, others white, though of the 
same species. Colour then, here, is a separable 
accident. '^ John is at dinner," expresses an ac- 
cident separable even from the individual, for 
John is not always at dinner. A separable 
accident then differs from an inseparable accident 
as well as from a property, in this, that it is not 
an invariable but a casual coexistence, or a 
casual succession of things. 

Upon the whole, it appears from this inquiry, 
that the first three of the scholastic Predicables 
are merely verbal ; while the two latter, if largely 
understood, comprise a great part of the Pre- 
dicables which I have proposed. Identity how- 
ever, and real Existence, find no place in the old 
classification. Thus, the old classification of 
Predicables is neither *' a purely formal general- 
ization," as it has been styled by a very high 
authority in Logic,' nor yet entirely real, but 
partly the one, partly the other. The first three 

' See notes to " Reid*s Brief Account of Aristotle's Logic,*' 
p. 687 of Reid's works, edited by Sir William Hamilton. 



172 INTKODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

of these Predicables are Logical, Formal, or 
Verbal ; the two latter Metaphysical or Real. 

In the Essay concerning Human Understand- 
ing,^ Locke reduces all that can be affirmed or 
denied about two things, one of another, or, in 
his language, about two Ideas, to four heads, viz. 
1. Identity or Diversity. 2. Relation. 3. Coexist- 
ence, or necessary connexion. 4. Real Existence. 
With respect to the first. Identity, it appears by 
Locke's own explanation, that he meant not 
Identity properly so called or absolute sameness, 
but close resemblance. It is clear also from the 
context that under Coexistence, or necessary 
connection, he included invariable succession, or 
sequence in time ; for, as an instance of Coexist- 
ence, he brings forward the fact that iron is 
susceptible of magnetical impressions. And he 
openly allows that '* Identity," in his sense of close 
resemblance, "and Coexistence, are truly nothing 
but Relations," of a peculiar kind indeed, and 
therefore, as he thinks, to be classed apart from 
Relations in general. Therefore, these Predicables 
of Locke, though diflFerently classed, comprehend 
in reality nothing different from mine, and all 
mine, with one exception, that of absolute identity 
or sameness, which he has omitted. 

Hume, in his first work, "A Treatise of Human 

8 Book IV. Chap. 1. 



PROPOSITION, THE PREDICABLE8. 173 

Nature,"^ observes that "it may perhaps be 
esteemed an endless task to enumerate all these 
qualities, which make objects admit of comparison, 
and by which the Ideas of Philosophical relation 
are produced. But if we diligently consider 
them, we shall find that without difficulty they 
may be comprised under seven general heads, 
which may be considered as the sources of all 
philosophical relation."' He then proceeds to 
enumerate these seven, which are, 1. Resemblance. 
2. Identity. 3. Relations of Space and Time. 
4. Relations of Quantity and Number. 5. De- 
grees of Quality, 6. Contrariety. 7- The Rela- 
tion of Cause and Effect. Now the first and 
second of these are contained in my classifica- 
tion, the third and fourth come under the more 
general head of Relations of Coexistence, while 
the fifth and seventh are included under Rela^ 
tions of Succession. There remains, then, only 
the Relation of Contrariety, which is but a striking 
difference, a difference which always supposes 
some resemblance. Were there no resemblance 
there would be no contrast. A dwarf contrasts 
well with a giant, less with an elephant, and not 
at all with a mountain. Contrariety then is in- 
cluded under resemblance. It supposes resem- 
blance in some particulars, perhaps in many, the 

^ Book I. Sect. 6. 



174 INTBOfDUCTlON TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

absence of it in others. But the mere absence of 
a relation is no new relation. 

In truth, resemblance as much supposes dif- 
ference as diflPerence resemblance. When we 
say that one thing resembles another, we in fact 
affirm that they are not one and the same, and 
if not the same or identical, there must be dif- 
ferences as well as resemblances. The mind of 
one man resembles that of another; but how 
many are the diflferences ! The idea which the 
same man is conscious of at one time may be as 
like as possible to the idea which he holds at 
another; but still there must be between them 
the difference in the time of their appearance. 

Upon the whole then, it appears that the Pre- 
dicables of Hume are fundamentally the same as 
mine, only differently arranged, with one excep- 
tion, that of Real Existence, which he has omitted, 
probably as not agreeable to his sceptical views. 
Locke mentions Real Existence, which Uume 
omits, while Hume mentions absolute Identity 
omitted by Locke. 

Lastly, Mr. Mill, in his System of Logic, enu- 
merates Existence, Coexistence, Sequence, Causa- 
tion, and Resemblance, and observes that one or 
other of these is asserted or denied in every pro- 
position, without exception.' This classification 

' System of Logic, Book I. Chap. 5. 



PROPOSITION, THE PBEDICABUBS. 17 5 

differs from the one proposed above, in two par- 
ticulars ; first, by classing Causation apart from 
Sequence, under which I have comprehended it ; 
and secondly, by omitting Identity. This last 
then is the only important difference. 

With these remarks I conclude the subject of 
Proposition and the Predicables. 



176 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHT. 



REASONING. 



God has given to man two grand means for 
the advancement of knowledge, and the discovery 
of truth, Observation, and Reasoning. Some 
truths are learnt by observation alone, as par- 
ticular facts submitted to the senses ; others, by 
reasoning alone, as the truths of pure Mathema* 
tics ; others again, and by far the greater number, 
by observation and reasoning together. All men 
know what is meant by observation. Suffice it 
then to remark that observation is of two kinds ; 
the one exercised upon phenomena over which 
we have no control; the other, upon changes 
which we ourselves have induced. The former 
may be called natural^ the latter artificial obser- 
vation, for it is exercised upon experiments. 

Though all men know what observation is, 
but few, comparatively, know how to observe to the 
best advantage. For observation simply is of 
very limited use: it may certainly prevent us 



REASONmO. 177 

from falling into a pit, or sinking in a quagmire 
before our eyes; but unless some inference be 
drawn from it, no general truth, no science can 
be established. Consequently, observation is 
useful, chiefly as a ground for inference, or 
reasoning ; and in common discourse, as well as 
in many popular works, they are so blended, that 
it does not readily appear where the one ends 
and the other begins. Facts, and inferences from 
facts, are continually confounded by inaccurate 
speakers and writers. 

The nature of Reasoning, and its different 
kinds are not so generally understood. Though, 
as we shall afterwards find, there are different 
sorts of reasoning, yet there must be something 
common to all, or the name reasoning would 
never have been given to the process in all cases. 
Our first question then is, what is common to all 
reasoning ? 

I. All reasoning is concerned with tracing 
the relations of things, and inferring a certain 
relation of two things from a relation of two or 
more other things. Such, in Metaphysical lan- 
guage, is the business of Reasoning. In Logical 
language the same is expressed otherwise, and 
from one or more propositions we are said to 
infer another. What, then, is common to all 
reasoning, is, that belief in one or more relations, 

A A 



178 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

or, when expressed in words, in one or more pro- 
positions, leads us on immediately to the belief of 
another relation, or another proposition, as a 
cause leads on to its effect. 

In all Reasoning, then, some relation or rela- 
tions, or, when stated in words, some proposition 
or propositions are granted, and these are called 
the Premises, from which another relation, or 
another proposition is inferred, that is called the 
Conclusion. 

Thus, in order to understand thoroughly the 
nature of Reasoning, we must know what is 
meant by a relation, and a prapositian. But these 
terms have already been explained in full.^ 
Suffice it here to repeat, that a relation differs 
from a perception, or a conception, in this, that 
it necessarily supposes two things, between which 
a relation is felt ; that the relation, as felt, is a 
state of mind quite distinct from the conceptions 
out of which it arises, and that as conceptions 
are various, so are relations. 

These last may all, however, be classed under 
three heads : 

I. Relations of Coexistence ; 

II. Relations of Succession ; 

according as they do not, or do, involve the 
notion of time ; and 

^ See these words in Philosophical Vocahulary, Part I. 



III. Relations of Resemblance, which may, 
or may not, involve the notion of time. 

The Relations of Coexistence are various, 
such as 

1. Relations of Position. 

2. Relations of Comprehension, or of a 
whole to its parts. 

3. Relations of Quantity, or more, equal, 
less, which may be called ewact Relations, in 
contradistinction to 

4. Relations of Indeterminate Degree. 

! Relations of Succession, on the other hand, 
are either of Invariable Succession, or of Casual 
Succession. 

These distinctions will be useful to us in de- 
termining the different kinds of Reasoning ; but, 
in the mean time, they are sufficient to show how 
vast is the field which it embraces. 

II. Among the relations now enumerated, 
those of Quantity deserve peculiar attention, as 
they alone are ewact relations, whereby they are 
clearly distinguished from all others. And as the 
relations are exact, so likewise is the reasoning 
built upon them. All reasoning, therefore, may 
be divided into two sorts ; the Demonstrative, or 
strictly a priori Reasoning, and the Probable, or 
strictly a posteriori Reasoning ; the one indepen- 
dent of experience, the other dependent thereon, 
either immediately or remotely. Demonstrative 



180 INTRODUCTION TO BfENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Reasoning is confined to Mathematics, or the 
science of Quantity, and contrary to what is 
often thought, is not founded on general prin- 
ciples or axioms, but on self-evident particular 
truths. The evidence of the propositions of 
Euclid does not rest upon the axioms placed at 
the beginning of the work, but upon the par- 
ticular instances of those axioms which occur in 
any proposition. Thus, when in the first propo- 
sition we show that, in the triangle 




ABC, the side A B is equal to the side B C, 
and the side A C to B C, we conclude at once, 
without the intervention of any general axiom, 
that the side A B is equal to the side A C. The 
general axiom, that things which are equal to the 
same are equal to one another, cannot make the 
conclusion one whit more evident than it was 
before. We see at once from the particular data 
that such must be the conclusion, or if we do 
not, no general axiom can convince us. The 
truth then of the Propositions of Euclid does 
not rest upon the axioms, nor were they first 
demonstrated from these. The axioms are placed 
there pro forma^ and give a more scientific air to 
the whole, but they are not necessary. 



REASONING. 181 

As particulars must be known before we can 
generalize, so particular instances of the truth, 
that ^^ things which are equal to the same are 
equal to one another,'' must have been noticed, 
before we could state it in the form of an uni- 
versal axiom. Not that the axiom is proved by 
an induction of particulars, as some affirm, but 
only that particulars were necessary to allow us 
to conceive the general proposition. As soon as 
conceived, its truth is self-evident. Still less, (if in 
such a matter degree were possible) is the general 
proposition required to prove the particular 
instances. In like manner, having proved any 
proposition of Euclid, in a particular case, the 
mind instantly generalizes the truth ; for it sees 
that what has been proved in the instance before 
it, must hold good in all other instances where 
the data are exactly similar. 

All the Reasonings of pure Mathematics are 
Demonstrative, and the conclusions arrived at are 
alone certain and eternal; for first, they start 
from self-evident or necessary truths, and the 
mind sees that they are, and always must be so ; 
secondly, the names employed are names of 
universals, which exist not as real matters of 
fact ; thirdly, these universals belong to Cluantity 
alone, and so admit of an exact definition, or, in 
other words, they can be accurately distinguished 
one from another ; and lastly, the deductions from 



182 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

these self-erident truths and these definitions are 
seen at each step to he also irresistihle, and un- 
changeahle even hy Omnipotence. 

Since each step in the deduction is self-evi- 
dent, as well as the first position, the conclusion 
must be true. 

Why do the relations of Quantity, or of 
Equality and Inequality, alone admit of demon- 
stration? Because the modes or modifications 
of Quantity alone can be accurately distinguished. 
One is as distinct from two as from two thousand. 
This is the case with no other modes. Other 
modes admit of indefinite graduation ; not so those 
of Quantity. These do not shade off one into 
another. It is on account of this indefinite 
graduation that other relations are not susceptible 
of demonstration.' 

Taking the above as a specimen jof Demon- 
strative Reasoning in general, and it may be so 
taken without any danger of error, we see that 
two previous propositions are necessary to esta- 
blish any Mathematical conclusion. First we 
have A B equal to B C, then A C equal to B C, 
and lastly A B equal to A C. B C may be called 
the middle term or medium of comparison be- 
tween A B and A C. 

The range of certainty is very limited, com- 

* See Article Quantity, in First Part, Philosophical Vocabulary. 



BRASOMINa 183 

prising only the pure Mathematics; for even 
Mechanical Philosophy, which uses Demonstrative 
Reasoning, is based upon experience, and there- 
fore it may err ; though granting certain prin- 
ciples, such as the Laws of Motion, the deductions 
from these are infallibly true. That is to say^ 
they are infallibly true, granting these principles, 
and supposing that no others come into play ; for 
it often happens that the conclusions of the Me- 
chanical Philosopher are wrong in reality, because 
there are in nature other principles which he has 
not taken into account. Even the pure Mathe- 
matician sometimes arrives at absurd conclusions, 
absurd in material nature, though true in the 
world of universals, for they follow irresistibly 
from his data^ i. e. from self-evident truths, and 
from his own definitions, which correspond not 
with things really existing. Such a conclusion is 
that of the Asymptote, or a straight line, which, 
though continually approaching, can never meet 
a certain curve."* 

^ If even perfect Ratiocination, such as the Mathematical, 
may lead to conclusions absurd in material nature^ surely the best 
possible Ratiocination on other subjects may also lead to absur- 
dities. Some German Philosophers of the present day, men of 
much thought, have reasoned themselves into Pantheism ! It is 
the business of Experience to correct the errors of pure Reasoning. 
Bacon has admirably pointed out the dangers of Rationalism as 
well as of Empiricism. Nov. Org. Lib. I. 



184 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

III. All Reasonings^ other than those already 
mentioned, lead to probable conclusions only; 
because they are all idtimately based upon facts 
known by experience, which is always fallible; 
for facts may be inaccurately observed, wrong 
conclusions may be drawn from them, and even 
what once was fact may cease to be so. 

Although all probable reasonings are based 
ultimately upon facts, real or supposed, yet they 
do not all arise immediately from the experience 
of particular things, which alone is properly ex- 
perience. Some reasonings, no doubt, do so spring, 
but others start from general principles, or general 
facts, which had been inferred from many particu- 
lars by a previous mental operation. Hence, a 
well-marked distinction between the Inductive 
and the Dbductive method. The one brings in 
particular facts in order to establish a conclusion, 
whether general or particular; the other, from 
some general proposition, deduces or draws out 
a less general proposition. Induction may pro- 
ceed not only from particulars to particulars, and 
from particulars to the general, but also from the 
general to the more general; while Deduction 
always proceeds from a general proposition to one 
less general. The latter is often called a priori 
reasoning, in opposition to the former ; though, in 
reality, the general proposition from which it 



RBA80NIN0. 1 85 

starts, is known only by induction based upon ex- 
perience. For instance, when we speculate on 
the advantages and disadvantages of any form of 
civil government, we may either consult the history 
of nations, in order to determine the result of 
such a scheme in times past, and then conclude 
that the same would follow now ; and here we 
reason from immediate experience, or inductively ; 
or we may draw our inferences from the acknow- 
ledged principles of human nature, and in this 
case we reason from remote experience or de^ 
ductively ; for the principles of human nature are 
known to us only by experience. 

It is evident that both these methods of in- 
quiry lead not to infallible, but only to probable 
conclusions. For, besides false accounts of facts, 
the connection between the premises, namely, a 
number of particular effects, and the inference 
that such a thing is the cause of these effects, 
and of innumerable others similar, is never irre- 
sistible ; because there is no self-evident absurdity 
in supposing any thing to be the cause of any 
thing, and also, because we never can be sure 
that the cases actually tried, and those not yet 
tried, are in all respects similar. And though 
the axioms established by induction be true 
generally^ yet, as they seldom are universally^ as 
their limits are not defined with perfect accuracy, 

B B 



186 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHT. 

and as there may be other and counteracting 
principles at work, therefore, reasoning from 
these general axioms cannot lead to certain 
conclusions. 

Instance of a general law of nature established 
by induction. 

From the fall, first of an apple, then of other 
bodies to the earth, Newton inferred, first, that 
all bodies tend to the earth, and then, that all the 
bodies in nature tend to each other, the earth, 
the moon, the planets, the sun, and all that 
therein is, in a word, that gravitation is universal* 

Instances of a general practical maxim ob* 
tained by induction. 

**For thiSj Thou shalt not commit adultery. 
Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal. Thou 
shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet ; 
and if there be any other commandment, it is 
briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself/'*' 

The superiority of a standing army over a 
militia, as to warlike efficiency, is proved induc- 
tively from the history of many nations, par- 
ticularly of the ancient world, when standing 
armies were not universal, and when those who 
had them conquered the rest; and deductively 
from the general principle of division of labour. 

^ Romans xiii. 9. 



REASONING. 187 

There is aa antecedent improbability against 
miracles, founded on our experience of the uni- 
formity of the course of nature ; but the truth of 
a particular miracle, as the raising of Lazarus, 
may be proved by particular facts in evidence. 
Here we have first a deduction^ then an induc- 
tion. 

The necessity, or^ at leasts the utility of local 
government in general, is proved inductively from 
the history of particular nations, some being the 
seat of government, others ruled as provinces ; 
and the same conclusion is arrived at deductively 
from the known principles of human nature; 
such as, that persons on the spot better under* 
stand, and are more interested in their own affairs, 
than strangers. Again, the utility of local govern- 
ment in general being proved, the expediency of 
the same in a particular case, as in that of 
Ireland, follows by deduction ; and a like conclu- 
sion is established inductively by a reference to 
the particular history of Ireland. 

Take another specimen of deduction. A man 
is accused of a certain crimre, say of murdering 
another. Starting from certain general princi- 
ples of human nature, or from the previous 
general character of the individual in question, 
we argue that it is very improbable that he com- 
mitted the murder. This is often called a priori 



188 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

reasoning, because it draws a conclusion prior to 
an examination of the particular parts of the 
case ; though in reality it is founded on experi- 
ence, on experience of human nature in general, 
or of the individual more especially. Afterwards, 
many particular facts are brought forward to 
prove that he actually committed the deed ; and 
from these facts we draw our particular con- 
clusion inductively. 

What is called Analogical Reasoning, is no 
distinct species, but only a variety of inductive 
reasoning. It may be called indirect induction. 
No better specimen of this can be given than the 
general strain of the Reasoning contained in 
Butler's Analogy, of which I shall here give one 
or two instances. It is supposed to be known by 
experience that even here there is a moral govern- 
ment, that the good, generally speaking, if not 
more prosperous outwardly, are more happy in- 
wardly than the wicked. Hence the inference 
that the same will hold good hereafter ; in other 
words, that the future state will be one of rewards 
and punishments according to desert. 

Again, natural religion is attended with great 
difficulties : hence, it is probable from analogy, 
that a system of revealed religion shall not 
be altogether free from them. 

Our own existence, particularly the union of 



REASONING. ] 89 

soul and body is a great mystery, and even seems 
to involve contradictions ; surely then, it is pro- 
bable that religion shall have mysteries. The soul, 
from the nature of spirit, can exist in no place : 
but we believe that it is united to our body, which 
does exist in space ; that where our body is, there 
also is our soul, and nowhere else. Is the mys- 
tery of the Trinity more incomprehensible than 
this? 

Since analogy signifies likeness or resem- 
blance, and analogical reasoning is reasoning 
from like things to like; wherein, it may be 
asked, lies the difference between this and other 
varieties of inductive reasoning ? For all induc- 
tion is from similar to similar ; whether from 
similar causes we infer similar effects, and vice 
versa ; or whether from likeness in some part of 
the chain we infer likeness in the whole chain, 
without knowledge of causes ; as when, from cer- 
tain appearances of the sky, we predict, perhaps 
long beforehand, the coming weather ; or whether 
from certain parts we infer the coexistence of 
other parts, as the experienced anatomist, who, 
from a single bone, or even fragment of a bone, 
can construct the whole animal. Inductive 
reasoning is a species, of which analogy is a 
variety ; nqr can we lay down any very definite 
distinction between it and other varieties. Only, 



190 INTBODUCTION TO BfENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

when along with the similarity there is also a 
good deal of difference, there we call the reason- 
ing analogical; as when we reason from the 
order of things in this life to that in a future 
state. Perhaps, the argument hy which we estab- 
lish the existence of the great Creator may be 
classed under the same head; for the instances 
of design in the universe, though palpable and 
innumerable, differ in many respects from those 
which we find in the works of man. But the 
similarity is sufficient to render the argument 
quite convincing; while the differences prove 
only the immeasurable superiority of the great 
First Cause.* 

As a specimen of a chain of Deductive Rea- 
soning, take the following : — 

The capacity of the mind is limited ; 

Therefore, the more it is occupied with one 
thing, the less can it be occupied with another ; 

Therefore, the more it is taken up with intel- 
lectual pursuits, the less can it be taken up with 
the affections, and vice versa. 

Therefore, s^ain, the more it is occupied with 
general benevolence, the less can it be occupied 

^ For an admirable specimen of Analogical Induction^ see the 
opening chapters of Paley's Natural Theology. Never was argu- 
ment better put. Man ought to consider it as his greatest 
privilege, that he can by reason find out God. 



REASONINO. 191 

vfith private attachments, and vice versa. In this 
reasoning, each proposition is less general than 
the preceding, and each is an inference from what 
went before. 

From the above examples and observations, 
the distinction between the inductive and the 
deductive method of inquiry seems to be clearly 
established. But when we come to examine the 
matter more narrowly, we shall perhaps find that 
there is not so much difference between the 
reasonings employed in these two cases, as we 
might at first suppose. 

Let us remark that the term Induction com* 
prebends two distinct mental operations; first, 
the obsernng, the comparing, the selecting of 
facts; and secondly, an inference drawn from 
them. The first part of this process is peculiar 
to induction ; for deduction collects not particu- 
lar facts^ it states a general proposition ; but both 
agree in drawing an inference from premises. 
Now the question is, whether this inference ]bc 
or be not drawn upon the same principle in both 
cases? 

In Deductive Reasoning, having stated a 
general proposition, our object is to show that the 
particular case which we have in view is really 
comprehended under the general rule ; so that if 
the one be true, so must the other. Thus, our 



192 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

general proposition being, that ^^the more the 
mind is occupied with one thing, the less can it be 
occupied with another,*' we then consider that in- 
tellectual pursuits are an occupation ; and again, 
that the afifections are another occupation; 
whence it appears that the less general proposition 
" the more the mind is occupied with intellectual 
pursuits, the less can it be occupied with the a£Pec- 
tions," is a case of the general rule, or compre- 
hended under it. 

Now, how stands the case with Inductive 
Reasoning ? Suppose a traveller in a new coun- 
try to meet with a troop of animals hitherto 
quite unknown to him ; that he catches one, 
kills and dissects it with the skill of a practised 
anatomist. One specimen contents him, for he 
confidently believes that all the rest, so like out- 
wardly, are also alike inwardly. Now, what 
reason has he for this belief ? The mental pro- 
cess necessary to justify his conclusion seems to 
be as follows. 

Here is an animal of a certain make. There 
are many other animals, to all outward appear- 
ances exceedingly like to this and to each other. 
But, nature is uniform in her operations, and never 
deceives us by uniting great differences with such 
striking resemblances ; therefore, all these animals 
are alike within as well as without. 



REASONING. 1 93 

Here it is evident that a general proposition 
is assumed, tacitly or openly ; and from this the 
conclusion is drawn. 

Now this is the case in every instance of In- 
ductive Reasoning. Some general principle is 
always taken for granted, and with this the par- 
ticular facts are compared before the conclusion 
is drawn. The general principle assumed is com- 
monly, ** that nature is uniform in her operations ;*' 
or, where human testimony is relied on, *' that men 
will tell the truth where they have no interest to 
the contrary." Thus, in examining the evidences of 
Christianity, we are careful to observe whether 
the first witnesses could have had any motive to 
spread a false story; and when we have deter- 
mined that they had none, we infer from the 
above general principle that they actually spoke 
the truth. Unless that general principle be 
sound, there is no reason why they should have 
given a true rather than a false account ; just as 
there is no reason why we should believe one 
quadruped to be organized inwardly like another 
quadruped, unless nature be in general uniform 
in her works and operations. 

If the above statement be correct, it follows that 
induction, when taken to comprise not only the ex- 
amination of facts, but also an inference from them, 
always embraces a deductive process of reasoning. 

c c 



194 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Wherein then, it may be asked, consists the 
diflference between Induction and Deduction pro- 
per ? The difference is, 

Firstj that the facts from which induction 
springs are never more genera] than the con- 
clusion ; 

Secondly, that the conclusion always seems to 
follow at once from the facts ; for 

Thirdly, the general propositions, being always 
the same, and universally acknowledged, are 
never stated ; and 

Fourthly, there is no such thing as a long 
chain of inductive reasoning, as there may be of 
deduction proper, where one inference may 
follow upon another till we get far away from 
the original premises ; whereas, on the other 
hand, 

Fifthly, in induction, the detail of facts may 
fill volumes. There is, in short, in induction, far 
less reasoning than in deduction proper, the 
process consisting in the former of one step 
only."* 

Lastly, since particulars occur first to the 
mind, it follows that the inductive must precede 

P Take, as an instance of the one, Malthus on Population, who 
fills three volumes with facts in support of his principle ; of the 
other, the writings of Ricardo and James Mill on Political 
Economy. 



REASONING. 1 95 

the deductive process. The general notions and 
general propositions, from which the latter sets 
out, must have been established by a previous 
process of inductive generalization, well or ill 
performed. Thus, in the order of time, induction 
comes before deduction. 

By many, Bacon has been called the inventor 
of the inductive method, a method, however, as 
old as the creation, which that eminent genius 
only brought more into notice^ restored, im- 
proved, and illustrated. 

The general principle which runs through 
deductive reasoning, and of which every such 
argument is only a particular application, is, that 
what is allowed to be true in general will be true 
in a particular case. Thus, suppose it granted 
that trade ought to be free, we may infer that the 
com trade ought to be free. But some one may 
object that here there is a reason for an ex- 
ception, that the rule is not applicable to this 
case. Hereupon issue is joined, and the dis- 
cussion turns upon the point, not whether trade 
in general ought to be free, for that is granted, 
but whether there be any circumstances peculiar 
to the com trade, which take it out of the 
general rule ; and according to the solution of 
this question, the above inference will, or will 
not, hold good. 



196 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Now, as we have seen that every case of in- 
duction comprises a process of deductive reason- 
ing, it follows that the general principle just 
mentioned must he common to both deduction 
and induction. But, besides this common prin- 
ciple, every purely deductive argument has its 
own less general principle, such as in the above 
instance, " trade ought to be free," from which a 
special conclusion is drawn. 

In induction, on the other hand, each argu- 
ment has not a principle peculiar to itself; it has 
only one or other of two or three very general 
principles, common to all cases of induction, 
such as ^^ nature is uniform in her works and 
operations." Thus we rise from the particular to 
the general by a process, which, comparing the 
expressed premises with the conclusion, is the 
reverse of the deductive ; though, as we have 
seen, the inference from the particular facts to 
the general law cannot be logically drawn with* 
out the intervention of a much more general 
but universally acknowledged principle. 

The object of general induction is to establish 
a general conclusion, by means of instances so 
divested of peculiar circumstances as to obviate 
the mistake of stating as general what is only 
particular. One instance would be as good as a 
thousand, if we could be sure that it was quite 



REASONING. 197 

in pointy that is, free from any peculiar circum- 
stances, and it is only because we are not sure of 
this, that we must multiply instances. The grand 
point then is to prove similarity, perfect, or at 
least sufficient similarity, between cases observed 
and others not observed. The uncertainty of 
induction depends partly on the difficulty of 
determining the degree of similarity between 
cases observed and others which have not been 
observed in all points, partly on the mistakes to 
which the original observation was liable. In a 
word, we may observe ill in the first instance, or 
the new cases may not be in all respects similar 
to the old. 

There is a strong tendency in the human mind 
to draw a general conclusion, even from a single 
instance. Thus, when a child first sees a pool of 
water, he can form no idea of the effects of water 
on man ; but let him once see a person drowned, 
and he will ever afterwards act on the belief that 
water will drown those who get over head and 
ears. Here the child reasons inductively, and 
from a single instance, and yet, in this case, cor- 
rectly. This, and innumerable similar cases, 
show us the natural tendency, which is to leap at 
once to a general conclusion, even from one fact 
observed, a tendency which a wider experience 
alone can check, and which> in many, if not in 



198 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

all, is checked but imperfectly during the whole 
course of their lives. 

We have seen that the validity of Inductive 
Reasoning rests fundamentally upon the tacit 
assumption, that nature is uniform in her opera- 
tions ; that things which have coexisted will be 
found again to coexist, and that those which have 
succeeded each other will continue to succeed in 
the same order. Now, this assumption is not 
self-evident, neither does it admit of proof; but 
we implicitly believe, and cannot help believing 
it to be true. It is then one of the first princi- 
ples of human knowledge, though not a necessary 
or self-evident proposition. That the sun which 
has risen every day of our lives will again rise 
to-morrow, that when it shines it will give sen- 
sible heat, that a stone thrown up into the air 
will speedily fall back to the earth, we cannot 
doubt, though the only ground for this belief is, 
that such has always been the case in time past. 
Between the assertion, this has always been, and 
the inference, this will always be, there is a wide 
gulf, which we must leap across, for we never can 
bridge it over. The inference is not logical, for 
we can see no connection between the premises 
and the conclusion, but it is irresistible. This, 
then, is a primary article of belief, totally inde- 
pendent of reasoning ; neither self-evident, nor 



REASONINO. 1 99 

known by experience ; for experience is only of 
the past. All inferences from experience, how- 
ever, take it for granted ; and on this assumption 
alone are they logically drawn. 

As the subject of induction has lately given 
rise to a controversy between two eminent 
philosophers, I shall conclude what I have to say 
under this head by a reference thereto ; and by 
examining the points in dispute, I may perhaps 
be able to throw some additional light upon this 
fundamental question. The points in dispute 
between Dr. Whewell and Mr. Mill, so far as the 
nature of induction is concerned, seem to be the 
following.'* 

1. Whether the term induction may with 
propriety be applied to the case where particular 
facts are brought in to establish not a general, 
but a particular conclusion. 

2. Whether general facts of every day no- 
toriety, learnt without effort, and commonly 
called practical knowledge, such as the freezing of 
water by cold, and its evaporation by heat ; the 
fact that water will suffocate, and fire consume ; 
and the like, be known by a process similar to 
that whereby truths less familiar, commonly called 
scientific, are established. 

^ See Dr. Whewell's little work '* Of Induction," and Mr. 
Miirs " System of Logic." 



200 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

3. Whether the skill which is gained hy 
practice, without formal study, skill in playing 
cricket, tennis, billiards, &Co skill in shooting 
with the gun or the bow, &c., when not derived 
from scientific principles of which the mind is 
conscious, be, or be not, acquired by a process 
similar to induction, so similar as to warrant us 
in applying to it the same name. 

Now, in order to solve these questions, we must 
call to mind what was stated at the opening of 
this inquiry into reasoning, viz. that God has given 
to men but two means for the acquisition of know- 
ledge, and the discovery of truth, — observation 
(including experiments,) and reasoning. There- 
fore, all knowledge must be acquired either by 
observation alone, or by reasoning alone, or by 
the two combined. 

Particular facts cognizable by the Senses are 
known simply by observation ; as the geographi- 
cal features of any country, the form of the 
coast, the course of the rivers, the position of 
the mountains. That Cambridgeshire is a flat 
country, Wales mountainous, and Westmoreland 
abounding in lakes, are facts known by observa- 
tion alone, at least in the first instance. Here 
no reasoning is required. On the contrary, the 
truths of pure Mathematics are known by rea- 
soning alone ; for, except the definitions, axioms, 



REASONING. 201 

and postulates, the first of which are, of course, 
propositions merely explaining the meaning of 
words ; the second, truths self-evident ; the third, 
self-evident possibilities; the whole process is 
reasoning. 

All other truths, whether general or particular, 
are acquired by observation, together with reason- 
ing ; either by the close union of the two, or by 
reasoning, based indeed upon observation, follow- 
ing it for a season, but afterwards emancipated 
from it. To the former of these we conceive 
that the term induction properly belongs. At 
least, as the process is similar, whenever obser- 
vation and reasoning closely unite, there the 
same name should be applied, whether Induction 
or any other. 

In the case of Induction, (upon which Pro- 
bable Deduction is always founded) the reasoning 
is based not on necessary or self-evident truths, 
but on what may be called primary, universal 
articles of belief, articles neither self-evident, nor 
capable of proof, which nevertheless we hold 
with unshaken constancy ; such as, belief in the 
existence of the material world, belief in the 
uniformity of nature, &c. Starting from these 
fundamental articles, and taking observation as 
our guide, we arrive at the knowledge of general 
truths, not cognizable by the senses, by a process 

D D 



202 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

combining reasoning with observation, to whieh 
the name Induction is always applied. Now, the 
question is, whether, by a process exactly similar, 
we may not obtain the knowledge of particular 
facts also, not cognizable by the senses of the 
inquirer. 

Let the particular fact to be established be the 
genuineness of the Gospel according to St. John. 
This is a fact certainly not cognizable by the 
senses of any one now alire, and which cannot 
therefore be known by observation alone. Neither 
can it be known by reasoning alone. Therefore, 
if it can be established, it must be by observation 
and reasoning together. The particular kind of 
evidence to which we here have recourse is that 
of testimony, the testimony of many ancient 
authors, who cite that Gospel as the undoubted 
production of St. John. Here we have a number 
of particular facts, brought forward to establish 
another particular fact, the principle being always 
assumed, (though tacitly,) that, generally speaking, 
human testimony is worthy of credit. Thus, we 
arrive at the conclusion, that the Gospel attributed 
to St. John was really written by him. Now, 
in what does this differ from any case of Induc- 
tion where the conclusion is general ? Simply in 
that, not in the process whereby the conclusion 
is established. We select a great number of 



REASONING. 203 

particular facts, in this case particular testi- 
monies, all tending to the same conclusion ; we 
then assume, tacitly indeed, the general principle 
founded on observation, that men will speak 
truth when they have no decided motive to the 
contrary ; and lastly, we infer that the Gospel of 
8t. John is a genuine work. 

The whole process consists, first, in the 
selection and bringing forward of particular 
facts; secondly, in the assumption of a general 
principle universally acknowledgedi and there- 
fore seldom openly stated; lastly, in drawing the 
inference from these premises. We may if we 
please establish a specific difference, and call this 
a case of Particular Induction, but we cannot 
allow that there is a generic distinction between 
it and General Induction. 

In Paley's Evidences of the Truth of Christi- 
anity, we find distinct specimens of both Induc- 
tive and Deductive inquiry. In chapter i. the 
author produces evidences of the sufiierings of 
the first propagators of Christianity, from the 
nature of the case^ that is, he endeavours to 
show from the known principles of human nature, 
that persons situated as were undoubtedly the 
first propagators of Christianity, were likely to 
endure much persecution. Here he proceeds 
Deductively. He afterwards brings forward the 



204 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

testimony of both heathen and christian writers 
in proof of the same; and here he adopts 
the Inductive method ; as also in the great 
chapter ix. divided into eleven sections, wherein 
he enumerates so many direct testimonies in 
favour of the genuineness of the Books of the 
New Testament. These we conceive are speci- 
mens of Particular Induction, for the facts estab- 
lished are of that order. 

To take another and familar instance. Sup- 
pose a man, previously in good health, to change 
his residence. Not long after, he feels indisposed, 
and he begins to think that the air of his new 
abode is unwholesome. This is a mere suspicion, 
for many other causes may have injured his 
health. However, he leaves his new house, and 
soon after his usual good health returns. His 
suspicion is now strengthened ; but he is not yet 
certain. He returns, and again falls ill ; now, he 
has but little doubt. Again he leaves, and again 
he recovers ; at last he is convinced. If the ex- 
periment were tried upon other persons, and 
always with like results, one must be almost as 
sure of the unhealthiness of the spot, as of a 
proposition in Geometry. The conclusion in this 
case is particular, and if it have not been arrived 
at by induction, I should like to know what name 
must be given to the process. 



REASONING. 205 

The second question is, whether general facts 
of every day notoriety^ learnt without eflfort, such 
as the freezing of water by cold, and its evapora- 
tion by heat, the fact that water will suffocate, 
and fire consume, and other such, be known by 
a process similar to that whereby facts less 
familiar, commonly called scientific, are estab- 
lished? Dr. Whewell seems to think that the 
term Induction should be applied only to the 
process whereby scientific facts are discovered. 
But we must remember that there is no accurate 
distinction between scientific and other general 
facts, no difference except in the degree in which 
they happen to be familiar. Thus what is con- 
sidered a vulgar ordinary fact in one country, or 
in one age^ may be science in another place, or at 
another time. The freezing of water at a certain 
temperature is a common occurrence in England, 
but to a native of the coast of Guinea it may be 
a scientific fact. But will it be said that the 
knowledge of a familiar fact is obtained in a 
different manner from a non-familiar one "? The 
only difference, as I conceive, is in the degree of 
eflfort, and in the degree of attention required in 
the two cases. The one we cannot help knowing 
if we have our eyes open, and enjoy a common 
share of intellectual faculties ; the other may 
require long and painful investigation. 



206 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOBOPHT. 

Still the nature of the process may be essen- 
tially the same. The degree of attention and of 
effort are variable accidents, not essentials, and in 
no two cases may they quite agree. But what we 
conceive to be alike in all these cases, is, that we 
begin by observation, whether with a previous in- 
tention or not, and from this observation, combined 
with a general article of belief, either original or 
derived, we draw a conclusion less general, which 
we afterwards apply in particular instances. 

Thus, to recur to an example formerly given, 
there can be little doubt that, were a child of a 
certain age, with his faculties well developed, to 
see a man drowned, he would avoid deep water 
ever afterwards. But why should he avoid it? 
Surely because he thinks that it would drown 
him too. And why does he think so ? Because 
he has seen a man drowned. But that alone is 
no reason. He must conclude from that particu- 
lar event that water will drown all men, and 
therefore himself, before he can be said to believe 
or act rationally. And how can he draw such a 
conclusion but by means of an original principle 
of belief, that what has been, will be, or that 
nature is uniform in her operations ? And here 
we have an exact specimen of the inductive pro- 
cess. Observe well, that this is not instinct, for 
instinct acts prior to experience, and uniformly, 



REASONING. 207 

as bees, who^ all over the world, build their cells 
in the form of hexagons ; and as some animals, 
who avoid poisonous plants without tr34ng them. 
But the child, before experience, does not know 
that water will suffocate, or fire give pain ; for 
children who have learnt no better will put their 
fingers into the candle. 

Neither can we allow, with Dr. Whewell, that 
the mere badness or insufficiency of the investi- 
gation, or that the falsity of the conclusion, is a 
sufficient reason for denying that the process is 
inductive. We constantly say, that a man rea- 
sons ill, that his conclusions are erroneous ; but 
we do not for that contend that he does not 
reason at all. So, a man may content himself 
with a very wretched induction, and yet he may 
use it after a fashion of his own. Even the 
Kentish clown, who said that Tenterden Church 
Steeple was the cause of the Goodwin Sands, 
because it was built just before the sea rose and 
swallowed up the land, may be said to have 
reasoned inductively* If we adopt the maxim 
post hoCy ergo propter hoc, we may prove any ab- 
surdity. 

I am glad to find that the opinion here 
stated is held by a distinguished Metaphysician^ 
Dr. Reid: — ^*The last kind of probable evidence I 
shall mention, is that by which the known laws 



208 INTBODUCnON TO MBNTAI. FHILOeOFHT. 

of nature have been discovered, and the effects 
which have been produced by them in former 
ages, or which may be expected in time to come. 
The knowledge of some of the laws of nature is 
necessary to all men in the conduct of life. 
These are soon discovered even by savages. 
They know that fire bums, that water drowns, 
that bodies gravitate towards the earth. They 
know that day and night, summer and winter, 
regularly succeed each other. As far back as 
their experience and observation reach, they 
know that these have happened regularly, and 
upon this ground, they are led, by the constitu- 
tion of human nature, to expect that they will 
happen in time to come, in like circumstances. 

The knowledge which the philosopher attains 
of the laws of nature differs from that of the 
vulgar, not in the first principles on which it is 
grounded, but in its extent and accuracy. He 
collects with care the phenomena that lead to the 
same conclusion, and compares them with those 
that seem to contradict or to limit it. And what 
conclusions does the philosopher draw from the 
facts he has collected ? They are, that like events 
have happened in former times in like circum- 
stances, and will happen in time to come ; and 
these conclusions are built on the very same 



REASONING. 209 

ground on which the simple rustic concludes that 
the sun will rise to-morrow.'"^ 

But the dignity of science is thought to be 
lowered by applying a scientific term to a process 
in use among the vulgar; and hence, we may 
suppose, the unwillingness of some peculiarly 
distinguished in the paths of science, to allow 
that common knowledge is really acquired by 
Induction. 

The third question is, whether the skill which 
is gained by practice, without formal study, skill 
in playing cricket, tennis, billiards, &c., skill in 
shooting with the gun or the bow, &c., when not 
derived from scientific principles of which the 
mind is conscious, and which it can state in 
words, be or be not acquired by a process simi- 
lar to Induction, so similar as to warrant us in 
applying to it the same name. 

It is supposed then, that the skill is acquired^ 
not instinctive^ and therefore, so far, it agrees 
with knowledge the result of Induction. And 
how is it acquired? By practice, as the phrase 
is ; that is, by experience ; not by simple observa- 
tion, but by numerous intentional trials or 
experiments. So far, again, it agrees with induc- 
tive speculative knowledge. And the performer 
is supposed to improve by experience. But how 

' Reid on the Intellectual Powers^ Essay vii^ 
E E 



210 INTRODUCTION TO MfiNTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

can he improve unless he have paid attention to 
the circumstances attending his successes, and 
his failures, and have thence drawn some general 
conclusions, some rules applicable to future 
occasions? What though these rules be not 
formally stated in propositions? What thoi^h 
they cannot be imparted to others ? They may, 
notwithstanding, exist in his mind in a shape 
sufficiently definite to act upon, and indeed we 
may be sure that they do so exist, otherwise no 
practice would make him better* 

Very similar is the case of what is commonly 
called practical knowledge in a learned profession, 
as in that of the Physician. All the study in 
the world will never make a good physician 
without experience of the treatment of diseases; 
and some gain more from the same experience 
than others. The same outward facts are before 
all, but some learn much from them, others little, 
that is to say, they make more or fewer, better or 
worse inductions. Much of this knowledge is 
incommunicable, and so dies with the individual, 
because it is not sufficiently definite^ subject to 
too many exceptions, to be formally stated in 
propositions. So it is with games of skill, such 
as cricket, or tennis. Some rules of good play 
may certainly be stated in words, but others 
cannot for the reason just given* But, because 



HSAfiONING. 3 1 1 

they cannot be enunciated, we must not con* 
elude that they exist not mentally; and that 
they do exist, the best proof is that progress is 
made. 

How can progress be made in any thing, spe- 
culative or practical, without an operation of 
mind? To move our limbs requires a previous 
mental change, and though muscular strength 
must exist, it is the mind that directs. To sup- 
pose that the mere muscular fibre can prefer one 
action to another, is as contradictory as to aj£rm 
that body is mind, that matter is spirit. Skill in 
bodily motion, then, always supposes a previous 
mental training; but there can be no mental 
training without rules, and no rules without 
induction. 

On each of the three questions above stated, 
I am thus led to a conclusion the reverse of that 
at which Dr. WheweU has arrived. On other 
points, however, I am glad to find that I agree 
with that eminent philosopher. It is debated 
between him and Mr. Mill, whether Kepler's 
discovery of the law, that the planets move round 
the sun in ellipses, be, or be not, an instance of 
Induction. That it i^, I completely agree with 
Dr. WhewelL Why is the contrary maintained by 
Mr. Mill ? " Because," says he, " it is a fact, surely, 
that the planet does describe an ellipse, and a 



212 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHIL060PHT. 

fact which we could see, if we had adequate 
visual organs, and a suitable position."' 

The whole pith of this objection lies in the 
Conjunction if. 

It is quite true that if we had such organs, 
and such a position, we should have no need of 
induction to establish the fact in question; we 
should require our senses only, and the faculty 
of perception. We require no induction to 
prove that the Pantheon at Rome is round, and 
the Colosseum oval. But these we can take in 
with a glance ; and it is exactly because we can- 
not so embrace the orbits of the planets, that 
Induction is necessary to establish the fact of 
their ellipticity. What Kepler really saw was a 
planet in many different positions, and nothing 
more ; he could not see it moving, still less could 
he see its whole course at once. How then 
could he possibly describe its orbit, as Mr. Mill 
supposes? for we describe only what we see. 
From many different positions then, which he 
actually saw, he inferred innumerable other posi- 
tions which he did not see, all which together 
made up this figure of an ellipse. I cannot 
conceive a fairer specimen of Induction ; though 
in this case, no law of causation was established. 
But the discovery of causes, though the highest 

• System of Logic, Ratiocinative, and Inductive, Vol. I. p. p. 363. 



REASONING. 213 

end of Induction, is not essential to the process. 

Can it be that Mr. Mill will allow this to be 
only a description, because the elliptical form of 
the orbit is a /act} But as I have shown under 
the article *^ Hypothesis and Theory," and as 
Dr. Whewell also maintains, a fact differs from a 
theory only in the degree of evidence on which 
it rests. A theory well established, and generally 
received, becomes a fact. This is a truth without 
the knowledge of which, there can, as I conceive, 
be no correct estimate of the object of science 
and philosophy. 

I also entirely agree with Dr. Whewell, that a 
conception is an essential part of induction. 
Indeed, I am at a loss to imagine how the con- 
trary can be maintained by any metaphysician. 
If we do not conceive a general fact before enun- 
ciating it in words, we must then, I suppose, 
perceive it. We may certainly perceive particular 
facts, such as the fall of a stone to the earth, but 
how can we perceive that all bodies within a cer- 
tain distance would fall to the earth, or that all 
bodies in nature tend to each other "? These are 
general facts far removed from our senses, and 
therefore from our perceptions, which are closely 
connected with our sensations. A simple tendency 
cannot be seen even in a particular instance, still 
less a general tendency. But the mitid conceives 



214 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

it, Otherwise how could we know it? If it be 
allowed that we know anything, and yet we do 
not perceive it, I should like to know what word 
we ought to employ better than conception to 
express that knowledge ? 

Unless we revive the exploded and unphilo- 
sophical notion of Condillac, that all our mental 
states are only transformed sensations ; unless we 
allow with Destutt de Tracy, that ^^ Penser c'est 
sentir et rien que sentir," we cannot get rid of 
conceptions, in cases where we know, suppose, 
conjecture, or imagine, but do not perceive. 

It is allowed that Kepler did not see, did not 
perceive the elliptical orbit of the planets, or of 
any one planet* Yet he affirmed, with more or 
less certainty, that the orbit was such. But how 
could he affirm that of which he had no notion 
or conception "? The supposition is a palpable 
contradiction. 

I likewise think with Dr. Whewell, that Mr. 
Mill has made a great mistake in supposing that 
the future progress of science will depend more 
upon deduction than induction. Nothing appears 
to me more unlikely. If we compare the slow 
progress of physical science before the triumph 
of the inductive method under Bacon, with its 
rapid progress since, we shall be convinced that 
its future advancement must still depend upon 



REASONING. 215 

the same method. Every year, almost every 
month, some new discovery is announced as thus 
obtained, and who shall say when these dis- 
coveries shall be exhausted ? If we consider that 
it is little more than two hundred years since 
men began seriously and patiently to investigate 
nature, we shall rather conclude that inductive 
science is, as yet, in its infancy. In the history 
of the human race, two hundred years is but a 
point. 

To many of the physical sciences deduction 
is applicable in a very limited degree, and no 
reason at present appears why it should ever be 
much more applicable. It enters little into the 
sciences of Chemistry, Physiology, Geology, 
or Meteorology; still less into the purely 
descriptive sciences of Zoology, Botany, and 
Mineralogy. 

Before the triumph of the Baconian Philoso- 
phy, physicians attempted to account for all the 
phenomena of life from a few principles of 
Chemistry or of Mechanics ; with what success 
all are now agreed. 

It is chiefly in the Mental Sciences, and in 
Mechanical Philosophy, which treats of sensible 
motions, that deduction plays an important part. 
In morals, and politics, innumerable volumes 
have been filled in deducing conclusions from a 



216 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

few general principles. The whole philosophy of 
Bentham is a deduction from his one principle of 
self-interest. 

So it is likewise in Mechanical Philosophy; 
where, from a few general facts established by 
experience, such as the laws of motion, we are 
able to deduce innumerable conclusions by rea- 
soning strictly demonstrative. The sensible 
motions of inanimate matter, and the actions of 
rational voluntary agents, seem then to a£Ford the 
greatest scope for deductive inquiry. Insensible 
motions, on the other hand, such as those of 
Chemistry, and even the sensible motions of liv- 
ing bodies, cannot be traced far in this way. 

It would, however, be a fatal mistake to sup- 
pose, that little or nothing remains to be done in 
the mental sciences by means of induction. 
Pure Mental Philosophy or Metaphysics, is more 
of an inductive than of a deductive science. It 
is by observing the operations of our own minds 
that we come to know them, and it is exactly 
because that observation was so neglected, that 
Metaphysics made so little progress.* And who 
shall pretend to say, that all the social and 
political lessons of history are exhausted, that no 

* For an example of the application of the inductive method to 
mental philosophy, see the Author's '* Analysis and Theory of the 
Emotions." 



REASONING. 2 1 7 

new principles remain to be discovered, that we 
have only to apply the old ? It is not many years 
since Malthus established the principle of popu- 
lation by a very copious induction. It seems to 
me the more remarkable that Mr. Mill should 
have undervalued the probable efficacy of induc- 
tion in the future progress of science, seeing that 
so large a part of his own great work is devoted 
to the subject. I cannot but consider this as the 
most important part of his system of Logic. 
His attempt to reduce induction to a scientific 
form appears to me worthy of all commendation. 
Dr. Wheweil, I am aware, thinks otherwise, and he 
is fortified by the opinion of Sir John Herschel» 
as well as by another eminent author, who look 
upon the corresponding efforts of Bacon, the 
"prerogatives of instances," contained in the 
second book of the Novum Organum, as more 
curious than useful. But the objections made to 
such attempts are nothing new ; they are the 
same as have been started against Logic in gene- 
ral, as well as against scientific systems of morals, 
viz., that men use induction naturally, reason 
naturally, praise and blame naturally, and there- 
fore there is no occasion for science in these 
matters. We grant the premises, but deny the 
conclusion. Men, it is true, use induction natur- 
ally, but often imperfectly ; they reason naturally, 

F F 



218 INTRQDUCTION TO lifENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

but often inconclusively ; they praise and blame 
naturally, but not always justly. Hence the 
utility of general rules applicable to induction, 
to reasoning in general, and to moral senti- 
ment. " 

I shall conclude this head with one of the 
Aphorisms of Bacon, wherein the two methods, 
the Deductive and the Inductive, are well des- 
cribed. 

** There are and can be but two . ways of 
seeking and finding out truth. The one, from 
sense and particulars flies to the most general 
axioms, and from these principles, firmly esta- 
blished, finds out and judges of intermediate 
axioms; and this is the way now in use. The 
other raises axioms from sense and particulars, 

" The argument in favour of the application of Science to 
Reasoning, as well as to Morals, may be seen, for the one, in the 
Introduction to Whately's Elements of Logic ; for the other, in 
the Introduction to my o\\*n Principles of Human Happiness and 
Human Duty. With respect to the utility of the rules of the 
Novum Organum in particular, the opinion of Dr. Reid differs 
widely from that of Dr. Whewell and Sir John Herschel. 
Among those philosophers who have most closely pursued the 
path pointed out in that great work, he mentions Sir Isaac Newton 
as holding the first rank ; ^* having in the third book of the 
Principia, and in his Optics, had the rules of the Novum 
Organum constantly in his eye/' " Brief account of Aristotle's 
Logic, Chap. vi. Sect. 2. 



REASONING* 219 

ascending continuously and gradually, so as at 
last to arrive at the most general; which is the 
true but untried way.'"" 

Though these two modes of inquiry, Induq- 
tion, and Deduction, embrace a very large part 
of probable reasoning, yet there seem to be 
some reasonings, which cannot properly be 
classed under either. As instances, take the 
following : 

A is the cause of B ; but B is the cause of C : 

Therefore^ A is the remote cause of C. 

Application depends upon the will; but in- 
tellectual advancement depends much upon 
application : 

Therefore^ intellectual advancement depends 
much upon the will. 

Romulus founded Rome; but Rome con- 
quered great part of the known world, and rose 
to an unexampled pitch of power and grandeur ; 

Therefore^ Romulus was the original cause of 
the power and grandeur of Rome. 

In these, and similar reasonings, we neither 
rise from particulars to generals, nor descend 
from generals to particulars ; but we remain as 
it were, on a plain^ as in pure Mathematics ; and 
from two previous propositions, likewise as in 
pure Mathematics, we infer a third : whereas in 

^ Novum Organum, Aph. xix. 



220 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

deductive reasoning, though there may he three 
propositions when the argument is stated in full, 
yet, one is very often suppressed ; in inductive 
reasoning always. This, then, I shall heg leave 
to call plain reasoning. Thus, we find, that pro- 
bable reasoning embraces at least three kinds ; 
the Inductive, the Deductive, and the Plain ; and 
the last seems to approach nearer to the nature 
of demonstration, than either of the others. In 
it, no general principle is tacitly assumed and 
reasoned from, but all is openly stated; and 
though the last proposition follows from the two 
former, it is not comprehended under either 
of them. 

Plain reasoning, then, differs much more from 
the Deductive and the Inductive, than these two 
from each other. Therefore, they ought not to 
be classed on the same line. Indeed we have 
seen, that though the whole process of Induc- 
tion differs widely from Deduction, yet, the 
reasoning, strictly so called, contained in both, is 
very similar. Consequently, we ought to class 
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning together, as 
species of a common genus, opposed to which, 
will be Plain Reasoning. 

IV. After these remarks on the nature of 
reasoning in general, as well as its different kinds, 
we shall be better able to answer that oft- 



REASONING. 22 1 

debated question^ what are we to think of the 
Syllogism ? In the whole history of philosophy, 
there is not a more singular fact than this, that 
the syllogism is still a matter of dispute. 

Since the days of Bacon, howerer, the empire 
of Aristotle has gradually been going to decay, 
and faith in the all-sufficiency of the syllogism 
has more and more been shaken. Bacon him- 
self, in his Novum Orffannm, frequently decries 
the syllogism ;^ Pascal depreciates it ;' and Locke, 
with some succeeding philosophers, particularly 
Thomas Brown, scoffs at it altogether. But in 
our days, an attempt has been made to restore 
the logic, as well as the religion of the middle 
ages, and the same university which nursed a 
Newman, has produced a Whately.* The latter 

' See Novum Organum in Diatrihutione operis, and Aph. 
xi. xii. xiii. xiv. and Ixiii. where Axistotle is blamed for corrupting 
Physics by his Dialectics. See also De Augmentis ScientU 
arum. Lib. V. Cap. ii. 

* See Pascal "De Tesprit Geometrique,'* and " De Part de 
persuader," contained in the last and best edition of the ''Pens^es 
de Pascal/' by Prosper Faug^re, Paris 1844, 

' It is worthy of remark, that Whately, in the Preface to his 
" Elements of Logic," acknowledges that the Rev. J. Newman 
^' actually composed a considerable portion of the work, as it now 
stands, from manuscripts not designed for publication ;" and that 
he is '* the original author of several pages.*' 



222 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHIL060PHY. 

has written a work, chiefly to prove that the 
Logic of Aristotle is the only Logic, and syllo- 
gism the only reasoning; that, in fact, the 
syllogism is not a particular kind of reasoning, 
hut the form to which all sound reasoning may 
he reduced, hy whatever name it be called. 
Thus, according to the Archbishop and Phi- 
losopher, there are no difFerent sorts of reasoning, 
but all are alike, whether certain, or probable, a 
priori, or a posteriori^ demonstrative, inductive, 
or deductive ; all are exactly similar. That the 
reasGning, strictly so called, contained in induc- 
tion, is akin to deduction, I am willing to allow, 
and indeed, have endeavoured to show ; but, that 
mathematical or demonstrative reasoning differs 
not specifically from either, I can by no means 
admit. This, Dr. Whately assumes without any 
attempt at proof. What I have called plain 
probable reasoning seems to me also to differ 
materially from the deductive, as well as from 
the inductive. 

No doubt there must be something common 
to all reasoning, or the same name reasoning 
would not have been given to the process in all 
cases ; but had there been no differences, neither 
would there have been any specific names, such 
as probable^ demonstrative, inductive, &c. What is 



REASONING. 223 

commou to all reasoning, what it is which makes 
reasoning a gentis^ we have seen in the opening of 
this article ; and that account we must hear in 
mind during the following discussion. Wherein 
consist the differences which mark out several 
species of reasoning, we have also seen ; and if 
these differences be real, especially the grand 
difference between demonstration and proba- 
bility, then it follows, contrary to the opinion of 
Whately, that all reasoning is not specifically 
the same. Consequently, unless the word syllo- 
gism mean nothing more than a sound argument 
in general, stated in full, unless it be merely a 
generic word, then all sound reasoning, stated 
explicitly, cannot be syllogistical. 

But, in order to know what the word syllogism 
really does mean, we must refer to the definitions 
which have been given of it, the examples 
brought forward in illustration, and the general 
principle said to pervade all syllogisms. When 
we know what a syllogism really is, then, and not 
till then, can we determine whether it include all 
reasoning, or any. 

Let us^ first take Aristotle's own definition of 
the Syllogism, which is as follows ; — "A syllogism 
is a speech in which certain propositions being 
stated and granted, some other proposition dif- 
ferent from these follows of necessity ; and this 



224 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

solely in virtue of the propositions stated."** 
And this definition is thus explained by Alex- 
ander, one of Aristotle's commentators. ^^But, 
when Aristotle says, follows of necessity^ this does 
not mean that the conclusion, as a proposition in 
itself, should necessarily be true ; for this is the 
case only in syllogisms of necessary matter ; but, 
that the conclusion^ be its matter what it may^ actual, 
contingent, or necessary, must follow of necessity 
from the premises.'' "" 

Reid's definition of syllogism, as completed by 
Sir William Hamilton, varies a little from the 
foregoing, but is perfectly consistent with it 
"A syllogism," says he, "is an argument, or 
reasoning, consisting (always explicably or im- 
plicibly) of three propositions, the last of which, 
called the Conclusion, is (necessarily) inferred 
from the (very statement of the) two preceding, 
which are called the Premises." "^ 

According to the above definitions, all pure 
mathematical or demonstrative reasoning is syllo- 
gistical ; for here, assuredly, each argument con- 

^ Prior Aualytics^ Book I. Chap i. 

* See Sir William Hamilton's editioa of Reid's works, " A 
brief accoimt of Aristotle's Logic." — Chap. iv. Sect. 6, Note. 

* The words in brackets have been supplied by Sir William 
Hamilton in his edition of Reid's works. 



REASONING. 225 

sists of three propositions^ and the conclusion fol- 
lows irresistibly, or of necessity, from the premises. 




In the triangle ABC, let the side A B be 
equal to B C, and AC to B C. Then the side 
A B will be equal to the side A C. Here there 
are three propositions, the two former being 
called the premises, from which the conclusion 
follows irresistibly. And as this is a specimen 
of all pure mathematical reasoning, therefore, 
according to the above definition, all such rea- 
soning is syllogistical. 

But, in all other reasonings, generally con- 
sidered sound and valid, does the conclusion 
follow of necessity from the conclusion ? 

Take the following as a specimen : — 
"Trade (in general) ought to be free," 

Therefore, the corn trade ought to be free. 

Is this reasoning, or is it not ? Is it good rea- 
soning? Most people, I conceive, would allow 
that the reasoning is fair, though not infallible. 
From the assumption that trade ought to be free^ 
we are entitled to infer, probably indeed, not 
necessarily, that the com trade ought to be free ; 
probably only, because, though trade in general 
ought to be free, there may still be circumstances 

G G 



326 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

peouliar to the corn trade which take it out of 
the general rule. Therefore^ here we have a 
specimen of what all would allow to he reason- 
ing, where the conclusion does not follow of 
necessity from the premises, and which, there- 
fore, does not agree with the definition of the 
syllogism. Consequently, all reasoning is not 
syllogistical in the sense above given. 

Moreover, can we say that the argument 
consists implicitly of three propositions? If 
there be three, then explicitly they are as 
follows : — 
" Trade (in general) ought to be free." 

The corn trade is a trade. 

Therefore, the corn trade ought to be free. 

Does not every one see that the second pro- 
position is a mere truism, or identical statement, 
where nothing is told which is not impUed in 
the meaning of the subject of the proposition? 
It cannot, therefore, be an essential part of the 
argument ; and if not, then we have a valid 
piece of reasoning, consisting only of two pro- 
positions. Here again, then, we miss one of the 
characteristics of the syllogism. But the above 
is only a specimen of ten thousand arguments of 
the same kind ; and therefore, we must conclude 
that all reasoning cannot be stated in syllogisms, 
as above defined. 



REASONING. 227 

Let US now take another method of arriving 
at the nature of the syllogism^ and instead of a 
definition^ let us examine what is allowed hy 
dialecticians to be the fundamental principle of 
all syllogisms, the famous dictum of Aristotle, 
which is, that whatever is affirmed or denied uni- 
versally of any class of things^ may he affirmed or 
denied of anything comprehended in that class. 
This, according to Archbishop Whately, is the 
Universal Principle of Reasoning ; for, as he 
thinks, all reasoning is syllogistical/ Now, cail 
this principle be applied to all reasoning ? In the 
first place, be it remarked, that this celebrated 
dictum is, in reality, no principle or axiom at all, 
for it affirms nothing which is not already com- 
prehended in the meaning of the word class. It 
is, in fact) a definition of a class, and so a 
merely verbal proposition. How a mere defini- 
tion can be the universal principle of reasoning, 
passes all conception. 

But, waving this objection, which meets us at 
the very outset of the inquiry, and allowing the 

* Let it not be supposed that I assert that Aristotle thought 
that he had discovered in this dictum the Universal Principle of 
Reasoning, My remarks apply to one of the most distinguished 
of his modern disciples, and we all know that disciples often go 
beyond their masters. Aristotle said only that the above dictum 
was the Universal Principle of Syllogisms. 



228 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

above to be entitled to the name of a principle, 
let us see whether it be applicable to all, or any 
kind of reasoning. When we refer to the various 
sorts of relation, about which reasoning is con- 
versant, that are mentioned above, we see but 
one kind, at most, to which the principle of the 
syllogism can be applicable, namely, relations of 
comprehension. This, no doubt, is a very im- 
portant class, but it is only one class; and 
certainly not more important than relations of 
cause and effect. If A be the cause of B, and 
B of C, then A is the remote cause of C. This is 
surely reasoning, and correct reasoning ; but how 
the conclusion is here comprehended under either 
of the premises, I am quite at a loss to perceive. 
So likewise in the reasoning, 
Application depends upon the will : 
But intellectual advancement depends much 
upon application : 

Therefore, intellectual advancement depends 
much upon the will. 

Here it will be allowed that the conclusion fol- 
lows fairly from the premises ; but surely, it is not 
comprehended under either of them. According 
to the syllogistic theory, application is here the 
middle term, and this is a class under which the 
subject of the conclusion, namely, intellectual 
advancement, must be brought, in order that 



REASONING. ' 229 

what had previously been asserted of the former, 
may be asserted also of the latter. But, how 
intellectual advancement is a particular instance, 
or a species, of the genus application, I am at a 
loss to see. By the supposition, the one, appli- 
cation, precedes as cause, and the other, in- 
tellectual advancement, follows as effect; and 
therefore, the latter cannot be an instance of 
the former. 

Again, taking relations of quantity. 




in the triangle ABC, if the side A B is equal 
to B C, and A C to B C, then is the side A B 
equal to A C. This, it will be allowed, is demon- 
strative reasoning ; but here also the principle of 
the syllogism is quite inapplicable. The con- 
clusion certainly follows irresistibly from the 
premises, but it is not comprehended under 
either of the previous propositions. 

It appears, then, from the acknowledged 
general principle of the syllogism, and from 
the particular instances of demonstrative reason- 
ing, and probable plain reasoning, now given, 
that to neither of these species of reasoning is 
the syllogism applicable. But we found before, 
that it follows directly from the definition of the 
syllogism, that all probable reasoning cannot be 



230 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHIL060PHY. 

Stated in syUogisms. Therefore, whether we 
start from the definition, or from the acknow- 
ledged general principle of the syllogism, we 
arrive at the same conclusion. Mark, however, 
this difference, that whereas, according to the 
definition^ demonstrative or pure mathematical 
reasoning is certainly syllogistical ; according to 
the general principle above stated, it certainly is 
not syllogistical. Therefore, the definition and the 
general principle are inconsistent ; but, whether 
we adopt the one or the other, it equally 
follows that all reasoning cannot be expressed in 
syllogisms. 

The question is now reduced to much nar- 
rower limits. Having seen that the syllogism is 
not the form in which all correct reasoning can 
be stated, it only remains to inquire whether any 
legitimate reasoning can be so expressed. 

If we take the definitions above given of the 
syllogism, that question is already answered ; for 
we found that demonstrative or mathematical 
reasoning agrees perfectly with those definitions. 
But, as they are in accordance neither with the 
so-called general principle of the syllogism, nor 
yet with the examples thereof generally brought 
forward, we shall adopt these in order to deter- 
mine whether any reasoning be really syllogistical. 

Agreeably to that fundamental principle, as 



REASONING. 231 

given above, it would appear^ that, to relations of 
comprehension, if to any, the syllogism must 
apply ; for the principle is, that what is true of a 
class, is true of all individuals comprehended un« 
der that class. To deductive reasoning, then, as 
tracing relations of comprehension, the syllo^sm 
may be applicable* 

Observe, that, in reference to reasoning, there 
are two questions to be solved, the one purely 
metaphysical and speculative, the other logical 
and practical: the first, what is really the pro- 
cess which goes on in our minds in reasoning ^ 
The second, how are we to test the validity of an 
ai^ument? Each of these questions must be 
treated separately. 

This distinction may be illustrated by refer- 
ence to Ethics, in which also there are two grand 
questions ; the one, what are th« causes present 
to the mind, which actually regulate our moral 
sentiments? The other, what are the circum- 
stances which justify us, on mature reflection, for 
awarding approbation or disapprobation to any 
action? The former question relates to the 
origin of our moral sentiments, the latter to the 
criterion of morality. 

The first question is, whether the syllogism be 
a full statement, founded on a correct Analysis, 
of the mental process in deductive reaaomng. 



¦¦M 



232 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Having already mentioned the general principle 
of the syllogism, let us now bring forward some 
examples. 

1. Whatever exhibits marks of design had an 

intelligent author. 
The world exhibits marks of design : 
Therefore, the world had an intelligent author. 

2. All tyrants deserve death. 
Csesar was a tyrant : 
Therefore, Caesar deserved death. 

3. Every dispensation of providence is beneficial. 
Afflictions are dispensations of providence : 
Therefore, they are beneficial. 

4. Every creature possessed of reason and liberty 

ought to practice justice. 
Man is a creature possessed of reason and 
liberty : 

Therefore, he ought to practise justice. 

5. No vicious man is worthy of esteem and 

reward. 
John is a vicious man : 

Therefore^ John is not worthy of esteem and 
reward. 

6. No tyrannical government is good. 
The Turkish government is tyrannical : 
Therefore, it is not good. 

These are instances of regular syllogisms, in 
the first Figure, to which, we are told by Aristotle 



REASONING. 233 

and his foUowers, all legitimate syllogisms may 
be reduced. Here the middle term is the sub- 
ject of the major, and the predicate of the minor 
proposition.' We shall also give a specimen of 
the second and of the third figure. 

7. Whatever is bad is not the work of God. 

All the natural passions and appetites of men 
are the work of God : 

Therefore, they are not bad. 

In this instance, the middle term is the 
predicate both of the major and of the minor 
proposition, or the syllogism is of the second 
figure. 

The next is from Reid. 

8. All Africans are black. 
All Africans are men : 
Therefore^ some men are black. 

Here the middle term is the subject both of 
the major and minor, or the syllogism is of 
the third figure. 

These instances may suffice to show us the 
nature of syllogisms. In all, the conclusion is 

' The firet three are taken from Whately's Logic. The first 
in particular is his favourite specimen. In the Prior Analytics, 
Book I. Chap. vii. Aristotle proves that all syllogisms may he 
reduced not only to the first figure, but to the two universal moods 
of the first figure, either directly by conversion, or indirectly by 
reductio ad absurdum, 

H H 



234 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

evident, pnovided the premises be granted ; and in 
all, the validity consists in the same thing, which, 
when stated generally, constitutes the dictum 
above mentioned; namely, that whatever is 
affirmed or denied universally of any class of 
things, may be affirmed or denied of any thing 
comprehended in that class. In framing the 
argument, then, the object is to refer the subject 
of the conclusion to some class, (middle term) 
of which class something can be affirmed or 
denied universally. Thus, in the first syllogism, 
the subject of the conclusion, '*the world," is 
referred to a class of things, " those which exhibit 
marks of design," of which it can be universally 
affirmed that " they had an intelligent author." 
And so with the rest. 

Now the question is, do men actually reason 
thus ? That they do not openly or apparently so 
reason, every one's experience may convince 
him. Taking each of the six syllogisms in the 
first figure, to which form the other figures may 
be reduced, we shall see that in every case 
the natural or usual way of reasoning would 
be confined to the second and third propositions, 
omitting the first. In order to prove that the 
world had an intelligent author, none but a 
dialectician would think of beginning by stating, 
"whatever exhibits marks of design had an 



BEASONINO. 233 

intelligent author;" but an ordinary reasoner 
would say, 

The world exhibits marks of design : 

Therefore^ it had an intelligent author. And 
so in the other cases. 

But though, not expressed, is not the first or 
major proposition understood? Mentally em- 
braced, though not stated in words? There lies 
all the question. 

When we examine these six syllogisms, we 
find that the major is always an universal pro* 
position, and this, in fact, is one of the laws of 
the first figure, as it is of syllogisms in general 
that one of the premises must be universal. 
Unless this be the case, no infallible inference 
can be drawn. If the major proposition be uni- 
versal, it must embrace the conclusion, for this is 
only a particular instance of the same. Con« 
sequently, by assuming the major, we assume the 
conclusion ; or, in other words, our first propo- 
sition takes for granted the very thing to be 
proved. And this, we are told, is the legitimate, 
nay, the only legitimate mode of reasoning! 
Certainly, of all the delusions that ever passed 
current in the world, this is the greatest ; for it 
is a delusion not peculiar to the vulgar, but 
shared, even now, by some of the highest names 
in philosophy. It is engendered between rever- 



236 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHIL060PHT. 

ence for antiquity and respect for Aristotle and 
Greek, and in many instances it has proved too 
strong, not only for common sense, but for high 
intellectual powers. On that account it is the 
more important that the delusion should be 
expelled. 

Aristotle shows (Prior Analytics, Book I. 
Chap, xxiv.) that unless one of the two proposi- 
tions which compose the premises be universal, 
there can be no syllogism. *'Thus," says he, "if 
we have to demonstrate that music is a dignified 
pleasure, if we state only that pleasure is digni- 
fied, without saying all pleasure, there is no syllo- 
gism." Strange that this acute philosopher 
should not have put the question to himself, if 
all pleasure be dignified, what occasion is there 
for reasoning to prove that the pleasure of music 
is so ? That question once fairly answered, he 
might have spared himself the immense trouble 
of writing the Prior Analytics, a mighty monu- 
ment of useless ingenuity. 

Who, I would ask, starting from the major 
proposition of the syllogism, would think of 
proving that Caesar, as a tyrant, deserved death, 
because all tyrants deserve death? That is the 
very thing to he proved. Whether we use the 
singular or the plural, it makes no difference; 
for the general term Tyrant comprehends as 



BEA80NING. 237 

many particulars as the phrase all Tyrants. 
What can be more silly than the statement, a 
tyrant, any tyrant, deserves death, becatise all 
tyrants deserve death ? But such, and no other, is 
the proof afforded us in this syllogism. These 
two propositions are in reality identical ; they 
differ only in form. We conclude that what, 
instead of proving any thing, begins by taking 
for granted the very thing to be proved, cannot 
be the natural mode of reasoning. 

Moreover, the above specimens of syllogism, 
and others, such as are usually found in books of 
Logic, in all the varieties of figure and mood, do 
not answer to the definition of syllogism given 
by Aristotle above, viz. that **a syllogism is a 
speech in which certain propositions (the pre- 
mises) being stated and granted, some other pro- 
position (the conclusion) different from these, 
follows of necessity ; and this solely in virtue of 
the propositions stated." Now, we have seen that 
the syllogisms constructed according to the rules 
of figure and mood, and in agreement with the 
Dictum of Aristotle de omni et nullo, as it is 
called, really bring out in the conclusion nothing 
different from the premises. Therefore, they do 
not correspond with the above definition, which, 
as we have shown, agrees with demonstrative or 



238 INTRODUCTION TO MSNTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

mathematical reasoning only.^ That definition is 
a definition of perfect or demonstrative reason- 
ing, and if we please to call it syllogistic, well 
and good : but then we must remember that such 
syllogisms are very diflPerent from the syllogisms 
of the schools, which alone we are now combat- 
ing. In these last, the connection between the 
premises and the conclusion is no doubt irre- 
sistible, because the latter is assumed in the 
former; but for that reason it can contain no- 
thing new, nothing different. Not so in real and 
perfect reasoning, such as that of Geometry, 
where the conclusion not only follows irresistibly 
from the premises, from both together, but where 
it' also contains something different from either. 

'^In what, then, consists this admirable 
discovery of the syllogism?" asks Barth^lemy 
Saint Hilaire, in the Preface to his Translation of 
Aristotle's Organon? "In this,*' answers he, 
^^ that Aristotle first established that reasoning 
was possible on the one condition alone of start- 
ing from a principle, to arrive by the aid of a 

'What we have called Plain Reasoning approaches more 
nearly to the Mathematical than any other, and in some cases 
seems not to fall short of demonstration: though the matter 
ahout which it is conversant he contingenty not necessary. 
Therefore, though the conclusion follows irresistibly from the 
premises, it may still be false. 



REASONING. 239 

middle term at a conclusion resulting necessarily 
from that principle.'* According to this state- 
ment, there can be none but demonstrative 
reasoning; first mistake. Again, by this, the 
conclusion in demonstrative reasoning follows 
necessarily from the principle, as Saint Hilaire 
calls it, or major proposition ; whereas, in mathe- 
matical reasoning, it follows not from one of the 
premises alone, but from both together; second 
mistake. In the simple reasoning, A is equal to 
B, and B to C ; therefore, A is equal to C ; the 
conclusion certainly follows not necessarily from 
either of the two premises, but from both, and 
the one is no more entitled to be called a prin- 
ciple than the other. It is only in the fictitious 
reasoning of the syllogism, that the conclusion 
follows necessarily from the major proposition, 
because in that proposition the conclusion is taken 
for granted beforehand. It may be remarked, that 
Logicians of a certain class are often at war with 
the Mathematicians. No wonder; for no science 
so clearly refutes the absurd pretensions of the 
School Logic as Mathematics. 

I am well aware that a very high authority in 
Logic maintains that we cannot draw the simplest 
inference in Mathematics without the use of an 
universal principle ; and that even the reasoning 
A is equal to B, and B to C, therefore A is equal 



240 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

to C, is elliptical. Stated in full, we are told 
that reasoning would be as follows :— 

What are equal to the same, are equal to each 
other ; 

A and C are equal to the same (B) ; 

Therefore, A and C are equal to each other. 

How is this question to be determined ? By 
an appeal to consciousness, the supreme tribunal 
in Metaphysics. To consciouness, then, we do 
appeal, and we maintain that the reasoning A is 
equal to B, and B to C, therefore, A is equal to C, 
is not elliptical ; that nothing is wanting to the 
evidence of the conclusion, that the mind sees 
that conclusion as resulting from the premises 
at once and irresistibly. Does any one deny this 
evidence, and ask for more proof ? We have no 
more to offer, for we cannot give a demonstra- 
tion of a demonstration. As for what is called 
the full statement, we deny that it is one whit 
more satisfactory than the other, or that it is the 
natural mode of reasoning. It is an artificial 
mode, invented to prop up a theory by reducing 
mathematical reasoning to the syllogistic form. 
We cannot of course support our denial by a 
formal proof, for the first principles of reasoning 
admit not of proof ; but we confidently appeal to 
the consciousness of every man of common un- 
derstanding. 



REASONING. 24 1 

We must not confound analysisy with general- 
ization. The reasoning, A is equal to B, and 
B to C, therefore, A is equal to C, seems to 
admit of no analysis, it is complete in all its 
parts, all is expressed; but, when we come to 
compare this with other examples of reasoning, 
we find that there is a striking similarity between 
them, which similarity, or point of agreement, may 
be stated as a general principle, and formalized 
in words, thus, " things which are equal to the 
same are equal to one another." This general 
principle, then, is said to pervade all such 
specimens of reasoning; that is, each is a par- 
ticular instance thereof. But we must not 
therefore suppose that each is proved from the 
general principle. On the contrary, but for the 
particular instances, the general proposition would 
never have been thought of. It comes after the 
particular proofs, by a process of generalization, 
forming an axiom convenient for the purpose of 
communicating knowledge, and satisfactory to 
the mind of the learner, as showing at a glance 
all that he is called upon to take for granted in 
the ensuing demonstration; but it cannot be 
necessary to a proof which is evident without it, 
and which actually was established without it; 
for few will maintain that the geometrical dis- 
coverer began by laying down axioms. 

I I 



242 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHT. 

One question only now remains. Though the 
syllogism be not an accurate detailed statement, 
derived from a correct analysis of the process of 
reasoning, is it of any use as a testj a criterion of 
the validity of an argument? In other words, 
though false metaphysically, can it serve any 
purpose logically ? 

If the syllogism be not an accurate statement 
of the full mental process in reasoning, there is 
surely a strong probability, a priori, against its 
logical utility. But let us examine this point 
separately. 

When we consider the specimens given above, 
or any others that are in due form, we shall find 
that what the syllogism does, is to point out in 
the major proposition what must be taken for 
granted, in order that the inference may be 
irrefragable, in other words, that the conclusion 
may follow necessarily from the premises. In 
order to show this necessary connexion, or want 
of connexion, the. syllogism so states the case, that 
the conclusion is evidently comprehended, or not 
comprehended, under the premises. But then, 
the major premiss, taken for granted, requires 
proof, quite as much as the conclusion, nay, 
more, for it comprehends it, and more also ; and 
therefore, though the inference be correct, the 
conclusion may be utterly false; and the reason 



REASONING. 243 

why the inference is irrefragable, is because the 
conclusion is taken for granted in the premises ; 
and if it be not taken for granted, then the 
inference is not irrefragable. The syllogism^ in 
fact, shows nothing more than this ; that unless 
such a preliminary proposition be true, we 
cannot be quite sure of the conclusion. But, as 
we can be quite sure of no matter of fact, at 
least of no universal fact, the conclusion must* 
after all, be hypothetical ; though we are apt 
erroneously to suppose that it is certain, because 
the inference is correct. 

The only conceivable use of the syllogism, is 
to show us what large assumptions must be made, 
if we would have a semblance of certainty ; and 
consequently, that there is no real certainty, but 
only probability. " The world exhibits marks of 
design," (that is which look like design) : "there- 
fore, the world had an intelligent author." It is 
true that this conclusion cannot be quite certain, 
unless, "^ whatever exhibits marks of design had 
an intelligent author." Neither is it perfectly 
certain, because *' CsBsar was a tyrant," " there- 
fore, he deserved death," unless ^^all tyrants 
deserve death ;" but what ought we to infer from 
this, but that all our reasonings on matters of 
fact are fallible, and liable to exceptions ; for, in 
order that the conclusion may follow irresistibly, 



244 INTRODUCTION TO MBNTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

universal propositioDs must be assumed to be 
true, though as such, they may be false? To 
impress this truth on the mind, seems to me the 
only possible advantage to be derived from the 
syllogism ; though its effect has been just the 
contrary ; for it has an appearance of perfect 
proof and certainty, and though only an appear- 
ance, the fiction, like other fictions, is apt to 
impose upon the understanding, and lead it into 
error. 

The grand mistake of the syllogistic theory, 
then, is the notion that we can ever arrive at 
demonstration in reasonings about matters of 
fact ; and in carrying out this notion, a form of 
reasoning was invented, (for invented is the word) 
whereby the appearance, and only the appearance 
of infallibility, was given to an argument. The 
very perfection of the proof in a regular syllo- 
gism shows the futility of the argument; for 
we know that, except in mathematics, there is no 
perfect proof; and consequently, the perfection 
can be only apparent, and therefore, the result of 
a trick. This trick, as we have seen, is assuming 
the conclusion in the premises. 

That a system of logic, raised on such a basis, 
should so long have stood its ground, and that 
even at the present day it should have eminent 
supporters, is certainly one of the most extra- 



BEASOMING. 245 

ordinary facts in the history of the human mind. 

To the name, the truly great name of Aristotle, 
must chiefly be attributed this long delusion ; a 
man distinguished in so many branches of 
science, in Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics, Rhe- 
toric, Criticism, and Natural History; the tutor 
of Alexander, the founder of the peripatetic 
philosophy. Assuredly, the writings of Aristotle 
have shed a light on the world ; but the great 
power of the philosopher is chiefly shown in this, 
that he bewildered it so long. 

To take an instance formerly given. Suppose 
that, either by induction, or otherwise, we have 
arrived at this general proposition, that 

Trade ought to be free : 
we may thence infer directly, that 

The corn trade ought to be free. 

Here the conclusion follows from the premises, 
follows probably, but not infallibly ; for the pro- 
position " trade ought to be free," though general^ 
is not stated as universal; and therefore there 
may be circumstances peculiar to the com trade, 
which make it an exception to the rule. But 
this is the natural mode of reasoning. Now, if 
we wish to convert this into a syllogism, we must 
state the argument thus : 

All trade ought to be free. 

The corn trade is a trade : 



246 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Therefore, it ought to be free. 

Here, by assuming too much, we render the 
argument insignificant, for we assume the eon- 
elusion in the major premiss. 

It is a very fair argument to infer, because 
trade in general ought to be free, that the corn 
trade ought to be free ; it is an argument drawn 
from a general proposition or a general principle, 
as the common phrase is ; in other words, an in- 
stance of deductive reasoning; but it is no 
argument to say that the corn trade ought to be 
free, because all trade ought to be free. This is 
simply a begging of the question ; it is to say, 
that there can now be no dispute about the mat- 
ter, that it has been already decided. Take another 
instance. Our general proposition may be, 

**' A local legislature is advantageous to a 
country," whence we may infer, that 

'* A local legislature in Ireland would be ad- 
vantageous to that country." 

This is a fair argument ; but, as the proposition 
pretends not to universality, there may be cir- 
cumstances peculiar to Ireland, which render the 
general rule inapplicable; or, on the contrary, 
there may in this case be circumstances which 
render a local legislature peculiarly desirable. 

When brought to the forna of a syllogism, the 
argument becomes as follows : 



REASONING. 247 

Every country is benefited by a local legis- 
lature. 

Ireland is a country : 

Therefore, Ireland would be benefited by a 
local legislature. 

Here, again, it is evident that by assuming 
too much, we do away with the argument alto- 
gether. We prove nothing, we show the pro- 
bability of nothing; we suppose the question 
already settled. 

Again, supposing ourselves convinced of the 
truth of this general proposition, that the law 
ought to favour the equal partition of property 
among all the children of a family, daughters as 
well as sons ; it may still be a question whether 
there be any circumstances peculiar to land, 
which justify an exception : but, if we begin by 
an universal affirmation, that all property ought 
to be equally divided, there is an end at once to 
reasoning. 

Hume's famous argument against miracles, 
which is contained in a single sentence, may be 
easily reduced to the form of a syllogism in the 
first figure ; and for that very reason it is nuga- 
tory. " A miracle is a violation of the laws of 
nature ; and as a firm and unalterable experience 
has established those laws, the proof against a 
miracle, from the very nature of the fact, is as 



248 INTRODUCTION TO BIENTAL PHIL060PHT. 

entire as any argument from experience can 
possibly be imagined." In due syllogistic form, 
the argument would stand thus : 

Whatever is opposed to a firm and unalter- 
able experience is unworthy of credit. 

But a miracle (being a violation of the laws 
of nature) is so opposed : 

Therefore, a miracle is unworthy of credit. 

The fallacy here lies in assuming in the minor 
premiss, that there is a firm and unalterable ex- 
perience against a miracle; for there exists a 
great deal of testimony for miracles; and until 
it be proved that all that testimony is false, it 
cannot be assumed that there is an invariable 
experience against them; for testimony is in- 
direct experience, and upon it, by far the greater 
part of our knowledge depends. Even the major 
premiss may be contested. If by firm and 
unalterable experience be meant (and what else 
can be meant ?) the experience of ourselves, our 
ancestors, and all whom we have known or heard 
of, then those born and bred between the tropics, 
and who have never wandered from thence, ought 
not to believe in ice. In fact, there is scarcely 
any universal proposition that may not be con- 
tested; and therefore, dialecticians have been 
obliged, in order not to expose the hollowness of 
their art, to have recourse to trifling examples, 



REASONING. 249 

such as, ^^ All men are mortal/' James is a man : 
therefore, he is mortal. " All men are sinners." 
John is a man : therefore, he is a sinner : where 
they knew that the major would not be dis- 
puted. Aristotle was more wary, for he stuck to 
letters, and thus concealed the insignificance of 
examples. 

Thus, the major premiss of the syllogism is, 
in general, either a truism, or an unwarranted 
assumption ; and therefore, though the inference 
be irresistible, yet the conclusion must be either 
trifling or uncertain. But, whatever it be, it is 
no more, as we have already seen, than what was 
previously known, being assumed in the premises. 
We cannot, therefore, wonder, that the syllogistic 
art, in spite of its great pretensions, should have 
contributed so little (or rather not at all) to the 
advancement of knowledge. 

If the argument of Hume had not laid claim 
to infallibility, it could not have been reduced to 
the form of a perfect syllogism. It would have 
remained a good, but an obvious argument, 
namely, that prior to the examination of the 
particular fact, there is a probability, nay, a 
strong probability, against any one miracle, on 
account of the general uniformity of nature. 
But general experience could not answer the 
purpose of an infallible conclusion ; and there- 

K K 



250 INTRODUCTION TO BffENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

fore, unalterable or universal experience was 
assumed; and it is exactly by reason of this 
assumption, that the argument becomes re- 
ducible to a syllogism, and, as a demonstration, 
is deceitful. 

We have seen that the grand error which lies at 
the bottom of the syllogistic theory, is the notion 
that we can ever arrive at demonstration about 
matters of experience ; and in carrjring out this 
notion, it was found necessary to assume, for 
premises, universal propositions instead of general 
ones. This is the precise difference between 
the ordinary, or natural mode of reasoning, that 
is, of deductive or general reasoning, and the 
artificial or syllogistic. We may reason from 
general propositions, that is, we may attempt to 
show that any particular case is comprehended 
under a general truth; but, we cannot reason 
from universal propositions; for these obviate 
the necessity of reasoning. We reason in order 
to prove something not known before ; but if it 
be already known, why reason ? 

So far concerning deductive reasoning, and 
the syllogism, the insuperable objection to which 
last is, that it presents a form of reasoning in- 
applicable to any real discourse ; that, under the 
semblance of a perfect or infallible argument, it, 
in fact, does away with all argument. 



RBASONINQ. 25 1 

When I consider the reasons on which this 
conclusion is built, they appear to me so clear 
and cogent, that here I could rest in full con- 
viction. But when I reflect on the fact, that for 
many ages, and throughout all civilized Europe, 
the syllogism was adopted, and that still some of 
the greatest thinkers defend it, I am almost 
tempted to fall back into scepticism, and to dis* 
card metaphysics and logic altogether, as destined 
perpetually to puzzle, never to satisfy mankind. 
To avoid this scepticism, this unmanly despair, 
I am forced to rebel against authority, and main- 
tain the liberty of thought. 

When men have been wedded to a system, 
they will not desert it, even when it leads them to 
absurdities. One might have thought that the 
following passage was a pretty good refutation 
of the syllogistic theory of the schools, a real 
reducHo ad absurdum ; but no, the author adopts 
the conclusion. ^^ Since all reasoning (in the sense 
above defined,) may be resolved into syllogisms, 
and since even the objectors to logic make it a 
subject of complaint, that in a syllogism the 
premises do virtually assert the conclusion, it 
follows at once that no new truth (as above 
defined) can be elicited by a process of reason- 
ing."*" Thus, in order to maintain the Syllogistic 

^ Whately'B Logic, Book IV. Chap. ii. 



252 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Theory, we must allow that no new truth can be 
elicited by reasoning ! The only use of reasoning, 
then, as we are told, is ^^ to expand and unfold the 
assertions wrapt up, as it were, and implied in 
those with which we set out, and to bring a 
person to perceive and acknowledge the full 
force of that which he has admitted; to con- 
template it in various points of view; to admit 
in one shape what he has already admitted in 
another, and to give up and disallow whatever is 
inconsistent with it."* According to this theory, 
when Pythagoras established by reasoning that, in 
any right angled triangle, the square of the side 
subtending the right angle is equal to the squares 
of the two other sides, he made no discovery, he 
only unfolded what was before wrapt up in some 
general notion common to him and other men, 
some one or more of the mathematical axioms. 
Must we, then, allow that the above famous pro- 
position is as much contained within the axiom. 
Things which are equal to the same are equal to 
one another, or some other similar, as that the 
proposition, '^ James is mortal,'* is contained 
within "all men are mortal?" No one, not 
blinded by system, will maintain such a doctrine 
for a moment. But, the syllogistic theory was 
to be supported, even at the expense of reason- 

^ Whately's Logic, Book IV. Chap. ii. 



REASONING. 253 

ing, which required to be depreciated in order to 
suit an artificial and futile system. 

As reasoning is depreciated in order to suit 
the syllogistic theory, so are the truths of pure 
mathematics. We are told that all the proposi- 
tions of pure mathematics are what Locke calls 
" trifling," wherein the predicate is merely a part 
of the complex idea implied by the subject. 
Thus, when we assert, taking the above example, 
that in a right angled triangle the square des- 
cribed on the side which subtends the right 
angle, is equal to the squares described on the 
two sides containing the right angle, we state 
merely a trifling proposition, one included in the 
meaning of the word right angled triangle ! If 
so, it ought to be included in the definition 
thereof. But the definition says nothing about it. 
The supposition is evidently preposterous. 

Again, the truths of mathematics are repre- 
sented by the same author, as in conformity, not 
with the nature of things, but only with our own 
hypotheses, our own definitions, and therefore 
comparatively insignificant. There is some founda- 
tion no doubt for this statement. The truths of 
mathematics are not quite conformable to the 
nature of things ; they are strictly true, only on 
a given hypothesis or definition ; but then, they 
are so far in agreement with the nature of exter- 
nal things, that the nearer things external ap- 



254 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

proach to the things defined, the more nearly 
does the practical result correspond to the ideal 
conclusion. Therefore, mathematical truths are 
not mere ingenious theorems, hut pregnant with 
useful application. 

Before me, the author of the Philosophy of 
Rhetoric, as well as Dr. Thomas Brown, objected 
to the syllogism, as necessarily involving a petitio 
principii. Dr. Whately does not attempt to prove 
the contrary, but he answers that the same ob- 
jection lies against all arguments whatever.^ All 
arguments involve a petitio principii/ Am I 
wrong, then, in saying that all reasoning is de- 
preciated in order to suit an artificial and futile 
system? After this, I need not add another 
word upon the syllogism. 

V. Thus, we have been able to distinguish 
three kinds of probable reasoning ; the inductive^ 
the deductive^ and the plain^ of which the two 
former have more affinity to each other than to 
the third. We are aware that, according to some, 
all reasoning is of two kinds, the inductive and 
the deductive ; that one author maintains all pro- 
bable reasoning to be deductive, or, as he calls it, 
analytic; and another, that all is inductive.' 

^ The words in italics are so printed in the original. 

* Dr. T. Brown maintains that all reasoning, except the 
Mathematical, or Proportional, as he calls it, is analytic; while 
Mr. Mill seems to think that all reasoning is in reality inductive. 



REASONING. 255 

But it certainly does not appear from an ex- 
amination of particular instances, that all pro- 
bable reasonings can be classed under these two 
heads, much less all reasonings whatsoever. 

Premature generalization is the bane of science ; 
and principia media are more applicable and more 
fruitful than principia generalissima. By general- 
izing prematurely we have always to begin 
afresh, nothing is gained ; whereas, by advancing 
more cautiously, we establish one position at 
least, whence we may hope in time to take a 
higher flight. Bacon has observed, that the 
grand error of philosophers before his time 
consisted in this, that from particulars they rose 
at once to extreme generalities, whence they 
endeavoured to deduce every thing; whereas, 
the true method of progress is to advance by 
degrees from one step of generalization to 
another, even unto the highest. 

Meanwhile, let us examine what relations are 
the proper subject of each of these sorts of 
reasoning; for we have seen that all reasoning 
consists in the tracing of relations. 

The subject of demonstrative reasoning is the 
relations of Quantity and those alone. The first 
subject of inductive reasoning is the relation of 
Resemblance, one of amazing extent, by means of 
which we arrive, also by induction, at the know- 



256 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOBOPHY. 

ledge of other relations, those of Cause and 
Effect 

The relations traced by deductive reasoning 
are those of Comprehension, of a whole to a 
part, as when we show that a particular proposi- 
tion is comprehended under a general one ; the 
policy of a free trade in corn, for instance, un 
der the policy of free trade in general. Se- 
quences of cause and effect are traced by plain 
reasoning, as in the examples above given. A is 
the cause of B, and B of C, therefore, A is the 
remote cause of C. Relations of Position also 
are traced by this sort of reasoning, as in the 
following instance : 

York is further from London than Stamford ; 
and Edinburgh is further from London than 
York; much more then is Edinburgh further 
from London than Stamford. 

From the first proposition, a person totally 
unacquainted with the position of Edinburgh 
could infer nothing ; and from the second propo- 
sition, one unacquainted with the position of 
Stamford could infer nothing; both, therefore, 
are necessary to the conclusion, which is not 
comprehended under either," 

" Such relations of Position are, in reality, relations of 
Quantity, and so, admit of demonstrative reasoning. 



BEASONINO. 257 

VI. It will be observed that we have not 
attempted, (as some have) to establish an univer- 
sal principle of reasoning, because we very much 
doubt whether any such principle exist. We 
have seen that all reasoning consists in tracing 
relations, and since these are various, it is natural 
to presume that the principles of reasoning may 
be so too. Even in mathematical reasoning, the 
most simple of any, for it embraces but one kind 
of relation, clearly distinguished from all other 
relations, and having its own differences ac- 
curately marked out, there is more than one 
fundamental principle or axiom. Surely then it is 
unlikely that there can be but one principle for 
all probable reasoning, which embraces various 
and complicated relations. The case of mathe- 
matics proves, at least, that all reasoning is not 
based upon one principle. "Things which are 
equal to the same are equal to one another;" 
and " if equals be added to equals the wholes are 
equal ;* are not one axiom but two. 

Do we clearly understand what is meant by a 
principle of reasoning P It is a general truth, of 
which each inference is a particular instance, a 
truth either self-evident, as in mathematics, or, 
at least, to be taken for certain, since it is in- 
capable of proof, and at the same time indis- 
pensable to the proof of other propositions. In 

L L 



258 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

this, the validity of an inference consists, and 
upon it, conviction depends. Considered in 
respect to the reasoning itself, it is an invariahle 
constituent or element; in respect to the in- 
fluence on the mind, a cause; for, as we have 
seen," a principle may be either constituent or 
elemental, or else causal. 

Although we do not pretend to lay down one 
universal principle of reasoning, yet we may 
arrive at some general truths on this subjects 
Since all reasoning consists in tracing relations, 
and since these are either of coexistence or of 
succession, it follows that the object of reasoning 
is to prove either that two or more things coexist 
or do not coexist ; or that two or more things 
succeed or do not succeed each other ; generally, 
if not invariably. The object of science, in 
particular, is to determine the permanent or 
invariable coexistence, and succession of things, 
partly by direct observation, and where that 
fails, by reasoning or inference. Where one 
thing is known certainly to exist, there to expect 
another along with it; or where one thing is 
ascertained, to look for another after it; such 
are the anticipations of human science. 

Coexistence and succession being two such 
different relations, it does seem improbable that 

° See Article Principle. 



REASONING. 259 

the very same maxims of reasoning should apply 
to both. But let us see whether we cannot deter- 
mine some which are applicable separately to each. 

Relations of Coexistence : 

Under this head come all the axioms of pure 
mathematics, which are well known, and there- 
fore, need not here be stated. The following 
maxims are applicable to other sorts of reasoning. 

1. If the first always coexist with the 
second, and the second with the third, then will 
the third always coexist with the first. 

2. And vice versa. If the first never coexist 
with the second, and if the second always coexist 
with the third, then will the third never coexist 
with the first. 

Relations of Succession : 

3. What has been will be. 

4. Every effect has a chain of causes. 

5. One effect may have many concomitant 
causes. 

6. An effect may be prevented not merely by 
the absence of the cause or causes proper to it, 
but also by opposing causes. Therefore, the 
absence of an effect proves not the absence of 
a tendency. 

Maocim applicable to hath kinds of Relation : 

7. Two or more things, which resemble each 
other in many observed particulars^ will be found 



260 INTRODUCTION TO MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 

to agree in other non-observed particulars. From 
the appearances of agreement we may infer, 
either that the composition of the things in 
question is similar, or that the changes which 
they undergo or produce are similar. The rela- 
tion of resemblance is peculiar in this, that it 
may be a relation either of coexistence or of 
succession; for there may be similarity of 
sequence as well as of composition. 

Relations of resemblance are the foundation 
not only of all classification, and hence of the 
descriptive sciences or natural history, but also 
of reasonings concerning cause and effect, and 
therefore, of philosophy. Nay, it is the peculiar 
office of the Imagination to trace relations of 
resemblance, not so much for the sake of truth, 
as of effect or emotion. Fortunate, then, is that 
mind which is alive to relations of resemblance, 
whether it thread the mazes of science, or follow 
the flowerj^ paths of eloquence and poetry : and 
valuable is that memory wherein things suggest 
others from similarity, and not from mere con- 
tiguity in place or in time. 



THE END. 



Crowley and Biiliiigton, Printers, Rugby. 



WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 



AN ESSAY ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH. 

Svo. I2s, 



POLITICAL DISCOURSES. 
Svo. 9s. 



A DISQUISITION ON GOVERNMENT. 

12mo. 4s. 



ANALYSIS AND THEORY OF THE EMOTIONS, 

Svo. 6s. 



A CLASSIFICATION OF THE SCIENCES. 

4to. 2s. 6d. 

EDINBUBGH: ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK. 
LONDON : LONGMAN, BBOWN, GBEEN, AND LONGMANS. 



INQUIRY INTO THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN 

HAPPINESS AND DUTY. 

Svo. I4«. 

LONDON: WILLIAM PICKEEING. 