C LIBRARY j 

UNIVERSITY OF 
CALIFORNIA 

SAN DIEGO \ 



ft 



LOGIC; 



t 

THE SCIENCE OF INFERENCE. 



SYSTEMATIC VIEW OF THE PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE, AND 

THE METHODS OP INFERENCE IN THE VARIOUS 

DEPARTMENTS OF HUMAN 

KNOWLEDGE. 



JOSEPH DEVEY. 



LONDON: 
HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 

MDCCCLIV. 



PREFACE. 



THE following pages comprise an attempt to systematise 
the various forms of inference engaged, either in the con- 
struction of science, or in the generation of opinion and 
belief. Notwithstanding the diversity of the subject, the 
author has endeavoured to meet its widest requirements; 
not neglecting, while he has devoted the greater portion of 
the treatise to the consideration of the laws and methods 
of inference in their simplest and most complex combina- 
tions, to include in his design a description of the different 
subject-matter on which they are ordinarily employed, and 
the foundations on which their processes ultimately rest. 
If, to views so discursive, he has been able to impart any- 
thing like systematic completeness, the merit is due not 
so much to him as to the excellent treatises which have 
already elaborated distinct portions of the subject and guided 
him through much of his labour. 

Logic, owing to the opposite schools of metaphysicians, 
lias met with various, and even conflicting treatment in 
nearly every age. It appears to be the only subject of which 
the difficulties multiply with the spread of knowledge, and 
which, instead of disentangling itself from the quarrels of the 
past, periodically carries forward all its old perplexities to be 
added to the account of the present. The disputes of JEnesi- 
demus with the ancient stoics is still rife in Germany, and 

b 



Tl PBEFA.CE. 

the gauntlet which Bacon threw down to the peripatetics of 
his age, is as warmly taken up by their successors in the 
present, as if the Novum Organum had been only yesterday 
ushered into the world. Hence, in the present vacillating 
state of the science, with its limits as well as its subject-mat- 
ter depending on each individual's fancy or caprice, no one 
knows when he finds the name of Logic on the back of a 
work what he is to expect. It may be a dish of metaphysics, 
a dry piece of scholastic wrangling, or an abstract treatise 
on method ; and should the views of the author be ultra, 
the reader will not improbably find a great many pages taken 
up with anathematising every view of logic but that assumed 
in the text. 

Now, this is not a satisfactory state of that science which 
concerns the operation of the faculty in which men chiefly 
glory, not only as the mark which pre-eminently divides them 
from the brute creation, but also as the primary source of 
those distinctions of rank and supremacy which obtain in 
society. Nor has the writer met with anything in logical 
treatises to necessitate the conflicting diversity of view in 
which they regard the science. There is nothing in the body 
of Aristotle's speculative views to hinder them from being 
engrafted on the practical doctrines of Bacon ; nor anything 
in the a priori methods of Descartes essentially antagonist 
even to the inductive methods propounded by Comte and 
Helvetius. Apart from the metaphysical tenets of these 
schools, the general body of their logical doctrines may 
be combined in one system. All have their distinct func- 
tions in the generation of scientific belief, and by the diver- 
sity of view which they bring to bear on any object, tend to 
strengthen and verify the accuracy of each other's processes. 
The writer has, therefore, avoided the fragmentary treat- 
ment of logic pursued by his predecessors, and attempted 
to place the science on its right basis, by grouping around 



PREFACE. Vii 

the central idea of Inference the various methods and sys- 
tems which are connected with its functions in the leading 
divisions of knowledge. The instruments may be diverse, 
but they all range themselves as so many subordinate con- 
ceptions round the leading idea of the science, and may be 
regarded as so many means of dissipating doubt, detecting 
error, and placing trath beyond cavil. 

Some persons manifest as much care in adjusting the limits 
of a science, as if they were laying down the confines of pro- 
vinces, or the boundaries of empires. The writer has not 
deemed this exact nicety beneficial to a science which is in 
a greater measure than any other interwoven with every 
department of human knowledge. He has therefore intro- 
duced into his pages everything which had a strong bearing 
on inference, whether as regards metaphysical discussions 
on the foundations of evidence, or collateral disputes which 
have been raised in the present day on the doctrine of quan- 
tification. He has not, however, adopted any of the innova- 
tions which Sir W. Hamilton would introduce into the 
scholastic logic, nor indeed omitted any portion of the 
Aristotelian system, except the part excluded by the intro- 
duction of special canons for each figure. With regard to 
the utility of the peripatetic system and its correlation with 
the other branches of logic, the views of the writer are in a 
mean ratio to those of Mill and "Whately. "While he concurs 
with Bacon in deeming this branch of the subject more 
directly applicable to the moral sciences 1 , he does not con- 
sider it entirely useless in physical investigation ; inasmuch 
as there can be no inference which may not be faulty as to 
form, and which, therefore, is not open to receive the aid of 
the syllogistic canons. 

In conclusion, the author expresses his conviction that 

1 Bacon's restriction referred to politics and theology ; but politics 
in his days was considered an a priori science. 



Till PKEFACE. 

there are only two legitimate methods of treating a practical 
system of logic, viz. : Either by pursuing the method adopted 
in these pages, of systematising all the processes of infer- 
ence which are embodied in the various departments of 
knowledge ; or by selecting some particular province or 
group of sciences, and pointing out the inferential methods 
employed in their construction. In the direction of the first, 
or general system of logic, Mill's is the only attempt that has 
hitherto been made, and he has excluded the Aristotelian 
portion of the subject. Of the last, or specific kind, several 
treatises have appeared, but in most cases carrying down the 
subject to subdivisions too minute to entitle Logic to the 
claim of a distinct science 1 . When confined to the investi- 
gation of a single subject, as in Oersterlen's Medicinische 
Logik, or in the clever treatise of George Cornewall Lewis, 
On the Methods of Observation and Reasoning in Politics-, 
Logic, however valuable the results in other respects, is taken 
out of its niche in the temple of the arts, and blended with 
the substance of the other sciences. 

J. D. 

London, 1854. 

1 The most amusing in this way is decidedly that on Parliamentary 
Logic by " Single- speech" Hamilton. 2 The reader may profitably 
eonsult another work by this ingenious writer, On the Force of Autho"- 
rity in Matters of Opinion. 



CONTENTS. 



HISTOEICAL INTRODUCTION. 
..'. BOOK I. 

OF TERMS. PBOEMIPM. 

CHAPTEE I. Of the Material Relation of Terms. 

PAGE 

1. Conditions of conception, substance, attribute 33 

2. Abstract and concrete connotative and non-connotative terms 34 

3. Relative and absolute, positive and negative terms 35 

CHAPTER II. Of the Formal Relation of Terms. 

1. Generalisation and abstraction .." 37 

2. Genus and species 38 

3. Differentia, property, and accident 39 

4. Extension and intension 42 

5. Nature and rules of logical division 43 

6. Examples of division. The categories and predicables 47 

CHAPTER III. Of Terms with regard to Things. 

1. Formation of distinct conceptions a part of logic 49 

2. What class of terms are liable to indistinctness 51 

3. How conceptions become distinct and confused 53 

4. Double mode of resolving conceptions 54 

5. Tests of accurate conceptions 58 

CHAPTER IV. Of Terms in Relation to Signs. 

jj 1. Use of language in logic 60 

2. Errors to which the formation of general terms are liable 61 

3. Confusion arising from the transitive application of words ... 63 

4. Twofold law of the transformation of names 64 

5. Logical definition 65 

6. Definition how far real 68 

7. Scientific definition 69 

8. Nominal definition , 71 



I CONTENTS. 

BOOK II. 

OP PROPOSITIONS. PROEMIUM. 

CHAPTER I. Of Propositions with regard to Matter. PAGE 
1. Simple complex and incomplex propositions 78 

2. Simple complex propositions 79 

3. Compound expressed propositions 80 

4. Reduction of disjunctive and conditional propositions to cate- 

gorical 83 

5. Tacit, or implied compound propositions 85 

CHAPTER II. Of Propositions with regard to Form. 

1. Quantity of Propositions 87 

' 2/ Quality of Propositions 89 

3. Distribution of terms in propositions 90 

4. Opposition of propositions 94 

5. Conversion of propositions 97 

BOOK III. 

OP SYLLOGISMS. PROEMItJM. 

CHAPTER I. Of the Properties of Syllogisms. 
1. Universal canon of mediate inference with the general rules 

of the syllogism 102 

2. Figures of the syllogism 108 

3. Moods of the syllogism 113 

4. Quantification of the predicate (new analytic) considered with 

reference to mood and figure 115 

CHAPTER II. Of the Notation of the Syllogism. 

1. Euler's method 120 

2. Ploucquet's and Lambert's method 123 

3. Sir W. Hamilton's method 124 

4. Use of notation ; equivalent syllogisms ,.. 126 

CHAPTER III. Of the Kinds of Syllogisms. 
1. Complex syllogisms 127 

2. Conditional syllogisms 132 

3. Disjunctive syllogisms 134 

4. Copulative syllogisms 135 

5. The dilemma 135 

6. The chain syllogism, or sorites 138 

BOOK IV. 

ON THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF INFERENCE. PROEMIUM. 

CHAPTER I. Of the Universal Methods of Inference. 
1. Analysis and synthesis 143 



CONTENTS. li 

CHAPTER II. Of the Universal Methods of Inference (continued.) 

PAGE 

1. Induction and deduction meaning of the terms 148 

2. Different kinds of induction, formal and material. Syllogism 

erroneously confounded with deduction 1 50 

3. Theories of reasoning 153 

4. Abstract truths exist independent of experience 1 59 

CHAPTER HI. Of the different Degrees of Evidence. 
% 1. Various grades of certainty 165 

2. Twofold doctrine of modality 167 

3. The same subject continued. Criteria of evidence. The doctrine 

of sufficient reason 169 

CHAPTER IV. Of the Foundations of Reasoning. 
1. Number of primitive elements or principles into which all 

knowledge can be resolved. Their relation to each other ... 171 

2. Memory an ultimate source of evidence 173 

3. External sense an ultimate source of evidence 177 

4. Analogy an ultimate source of evidence 185 

5. Reason an ultimate source of evidence 188 

6. Authority an ultimate source of evidence 189 

BOOK V. 

OF THE METHODS OF SCIENTIFIC PROOF AND INVESTIGATION. 
PROEMIUM. 

CHAPTER I. Of the Methods of the Physical Sciences. 
1. The nature, grounds, and limits of physical investigation 195 

2. Observation and experiment 209 

3. The methods of experimental inquiry. Discovery of minor 

laws ;' their extension and verification 216 

4. General outline of the inductive method difficulties and 

limits attending the application of its special canons 237 

5. Nature of scientific deduction formation and verification of 

theories 243 

6. Empirical generalisations : theory of probability ; and analo- 

gical evidence '. 252 

CHAPTER IL Of the Methods of the Moral Sciences. 
1. Nature of the moral sciences: in what respect their methods 

differ from the physical 261 

2. The sciences amenable to the abstract deductive method. 

The functions of the cross-examining elenches and the 
negative process. Examples ,of scientific praxis 268 

3. The laws which regulate successive states of mind. The 

sociological sciences. The concrete deductive method direct 
and inverse 277 

4. Probable inference. Example and analogy 295 



.ill CONTENTS. 

BOOK VI. 

ON FALLACIES. PROEMIUM. 

CHAPTER I. Of Formal Fallacies, PAGE 
1. Illicit process and undistributive middle 305 

CHAPTER II. Of Verbal Fallacies. 
1. Ambiguous middle 307 

CHAPTER III. Of Material Fallacies. 
1. Non causa pro causa. Fallacy of groundless assumptions ... 313 

2. Incomplete enumeration 320 

3. Fallacy of false analogies 322 

4. Petitio principii 326 

5. Ignoratio elenchi 331 



APPENDIX. 
Modern schools of logic 337 

APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

CHAP. II. 1,2. Nominalism and realism 342 

CHAP. II. 6. The categories of Aristotle 347 

CHAP. IV. 1. Use of language in logic 349 

CHAP. IV. 2. Abuse of general terms 351 

CHAP. IV. 3. Transitive application of words 352 

CHAP. IV. 4. Twofold law of the transformation of names 354 

CHAP. IV. Primary and secondary intentions. Analogical use 

of terms 355 

APPENDIX TO BOOK IV. 

CHAP. I. 1. Analysis and synthesis 360 

CHAP. IV. 3. The senses and ultimate sources of evidence 362 

APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 

CHAP. I. 2. Classification and nomenclature 366 

CHAP. I. 3, 4. Formal analysis in physics 371 

CHAP. I. 5. Mathematical reasoning 374 

Division of the sciences 375 



Amperes Tables 380 

Verses Explanatory and Mnemonic 386 

INDEX.., 391 



HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 



IT does not appear that either the African or Asiatic 
nations were able, at least before the Grecian era, to distin- 
guish between the value of rational causes and fabulous 
traditions, or ever habituated themselves to analysing their 
thoughts, with a view to elaborate a code of rules for the 
practical guidance, of the reasoning faculty 1 . The early 
Greeks were the first people who deemed it requisite, to the 
acquisition of correct knowledge, to inquire into the real 
causes of things, but their method of investigation, faltering 
and uncertain, led to few discoveries, nor gave them sufficient 
confidence to draw up a code of logical rules for any other 
purpose than that of verbal dispute. Zeno the Eleatic is 
the earliest logician to whom antiquity refers 2 , as furnishing 
the Greeks with a method of wrangling calculated to ensure 
its possessor a triumph over any opponent who might venture 
to question his thesis, but without further use or pretence, 
unless it might be the collateral one of sharpening the 
mental faculties, and leading to habits of intellectual acute- 
ness. Though Socrates charges the author of this work with 
obscurity and confusion, in that part which treats of conse- 
quences 3 , he did not scruple to adopt the interrogatory 
method of disputation (epwrrjo-ir) which forms the leading 



1 An account is given in Colebrooke's essays, vol. ii. p. 292, of an 
Hindu logic, by Gotama, which has, however, so many striking resem- 
blances to the Aristotelian system, that critics are disposed to rank its 
publication as posterior to the Organon, and to place its author among 
the disciples of the Stagyrite. See St. Httaire, Logique d'Aristote, ii. 
330. * Lived in the LXXX. Olympiad, or about 460 B.C. * Plat. 
Tarmen. 

:s 



2 HISTOKICAL INTEODUCTION. 

feature of the work, and to apply the collection of sophistical 
questions it contains for the purpose that Zeno pointed out, 
of leading any person with whom he might happen to dispute, 
by the concession of some point which seemed unavoidable, 
into the meshes of absurdity. 

Socrates, however, in furnishing brilliant illustrations of the 
efficiency of Zeno's dialectics, distinguished three modes of 
analysis, and laid, the foundation of logic proper, by intro- 
ducing the terms genus and definition into the Greek 
language. The first analytical method, which is similar to 
that employed by geometricians, consists in admitting, by 
hypothesis, the truth of a proposition until we reject or affirm 
our judgment, by inferentially linking it with some other 
recognised truth or absurdity, of which an example may be 
found in the instruction given by Socrates to Critobulus 1 , re- 
lative to the means of obtaining true friends, and where he 
teaches Euthydemus the necessary conditions of true go- 
vernment. The second of these methods either ascends from 
particular facts to abstract truths, or detaches general notions 
from the particular groups which they include, and may be 
characterised as analogous to the method pursued by natu- 
ralists, and the inductive system of Bacon 2 . The third 
separates the notions which are associated with complex 
ideas, and by distinguishing their properties, tends to dis- 
pel the confusion which is apt to lurk beneath their indis- 
criminate assimilation. This method has some resemblance 
to the resolving process of mechanicians and chemists, and is 
warmly recommended by Condillac. Perhaps there is nothing 
on which Socrates bestowed more attention than this case of 
determining complex ideas by a close examination of the 
elements into which they are capable of being resolved ; as 
may be seen in the Memorabilia 3 , where he endeavours to 
define the idea of wisdom, virtue, goodness, justice, and piety ; 
and in the second Alcibiades, where he distinguishes the dif- 
ferent species of ignorance, with their corresponding effects; 
and in the Crito, where he fixes the true value to be at- 

1 Xenoph. Memor. ii. 13 ; iii. 6. See also Plat. Meno and the 
first Alcibiades. * See Socrates' Conversation with Aristippus, 

Xenoph. Memor. ii. I ; with Charmides, iii. 9 ; and Euthydemus, 
iv. 9. Also Plat. Hippias. 3 i. 22, 23; iii. 16; IT. 1518. 



DESCABTES, EUCLID, AND PLATO. 3 

tached to the opinion of the people, and the essential cha- 
racteristics of justice. Occasionally Socrates weaves the 
three modes of procedure into the same demonstration, alter- 
nately employing each according as the different parts ad- 
mitted of their application. 

Previous to the time of Socrates, philosophy had been 
delivered in language borrowed from the poets, and even as 
taught by Zeno, it only furnished a species of amusement to 
the sophists who met beneath the royal portico of Athens 1 , 
to perplex each other with metaphysical subtleties, and 
darken thought by words of vague import. Socrates was 
the first to aim at the creation of a philosophical language, 
by introducing, and insisting upon, the practice of definition 
as an essential preliminary to correct inference 2 , and re- 
solving all the disputes of his day into cases of verbal equivo- 
cation. He dared to strip philosophy of the meretricious 
ornaments of rhetoric, and make language a faithful mirror 
for the reflection of the most delicate rays of thought. 

Of the pupils of Socrates, Euclid and Antisthenes de- 
veloped the doctrines of Zeno. The former expanded the 
third part of his treatise which referred to sophistical ques- 
tions, and is the author of many of the fallacies attributed 
to the Stoical School. Simon of Athens and Simmias of 
Thebes were closer followers of Socrates ; but the logical 
treatises in which they professed to methodise 3 the system 
of their master have not come down to us. 

Plato wrote no treatise on the science, and what he de- 
livered must be collected from the body of his writings and 
his method of treating the subjects of the dialogues. From 
these sources, it appears that he had an adequate conception 
of the inverse methods of analysis and synthesis, and wrote a 
work explanatory of their different properties, which, how- 
ever, has not come down to us. In his Philebus he prefers 
the latter method, but in his written or exoteric works 
he constantly employed the other. Plato only discrimi- 
nated two modes in which reason can be exercised: viz., 
that of departing from general principles to arrive, through 
the medium of perception, at the knowledge of individual 
facts, and the mounting from these general principles, with- 

i sroia /3u<riXfoj. 2 Arist. Metapby. i. 6. 3 Simon, Art of 

dispute ; Simmias, On truth and reasoning. 

B2 



4 HISTOBICAL INTBODUCTION. 

out the aid of perception, to reach a primary principle by 
which the different branches of knowledge are linked to- 
gether, and obtain a fixed and immutable character. His 
a priori doctrine concerning ideas, which he made the key- 
stone of his system, would not allow him to admit any species 
of inference to be legitimate, from the particular to the 
general, and compelled him to place the perfection of reason 
in resolving notions into all the qualities they bore, and in 
seeking to educe from abstract propositions all the furniture 
of the universe. He, however, contributed to keep alive 
among his countrymen that caution respecting the use of 
complex notions which Socrates had introduced, by tracing 
most of our errors to the vagueness and obscurity of 
this class of ideas ; and by viewing language simply as an 
instrument of thought, which caprice, as well as nature and 
analogy, had conspired to form, he impressed upon his fol- 
lowers, with no less force, the necessity of defining all terms 
of a compound or abstract character before employing them 
in reasoning. 

The treatises of Aristotle, which his Greek as well as mo- 
dern commentators have agreed to consider, under the title of 
the Organon, as parts of one work, embrace an exposition of 
every principle which concerns method, truth, the operations 
of the reasoning faculty, and the foundations of evidence ; 
subjects which, being widely distinct from pure metaphysics, 
evidently show that Aristotle had not that limited idea of 
the domains of the science within which some illustrious 
modern logicians would fain confine it 1 . Aristotle regarded 
logic as the code of human reason ; but, since ideas are the 
materials of the edifice it is called to construct, the Stagy- 
rite deemed it expedient to commence the work with an in- 
ventory of the immense number of conceptions with which 
the mind is furnished, marshalling them in distinct rank and 
file, that every notion may be found in its proper class, and 
every class ranged under the head of its appropriate divi- 
sion. This portion, which comprises the categories, may be 
regarded as the frontier-ground where psychology is blended 
with logic where the one science terminates and the other 
begins. 

J See Whately's Logic, Introd. p. 8, and Sir W. Hamilton's critique 
on this work in the Edin. Kev. for April, 1833, or in his recently col- 
lected essays. 



ABISTOTLE. 5 

To combine the isolated elements expounded in the cate- 
gories is the function of judgment, which, verbally expressed, 
gives rise to propositions 1 . Several propositions connected 
by certain laws constitute reasoning, and the most simple 
form of it is that which unites two ideas by declaring 
their identity with a third, through the medium of three pro- 
positions, termed the premises and the consequence. Hence 
the construction of the syllogism a Greek word, signifying 
this association of verbal judgments, which Aristotle follows 
out into all its developments, and of whose legitimate forma- 
tion he clearly enounced the rules. The Book of Interpre- 
tation, comprising the second portion of the Organon, re- 
lates to the exactitude of propositions ; the Prior Analytics, 
which immediately succeeds, expounds the law of the syllo- 
gism, its figures, and modality. 

The art of combining syllogisms in a compact chain of 
conclusive demonstrations aud the general principles of evi- 
dence are taught in the Posterior Analytics. The subjects 
of syllogistic probability and the laws of dispute, so far as 
matters of opinion are concerned, are laid down in the 
topics ; while the concluding section of the Organon is 
employed about sophistical arguments, or the means of de- 
tecting error in syllogisms constructed in contravention of 
the laws of reasoning. 

Of the general doctrines of Aristotle concerning the founda- 
tions of evidence and the different scientific methods, it may 
be sufficient to state that he regarded experience as the 
source from which the materials of each science must be 
drawn, and pointed to induction as the proper mode of con- 
structing general propositions out of the facts which it 
yields ; nevertheless, he rather inconsistently refused to 
the intermediate axioms so derived any character of cer- 
tainty, until they had been applied by deduction to demon- 
strate the existence of the particular facts out of which they 
had sprung. His nominalism did not even lead him to deny 
the existence of universal axioms which derived their co- 
gency from other sources than experience, or hinder him 
from tracing our knowledge as much to the intrinsic percep- 
tion of such principles, and the consequences evolved out of 
them by deduction, as to the recognition of simple facts and 
' De Interpret, c. 2, 3, 11, 12. 



6 HISTORICAL INTBODUCTION. 

the general laws to which they inductively led 1 . Hence he 
clearly distinguished the two modes of knowledge mediate 
and immediate : the former identified with proof, the latter 
with first principles; which he strongly insisted that no person 
could attempt to prove without landing himself in the belief 
of the impossibility of knowledge 2 . He also assigned a limit 
to definition as well as evidence, and clearly shows that any 
effort to define simple terms must involve the logician in a 
vicious circle, since it can only be achieved by words of a 
more complex character, whose signification already has as- 
sumed the object of the definition which is sought to be esta- 
blished 3 . Aristotle also distinguished the definition of names 
(i. e. that which assigns any arbitrary meaning to a term 
otherwise indeterminate) from the definition of things, which 
he instructs the logician to express in terms of the nearest 
genus and most approximate difference, if he would compare 
the thing defined with those which have most analogy with 
it, and discriminate their common properties and several 
points of difference. To define, however, is not to demon- 
strate ; the object of definition being rather to serve as a 
basis of science, by fixing the sense of terms to be employed 
in eliminating new truths than as a direct inlet to fresh 
knowledge 4 . 

"We meet also in the same part of the Organon 5 a dis- 
tinction between absolute and relative principles, the first of 
which Aristotle places in the nature of things being ex- 
pressed in universal axioms and propositions, the furthest 
removed from sense ; he assigns the latter to the judgments 
we make respecting individual facts, \vhich, as they are 
mainly derived through sensation, and are most proximate 
to sense, are the first in the order of knowledge^. To this 
contrast he refers three others : that of the universal and 
particular, that of the necessary and contingent, and that of 
the essence and accident. Absolute knowledge embraces 
the real essence of things, which Aristotle invested with the 
attribute of necessity ; relative knowledge comprises what is 
particular and contingent, and every other property con- 
nected, in Aristotle's view, with the accident of things. The 

1 Post. Analyt. b. i. c. 1, 2, 8, 18. 2 Ibid. b. i. c. 3. 3 Ibid. 

b. i. c. 1. 4 Ibid. b. ii. c. l, 2, 3, 4, 12, 14. 5 Ibid. b. i. c. 2. 

Ibid. 



ABISTOTLE. 7 

first only, admitting of demonstrative proof, deserved the 
name of science ; the second, as affording scope merely 
for the inductive method, appertained solely to belief and 
opinion 1 . 

It is unfortunate that these distinctions should have been 
mainly founded upon a glaring error in the Aristotelian 
physics : viz., that of attributing contingency and accident 
to what were simply isolated instances of general laws modi- 
fied by peculiar circumstances, as they led the Stagyrite to 
divest one branch of proof of the certainty which belonged to 
it, and thereby mainly contributed to disseminate those false 
ideas concerning induction which kept positive science sta- 
tionary for nearly two thousand years. If induction could 
only explore contingent events, and if experience can only be 
consulted through its method, it is evident that all the facts 
derived from this source must partake of uncertainty, and that 
Aristotle resolved all our knowledge into a principle which 
had no sufficient basis. By what means demonstration con- 
verted the facts to which it led into a certainty they could 
not possess even from the most compacted link of induc- 
tive inference, or how universal, absolute, and necessary pro- 
positions can be identical with particular and contingent 
judgments derived from sense, the Stagyrite does not inform 
us ; and the Organon is consequently transmitted to posterity 
with doctrines upon the applied part of logic which conflict 
with each other, and convey, with respect to the most fecund 
methods of introducing the empiric element into science, the 
falsest impressions. It is, however, fair to add that the greater 
portion of Aristotle's logical treatises has been lost, and that 
those which have come down to us have not escaped the 
ravages of time and the mutilations of commentators. 

"With the exception of Theophrastus and Eudemus, who 
extended the boundaries of the Aristotelian logic by the in- 
vention of the five moods and the important doctrine of hy- 
potheticals, we meet with no important writers on the 
science till the early centuries of the Christian era. In the 
intervening period the writings of Aristotle seem to have 
been buried, though the logical portion of them was tradi- 
tionally handed down by his disciples, and contributed to 

1 Prior Analyt. b. L c. 2, 3, 12, 17 ; ii. c. 24. Post. Analyt. b. i. 
C. 1, 4, 6, 8, 13, 29, 30, 33; ii. C. 3, 4, 7, 12. 



8 HISTOEICAL INTRODUCTION. 

guide the speculations of some of the Roman sages. In the 
second century, however, owing to their discovery by An- 
dronicus of Ehodes, they met with a considerable revival, 
and we find them the subject of many learned commenta- 
ries by Galen, Ammonius, Alexander, and Porphyry. Yet 
not one of these made any valuable accession to logic, the 
labours of Galen 1 being confined to the discovery of the 
fourth figure, and those of Porphyry to his work on the pre- 
dicables. Their writings, however, though unimportant in 
themselves, were not unproductive in results. They gave 
rise to a spirit of philosophic inquiry among the Arabians 
when the thirst of conquest had subsided, and, by broaching 
the question of nominalism and realism among the Maho- 
metan and Christian doctors, led thought out of the stagnant 
flats in which five centuries of war and rapine had con- 
fined it. 

From the scholastics logic inherited a great abundance of 
acute distinctions which helped to disperse much of the con- 
fusion apt to lurk in terms and propositions of a complex 
character ; but it is hard to say whether the waste of verbal 
subtleties with which they encumbered the science, and their 

1 This is the current opinion at Oxford ; but it is fair to state that 
Galen wrote a treatise on the art of demonstration, which, on the 
authority of Hipp. Decreta (ii. cap. 30, ix. cap. 1 ), had it reached us, 
would have placed him in the rank of the most pioneering logicians 
of the present day. Galen is there represented as placing the radical 
vice of the ancients in seeking fecund propositions for science in abstract 
dialectics, and in abusing general notions by substituting them for the 
light of facts; and is made to define with surprising exactness the na- 
ture of synthesis and analysis, with their correlative methods, point- 
ing out the errors of relying on either of these methods to the exclu- 
sion of the other, and the necessity of combining both as the condition 
of perfect science (De Hipp, et Plat. Decret. ix. cap. 5). If we may 
believe these authorities, he makes sense the criterion of simple 
objects, the understanding those of complex and rational ones, but sub- 
sequently establishes the mutual dependence of these two channels of 
knowledge. Observation imparts the signs of things, the understand- 
ing abstract truths; the first is the origin of discovery, and leads to the 
decomposition of the principles of the sciences, the second extends dis- 
covery to new cases by demonstration, and establishes the alliance of 
the facts so pointed out, with empirical truths, a union which alone 
constitutes perfect knowledge (De Optim. Sect. c. 2; De cujusque 
animi prec. cogn. atque Med. c. 3, 6, 8; De optim docendi genere, de 
Hipp, et Plat. Decret. vii. 8, ix. 1, 8). Galen traces the greater part 
of our errors to precipitate assimilation. 



THE SCHOLASTICS. 9 

constant use of the syllogism in its naked, skeleton-like form, 
did not counterbalance the advantages which undoubtedly 
sprung from the exactness of their terminology. Their want 
of elegance, however, in logical exposition must be traced to 
the slender resources which Boethius' 1 translation afforded 
them, to whom they were mainly indebted for their know- 
lege of the Organon ; while the entire absence of anything 
like physical science or experimental observation threw their 
minds upon abstract principles and a priori reasoning, and 
may form some excuse for their devotion to pursuits in 
which the most gigantic intellects must have run to seed. 
Their logical works are multitudinous ; yet all wear the same 
aspect and teach the same doctrines, unless in the solitary 
point about universals, on which only they presumed to 
differ. Diligent bibliographers 2 have been able to catalogue 
nearly two thousand treatises from this source, all of which 
may be characterised as the bare formulising of the peripa- 
tetic logic 3 . It is strange that men should have taken such 
pains to re-echo what had been so often repeated before 
them; but there were only two or three subjects upon 
which the mind could be employed viz., metaphysics, logic, 
and theology, and the religious uniformity of the age caused 
the same doctrines on these topics to be continually re- 
produced. 

As soon, however, as Greek learning had been scattered 
over Europe from the shrines of Constantinople, a spirit of 
disaffection at once manifested itself against the Stagyrite's 
supremacy ; and, as his assailants deemed the Organon the 
citadel of his empire, they sought, in destroying that, to 
complete his overthrow. Their efforts do not appear to have 
ended in anything very decisive, since they attacked the old 
logic entirely on false grounds, and had nothing to set up in 
its place, save some crude theories about method and the 
value of dichotomies. Nizolius flanks his attack 4 on the 
Organon with the strange assertion that correct reasoning 

1 Published at the commencement of the sixth century. 2 See 
Blakey's Logical Catalogue. Even he has not mentioned half of them. 
3 The treatise of St. John of Damascus is the only exception which we 
encountered in looking over a formidable number at the Cheetham and 
Bodleian libraries. 4 De Veris Principiis et Vera ratione Philo- 
sophandi, ii. c. 1. 



10 HISTOEICAL nfTEODUCTION. 

consists in a clear and transparent diction, and confounds 
persuasion with conviction in attributing to the flashes of the 
rhetorician the effects which can only follow from sound 
reasoning. Eamus, who endorsed many of the views of 
Nizolius, affirmed with rather amusing gravity that he had 
studied the Organon for ten years without becoming a better 
geographer or a wiser historian; and proceeded to attack 
that treatise, on the ground that it did not teach men facts 1 . 
Tet the method of division by dichotomy, which he at- 
tempted to substitute for the peripatetic logic 2 , was simply 
an unnatural extension of the disjunctive syllogism, whose 
functions the Organon had already pointed out ; and which, 
if practically enforced, would have stunted the growth of 
reason by reducing the entire sphere of its operations to one 
of its least significant forms. This substitution, however, 
does not appear to have been sufficiently absurd to lack 
supporters in more recent times : its innovating character 
found strong favour with Milton 3 , while Condillac advocated 
it in his Calcul, and Bentham in his Chrestomathia. 

The zeal with which Eamus went about the demolition of 
the Organon was frequently displayed at the sacrifice of 
consistency; and the charges which he urged against its 
author, if they had any weight, would often rebound with 
much more force against himself. He reproaches Aristotle 
with his exclusive adoption of the analytic method, and 
gives his preference to synthesis ; while his celebrated divi- 
sions (dichotomise) are so many glaring instances of analysis. 
His system received the name of the Causal method, not 
because it offers any instrument for the investigation of 
causes, but because it places in causes a means of definition, 
and one of the characters which determine the conformity of 
argument with things. 

Patrizzi and Concio likewise became famous about the 
same era by their audacious attacks upon the Stagyrite ; but 
beyond a few isolated gleams of light upon method, they do 
not appear to have been in possession of anything so good 

1 Animadversiones in Dialecticam Aristotelis, i. iv. For its deve- 
lopment, see Institutiones Dialecticse, ii. Paris, 1543. Scholse Dia- 
lecti. Bas. 1559. 2 Ramus took his bifurcate division from the 
Isagoge of Porphyry. 3 Artis Logicae Plenior Institutio, 1672. 



ATTACKS OK AEISTOTLE. 11 

as the system they attempted to pull down. Patrizzi, indeed, 
gave Bacon that magnificent hint about laying the foundations 
of philosophy entirely anew, and erecting the fabric by the scaf- 
folding of induction ; but his attempt at the task was converted 
by the platonic ideas he adopted into a ludicrous travesty of 
his own principles. Concio's views of method were far more 
distinct, and they are laid down with a particularity which 
shows that his conceptions grew out of a practical acquaintance 
with the modes by which the sciences might be moved out 
of the ruck in which they had so long been embedded. In 
his work on the subject 1 he places the problem of logic in 
determining the relation of the known to the unknown, which 
may be distributed under different classifications : that of the 
relation of the general to the particular; of the whole to 
its parts ; of the compound to the simple ; of the cause to 
the effect ; or that of the reverse order of these divisions. 
Each development of these relations led him to distinguish 
three sorts of analysis, not discriminated up to his time, and 
subsequently confounded by Condillac viz., that which pro- 
ceeds from the general to the particular, from the whole to 
its parts, and from the ends to the means. They are, how- 
ever, commonly united, though one of them generally pre- 
dominates in the same investigation. Of the three, Concio 
gives the preference to that which proceeds from the end to 
the means, or from the effect to the cause ; and controverts 
the notion that analysis is the best instrument of discovery, 
and synthesis the most available for the purposes of exposi- 
tion. According to Concio, the true method of instruction 
is to reveal the paths which led the discoverer to the truths 
we seek to explain 3 . For the rest, in his definitions, nomen- 
clature, and classifications, he follows Aristotle ; asserts with 
the Stagyrite the illogical consequences of defining the first 
and last terms in the ladder of reasoning, and, like him, pro- 
pounds the general principles, but failed to develope the 
theory of the combination of rational deductions with experi- 
mental truths. 

As the discoveries, however, of Galileo gradually revealed 
the hollow [nature of the Aristotelian physics, the Organon, 
which had been partly instrumental in their formation, began 

1 De Methodo, 9, p. 29. Ibid. 17, pp. 8490. 



12 HISIOEICAL INTRODUCTION. 

to lose ground in proportion, and a voice was heard from 
England's great chancellor arraigning the author on the 
charge of having corrupted science by an extravagant per- 
version of logic 1 . Bacon, however, in descending into the 
details of the impeachment 2 , did not evince any clear ideas of 
the points where Aristotle had failed, though he exhibited 
astounding ingenuity in unmasking the several causes which 
had impeded the progress of science, and in constructing a 
system calculated to neutralise their effects in future. The 
error of the Stagyrite was hardly, as Bacon alleged, in intro- 
ducing a mode of reasoning compounded of propositions and 
middle terms which were liable to all the illusions of lan- 
guage, since no one can demonstrate without the aid of this 
method ; but in the assumption of metaphysical axioms and 
definitions untested by experience, in conformity with which 
he attempted to prejudge every fact that nature presented 3 . 
Against the errors which arose from the application of such 
principles, Bacon effectually provided by excluding every 
generalisation from the domain of philosophy which did not 
fairly arise out of the rigorous examination of the pheno- 
mena it included ; and in framing a code of rules by which 
the mind might be led from particular facts to intermediate 
axioms, and from these ascend to the universal laws which 
enchain the universe. "When general propositions were so 
reached through the medium of a legitimate induction, 
Bacon allowed the utility of the inverse method of demon- 
strating the individual facts which these universal state- 
ments included, and tracing their remotest consequences, 
by which we are led not only to the particular propositions 
by whose immediate consideration we rose to their dis- 
covery, but to others of which we had no previous know- 
ledge 4 -. 

Hence it will appear that the doctrines of the two Orga- 

1 Novum Organum, b. i. aph. 63. (Bohn's Scientific Library.) 
* See Introduction to the De Augmentis. 3 Such are the principles 
that nature abhors a vacuum, the abstract perfection of circular 
motion, his separation of celestial from terrestrial mechanics, and 
his definitions of light and heavy, motion and transparency formed 
without any consideration of the objective realities to which they refer, 
and sometimes in defiance of them. * Nov. Organuin, i. aph. 18; 
De Augmentis, i. vi. c. 2. 



AEISTOTLE AND BACON. 13 

nons are not so conflicting as is commonly reputed, and that 
after abating some exaggeration of view on each side, one 
may be fairly taken as supplementary to the other. Aris- 
totle insists, as well as Bacon, upon the necessity of blend- 
ing abstract with experimental truths if we would attain to 
perfect science 1 ; but both mistook the exact forms in which 
the combination should be effected, one making induction 
(the instrument of investigating truth) the chief agent in 
the j formation of each science ; the other, deduction, which 
is more properly the means of demonstrating truth when 
discovered. The error, however, lies only in the extreme 
length to which they pushed the two mutually corroborative 
poles of proof, and would have disappeared, had each only 
taken the pains to reconcile the discrepancies of their own 
statements on the subject. Bacon refused to take things 
as principles of evidence upon any other testimony than ex- 
perience ; he nevertheless frequently admits the cogency of 
demonstrative laws, which derive their force from abstract 
truths, to discover facts which have not fallen under our ob- 
servation. Aristotle, while he resolves all our knowledge into 
experience, strips induction, the only method by which it 
can be consulted, of every claim to certainty. It does not 
appear to have occurred to either that abstract principles 
can only be combined with experimental truths through the 
blending of their correlative methods, and that their respec- 
tive functions must be employed according as each science 
admits of their influence. To deny the relevancy of demon- 
stration because the laws of induction have been legitimately 
propounded, is as absurd as to impugn the utility of the wind- 
mill because the steam-engine has been invented ; and if 
Aristotle and Bacon have contributed to this error, they have 
contradicted themselves as much as each other. 

Though Bacon's method has received no brilliant confir- 
mations out of the circle of the experimental sciences, he ex- 
pressly urges its competency 2 to meet all the purposes of 
scientific inquiry. This statement, however, is only true so far 
as the introduction of the empiric element is concerned, and 
the verificatory functions which it is only competent to dis- 
charge where abstract evidence can be brought to the touch- 

1 Post. Analyt. b. i. c. 1, 2, 8, 18. Introduction to the Instauration 
le Aug.- i. vi. c. 2. Nov. Org. i. aph. 18. (Bohn'a Scientific Library.) 
' Novum Organum, b. i. aph. 127. 



14 HISTORICAL rtTTBODTJCTION. 

stone of facts. Out of this sphere its application is unnatural, 
and the attempt to obtrude it into ethical science has given 
birth to utilitarian chimeras, as -wild and fanciful in their way 
as those which arose from the unseasonable application of the 
counter-method to physics. In general, however, abstracting 
from the zeal of one or two small philosophical sections, who 
place each other out of the pale of reason, the functions that 
the two Organons are destined to fill have been practically as- 
signed to them, and their spheres kept, perhaps, even more 
distinct than is advantageous for science. Aristotle still rules 
over ethics, hermeneutics, and jurisprudence, and as the master 
of scholastic divinity he yet contrives to mould the minds of 
those who sway the Christian world ; but it is the distin- 
guished prerogative of our immortal countryman to preside 
over the field of nature, and teach man to unveil its secrets 
and subject its wildest elements to his will. 

Notwithstanding that the claims of the inductive method 
in all cases of appeal to facts had been urged before Lord 
Bacon, and by none with more philosophical exactness than 
his great namesake 1 , he was the first to give them an ex- 
tensive development, and to announce them witli that spirit- 
stirring eloquence which, conspiring with the awakening 
thought of the age, gained them a speedy entrance into the 
scientific mind of Europe. After the publication of the 
Novum Organon all logic seemed to be resolved into method, 
and the success of that great work raised up rivals as well 
as imitators in that department of the science. Descautes 
would not admit that diversity of doctrines could be attri- 
buted to any other cause than the diversity of modes pursued 
in their establishment; and as he regarded mathematical 
proof as furnishing the highest gradation of certainty, he 
endeavoured to raise a theory of method on the geometrical 
model 2 , and in its execution penetrated into some of the 
most subtle operations of thought. In conformity with his 
general principle, he was obliged to avow the homogeneous 
nature of all knowledge, which he placed in the composition 
of known things 3 , and by not accepting anything as certain 

1 Roger Bacon, Opus Magus. 2 Discours sur la Methode, i. ii. 

Regies pour la Direction de 1'Esprit, part i. r. 4. Medit. Pref. Prin- 
cipes de Philosophic, Pref. 3 Regies pour la Direction de 1'Esprit, 

p. ii. r. 13. 



DESCABTES. 15 

but what immediate intuition or legitimate deduction reveals, 
to limit induction to the functions of determining the state 
of a question, of disengaging it from irrelevant matter, and 
subdividing it into complete and consecutive categories ; all 
which operations Descartes viewed with. Aristotle as so 
many preliminaries to demonstration 1 . Hence he does not 
establish his series of truths by classes of facts, gradually 
becoming more general and less complex in the ascent of 
proof, but by chains of inference which derive their force 
from the most abstract laws of thought ; and here we meet 
with the great divergency of the two paths pursued by him 
and Lord Bacon. 

Evidence, according to Descartes, is the result of the le- 
gitimate exercise of all the operations of reason in the 
acquisition of knowledge. Induction and analysis prepare 
the way ; intuition commences, but deduction completes the 
work. In the pursuit of the latter branch, we are led from 
words, or abstract principles, to things ; from the same to 
the same ; from the whole to its parts, and vice versa, or 
from the effect to the cause, and inversely 2 . All his rules 
for the direction of the mind in these operations may be re- 
duced to the following. To submit our thoughts to the test 
of a rigid analysis, removing all simple presumptions, doubt- 
ful opinions, and obscure notions 3 . To examine if the thing 
to be determined spontaneously presents itself to us, or 
whether it is known through the medium of another object, 
and in the latter case to discover the class from which it is 
to be deduced. For the rest, every scientific question may 
be reduced to the solution of a mathematical problem ; since 
it encloses an unknown object which it is necessary to dis- 
engage and explain, by obtaining the sign and determining 
the conditions which belong to it 4 . Descartes failed to dis- 
criminate with sufficient precision the methods of analysis 
and synthesis, misled by the error that they admitted of the 
same development in speculative philosophy as in geometry. 

1 Post. Analyt. ii. c. 13. (Bohn's Scientific Library.) s Bugles, 
&c. p. ii. r. 12. 3 Ragles, &c. p. i. r. 12. Dis. Math. p. i. 

Princip. de Philoa. part i. art. 66. * Kfcgles, &c. p. i. reg. 12; 

p. ii. regs. 13, 1719. 



16 HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 

He deemed his meditations an instance of analysis, because 
they established the knowledge of God as a cause, from the 
effect of his own existence, notwithstanding his proof of the 
Divine Being is eminently synthetic. In another portion of 
his works 1 he attempted to establish his metaphysical system 
upon a synthetic basis. But, on comparing the two modes 
of procedure, we find only a difference of arrangement in the 
compilation of the work, and not a reverse order in the de- 
velopment of the ideas. 

With these principles it will be readily seen that Descartes 
could admit no other criterion of truth than the logical 
axiom, " all that which is included in the idea of a thing may 
be affirmed of it." He considered this principle competent to 
legitimise all inference, and as he called his celebrated enthy- 
meme, " I think, therefore, I am," his generative principle, 
or the corner-stone of the edifice, he deemed his philosophical 
criterion the regulating line which determined the rectitude 
of the facts of which the structure was composed. The dis- 
crepancy, however, of limiting intuitive certainty to one me- 
taphysical maxim, and of assuming at the same time a logical 
axiom, having no connexion with it as the test of the exten- 
sion of that certainty to other truths, he does not endeavour 
to explain, or to show how a principle purely logical can 
be rationally applied to any objects out of the sphere of ab- 
stract and conditional truth. Wishing to impose upon every 
science the same criterion of evidence, and to unfold their 
truths by the same method, he applies a maxim which can 
only regulate the interior combinations of our ideas, to legiti- 
mise the relation of real things in the objective world. Hence, 
as far as natural science was concerned, Descartes wrecked 
his genius on those abstract principles which Bacon had 
pointed out as the philosophical Charybdis of antiquity. By 
degrading induction from its legitimate functions, and en- 
deavouring to reason out natural facts by the a priori method, 
his theories burst like soap-bubbles, almost as soon as they 
were formed ; while the system of Bacon, in the hands of the 
illustrious Newton, gave rise to a philosophy founded on the 
basis of observation and experience, which will last so long as 
reason and the nature of things remain as they are. 
1 Reponse aux Premier Objections, part i. p. 441. 



MAEIOTTE AND THE POET EOYALISTS. 17 

"With the exception of a stray treatise or two, like Lord 
Herbert's De Veritate, Tschirnhausen's Medicina Mentis, 
and Spinosa's De Emendatione Intellectus, nothing of any 
importance appeared upon methodology after Descartes ; but 
logic did not retire to its old limits without making some 
provision for the new processes of inference that had arisen, 
and attempting to reconcile the operations of reason in the 
pursuit of the new sciences with the principles it had ap- 
plied to the construction of the old. Mariotte 1 was the first 
to extend the Aristotelian logic by the introduction of ex- 
perimental principles, and to endeavour to bring all the 
operations of inference into harmony with each other, by 
linking the increasing powers of the new calculus, the laws 
of induction and demonstration, to the same homogeneous 
axioms and definitions ; thus seeking to make logic stand to 
the other sciences as algebra to mathematics; a supreme 
and universal science, offering the key to the unknown in 
every department of knowledge, and expounding all the 
methods by which truth can be sought out and demon- 
strated. 

A work of this kind, though without aiming at so close an 
assimilation of the different methods of proof, appeared in the 
Port Royal Logic 2 , written by Arnauld and JSTichole with a 
view to bring the old Organon in closer alliance with the 
Cartesian philosophy. The peripatetic logic, however, though 
not absolutely disparaged, is considered of subordinate im- 
portance to the rules of their master, and the methods of 
geometry in the natural and speculative sciences ; and an 
examination of the sophisms apt to spring from self-love, 
interest, or passion in points of dispute, is held out as far 
more likely to lead to the dissemination of truth and the- 
overthrow of error than attention to the laws of quantifica- 
tion, or to the legitimacy of syllogistic moods 3 . The eight 
rules condensed from Descartes, intended by the authors to 
comprise the different methods to which the sciences owe 

1 Essai sur la Logique, printed at the end of the two volumes of 
his physical treatises. 2 First appeared in 1662. For a more detailed 
account of this work we must refer the reader to the introduction to 
the translation of this work by Spencer Baynes, and to Pcre Buffier's 
critique at the end of his Logic. 3 Part iv. on Method, which con- 
tains a posthumous paper of Pascal on the Method of the Geometers. 
Part iii. ch. 20. 



18 HISTOEICAL INTEODTTCTION. 

tlieir development, are not so calculated to guide the mind to 
the discovery of truth as to fortify it from error ; a failure of 
design which arose from their absolute neglect of the induc- 
tive element, and the nonchalance with which they treated 
judgments of facts. Even this exclusive adherence to de- 
monstration did not enable them to bring the new methods 
into harmony with the syllogysm, or to promote anything 
like consilience of parts in the exposition of their doctrines. 
They treated the old logic as a thing going out of fashion, 
yet too respectable to be despised, while their exclusion of 
the most powerful instrument of discovery left tlieir demon- 
strative code much in the position of Quixote's system of 
strategics, which defined with the greatest precision the 
movements to be observed after the defeat of an enemy, 
without throwing any light upon the mode by which that 
defeat was to be accomplished. 

Locke, whose treatise immediately followed, revived the 
old cry of the absolute worthlessness of the Aristotelian 
syllogism even in matters of speculative reasoning, where 
Bacon had confessed its power, and seemed inclined with 
Eainus to limit the functions of reason to correct definition 
and methodical analysis. Beyond these preliminaries to 
demonstration he refused to acknowledge the efficiency of 
any rules for the guidance of the judgment, and assimi- 
lated, like Descartes, moral proof to mathematical in- 
ference, that the consequence might follow from the correct 
statement of the conditions of the question. In determining 
the origin of our simple ideas, the growth of their complex 
forms, the reality of knowledge which he made to consist in 
the conformity of words with things, the use and abuse of 
language, and the nature of truth which he placed in the 
conjunction and separation of signs according as the things 
they denote agree or differ, Locke found a field better 
adapted for his keen analytic powers than the regions of 
pure logic, in which, through his inability to demonstrate, 
he was peculiarly unfitted to move. But the attempt of the 
Essay on the Understanding to carry the inductive method 
into psychology is not without its uses to the logician. It 
accustoms him to analyse his notions with rigorous precision, 
to provide against the errors of popular phraseology, and dis- 
perse the equivocations apt to cluster round certain forms of 



LOCKE AND CONDILLAC. 19 

expression. It is wrong, however, to confront it with logic, 
or include it in the same category. It only takes us to the 
threshold of the science, and leaves us there. 

Condillac 1 gave a more explicit development to the views 
of Locke by resolving the elements of all kinds of reasoning 
into the mathematical principle that the same is the same, 
thus referring all truth to identity of ideas, and reducing the 
artifice of reasoning to the mere transformation of signs 
between propositions brought into relations of equality 2 . 
Hence, as algebraical forms constituted the only laws to be 
observed in the process of inference, the functions of logic 
were restricted to definition, the syllogism was treated as a 
joke 8 , and the highest results of reasoning in any walk of 
science deemed of no further utility than the formation of a 
philosophical language. As Aristotle delighted in contrasts, 
Condillac was singularly enamoured of unity, and simplified 
everything. According to him, there was only one criterion 
of certainty, one method of proof ; only one order of analysis 
and one source of error. His unique analysis consists 
merely of a method of division already laid down by Des- 
cartes, the specific object of which was to make a complete 
inventory of all the parts which constitute a whole. His 
sole fount of error is the employment of words without de- 
termining the ideas they are intended to convey 4 . 

The principal merit of Condillac consists in his clear expo- 
sition of the principles which lead to the legitimate alliance 
between abstract truths and judgments of fact 5 ; but this 
portion of his work stands out in strong antagonism with 
the rest of his logical theory, which reduces all propositions 
to abstract and rational judgments, and makes their identity 
constitute the foundations of science. The consequences of 
such a principle in psychology demonstrate its illogical 
nature, and would land Condillac in opinions quite opposite 

1 His Logic does not follow the Essay on the Understanding in the 
order of time Wolf comes between the one being published in 1 685, 
the other in 1753; but the authors are too commonly classed together 
to be separated. 2 Langue de Calcul. Objet de 1'Ouvrage. L'Art 
de Penser, part i. c. ix. Logique, c. viii. 3 Ibid. Le syllogisme est 
on amusement de college ; nous ne faisons aucun usage de tout cela. 
4 Langue de Calcul. Objet de 1'Ouvrage. L'Art de Penser, par. ii. c. 6. 
* L'Axt de Penser, part i. c. 8 ; ii. c. 7. 

o2 



20 HISTOBICAL INTRODUCTION. 

to those which he strove to establish, and which he ia com- 
monly supposed to represent. If all science is limited to the 
identity of our ideas compared with each other, irrespective 
of inductive evidence, we surely can know nothing of the re- 
lation of our ideas to things. We enclose ourselves in a 
circle of idealism, and place a gulf between 'our knowledge 
and the external world, which no logic can bridge over. 

Against the extreme doctrines of Descartes and Locke 
there had been a strong reaction in Germany, headed by 
Leibnitz ; but its logical bearings were not formally ex- 
pounded before Wolf issued his great encyclopaedia of the 
sciences 1 . The views of this eclectic are similar to those 
already attributed to Mariotte, being an attempt to combine 
all that was sound in the old and new Organons and methods, 
and vindicating for logic its natural position, as a sort of 
propadeutic to all the sciences, that knowledge might rest on 
consistent principles, and a termination be put to many irre- 
levant disputes in philosophy. To this end Wolf sought to 
shed a new light on the maxims of Descartes, of Locke, and 
Leibnitz, and to reconcile many of their statements with 
respect to the character of clear and confused, adequate and 
inadequate ideas, by introducing a distinction between the 
formal qualities with which the mind is apt to clothe its con- 
ceptions, and the material qualities which arise solely from 
the nature of the objects themselves 3 . This distinction forms 
the basis of the two branches of his logic ; formal conceptions 
being connected through abstract principles with demonstra- 
tive reasoning, while those of a material character are allied 
with experience, and give rise to the functions of induction. 
The principle of causality is the guide of the second, the ne- 
gative process that of the first. He attempts to reconcile the 
discrepancies of Aristotle between these two orders of truths, 
by showing how universal propositions are connected with 
particulars by the scaffolding of inductive inference which 
Bacon had designed ; though Wolf failed to unite the two 
methods under one criterion of evidence. The intuitive 

1 Wolf published, in 1710, a small treatise on Logic, under the title 

of Vernunftige Gedanken von den Kraften des Menschlichen Ver- 

, standes ; but his great Latin treatise on the subject, from which our 

references are taken, did not appear till twenty years later. 2 Logica, 

pars. i. 2, c. 1, 2, 77116. Psychologia Empirica, i. 3035. 



WOLF AND HIS GERMAN SUCCESSOBS. 21 

judgments which underlie each mode of proof, are distin- 
guished with sufficient clearness : the several uses of hypo- 
thesis determined, and the laws of causality traced out with 
the practised eye of a metaphysician 1 . 

Notwithstanding the completeness, simplicity, and preci- 
sion of these views, "Wolf has been charged with investing 
simple truths with all the pomp of demonstration 3 , and with 
converting the proof of ordinary facts into theorems of geo- 
metry. But these attempts arose from a desire to bring the 
complex parts of his treatise into logical symmetry, by con- 
necting them with rational criteria, and by making the in- 
ductive and demonstrative methods coalesce and verify each 
other as much as possible. In furtherance of the same sim- 
plification, Wolf had asserted the homogeneous character of 
the speculative and mathematical branches of deduction, sup- 
posing that as the whole series of geometrical proof could be 
drawn out in syllogistic array, to which, indeed, he attributed 
their cogency ; so the whole chain of philosophical inference 
admitted of the same rigorous precision as those of quantity 3 ; 
a statement which was subsequently challenged by Eudiger, 
on the ground that mathematics embraced probability, but 
philosophy the transition from the possible to the real 4 . 

Among the opponents or followers of Wolf, we meet with 
few marked contributors to logical science till the time of 
Lambert. Eudiger introduced the logic of analogy, so much 
neglected by the moderns, and entirely passed over by the 
ancients ; and Walch pointed out the extensive application 
it might receive in the various branches of the moral and 
natural sciences 5 . Crousaz, who wrote his treatise on the 
principles of Bacon and Locke, contributed an excellent 
chapter on probability and on causality 6 , in which he at- 
tempted to rectify the peripatetic classification by substi- 
tuting an exact category of all the relations to which the 

Logica, pars. ii. 2, c. i. 2, 662709; c. 3, 727728; Discur. 
Prelim, c. 4, 126 129. * Galluppi Lezioni di Logica. Wolf cer- 
tainly attempts to define existence, but he does so against his own rule. 
' Discur. Prelim, c. iv. 139. 4 De Sensu Veri et Falsi, i. 4; Halle, 
1709. See 
sciences, 

sic, 1747. * Phil. Lex. Einleitung 
25. Logique, part i. 2, c. 6. 



22 HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 

word cause may be applied, with their respective distinctions ; 
putting forth, similar -views of the science to Crousaz, Pere 
Regnault made a successful attempt to popularise logic, by 
expounding it in a conversational form 1 . His book, written 
in a clear and sketchy manner, in imitation of Fontenelle, 
was issued in a spirit of compromise, being an attempt to 
reconcile the old notions on logic with the empiric principles 
that domineered over his age. 

But the most important accession to logic at this epoch 
was the introduction of a scheme of notation calculated to 
reduce its method to algebraic simplicity, an improvement 
which grew out of the ancient constitution of the science, and 
destined to be prolific in great results. Aristotle had con- 
ceived that the combinations of abstract ideas in reasoning 
might be reduced to a certain number of formulas, and that 
ideas might be distributed into certain classes. Hence 
sprung his rules for the syllogism, his categories, and com- 
mon-places. In the middle age, Raymond Tally had founded 
his combinatorial art on the development and abuse of this 
great conception. Wilkins, Athanasius Kircher, and Dal- 
garno flattered themselves they were possessed of the power 
to represent the entire system of our ideas in a language 
competent to produce all their analogies. An attempt was 
now made to apply the same notion to logic, by giving that 
science the form of mathematical calculation, and investing 
it with the rigour of its methods. 

"With this view Plouquet introduced, and Lambert per- 
fected, a system of particular signs directed to express the 
logical relations of ideas. [Following Locke, Lambert 2 first 
endeavoured to determine the signs of the relations of simple 
ideas, and left those of the complex ones to be determined 
by the combinations of their elements. The identity of pro- 

1 La Logique en forme d'entretien ou Tart de trouver la verite. 
* Published his views in the Neues Organon and Architectonic (1764) ; 
the former work embracing the rules to which the form of scientific 
knowledge can be reduced; the latter fixing the general notions which 
are to constitute their matter. The first work comprises four divisions, 
yiz. Dianoiologie, or the art of thinking ; Alethologie, which considers 
truth in its elements ; Semiotic, which assigns to truth its exterior 
characters ; and Phenominology, or the distinction between appear- 
ances and reality. His Architectonic relates to metaphysics, and is 
consequently out of our plan. 



LOGICAL NOTATION. 23 

Positions in his system is represented by the sign of equality, 
he relations of genus and species by exponents varying in 
power proportionate to the extension of the distinguishing 
difference ; and those of opposition, of analogy, of quantity 
and quality, of the known to the unknown, are expressed by 
other marks analogous to those of algebra. As there are in 
logic simple as well as compound relations, this theory has 
its corresponding proportions and progressions, and assigns 
to logic its series and limits as well as to the higher algebra 1 . 
But the greater part of the notation lies open to all the 
objections urged against investing matters of moral specula- 
tion with the rigorous precision of quantity, and has, in fact, 
remained unenforced unless by one or two stray logicians 
who, like Condillac, made the homogeneity of the two classes 
of truths the groundwork of their system. The scheme, how- 
ever, led Euler 2 to devise a system of figures solely re- 
stricted to represent the logical relations of our conceptions, 
apart from any assumptions of particular doctrines, and pre- 
pared the way for Sir William Hamilton's mode of notation, 
which, by enabling us to render the equivalent and con- 
vertible syllogisms in the different figures at a glance, accord- 
ing to extension or intention, has simplified all the relations 
of pure logic, and would form, were it not narrowed to a 
particular system, one of the most important features in its 
progress 3 . 

Since the fall of the "Wolfian system, and ', the inaugura- 
tion of a popular literature in Germany, logic has gradually 
subsided in that country into a history of dreams. Even 
such scientific logicians as Platner and Schulze, who knew 

1 Versuche einer Zeichenkunst, in Lambert's Logische und Philoso- 
phische Abhandlungen. Berlin, 1787. See also Fragment 4. . 2 Lettres 
a une Princesse d'Allemagne. s Lambert is the only logician who 
has attempted to complete the unfinished parts of Bacon's method, as 
projected in the Novum Organon, b. ii. aph. 21. He is also commonly 
reported to have substituted the four dicta of the syllogistic figures in 
the place of the dictum de omne et nullo laid down by Aristotle as the 
condition of all perfect inference. Prior Anal. i. ch. 5 and 6. See 
Mills' System of Logic, vol. i. p. 232 ; Buhle's Geschichte, vi. 543 ; and 
Troxler's Logik, ii. p. 62. But Thompson contradicts these authorities 
in assigning the invention of the three first dicta -to Keckermann 
(Logic, iii. ch. 7 9), whose work appeared a century earlier. Thomp- 
son's Outlines of the Laws of Thought, p. 245. 



24 HISTOBICAL INTRODUCTION. 

the importance of maintaining the independence of their art, 
bound it up to a great extent with empiric psychology ; 
while more audacious thinkers have confounded its axioms 
and rules with a mass of metaphysical hypotheses, framed for 
no other purpose than the invention of argument to contra- 
dict common sense. Yet, with a view to clearness and pro- 
priety of thought, it is evidently necessary that every science 
should be treated strictly on its own grounds, and most 
scrupulously distinguished from the sciences which lie upon 
its confines ; while it is no less essential to the progress of 
knowledge that those mental phenomena which admit of irre- 
fragable proof, and stand upon a certain foundation, should 
be separated from a heap of supposititious paradoxes, whose 
leading object appears to be, to deny what is, and to prove 
what is not. Kant felt the truth of these views, and in his 
new philosophy assigned to logic its old limits, but his 1 suc- 
cessors have found in his doctrines principles which impugn 
this division, and their final development by Hegel has ter- 
minated in a position which tears up the old logic by the 
roots, introducing as the criterion of truth the very tenet that 
it upheld as the test of falsity 2 . 

In Italy a few excellent treatises have appeared on the 
science within the last hundred years ; among which the works 
of Genovesi and Galluppi 3 stand conspicuous for complete- 
ness, precision, and exactitude. Though they follow "Wolf 
in applying the mathematical methods to the speculative 
sciences, they do not invest them with the same degree of 
certainty; but as evidence admits three classes of truths. 

1 Critik, p. 74. See also his Die Wissenschaft der Verstandes 
regeln Uberhauft. Kant's Logik was a posthumous work, and com- 
piled at his request from his own papers by Gottlob B. Jahsche. 
The introduction is longer than the entire work, and contains little 
worthy of remark beyond some formal distinctions, principally de- 
signed to separate pure from applied logic. 8 It is idle to attempt 
to refute a man who assumes the livery of falsehood as the badge of 
truth, and who asserts that, when you have involved him in a contra- 
diction, you have only established the truth of his principles. It would 
appear that Hegel's Wissenschaft der Logik screens itself by such an 
assumption from any attack on the part of the old, and that there 
requires a logic absolutely superior to both to decide the controversy. 
3 Genovesi was contemporary with Condillac and Benedict XIV. Gal- 
luppi's treatise, Lezioni di Logica e di Metafisica, was issued so re- 
cently as 1841. 



ITALIAN AND ENGLISH LOGICIANS. 25 

viz., mathematical, moral, and sensible, they likewise dis- 
criminate the same number of certainties, and lay down 
criteria for their determination. This portion of their system 
is connected with a rigid analysis of the sources of evidence, 
which is resolved into intuitive perception, sensation, reason- 
ing, and testimony 1 a leaf taken from the scholastic logic in 
use among Catholic universities 3 , and evidently connected 
with the science, though generally neglected of late years by 
its popular expositors. Genovesi 3 , whose treatise is more 
original and concise, but not so profound as Galluppi, has 
instituted eight simple rules of a more facile and general 
application than those which appertain to the syllogism, 
which arise out of his definition of reasoning as that of de- 
veloping a confused idea, so as to render it distinct in 
making its clear portion explain that which is confused ; and 
condenses into a few maxims the principles which control 
a priori and a posteriori inference. He concludes his logic 
with a survey of the entire systems of knowledge in a classi- 
fied form, and with an exposition of the harmony which 
ought to reign between their several groups, and a precise 
statement of their peculiar characteristics and fundamental 
principles. 

As the views of the principal English logicians of the 
present century are discussed in the body of this work, we 
need not here go further into detail than to point out their 
general features, and show the different aspects which the 
science assumes from their embodiment. At the commence- 
ment of this era, logic, which had restricted itself to the 
scholastic garb, was fast declining as a study, not less owing 
to the sweeping censures of Brown and Dugald Stewart, 
than to the blighting railleries of our comic dramatists, and 
the feeble talents of its own expositors. Kett Belsham 
and Kirwan 4 only repeated what had been said as well, if 

1 Galluppi adds memory and evidence, but subsequently resolves 
memory into an auxiliary agent of the others. Evidence is plainly no 
faculty, but simply the result of the legitimate exercise of the mental 
faculties in reasoning. a The most methodical treatise of this class, 
and surpassing all others in the completeness of its views, is one by 
Professor Ubajjhs, of Louvain. 3 For his logical views, see Elementa 
artis Logics Critic and his Delia Logica. Venice, 1799. 4 Bel- 
sh sun's Compendium appeared in 1801 ; Kirwan's Elementary Logic in 
1807. 



26 HISTOEICAL INTEODTTCTION. 

not better, before them by Crackenthorpe, Wallis, Saunder- 
son, and others ; and it appeared that the Aristotelian form 
of the science was on the point of being restricted to scien- 
tific theology, had not an advocate of colossal dimensions, 
Archbishop Whately, stood forward to re-assert its em- 
pire, and answer the Scotch professors with arguments 
quite as striking as any which they had urged. The work 
achieved its object. A host of treatises appeared, more or 
less embodying its principles ; two or three, of course, in 
the natural order of things, venturing on a condemnation 1 ; 
and the science experienced a revival which has, during the 
interval of a quarter of a century 2 , manifested no signs of 
abatement. 

The great object of Dr. "Whately is to extricate logic from 
the false views with which it had been connected, and defend 
and expound its doctrines according to the limits assigned to 
it by the scholastic divines. With regard to method in the 
Cartesian sense, or to the trains of thought which have led 
philosophers to grasp the highest axioms of science, logic 
has nothing whatever to do. It simply confines itself to 
analyse and determine the reasoning process so far as it is a 
verbal operation 3 . Beyond this Dr. Whately will not admit 
the possibility of an abstract science of evidence, the field 
being too large and multifarious to permit the methods pur- 
sued in each science to be succinctly generalised. Hence, if 
a reader wish to have any idea of the processes by which the 
mind is led to attain truth, or to appreciate their relative 
force, he has no other resource than to attack with Leibnitz 
the entire group of the sciences, and familiarise himself with 
the encyclopaedia of knowledge. Of the general theory of 
inference he can know no more than what Aristotle told him 
some two thousand years ago, when reason had made but a few 
ill-digested efforts to explain man's position in this world, 

1 Among the former may be mentioned Hind's "Introduction to 
Logic," and Hill's " Artis Logicae Kudimenta." Dr. Whately's excel- 
lent treatise, however, experienced severe strictures in the critical 
examinations of G. C. Lewis, Bentham's New Outline of Logic, and 
in one of Sir W. Hamilton's essays. 2 Dr. Whately's Elements 
appeared in 1825. 3 "Logic is entirely conversant about language." 
" It is the art of employing language properly for the purposes of rea- 
soning." 



WHATELY AND MILL. 27 

and when its highest results were to be found in the victories 
of the sophist. It is evident such a statement must be 
received with caution. Had Dr. Whately confined his re- 
marks to those who confounded metaphysical discussions, 
mnemonic aids, and educational suggestions, with the science 
of inference, his censures would have been as applicable as 
they are forcible ; but to strike at those who claim for logic 
the analysis of all the methods of inference which reason 
employs in the investigation of truth, and limit the science 
to that part of it which the deductive syllogism involves, is 
arresting generalisation in logic at a stage when it was mani- 
festly impossible that it could be otherwise than imperfect. 
Even the a priori forms of the logical faculty cannot be cor- 
rectly analysed without a distinct reference to the tangible 
facts about which they are employed 1 , and when Aristotle 
wrote, physical science was a blank, and law and theology 
were unborn. 

An attempt has been made to supply a logic embodying 
the leading forms of inference pursued in the chief depart- 
ments of science by John Stewart Mill, whose treatise is, 
perhaps, the only one which presents an adequate concep- 
tion of the science 2 . "Were it not for the ultra- nominalist 
theories of the author, and his disposition to regard material 
objects as the only things to which real inference can be 
applied 3 , his work, we doubt not, would have been one of 
the most perfect expositions that logic, as the science of 
inference, could have received at the present day. He sees 
distinctly through his subject, exhibits compact and con- 
secutive thought in harmonising its various details, and 
withdraws the mind from too much attention to empty 
formulas and trifling distinctions, which is the bane of the 
peripatetic logic, and fixes it on the realities of nature. 
In expounding the theory of induction, which he makes the 

1 In proof, we refer the reader to Aristotle's Theory of Induction. 
* We regret, in addition, he should have referred his readers to 
scholastic logicians for an exposition of the laws of the Syllogism, and 
taken up much valuable space with frivolous metaphysical disputes 
with Whewel, in which his arguments only go to prove that he is on 
the wrong side. 3 Mill will not admit there is such a thing as in- 
ference in Law and Theology, but only interpretation. 



28 HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 

basis of inference, ratiocination being, in his view, a de- 
pendent and subsidiary process, he takes the laws of the 
material world as a sort of middle term by which the methods 
pursued in all the sciences may be presented even to the 
uninitiated in a general and perspicuous form, and considers 
these laws under every point of view in which they are 
capable of shedding new light upon the processes of science. 
The result is a masterly analysis of the logic of the physical 
sciences in the spirit of Lord Bacon, whose chief merit it 
was to commence the undertaking. In supplying the very 
gap which Bacon pointed out, Mr. Mill's treatise has placed 
logic on its legitimate foundations, and constitutes an era in 
the science destined to be of paramount influence over future 
times. 

The newest phase, however, which logic has assumed in 
the present century is that which arises from a thorough- 
going quantification of the predicate, which Sir W. Hamilton 
ventures to think will remove many cumbrous forms that 
now clog the peripatectic development of the abstract law of 
reasoning, and both simplify and extend its general results. 
Though this distinguished metaphysician has not yet com- 
municated his views to the public, a general outline of them 
has appeared from the pen of Spencer Baynes, in the shape 
of a prize essay, which Sir William Hamilton, who proposed 
the subject to his pupils, has endorsed with his sanction. 
We are unable, however, to see, from Mr. Baynes's state- 
ment of his views, that the proposed alterations will effect 
any improvement in this branch of the science, so far as 
practical utility is concerned, however serviceable such 
emendations may be in simplifying the abstract statement of 
the laws of thought. Our reasons will be found in the parts 
of the treatise which the complete quantification of the pre- 
dicate would modify, where Sir W. Hamilton's opinions are 
noticed in detail. De Morgan's treatise, .which deserves 
honourable mention for its list of privative judgments 1 , em- 
bodies, we believe, most of Sir W. Hamilton's views on pure 
logic, but the mathematical mnemonics which run through 

1 De Morgan's Formal Logic, p. 61. Leibnitz (Op. xx. p. 98. Erd- 
man's ed.) had started, but did not continue the subject. 



THE NEW ANALYTIC. 29 

the whole of it, will ever tend to render it a sealed book to 
those not over enthusiastic about algebraic symbolism. 
Mr. Thompson's " Laws of Thought" is avowedly written to 
introduce the alterations proposed by a complete quantifica- 
tion of the predicate in a popular treatise on logic. But 
the author by no means adopts the entire doctrines of the 
illustrious Edinburgh professor ; he ventures to think that 
many of the new syllogistic moods in his system are useless 
and nugatory. To a clear exposition of pure logic, Thomp- 
son subjoins an analysis of the scientific processes which con- 
stitute the mixed branch of the science, but in too isolated a 
manner. The work is lucidly written, and forms an in- 
valuable accession to the literature of logic 1 . 

Notwithstanding the success of these efforts, the age has 
not been without impugners of the peripatectic system, who 
with Brown and Locke would tear it up root and branch, and 
hardly leave a single vestige of it in the science of inference 2 . 
Though their objections are strikingly stated, we meet with 
nothing of a very novel character in their works, nor do we 
think the reasons adduced at all likely to shake the empire 
of the Stagyrite, so long as that is confined to its strict 
domain 3 . 

1 Outlines of the necessary Laws of Thought, by the Kev. William 
Thompson, first published in 1822, but has since gone through two 
editions. We would refer the reader to this book for a lucid exposition 
of the bearings of nominalism and realism. 2 B. H. Smart's Outlines 
of Sematology, and Mr. Samuel Bailey's Theory of Reasoning. 
3 In this introduction we have been compelled to omit even the 
mention of many excellent treatises, such as Moberly's, Professor 
Newman's Lectures on Logic, and Wesley's clever little compendium, 
" The Art of the Syllogism," owing to the narrow limits to which our 
space has necessarily confined us. 



LOGIC. 



BOOK I. OF TEEMS. 



BOOK I. 

OF TEEMS. PEOBMIUM. 

ALL reasoning is founded upon judgments, and these can 
only be employed about the mind's conceptions of things, 
which enunciated in language are called terms. Hence 
logic, at the outset, concerns itself with the formation of, 
and verbal expression of, conceptions, so far as these opera- 
tions concur to the deduction of correct inference. This 
limit, we conceive, may be as easily drawn as that which 
marks the boundaries of any other science in the group of 
those which have language as a subject-matter in common. 
If it is obvious that grammar has to deal with terms only as 
they concern correct speaking, and rhetoric only as the em- 
ployment of them is calculated to excite certain emotions, it 
is no less obvious that in logic we must restrict ourselves to 
that view of them which concerns the operations of the mind 
in correct reasoning, and the part they play in the process. To 
attain this object two things are manifestly requisite. First, 
to trace the results of the diiferent processes of thought to 
which objects must be subjected, before their relations of 
agreement or disagreement to each other can be adequately 
ascertained ; the second, to examine the process by which 
notions and signs become the representatives of these objects, 
with a view to discover how far, and under what sense, the 
abstractions and names with which they ax-e clothed may be 
relied upon as a correct designation of the properties which 
they imply. These two heads cover the entire ground of the 
Aristotelian and Baconian analysis of terms, and will, if fully 
developed, exhaust the subject. The first is intended to ex- 
plain all that relates to conceptions with regard to their form, 
while the second will comprise everything which has reference 
to their matter. The prior member of the division naturally 
resolves itself into material and formal relation, the first of 
which will form the opening chapter. 



C. I. 1.] MATERIAL DELATION. 33 



CHAPTER I. 

MATEEIAL BELAT1ON OF TEBMS TO EACH OTHER. 

1. Conditions of Conception Substance Attribute. 

IT is clear that the mind can form no distinct conception 
of an object without ascribing to it some property, or with- 
out receiving an impression of its existence in some mode or 
manner. The object which is thus supposed to exist by 
itself is denominated substance; the property assigned to it is 
called its attribute. Thus, in the proposition that stone is 
flinty, we assign the mode or attribute of flintiness to the 
substance stone ; and not unfrequently condense both into 
one expression as a flinty stone. 

The names of objects were denominated by the schoolmen 
substantive or absolute. The names which represent things 
as modified for example, round, hard, just, prudent as con- 
notatives, from the Latin word connotare (to mark along 
with), because, while they point out distinctly the mode, they 
also denote the subject in which it inheres. This designa- 
tion is of great use in keeping in view the distinction be- 
tween the names which simply denote objects, without any 
reference to their attributes, such as proper names and those 
which imply along with them, denotation or marking out of 
the object, the attributes with which it is invested. 

All attributes are either adjectives or substantives, gene- 
ralised from them, as human or humanity ; corporeal, cor- 
poreality ; rational, rationality ; and necessarily imply rela- 
tion to some substance of which they are the mode. This 
relation may be either essential or accidental that is, con- 
tingent. An essential attribute enters so far into our idea 
of the substance to which it refers, that we cannot conceive 
it to exist without incorporation with it. In this manner 
rotundity is essential to a circle, rationality to man, and four- 
sidedness to a square ; since these notions invest them with 
the properties that constitute their being. A contingent 

D 



34 DELATION OF TERMS TO EACH OTHEB. [B. I. 

attribute may, on the other hand, as the term imports, exist 
apart from the substance to which it implies relation. Be- 
cause many men are found black, it cannot be inferred that 
any particular colour enters into our conception of humanity 1 . 

2. Abstract and Concrete Connotative and Non-Conno- 
tative Terms. 

"When the mind embodies the attribute in a subject, the 
notion thus definitely limited is called concrete; when it 
views the attribute in a substantive form, apart from the 
object, the term is called abstract. Thus, when the property 
of wisdom is considered with reference to man, we get the 
concrete " sage ;" but if we generalise the term wise, and 
view it without reference to the object it denotes, we obtain 
its abstract " wisdom 2 ." All general names, however, since 
the time of Locke, have been denominated abstract, and 
common usage has conventionalised the expression ; but the 
term was employed by the schoolmen solely to designate 
that large section of words which substantise attributes, and 
to that sense it ought to be restricted. Hence, as abstract 
terms generally refer to one special property, as whiteness, 
rotundity, or smoothness, they are designated non-connota- 
tive, since they do not imply any object beyond it. 

Substances may be said to be singular when the mind 
employs itself about any one definitely, as this tree, that 

1 The distinction between mode and substance is not, as the Port 
Koyal Logic asserts, that the true mode cannot be conceived apart from 
its relationship with the substance which it implies, while the substance 
can; for when that relation is essential, the substance can no more be 
conceived without it than the attribute. The clear distinction between 
attribute and substance is fundamental to correct reasoning; but it 
appears to us to lie in the discrimination of one property from a 
congeries of properties, the former of which always finds expression 
in an adjective form, or as a substantive generalised from an adjective. 
2 Hence abstract words generally are not capable of being pluralised, 
while all concrete are. A principle which led the Greeks to adopt the 
very elegant contrivance of using the same word to denote the general 
idea, while they marked the abstract or concrete character it bore by 
a simple alteration of the number; the plural of an abstract noun 
being used for the singular of a concrete. For instance, rf^w; is the 
abstract term for art; re^vai the concrete designation of the par- 
ticular exercise of the art. See ^Esch. Agam. 249. 



C. I. 3.] MATEEIAL BELATIOH. 35 

house, or when the thing actually existing stands apart by 
itself, as the city of London, the university of Durham. 
They are denominated general or common when they are 
viewed in connexion with the class to which they belong, as 
tree, city, university, &c. It may be necessary to distinguish 
general from collective terms. The former can be predi- 
cated of each individual of a multitude ; a collective name 
cannot be predicated of each separately, but only of all taken 
together. Thus, Kellerman's division of infantry could not 
be predicated of every individual who composed it, but only 
of the collective body. Such a term is considered as a single 
collective name ; but if we mention a division of infantry, 
without reference to any special one, the name must be con- 
sidered as general and collective. 

All concrete general terms are connotative. The word 
man, for instance, denotes an indefinite number of indi- 
viduals, of whom taken as a class it is the name, but it is 
applied to them because they possess certain attributes : as 
animal life, corporeity, rationality, and a certain external 
form which is called human. Every existing being which 
possessed these attributes would be called a man ; but none 
could be so denominated that wanted any of these qualities. 
If a race of animals were discovered like Swift's Houyhnhms, 
possessing reason equal to human beings, but invested with 
another corporeal form, some other name than that of man 
would be required for their denotation. On the other hand, 
most singular names are non-connotative, since they denote 
the individual objects to which they are applied, without im- 
plying any attribute in connexion with them. For example : 
when we call a boy " Edward," or name a girl " Clotilda," it 
is simply to enable these individuals to be distinguished from 
their kind without awakening in the mind any impressions 
concerning their attributes. 

3. Relative and Absolute, Positive and Negative Terms. 

When the mind considers any object as connected in any 
way with another, the term in which it is expressed is called 
relative. Such are father, son, ruler, subject, cause, effect, 
and those various degrees of comparison by which subjects 

D2 



36 EELATION 01? TEEMS TO EACH OTHEE. [B. I. 

are contrasted together : as like, unlike ; longer, shorter, &c. 
Absolute terms are those which express the object inde- 
pendent of such relation : as man, house, animal. "When 
two objects which are pairs are viewed in reference to the 
relation they hold to each other, the terms in which they 
are expressed are denominated correlative. Thus : though a 
king is the ruler of men, king and man are not correlative, 
but king and subject are. 

When the mind attributes any definite property to a sub- 
ject, the mode so assigned is termed positive: as, a man 
reasoning. If the term denote that such a quality might be 
conceived to exist in the subject, but does not, the attribute is 
called privative : as dumbness, a man who is silent, a blind 
child. If the mode is inconsistent with the subject of which 
it is predicated, it is then called negative : as a dumb picture, 
a lifeless statue. "We may notice, however, that attributes 
are often positive in form, while they are negative in reality. 
Thus: the words idle or sober, though positive in form, 
merely connote the absence of activity and drunkenness. 
Some terms, on the other hand, conceal a positive attribute 
under a negative form : as truthlessness does not express the 
mere absence of truth, but the positive attribute of lying. 

Notions are said to be contradictory when they completely 
exhaust all nameable things : as animate and inanimate, cor- 
poreal and incorporeal, organised and unorganised ; for it is 
impossible that one or other should not belong to every 
object; as there is nothing that can be both, so there is 
nothing that can be neither. On the other hand, contrary 
notions are those which cannot be predicated of the same 
subject at the same time, though there are many subjects to 
which they do not apply at all, and others to which they are 
applicable at different times. Nothing can be at once dis- 
creet and imprudent ; but a man may be so at different 
.epochs of his life, while a tree can never be deemed either. 



C. H. 1.] FOBMAL BELATION. 37 



CHAPTER n. 

FORMAL RELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHER. 

1. Generalisation and Abstraction. 

THE principal act by which the mind arrives at the various 
conceptions we have enumerated, is abstraction. By this 
faculty we can divide substance into its logical parts, viz., 
subject and attributes, and restrict our attention to any 
definite mode, apart from the subject in which it is supposed 
to inhere. This is clearly evinced by geometricians, who in 
treating their science do not, as is the vulgar opinion, sup- 
pose that there are lines without breadth, or surfaces without 
depth, but simply that they are able to consider length apart 
from breadth, which is even competent to the peasant when 
he measures the distance from one town to another. 

It is obvious that by the same faculty we can detach our 
mind from the accidental properties of a subject, and consider 
its essential attributes alone. As in the case of a human 
being, we may withdraw our thoughts from his individual 
peculiarities, as height, complexion, colour of hair, &c., 
and attend solely to those qualities which enter into the 
essentiality of his being, as a particular form of corporeity 
endued with reason and animal life. In the same manner, 
when we draw a triangle on paper we are able by an 
instantaneous process of thought to withdraw our attention 
from the place where it is, and the other accidents which 
determine it, and consider the diagram as a figure bounded 
by three right lines. "We thus obtain a conception which 
applies to all triangles indiscriminately; as in the former 
example, we obtained a conception which included under it 
all members of the human family. By fixing the results of 
these processes of thought in permanent language, as man, 
triangle, animal, we obtain the terms we have already de- 
signated common from being applicable to all the indivi- 
duals included under them alike, and which are sometimes 
called predicables, because they can be predicated of each 
affirmatively. 



38 EELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHEE. [B. I. 

2. Genus and Species. 

By this process of generalisation the mind is enabled to 
dilate or contract its view of objects to an extent only limited 
by the boundaries of human intelligence. We may, by ab- 
stracting from or adding to any conception within the range 
of actual existence, proceed through the varied scale of being 
till we reach the highest or lowest link it opens out to 
us. Thus, by observing a particular horse, Bucephalus, 
grazing with others in the same field, and abstracting the es- 
sential qualities of the group from those which are merely 
accidental, as colour, size, age, &c., we get the common 
notion of horse. If again we contrast the notion of horse 
with cow, wolf, tigress, we observe that they have one 
property in common viz., that of suckling their young, 
and abstracting this from the other qualities in which 
'they differ, we form the wider conception of mammalia. Car- 
rying the process still further, we may compare the mam- 
malia with birds, fishes, insects, and worms, whence per- 
ceiving that all these, however different, agree in connoting 
corporeal life and sensation, we arrive at the wider conception 
animal, which embraces all material living things. In the 
same manner animal may be considered in relation to inani- 
mate objects, when the abstraction of life and sensation will 
leave us the residuum of corporeal substance common to 
both. Another step will lead us to the most general con- 
ception the mind is capable of forming viz., that of being 
as synonymous with substance, i. e. a substratum in which 
certain properties inhere. The mind, in its view of objects, 
ranges with equal freedom through the descending and 
upward series, and by bringing any two notions into the 
scale can ascertain their definite relation to each other. 
Thus the notion animal connotes distinct qualities, in which 
mammalia and insects equally participate ; it can, therefore, 
be predicated of both; but mammalia and insects, though 
included in one compact term, designate different attributes 
in the kinds which they represent, and on that account reci- 
procally exclude each other. 

When a notion is considered as included in one more 
general it is called a species, and the containing term in con- 
nexion with it is denominated genus. Thus body and mind 



C. H. 3.] FORMAL EELATION. 39 

are contained in the notion of substance ; as rhinoceros and 
elephant in that of animal. They are, therefore, species of 
which substance and animal are the genera. Things which 
are species to one genus may be respectively genus and 
species when viewed in relation to each other. Thus man 
and animal are species with reference to substance; but 
animal is the genus of .man, who in turn is a species of 
animal. Species, however, of the same genus which mutually 
exclude each other are denominated co-ordinate species : as 
mammalia and insects are the co-ordinate species of animal. 
In like manner the same notion may be a genus when com- 
pared with the things to which it extends, and a species 
when compared to another term which is more general. 
Thus body, which is a genus in respect of organised and 
unorganised things, is a species in relation to substance ; and 
quadrilateral, which is a genus with reference to parallelogram 
and trapezium, is a species in relation to figure. Such terms 
as are respectively genus and species, according to the light 
in which they are viewed, are called subaltern genera or 
species. There are, however, species which cannot become 
genera, as circle includes only individual circles which are all 
of the same species. These are termed infirma species, of 
which there are many kinds. But there can only be one 
absolute genus summum genus, which is not a species ; 
whether we choose to call it being or substance, is a point 
for metaphysical rather than for logical discrimination. 

3. Differentia, Property, and Accident. 

But, besides genera and species, which being the results 
of the general ideas that represent their objects to us as 
things or modes of things denoted by substantives, there 
are a class of notions formed by the abstracting power of the 
mind that have reference to objects as things modified, and 
are generally expressed by adjective or connotative terms : 
these, when compared with the substances to which they re- 
late, will fall under the head of difference, property, or acci- 
dent. 

When we divide a genus into its species, as animal into 
horse, bird, or man, &c., we have regard to some essential 
attribute, which not only distinguish them from their com- 



40 BELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHEB. [B. I. 

mon genus, but separate them from each other. Without 
such attribute, it is evident the species would be confounded 
with the genus, and with each other. Eor example, body 
and mind are two species of substance ; but we are only led 
to conceive them such because body, though included in sub- 
stance, is distinguished from it by an attribute which sub- 
stance does not connote, viz., that of extension, and mind 
by that of thought : which attributes in turn serve to 
separate the species from each other. Now such essential 
attribute, whatever it be that leads us to discriminate the 
species from the genus, is called, as the sense implies, its dif- 
ference hence, the genus with its difference makes up our 
idea of species. Thus metal-wire, endued with polarity, con- 
stitutes a magnet, so that the species includes all the attri- 
butes of the genus, just as the genus includes all the subjects 
of the species. Or, to take a plainer instance, man is a 
responsible animal ; the term animal (genus) includes every 
kind of organised being endowed with sensation, among 
which man finds a place ; while the term man (species) in- 
cludes all the qualities of free-will and reason, combined with 
material agency, in which the attributes of the genus, viz., 
organised and percipient sensation, necessarily are com- 
prised 1 . 

The species, however, may be distinguished from the genus 
by other essential attributes besides that which constitutes 
the difference, and which, as the difference is generally the 
leading quality, is often implied in, or dependent upon, it. 
Thus extension is the differentia of matter, but in examin- 
ing the nature of extension we find it connotes divisibility. 
Hence we call this quality a property of matter. Occa- 
sionaDy, however, a property may be something distinct from 
the differentia that is not implied in it, as it is an essential 
quality of a triangle that its three angles be equal to two 
right angles ; but this property is not implied in the dif- 
ferentia which distinguishes a triangle from other figures, 
viz., three straight lines which enclose a space. Hence pro- 

1 Difference does not occupy a distinct place among the predicables 
of Aristotle, though it may be inferred from his category. See Organ. 
Top. ch. iv. The division of predicables in the text was first fully 
drawn out from his Topics, by Porphyry. 



C. H. 3.] FOEMAL BELATIOJT. 41 

perty may be taken to be such essential attribute of the 
species as is not employed for its differentia. 

Since the difference and property of a species must be 
essential to our conception of any of the individuals included 
under its class, it is evident that their universality must be 
co-extensive with it. They are, therefore, creations which 
depend as much upon the mind's generalising faculty, as 
genera and species, and are not improperly included with them 
in the same category. It should, however, be observed, 
as the mind is generally led to adopt that attribute as 
the differentia which is most important to the end it has in 
view, that which may constitute the property of a species 
with one may form its differentia with another. Thus, in 
naval science, the polarity of the magnet is the quality which 
would be viewed as the differentia, while by those who 
employ magnets for more expeditiously picking up bits of 
iron, this might be regarded as a property, but the attracting 
power of the magnet would constitute the differentia. 

Any quality that does not enter into our conception of the 
essence of a species, but may be absent or present, that 
species continuing the same, is called an accident of the 
species. Thus a man may be walking, or he may be a Ma- 
hommetan. Of these two examples the former is called a 
separable accident, because it may be separated from the in- 
dividual; and the latter inseparable, for a contrary reason. 
Every accident, however, must be separable from the species, 
otherwise it would be a property. 

It is very important here to observe, that no term can be 
determined, to belong to any of these five universal predi- 
cables unless it be specified of what it is to be predicated. 
For example, the term " red" would be considered a species 
with regard to colour ; a genus, in relation to the terms 
" pink," " scarlet," &c. It might be regarded as the dif- 
ferentia of " red rose," as a property of " blood," and as an 
accident of " a house." Thus the power of resisting oxidi- 
sation is an accident in reference to the term metal, but it is 
a property of gold and several other metals ; and hence we 
may infer that, in all cases, the differences or properties of 
any lower species will be accidents in reference to the higher 
class in which they are comprised. 



42 BELAT10N OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHEE. [B. I. 



4. Extension and Intension. 

By examining the relations which genus and species bear to 
each other, and the different natures of the wholes by which 
one is said to be included in the other, we shall distinguish 
a very important law of abstraction. It is evident we 
cannot detach any properties from a notion without extend- 
ing the list of objects to which it is applied. Thus, if we 
abstract from a rose those peculiar properties which consti- 
tute its essence, and attend solely to those which it connotes 
as a plant, we extend its application, before limited to 
flowers with red petals, to the oak, fir, lichen, geranium, and 
a countless variety of others. This view of a conception, re- 
stricted solely to the number of objects it denotes, is called 
its extension. But, in proportion as we extend the applica- 
tion of a notion to denote -a greater number of objects, the 
notion must necessarily comprehend fewer properties ; as in. 
extending rose to plant we dropped petals, leaves, stamina, 
and pistals, for vegetable growth, the only property we can 
assign to plant. But as we narrow the sphere of a notion 
the qualities which it comprehends proportionably increase. 
As in restricting the term body to animal, we are obliged to 
endue it with the qualities of life and sensation ; and if we 
still further narrow it to man, we must comprehend reason 
in the list. This view of a conception in relation to the 
properties it connotes is called its comprehension. 

Hence the comprehension of a notion is always in the in- 
verse ratio of its extension ; the maximum of the one being 
necessarily the minimum of the other. This arises from the 
different nature of the counter wholes which these quantities 
represent, the one comprising an assemblage of attributes, 
the other of objects ; the one a concrete, the other an abstract 
whole. Thus in the individual when the greatest number of 
attributes is united, comprehension is at its maximum, and 
extension at its minimum ; while in the most abstract notion 
the mind can form, viz., that of being, extension is at its 
maximum, and comprehension necessarily at its minimum, 
since it only connotes the single attribute of existence 1 . 

1 Bayne's translation of the Port Royal Logic, 2nd ed. note 17. 



C. H. 5.] FOBMAL BELATION. 43 



5. Nature and Rules of Logical Division. 

"When we enumerate all the co-ordinate species included 
in a general term, or, in other words, when we state in full 
all the objects which such term denotes, we are said to sub- 
ject it to a logical division. Such a process is, in fact, identi- 
cal with the statement of a conception in terms of its exten- 
sion 1 . 

Dr. Whately, with all deference to such high authority, 
confounds, as it seems to us, the operation of narrowing a 
term to certain attributes, with the statement of the objects 
which are included under it, in calling the process by which 
we obtain a logical division the reverse of generalisation 2 . 
This can hardly be correct in the majority of cases; for 
in that process we abstract not objects, but attributes of 
objects. So that the inverted operation would lie in the 
annexation of the abstracted attributes ; that is in the 
narrowing a term to a smaller circle of objects, by in- 
creasing its definitive properties. "We need hardly say that 
such an operation is widely distinct from enumerating the 
several kinds of objects denoted by a common term, which is 
the main branch of logical division. Thus, body may be di- 
vided into stone, plant, brute, man, and other things, which 
form its co-ordinate species. In the same manner organised 
substance may be divided into plant, brute, and man, which 
are contained under its extension as subject parts. 

This mode of division is regulated by rules. The first is, 
that it be complete ; or in other words, that all the parts, or 
members, must be exactly equal to the thing divided ; as even 
and odd comprehend the whole extent of the term number, 
there being no number which is not included under one of 
these branches. It is a common error with the schoolmen to 
assume an incomplete for a complete division ; and having 
limited the subject to their own category, to argue as if the 
thing discussed had no existence beyond it. The mistakes in 

1 A conception, however, is capable of being divided into the quali- 
ties which distinguish its co-ordinate species from each other. As 
every animal is rational or irrational, every line is straight or curved, 
every substance is organised or unorganised, material or immaterial, 
&c. * Logic, p. 151, 7th ed. 



44 BELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHEE. [B. I. 

these cases appear to have arisen from taking terms in a contra- 
dictory sense, which were only contrary ; and also from dealing 
with subjects so vague and abstract as to defy human intelli- 
gence to fix them by any exhaustive denotation. Thus, if 
one divided spirit (in its rational sense) into human, angelic, 
and divine, and discussed its properties as if restricted to the 
beings whom those terms denote, his inferences concerning 
them would be open to grave doubt in a philosophical point 
of view, since we have no scientific data to confine the exist- 
ence of such a principle to such tripartite sphere. Again, did 
a philosopher divide men into ignorant and learned, or a theo- 
logian into virtuous and vicious, a physician into diseased 
and healthy, the least discerning would immediately perceive 
that, if they dealt with these branches of their subject as in- 
cluding the entire of the human family, a serious error would 
be committed. For there is a certain medium of knowledge 
which removes a man from the rank of the ignorant, though 
it does not place him among the learned ; between virtuous 
and vicious there is a medium state, to which we may apply 
what Tacitus said of Gralba, " Magis extra vitia qiiam cum vir- 
tutibits 1 ." For there are many who are excluded from vice 
by the same inactivity which prevents them from doing good. 
Between diseased and healthy there is the state of conva- 
lescence and of the man ailing, and so with numerous others. 
Ramus, to ensure obedience to this rule, reduced all division 
to a twofold form, which should exhaust the subject at every 
stage of the process. This form did not, as is expressly as- 
serted by Reid and others 2 , originate with Eamus, but was 
frequently employed by Aristotle 3 and the scholastics, when- 
ever the subject seemed to invite its application. This divi- 
sion proceeds upon the principle, that a term, along with 
its contradictory, comprehends everything. Thus substance 
may be divided into material and immaterial ; material into 
organic and inorganic ; organic into percipient and non- 
percipient ; and the repetition of the process, so as to carry- 
on the subdivision to the required length, is called by phi- 

1 Hist. i. 49. - See Keid's Analysis of Aristotle, art. Categories. 
It is curious to observe a divine analysing an author whom he seems 
never to have read. 3 The Stagyrite, however, condemns the proce- 
dure as useless for scientific discovery. Anal. Post. ii. ch. 5 ; An. Prior, 
i. ch.31. 



C. II. 5.] FORMAL EELATIOK. 45 

losophers abscissio infiniti. Though this bifurcate division is 
cumbersome, from the vast quantity of subdivisions to which 
it leads, and also obscure, since it leaves us entirely in the 
dark with regard to the properties of the most extensive 
member of division, there are many cases in which it can be 
turned to account in scientific discovery 1 . 

The second rule which a logical division ought to observe 
is, that the constituent members must exclude one another, 
on the principle of the division which formed the logician's 
point of departure. Thus, if a naturalist were to throw 
light on the horse tribe by dividing them into Arabic, 
French, English horses, racing horses, waggon horses, 
grey horses, chestnut horses, cab horses, &c., no one would 
give him credit for any distinct knowledge of his sub- 
ject. Yet, ludicrous as this division may appear, there 
are not wanting instances in which the greatest philosophers, 
through losing sight of the mutual exclusion of the dividing 
member on the ground of one unique principle of division, 
have committed follies quite as absurd in the higher walks 
of science. Thus Bacon, without any distinct point of de- 
parture, divides motion into every conceivable kind that can 
be presented to the eye 2 , or even entertained by the mind, 
without any distinct idea of what he is aiming at, save a 
loose cataloguing of every sort of motion on which a distinct 
name could be fixed. In this way he enters into an elaborate 
detail of motions of pressure, motions of coercion, motions of 
liberty, motions of art, motions of union, motions of strife, 
and a dozen other kinds of motions, equally homogeneous, 
which, like the above ludicrous division of the horse tribe, 
present no real difference in kind, and are capable of being 
affirmed of the same subject. Some of Aristotle's divisions 
are equally trifling and absurd 3 . 

As any subject may be considered in a variety of ways, it is 

1 As to what respect, see History of Logic, Ramus, p. 10. 2 Novum 
Organ, book ii. app. 48. His division of methods, in the 6th book of the 
De Augmentis, not much better. Bacon was endowed with a spirit 
eminently nomenclative, which led him to throw every thing he treated 
into tables; but though he continually reproaches the scholastics with 
confounding the essential differences of things, he never ceases to 
commit the same fault himself. 3 An instance of illogical divi- 



46 BELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHER. [B. I. 

necessary to understand the object we have in view in subject- 
ing it to a division, and allow that to be our guide throughout. 
Thus horses would be divided by an agriculturist according 
to their uses ; by a naturalist, with reference to their tribes ; 
but these two principles could not be introduced in the 
same division without giving rise to confusion, by running 
the dividing members into one another, and defeating the 
object of logical division altogether. In like manner the 
division of a library could not be undertaken without some 
precise notion of the principle of the arrangement. If 
books are to be divided according to their sizes, we under- 
stand that folios will comprise one section of the subject, 
and quartos and duodecimos two others. If the matter of 
which they treat is to form the basis of the arrangement, all 
know that history, fiction, theology, and the leading branches 
of science, will form the prominent members of the division. 
But should the language in which they are written be the 
ground of the division, the dividing members are still more 
obvious. 

It is not necessary that the dividing members absolutely 
exclude each other, but only in the point of view upon which 
the division is framed. Thus writers of fiction may be divided 
into poets, dramatists, and novelists; but the members of 
such division, though mutually exclusive, as far as the kinds 

sion quite as flagrant as either of those just given was furnished 
by Watt, in that very part of his Logic written to guard his readers 
against it: " Furnish yourself," said he, " with a rich variety of ideas ; 
acquaint yourselves with things ancient and modern; things natural, 
civil, and religious; things domestic and national; things of your native 
land and foreign countries ; things present, past, and future; and above 
all, be well acquainted with God and yourselves; learn animal nature 
and the workings of your own spirits." To which he adjoins the very 
sapient remark, that so complete an acquaintance with things in 
general will be of very great advantage. To the success of Watt's 
Logic, which is one of the most widely circulated books on the science 
in the English language, may be ascribed much of the prevalent con- 
fusion about logic. It is a bad compound of the worst parts of Locke 
with the worst parts of Arnauld. Watt seems to have taken the chap- 
ters on the Human Understanding and the Port Royal Logic as they 
came to hand, and stitched them together, without caring how the 
apocryphal d priori principles consorted with the crude experimental 
notions, so as he made a book out of them. The elder Degerando sets 
down this work as the text-book at Oxford. 



c. ii. 6.] 



FOEHAL BELATION. 



of imaginative writing are concerned, which is the principle 
of the division, doea not imply that some poets may not be 
novelists, or some dramatists writers of romances. 

The reader will observe that division, in a logical sense, 
has a far different signification to the separation of the com- 
ponent parts of a thing which is its natural meaning. We 
divide a flower into leaves, stamens, and petals, each of which 
is much less than the whole ; but in the metaphorical sense 
of the word which logic implies, each member of the division 
is in reality greater than the whole, for we cannot assign to 
the genus flower its constituent species rose, geranium, 
tulip, &c., without expressing, in addition to the general 
notion of the term, the peculiar differences which separates 
one species from the other. 

6. Examples of Division. The Categories and Predicdbles. 

The most complete examples of logical division are fur- 
nished by Aristotle, in his enumeration of everything that 
can be made the subject or the predicate of a proposition, 
and of all the possible relations which the subject and pre- 
dicate can have to each other. The former class are de- 
nominated categories or predicaments, and muster every 
object of human apprehension under ten heads ; so that, as 
every soldier belongs to some company, and every company 
to some regiment, in like manner all the notions that enter 
into the human mind have their place in one or other of 
these categories, and by proper subdivision may be drawn up 
in rank and file, and passed under review 1 . 



Being. 



Substance ( 

Mode of sub- 
stance. 


Absolute. 
Relative (4). 



5 Matter i. e. quantity (2). 
Form i. e. quality (3). 

'Action (5). 
Suffering (6). 
Where (7). 
When (8). 
Posture (9). 
, Habit (10). 

We have given Sir W. Hamilton's distributions of the predica- 
ments, as the most perfect that can be selected. See his edition of 
Reid's Works, p. 687. A humorous illustration of the categories is 
given by Cornelius to his pupil, Martinus Scriblerus. Cornelius was 
forced to give Martin sensible images: thus calling up the coachman. 



48 DELATION OF TEEMS TO EACH OTHEB. [B. I. 

This division, commonly known by the name of the five 
predicables, expresses every conceivable relation of subor- 
dination or co-ordination to which the forms of inference 
necessarily subject these classes of predicaments. So far 
our treatise on terms has hardly consisted of anything else 
than an explication of them, as the following summary will 

show: 

Every predicable expresses either 



The whole essence of the 
subject i. e. species. 


Or part of its 
essence. 
1 


Or somethi 
its es 


Qg joined to 
sence. 


Genus difference. 


Property. 


Acci 


dent. 



Universal, but Peculiar, but Universal and Separable in- 
not peculiar. not universal. peculiar. separable. 

If, then, the predicaments present us with every intelligible no- 
tion, the predicables reveal all the conceivable modes in which 
these notions can be compared together. The categories deli- 
neate the boundaries which intersect the vast region of human 
knowledge ; the predicables state the result of those laws of 
thought which lead to their discrimination. The one pre- 
sents us with all the objects cognisable to human intelligence ; 
the other, with all the forms which characterise the operations 
of that intelligence in dealing with them. The one reveals 
the compartments under which the phenomena presented by 
nature may be arranged ; the other, the results of the appli- 
cation of rational principles to the objects they represent. 
By the union of both, the whole furniture of the human mind 
is presented to us at one view, and the registry of all nameable 
things in the universe and of the world-embracing mechanism 
of thought brought within the compass of a nutshell. 

he asked him what he had seen at the bear-garden? The man 
answered he had seen two men fight for a prize: one was a fair man, a 
sergeant in the guards; the other black, a butcher; the sergeant had 
red breeches, the butcher blue ; they fought upon a stage about four 
o'clock, and the sergeant wounded the butcher in the leg. Mark (quoth 
Cornelius) how the fellow runs through the predicaments men (sub- 
stantia), two (quantitas), fair and black (qualitas), sergeant and 
butcher (relatio), wounded the other (actio et passio), fighting (situs), 
stage (ubi), two o'clock (quando), blue and red breeches (habitus). 



C. III. 1.] TEEMS WITH EEGAED TO THINGS. 49 



CHAPTER III. 

TEEMS WITH EEGAED TO THINGS. 

1. Formation of Distinct Conceptions a Part of Logic. 

THUS far our design has been simply to register the dif- 
ferent relations which any two terms assume when their 
agreement or disagreement is to be ascertained ; but for the 
comparison to terminate in a correct result, it is evident that 
the terms themselves must be accurate exponents of the 
properties for which they stand, and not as Bacon says, be 
rashly abstracted from things. For instance, suppose it 
required to be known if the quality spontaneous may be 
affirmed of the motion by which air rises out of water, it is 
necessary that the word spontaneous should imply some 
distinct property, and that the phenomenon denoted by the 
aqueous motion of air should be completely understood 1 . 
This part of the subject, viz., the obtaining clear concep- 
tions of the terms which are brought into contrast, is obvi- 
ously the first step, and the one most decisive in the investi- 
gation of truth. Without it the most perfect accuracy in 
the subsequent processes will but propagate error, so that 
we can only expect to be right by accident 2 . Tet writers 
on the scholastic logic relegate this branch of the subject 
from the science as something extraneous to its object, as if 
the operation of abstracting notions from things was not as 
necessary to the establishment of correct conclusions, as a 
knowledge of the relations which such notions can bear to 
each other, and the laws of inference to which they lead. 
The warmth with which this view of the science has been 
maintained, has driven Bacon and his followers into the 
opposite error of depreciating the scholastic rules and nar- 
rowing the entire scope of the science to the formation of 

1 However obvious the remark may appear, the neglect of it in the 
illustration alluded to, led Aristotle to lose sight of the fact that air 
was forced to the surface by the pressure of the water beneath, and to 
assert that the motion was the effect of the air seeking to join its own 
element. 2 See Bacon's distribution of the great instauration, and 
the preface to the Novum Organum, with note upon the context. 
(Bohn's Scientific Library.) 

B 



50 TEEMS WITH REGABD TO THINGS. [B. I. 

correct and appropriate conceptions, and the inductive gene- 
ralisations built upon them. We, however, instead of per- 
ceiving any antagonism between the two systems, think 
that they so far coalesce as to form correlative branches of 
the same science. What opposition can there be between 
the operation which abstracts notions from things, and that 
which establishes the different modes in which such notions 
are contrasted together? The same mental faculty is 
evidently at work in both cases, and though on different 
objects, with the same view, viz., the eliciting truth out of 
the material presented to the judgment. In the first case, 
the mind is employed in fitting notions to objects ; in the 
second, in fitting notions to each other. With much more 
reason might the craft of the stonemason, which is the 
preparation of stones for building, be viewed as something 
directly obstructive to the process of laying stones on each 
other, to which it is a necessary preliminary. In fact, 
the very subject-matter which each party claims as the 
peculiar province of their own view of the science, show 
that the ground is common between them. For what is the 
purport of a real definition in the scholastic sense but the 
adaptation of notions to convey the correct properties of 
things? And what principles does the physicist put into 
requisition in seeking the same object, but those involved 
in the rules of scholastic definition. 

Though the distinct conceptions is undoubtedly a part, 
and no small part, of logic, it has its boundaries, which it 
will be well not to go beyond. In the first place, it is not 
our province to treat of the mechanism of the formation, viz., 
whether objects are directly perceived by the mind, or whe- 
ther they convey impressions thereto by sensible or spiritual 
images, or whether such impressions are only modifications 
of the percipient mind ; nor is it our business to enter into 
the origin of abstract ideas, and consider how far they are 
conceptions of general properties, or generalisations from 
individual groups, or in what light their existence may be 
considered as restricted to the human mind, or as existing 
in that of the divine artificer ; for all these questions involve 
metaphysical theories, concerning which the greatest minds 
have differed, and are quite extraneous to logic, which deals 
with principles about whose cogency there cannot be the 



C. III. 2] WHAT TEEMS ABE INDISTINCT. 51 

slightest doubt. With that branch of the formation of con- 
ceptions we have to do, not which treats of the mechanism 
of our conceptions, but of the principles and rules by which 
their trustworthiness may be ascertained, as exponents of 
clear and definable objects. But since this view is so ex- 
tensive as to embrace, in some measure, the entire scope 
of logic 1 , it will be necessary to limit it at this stage to 
that part of the process which concerns the mere obtaining 
materials for inference. We shall therefore, at present, con- 
fine ourselves to pointing out the characteristics of distinct 
and indistinct conceptions ; the leading sources, including 
language, from which such marks arise, and how far defini- 
tion confirms those which are clear, while it disperses un- 
settled or indistinct connotation. 

2. What Class of Terms are liable to Indistinctness. 

And here it is necessary to refer to our distinction between 
the denotation and connotation of names as fundamental 
to the subject. It is evident when we point out any special 
object, as this book, that table, we imply i. e. connote, 
no peculiar properties proposed by that object, but merely 
point out i. e. denote, the thing itself. Hence all singular 
names, with few exceptions 2 , or general names used in a 
singular sense, being employed not to convey information 
concerning the objects they denote, but simply to point them 
out as things towards which the attention is directed, never 

1 Genovesi correctly remarks that all reasoning is nothing else than 
the dispersion of what is confused and indistinct in a term by that 
portion of it which is defined and clear. Hence, if some limit was not 
introduced in the exposition of terms, it would absorb the entire field 
of logic. The boundary drawn in the text is taken from Whately 
(book ii. ch. i. note). But Reid (see his Hist. Arist. Organ, p. 686, in 
the recent edition of his works by Sir W. Hamilton) is disposed to 
allow no place to terms in logic at all, only with a view to, and so far 
as is necessary, to the explanation of propositions, and these latter 
again only so far as is indispensable to the knowledge of the syllogism. 
But this distinction, however consonant to a system of formal logic, is 
too wire-drawn for the purposes of practical utility. 3 The conno- 
tative individual names alluded to are sun, God, or such as from the 
form of expression lead to the implication of some attribute ; as the 
first King of France, or the present Chancellor of the Exchequer; 
yet the latter names are used generally in a strictly denotative 
sense. 

2 






52 TEEMS 'WITH EEGAED TO THINGS. [B. I. 

fail to attain their object, and can be in no instance the cause 
of confusion in our judgments. They involve no abstraction 
of words from things, no wrapping up of multiform pro- 
perties in one expression, like individual complex or concrete 
general terms, and, therefore, do not require any elucidation 
at the hands of the logician. There is another class of terms 
equally exempt from notice in this place ; viz., those which 
are abstracted from one branch of the concrete general 
terms we have mentioned, as rationality from rational, 
corporeity from corporeal, whiteness from white, because 
they do not generally connote any attribute distinct from 
the abstract name they denote ; or, if they do in some in- 
stances, it is only as names restricted to an individual sense 
simply by virtue of the process by which the general concrete 
term is formed. It is, therefore, on individual complex and 
general concrete terms alone that the attention of the 
logician must be concentrated, as the central points of con- 
fusion in erroneous judgments, since connoting several pro- 
perties, they are liable to be imperfectly known, and not 
only seen in partial lights, but connected with objects with 
which they can have no relation. Thus iron, one of the 
simplest of this class, conveys a widely diflerent notion of its 
properties to one who has heard of magnetism than to 
another in a contrary predicament. The vulgar who regard 
this metal as incombustible, and the chemist who sees it 
burn with the utmost fury, and who has other reasons for 
regarding it as one of the most combustible bodies in 
nature ; the poet who uses it as an emblem of rigidity, 
and the smith and engineer in whose hands it is plastic 
and moulded like wax into every form ; the jailor who 
prizes it as an obstruction, and the electrician who sees 
in it only a channel of open communication, by which that 
most impassable of all objects, the air, may be traversed by 
his imprisoned fluid, have all imperfect and some conflicting 
notions of the word 1 . And so it is with other complex 
terms ; some are indefinite, as hard or soft, light or heavy, 
and others so intricate, as life, matter, instinct as to mock 
every attempt of science to unfold their entire connotation. 

1 Sir John Herschel, Discourse on the Study of Nat. Phil. p. 20. 



C. III. 3.] HOW CONCEPTIONS BECOME DISTINCT. 53 

3. How Conceptions become Distinct and Confused. 

Though this class of terms are, in the generality of in- 
stances, formed for us, and in no case do we create them 
except in discovering or combining new truths, it is hardly 
possible for us to attain any clear insight into the causes of 
their distinctness or ambiguity but by analysing their com- 
position, and closely watching their growth in the mind. To 
commence with some of the simplest examples, it is evident 
that the word man implies an assemblage of properties, which 
the mind, through the faculty of abstraction, has first de- 
tached from the accidental qualities of the individual, and 
then bound up into a conception which equally represents 
any member of the human family. Each of the properties 
which form the aggregate of the conception are known, and 
possess marks which not only discriminate it from others, 
but lay open its own nature and constitution. The notion 
man is, therefore, called clear and distinct, since we know all 
its properties, viz., rationality, corporeity in a certain shape, 
animal life, &c., and can, upon a minute survey, adduce the 
marks by which these properties are so constituted. Take 
another instance, that of matter. This term also implies a 
congeries of properties, some of which are as distinctly ascer- 
tainable as those included in the last example. It is evi- 
dently an extended substance, composed of divisible particles, 
which are constantly undergoing change according to regular 
laws ; but we can scarcely predicate further concerning it 
with safety. It has its accidental as well as its essential 
qualities, and, to a certain extent, these can be pointed out. 
For example, it must be extended, though this may occur in 
any diversity of form. Colour and shape are alike indifferent 
to it. It may be animal, vegetable, or mineral ; but it would 
be hazardous to range its gravitating property in the same 
category to call it essentially inert, or deny its incompetency 
to be invested with the attribute of thought. Hence our 
notion concerning its leading properties are incomplete, and 
to predicate anything of them with dogmatic certainty would 
only expose us to error. We know, however, sufficient of its 
properties to distinguish it generically from mind, and to divide 
it into many subordinate species. The notion is clear since 



54 TEEMS WITH EEGAED TO THINGS. [B. I. 

it communicates a distinct conception of its object, but im- 
perfect or inadequate to realise everything that it contains. 

It is evident that such examples could be enlarged until 
they embraced the entire gradations of clearness and indis- 
tinctness in ideas ; and though the boundaries fade by im- 
perceptible degrees into each other, philosophers have deter- 
mined the classes, which they divide with sufficient precision 
to assign to them the marks by which they may be distin- 
guished. On examining, however, any of their tables, we 
find only one generating principle of the degrees of clearness 
or indistinctness they contain viz., the capability of resolv- 
ing any subject that may present itself into its constituent 
elements, and decomposing these until the elements of their 
elements can also be resolved, and we arrive at the simplest 
analysis. Thus, the classification of Leibnitz 1 , which is the 
most popular, will tell us that those notions are most ob- 
scure whose qualities are so impalpable that we cannot dis- 
tinguish them from others ; that confused notions, though 
they admit of such clear discrimination, are perfectly inso- 
luble with respect to their own nature, while those ideas can 
only claim the privilege of being distinct and adequate whose 
properties can be resolved into others whose natures are 
known 2 . Now this is only a more particular way of stating 
the general proposition that notions are clear and appro- 
priate to the objects which they represent in proportion as 
they unfold their specific properties. 

4. Double Mode of Resolving Conceptions. 
The general principles which preside over the process is 
ordinarily pointed out by the source from which bur con- 
ceptions arise, there being a wide difference between the 
determination of ideas which refer to sensible objects and 
those which represent spiritual and abstract ones. It is evi- 

1 Opera Philosophica. Erdman, p. 79. Opera Omnia Dateus, ii. 
p. i. p. 14. First published in the Acta Eruditorum, 1681. 2 If 
the elements into which an idea can be resolved are unknown, Leibnitz 
terms it inadequate. His classification will consequently stand as 
follows: 

Notion, 



Distinct. Adequate, 

Inadequate. 



C. HI. 4.] DOUBLE MODE OF BESOLYING CONCEPTIONS. 55 

dent that, with regard to objects of sense, the accuracy of 
our notions will depend much upon the results of experience ; 
while the nature of those which refer to subjects purely ab- 
stract and spiritual, must be sought from inferences struck 
out of the primordial elements of the mind. The sources of 
the first are simple facts derived from objects alien to the in- 
tellect, through the channel of sensation ; those of the second 
are pure cognitions, either intuitive or obtained by formal 
inference, from principles bound up with the nature of the 
mind itself, and forming part of its constitution. Now, the 
method of obtaining accurate conceptions of material phe- 
nomena is either by analysing or dissecting the facts to 
which they refer, and seeking to educe out of the points of 
resemblance and difference some determinate notion of their 
elementary properties ; or by forming such hypothesis as 
appear to suit the circumstances of the case, and then test- 
ing its legitimacy by using such verifications as the nature of 
the phenomena admit. The mode of gaining an adequate 
knowledge of the second is, by tracing their growth in the 
mind and fixing their accordance with the intuitive prin- 
ciples out of which they spring. 

If we confound the principles according to which each of 
these two classes of ideas are invested with distinct appro- 
priate connotative powers, our subsequent judgments are 
certain to be false in the precise proportion of their accu- 
racy ; or, in other words, we can only expect to escape from 
the consequences of the wrong conceptions we have formed 
by a counter error in contradicting or affirming them of each 
other. Thus, when Aristotle, induced by the abstract per- 
fection of circular motion was led to assert that all the 
planets moved in perfect circles, he falsely applied, without 
looking at his facts, an ideal conception to account for a cer- 
tain mode of their existence, and could only escape from the 
consequences of this misconception by mistakes in his subse- 
quent deductions ; or when Bacon restricted the summum 
bonum to the subjection of the individual will to that of the 
community 1 , he applied a principle founded upon experience, 
to explain an idea which, being purely native to the mind, 
no facts can reveal to us, and thus gave rise to a false sys- 
tem of ethics 2 . 

1 De Augmentis, b. vii. ch. 2. The utilitarian philosophy. 



56 TEEMS WITH. EEGABD TO THINGS. [fi. I. 

The application of abstract principles, whether real or 
supposititious, which cannot be brought to the touchstone of 
facts, to explain the properties of natural objects, has been 
one of the great sources of all the errors which have hitherto 
obstructed the progress of physical science. While the 
phlogistic doctrines of Becher and Stahl were assumed to 
account for all the phenomena of chemistry, no attempt was 
made to bring the objects of that science to the test of ex- 
perience, and connect them with number, weight, and 
measure. While the notion that nature abhors a vacuum 
was accepted as a perfect explanation of the rise of water by 
suction, no essay was tried to determine the properties of the 
air ; and while the geometrical conceptions falsely attributed 
to the circle were deemed sufficient to determine the relation 
of forces in the lever, the principles of mechanics could not 
assume a rational basis. 

Though the contrary error of introducing empirical prin- 
ciples into moral subjects, and of seeking to resolve happi- 
ness, integrity, and similar ideas into the results of mere 
outward experience, is less palpable, it has been at the 
bottom of all the errors connected with false systems of 
ethics, politics, and theology. Hobbes, for instance, when he 
resolved the idea of natural right into brute force, was neces- 
sarily led to frame a system of government which, if practi- 
cally carried out, would have transformed a subject into a 
slave, and a king into a despot. When Hume, in like manner 
traced all our notions of virtue and vice to the experience of 
the effects which society feels from their influence, he founded 
a system of ethics on an empirical principle, which completely 
subverted the moral nature of actions, and made adultery in- 
trinsically as innocent as going to church. Machiavelli 
could not restrict himself exclusively to the past in drawing 
out fundamental maxims of political wisdom, without im- 
pugning some of the plainest instincts of justice ; nor could 
Mahomet, or any of the Grecian seers, frame a system of 
religion to flatter the results of man's sensible experience, 
without introducing depravity into Olympus, and making its 
denizens the mere roues of pleasure 1 . It is obvious that 

1 Thus Plato's doctrine of ideas, as an Oxford logician (Mr. Karslake) 
correctly remarks, is perfectly true on the side of moral truth, but he 
unhappily extended his doctrine to truth at large, and hence all the 



C. HI. 4.] CONSEQUENCE OF EBBOKEOUS METHODS. 57 

the greater part of the conceptions to which these subjects 
relate being written on the heart of man, cannot possibly be 
ultimately based on experience, and to attempt exclusively to 
extract them from the latter source while we leave their true 
fountain unsealed, tends to disenchant man of his high con- 
ceptions, and, even when not practically carried out, to lower 
art, and in a proportionate degree to degrade his being 1 . 

Conceptions, when so applied to unfold the properties of 
objects which exist in an entirely different sphere, may be 
properly denominated false ; but there is a class which, 
though as fruitful in erroneous judgments as the ones to 
which we have adverted, arises from a superficial examination 
of the properties they would connote. Thus Aristotle, when 
examining the subject of motion, for once drew his attention 
from abstract principles to concentrate it on the facts he 
sought to explain ; and perceiving that bodies fell to the 
ground as it were spontaneously, and that flame appeared to 
ascend, and bubbles of air to arise in water by the same 
means, he called such motions natural, as they all seemed to 
arise from a spontaneous movement of each body towards its 
own place, in order to mingle with their kindred element : 
while other motions never occurred without the impress of 
an external force, and when reluctantly set in action always 
manifested a disposition to cease. On comparing these motions 
with each other, he found they also agreed in one property 
quite opposite to the former viz., that of motion from their 
own place ; and denominating the latter violent in contradis- 
tinction to the former, he flattered himself he had rendered 
a complete and satisfactory account of the matter. Now had 
Aristotle only extended his list of motions apparently spon- 
taneous, to include that of the earth and the planets ; or to 
that of a fog rising from a lake when the motion takes place 

empiricists were ui arms against him ; while Aristotle's doctrine of 
the experiential origin of every idea was perfectly true of the physical 
sphere ; since there is no idea of man in our mind beyond what is ob- 
tained by abstraction and generalisation from external nature. But 
he extended his doctrine to universal truth, and denied that goodness or 
virtue was an idea in any other sense than a generalisation from past 
experience, and hence the outcry against him of all who were anxious 
for the immutability of moral truth. > The general methods and 

rules for developing these two classes of conceptions will be given in 
the fourth book. See Analysis and Synthesis. 



58 TERMS WITH REGARD TO THINGS. [B. I. 

in a contrary direction to what his theory would indicate; 
and had he submitted his instances of spontaneous motion to 
minuter examinations, and discovered that many like the 
bubbles of air, for instance did not rise of their own accord, 
but impelled by the force of the stronger element with which 
they were in contact ; he would also have discovered that his 
terms natural and violent only connoted a superficial sem- 
blance of agreement, and must therefore be deemed inac- 
curate. 

5. Tests of Accurate Conceptions. 

Even in the rigid analysis of phenomena with a view to 
the formation of distinct and adequate conceptions, we may 
fail to attain our object by relying too exclusively either 
upon sensation or the spontaneous processes of reason. In 
the latter case we must cross-examine our consciousness, 
view the objects which it presents us with in every light, 
connect them in gradual sequence with higher truths, test 
their accuracy by multiplied and diverging threads of argu- 
ment, and, in all cases where such a procedure is possible, 
verify them by a direct appeal to facts. We must appeal, 
in the former, from sensation in its causes, set one sense 
against the other, and bring their testimony, in all cases 
where it is feasible, to the test of accurate measurements 
and quantitative laws. If we referred, like Lord Bacon 1 , 
only to sensation as an indication of the presence of heat, 
we should be greatly deceived, since many of those things 
which excite in our organs, and especially of those of taste, 
a sensation of heat, owe this property to chemical stimu- 
lants, and not at all to their being hot. Again, there are a 
number of sensations, which, by a wise arrangement of Pro- 
vidence, are made to refer their seat of action from the mind 
to the parts of the body where they first occur, though the 
contrary is the fact. Thus, for instance, the painful sen- 
sation we experience in the hand or the foot, when fire or 
steel lacerates them, is nothing else than a feeling of aversion 
which the mind conceives at some movement in those parts, 
contrary to the natural constitution of the body. The con- 

1 NOT. Org. b. ii. table 2 (29, 30), &c. 



C. III. 5.] OBSERVATION AND EXPERIMENT. 59 

ception of colour, as something inherent in an object, like its 
weight, hardness, &c., so that it would be impossible to see 
the object apart from its colour when nothing intervenes 
between the eyes, and it seems perfectly rational and obvious 
by the evidence of vision ; yet we need only expose the 
object in a dark room to the different coloured prismatic 
rays, to invest it with any particular colour we please, and 
thus convict sight on its own evidence. 

It was mainly to the want of a knowledge of experiment 
as an assistant to the analysis of natural phenomena that the 
ancients failed to obtain that command of clear and appro- 
priate conceptions which have led to the formation of the 
physical sciences, and marked the successive stages of their 
growth. They failed to discover the laws of mechanics, 
because they had no clear ideas of pressure, resistance, 
momentum, and uniform and accelerating force ; but the 
absence of such conceptions must be attributed to their 
slight of experiment, or their neglect to trace the principles 
of equilibrium and motion, by producing those phenomena 
under circumstances of sufficient variety to reveal their laws. 
In like manner the tardy development of optics, electricity, 
magnetism, mineralogy, and the higher generalisations of 
chemistry, may be ascribed to the absence of any concep- 
tion of polarity, men contenting themselves with expressing 
wonder at what they deemed capricious freaks of Nature's 
workmanship, instead of ransacking her laboratory with a 
view to discover kindred phenomena, and to bind them up 
in one conception, which should connote their peculiar pro- 
perties, and serve as a new kind of intellectual sense in 
leading to more wonderful discoveries. 

It may, however, be observed, that it is not essential to 
the clearness of a conception that we should know all the 
properties of the things we class together. That would be, 
as Stuart Mill correctly observes, to have our conceptions of 
the class complete as well as clear. It is sufficient if we 
never use a conception without having ascertained what 
attributes it is intended to connote, and in virtue of what 
properties its component parts are bound together. For 
the rest, if we never strain a conception to mean more than 
our knowledge of the properties which it connotes implies, 
OP introduce it into a sphere foreign to its application ; if we 



60 TEEMS IN RELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

reject all those which are too vague and indefinite to admit 
of determinate extension and intension, and endeavour by a 
strict analysis, pursued in the spirit we have pointed out, to 
invest those which only are distinct enough to bear a logical 
determination with a distinct connotative character 1 , our 
progress may be slow, but the ends of logic will be gained, 
in securing the preliminary operations of reasoning from 
error. 

CHAPTEE IV. 

CONCEPTIONS IN EELATION TO SIGNS. 

1. Use of Language in Logic. 

THOUGH our ideas are mainly acquired though the medium 
of sensation and reflection, we should find ourselves at a loss 
to preserve the more general and complex ones in a perma- 
nent form, or to convey them to others, without assigning^to 
each a peculiar mark or name by which it might be distin- 
guished. With regard, indeed, to individual objects which 
have no connotative meaning, or those whose properties are 
bound up with sensible objects, and depend on no abstract- 
ing faculty for their formation, verbal signs would be hardly 
necessary to this end, inasmuch as the appearance of the 
objects themselves would awaken their respective ideas in 
the mind; yet even in these instances, which comprise a 
very small class of the conceptions employed in ordinary 
language, a sign is imperatively necessary to recal the idea, 
in the absence of its object to the mind of others, and to 
reason about it in conjunction with those of purely abstract 
formation in our own. 

1 The words in the text have reference to the double capacity of 
conceptions, which have been called by Sir W. Hamilton the cardinal 
point of logic. They may be expressed as follows : 

A conception viewed as a 

logical whole, metaphysical whole, 

has has 

extension, intension or comprehension, 

breadth, depth, 

sphere, matter, 

objects, marks, 

power to denote. power to connote. 



C. IV. 2.] FUNCTIONS OF LANGUAGE. 61 

The importance of language, however, as an instrument 
of thought, rises in proportion to the degree of abstracting 
power with which each individual is invested ; savage tribes 
and semi-civilised people requiring it very little, while nations 
of any pretension to refinement find its application on an 
extensive scale essential at every step, not only as a means 
of intellectual progress, but to maintain them in their actual 
position. Barbarous tribes, and even a large mass of the un- 
educated people of civilised communities, seldom lift them- 
selves above individual objects, and in their inferences com- 
monly creep along the ground of particulars. Hence, in 
their reasoning, nothing is required unless association to 
suggest ideas and sense to perceive their congruity or dis- 
agreement ; a mode of inference of which brutes are capable, 
though in a less degree. But with men who deal in large 
generalisations, language is peremptorily required to fix the 
complex ideas to which their minds have attained in com- 
paring classes of particular truths, and to enable them, by 
combining a wide range of properties in one expression, to 
start anew from groups of comprehensive details, as if they 
were so many particular facts, in order to reach still more 
extensive generalisations. 

2. Errors to which the Formation of General Terms are 
liable. 

But if language is thus essential to scientific reasoning, 
in clenching the results of the mind's abstracting power, it 
must be said to accomplish this at no ordinary sacrifice, since 
it introduces into the sphere of its operations all the confu- 
sion to which vulgar conceptions, the caprices of custom, and 
the revolutions of the outer world, give rise. Unless in 
matters of physical science, where the formation of general 
terms is exclusively in the hands of professional guides, such 
names generally owe their origin to the vulgar, who, struck 
with a confused feeling of resemblance between several 
objects, combine them in one expression, without exactly 
knowing the common properties which their appellation is 
designed to connote. Take the word civilised, for instance. 
Having observed that men who live in cities agree in the 
possession of certain marks of refinement which the denizens 



62 TEBM8 IN BELATION TO SIGNS. [fi. I. 

of forests do not manifest, they call the former civilised, 
though without knowing exactly in what the essential mean- 
ing of the word consists, or the number of properties which 
is required to justify its application. Hence no two persons, 
even among the most educated, would be found to agree in 
determining the limits of this word, or its abstract civilisa- 
tion, and when it is predicated of anything no other person 
knows, and even the speaker himself is ignorant of the pre- 
cise objects he means to assert. Every person need only 
examine the vocabulary of general names he is in the habit 
of using, as beauty, greatness, honour, and gentleman, to 
discover a host of others which exemplify this uncertainty in 
a still more striking manner. 

Even with names whose connotation is less exposed to 
cavil, being determined with precision by men of accurate 
habits of thought, or marked out by our common instincts, 
much confusion may originate by the fluctuations of belief 
and opinion, which fling the mind upon new modes of thought, 
and unfix its old creations. The word piety was doubtless 
applied by the ancients to denote that class of actions which 
took place in conformity with the moral law, and the pre- 
scribed usages of their religion. With Christians, a stigma 
would be fixed on the majority of cases to which they applied 
the name. The same term in the writings of a Pagan phi- 
losopher we could hardly take upon ourselves to determine 
until we knew the school to which he belonged ; while the 
sense which the modern divine attaches to it agrees with 
none of those schools, and the meaning this word bore in the 
mouth of French society at the close of the eighteenth 
century conflicts with all. 

"When such names become connected with philosophical 
doctrines or habits of belief which men choose to uphold as 
the fundaments of truth or the arbiters of their destinies, the 
contests to which they either give rise or serve to aggravate 
are innumerable, and become too much interwoven with the 
feelings to be settled by the rules of the mere logician. What 
acrimonious disputes have arisen among modern polemics 
about the respective merits of faith and works, which, had 
they only reflected that the scholastic theology employed the 
former term only to express a simple act of belief, would 
never have taken place. Some controversialists, seeking to 
resolve such disputes by having recourse to the derivation of 



C. IT. 3.] TEANSFOBMATIOK OF TEEMS. 63 

the word, regard a bishop as a sort of moral inspector, be- 
cause the original Greek word fnia-Ko\os signifies to over- 
look. They might as well call a policeman an apostle, because 
he is sent forth (aTroo-reAAeti'), or the church an assembly of 
democrats, because exXijo-ta was used by the Greeks to de- 
signate a popular meeting. 

3. Confusion arising from the Transitive Application of 
Words. 

It is one great law of association of ideas that leads man- 
kind to fix the same term to a congeries of objects, some of 
which have nothing in common, though they may be con- 
nected by a confused feeling of resemblance in the interme- 
diate links which led to the adoption of a common term. 
Thus, as Dugald Stewart observes, if we allow A, B, C, D, E, 
to denote a group of objects, in which A possesses some 
quality in common with B, and B a quality in common with 
C, and C with D, &c., while no quality can be found in com- 
mon with any three objects in the series ; the affinity between 
A and B may produce a transfer of the name of the first to 
the second ; and that in consequence of the other affinities 
which connect the remaining objects together, the same name 
may pass in succession, though the intermediate links from 
A to E, and a common appellation be affixed to both of those 
objects, though they may widely differ in their nature and 
have not one property in common. When the association is 
slight and casual the several meanings will remain distinct 
from each other, and assume, in process of time, the appear- 
ance of capricious varieties in the use of the same arbitrary 
sign ; but where the association is so natural as to become 
virtually indissoluble, these transitive meanings will coalesce 
in one complex conception, and every new transition will be- 
come a more comprehensive generalisation of the term in 
question 1 . 

This law, in its last result, has been the source of infinite 
confusion in reasoning, since it generally gave rise to the be- 
lief that the general name thus established connoted a com- 
mon property among the objects it designated, and led grave 
philosophers into the chimerical search of finding it out. The 
endeavours of Plato to abstract the essential properties of the 

1 Philosophical Essays, 226, 27. 



64 TEEMS IN EELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

good, the fit, the becoming, from a crowd of dissimilar objects, 
though furnishing perfect examples of the preliminary pro- 
cess to induction, was really so much heating of the air, since 
the phenomena whose common properties he attempted to 
discover had really no common properties at all ; and Aris- 
totle's attempt to trace the common idea, which in the case 
of any effect belongs to the efficient, to the matter, to the 
form and to the end, with Bacon's inquisition into the nature 
of heat, must be placed in the same category. In each of 
these cases the above philosophers, led astray by the confused 
generalisations of the vulgar, which they unsuspectingly ac- 
cepted as something real, wasted an infinity of sober calcu- 
lation to reach a definition which should serve for several 
distinct meanings at once, and classify objects which had no 
property in common. 

4. Twofold Law of the Transformation of Names. 

But in a greater degree than mental law, custom is a great 
arbiter of language, and tends to confuse the ideas they de- 
note, either by completely changing the signification of 
words, or widening and contracting their logical or meta- 
physical sphere. The first case may be exemplified in the 
word Pagan, originally equivalent to a villager*, but which,, 
from having been used in the fourth century of the Christian 
era to denote the country-people among whom the old my- 
thology still lingered, came gradually to suggest the idea of 
a worshipper of the old divinities, until the additional pecu- 
liarity of their residence being also wiped out, the term sug- 
gested nothing else. In the same manner villain, which in 
the middle ages signified a serf of the soil, came to imply, 
after serfdom had been abolished, all the hateful qualities of 
crime and guilt by which many of that class had been distin- 
guished. 

These cases, however, are extreme instances of a move- 
ment of generalisation continually going on in language, and 
are not likely, when the new meaning is completely evolved, 
to generate confusion ; it is only in the transition state, 
when two or three distinct conceptions are floating about 
a name, or when words are extended to fresh classes of objects 

1 From the word pagus, a village. 



C. IV. 5.] LOGICAL DEFINITION. 65 

without sufficient discrimination between the old connota- 
tion and the new cases to which they begin to apply, that 
any error is to be dreaded. The phrase landed proprietor, 
for instance, with the first English conquerors of our East 
Indian settlement, would have led to no error had it recast 
its connotation at the same time that it extended its sphere. 
It was the application of the term in its old signification to 
fresh cases, which the framers of that signification had never 
contemplated, that led the conquerors of Bengal, by con- 
founding limited with absolute rights, to drive whole classes 
of men to ruin and despair, to fill the country with banditti, 
and to produce, with the very best intentions, the disorgani- 
sation of the country. 

A counter movement to the generalisation which custom 
produces in language, may be witnessed in such terms as 
loyalty, when the original meaning becomes specialised. 
That word was accustomed to signify fair, open dealing, as it 
indeed still means in French, whence it was imported ; 
whereas it is now restricted to the single case of fidelity to 
the throne. This tendency to use general words in a re- 
stricted sense is much increased as civilisation advances, 
owing principally to the growing habit the refined manifest 
to keep the disagreeable aspect of things as much out of sight 
as possible, and to speak of objects which give rise to any 
unseemly ideas, so as to convey the faintest suggestion of 
their characteristic qualities. The effect, however, of this 
law is not so much to unfit a language for the purposes of 
accurate discrimination, as to render its general terms un- 
steady exponents of their old meanings, and to leave the par- 
ticular ones whose places they have invaded to fall into 
desuetude and decay. 

5. Logical Definition. 

To remedy the errors to which the mind is exposed from 
the fluctuations of language, as also more distinctly to realise 
and determine the nature of its conceptions, recourse is had 
to definition that is, a mode of laying down their exact 
boundaries, and marking each by so essential a feature of its 
nature as shall imply all the properties it connotes. The 
logical rule for this purpose is to express the object whose 



66 TEEMS IN RELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

definition is sought in terms of its proximate genus and 
difference. Every conception capable of entering the mind 
Aristotle 1 , as we hare seen, ranged under the head of one of 
his ten categories, and when he wished to hunt out, as 
he called it, the essential nature, or, according to Albertus 
Magnus, the quiditas of a thing, the enunciation of whose 
nature constituted its definition, he divided the head of the 
category in which it was included into its subaltern genera 
until he reached the one under which the object before him 
was contained, and this last genus, along with the specific 
difference by which it was divided, constituted its logical 
definition. Thus the definition of triangle is obtained by 
the subdivision of quality into its four kinds, including 
figure, and figure into its various kinds, including plane recti- 
lineal, the last of which is the proximate genus, as the 
triangle constitutes one of its species, with the distin- 
guishing difference of three sides. "We need not, however, 
follow so circuitous a route, as a very slight knowledge of 
the subject, with moderate habits of generalisation, will be 
sufficient to suggest the proximate genus without the inter- 
vention of a category. 

It happens, in the majority of cases, that the distin- 
guishing difference may be selected from a variety of 
properties, each equally essential to a proper conception of 
the object ; as in the triangle, the attribute of its three 
angles being equal to two right angles is of no less im- 
portance than its possession of three sides ; yet there is one 
of these properties generally which strikes us as more pro- 
minent than the rest, or which is more important in re- 
ference to the end we have in view, and this, consequently, 
ought to constitute the differentia in our definition. It is 
always essential, however, to the greater accuracy of our 
conception that we steadily keep the distinction between pro- 
perty and differentia in view, and do not employ an attribute 
which is virtually implied i. e. easily deducible from others 
of superior importance. That property ought to be selected 
as the differentia out of which all the others can be the most 
easily evolved. Another caution to be observed is that 
the genus do not enter into i. e. constitute a part of the 

1 Anal. Post. ch. 13. Pacian's division. 



C. IV. 5.] LOGICAL DEFINITION. 67 

difference 1 . In some cases, however, this blending is un- 
avoidable ; as in the definition of curved and right lines, the 
idea of rectitude and crookedness which form their specific 
difference cannot be viewed apart from length, which consti- 
tutes their genus. 

The great end of logical definition appears to be to unfold 
the nature of a thing in as few words as possible, that the 
notion may be clearly seized by the mind, and no entrance 
given to words which admit of doubt or cavil. If properties 
which are virtually implied in the specific difference were 
expressly associated with it in the definition, it is clear this 
object would not be gained, the mind being liable to view 
the two properties as separable 2 . Thus, to define a parallelo- 
gram, as a four-sided figure whose opposite sides are parallel 
and equal, might lead the mind to suppose that there may 
be a four-sided figure whose opposite sides are parallel, but 
not equal. For the mention of any circumstance introduced 
into the statement of a definition or of a precept, is to be 
presumed so necessary to be inserted that the definition or 
precept would not attach if this were absent. If we were 
told that some celestial phenomena could not be seen by 
the naked eye, it would be inferred that it might be visible 
through a telescope, just as it has been concluded from 
St. Paul's injunction, " Let a bishop be a man of one wife," 
that the laity might have two. 

The proximate genus is laid down as an essential part of 
this kind of definition, since, if a genu& more remote was 
taken, the definition would be too extensive i. e. include 
more than its object. Thus, to define fish as an animal 
which lives in water, would include under that name all the 
insects who live in the same element. In like manner, the 
definition would be inadequate, if an accidental property was 
taken for the specific difference. For instance, if we were 
to define fish as an animal which has an air-bladder, the 
definition would be too narrow, since there are many fish 
without any. 

1 Galluppi's Lczioni di Logica, 22, p. 168. 2 Wolf has very 

property said, "In definitione ermraerare debent notae nee plures, nee 
pauciores quam quae ad rem clefinitem agnoscendam et ab aliis dis- 
tingueudam sufficiunt." 15. 

F 2 



68 TEEMS IN RELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

It is clear that individual terms are not capable of strict 
logical definition, though they may be distinguished with 
sufficient accuracy from others by an analogous process. 
Thus to describe a rosadendron, we take the peculiar pro- 
perties of its petals as its specific difference, while we assume 
the species flower as its genus. There are also a large class 
of simple terras, merely used in a denotative character: to 
define these in terms clearer than their own would be im- 
possible, and hence they are accepted by all as perfect ex- 
ponents of their own meaning 1 . This is according to the 
nature of the case ; for if we attempted to define every 
word, it is clear that, in many instances, the thing defined must 
enter into the definition, since it would be impossible to 
commence the task without assuming some words in our 
first definitions as already sufficiently clear ; nor could we 
close it without defining the words so assumed in terms 
of the definitions which they had contributed to establish. 
In every instance, however, in which this occurred, our 
definition would be a nullity. To say a circle is a circular 
figure, is really to say nothing. Hence Locke cautions us 
against using words in our definitions which are synonymous 
with the thing defined 2 . Wolf calls this the vicious circle 
of definitions, and cites as an instance of it the definition of 
a day as a part of time made up of twenty-four hours. 



6. Definition how far Real. 

If we consider with Locke 3 the real essence of a thing 
that by which it is constituted what it is ; or that one 
quality if there be such upon which all its other qualities 
depend, it is evident no definition that we can frame of any- 
thing existing external to us can be accepted as unfolding 
the real essence of its subject, but only what is commonlv 
termed the nominal essence, viz., that by which the miud 
conceives it to be what it is. But as the ideal nature of 
a thing is identical with its real nature in all conceptions 

1 Descartes' Principes de Philos. 4, x. Wolf, however, together with 
Baumerster, attempted to define existence, but only succeeded in 
darkening the meaning of the word. - B. 3, c. 4, 6. 3 B. 3, 

c. 3, 15. Yet in b. 3, c. v. he restricts his meaning to the essence of 
simple ideas and those of substances, and allowed the names of mixed 
modes and artificial things to signify the real essences of their species. 



C. IT. 7.] DEAL AND NOMINAL ESSENCES. 69 

which are purely of the mind's creation ; to define these in 
terms of their real essence, we need only assign to them 
those attributes which led the mind to erect them into 
distinct conceptions. In mathematics for instance, every 
definition will imply all the properties that belong to the 
thing defined, since they entered into the mind's conception 
of it ; and in morals, where any partial ideas are bound up 
into a complex one, as in parricide, incest, sacrilege, &c., the 
mind will at once recal the ideal attributes which led to its 
formation as constituting its real definition, little solicitous 
whether such entities have existed or are ever destined to 
exist in nature. 

It is very important, however, to observe, that this ques- 
tion cannot be so summarily disposed of as Locke ima- 
gined, since that can hardly be called an ideal definition 
which has its roots in the nature of objective realities, and 
is determined by their complexion. If it does not unfold the 
entire nature of the thing, or in other words, leaves out even 
of its implied statement many properties which are involved 
in its existence, it at all events suggests a portion of such 
nature, and, pro tanto, is real. The condition that the defini- 
tion express that quality of the object on which all its other 
properties depend in order to be real, is wholly hypothetical, 
since no person can undertake to say whether such property 
exist: and to postulate an imaginary essence as essential 
to unfolding the real nature of a thing, is very much like 
proving what is by something which is not. In many cases 
the absence of such all-embracing quality can be fully shown 
without affecting the real nature of the definition, as in those 
instances which refer to the actions of things rather than 
to their constitutive properties. For example, when examin- 
ing the nature of motions produced by gravity it was found 
that their uniformity was the result of the ratio of the velo- 
city to the time elapsed, these co-ordinate attributes were 
allowed to constitute the real definition of uniform motion, 
though they fail to express its entire nature, and lead to no 
derivative properties. 

7. Scientific Definition. 

Clear definitions of the last kind are of immense scientific 
importance, inasmuch as the quick progress of physical 
knowledge in modern times may be ascribed to the results to 



70 TEEMS IN DELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

which they have conducted, and is involved in the process 
of their formation. Hence, the establishment of scientific 
definition is the reverse of that laid down by Aristotle, 
beginning with the most scrupulous examination of the ele- 
ments of the objects to be defined, and endeavouring to 
arrive at their exact nature by subjecting it to every combi- 
nation that experiment can devise. The phenomena, among 
which the elements of the object is to be sought, will of 
course be pointed out by the nature of the question in- 
volved, as Aristotle's genus and differentia were hunted out 
from their corresponding category ; but these elements, de- 
pending on the laws of physical substances, can only be 
selected through the medium of observation and comparison, 
For example, the inquiry concerning the law of falling bodies 
led to the question, whether the proper definition of a uni- 
form force is proportional to the space from rest, or to the 
time. Taking it for granted, what indeed had been fully 
proved, that gravity was a uniform force, the results of ob- 
servation collected from a series of experiments, being sub- 
jected to the test of calculation, showed that the ratio of the 
velocity was to the time elapsed. In like manner, when it 
was observed, in the case of two bodies infringing upon each 
other, that the momentum lost by the one is equal to that 
gained by the other, the question naturally arose what is that 
of which a body when it sets another body in motion loses 
exactly as much as it communicates ? And when experiment 
had shown that this something was the product of the 
velocity of the body by its mass, or its quantity of matter, 
this became the definition of momentum. 

The establishment of scientific definition, therefore, is part 
of the business of discovery, and requires for its accomplish- 
ment no small portion of that sagacity by which truth is de- 
tected ; whereas logical definition in all cases, where it is not 
hypothetical, has really no other aim than to demonstrate 
truth when discovered, in placing the essential nature of one 
of the terms out of which it is to be evolved clearly before the 
eye. In moral speculations, indeed, when we arrive at 
truths unknown before, by grave deduction from principles 
independent of experience, it is quite possible, and in most 
cases expedient, to establish our definitions according to the 
Aristotelian rule ; but where the laws of physical nature are 



C. IT. 8.] WHAT DEFINITIONS PEOYISIONAI. 71 

concerned, it is clearly absurd to attempt to frame our ideas 
of the objects they involve by any other method than that of 
registering their principal properties as observation and com- 
parison point them out. In this way many of our defi- 
nitions will be necessarily progressive and provisional ; ex- 
tending their connotation as the progress of discovery throws 
additional light upon the intrinsic nature of the object they 
design to unfold ; they will nevertheless be clear and explicit 
in drawing a boundary between the light and dark side of a 
subject, and excite inquiry by placing the mind directly in 
front of the unknown 1 . 

8. Nominal Definition. 

Up to this point, all our remarks refer to those defi- 
nitions which concern things. There are, however, a dif- 
ferent class, which arise from giving a settled meaning 
to names otherwise vague and uncertain in their conno- 
tation, with a view to exclude any ambiguity from phrases 
in which they may happen to be employed. Such definitions 
are called nominal, or definitions of names 2 . For instance, 
the word spirit occurs in dispute, and introduces the usual 
half-a-dozen meanings that commonly cluster round it. "We 
ought in that case, with a view to avoid anything like 
equivocation, to restrict the word to some one of these signi- 
fications, or if none of the attributes formerly assigned to 
it convey our sense, to invest it with a new signification. 

1 Aristotle being entirely unacquainted with the modern method of 
discovery, had no distinct conception of the kind of definition it em- 
ployed. Whenever he departs from his own method, it is only to en- 
tangle himself in vague metaphysical distinctions and imaginary 
assumptions ; as an instance of which, we may take his definition of 
motion the act of a being in power, inasmuch as it is in power ; and 
of light the act or energy of a transparent body, inasmuch as it is 
transparent. In these cases, he first assumed the motion of body or 
being, then that of act and potentiality, and refused to consider nature 
unless under these two arbitrary assumptions. 2 Archbishop 

Whately seems to confound them with the etymological explana- 
tion of a word which may be found in a dictionary. Logic, b. ii. 
C. v. 6. But there is a wide difference between nominal defini- 
tions and the meaning arising from the conventionalities of a lan- 
guage. _In the first case we define a word arbitrarily, in order that 
our conceptions may be clearly communicated to others ; in the latter 
we adhere to that signification which is attached to it by the common 
usage of society. 



72 TEEMS IN BELATION TO SIGNS. [B. I. 

The meaning thence arising in either of these cases would 
constitute the nominal definition of spirit. 

Such definitions are clearly distinguishable in many re- 
spects from the definitions of things, though each come 
under the common classification, and are subject to the same 
rules and exposition. For a word being a sound to which 
we may attach any signification we please, provided we ap- 
prise others of our intention, a nominal definition cannot be 
contested, but must be taken as a principle ; but definitions 
of things may be contested by those who deem them false, 
and cannot be assumed as principles until they are fully 
demonstrated unless, indeed, they are evident of themselves 
as axioms. We are not, however, to infer anything more 
from a nominal definition than the idea which we have at- 
tached to the name ; or believe that, because we have given 
the name a definite meaning, that it must signify something 
real. For example, if any one call heaviness the inward 
principle which makes a stone fall without being impelled by 
anything, though we cannot contest the definition, since it 
merely enables us to understand what he wishes to say, we 
ought not to admit that to be anything real which he means 
by the word heaviness, because there is no such principle in 
stones. 

As a further instance of nominal definition, may be ad- 
duced the apparent discrepancy between the meaning of the 
term idea as taken in the Peripatetic, Cartesian, and Lockian 
schools. The first maintained that all ideas were false ; the 
second that all ideas were true ; and the third, that ideas 
were neither true or false. Which opinions, though their ap- 
parent antagonism is apt to set precipitate people by the ears, 
are really all correct, since the relation of ideas to outward 
realities are assumed by each in opposite senses. For Aris- 
totle, taking the word idea as synonymous with the sensible 
image which the exterior object, through the medium of the 
senses, conveys to the mind, maintained that such idea was 
false because it did not represent the object as it really 
existed in nature. Thus the visual impression we receive of 
the stars is that of " small patens of bright gold," and not 
suns or worlds, as science demonstrates them to be. But Des- 
cartes applied the term ideas to the reflection of the sensible 
image in the mind ; and, consequently, asserted their truth, 



' C. IT. 8.] NOMINAL DEFINITIONS. 73 

on the ground that they correctly represented things as they 
appeared to us a doctrine of course which no peripatetic 
could dispute. "While Locke, using the term idea to denote 
the mere presence of an object in the mind, asserted it could 
not be either true or false until we expressed some judgment 
concerning it ; and then the truth or falsity would not enter 
into the idea, but into the nature of the inference of which 
we had made it the subject an opinion which we opine 
neither Aristotle or Descartes would be inclined to quarrel 
with. 

The neglect of nominal definition, when names are liable to be 
taken in a variety of senses, occasions interminable disputes, 
and leads men, by confounding what is clear and true in con- 
fused ideas with- what is false and obscure, into very decep- 
tive errors. Thus philosophers formerly associating the word 
fire with heat, and stone with heaviness, believed that nothing 
could be clearer than that the former was hot and the latter 
heavy, without in the least imagining that these two judg- 
ments might be false in one sense and true in another. If 
they signified by heat simply that which really produces the 
sensation of heat in us, and by heavy that which falls to the 
ground when nothing upholds it, the assertion evidently 
would be accurate; but if they understood by heat that 
which is the cause of that sensation, whatever it be, within 
us, and by weight that which has in itself a principle which 
makes it fall towards the centre of the earth without being 
impelled by anything, it is evident that neither proposition 
would agree with facts. 

It is also a very common practice, and perhaps by none 
more assiduously followed than by Aristotle and the scho- 
lastics, to confound the definition of things with the de- 
finition of names, and to invest the former with that un- 
contested character which can only belong to the latter. 
For example, when the peripatetics defined that quality in a 
concave mirror which burns wood, when applied to the sun- 
beam, to be an ustorious principle arising from its substantial 
form ; and insisted upon the acceptance of this definition as 
a satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon in question ; 
or when they referred the hardness, colour, heat, and other 
properties of bodies to certain occult qualities, in virtue of 
which they are as they are, and beyond which it is useless to 



74 PBOPOSITIONS. [B. n. 

inquire further, they palmed bad nominal definitions, con- 
veying no meaning of a positive character, upon their age 
as correct exponents of natural facts ; and succeeded, ridi- 
culous as it may appear, in passing on these deceptions 
through numerous generations, by assuming the tone of 
men who had nothing to learn, and pretending to treat 
those who denied such principles as men who were not 
worth disputing with 1 . 



BOOK II. 

PROPOSITIONS. PBOEMTU1L 

CONCEPTIONS of themselves imply nothing, beyond the 
fact of consciousness. It is only by comparing them toge- 
ther, with a view to their mutual agreement or exclusion, 
that we obtain knowledge ; and the sentence by which this 
act of the mind is enounced, is called a proposition. Hence a 
proposition may be defined to be an indicative sentence, that is, 
a sentence affirming or denying, the adjective being accessory, 
as differentia, to exclude questions and commands, which are 
also sentences, but unaccompanied by any act of judgment. 
In whatever order the two terms which constitute the matter 
of a proposition stand, that which we afiirm is called the 
attribute or predicate, and that of which we affirm, the sub- 
ject 2 . The verb which connects them is called the copula. 

It is hardly for us to inquire into the nature of the 

1 Definitions are commonly divided by logicians into other classes, 
such as accidental, which denotes one in which the differentia is an 
accident, not an essential property of the subject, as a man is an 
animal who sows wheat and plants vines : and physical, in which 
the object is simply divided into its natural parts as, Britons 
are those who dwell in England, Scotland, or Wales. But we 
need not trouble the student with a host of distinctions, which owe 
their rise to scholastic trifling. 2 If the student will remember 

that what we affirm is the attribute of every proposition, and that 
of which we affirm, the subject, he can never be at a loss to dis- 
tinguish these two terms in any proposition, no matter however 
complex, or in whatever order its members may be found. For 
example, in the proposition, "It is disgraceful to obey one's pas- 
sions ;" it is clear from the sense that to obey one's passions is 
the subject, since we affirm of it the term disgraceful. Of a simi- 
lar kind are such propositions: It is foolish to listen to flatterers. 
It is hail which falls. Propositions, however, may be blended with 



B. II.] SUBJECT A1TD ATTBIBTTTE. 75 

mental phenomena which constitute judgment ; whether it 
consists, as the conceptualists say, in the expression of a 
relation between two ideas, or according to the doctrine of 
the nominalists, in the simple expression of agreement or 
disagreement between names. Such a discussion is rather 
of metaphysical than logical concernment. Though it is 
essential, as the principal at stake deeply concerns the 
theory of reasoning, that the logician should have made up 
his mind on the subject, and shape his views of the science 
in accordance with the conclusions to which he has arrived, 
that the structure may arise in harmonious consistency with 
its metaphysical foundations. 

According to the opinions to which such speculations lead, 
propositions are denominated real and verbal, identical, or 
essential and accidental, as the different relations in which 
their terms stand to each other and to their subject-matter 
determine. If the predicate assign to the subject a deter- 
minate attribute whose agreement has been ascertained from 
experience, or withhold such attribute on the same evidence, 
as : man is mortal ; a charlatan is not worthy of esteem 
all would concur in denominating such propositions real, 

matter extraneous to the mere attribution or denial of a quality with 
respect to the subject, as in the instance of active verbs, accompa- 
nied with two or more cases. Thus : God commands us to honour our 
parents. The law bids us to respect the queen : where, without 
changing the active verb into its passive, we may find it difficult to dis- 
tinguish either subject or attribute. As soon as this is done, however, 
the terms of both propositions, by the application of the test, be- 
come easily apparent, as: Our parents are to be honoured (by the 
command of God). The queen is to be respected (according to the 
injunction of the law). 

It occasionally happens that the attribute is one simple word, while 
the subject is composed of many propositions, as hi the stanza of 
Horace: 

Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis, 
Ut prisca gens mortalium ; 

Paterna rura bobus exercet suis, 

Solutus omni faenore; 

where beatus is the attribute, and all the rest the subject. We also 
sometimes meet with sentences hi which the determination of the 
predicate will depend upon the emphasis which the speaker chooses 
to lay upon a particular word. Thus: The Organon of Bacon was 
not intended to supersede the Organon of Aristotle, where at least 
six of the principal words may separately be taken as the predicate, 
according as the stress is laid upon each in the enunciation of the 
proposition. 



76 PEOPOSITIONS. [B. 11. 

though some might deny their existence 1 ; but should the 
terms simply relate to the meaning and extent of the 
words employed, and not to the things signified by them, 
as : proper names are not connotative, the resulting proposi- 
tion is verbal. In like manner, propositions may be called 
accidental, essential, or identical, according as the property 
represented by the attribute is merely an accessory of, or 
inherent in, or equivalent to, the subject 2 . 

Regarding the two terms of a proposition as expressive of 
its matter, and the act by which they are confirmed or sepa- 
rated as relating to its form, all that the logician has to advance 
upon this portion of the science may be treated under these 
two heads. The material aspect of propositions subdivides 
itself into simple and compound ; the former section branch- 
ing out into complex and incomplex, the latter into ex- 
pressed and tacit propositions. Simple complex proposi- 
tions may be subdivided into determinative and explicative ; 

1 As Hobbes, and the extreme section of the nominalists. 2 Mill 
gives a different account. According to his theory of reasoning, 
when we attribute to a subject any property which attaches to it as 
a class, we form an identical judgment ; or, in other words, we sim- 
ply affirm what is as, man is an animal ; a tree is a substance ; 
since all the properties which constitute the class make up our idea of 
each individual included, and to predicate the one of the other is 
simply tautological. To such propositions he applies the three names, 
essential, identical, and verbal, denominating those accidental and real 
which register the results of our experience. We, however, cannot see 
any ground for the distinction taken between the attribution of pro- 
perties which constitute a class, to one of the individuals included 
under it, and of those derived from experience, to a subject with whose 
nature they have never been associated. For how are classes formed 
even according to Mr. Mill's own showing if the first category of 
properties do not grow out of the second ? But surely there is nothing 
beyond a distinction of time between the attribution of a property to 
an object that has been discovered by induction, and that of a property 
which has already entered into our conception of it through the 
habit of association. Both marks may be equally essential to its 
constitution, though the former may be less prominent, and require 
something more than a superficial glance to distinguish it. The 
name identical, which Mr. Mill gives to what he calls verbal defi- 
nition, appears equally unfortunate. When a horse is said to be an 
organised being, endued with sensation, we do no infer that the predi- 
cate is coextensive with the subject, which, however, is the mark of 
identity in a proposition. Locke more correctly affirms, that all identical 
propositions are tautologous, and cites as examples those in which 
the subject and predicate are exactly equivalent to each other. 
Hum. Under, iv. viii. 4. 



JJ. II.] 



DIVISION OF PEOPOSITIONS. 



77 



expressed compounds into copulative, disjunctive, conditional, 
and causal ; and tacit compounds into exclusive, exceptional, 
and comparative. The relation of these sections will be 
sufficiently clear from the following scheme : 
Propositions with regard to their matter. 

Simple and compound 



Complex, incomplex 



Determinative, explicative. 



Expressed 



Tacit 



Copulative, disjunctive, 
conditional, and 
causal 



Exclusive, 

exceptional, and 

comparative. 



As regards their form, propositions are usually divided 
into affirmative and negative, and these, accompanied with 
two other properties of propositions, give rise to the process 
of opposition and conversion, which, as they mainly depend 
upon the form, may be treated under that head 1 . 

1 Kant's division of propositions is according to the four necessary 
forms with which a judgment must be invested, viz., quantity, quality, 
relation, and modality. With a little alteration, the scheme in the 
text might be blended with it, which would enable the student to recal 
at a glance everything important to recollect in connexion with this 
branch of logic. Thus 

'with regard to^ simple } complex 5 determinative 
relation ( explicative 

) incomplex 



compound 



expressed C categorical 
3 disjunctive 
(. conditional 



tacit 



Propositions \ with regard to } probable 
modality > contingent 
) necessary 

with regard to ") universal ^ opposition 



f exclusive 
\ exceptional 
(.comparative 



quantity > particular 
j singular 

with regard to } affirmative 

quality > negative 
. j limited 



and 
conversion 



78 PEOPOSITIONS WITH EEGAED TO MATTER. [-B. II. 

CHAPTEE I. 

PEOPOSITIONS WITH BEGAED TO MATTEE. 

1. Simple Complex and Incomplex Propositions. 



a proposition has only one subject and one attri- 
bute, it is called simple as, Mirandola was a platonist ; 
should either or both of these terms comprise more than one 
subject, or predicate, it is denominated compound as, Plato 
and Pericles were cotemporaries ; or, Sir Thomas More was 
both a judge and philosopher; Charlemagne and Alcuin 
founded schools and erected churches. There are, however, 
many propositions which embrace in reality only one subject 
and attribute, but which nevertheless appear compound, on 
account of certain incidental propositions being connected 
with one or both of the terms by who or which, whose func- 
tion is in these cases to constitute one proposition out of 
many. Thus: Alexander, who was the most generous of 
kings, conquered Darius ; or, expressing the incidental pro- 
position, as a Latin substantive in apposition Alexander, the 
most generous of kings, conquered Darius ; or, Boethius, the 
most learned man of his time, translated Aristotle. Such pro- 
positions are termed simple complex, for though the attribute, 
or subject, may embrace several propositions, they do not on 
that account lose their unity. By destroying that unity, 
however, they become compound propositions : as, Alexander 
was the most generous of kings, and the conqueror of Darius ; 
Boethius was the most learned man of his time, and the 
translator of Aristotle. 

The complexity of a proposition may fall on the subject, on 
the attribute, or on both. Thus: Every man who fears 
nothing is a king is an example of the first: Piety is a 
good which renders man happy in the greatest adversity 
is a case of the second : and The great who oppress the 
poor will be punished by Providence, who is the protector of 
the oppressed is an instance of the third. As it is a pecu- 
liarity of such propositions that they may be contradicted in 
two ways, viz., either by denying the attribute or the inci- 
dental proposition of the subject, it follows that all proposi- 



C. I. 2.] SIMPLE PBOPOSITIOKS. 79 

tions compounded of active verbs and their objects must be 
reckoned complex, since they admit of double contradiction, 
and thus imply two propositions. For example, the statement 
Brutus killed a tyrant : may be expressed, Brutus killed 
one who was a tyrant, and may be consequently contradicted 
either by denying that Brutus killed any one, or that the 
person whom he killed was a tyrant. 

2. Simple Complex Propositions. 

Incidental propositions may be annexed to a subject, either 
with a view to unfold some of its essential properties, or to 
restrict its signification. In the former case they are denomi- 
nated explicative, in the latter determinative. Thus : " Men 
who are endowed with reason are responsible beings," is a pro- 
position in which the incidental term is explicative, the feature 
of rationality being an essential part of man ; the attribute 
consequently may be considered, apart from, the incidental 
proposition, as solely referable to the subject, as, " men are 
responsible beings." But when the incidental proposition 
simply restricts the meaning of the subject, in annexing to it 
a property which is not coextensive with it, as Men who 
are pious are charitable, such incidental proposition is called 
determinative, and the attribute can no longer be considered 
as affirmed of the subject alone, but must be applied to it as 
restricted by the incidental proposition. !Por it would be 
evidently wrong to say, " men are charitable," since we know 
that a great many of them are malevolent. Hence inci- 
dental propositions which are explicative are readily dis- 
tinguished from such as are denominative, by omitting the 
part qualifying the subject. In which case, the explicative 
proposition will lose nothing of its truth ; while the deter- 
minative will imply an absurdity. 

Error is only liable to steal into incidental explicative 
propositions, since they alone affirm an attribute of the 
subject to which the relative pronoun appertains. For ex- 
ample : the proposition, " Horace "Walpole, who was the son 
of the Earl of Orford," affirms, though incidentally, that 
Horace was the son of that nobleman, and consequently, 
if it be not so, as some suspect, it states a falsehood. 
Should error, however, lurk in the incidental proposition, 
it cannot affect the truth of the principle. Thus : " Horace 



80 PBOPOSITIONS WITH BEGAHD TO MATTEE. [u. II. 

"VValpole, who was the son of the Earl of Orford, wrote the 
most delightful letters in the English language," would not 
be considered the less true if Horace was the son of another 
man. Incidental determinative propositions cannot be false, 
since they are simply applied to restrict the signification of 
the object without affirming or denying anything concerning 
it, beyond the mere assumption of their possibility. For 
example : when we say, " senators who never say or do any- 
thing by favour or party feeling," we do not say that there 
are senators who so comport themselves, though we virtually 
imply the possibility of their existence; and so far such 
propositions may be false. 

3. Compound Expressed Propositions. 

We have seen that compound propositions are distin- 
guished from simple by the plurality of one or both of their 
terms. Now, according as the composition is denoted ver- 
bally or implied, these may be denominated, expressed or 
tacit. The prior member of the division embraces copu- 
lative, causal, disjunctive, and conditional compounds. Of 
these, copulative and causal may be united under the head of 
categorical. 

As all propositions are termed categorical which affirm or 
deny anything directly of another, every simple proposition 
may rank under that head ; but the term is taken here to 
distinguish that class of compounds connected by the copu- 
lative conjunctions and and because from those which are 
hypothetical and disjunctive, with a view to trace their 
peculiar laws, and define the respective relations of each of 
these classes to one another 1 . 

Copulative compounds may comprise a plurality of sub- 

1 Dr. Whately takes categorical as opposed to compound, which he 
calls identical with hypothetical syllogisms, including under the latter 
term, conditional and disjunctive syllogisms (Logic, b. ii. c. iv. $2). 
But this is surely wrong ; for compound propositions, besides all 
simple propositions, include many which are categorical, while the 
term hypothetical is synonymous with conditional, and to substitute 
it for compound is to confound a genus with its species. Boethius, the 
first among the Latins who elaborated this part of logic, employs in- 
differently the terms hypotheticus conditionalis non simplex for the 
genus, as opposed to categoricus. See Edinburgh Review, April, 1833. 
The division of categorical into pure and modal (Logic, b. ii. c. ii. 1), 
in which the archbishop, as usual, follows Aldrich, is equally unfortu- 



C. I. 3.] COMPOUND PROPOSITIONS. 81 

jects, of attributes, or of both, and accordingly give rise to 
three corresponding kinds of propositions. Thus, the pro- 
position, death and life are in the power of the tongue, con- 
tains a plurality of subjects ; while the dicta of Horace, that 
" a well-regulated mind hopes for prosperity in adversity, and 
fears adversity in prosperity 1 ," and "neither houses, nor 
lands, nor heaps of gold and silver, can chase away fevers 
from the body, or cares from the minds of their possessors 2 ," 
comprise a plurality of attributes and a plurality of subjects 
and attributes respectively. The truth of these propositions 
depends on the truth of each of their parts ; the falsity of 
any one of which invalidates the whole. 

Copulative propositions are only considered negative when 
the negation falls on the conjunction, which may, however, 
happen in various ways, sometimes at the head of a sen- 
tence, as, " we cannot be in love and be wise 3 ;" occasionally 
in the centre, " as love and majesty do not agree together 4 ". 

Causal propositions are those which express the cause and 
effect of a thing together. For example : a stone unsus- 
tained falls, because it is heavy: such a prince was un- 
fortunate because he was born under a certain constellation. 
To be true, such propositions require the proof of three 
tilings, viz., the reality of the existence of both cause and 
effect disjointly, and then the establishment of the fact that 
the effect really follows from the cause which has been 
assigned to it. The neglect of the former of these con- 
ditions gave rise to the absurd attempt of the Royal Society 
to solve the celebrated problem of Charles II. Why does 
a fish lose its weight by being immersed in water ? Had 
the members set out with ascertaining the reality of the 

nate, since it leads the student to infer that there are pure propositions 
which are not modal, and restricts the term modality to a meaning 
which in its strict sense that word does not bear. 
Sperat infestis, metuit secundis 
Alteram sortem, bene praeparatum 
Pectus. Hor. Car. ii. 10. 
Non domus et fundus, non seris acervus et auri, 
^Egroto domini deduxit corpore febres 
Non animo curas. Hor. EpisL i. 2. 
Amare et sapere vix deis conceditur. P. Syrus, Sent. 20. 
Non bene conveniunt, nee in una sede morantur 
Majestas et amor. Ovid, Metam. ii. 846. 
O 



82 PBOPOSITIONS WITH BEGAED TO MATTER. [B. n. 

fact which Ms majesty called upon them to solve, they 
might have escaped from the absurdity of applying their 
grave powers to account for a nonentity. The falsity of a 
causal proposition may be shown by impugning either the 
reality of the effect, or its sequence from the cause. Thus, 
the statement that the change in the general climate of the 
globe is owing to the earth having cooled from a state of 
absolute fusion) may be contradicted, by proving that such 
absolute fusion could never have occurred, or was insuf- 
ficient to account for the phenomena in question. If the 
existence of the subject only be disproved, the proposition 
is simply put out of court as an assertion about nothing. 

Disjunctive propositions consist of two or more simple 
propositions, into which the disjunctive conjunctions either, 
neither, and their correlatives enter, and the force of which 
is to state an alternative. For example : " A man is either a 
fool or physician at forty ;" " women either love or hate, they 
are never indifferent 1 ;" every deliberate action is either 
good or evil. The truth of these propositions depends upon 
the necessary opposition of the parts which ought to exhaust 
the subject and admit of no medium. But as such absolute 
exhaustion is not attainable in all subjects, those disjunctives 
may be considered morally true which approximate to it. 
For instance, though the proposition, men act either from 
interest or fear, is not absolutely true, since there are some 
who act from neither of these passions, but from a consider- 
ation of their duty ; yet it may be accepted as morally cer- 
tain, because it embraces the two motives which influence 
the majority of mankind. The proposition, however, that 
every man who disobeys the law, is either ignorant of its 
existence or misconceives its import, is neither morally nor 
absolutely true, since the greater portion of defaulters in- 
fringe it through defect of will. Though the truth of one and 
only one of the members is generally implied in these propo- 
sitions, and the division is consequently reckoned exclusive, 
this, as in the instance of the proposition just cited, is by no 
means universally the case. For all men are generally im- 
pelled by interest, fear, and duty, at some time or other in 
their lives, and occasionally are influenced by the three 
motives conjointly ; so that from the affirmation of one, we 

1 Aut amat aut odit, mulier; nihil est tertium. P. Syrus, Sent. 26. 






C. I. 4.] SEDUCTION OE PROPOSITIONS. 83 

are not led, as in alternatives properly exclusive, to reject 
the other. 

Conditional propositions are those which assert the neces- 
sary dependence of one proposition on another ; for example : 
if the soul is spiritual it is indivisible. The clause which 
conveys the condition is called the antecedent, the other the 
consequent. These propositions may be true with regard to 
the necessary connexion of their parts, but false with regard 
to their matter. As : if the will of the creature is capable 
of frustrating the absolute will of God, God is not almighty. 
If the earth was not made by a wise artificer, it was either 
produced by a fortuitous concourse of atoms, or must have 
existed from eternity. Hence, in relation to the truth of this 
class of propositions, we need only examine the connexion, 
since if that be true, the sentence, so far as it is conditional, 
holds good. Though in every instance, where the depen- 
dence is established, the consequent follows from the ad- 
mission of the antecedent, the antecedent could not be 
inferred from the truth of the consequent. Thus, though 
we may say : If he be & man he is a two-footed animal, we 
cannot infer from his being a two-footed animal that he is a 
man. For the same consequent may follow from other ante- 
cedents. 

4. Seduction of Disjunctive and Conditional Propositions 
to. Categorical. 

Though the validity of these kinds of compounds can be 
sufficiently tested by the rules already given, it is sometimes 
necessary, to avoid all ambiguity in the higher processes of 
inference, to reduce them to the simpler form of categorical 
propositions. For this purpose we must consider every 
conditional proposition as a simple affirmative with the 
antecedent for its subject, and the consequent for its pre- 
dicate ; for example, " if its inhabitants are industrious 
a country is likely to prosper," is equivalent to saying that 
the case of its inhabitants being industrious is a case of a 
country being likely to prosper. No hypothetical proposi- 
tion is valid which cannot be reduced to such a form. 

This law of reduction springs from the identity of the 
logical function of categorical and conditional propositions, 

02 



84 PROPOSITIONS WITH EEGAED TO MATTEB. [B. II. 

which simply consists in affirming the invariable connexion 
between their two terms, the only difference being that in 
categoricals the terms which are generally simple declare 
that a thing or class of things has some property, while in 
conditionals, the terms which always consist of propositions 
affirm either the causal coincidence of two facts or the de- 
pendence of two truths. "When it is affirmed that all the 
tissues of the body continually decay and are reproduced, 
it is signified that wherever one of the tissues of the human 
body exist, decay and reproduction are going on ; and in like 
manner, when we assert, if the moon comes between the sun 
and the earth, the sun will be eclipsed, we mean that when 
the moon is found in that position a solar eclipse will accom- 
pany it. In both instances one thing is affirmed to be a 
concomitant of the other. In the categorical a thing has 
the mark expressed by the predicate, while in the conditional 
a fact has another fact for its mark. The formula therefore 
represented by the case, fact, or notion of this existing is a 
case, fact, or notion, of that existing is sufficient for the re- 
duction of any conditional to a categorical proposition 1 . 

Disjunctive propositions may be reduced to conditionals 
by assuming as an antecedent, the contradictory of one or 
more of its members, " thus either the earth is eternal, or 
the work of chance, or the work of an intelligent being," is 
equivalent to " if the earth be not eternal it is either the 
work of chance or the work of an intelligent being," the 
proposition in that case will nevertheless remain partly dis- 
junctive. It may, however, be divested of its hybrid cha- 
racter, and transformed into a compound categorical by 
adhering to the formula above laid down. For example : 
" The possible cases in this matter are that the earth is 
eternal, that it is the work of chance, and that it is the 
work of an intelligent being." And again, either Horace 
"Walpole is right in his historic doubts, or Richard III. was a 
monster; which proposition, categorically expressed, is, "the 
possible cases in this matter is that Horace Walpole is right 
in denying the existence of Richard III., and that of the 
monarch being a monster." 

1 Thompson's Laws of Thought, p. 169, 2nded. 



C. I. 5.] TACIT PEOPOSITIONS HOW CONTBADICTED. 85 

5. Tacit, or Implied Compound Propositions. 
These may be discussed under the head of exclusives, 
exceptional, and comparatives. Those are termed exclusives 
which indicate that the attribute agrees with one subject, 
and that it agrees with nothing else. They consequently 
contain two judgments, and are for that reason called com- 
pound. For example, the conclusion of one of Martial's 
epigrams : " The only riches which will always remain with 
you are those which you have freely given away 1 ;" and the 
apothegm, " virtue is the only true nobility 2 ." The truth of 
these propositions depends upon the agreement of the attri- 
bute with the subject, and with nothing else. Hence they 
can be contradicted in three ways, viz., either by denying the 
agreement of the attribute with the subject, or by affirming 
that it agrees with something else, or by pursuing both of 
these courses. For instance, against the expression of Mar- 
tial, it may be urged, that riches which we give away do not 
remain with us: that the riches which we keep remain 
with us as well as those which we give away: that the 
riches which we keep remain with us, and not those which 
we give away. In like manner the celebrated maxim of 
the academics, " that it is certain that there is nothing 
certain," which affords another instance of an exclusive 
proposition, was differently contradicted according to the 
opinions of the sects who opposed it. For the Dogma- 
tists maintained that it was doubly false, since in the first 
place if it could be affirmed that nothing was certain, at 
least the act of the mind by which that judgment was pro- 
nounced was certain ; and in the second place they main- 
tained that many other things could be known with the ut- 
most certainty. The Pyrrhonists said the proposition was 
false for a contrary reason, viz., that everything was so 
uncertain that it was even doubtful whether there tras 
nothing certain 8 . 

Exceptives are only another kind of exclusives, in which, in- 
stead of affirming the attribute of the subject alone, we deny 

Ep. B. v. Ep. 43 



1 Quaa dederis solas semper habebis opes. Ep. B. v. Ep. 
* Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal, Sat. vii 
3 Or according to the inimitable author of " Don Juan," 
" Who doubt that even doubt itself is doubting." 



viii. 20. 



86 PROPOSITIONS WITH BEGABD TO MATTEE. [B. II. 

it of everything else, and express the subject as an excep- 
tional case. Thus: "The Platonists alone, of the ancient 
philosophers, recognised the spirituality of God," becomes 
exceptive when we affirm that " none of the ancient philo- 
sophers except the Platonists recognised the spirituality of 
God 1 ." This proposition evidently involves two judgments : 
first, that the ancient philosophers believed God corporeal ; 
and the second, that the Platonists believed the contrary. 
Many of the terse sayings of P. Syrus and Seneca are of 
this character. As : " The miser does no good except by 
dying 3 ." " No one thinks himself miserable except by com- 
paring himself with those who are more happy 3 ." 

The truth of these propositions depends upon the truth of 
the whole and the truth of the exception, and hence they may 
be contradicted in the same way as the exclusives. For 
example, the assertion of the stoics, that " Except the wise 
man (formed after their model of wisdom) all men are fools," 
may be met by maintaining 1st. That the wise man of the 
stoics was as great a fool as other men ; 2ndly. That there 
were others besides their wise man who were not fools ; and 
3rdly. That their wise man was really a fool, and many 
others were not. 

Propositions which consist of comparisons involve two 
judgments : first, the existence of the thing in a peculiar 
mode ; and secondly, the degree which it holds in that mode. 
Thus the sentence of Syrus : The greatest of all losses is 
the loss of a friend 4 , implies both that the death or estrange- 
ment of a friend is a loss, and the greatest of all losses. Also 
the remark of Horace : " More impression, even in important 
matters, is produced by a little agreeable raillery, than by the 
best arguments 5 ," implies, in addition to the degrees of the 
impression, the reality of its existence. 

1 In like manner the exceptive proposition of Terence, 

" Imperitus, nisi quod ipse facit, nihil rectum putat," 
has been transformed by Cornelius Gallus into this exclusive: 
" Hoc tantum rectum quod facit ipse putat." 

2 Avarus nisi cum moritur, nihil recte facit. P. Syrus, Sent. 62. 

3 Est miser nemo nisi comparatus. Seneca, Troas, 1021. 

4 Amicum perdere, est damnorum maximum. P. Syrus, Sent. 34. 
* Bidiculum acri 

Fortius ac melius magnas plerumque secat res. 

Hor. Sat. i. 10. 



C. H. 1.] QUANTITY OF PEOPOSITIONS. 87 

Hence the truth of comparatives" depends upon the truth of 
the two senses they bear, and may be contradicted by denying 
either of them ; as the maxim of Epicurus, " That pain is 
the greatest evil," was impugned by the stoics, on the ground 
that pain was not an evil at all ; while the peripatetics, 
though allowing pain to rank in the category of evils, main- 
tained that vices and other irregularities of the mind were 
much greater evils. 



CHAPTEE H. 

PBOPOSITIONS WITH EEGAED TO POEM. 

1, Quantity of Propositions. 

ALL propositions are divided into universal, particular, and 
singular, according to the extent (i. e. quantity) to which the 
predicate is affirmed of the subject. If the predicate is affirmed 
of the whole of the subject, the proposition is universal ; if 
of a part of it only, the proposition is particular. For exam- 
ple : " All vicious men are miserable ;" " No miser is rich ;" 
are universal, and their subject being applied to the attribute in 
its broadest sense, is said to be distributed. But " Some poor 
men are not unhappy;" "All despots are not cruel," are 
particular. Their subjects are consequently said to be not 
distributed, being only connected with the attribute accord- 
ing to a certain indeterminate part of their extension. 

When the subject of a proposition is a singular term, it is 
also called singular, as " Colbert first introduced the funding 
system into France ;" "Victoria is worthy of the homage of 
her subjects :" but as such propositions resemble the uni- 
versal in having the predicate affirmed of the subject accord- 
ing to the whole of its extension, they are ranked under that 
head. For it is only essential to the universality of a propo- 
sition that its subject be taken in the whole of its sphere ; 
whether that sphere be great or small does not in the least 
concern it. Single propositions, however, may be fairly 
reckoned particular when accompanied with a qualifying 
word, which restricts the attribute to a portion of the sub- 
ject, as Non omnis moriar: I shall not altogether die; 



88 PEOPOSITIONS WITH EEGAED TO FOBM. [fi. II. 

Caesar was not wholly a tyrant. But, strictly speaking, such 
propositions, admitting of a variation in quantity, are not 
properly considered singular, the subject being not Caesar, but 
the parts of his character 1 . 

When the subject of the proposition is a common term, 
the universal signs, "every, all, no, each," are used to signify 
it is distributed, and the particular signs, "some, there are," 
&c., to indicate the contrary. Should the common term, 
however, be without any sign, the quantity of the proposition, 
which in that case is termed indefinite, is ascertained by the 
matter of the judgment, or in other words, the nature of the 
connexion between the two terms. Where the mind conceives 
such connexion necessary, either through its inability to con- 
ceive the two terms apart, or from its knowledge of their 
essential association, the proposition which they constitute is 
deemed universal, as " Birds are not quadrupeds ;" " Circles 
have their radii equal;" "The planets move in ellipses;" 
" The elementary atoms of matter combine in definite propor- 
tions 2 ." Where the connexion is only casual or accidental 3 , 
the proposition will be particular, as " Birds sing ;" " Sena- 
tors are eloquent;" "Food is necessary to life ;" where the 
matter implies that the predicate cannot be said of the en- 
tire class of objects for which the subject of the proposition 
stands 4 . Should the nature of the connexion, however, be 

1 Whately's Logic, b. ii. ch. ii. 2. 2 Though the matter of 

these propositions, i. e. the connexion between their terms, is not 
equally necessary, since the negation of the two first examples would 
be inconceivable, while the denial of the two last would suppose no 
absurdity; yet, since the necessity of the connexion of the terms of the 
latter depends upon the laws of nature, its competency to imply a 
universal may be presumed equal to the former. 3 Archbishop 

Whately, after Aldrich, calls this kind of connexion contingent. But 
that phrase is applied by the scholastics, and their modern successors, 
as also by Kant, to denote that class of facts which depend upon 
natural laws as contradistinguished from absolute truths which can- 
not be conceived otherwise than they are. In that sense, the word 
would exclude many instances of necessary connexion, and is there- 
fore likely to mislead. * The Port Royal logicians cavil with 
the idea of the distinction between necessary and accidental matter 
as affording a clue to the quantity of indefinites, and would sub- 
stitute doctrine and circumstances of fact in their place. Logique, 
part ii. ch. xiii. Thus : Angels have no body being a matter of doc- 



C. II. 2.] QUALITY OF PBOPOSITIONS. 89 

doubtful, it is evident, since we can only affirm or deny tlie 
predicate of those cases in which we have tested the certainty 
of our judgment, that the proposition must be particular. 
Hence indefinite propositions have no place in the logical 
system, and are only mentioned here to put the reader on 
his guard against them 1 . 

2. Quality of Propositions. 

The division of propositions into affirmative and negative 
gives rise to their quality ; an affirmate proposition, of course, 
being that whose copula is affirmative, as " fish breathe ;" and 
a negative one whose copula is negative, as " misers are not 
happy." 

Some logicians, however, hold 3 that there is in reality no 
negative in thought, but only in the form of expression. To 
say " Adeline" is not tall, is to say that she is short. This is 
correct in those cases where the negative is not referred to 
the verb, but to one of the terms. For then we regard the 
predicate, or subject, as a thing limited that is, as a positive 
thing deprived of some property. For example: Human 
knowledge is not perfect, is equivalent to human knowledge 
is imperfect ; and some graduates are not learned, is equal 
to some graduates are unlearned ; but when the negative 
is referred to the verb, the proposition must be considered 
negative as respects the form, otherwise we might argue 
that no proposition could be considered affirmative, as every 
judgment is capable of assuming a negative form. 

The quality or form of a proposition may be either simple 
(pure) or complex, as well as its matter. Thus " Caesar 
loved Cleopatra," is an instance of the simple kind of affirma- 
tion. " Copernicus proved demonstratively that the Helio- 
centric theory was true," is an example of the second ; for 

trine, is universal; while: Soldiers were engaged in review being 
one of fact, is particular. But this, in reality, is only expressing the 
same distinction in theological language. * Logicians, however, 

distinguish a species of moral universality, which, though not without 
exception as in the case of absolute or metaphysical universality, yet 
are sufficiently approximate to enable us to found an argument upon 
them, as Women are talkative ; Old men are prudent. Professor 
de Morgan calls attention to these under the head of plurative judg- 
ments (Formal Logic, p. 325). a De Stutt Tracy, Grammaire, 
part i. c. 4. 



90 PROPOSITIONS WITH EEGAED TO FORM. [B. II. 

the terms " Copernicus proved demonstratively" is only 
alleged in support of the affirmation that the Heliocentric 
theory is true, and consequently does not fall upon the 
matter but upon the form. 

Cases, however, sometimes occur where the complexity 
may be applied to both, and, according as it is so taken, com- 
pletely change the meaning of the sentence ; as " Locke 
asserts that all our ideas have their origin in sensation and 
reflection," may imply a wish on the part of him who utters 
it to uphold that doctrine ; in which case the first part of 
the sentence, " Locke asserts it," must be regarded as an 
incidental proposition adduced in support of the affirmation 
in the latter : or it may denote an intention to express this 
doctrine as the opinion of philosophers without affirming any- 
thing about its truth ; in which case the first part, viz., "Locke 
asserts," would become the principal proposition, and the last 
would only form a portion of the attribute. The complexity 
then would fall upon the matter, but the signification would 
be entirely changed. In such ambiguous phrases, however, 
the nature of the incidental proposition may easily be col- 
lected from the intention of the speaker or writer. 

Many logicians in this place consider the morality of 
propositions that is, the degree of certainty with which the 
mind affirms or denies the connexion between the terms of 
any proposition it may entertain. Of these there are many 
gradations, as each person may ascertain by consulting his 
own consciousness ; but as their explication would involve 
the question of the foundations of evidence, we join the 
modern schoolmen in relegating them from this part of 
logic. 

3. Distribution of Terms in Propositions. 

"We have said the subject of a universal proposition is dis- 
tributed, since it is taken in the whole extent of its signi- 
fication ; and the subject of a particular proposition undistri- 
buted, because only some of its parts are applied to or excluded 
from the predicate. Hence it follows, that the distribution 
of the subject depends upon the quantity of a proposition, 
and is distributed in universals, and in universals alone. 

The distribution of the predicate, on the other hand, de- 
pends on the quality of a proposition. For it is sufficient 



C. II. 3.] DISTRIBUTION OP TERMS. 91 

to admit the predicate to be affirmed with truth of the 
subject, that some part of it should agree with the subject ; 
we consequently cannot infer that it is taken in its whole 
extent from the bare act of affirmation. But for a negative 
to be true, it is necessary that the entire predicate should 
be excluded from the subject. To fulfil this condition, there- 
fore, in every negative proposition the predicate must be 
distributed. Hence the two practical rules generally given 
for distribution are, that none but universals distribute the 
subject, and none but negatives distribute the predicate. 

But the last rule is not to be taken absolutely, since 
affirmative propositions occasionally distribute the predi- 
cate ; as in those cases where the proposition assumes the 
form of a definition, as common salt is chloride of sodium ; 
some animals are all men ; and we may even conceive cases 
in whicli the rule is entirely overridden, as, " some trees are 
not some plants ;" " no sinners are some men," where the pre- 
dicate is quantified in common with the subject. But such 
propositions are evidently unnatural in their present form, 
and, if not entirely nugatory when transformed to their 
conventional shape, may be brought under the two rules 
already given. Thus, "some animals are all men" is equi- 
valent, according to the first rule, to "all men are ani- 
mals," and in ordinary parlance, never appears in any 
other form. Again, the negative proposition that " no 
publicans are some men," does not preclude our constructing 
an affirmative judgment out of the same terms, as " all pub- 
licans are men." Not having, therefore, the force of a 
negative, it never occurs in speech, and is consequently 
useless. But a negative proposition which contains two 
particular terms, as " some lichens are not some plants," is 
still more nugatory, as it might be affirmed of everything 
not only existing, but even identical. For if we define 
common salt to be chloride of sodium, we may, nevertheless, 
affirm that some common salt is not some chloride of sodium, 
meaning, of course, that the common salt in this salt-cellar 
is not the chloride of sodium in that 1 . 

It is not essential to clearness of thought that the pre- 
dicate be quantified i. e. have a determinate quantity 
either in judgment or expression. In affirming the agree- 

1 Thompson's Laws of Thought, p. 188, 2nd ed. 



92 PEOPOSITIONS "WITH BEGAED TO POEM. [B. II. 

ment or disagreement of two ideas, the mind concentrates 
its attention upon the double sphere of the subject, and 
never looks further into the nature of the predicate than is 
sufficient to enable it to affirm or deny it of the subject. 
To this end it is by no means necessary that the logical 
sphere of the predicate be known, at least in affirmative 
cases, but only such parts of its connotation as are either 
identical with the subject, or so distinct from it as to imply 
the non-agreement of the rest of its properties. Thus, when 
we say "all men are sinners," we pay no attention to the 
extent to which " sinners" may be affirmed of other objects 
besides men, it being a law of the mind never to examine 
further into the nature of the terms upon which it has to 
decide than the correctness of the judgment warrants. For 
this purpose it is evidently sufficient to know that each man 
is peccable without inquiring what other things are so. So 
much, indeed, is this the case, that in affirming " all men 
are sinners," very few, unless theologians, upon whom the 
question has been forced by abstract study, have ever dreamt 
of asking themselves whether " all men are all sinners," or 
whether "all men are some sinners," that is, whether the 
term can be applied to angels and devils also, and even if 
some brutes are not included under it 1 . Again, it is so 
far from being essential to the clearness of the proposition, 
" some men are not rational," to know whether rational is 
taken in its universal or particular sense, that the very sug- 
gestion of its quantification is apt to confuse the judgment 
in pronouncing it. 

Indeed, so foreign is the effort of realising "the new 
analytic" to the mind, that the thing would never have been 
dreamt of had not Sir "W. Hamilton been led to it by the 
development of the general idea of predicate quantification ; 

1 We have gone into this case at some length, as the contrary 
opinion has been distinctly put forth in favour of a thorough-going 
quantification of the predicate, on the ground of its absolute necessity 
to the formation of clear judgments, by Spencer Baynes a writer of 
some promise in his " New Analytic of Logical Forms," which is 
simply intended to state the views of Sir W. Hamilton as to the ex- 
tensive and beneficial nature of the changes which such quantification 
is calculated to introduce into logic. Mr. Baynes in that work 
hazards the assertion that " the quantity of the predicate is always 
contained in thought," a statement which appears to us, as in the ex- 
ample cited in the text, to be almost exactly the reverse of the truth. 



MODES OF PREDICATION. 



93 



c. ii. 3.] 

yet no one, surely, 'would be bold enough to assert that 
every judgment formed up to this time was less clear, from 
the fact that mankind had never attended to its twofold 
quantification. The obliviousness in which the particular 
details of the general doctrine lay buried 1 , is the very proof 
required to show that the mind does not need them, and, in 
fact, never adverts to them in the formation of its judgments, 
since the agreement or disagreement which such acts pro- 
nounce can be ascertained with certainty without further 
knowledge than the double sphere of the subject and the 
connotation (metaphysical sphere) of the predicate afford. 

The propositions which we have examined in connexion 
with a quantified predicate, if combined with those which 
arise out of a quantified subject, will, it is evident, embrace 
every conceivable mode of affirmative predication ; and we 
need only negative each proposition it contains to get every 
conceivable mode of negative proposition, and thus complete 
the list of simple categorical propositions real as well as 
possible. Annexing corresponding signs to each of these for 
the sake of brevity, they stand thus : 



Predicate distributed in conformity 
with rule. 


Quantity. 


Quality. 


Signs. 


All planets move in ellipses . 


Universal 


Affirmative 


a 


No unjust action is expedient 


Universal 


Negative 


e 


Some muscles act without our 








volition 


Particular 


Affirmative 


i 


Some rocks are not granite . 


Particular 


Negative 





Predicate distributed against rule. 








Common salt is chloride of 








sodium 


Universal 


Affirmative 


X 


Some plants are all lichens . 


Particular 


Affirmative 


y 


No rational animals are some 








men 


Universal 


Negative 


v 


Some flowers are not some 








rosadendrons 


Particular 


Negative 


z 



1 Mr. Baynes seems hardly to have been aware that in advancing 
his master's (Sir W. Hamilton) claims to originality in the develop- 
ment of the doctrine, he was only proving its absolute inutility for all 
the practical purposes of logic. He first writes a treatise to show that 



94 PEOPOSITIONS WITH BEGAB.D TO TOEM. [B. n. 

An examination of the above table will lead to tlie conclusion 
already pointed out, that all the propositions, the predicate 
of which is distributed or quantified against the rule, save oc, 
are unnatural, and, as such, never used ; and that with regard 
to x the predicate is not strictly, but merely casually, de- 
finitive, not being implied in the form of the expression. It 
will be, moreover, seen that the import of y, u, and z, find 
their correct expression in a natural form only when their 
terms are arranged to bring them under a, e, i, a ; we con- 
sequently are led to reject the four other forms of judg- 
ments as worthless, so far as practical logic is concerned, and 
rest satisfied with the rule already given as sufficiently in- 
dicative of the logical sphere of the predicate 1 ; viz., that all 
universals and no particulars distribute the subject ; all 
negatives and no affirmatives distribute the predicate : and 
thus we have a distributing its subject, e both its terms, 
i neither, and o its predicate. 

4. Opposition of Propositions. 

Opposition of propositions is simply the relation of the 
agreement or disagreement of propositions which have the 
same subject and predicate, (matter), but a different quantity 

the quantification of the predicate is essentially necessary to the forma- 
tion of accurate judgments ; in fact, invariably accompanies such 
mental acts, and then proves, by way of appendix, that no person ever 
had such quantification in mind but Sir W. Hamilton. Is not the 
effect of this procedure clearly to intimate that clear conceptions have 
been hitherto unknown, or to land Mr. Baynes in aflat contradiction? 
The dilemma is inevitable, and. Mr. Baynes must choose his horn. 
1 In rejecting the express quantification of the predicate we find 
ourselves in respectable company. Aristotle (De Enunciandi Katione, 
c. vii., and in Anal. Prior, i. c. 27, 9) also rejects it on the ground of 
its futility; and is followed by nearly all his commentators, including 
Boethius (Opera Omnia, Basil, p. 348) ; Averroes (Opera Omnia, 
Venit. b. i. fol. 45) ; and Palius, in Arist. de Interp. c. vii., and Anat. 
Prior, c. 27, 9, fol. 46. Ambrosius Leo appears the most inclined to 
treat it with favour; but this arose from his antagonism to Averroes, 
every one of whose opinions he made it a point to dispute (Castig. Ad. 
Aver, in Lib. de Interpret.) Isenach, one of Luther's tutors, also 
coquetted with the doctrine, in his Breviarum Dialectica, a divine 
attached to the old opinions, whom, Luther says, he killed by expressing 
before him his withering contempt for scholasticism. For a develop- 
ment of Isenach's views on the quantification of the predicate, see 
Mr. Baynes's Appendix to his New Analytic. 



C. II. 4.] OPPOSITION OF PEOPOSITI05TS. 95 

and quality, or both, (form). As we can run any given 
subject, and predicate through the four simple categorical 
propositions a, e, i, o, forming a distinct judgment in each, 
any two of which may be said to be opposed, it follows there 
are four different kinds of opposition viz., Istly, the two uni- 
versals (a and <?), which are called contraries to each other, as 
" every man is a responsible agent," " no man is a responsible 
agent*;" 2ndly, the two particulars (* and 0), which are called 
subcontraries, as "some man is a responsible agent," " some 
man is not a responsible agent ;" these two cases differ only 
in quality, but agree in quantity ; 3rdly, a and i, or e and o, 
which differ in quantity, but agree in quality, as " every 
angel is a rational creature," " some angel is a rational crea- 
ture ;" " no metal is incapable of being magnetised," " some 
metal is not incapable of being magnetised;" which kind of 
propositions are called subalternans : 4thly, a and o, e and i, 
which differing both in quality and quantity, are called con- 
tradictories, as "all muscat is fruit," "some muscat is not 
fruit;" "no forms of government are exempt from change," 
" some form of governments are exempt from change." 

In considering these propositions it will be observed 
that contraries can never be both true, though they may 
be both false. For, if it be true that every man is ac- 
countable for his actions, it is false that some man is not 
accountable for his actions, which is the contradictory ; and 
still more false, that no " man is accountable for his actions," 
which is the contrary. But the falsehood of the one does 
not imply the truth of the other. Eor example, if it should 
be false that all men have a right to freedom, it would not 
follow that, therefore, no men have. 

Subcontraries may be both true, but cannot be both false, 
as " some men are rich," " some men are not rich," may be 
both true if we do not consider the negation to regard the same 
subject as the affirmation ; but it is evident they cannot be 
both false, unless we are prepared to assert a man can be 
rich and not rich at the same time. It may, however, be 
observed, that there is no real contrariety where the subject 
of the propositions are not identical, and that consequently 
the term subcbntrary is entirely arbitrary and unmeaning. 

There is also no true opposition in the case of subalternans, 
since the particulars are consequences of the general, so that 



96 PROPOSITIONS WITH BEGABD TO FOBM. [B. II. 

the relation between them is one of partial agreement. For 
if " all geraniums are flowers," " some geranium is a flower," 
and if "no man is faultless," "some man is not faultless." 
But it will be at once seen that the truth of the particulars 
does not imply the truth of the universals, though their 
falsity does ; and that the falsity of the universals does not 
imply that of the particulars. Hence it is evident that there 
are many cases in which these subalternate propositions are 
both true, and others in which they are both false. 

The opposition of contradictories is more perfect than any 
of the others, as they are never both either true or false to- 
gether ; and hence, if any proposition is known to be true, 
we infer that its contradictory is false ; if false, that its con- 
tradictory is true. For example, if every man is a dependent 
creature, it cannot be true that some man is not a dependent 
creature, and if, contrariwise, it be true that some man is not 
a dependent creature, it is consequently untrue that every 
man is a dependent creature. 

It is important to observe, as the truth or falsity of any 
proposition must depend upon the nature of the connexion 
between the two terms, that in necessary matter all affirma- 
tives are true, and negatives false : thus, all the radii of a 
circle are equal, is an instance of the first ; no radii of a circle 
are equal, or some radii of a circle are not equal, is a case 
of the second : that in accidental matter all universals are 
false, and particulars true ; as, all islands are fertile, no 
islands are fertile, are both false, but become true by sub- 
stituting "some" for "all" and "no:" that in impossible 
matter all affirmatives are false, and negatives true, as is 
evident from the nature of the case. By this means, from the 
nature of the matter, we shall at once be enabled to decide 
upon the truth or falsity of the judgments in every scale of 
opposition ; as, e. g. in accidental matter, contraries will be 
both false, but never both true ; sub-contraries both true, 
but never both false ; and contradictories always one true 
and the other false. 

Denoting the four propositions by their symbols, and the 
truth or falsity of each proposition in each matter by the 
letter V. for (verum) true, and F. for (falsum) false, the 
entire doctrine of opposition, and everything which pertains 
to it, may be elicited from the adjoining scheme. 



C. II. 5.] CONYEBSIOH" OF PEOPOSITIONS. 



97 



n-v- -f ,n- 


+f. 




V I- 

^a- 


a CONTRARIES t 




1 %, ^ S 
^^^ ^ g 

v^'/ 2 




i -f 
a-i;- 


i suBcotnanRiEs o 


/ n- 

v i 
v a- 





For practical purposes opposition is important, as showing 
the force of any assertion, exhibiting the power which it has 
of resisting any argument brought against it, or against 
which it is brought. 

5. Conversion of Propositions. 

The conversion of propositions consists in the transposition 
of their terms, that is, in making the subject the predicate, and 
the predicate the subject, without affecting the truth of the 
original proposition. To ensure this it is evident that the 
quality of the judgment must be preserved, and no term dis- 
tributed in the converse that was not distributed in the con- 
vertend. For example, because " all salts are fusible," we can- 
not infer that all fusible things are salts ; for in that case we 
would employ the predicate universally in the converse, which 
was only taken particularly in the convertend. 

"When the distribution of the terms, however, is not 
affected by the simple transformation of the subject and pre- 
dicate, the conversion is legitimate, the truth of the converse 
being expressly implied in that of the convertend, as 

No charlatan is a patriot ; therefore 

No patriot is a charlatan. 

Some boasters are cowards ; therefore 

Some cowards are boasters. 

But this species of conversion, which is called simple, only 
occurs with e and *, the first of which distributes both its 
terms, and the last neither. 

But in those propositions which distribute only one of 



98 PROPOSITIONS WITH KEGA.RD TO FORM. [fi. II. 

their terms, simple conversion would not be legitimate, as in 
a ; and to render the terms in the converse equivalent to 
those in the convertend, we must affix the word some to the 
predicate. Thus, though we cannot infer from 

All birds are animals, that 
All animals are birds, 

we can, by limiting the predicate in the converse to the 
exact extension it holds in the convertend, effect a legitimate 
conversion, as 

All birds are animals, 

Some animals are birds. 

This species of conversion is consequently known by the 
name conversion by limitation : e may thus be converted, but 
a is generally so. 

The proposition o, however, is inconvertible by either of 
these methods, since, whether the quantity be changed or 
not, the predicate of the converse will remain undistributed, 
which was not so in the convertend. We are, consequently, 
obliged, in order to effect its conversion, to reduce the pro- 
position to i, by considering not as prefixed to the predi- 
cate, instead of to the copula. It may then of course be 
converted simply, that is, by the mere transformation of its 
terms, the subject assuming the form of an incidental propo- 
sition. Thus, " some members of the university are not 
learned" is equivalent to some members of the university are 
not-learned, or some who are not learned are members of 
the university. This may be termed conversion by negation, 
or, as it is commonly called, by contraposition. Not alone o, 
but every proposition may be converted in this way 1 . Hence 
we may conclude, that in one of these three modes every pro- 
position may be legitimately converted ; e and i simply, a e 
by limitation, and o, a, e, and i by negation 2 . 

An attempt has been made to get rid of the doctrine of 
conversion thus propounded by introducing the quantification 

1 Archbishop "Whately says only a, but if the student chooses to try, 
he will find the conversion applicable to each of the four categorical 
propositions. 2 It may appear that a is capable of simple con- 

version, as in definitions where the predicate is identical with the 
subject, but as its truth does not follow from the original proposition, 
there is no conversion in the case, the resulting converse being a 
different judgment, and not the same judgment in another form. 



C. II. 5.] CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS. 99 

of the predicate, which would reduce the whole affair to a 
mere transformation of terms 1 . The simplification, however, 
if at all practicable, would be purchased at the expense of 
utility. Take the most complex form which the old doctrine 
assumes, that of conversion by negation, and transform the 
terms of a proposition in o, after having quantified the pre- 
dicate. By this process, the proposition " some metals are 
not all conductors" would become " all conductors are not 
some metals," or " no conductors are some metals." Of 
what conceivable use can the latter judgment be, which the 
first is not able more properly to effect? Conversion in 
such cases would frustrate every purpose it is instituted to 
effect by reducing a proposition from a form in which it is 
of some use, as conveying substantial information, to another 
in which it is deprived of a determinate meaning; for it 
cannot concern us to know that no metals are some con- 
ductors, since there may be other conductors which are some 
metals. Yet only in the conversion of o could the quantifi- 
cation of the predicate effect any direct simplification. For 
the conversion of a, the sole case where its application is 
admissible, cannot be more simply provided for than by the 
old rule ; while that of e, by limitation, if effected in accord- 
ance with the quantification of the predicate, would lead to 
the inference of a particular proposition where a universal 
might be drawn, and consequently be so far nugatory. 

It appears to us that the advocates of a complete quantifi- 
cation of the predicate are so absorbed in the means which 
logic employs, as to lose sight of the ends they are intended 
to effect. The object of conversion is to enable us to throw 
a proposition either into a clearer form or into one more 
fitted to sustain the argument which we may be endeavour- 
ing to establish. But either of these purposes must be 
defeated by crowding the brain with a series of unnatural 
propositions, such as the quantification of the predicate would 
generate, which are never used in ordinary discourse, simply 
because the mind never considers them adequate either to 
express the clearness or the force of its conceptions. Even 
in the supposition of their competency, they could not be 
substituted for those forms of conversion which logic already 
employs, each of which has its peculiar functions to fulfil in 

1 Mr. Baynes's New Analytic, which expresses Sir W. Hamilton's 
views, and bears his imprimatur. 

n2 



100 SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

the hands of the dialectician. To take the conversion by 
contraposition, which is the one against which there is the 
most complaint, its striking importance is manifest in en- 
abling us to throw a proposition into the negative form, 
when that form will more easily lead to the establishment of 
our position than any other ; as is done by Paley in proving 
the main proposition of his Evidences. The means may be 
cumbrous ; but a complex arrangement is often required to 
gain the end in view, where a more simple instrument would 
fail. No doubt the Cuirassiers at Waterloo felt their armour 
an encumbrance; but had they exchanged their plates of 
mail for woollen coats, would they have done their work so 
well, or, rather, would they have been allowed to do their 
work at all ? 



BOOK III. 

SYLLOGISMS. PEOEMIUM. 

As the combination of two or more terms leads to the 
expression of a 'judgment concerning their agreement or 
difference, so the union of two or more propositions is essen- 
tial to the formation of inference ; or, in other words, we 
reason from a comparison of propositions, as we may be said 
to judge from a comparison of terms. But in order that 
two propositions may unite to form a distinct judgment, it is 
necessary they should express something concerning the 
same object ; or, in other words, that they have one term in 
common: the agreement or disagreement of the common 
term with the other terms involved, will then lead to the 
enunciation of a new judgment, declaratory of the relation in 
which the dissimilar terms stand to each other. The evolu- 
tion of such a judgment from two antecedent propositions 
asserting something concerning a common term, is an in- 
stance of one of the simplest forms of reasoning ; and the 
formal statement of the propositions concerned, in their 
sequential order, is called a syllogism. Thus : 

All planets move in ellipses ; 

But Mercury, Mars, and Venus, are planets, 

Therefore they move in ellipses. 



B. III.] TWO KINDS OF INFERENCE. 101 

Though every illative process implies three judgments, in 
two of which one term is compared with two others, in order 
that the relation between these last may be accurately deter- 
mined in a conclusive proposition; yet this number of judg- 
ments is by no means necessary for every sort of inference. As 
we have already seen in the opposition and conversion of pro- 
positions, we can make a series of inferences from two terms ; 
as from the fact of man being mortal, it is competent to any 
one to infer that some mortal beings are men, or that no 
man can be immortal ; that immortal beings are not men, 
and that he who honours a man honours a mortal ; but such 
inferences do not embrace any illative process that is, the 
evolution of any new judgment different from the one already 
expressed, but only the same judgment in a different form ; 
and, therefore, are properly excluded from the domain of 
strict reasoning, which is only employed in eliciting new 
truths, or in presenting those already discovered in a de- 
monstrative form to others 1 . Each inference in the case of 
strict reasoning, when completely analysed, will be found to 
depend upon three or more such propositions, as we have 

1 The reader must have his eye on this distinction, as it appears to 
us that the losing sight of it has betrayed some distinguished writers 
into an erroneous conception of the nature of reasoning. Thus Dugald 
Stewart resolves the whole process into intuition and memory, and 
presents us with a case of immediate inference, which the first kind is 
generally called, as an instance of reasoning in which three judgments 
are irrelevant, and then proceeds to reject the Aristotelic theory on 
account of its non-applicability to a case in which there is really no 
reasoning at all!! (Phil. Hum. Mind, b. iii. c. ii. 1.) Mr. Samuel 
Bailey, in his recent able Essay on the Theory of Reasoning, seems to 
fall into the same error, in citing similar cases of reasoning ( ?) as un- 
recognised by, and foreign to, the Aristotelic syllogism (p. 83), as "all 
men are fallible," " this man is fallible." Locke (Hum. Und. b. iv. 
15), who, in this and other places, seems above his disciples, re- 
stricts reasoning to the sense in which we have taken it, and insists 
upon the distinction above laid down between the two kinds of in- 
ference, one of which he calls immediate, the other mediate. All the 
writers who adopt Stewart's views confound the relation between the 
formal identity of a syllogism viz., the necessity of the conclusion, if 
the premises be true, with its material identity viz., the identical 
truth of each of the three judgments. Though we see the former in- 
tuitively, we do not see the latter. A middle term is necessary to dis- 
tinguish it. Truth, like life, is propagated by union: two verities must 
unite to produce a third. 



102 PEOPEBTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. HI. 

described ; and the properties which attach to them in their 
syllogistic union, and the multiform modes in which they 
may be combined, will form the subject of the present book. 
Under the former head we shall treat of the one great 
canon of mediate inference, and the general rules which are 
to be observed in its application ; the moods and figures will 
follow with their special canons and rules, and the number 
of valid cases of inferences to which these lead will be con- 
trasted with the more enlarged series which a complete 
quantification of the predicate is said to establish. The second 
portion will comprise the different kinds of syllogisms with 
the laws of the reduction of the more complex to a sim- 
ple categorical form, to which the syllogistic rules and 
canons are more applicable. In this book, therefore, we 
restrict ourselves to the naked syllogism as the inferential 
link out of which the chain of proof is constructed. How 
these links are bound together in the evolution of new truths, 
or in conclusive lines of demonstration; the inductive and 
deductive forms they usually assume with the laws of their 
combinations ; the grounds on which all proof rests, and the 
various axioms which legitimise and discriminate its dif- 
ferent degrees of certainty ; are evidently matters which re- 
gard a higher step in the treatise than simple inference, and 
may be regarded, in Lord Bacon's manner, as certain pro- 
dromi, or anticipations which prepare the way for the con- 
sideration of the consecutive forms of reasoning which 
are to engage our attention in the different sciences. As 
such we shall consider them apart in the next two books. 



CHAPTER I. 

PEOPEBTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. 

1. Universal Canon of Mediate Inference with the General 
Rules of the Syllogism. 

As all reasoning may be virtually resolved into a com- 
parison of two terms with a common third term, with a view 
to ascertain their respective relations to each other, the 
geometrical axiom viz., two things which are equal to a 



C. I. 1.] TTNIVEBSAL CA^Otf. 103 

third thing are equal to each other which underlies all ma- 
thematical inference, may be said to be fundamental to every 
kind of valid inference on whatever matter employed 1 ; but 
to transform this axiom into the universal canon of in- 
ference, in such a manner that it shall prospectively embrace 
all the general rules, requires a preliminary remark respect- 
ing the sense of the word relation. 

Two terms are said to be related when they stand to each 
other in the position of subject and attribute ; but this re- 
lation varies in degree according to the different quantity 
and quality of the proposition in which it is expressed. 
Thus, if a subject stand to an attribute in the relation of a 
universal to a particular, the relation of the attribute to the 
subject is said to be inferior to that of the subject with the 
attribute, because the latter embraces fewer objects ; and, 
in like manner, if a common term be affirmed of one object, 
and denied or excluded from another, the relation in which 
such term stands to the latter is called inferior to that of 
affirmation, since it is much more definitive to affirm than to 
deny. Hence when two terms, taken in the same extension, 
are contrasted affirmatively with a common third term, no 
difference of relation occurs between them in other words, 
the relation is termed equal ; but when one is applied either 
particularly or negatively to a common term, while the other 
is taken universally and affirmatively, the relation of the 
former is said to be inferior to that of the latter. "With 
this proviso, we may take the universal canon of reasoning 
to be : What equal or inferior relation subsists between either 
of two terms and a common third term, with which loth are 
related, and one at least positively so, that relation subsists 
between the two terms themselves 2 . Observing this canon, no 
syllogism can be formally invalid, and we shall see the reason 
of this by tracing the manner in which it folds up within 
itself the general rules of the syllogism. 

1st. Every syllogism must contain no more than three 
terms. Of these, the two whose relation is to be proved 

1 See Bacon's Primary Philosophy, De Aug. b. iii. c. 2 : " QUCE in 
eodem tertio conveniunt inter se conveniunt," regula est itidem ex mathe- 
maticis ; verum simul tarn potens in logica ut syllogismi sit fundam.cn- 
tum. 3 This canon, with a little alteration, we have taken from 
Sir W. Hamilton. See Mr. Baynes's New Analytic. 



104 PROPERTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

are called the extremes of the conclusion, or question ; and 
the term, by which their relation is proved, is called the 
middle. Of the extremes, again, the subject of the conclu- 
sion is called the minor term, and that which stands as 
predicate the major term 1 . 

The term major has been applied to the attribute of the 
conclusion, and minor to the subject, because in the most 
natural form of inference 3 , the major was by its position 
the most extensive, and the minor least. Thus, in the 
syllogism: All wise men are circumspect; but Solon was 
a wise man ; therefore, Solon was circumspect ; circum- 
spect, the major term, is more extensive than Solon, the 
minor, for we include Solon and all other wise men in 
circumspect. When the conclusion, however, is either par- 
ticular or negative, it is impossible to ascertain the relative 
magnitude between the two terms. There is nothing to 
prevent in such cases the so-called major term from being 
much less than the minor, though there is always a pre- 
sumption in favour of the contrary case, arising from the 
mental habit of restricting the subject and leaving the 
predicate unquantified. 

The fulfilment of this rule is secured by that part of the 
canon which enjoins the relation of two terms with a com- 
mon third term by way of subject and predicate : but this 
does not prevent one of the propositions from being con- 
junctive, that is, from including several distinct terms under 
it ; for so long as one predicate is affirmed of them, such 
plural subjects are logically considered as one term. The 
rule is directly aimed against the assumption of two middle 
terms, since, in that case, . the extremes, or terms of the 
conclusion, not being both compared to the same term, 
could not be conclusively compared to each other. 

2nd. Every syllogism can embrace only three judgments, 
viz., those commonly called the premises, in which the 
extremes are respectively compared to the middle, and the 

1 In Greek, major = TO axpov 

minor = TO erepov 
middle = TO peaov 

2 The first mood of the first figure. See next section. 



C. I. 1.] EULES OF THE SYLLOGISM. 105 

conclusion in which the relation of the two extremes is 
expressed. Of the premises, that in which the middle term 
is compared with the major or attribute of the conclusion, is 
styled the major premiss, and that in which the middle is 
compared with the minor, or subject of the conclusion, is 
termed the minor premiss. 

There may be some combinations of more than three 
propositions, which seem to present simple cases of infer- 
ence ; but if all such are carefully analysed, they will be 
found to resolve themselves into plural inferences, each of 
which, when fully expressed, expands into a distinct syllo- 
gism, with a triplex judgment. The rule, therefore, strictly 
holds under every circumstance, and, indeed, may be con- 
sidered as a necessary corollary of that part of the canon 
which ensures the first rule. For if there be only three 
terms, each of which is to be compared once only with 
the two others, it is evident there can be only three judg- 
ments, viz., those which express the three acts of comparison, 
since three terms cannot be incorporated in more than three 
propositions without repetition 1 . 

3rd. The middle term must be distributed once at least 
in the premises, which is ensured by making it either the 
subject of a universal, or the predicate of a negative ; for if 
it be taken particularly in both of the premises, one of the 
extremes may happen to be compared with one part of its 
extension, and the other with the other part, as : 

The wise are good ; 

Some ignorant people are good ; 

Therefore, some ignorant people are wise. 
Here the term good being undistributed, is applied to two 
different classes of people, and in that double sense predi- 
cated of ignorant and wise. These extremes are conse- 
quently compared with two different parts of the term 
good, so that in lieu of one middle term we have two, 
against the express sanction of the canon. The same 
illusion equally obtains where the middle term is ambiguous 
or equivocal, for in such instances two different senses may 
be struck out of the word, and the same error committed as 

1 Thompson's Laws of Thought, p. 231, 2nd ed. 



106 PBOPEBTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

if the term had remained undistributed. To cite a glaring 
instance : 

Light is contrary to darkness, 
Feathers are light ; 

Therefore, feathers are contrary to darkness 1 . 
As the purport of the rule, however, is to secure the 
comparison of each of the extremes with the whole or the 
same part of the middle, this, it has been argued, may be 
obtained 3 without an express distribution of the middle ; as 
when, instead of introducing every part of a third term, we 
specify what part of it, is intended to be taken in botli 
premises ; but we cannot so specify the part of the middle 
without rendering it a singular term, and such we have 
seen are universal, and consequently distributive. Thus, from 
the premises : 

Three-fourths of the army were Eussians, 
Three-fourths of the army were slaughtered ; 
we may fairly infer that 

Some who were slaughtered were Eussians. 
For, even supposing the whole of the remaining fourth that 
were slaughtered were Turks, there would still remain two- 
fourths in the second premiss to be put to the account of 
the Eussians, as the following lines will show : 
Eussians ' [ 

Army I I I I I 

Men slaughtered l_ 



But it is evident that in this case the middle term is of a sin- 
gular character, and consequently universal, and as such dis- 
tributed in both premises. 

4th. No term must be distributed in the conclusion which 
was not distributed in one of the premises, since that would 
be to employ the whole of a term in the conclusion, when 
only a part of it had been employed in the premises, which 
is in reality equivalent to the introduction of a fourth term. 
Thus: 

Edward is melancholy, 

Edward is wise ; 

Therefore all wise men are melancholy. 

i Archbishop Whately's Logic, b. ii. c. iii. 2. 2 Thompson's 

Laws of Thought, p. 237. 



C. I. 1.] EULES OF THE SYLLOGISM. 107 

Again : 

All quadrupeds are animals, 

A bird is not a quadruped ; 

Therefore it is not an animal. 

In the first example, the minor term is taken more exten- 
sively in the conclusion than in the premises an act which 
is called illicit process of the minor ; in the second example, 
the major term is in the same position, and is similarly 
termed an illicit process of the minor. Between the two in- 
stances there is, however, this difference, that the illicit pro- 
cess of the major is far the worse fault, as in that case we are 
not entitled to draw any conclusion at all ; but in the other 
we only draw a universal in place of a particular. This rule 
is expressly provided for by that part of the canon which 
directs that the terms be expressed in the conclusion accord- 
ing to the inferior relation which they hold in the premises. 
5th. From negative premises we can infer nothing ; con- 
sequently one must be affirmative. For if both extremes are 
said to disagree with the middle term, they cannot be com- 
pared together. Thus, from 

Every wise man is not amiable, 

Wo miser is wise, 

we can infer nothing. This rule is expressed in the canon 
by the clause enjoining that one of the extremes shall be 
connected with the common third term positively. 

6th. If one premiss be negative, the conclusion must be 
negative. For in that premiss the middle term is pro- 
nounced to disagree with one of the extremes, and in the 
other premiss, which must by the preceding rule be affirma- 
tive, to agree with the other extreme ; but extremes which 
disagree with each other can only lead to a negative conclu- 
sion. This rule is also secured by that part of the canon 
already quoted as involving the fourth rule ; viz., that the 
conclusion must follow the inferior relation of the extremes 
in the premises. 

These rules in the common school logics are extended to 
eight, and are thus expressed in hexameters : 

Terminus esto triplex medius majorque minorque : 
Latius hos quam praemissae conclusio non vult : 
Nequaquem medium capiat conclusio oportet : 
Aut semel aut iterum medium generaliter esto : 



108 PEOPEETIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

Utraque si prsemissa neget, nihil inde sequitur : 
Ambse affirmantes nequeuut generare negentem : 
Nil sequitur geminis ex particularibus unquam : 
Pejorem sequitur semper conclusio partem. 

But if these are examined, the remaining two will be found 
to be included in the ones we have already particularised. 
For example, the third and fourth rule preclude all inference 
from two particular premises, because the resulting syllo- 
gism would involve either an undistributed middle or an 
illicit process. As : 

Some minerals are crystals, 

Some stones are not crystals ; 

Therefore some stones are not minerals. 
The fourth rule, also, collaterally implies, that if one of the 
premises be particular, the conclusion must be particular, in 
accordance with the canon, that the terms in the conclusion 
must follow the inferior relation, if such exist, which obtained 
in the premises. For, the inferring a universal conclusion 
in that case would lead to the illicit process of the minor. 
Thus, from 

All who live virtuously deserve esteem, 
Some Pagans lived virtuously, 
we can only infer that 

Some Pagans deserve esteem. 

It may also be remarked, that several of the rules assign the 
conditions for the existence of a syllogism rather than afford 
any direct test of its validity. It is likewise important to 
remember that all the general rules already given are not to 
be regarded as something distinct from the canon, but as a 
detailed exposition of its principles, intended to secure in all 
cases every illative process from error. 

2. Figures of the Syllogism. 

The figure of a syllogism is determined by the situation of 
the middle term when compared with the extremes of the 
conclusion in the premises. This may obviously vary in four 
different ways. For the middle term can either be the sub- 
ject of the major premiss, and the predicate of the minor, 
which is the first figure ; or the predicate of the major premiss, 
and the subject of the minor, which is the fourth figure ; or the 



c. i. 2.] riGURES or THE SYLLOGISM. 109 

predicate of both premises, which forms the second figure ; or 
the subject of both, which constitutes the third figure. Using 
the initial letters of the different terms, in lieu of concrete 
exemplifications, the scheme may be thus expressed : 
1st fig. 2nd fig. 3rd fig. 4th fig. 

M, P, P, M, M, P, P, M, 
0,M, I, M, M, S, M, S, 
/. S, P, /. S, P, .-. S, P, .-. S, P. 

Each of these figures have their respective rules, which, how- 
ever, are involved in the universal canon and the rules already 
given; and only lead to a separate statement, by way of 
caution, that none of the figures may violate the principles 
of the rules already given. Though the reader might easily 
evolve these special rules, from an examination of each figure 
in connexion with the main canon, we will state them at 
length, together with the laws or principles which the four 
figures exemplify. 

The construction of the first figure requires the major 
premiss to be universal, and the minor affirmative ; as in the 
celebrated argument of Aristotle 1 , to prove the inseparable 
union of the virtues : 

He who possesses prudence possesses all virtue, 

He who possesses one virtue must possess prudence ; 

Therefore he who possesses one virtue possesses all. 
Por if the minor were negative, the major must be affirma- 
tive by the fifth general rule, and the conclusion negative by 
the sixth ; the greater term, which is taken only particularly 
in the major premiss, would then be taken universally in the 
conclusion, in contravention of the fourth rule. Now, if the 
minor must be affirmative, the major premiss must be uni- 
versal, otherwise the middle term, being the subject of the 
latter, and the predicate of the former, would be taken twice 
particularly, against the third rule. 

The principle or law which the first figure exemplifies, is 
the celebrated dictum de omni et nullo, which Aristotle sup- 
posed to be inclusive of all reasoning. It may be thus ex- 
pressed : " Whatever is affirmed or denied of a class may be 
affirmed or denied of any part of that class 3 ." So that if 

1 Eth. b. Ti. passim. * Arist. Cat. ch. v., and Pri. An. i. ch, v. and 
vi. See Bohn s Scientific Library. 



110 PBOPEBTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

one attributes to men free agency, we may also affirm it of 
Ethiopians as part of the class men ; or if it is denied that 
brutes are thinking beings, we may also aver the same of 
apes, which are included in the same category. Whatever be 
the subject-matter, this figure invariably illustrates the same 
principle ; since in it the greater term is affirmed or denied 
of the middle, taken universally, and this same middle is again 
affirmed of the lesser term, in a particular sense, which makes 
the subject of the conclusion stand in the same relation to 
the subject of the major premiss as part to a whole, and con- 
sequently produces a subordination of classes. 

The first figure is generally deemed the most perfect, be- 
cause all the propositions, a, e, i, o, can be proved by it, 
and a universal affirmative by it alone 1 . The reason of the 
latter is, that with a view to make the conclusion a universal 
affirmative, the lesser term must be taken generally in the 
minor, and consequently form its subject ; but the middle term 
being the predicate of the minor, is particular, whence arises 
the necessity of taking it universally in the major where it is 
the subject. But this can only occur in the first figure. 

Since the second figure is that in which the middle term is 
taken twice as attribute, it requires two cautions, with a view 
to secure its adherence to the general rules of the universal 
canon. The first is, that one of the premises, and conse- 
quently the conclusion must be negative ; and secondly, that 
the major proposition must be universal ; as in Cicero's argu- 
ment against the Epicureans 2 . 

All true philosophers regard virtue as a good in itself, 
But the Epicureans do not reckon virtue a good in itself; 
Therefore the Epicureans are not true philosophers. 

For if both propositions in this syllogism were affirmative, the 
middle, which in this figure is always the attribute, would 
be taken twice particularly, against the third rule ; and since 
the greater term is universally taken in the conclusion, it 
cannot be taken particularly in the major premiss, where it 
is the subject without an illicit process, which the fourth rule 
directly forbids. 

1 Not as Mr. Thompson states (Laws of Thought, p. 242), because 
it more directly exemplifies the dictum de omni et nullo. 2 De 
Officiis, b. i. and ii. 



C. I. 2.] FIGFEES OF THE SYLLOGISM. Ill 

The second figure illustrates the dictum de diverso, being 
founded on the axiom, " If one term is contained in, and 
another excluded from a third term, they are mutually ex- 
cluded," and is obviously useful for showing the differences 
of things, and remedying the confusion arising from indistinct 
conceptions. For instance, when we have to disprove some- 
thing that has been maintained, or is likely to be believed, we 
show that the thing we are speaking of cannot belong to 
such a class, either because it wants what belongs to the 
whole of that class, or because it has something of which that 
class is destitute ; in either case the inference will fall into 
the second figure. 

As the middle term in the third figure is twice taken as 
subject, it follows, with a view to the observance of the canon, 
that the minor proposition must be affirmative, and the con 
elusion particular; as in Adam Smith's reasoning on the 
moral sentiments 1 , 

Prudence has for its object the benefit of individuals ; 

But prudence is a virtue ; therefore 

Some virtue has for its object the benefit of the individual. 
For if the minor were negative, the same consequences would 
follow which have been already pointed out in the case of 
a minor negative in the first figure. While a general con- 
clusion would lead to an illicit process ; as the subject, which 
is only taken particularly in the minor premiss, would then 
be universal against the fourth rule. 

The principle which the third figure exemplifies may be 
called the dictum de exemplo, that is, " Two terms which con- 
tain a common part partly agree, or if the one contain a part 
which the other does not they partly differ ;" and is generally 
employed to establish an objection to an opponent's premiss 
where his argument is such as to require that premiss to be 
universal. Thus, if any one contended that this or that 
doctrine ought not to be admitted, because it cannot be 
explained or comprehended, his suppressed major premiss 
might be refuted by the argument, that gravitation, as an 
occult quality, cannot be explained or comprehended : a great 
part of Butler's analogy might be exhibited in this form 2 . 

The fourth figure is only employed by an accidental awk- 

1 Against Hutcheson and others, who placed all virtue in benevolence. 
* Whately's Logic, b. ii. ch. iii. 5. 



112 PBOPEKTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

\rardness of expression ; and as the conclusion which the 
mind would naturally draw from premises in which the 
middle term appears as the predicate of the first proposition, 
and the subject of the second, would change it into the first 
figure, this course is ordinarily taken by simple conversion. 
Thus, in Cicero's argument 1 : 
Whatever is expedient is conformable to nature, 
Whatever is conformable to nature is not hurtful to society ; 
Therefore what is hurtful to society is never expedient. 
Here the mind is naturally led to expect the converse of the 
conclusion to be drawn as the proper consequence, viz., 
' : what is expedient is not hurtful to society," which would 
transform it into a syllogism in the first figure. It would, 
therefore, be only sanctioning a blunder to invest the fourth 
figure with axiom and rules 2 , and we mention it, indeed, in 
this place only to caution the reader against it. 

Some logicians 3 , it may be observed, taking that proposi- 
tion which is placed first for the major premiss ; and for the 
minor, that which stands second, apply to the fourth figure 
the reasonings of the first, and condemn Aristotle for not re- 
cognising it. If, however, the major and minor premises 
were to be determined by their situation in the syllogism, it is 
obvious that the conclusion would be frequently confounded 
with them, since, in ordinary reasoning, it is as customary to 
mention the fact and then proceed to the proof, as it is to 
begin with the proof and then mention the fact ; while in that 
class of reasonings which take the shape of questions and pro- 
blems, it is invariably the practice to commence with a state- 

1 De Officiis, b. iii. 9 It was, notwithstanding, done by Lambert 
and the Port Royal logicians, though Arnauld treated the subject of 
his labour with some degree of contempt. See 1'Art de Penser, part iii. 
ch. viii. Aristotle never alludes to the fourth figure; and some logi- 
cians, on the authority of Averroes (in 1 Pri. An. ch. viii. vol. i. 
p. 63), have attributed it, as an actual discovery, to Galen; which is 
much about the same as to attribute phlogiston to Beecher as a chemi- 
cal discovery, because no one had stumbled upon that error before. 
Mr. Thompson is of opinion that Galen did not adopt the fourth figure, 
from the inspection of a Greek copy of Galen's Dialectia, recently 
published in Paris, from a MS. of the eleventh century. To prove, 
however, that nothing can be so absurd that will not admit even of 
elaborate apology, Zaberella has written a book in defence of the 
fourth figure. 3 Gassendi, Institutio Logica, pars tertia, canon i., 

and Zaberella. 



C. I. 3.] ABRIDGEMENT OF PREMISES. 113 

ment of the conclusion 1 . Of the latter instance, we of course 
find many examples in mathematics ; of the former, any writer 
will afford us frequent examples. Thus, Horace : 
Qui melior servo, qui liberior sit avarus ; 
In triviis fixum, cum se demittit ob assem 
Non video : nam qui cupiet, metuet quoque : porro 
Qui metuens vivit, liber inihi non erit unquam 2 , 

which, is reducible to, 

He who is in continual fear is not free, 
Every miser is in continual fear ; 
Therefore no miser is free. 

The local arrangement of the propositions, therefore, which 
affect no change in the argument, are not to be taken as 
an index of the major or minor premiss, but that proposi- 
tion must be considered as major, one of whose terms is the 
attribute of the conclusion, and that the minor, in which the 
subject of the conclusion is found. 

3. Moods of the Syllogism. 

The designation of the three propositions of a syllogism, 
in their logical order, according to their respective quantity 
and quality, constitutes its mood. Thus the syllogism last 
given, " He who is in continual fear is not free," is in the 
mood e, a, e. Since there are four kinds of propositions (a, 
e, i, o), and three propositions in each syllogism, all the pos- 
sible ways in which these can be 'combined in a syllogism 
are sixty-four. For any one of these four may be the major 
premiss, while each of these four majors may have four dif- 
ferent minors ; and of these sixteen pair of premises each may 
have four different conclusions. But by bringing each mood 
to the test of the canon, twenty-eight will be found excluded 
on account of negative and particular premises ; eighteen by 
the condition that the conclusion follow the inferior part ; 

1 Sir W. Hamilton asserts, that the Greeks (Pagan and Christian, 
Peripatetic, Academic, Stoic, Epicurean, and Sceptic, down to the 
taking of Constantinople) placed first in syllogistic order the minor 
proposition, and that the Latins, up to the sixth century, were of accord 
with the Greek, when the example of Boethius caused succeeding 
scholars to follow the present practice, which assigns the first place to 
the major premiss. 3 Epist. i. 16. 

I 



114 PEOPEETIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

six for the reason that a negative conclusion cannot follow 
from particular premises ; and one, *, e, o, because the major 
proposition of a negative conclusion can never be a particular 
affirmative by the fourth rule. When these fifty-three in- 
valid moods are subtracted from the list, there only remain 
eleven, viz. : 

Four Affirmatives and Seven Negatives. 

a, a, a, e, a, e, 

a, i, i, a, e. e, 

a, a, i, e, a, o, 

i, a, i. a, o, o, 

o, a, o, 

e, i, o, 

a, e, o. 

Each, however, of the valid moods are not admissible into 
every figure, since some may violate the general canon in 
one figure though not in another. Thus, i, a, iis a valid 
mood in the third figure, but in the first it would be attended 
with a distributed middle. So a, e, e would involve in the first 
figure an illicit process of the major, but is legitimate in the 
second ; and a, a, a, which is admissible in the first figure, 
would in the third involve an illicit process of the minor. By 
a 'similar application of the moods to the figures in detail, it 
will be found that each will admit only six valid moods ; and 
of these several, though valid, are useless, as leading to a 
particular conclusion when a universal might be drawn. As, 
for instance, a, e, o, in any of the four figures, or a, a, i, in 
the first figure : Thus, 

All human creatures are entitled to liberty, 

All slaves are human creatures ; 

Therefore some slaves are entitled to liberty. 
For this reason, five out of the twenty-four moods arising 
out of the union of six valid moods in each figure are re- 
jected; so that nineteen remain as the only valid forms in 
which inference can lead to a useful result ; and even of these, 
five may be very well neglected as belonging to the fourth 
figure. As one mood may occur in two figures, it is neces- 
sary to distinguish both the mood itself and the figure in 
which it is to be found, and to effect this purpose logicians 
have devised names, with vowels, corresponding to the several 



C. I. 4.] MOODS OF THE SYLLOGISM. 115 

inoods, and arranged them in verses, each line of which 
answers to the respective figure in which the moods occur. 
Thus: 

FIG. 1. Barbara 1 , celarent, dam, fm'oque prioris. 

PIG. 2. Cesare, cames-tres, festino, baroko secundae. 

FIG. 3. Tertia, doroptt, disarms, datisi, fielopton 

Borordo, feriso, habet. Quarta insuper addit 

FIG. 4. Bromontt'p, camenes, dimaris, fesapo, fresison. 

The five moods of the fourth figure are sometimes ex- 
pressed as 

Boralzpton, celantes, dabitis, fopesmo, 
Frzsesomorum, 

which transform the minor into the major premiss : For it 
was maintained, as Aristotle had not made a separate figure 
for these moods, that they were only indirect moods of the 
first figure with the conclusion reversed, and that, conse- 
quently, the attribute of the latter was the true subject. But 
as the conclusion is invariably supposed to be the thing which 
requires proof, it is certainly preferable to take always as the 
major the proposition into which the attribute of the conclu- 
sion enters, and bring them under the first figure by simple 
conversion. 

4. The Quantification of ike Predicate (new analytic) 
considered with reference to Mood and Figure. 

The list of valid moods has been enlarged by introducing 
into the combination the four additional propositions which 
emerge out of the express qxiantification of the predicate : 
but as we endeavoured to show that judgments with a 
quantified predicate were never practically subject to the 
mind's attention, and that if it needed to express the rela- 
tions about which they are employed, it would fling them 

1 These verses commence (barbara) ominously enough, and hare 
been the subject of some wit and banter. It must, however, be con- 
fessed, considering the age in which they were produced (thirteenth 
century), and the man in whose works they were first found (Peter 
Hispanus), that they display an ingenuity which might have excited 
the envy of the Stagyrite himself. In addition to the distinction 
of mood and figure, the consonants, combined with the vowels, were 
intended to serve a distinct purpose in reduction, which, however, the 
discovery of dicta quite as potent as the axiom de omni et nullo for each 
of the figures, has rendered nugatory. 

I 2 



116 PItOPEBTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

into one of the forms included in the four judgments, a, i, 
e, o, to which we have restricted the consideration of logical 
quantity and quality, we might rest the matter here : since 
if that position be sound, the extension of valid moods can 
only be gained by the interpolation of. useless propositions, 
leading to conclusions or inferences that no one ever seeks 
to establish. It may, however, be important, considering the 
high quarter 1 from which the doctrine of the complete quan- 
tification of the predicate emanates, to give it an ampler con- 
sideration here, where it is designed to replace the old cate- 
gory of syllogisms, and which, consequently, is alleged to be 
the true sphere of its utility. 

The two great ends which the new quantification is designed 
to accomplish, are the amplification of the valid forms of rea- 
soning, and through it, the abolition or simplification of all 
that is cumbrous in the old system of logic. The first of 
these is certainly effected by the introduction of the four 
additional propositions, v, y, x, z, already given 2 ; as these 
would increase the list of judgments to eight ; and the dif- 
ferent modes of combining eight propositions by three (the 
number which constitute the syllogism) would be 8 X 8 
(=64) x 8 =512. After the invalid syllogisms have been 
excluded from this large category, there remain thirty-six 
legitimate syllogisms twelve negative and twenty-four affir- 
mative for each figure, so that if we even restrict ourselves 
to the three first figures we shall get 108 forms of valid 
inference in lieu of the twenty-four obtained in the old table, 
On examining the new forms of judgment, however, the 
majority of the inferences will be found so weak and indefi- 
nite as to be of no practicable utility ; while there is hardly 
one of those which may be said to add something to our 
knowledge of the subject, which the mind would not throw 
into one of the first four propositions as a more natural 
expression of the relation between the subject and the pre- 
dicate than the constrained forms sought to be introduced. 
Thus, to take the first case, of what earthly use is it to infer 
by the mood o, i, z (of the second figure), the following : 

Some minerals are non-conductors, 

Some metals are conductors ; 

Therefore some minerals are not some metals ; 
1 We need hardly say the distinguished professor of logic and 
metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh, Sir \V. Hamilton. 
2 Ante, p. 93. 



C. I. 4.] THE NEW ANALYTIC TESTED. 117 

notwithstanding every mood in which x, z occur, that is forty- 
five out of the 108, end in some intimation of an equally 
startling character. 

Though the syllogisms in which y occurs alone, or in com- 
bination \vith any of the four propositions o, e, i, o, are com- 
petent to communicate information which might fairly form 
the subject of inference ; yet this is done in so unnatural a 
manner that the mind, even in its most confused state, never 
stumbles upon them by the remotest accident. Thus, who 
could ever be led to infer y, y, y, in the first figure ? 
Some beasts are all cloven-footed, 
But some animals are all beasts, 
Therefore some animals are all cloven-footed. 

Yet this is an average specimen of the class of syllogisms 
the reader would get from introducing y into the series of 
propositions. It is obvious, as we have before remarked, 
that if the mind had to express such a relation it would 
transfer the terms thus : 

All cloven-footed creatures are beasts, 

But all beasts are animals, 

Therefore all cloven-footed creatures are animals, 
which would bring the syllogism into the mood a, a, a. On 
account, therefore, of that mental law which leads us in- 
variably to affirm the particular of the universal, and con- 
sequently to assign to the latter the first place, or, in other 
words, to make it the subject of the judgment, the propo- 
sition y may be regarded as deformed and useless in logic : 
its place is always naturally supplied by a. 

The moods in which u occurs, though not so faulty in ex- 
pression, may be put out of court for the same reasons as 
y, its functions being so completely discharged by a, that no 
instance can be adduced of a practicable nature which would 
call for its interposition. Thus, to take a casual instance, in 
v, a, a, of the second figure : 

All responsible agents are all men, 

But all Ethiopians are men, 

Therefore all Ethiopians are responsible agents ; 

we do not require the attribute of the major to be taken 
universally to get the conclusion, which would be equally 
evident were the more natural judgment (a), viz., "Ail 



118 PEOPERTIES OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

responsible agents are men" substituted in its place. The 
mind, indeed, never adverts to the extension of the predicate 
further than is required to ascertain whether it can be 
affirmed or denied of the subject ; the consideration how far 
it may overlap it, or to what other things it may be applied, 
would be quite extraneous to the judgment before it, and is 
therefore never dwelt upon. Admitting, therefore, the ex- 
tension of the valid forms of reasoning at which the doctrine 
of quantification aims, a close inspection of the new judg- 
ments which arise from its application compels us to reject 
it as useless ; for where the inference to which they lead is 
not equivocal or ambiguous, it is too awkward to be ever 
used ; and, in the latter case, the relations of the judgment, 
and the subsequent inference, find their natural expression 
in the nineteen moods already given. 

Nor is the plea of utility unadmitted by the advocates of 
the new system, who advocate many changes on that ground, 
although they involve themselves in not a little inconsistency 
by challenging at the same time for logic the evolution of all 
the conceivable modes of thought. That the two principles 
are often in antagonism, no one can deny, since many modes 
of inference are conceivable which have no practicable utility ; 
and least of all the proposers of the new quantification, who 
reject the fourth figure on the very ground that we extrude 
the new analytic from a practical system of logic 1 , viz., that 
of its utility ; but as they have admitted the competency of 
that test to sweep away a figure along with its five moods, 
they cannot shield themselves from its application to the new 
table of judgments, which it will be found to explode quite as 
effectually as the fourth figure. But we are disposed to carry 
the test of utility to higher ground, and apply it to the very 
extension of reasoning forms, which it is the professed mis- 
sion of the new analytic to establish. Is it really conducive 
to those functions which logic was created to discharge, that 
the forms of valid reasonings should be multiplied ? We 
think otherwise. The aim of logical science is simply to 
teach men to reason legitimately, and to place in their hands 
a body of rules by which sophisms may be detected ; and the 
fewer the forms to which all correct and habitual inference 
may be reduced, the more compact the moods in which all 
legitimate reasoning can be represented, the better and sooner 
1 See Mr. Baynes'sNew Analytic. 



C. I. 4.] THE NEW ANALYTIC TESTED. 119 

will this object be effected. To scatter the nineteen legiti- 
mate forms of inference over 108 distinct moods, comprising 
the conceivable as well as the actual forms of reasoning, is 
only breaking down the fence which enables us to hunt a 
sophism into a corner, and by multiplying the valid tests to 
which any argument can be brought to multiply, besides 
the additional labour, our chance of error in the application 
of them. The aim of the new analytic, therefore, in enlarging 
the field of inference, is hardly fortunate ; in a practical sense 
it does not succeed, and even if it accomplished its object 
success would be worse than defeat ; for it would be accom- 
panied by the destruction of the very simplification which 
render the doctrine of the syllogism really serviceable to the 
reasoner. 

It is, notwithstanding, one of the professed aims of the new 
analytic to simplify logic, and that through the very means by 
which its lists of valid judgments would be rendered more com- 
plex ; and it is supposed to effect this object in three ways : 
viz., by reducing the general rules to one complete canon ; 
by the abolition of the special rules of the figures ; and by 
the removal of the erroneous doctrine of conversion of pro- 
positions and reduction of syllogisms 1 . The first and second 
notion we need hardly say are simply absurd, inasmuch as 
the general rules, and even the special rules of the figures, 
are in nowise distinct from the canon, but only act as so 
many cautions, which it is advisable for the reasoner to have 
before him, in order that he may not violate any of its prin- 
ciples. They might, therefore, be omitted from the old logic 
with as much propriety as from the system sought to be 
established, and with more security against error, since its 
code of valid syllogisms are much fewer than those arising 
out of the quantification of the predicate, and consequently 
afford less ground for the violation of the canon. But in 
reality they can be spared in neither system, as it is obvi- 
ously necessary, to secure the understanding from error, that 
every mode by which a deviation can occur from the princi- 
ples of right reason should be drawn out distinctly before it. 
The Ten Commandments are reduced by theologians to two ; 
but it would hardly conduce to the fulfilment of the natural 
law to insist on that account upon their abolition. 

With regard to the cranky doctrine of reduction, it does 
1 Mr. Baynes's New Analytic. 



120 NOTATION OP THE SYLLOGISM. [is. HI. 

not require the introduction of the new analytic to escape 
from its intricacies, as the legitimation of each figure by its 
own axiom renders that doctrine not only nugatory, but 
absurd. It has been, consequently, avoided by many logi- 
cians, from the days of Wolf downwards, who never dreamt 
of quantification ; and we have omitted it in this logic on 
similar grounds. As respects conversion, we in the last 
book have shown the object which it is intended to effect is 
indispensable to many forms of solid argument, and pre- 
sents a lever of proof which could not be supplied by the 
quantification of the predicate; its abrogation, therefore, 
would only weaken the science by depriving it of one of 
the means of producing conviction. 

The introduction of the new analytic, therefore, can 
serve no purpose of simplification beyond that already 
attained, while it would materially enhance the danger of 
error by enlarging the list of valid moods in each figure, to 
which the rules would have to be applied, and in some mea- 
sure introduce the complexity into logic it was designed to 
abolish. "We consequently reject it on three distinct counts ; 
because a part of the object at which it aims is chimerical ; 
because it fails to accomplish the remaining part ; and 
thirdly, because that portion of the object, even if achieved, 
would be destructive of the very simplification it is instituted 
to realise 1 . 



CHAPTEE II. 

NOTATION OF THE SYLLOGISM. 

1. Euler's Method. 

THE relations which mentally subsist between conceptions 
have been attempted to be represented to the eye by dia- 
grams, and though some mathematical logicians have carried 

1 It would exceed our limits to answer the particular charges which 
Sir W. Hamilton, through the medium of his pupil's essay, brings 
against the old doctrine of mood and figure; such as that of inconsis- 
tency in the discrimination of mood where there is no difference of 
quantity and quality, but a mere transposition of terms; and that of 
mere accidents of expression prevailing over essential forms of thought, 
in rendering moods valid in one figure, invalid in another. Every one 
of these allegations admit of a satisfactory reply, which we reserve, 
however, for another place. 



c. ii. 1.] ETTLER'S METHOD. 121 

this species of notation too far 1 , it must be allowed, if kept 
within moderate bounds, to facilitate logical analysis. 

The most celebrated scheme, and at the same time the 
simplest, is that of Euler 2 , which represents the sphere of a 
conception by a circle ; an affirmative judgment by one 
circle, wholly or partly contained in another ; and a negative 
by two separate circles. Thus, since the proposition "all 
plants are organised beings," includes under organised beings 
many species of plant, the former term is represented by a 
large circle, and the latter by a small one enclosed within it. 
If we, consequently, include "avaleas" in the class "plant," 
this term will fall into a smaller circle than plant, and be 
enclosed by it in return. We shall thus get the diagram : 




as illustrative of the mood a, a, a, of course in the first 
figure, in which it can only occur. 

Again, were we to infer that " some stones have deter- 
mined figures," from the fact that " all crystals have deter- 
minate figures," and some stones are crystals, the scheme 
may obviously be represented by making the circle which 
denotes crystals cut the circles denoting stones and deter- 
minate figures. Thus : 




This constitutes a, i, i, of the first figure. The mood e, t, o 
of the same figure is represented in a simpler form. Thus, 
supposing it required to prove some men are not respon- 
sible agents, our argument would naturally be : 

' * Ploucquet, one of the first to introduce it, appears to labour under 
this error with Condillac. Prof, de Morgan, in his excellent trea- 
tise on Formal Logic, may be said, to use a phrase of Bacon's, " to 
corrupt logic by mathematics." What end can it serve to invest logical 
relations with the forms of the calculus, and to be constantly carrying 
analogies below zero, and considering them under some relation of in- 
finitude ? * Lettres a une Princesse d'Allemagne, vol. ii. p. 110, 
and continuation. 



122 NOTATION OF THE SYLLOGISM. [B. III. 

None who have lost their reason are responsible ; 
But some men (lunatics) have lost their reason ; 
Therefore, some men are not responsible. 

Assuming A for the middle term, B for the attribute of the 
conclusion, and C for the subject, we get either of the two 
figures, 




For it is not necessary to know how far C may be included 
in B to infer the conclusion ; it may, in fact, either be iden- 
tical with it, or wholly included in it, or only in part. 

In addition to the transparent clearness with which 
this notation serves to bring out the relative extension of 
the terms of a syllogism, it occasionally is useful in show- 
ing the falsity of an argument, hardly perceptible when 
conveyed in ordinary language, as, 

Some learned men are misers, 

No miser is virtuous ; 

Therefore some virtuous men are not learned. 

Eepresenting the major, minor, and middle by the letters A, 
J5, (7, it is evident that no part of B (virtuous men) is in- 
cluded in C (misers) : their spheres, consequently, are quite 



separate ( j ( ) But because some of the class A 

S ~v" ~v 

is included in JB, that is ( * Q B ), we are not on that ac- 



^_^-" . 

count entitled to say that part of C is not A, as for anything 
we know it may be included in the whole of it. The only 
legitimate inference it is competent to us to draw in this case 
is, that part of A which is included in B is not C. 
Again, suppose it required to notify 

Some A is B ; Some A is B ; 

All .Bis C; or, Alibis C; 

Therefore some C is A ; Therefore some C is B ; 






C. II. 2.] GEEMAN METHODS. 123 

or its negative : 

Some A is not : 

All A is C; 

Therefore some C is not S ; 
the figures would evidently be : 



OR 



2. Ploucquet and Lambert's Method. 

The method which Ploucquet introduced and Lambert 
perfected, is more definite than Euler's, and consequently 
of much easier application. It serves, also, to bring out 
many inferences which Euler's notation hardly suggests, 
from substituting for the sphere of a term the more logical 
idea of its distribution. Thus a distributed term is de- 
noted by an horizontal line , with the letter 

S, P, or M, attached according as it is the subject, predicate, 
or middle term of the syllogism : while an undistributed 

term is marked by a row of dots in a 

line with its significant letter. 

Now premising that every affirmative judgment is repre- 
sented by drawing one line under the other, the predicate 
being always uppermost ; and every negative by drawing the 
two lines apart, we may represent the argument adduced 
by Dryden in defence of Christianity 1 : 

No body of impostors would have conspired to cheat 
men with a lie without temporal gain ; 

The Apostles did this ; 

Therefore they were not impostors. 

As: 



M 

8 

which signifies 

No M is P; 
But all Sis M; 
Therefore no S is P. 

1 Hind and Panther. 



124 NOTATION OF THE SYLLOGISM. [B. III. 

Again : 
All organised beings without volition are endued \vith 

unconscious perceptions ; 
But plants are organised beings ; 

They are therefore endued with unconscious perceptions ; 
would become, 

P 

M 

8 

From this notation, besides the two premises given, 

(1) All M is P, 

(2) All 8 is M, 
we may infer 

(3) Some P is M, 

(4) Some M is 8. 

3. -Sir W. Hamilton's Method. 

The notation of Sir W. Hamilton surpasses all its prede- 
cessors in its completeness and simplicity, and were it 
not exclusively framed to meet the extensive changes which 
the introduction of the new analytic would introduce into 
logic, its practical value would be inappreciable. The former 
systems of notation only embrace the extension of a syllo- 
gism, this includes its intension, besides denoting the pre- 
mises which may be converted without changing the mood 
of the figure. To give the entire method would be useless, 
as we have not adopted the system to which it corresponds. 
Its outlines, however, are well worthy of inspection, as a spe- 
cimen of learned ingenuity. 

The middle term is invariably represented by its initial 
letter M, while C and F stand for the two terms of the con- 
clusion ; a colon (:) denotes the distribution of the term to 
which it is annexed ; a comma (,) signifies it is not distri- 
buted. "When the middle term consequently has (:) on one 
side, and (,) on the other, its extension is determined by 
the term with which either of those marks is associated in 
judgment. The agreement of two terms is signified by ^ 
and disagreement by =4- } the thick end of the bar denoting 
the subject, the thin end the predicate when we regard the 
extension of the terms ; but contrariwise when the syllogism 



c. ii. 3.] HAMILTON'S METHOD. 125 

is interpreted according to its intension. Thus, in the one 
case, C-. , M would denote " all G is some M," in the 
other, " all M is some (7." 

The terms are generally stated in the same line with a bar 
drawn beneath them to indicate the conclusion ; but as in 
the second and third figures there may be two conclusions 
indifferently, a second bar is drawn above the terms to ex- 
press the second of them. Thus, Oersted's argument : 
All cases of magnetic polarity are cases of opposite pro- 
perties in opposite directions ; 

But some electric phenomena, viz. the voltaic pile and 
electrified minerals, develope opposite properties in 
opposite directions; 
Therefore some electric phenomena are all cases of 

magnetic polarity ; 
would figure thus : 




For, according to this system, it is of little moment whether 
we infer from the premises, 

Some electrical phenomena are all cases of magnetic 

polarity, 
or, 

All cases of magnetic polarity are some electrical phe- 
nomena, 

as its author will allow no distinction between major and 
minor premiss. 

We may add, the mark -. -^ ' placed under a mood de- 
notes that the premises may be converted without affecting 
either the quantity or quality. But the sign ~^><^ between 

two moods signifies that this transposition of the premises 
cannot occur without the two corresponding syllogisms 
changing places with each other. This may be easily per- 
ceived, without further explanation, from the adjoining dia- 
gram of syllogisms in the first figure : 




126 NOTATION OF THE SYLLOGISM. [B. III. 

4. Use of Notation ; Equivalent Syllogisms. 

The chief end of any adequate system of notation is to 
present to the eye, by a species of symbolical language, all 
the intricate relations which subsist between terms in a syl- 
logism, so that no point may be overlooked which has any 
bearing on the conclusion, and the inference be viewed in all 
the various shapes which the premises allow it to assume. 
It is not only serviceable in simply illustrating the rules of 
syllogisms, though that utility is sufficiently great to chal- 
lenge its admission into every logical system ; but it can, 
moreover, be employed, by way of a "glaring instance," to 
test the validity of an argument when the application of the 
canon to its syllogistic form has been attended with a doubt- 
ful result. 

Another great advantage attending notation is, that, if 
properly developed, it must not only represent the mutual 
relations of terms, but to some extent of propositions and 
syllogisms. It is in many cases very desirable to know what 
premises can be converted without changing the mood of the 
syllogism, i. e. without interfering with the quantity and 
quality of each proposition in it ; what syllogisms in eacli 
figure will pass into one another's place on the transposition 
of the premises ; and also in how many figures the same ar- 
gument may be stated; so that if its cogency be denied 
in one, it may be presented in another. 

It is obvious, though neither judgment or inference may 
derive more intrinsic light or force from one mode of state- 
ment more than another, that there are certain forms in 
which an argument will strike conviction to some minds ; 
which, if presented in another though equally conclusive 
shape, it would have failed to effect ; and it becomes, there- 
fore, of moment to the logician to be familiar with all the 
modes in which a valid syllogism can be urged, in order 
that when conviction does not attend his reasonings in one 
form, he may produce them in another. All the artifices, 
indeed, of mood, conversion, and figure, comprise only a 
species of symbolical representation, witli a view to show 
the various ways in which the relation between the terms of 
an argument can be expressed while that relation remains 
fixed and immutable. 

With a view to exhibit the utility of this species of cipher 



O. in. 1.] EQUIVALENT SYLLOGISMS. 127 

as far as equivalent syllogisms are concerned, let it be re- 
quired to be shown in bow many ways tbe following argu- 
ment may be proved : 

Electricity will travel along a tied nerve, 

The nervous fluid will not travel along a tied nerve ; 

Therefore the nervous fluid is not electricity. 

This is a syllogism in Camestres, and the permanent relation 
of the terms would be represented in Lambert's method by 

M 

P 8 

But by a glance at the lines it is obvious we can express the 
same argument quite as conclusively in Cesare. Thus : 
The nervous fluid will not travel along a tied nerve, 
Electricity will travel along a tied nerve ; 
Therefore electricity is not the electric fluid ; 
or instead of asserting that no part of S agrees with M, we 
may express the converse, which will lead to a syllogism in 
Celarent of the first figure: 

Nothing that travels along a tied nerve can be the elec- 
tric fluid, 

Electricity travels along a tied nerve ; 
Therefore electricity cannot be the nervous fluid. 
In this manner notation is pre-eminently useful in suggest- 
ing all the inferences which may be drawn from the syllo- 
gistic relation of terms, thus leaving the logician at liberty 
to choose that which best suits his purpose, either in the 
establishment or demonstration of fact, or in producing con- 
viction in the mind of others. 



CHAPTEE III. 

KINDS OF SYLLOGISMS. 

1. Complex Syllogisms. 

EVERY form of argument yet considered has been of a 
simple incomplex character, with a view to place the nature 
of the syllogism in as clear a light as possible, that there 
might be no difficulty in comprehending the full import of 
its various properties, and the bearings of the rules which 



128 KTNDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

legitimise its forms. But a large class of reasonings are 
composed of syllogisms some complex, and others compound 
in their characters, which it is obviously necessary to deal 
with, either by resolving them into simple incomplex syllo- 
gisms, and thus bringing them under the rules already given, 
or by creating new rules by which their validity may be 
tested on their own grounds. 

Of these, perhaps embracing the largest class of reason- 
ings, and certainly the most difficult to bring under distinct 
rules, are complex syllogisms. They generally present a 
simple incomplex minor premiss combined with a major pre- 
miss and conclusion, in which incidental propositions are 
introduced, and occasionally the complexity of the syllogism 
is enhanced from the conclusion not being taken entire in 
each of the premises, and consequently being only in part 
compared with the middle term. Thus : 

The sun is a thing insensible, 

The Persians worship the sun ; 

Therefore the Persians worship a thing insensible ; 

in which worship, though excluded from the major, is intro- 
duced in the minor and conclusion. 

To reduce this class of syllogisms to a simple incomplex 
form, we need only follow the rules already given for the 
simplification of the propositions of which they are com- 
posed, eliminating every part of the terms which have no 
relation to the inference, and limiting the major to the exact 
sense in which it is taken in the proposition. Thus, in this 
syllogism : 

The virtuous only are happy, 

Some rich men are not virtuous ; 

Therefore there are rich men who are not happy. 

The major, being an exclusive proposition, is in reality com- 
posed of two propositions, viz. : All the virtuous are happy, 
and all who are not virtuous are not happy. But since the 
force of the inference depends entirely upon the last proposi- 
tion, we adopt it exclusively, and thus make the subject of the 
major, all who are not virtuous, the predicate in the minor 
premiss, which changes its quality, as, 



C. III. 1.] COMPLEX SYLLOGISMS. 129 

All who are not virtuous are not happy, 

Some rich men are among the number of those who are 

not virtuous ; 
Therefore some rich men are not happy 1 . 

To denude the syllogism of all words which are irrelevant 
to the inference, and set the terms in a clear light, it is fre- 
quently necessary to transfer the active verb which generally 
enters into complex propositions, to its passive tense 2 , as 

The divine law commands us to honour our rulers, 
Victoria is our ruler ; 

Therefore the divine law commands us to honour Vic- 
toria. 

Although the term "rulers" in the major of this syllogism 
appears to be the attribute, it is in reality the subject, since 
we affirm of it that they are to be honoured on the authority 
of the divine law. The syllogism should therefore stand : 

Rulers are to be honoured (by the command of the 

divine law) ; 

But Victoria is our ruler ; 
Therefore Victoria is to be honoured (by the command 

of the divine law) ; 

where the clauses in brackets being obviously incidental 
only to the inference, may be omitted without affecting its 
validity. 

It often happens that a part of the premiss may be inci- 
dental in one sense, and an essential constituent of the judg- 
ment in another, as : 

' Many have cited such syllogisms to prove that the rule which 
asserts that no inference can be drawn from two negative propositions 
is false, without observing that the negation in the minor falls on the 
term which is privative, and not on the verb, and that, as in the above 
proposition, if the attribute of the minor was not taken in a privative 
sense, the term would not have the same import in both propositions. 
Of this kind of syllogism, the following is taken from 1'Art de Pensor 
(part iii. ch. ix.): 

That which has no parts cannot perish by the dissolution of its 
parts, 

The soul is a substance which has no parts; 

Therefore, the soul cannot perish by the dissolution of its parts. 
- See ante, p. 75, note. 

K 



130 KINDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

All philosophers maintain 1 that heavy things fall to the 

ground without being impelled by anything ; 
But this is an error ; 

Therefore all philosophers may teach error. 
Here the first part of the minor is the subject, for we affirm 
of philosophers that they K teach a certain doctrine : but 
should we argue, 

All philosophers maintain that heavy things fall to the 

ground without being impelled by anything; 
But stones are heavy ; 

Therefore stones fall to the ground without being im- 
pelled by anything, 

the minor, or complex proposition, would become the major, 
and that part of it which was the subject before, would be- 
come an incidental proposition, merely qualifying the attri- 
bute and having no bearing on the inference. Thus : 
Heavy things fall to the ground without being impelled 
by anything (according to the teaching of philoso- 
phers) ; 

But stones are heavy ; 

Therefore stones fall to the ground without being im- 
pelled by anything (according to the teaching of 
philosophers) . 

It is therefore necessary, before eliminating from the terms 
of the syllogism such words as are only incidental, to know 
distinctly what is aimed at by the proof; as part of a propo- 
sition may be a term in one sense, and only an incidental 
expression qualifying a term in another 2 . 

Some logicians 3 desirous to find a shorter process to the 
validity of such syllogisms than their reduction to incomplex 
forms and the application of the general rules afford, have 
placed the entire artifice of reasoning in showing that the 
conclusion is contained in one of the first propositions by 
the interpolation of another, which establishes the inclusion ; 
and since no argument can be vicious which is true to this 
principle, they are disposed to accept it as an easy test by 
which, without reference to mood and figure, the correctness 
of every syllogism, however complex, may be ascertained. 

1 As was the case anterior to the time of Galileo. 2 See ante, 

pp. 79 and 90. 3 Arnauld and Nicol. See 1'Art de Penser, part iii. 
ch. ii. 



C. III. 1.] TJKIYEESAL TEST OF SYLLOGISMS. 131 

Thus, on being required to snow that every vicious man is 
unhappy, we first endeavour to find a more evident proposi- 
tion in which this is implicitly contained, as, Every man who 
is the slave of his passions is unhappy (containing proposi- 
tion) 1 ; but as this does not include the judgment which is 
sought to be established expressly, we interpolate another 
proposition to show that the containing proposition unde- 
niably includes what we desire to prove, as, Every vicious 
man is the slave of his passions (applicative proposition). 
The syllogism would consequently be : 

Every one who is the slave of his passions is unhappy, 
Every vicious man is the slave of his passions ; 
Therefore every vicious man is unhappy. 

In affirmative syllogisms it is frequently optional which 
premiss is assumed to be the containing or applicative proposi- 
tion, as each will contain the conclusion in such case, only in 
a different sphere, the major in that of extension, the minor 
in the counter one of comprehension. Thus, in the above 
example, the subject of the conclusion, "vicious," is con- 
tained under the extension of the subject of the major, 
' slave of his passions," and the minor shows this. But the 
minor contains it likewise, since "slave of his passions" 
comprehends in its idea that of "unhappy," as the major 
indicates. As the major, however, is nearly always the more 
general proposition, it may be commonly regarded as the 
containing proposition, and the minor only the applicative. 

In negative syllogisms the affirmative proposition, whether 
major or minor, will be the least general, and consequently 
will form exclusively the applicative proposition, as in the 
argument : 

Every happy man is content, 

No miser is content ; 

Therefore no miser is happy. 

It is more natural to say that the minor contains the conclu- 
sion, and that the major, which is affirmative, proves the in- 
clusion, than contrariwise. For the minor separating miser 
from content, excludes it also from the term happy, since 
that attribute, according to the major, is wholly contained 
under the extension of content. 



132 KINDS OP STLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

2. Conditional Syllogisms. 

There are other kinds of syllogisms corresponding to the 
different forms which the major proposition may assume, and 
as this gives the name to the syllogism of which it forms a 
part, the latter may be said to admit in some sort of the same 
multiform division as propositions themselves. "We have 
already dealt with that class of them which are simple, in- 
complex, and complex, we proceed now to deal with com- 
pound syllogisms, and take, as the first in order, that species 
which is termed conditional. 

These may be defined to be syllogisms in which the major 
is a conditional proposition containing the entire conclusion. 
For example : 

If matter cannot move of itself, its first motion must 
have been given to it by a spiritual being ; 

But matter cannot move of itself ; 

Therefore its first movement must have been given to it 
by a spiritual being. 

Since the consequent may be inferred from the concession 
of the antecedent, and the denial of the antecedent from 
the negation of the consequent 1 , we get two corresponding 
kinds of conditional syllogisms ; the affirmative being called 
constructive, the negative destructive. For instance, in the 
proposition, "If the crops are bad, corn must be dear;" 
should the antecedent be conceded, the first case applies, and 
the consequent may be inferred. The argument would conse- 
quently be : 

If the crops are bad, corn must be dear ; 
But the crops are bad ; 
Therefore corn is dear. 

This conditional is constructive. But if the consequent is 
denied the second case applies, and the syllogism emerges in 
a destructive form. Thus : 

If any increase of population is desirable, some misery is 

desirable : 

But no misery is desirable ; 

Therefore some increase of population is not desirable. 

Hence conditional syllogisms, in addition to being faulty as 

to matter when the condition is irrational, can with respect 

1 See ante, p. 83. 



C. III. 2.] COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS. 133 

to form be defective in two ways, viz., when we attempt to 
infer anything from the affirmation of the consequent, or the 
denial of the antecedent. For it is obvious from the conces- 
sion of the consequent we can infer nothing, since the 
same consequent may follow from other antecedents ; as in 
the above example, corn may be dear from other causes 
besides a failure in the harvest. Therefore it does not follow 
from corn being dear that the harvest has failed. In like 
manner we cannot infer from the denial of the antece- 
dent, viz., that the crops are not bad, that they are not dear. 

Yet arguments in which the latter fallacies are used, are 
occasionally made to assume a very plausible shape : thus, 

If such an administration had involved the country in 
war, it would have been a bad administration ; 

But it did not involve the country in war ; 

Therefore it was not a bad administration. 
Or, 

If I refused to meet my liabilities, I should be a bad 
member of society ; 

But I do not refuse to meet my liabilities ; 

Therefore I am not a bad member of society. 
These we need not say are arguments which prove nothing, 
since a bad member of society and mal-administration may 
arise from various other sources besides those assigned. 
When, however, there is an exclusion, either understood or 
expressed in the major, no objection can be taken to this 
kind of inference. As in Cicero's defence of Muraena: 

"I could then only be accused with justice of acting 
contrary to my law, if I maintained that Muraena purchased 
the votes, and was justified in doing so. But I maintain 
that he did not buy the votes, therefore I do nothing con- 
trary to the law 1 ." 

The same may be said of the argument urged in the follow- 
ing passage of the ^Eneid : 
" Si sine pace tua, atque invito numine Tree's 

Italiam petiere, luant pecata, neque illos 

Juveris auxilio. Sin tot responsa secuti, 

Quaa superi manesque dabant ; cur nunc tua quisquam 

Vertere jussa potest ? aut cur nova condere fata 8 ?" 

1 O r at . pro L. Muraena, c. iii. Ramus cites it as an example of bad 
reasoning, but he is evidently in error. 2 -35neid, x. 31. 



134 KINDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

Tor, supplying the exclusive term in the major, the reason- 
ing may be thus rendered : 

If the Trojans had come into Italy contrary to the will of 
the gods, they would then alone have been punishable ; 

But they came not contrary to the will of the gods ; 

Therefore they are not punishable. 

If the exclusive term, however, could not be established, the 
argument would be nugatory. These syllogisms may be 
changed into a categorical, by the reduction of the major to 
that form. 

3. Disjunctive Syllogisms. 

Those syllogisms are disjunctive whose major contains a 
disjunctive proposition 1 ; whose object is to state an alter- 
nate which leaves us at liberty, either by denying one part 
to infer the other ; or, by affirming one part to reject the re- 
maining. Of the first kind, Cicero's argument may be taken 
as an example : 

Those who have slain Caesar, are either parricides or 
defenders of liberty ; 

They are not parricides ; 

Therefore they are defenders of liberty. 
But it is not necessary that the alternative should be re- 
stricted to two terms ; it may lie between several, as : 

All sciences are either pure, inductive or mixed sciences ; 

But astronomy is not a pure, or an inductive science ; 

It is therefore a mixed science. 
Gibbon's argument may serve as an instance of the second : 

Mahomet was either an enthusiast or an impostor ; 

But he was an enthusiast : 

Therefore he was not an impostor. 

Disjunctives are rarely defective, unless through the weak- 
ness of the alternative which leaves a mean between the 
opposed members. This, indeed, occurs in the last syllogism, 
for there is nothing so antagonistic in the nature of an en- 
thusiast and impostor as to prevent them being combined in 
the same person, even at the same time, as was undoubtedly 
the case with Mahomet. Of course when both members of 
the major are true, we are not authorised, from the denial or 
affirmation of the one to infer anything with regard to the 
other, but only when the members are exclusive. 
1 See ante, p. 82. 



C. III. 5.] COMPOUND SYLLOGISMS. 135 

4. Copulative Syllogisms. 

These syllogisms are only another form of disjunctives, 
with the alternative expressed in the major by the copulative 
conjunction "at the same time," "and," instead of ''either," 
"or." For example : 

A Government cannot be at the same time despotic and 
the licenser of a free press ; 

But the English Government permits a free press ; 

Therefore the English Government is not despotic. 
Now, granting the truth of the matter in the above syllo- 
gism 1 , it is evident we can only from the concession of one 
part deny the other ; but cannot conclude anything from the 
denial of one part. Otherwise we might argue, 

A Government cannot be at the same time despotic and 
the licenser of a free press ; 

But the English Government is not the licenser of a 
free press ; 

Therefore the English Government is despotic ; 
which of course would be absurd, since despotism may arise 
from a variety of other circumstances besides the violation of 
freedom of discussion, and because matters may occasionally 
take such a course as to warrant the present Government to 
place restrictions on the press, with a view to preserve, 
even liberty. 

5. The Dilemma. 

A syllogism with a conditional major, in which either the 
antecedent or the consequent is disjunctive, is called a 
dilemma. Thus, the argument of divines _ against temporal 
felicity may be expressed in this form : 

Man can only be truly happy on earth by yielding to 
his passions, or by combating them ; 

But either of these courses is attended with pain ; 

Man cannot therefore on earth be truly happy. 
Neither antecedent or consequent, however, is restricted to a 
double member, as the word dilemma implies 2 , but either, or 

1 Which some (Mr. Disraeli) are disposed to contest. * The 

word literally signifies, " double proposition ;" hence the common ex- 
pression of the "two horns of a dilemma." But the popular meaning 
of the term arises from the condition of some one of the antecedents 
being true, or one of the consequents false, though we cannot say which 
is so. 



136 KINDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

even both, may be compound to any degree, as in the argu- 
ment of St. Augustine : 

If children suffer misery, it must be either 1st. As 

the consequence of sin committed in a previous life 1 . 

Or, 2nd. The impotence of God, who has not the 

power to prevent it. Or, 3rd. The injustice of God, 

who inflicts it without a cause. Or, 4th. Original sin ; 

But it is impious to allege the three first causes ; 

Therefore the misery of children is to be attributed to 

original sin. 

Or, if the major premiss have a compound antecedent with 
a simple consequent, the latter may be aflirmed of any one 
member of the antecedent disjunctively granted. As : 

Whether the soul perish with the body, or survive it in 

the same or another form, death is to be feared ; 
But either of these cases will happen ; 
Therefore death is to be feared. 

But should the different members of the antecedent have 
each its separate consequent, then each member of the ante- 
cedent being as before disjunctively granted, the consequent 
can be only disjunctively inferred. For example : 

If -iEschines joined in the public rejoicings he is incon- 
sistent ; if he did not he is unpatriotic. But he either 
joined or not ; therefore he is either unpatriotic or 
inconsistent 2 . 

The forms already given, which end in affirmative infer- 
ence, are generally termed constructive ; there are, however, 
others of a negative kind, in which, having denied the whole 
of the consequent, or consequents, we deny the correspond- 
ing antecedent. These are termed destructive. Thus : 
If despotic Governments are conducive to the welfare 
of society ; then the restriction of individual rights, 
the publication of arbitrary enactments, and the re- 
straint of public opinion is beneficial ; 
But none of these are beneficial ; 

Therefore despotic Governments are not conducive to 
the welfare of society. 

1 A belief of some Pagan philosopher. * The argument of 

Demosthenes in the De Corona. 



C. III. 5.] PBINCIPLES OF THE DILEMMA. 137 

There are many dilemmas in which the proposition con- 
taining the alternative is understood, being sufficiently in- 
dicated by the statement of each particular part of which it 
consists. Thus, the argument urged by Antisthenes, that 
we ought not to meddle with the affairs of the State, 
which seems to have had great influence upon some of the 
ancient philosophers : 

If we conduct the affairs of State well, we shall offend 
men; 

If we conduct them iD, we shall offend the gods ; 

Therefore it is not expedient to engage in them. 
Of the same kind is the argument of Bias, quoted by Aulus 
Gellius, in defence of the bachelorate : 

If a wife is beautiful, she excites jealousy ($ 

If she be ordinary, she disgusts (e 

Therefore it is best not to marry. 
In such cases the omitted proposition should be supplied 
before the force of the dilemma is tested, as it may entirely 
invalidate the conclusiveness of its matter. Thus, the 
dilemma of Antisthenes, when fully expressed, would require 
as its major : 

" It is not expedient to engage in State affairs, if we 
either displease god or men ;" 

a proposition which bears the falsity of its matter on the face 
of it. Pursuing the same course, the universal proposition 
to the dilemma of Bias would be : 
It is not wise to marry, if a woman creates jealousy or 
disgust ; 

a proposition which, even if admitted, would not establish 
the conclusion, since many beautiful women so comport 
themselves as to leave no room for jealousy ; and many ordi- 
nary ones possess qualities of mind which cannot fail to 
please all who approach them. Hence it is obvious, with 
regard to the matter of dilemmas, that each particular con- 
clusion should be necessary, and that the dividing member 
should comprehend the entire subject to which they apper- 
tain. 

As dilemmas belong to the class of compound conditionals, 
they are reducible to two or three simple syllogisms of that 



138 KITTDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [B. III. 

kind, and the validity of their form may be tested by the 
same rules. Thus, the dilemma : " If a man be wicked or 
insane, he is unfit for society ; a criminal is either of these 
two ; for if he knew the consequences of his act he was wicked ; 
if he did not he was insane ; therefore he is unfit for society ;" 
may be resolved into two simple conditional syllogisms, in 
which " wicked" will form the attribute of one minor premiss, 
and " insane" of the other. Dilemmas consequently admit of 
being stated like pure conditionals, in a categorical form. 
As: 

The case of A being JB , is a case of C being D, or E 
being F; 

This is not a case of C being Z), or E being F ; 

Therefore it is not a ease of A being B. 
In the same manner constructive dilemmas may be reduced 
to categoricals, and, if needs be, tested by the general rules 
of the canon. 

6. The Chain Syllogism, or Sorites. 

"When a series of inferences occur in such order as to 
make the predicate of one proposition the subject of the next, 
till the attribute of the last of the premises is predicated in 
the concluding proposition of the subject of the first, we have 
what is termed a sorites 1 . Thus : A is B, G is D, D is E, 
therefore A is J7, where the mind passes from proposition 
to proposition, without expressing the conclusion until it 
reaches the attribute which it seeks to connect with the sub- 
ject of the first proposition. Of this kind of argument we 
cannot adopt a better illustration than one given by Lord 
Eldon, on the occasion of Laurence's injunction concerning 
the pirated edition of his book on the Natural History of 
Man : " I have a rational doubt whether some portion of this 
book do not lean to materialism ; what leans to materialism 
is inconsistent with the immortality of the soul ; what is in- 
consistent with the immortality of the soul is contrary to 
Scripture ; but as that which contradicts Scripture does not 
come under the protection of the law, I have a rational doubt 

1 Or, accumulating argument, from the Greek o-<apbs, a heap, though 
we must confess the German name Kettenschluss, which we have adopted, 
is more significant. 



C. HI. 6.] THE CHAIK SYLLOGISM. 139 

whether the injunction can be maintained; therefore the 
injunction is dissolved 1 ." 

It will be observed that each intermediate proposition 
between the first and last contains a middle term of the 
sorites, which, on that account, is capable of being drawn 
out into as many distinct syllogisms. In the major of the 
first syllogism, the second proposition of the sorites must 
be taken, while the first proposition will form the minor 
premiss, and to each succeeding syllogism, the conclusion 
of its predecessor will form the second premiss. Hence 
the first proposition in the sorites is the only minor premiss 
which is expressed. Prom this we may conclude that the 
first proposition alone of all the premises can be particular ; 
because in the first figure into which the reasoning of the 
sorites falls, the minor may be particular but not the major : 
and all the other propositions anterior to the conclusion are 
major premises. It may likewise be inferred that in a sorites 
there can be but one negative premiss, and that the last ; for 
none other could be negative without involving, contrary to 
the rule of the first figure, the implied syllogism in a nega- 
tive minor. 

A sorites may be exhibited in two ways by reversing the 
order of the premises in the examples already given. Thus, 
D is E, C is D, jB is C, A is B, therefore A is E. In this 
form, which is called the Groclenien, from the name of its 
originator, extension is more conspicuous, as the sorites 
starts from its two widest terms, while in the common form 
intension predominates. The former descends in extension 
from the predicate to the conclusion ; the latter ascends in 
intension from the subject 2 . 

It may be remarked that a chain of conditional syllogisms 
may be expressed in either of these forms. Thus, if educa- 
tion be indispensable to the progressive development of so- 
ciety, it is important that it should be well conducted. If 
it is important it should be well conducted, an order of men 
should be strictly trained for that purpose under the surveil- 
lance of the State, But education is essential, &c., therefore 
an order of men should be strictly trained, &c. Of course 
if the sorites were destructive, the procedure would as- 
sume the Goclenien form, and we must go back from the 

' Campbell's Lives of the Chancellors. 2 Thompson's Laws of 

Thought, p. 284, 2nd ed. 



140 KINDS OF SYLLOGISMS. [fi. III. 

denial of the last consequent to the denial of the first ante- 
cedent. 

6. Of the Enthymeme, or Imperfect Syllogism. 

It is usual for logicians to denote one or two abridged 
forms of arguments, commonly called enthymemes and pro- 
syllogisms ; though as these distinctions only arise from 
accidental forms of expression, there is no reason for their 
admission into logic, any more than a score of others of the 
same kind which might be mentioned. The enthymeme is 
usually called a syllogism with one premiss suppressed ; but 
as all the terms are comprised in the conclusion and the ex- 
pressed premiss, the one omitted is commonly understood, 
and may be readily supplied. Thus, Victoria is a sovereign 
who respects the forms of the constitution, therefore her 
subjects are free : the major premiss wanting to make the 
syllogism conclusive from the form -of expression is, the 
subjects of every sovereign who respects the forms of the 
constitution are free ; but this is so easily understood as 
to be dispensed with in the ordinary usage of language. 

When one of the premises of a syllogism is itself an en- 
thymeme, the concluding clause of that premiss is termed a 
pro-syllogism, as the bracketed line in the argument : 

Everything which concerns the public weal ought to be 

under the control of the Legislature ; 
But education is such (since property cannot be secure 

without it) ; 
Therefore education ought to be under the control of 

the Legislature. 

Sometimes the conclusion of the syllogism in common par- 
lance furnishes a species of premiss from which a second con- 
clusion is deduced, in which case the last proposition is 
termed an episyllogism : A statesman who involved the 
country in great debts could not be a good financier ; Pitt 
involved the country in great debts, therefore he was a bad 
financier, and (therefore he is unworthy of indiscriminate 
panegyric). 



B. IV.] GENEBAL PBINCIPLES OF INFEBENCE. 141 

BOOK IV. 

GENEBAL PBINCIPLES OF 1NFEBENCE. 
PBOEMITJM. 

WHEN the truth of either premiss, or both, in a syllogism 
is not intuitively evident, other arguments are required to 
establish its validity, which gives rise to what are called 
trains of reasoning, or combinations of inference. An ex- 
ample of this kind has already been furnished in the sorites, 
which is nothing else than a series of syllogisms stript of 
the minor which is easily understood, and so arranged as to 
connect an attribute or property with the subject of the first 
propositions, apparently foreign to it, through a group of 
inferences in which the connexion is intuitively discerned. 
Thus restoring the suppressed premiss in each of the in- 
ferences drawn by Lord Eldon, in the illustration already 
cited, we should get the following train of reasoning. What- 
ever contradicts Scripture is contrary to law ; this book con- 
tradicts Scripture ; therefore it is contrary to law. Though 
the major and minor premiss would be contested by a civilian 
of the present day, in Lord Eld on' s opinion the latter was 
only open to cavil, and he consequently sought to place it 
beyond dispute by an additional inference : Whatever leans 
to materialism contradicts Scripture ; this book leans to 
materialism ; therefore it contradicts Scripture. But the 
phrase " leans to materialism" is rather indefinite, and it 
might be fairly argued that the " Natural History of Man" 
did not fall within its sphere ; the judge, therefore, proceeds 
to clench his argument by placing the book in the category 
of things that lean to materialism, because it contradicts the 
immortality of the soul. We in this manner obtain two syl- 
logisms in corroboration of the minor premiss of the first 
argument. Such combinations of inference it is evident will 
grow more complex and involved in proportion as the two 
terms of the conclusion is removed from the middle in the 
syllogism whose validity we seek to establish ; as the farther 
the distance, the more numerous will the intermediate links 
become through which the connexion is demonstrated. 

These trains of reasoning exemplify certain laws and 



142 GEKEBAL PBZSTCIPLES OF INEEEEKCE. [B. IV. 

methods, are employed about different degrees of belief, and 
rest upon various foundations of evidence. Each of these 
divisions, developed in corresponding chapters, will form the 
subject of the present book 1 . In this view it will only be 
preliminary to the great design of logic, viz., the repre- 
sentation of the valid forms of inference employed in the 
construction of the moral and physical sciences, and will 
serve (to use a Baconian phrase) as a kind of prodromi, or 
anticipations of those principles of evidence to which all the 
preceding parts of logic converge. From the exposition of 
the laws of simple cases of inference to that of the multiform 
functions which they fulfil in the construction of the two great 
branches of knowledge, is manifestly too wide a step to be 
taken at once, and it is but consulting the methodical expan- 
sion of the science to interpose between them a survey of the 
different grounds of evidence on which those inferences rest, 
the primitive truths into which they can be resolved, together 
with the laws and methods which they exemplify, and the 
various degrees of belief which they excite in the subjective 

1 The common school logics generally terminate with the first mem- 
ber of this division, viz., Method, and leave the young logician in total 
ignorance of the mental laws which the theory of reasoning is supposed 
to illustrate, of the foundations upon which it is raised, and the 
different forms which demonstration and induction assume in the 
various sciences, to which the preceding subjects are subsidiary. Such 
a procedure, which is not an unapt illustration of the play of " Hamlet" 
with the part of the Prince omitted, doubtless arose from the 
common habit of teaching the science in our universities before 
a course of physics was entered upon ; but we hope, after Mr. 
Mill's " System of Logic," the abuse will be corrected. If logic, 
both in the continental and our home universities, is deemed an 
essential propadeutic to the study of theology and ethics, it must be 
deemed equally necessary to the study of natural philosophy. In 
both cases we have distinct groups of knowledge raised out of 
various combinations of inference ; and if it is essential in the pur- 
suit of the moral sciences to have the general principles upon which 
the evidence proceeds, in our grasp before we proceed to master the 
particular details, the same course ought to be pursued in physics. 
Hence, Sir John Herschel has very properly made this subject one of 
the leading divisions of his Preliminary Discourse on the Study of 
Natural Philosophy. Dugald Stewart (Philos. of the Mind, passim), 
however, thought logic ought to follow, and not precede, the study of 
the sciences, a view in which Dr. Whewell seems to coincide, by making 
their philosophy supplementary to their history. We, notwithstanding, 
deem this opinion a very erroneous one. 



C. I. 1.] ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. 143 

mind, that the reader may be presented not only with all the 
mechanism of the formulae of reasoning, but have a clear 
insight into the structure of knowledge which they are em- 
ployed to raise, and a complete view of the foundations upon 
which the edifice reposes. In pursuit of each branch of the 
subject we shall have to encounter two objections of a very 
formidable character, either of which, if admitted, would 
prove fatal to the system of logic propounded in this work. 
The first is, that which resolves all our knowledge into a series 
of inductive generalisations; with its two necessary corollaries, 
viz., that the interpolation of the major premiss in a syllogism 
is an assumption of the thing to be proved (petitio principii) ; 
and that there is no such thing as necessary truth existing, 
unless what is of hypothetical creation. The second is, that 
which denies the existence of anything like certainty either 
in reasoning or in the first principles that inference assumes, 
and which consequently attempts to rase every scientific 
structure to the ground. The answer to these objections 
will bring into court everything connected with the rationale 
of evidence, and expose every artifice that human ingenuity 
has contrived to convict its methods of falsehood and illusion. 



CHAPTEE I. 

UNIVERSAL METHODS OF INFEBENCE. 

1. Analysis and Synthesis. 

KEFLECTION cannot be exercised, and consequently no 
modes of reasoning be pursued, without viewing the object 
about which they are employed in either of two ways : viz., as 
an obscure whole, whose parts are to be resolved, or as a group 
of detached parts to be linked together in the form of a con- 
stituted whole. The first process is called analysis, from a 
Greek word, signifying decomposition 1 ; the last, synthesis, 
from a term derived from the same source, designating re- 
composition. These are the two vital functions of methods 
the two essential accompaniments of all thought as systole 

1 For the different modes of analysis, see History of Logic, pp. 2, 11, 
and 15. 



144 ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS. [fi. IT. 

and deastole are the living conditions of the animal or- 
ganism. 

This will be more evident on interrogating ourselves as to 
the nature of truth. In what else can it consist, unless in 
the relation of things to each other ; and by what other mode 
can that relation be investigated, unless by mounting from 
their primitive elements to their successive combinations ; or 
by descending from these to the simple parts out of which 
they arise ? Nature, by the process of growth and decom- 
position going on within her, is continually weaving and un- 
ravelling the complicated web of existence ; and, in whatever 
position the threads may be placed, they can assume no other 
relation than that of combination (synthesis) or disentangle- 
ment (analysis). 

Although each of these methods vary in some degree, ac- 
cording to the subject-matter of the different sciences in 
which they are employed, they nevertheless preserve in their 
widest diversity those distinctive features which mark them 
out as varieties of one species, and as such may be used to illus- 
trate each other. Thus logical analysis, by which a process of 
inference is resolved into syllogisms, and syllogisms into pro- 
positions, and then again into the two terms and copula 
which form the connecting link, or by which any of these parts 
may be again resolved into the divisions which we have already 
comprised under them, is perfectly analogous to the ana- 
lysis which the chemist employs to get at the ingredients of 
any mixture in his laboratory, or to that which geometricians 
make use of when they convict any theorem of falsity, by 
pointing out the ridiculous inferences to which the assump- 
tion of its truth must lead. The same may be said of the 
various synthetic processes which obtain in the different 
sciences, as these are but the inverse methods of the cor- 
responding analysis out of which they arise, and consequently 
manifest in the same degree an opposite unity of method. 
Distinct, however, as the two paths are by which the stream 
of knowledge is either descended to its source or pursued 
out into the wide arm which unites all its tributary branches, 
they are commonly, more or less blended in every large train 
of inference ; and where the investigation is of such a nature 
as to allow either of the methods to predominate, they are 
sometimes confounded together, through the process re- 



C. I. 1.] SYMBOLICAL PROOF HOW FAB ANALYTIC. 145 

ceiving the name of the prevailing method. Thus sym- 
bolical reasoning is generally termed analytic, because we 
do not necessarily here, as in geometrical reasoning, proceed 
by linking one truth to another till we reach the desired 
result ; but commence with stating the unelicited truth, or 
the given combination of known quantities in its symbolical 
form, and then proceed, in conformity with certain axioms, 
to trace what other truths are involved in the one first stated ; 
resolving step by step the symbolical assertion with which 
we began into others, which gradually reveal the meaning of 
the unknown quantities which entered into the original 
statement. Now the first process, which consists in forming 
out of the quantities presented by the conditions of the ques- 
tion one equation, is evidently synthetic, while the subse- 
quent steps of the proof is analytic ; but as the latter com- 
prise the main branch of the procedure, all symbolical rea- 
soning became confounded with it. 

With regard to the relative value of these two methods, 
that must be determined according to the subject which pre- 
sents itself for investigation. In physical science it is evi- 
dent there can be no correct synthesis before analysis has 
legitimated the use of that method, inasmuch as we can boast 
of no revelations of the mysteries of nature but those which 
arise from anatomising the interwoven mass of facts which 
she presents, and acquainting ourselves with the mutual 
bearings of their distinct parts. Thus, how vain would 
have been the attempt to manufacture lapis-lazuli until we 
had discovered that the components of the stone were silica r 
alumina, soda, sulphur, and a trace of iron ; or to seek to 
discover, at least without a number of wasteful experiments, 
at what point of space the curved path of a given shot will 
terminate, before examining the laws which the cannon-ball 
obeys from the first moment the match has been applied. 
We might, indeed, in the first instance, have accidentally 
thrown together the five components of ultra-marine 1 in the 
exact proportion required to produce the beautiful pigment 
referred to ; but such an instance would have given us no 
power to produce the combination at will, and still left us 
dependent on the niggardly supplies which nature doles out, 

1 As did really occur in 1710 in a furnace used for the manufacture 
of alkali. 



146 ANALYSIS AIH> SYITTHESIS. [. IT.. 

of this beautiful material. By chemical analysis, however, 
we have wrung out of nature one of her important secrets, 
and are thus enabled (verifying a prediction of Lord Bacon) 
to produce- frequently what she does rarely, and to achieve in 
a moment results which she takes centuries to consummate. 

In physical science y therefore, the legitimacy of all syn- 
thesis is in direct proportion to the .preceding analysis. If 
we attempt to synthesise or construct a system of science 
before the analysis of the parts to which it refers is complete, 
the result is a false science ; just as, if we rest content with 
simple analysis, and do not attempt its corresponding syn- 
thesis, as far as its data would warrant such a procedure, the 
result is an incomplete knowledge. But, if an error is to be 
committed, the latter course is much preferable to the for- 
mer, as an analysis, one day or other, is sure to find its syn- 
thesis ; while, if we commence with synthesis, there is no 
return to the true path unless through the demolition of the 
vague hypothesis which such unwarranted synthesis has con- 
structed. Of this truth the history of science is nothing less 
than a series of illustrations. Aristotle, through leaping at 
inference before a complete analysis of the facts upon which 
his mind was employed, affirmed that the matter of the sun 
was incorruptible ; and the falsity of the assertion was not 
detected until the examination of the sun's disk by means of 
the telescope discovered spots in that luminary. Ptolemy, 
with a very incomplete analysis of celestial phenomena, at- 
tempted to construct the whole theory of celestial mechanics. 
The result was, that astronomy for nearly fourteen hundred 
years was kept embedded in the ruck of fiction, and could not 
advance until the orbs and epicycles with which he had peo- 
pled space were swept away, and the analysis recommenced 
from the point at which it had been broken off. Thus the 
entire course of philosophy has been no other -than that of 
analysis with synthesis following in its train ; and the im- 
pediments which have constantly beset its path have sprung 
from no other source than the rash commencement of such 
synthesis before the corresponding analysis was made out. 

The contrary principle, however, may be said to obtain, in 
all cases where law and revelation are concerned, concerning 
either particular doctrines or individual acts. For then, we 
arrive at results, not through the dissection of the matter to 
which they refer, but by linking successive cases to each 



C. I. 1.] SUBJECT-HATTEB OF SYNTHESIS. 147 

other, in conformity with the laws enunciated in the revealed 
proposition. Everything consequently must be made to meet 
the truth which it expressed, either directly in itself or by its 
immediate consequences, as coming from an impugnable 
authority ; and hence arises the opinion 1 that, not alone in 
the moral sciences, but in every complete system of knowledge 
which professes to trace the relations of all science to each 
other, and their mutual blendings and ramifications, the 
synthetic element must predominate and give the tone to the 
rest. This ground, however, is of too uncertain, a character 
to warrant any kind of dogmatism, and the best course to 
pursue, is that of conceding to each of the two great branches 
of knowledge the predominance of their correlative methods, 
while we refrain from thrusting forward a probable inference 
in one department as sufficient ground for oversetting a legi- 
timate conclusion in the other. 

As in revelation we are not said to discover general laws, 
but merely infer cases from laws already given, the synthetic 
process, which is its method, is not said to discover truth, but 
only to demonstrate it when discovered ; while that of ana- 
lysis, which prevails in the physical sciences, brings new 
truths to light, both with regard to particular facts, and the 
general laws which are shown to arise out of them. Both, 
therefore, may serve as verificatory processes to test each 
other's legitimacy ; since as truth is always in unison with 
itself, a fact which has only been analytically inferred, is 
doubly confirmed when found to be in accordance with moral 
truth, and to stand the test of the correlative method ; as a 
principle, must shine forth with clearer lustre when it derives 
renewed confirmation from the analytic examination of par- 
ticular facts. There is consequently no fundamental oppo- 
sition between the two methods, nor can they ever be viewed 
as conflicting; unless from an erroneous conception of the 
nature of the sciences, and the uses to which they are applied. 

Though the direction of these methods must depend in a 

1 Propounded by Gioberti in his Elementi dello Studio di Filosofia, 
torn. ii. cap. ii., and covertly stated by Chretien in his work on Logical 
Method, p. 218. These writers, in this case, are only the exponent* of 
the views advocated by Catholic theologians both at Oxford and Rome; 
but all the experimentalists and eclectics, with Victor Cousin at their 
head, condemn this view. See ITntroduction a la Cours de PHistoire 
de la Philosophic, by the latter. Troisieme Legon. 

L2 



148 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IY. 

great degree on individual sagacity, the rules which Descartes 
laid down may not be without their use, if kept steadily 
before the eye in all cases of investigation. They are, with 
regard to analysis, as follows: 1st. Never to accept any- 
thing as true which we do not clearly know to be so. 2nd. 
To divide each of the difficulties we examine, into as many 
parts as possible, and as may be necessary for resolving it. 
3rd. To arrange our thoughts in order, by commencing with 
objects the most simple and the most easily known, in order 
to ascend by degrees to the knowledge of the most complex. 
4th. To make, in relation to everything, the enumeration so 
complete and general, that we may be assured of having 
omitted nothing. The synthesis are thus given in the second 
part of the same work on Method: 1st. To leave ^ no 
ambiguity in the terms, by having due recourse to definition. 
2nd. To assume only clear and evident principles, which 
cannot be contested by any persons. 3rd. To prove demon- 
stratively all the conclusions advanced, by employing no 
other means than the definitions and principles (axioms) 
already laid down. 

CHAPTER II. 

UNIVEESAL METHOD OF INFEBENCE. 

1. Induction and Deduction Meaning of the Terms. 

IF any train of reasoning be minutely examined, it will be 
found to proceed either in a descent from the more general 
to the more particular, resolving a whole 1 into its parts ; 
(analysis), or in an ascent from the more particular to the 
more general, or framing out of the particular parts a consti- 
tuted whole ; (synthesis). The former is called deduction, the 
latter induction. Thus the physical sciences are commonly 
called inductive, because they consist of a series of generali- 
sations, founded on the most circumstantially stated particu- 
lars, and carried up through intermediate axioms to universal 
laws, which comprehend in their statement every subordinate 
degree of generality ; while the abstract sciences are usually 

1 Which may be either of intension or extension. Sir W. Hamilton 
restricts it to the former, see Ed. Kev. vol. Ivii., but he is evidently in 
error. 



C. II. 1.] THEIR DELATION TO EACH OTHEE. 149 

termed deductive, because they follow the inverse method of 
proceeding from general axioms to particulars, by which these 
axioms are traced back to their remote consequences, and all 
the particular results deduced from them which are included 
in the general proposition. Of course each branch of know- 
ledge not only admits, but even exacts as the condition of its 
perfection, the blending of the two methods, but they are 
generally so designated, as one or the other element predomi- 
nates in the proof and fashions its initiatory processes. 

Every inductive train of inference, as well as deductive, is 
capable of being resolved into its appropriate syllogisms, and 
is consequently amenable to the laws of the universal canon 
of reasoning ; the only difference between the two forms in 
this respect being that, though the former equally ranges 
through all the figures, it finds its most natural expression 
in the third, while its deductive counterpart finds its most 
direct form in the first. By employing the same symbols, 
the correlation of the two processes may be thus exemplified : 
Inductive. Deductive. 

x, y, z are a. b is a. 

x, y, z represent the class b. x, y, z are contained in b. 
.'. b is a. .'. x, y, z are a. 

or, or, 

a contains x, y, z. a contains b. 

x, y, z constitute b. b contains x, y, z. 

.'. a contains b. .*. a contains x, y, z 1 . 

In the syllogisms the order of the terms remains un- 
changed, but that of the propositions is reversed ; the con- 
clusion of the one forming the major premiss of the other. 
Of the terms the major is common to both, but the middle 
term in the deductive syllogism becomes the minor in the 
inductive ; and the individuals which are the minor, or deter- 
mined notion in the deductive syllogism, become the middle 
term, or determining notion in the corresponding inductive 
syllogism 2 . The one process, according to this view, is only 
an inverted counterpart of the other. 

1 Mr. Karslake, estimating the inductive by the deductive syllogism, 
restricts the former to the 3rd fig. The scheme of Sir W. Hamilton in 
the text presents the more correct doctrine. See Aids to the Study of 
Logic, vol. i. p. 89, by W. H. Karslake, B.A. a Hence Aristotle 



150 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IT. 

2. Different kinds of Induction, Formal and Material. 
Syllogism erroneously confounded ivith Deduction. 

Much confusion of thought has arisen through the absence 
of distinction between the matter and form of induction, and 
the propagation of the error thence resulting, that because 
it proceeds in an inverted method to deduction, and is 
generically applied to designate a distinct ^class of truths, it 
must necessarily denote a species of inference not contem- 
plated by the founder of logic ; a view which is countenanced 
by the fact, that in the days when the laws of the syllogism 
were evolved, no such thing as inductive science could be 
supposed to exist. Hence that class of moderns who, like 
Bacon and Dugald Stewart, will admit of no other correct 
elementary process than induction, are led to throw aside the 
syllogistic doctrine both as practically useless, and as an im- 
perfect exposition of the theory of inference 1 . 

seems to have had a correct idea of induction when he affirmed it to be 
a syllogism in which the major is proved of the middle by means of the 
minor; 'ETraycoyrj fj.ev ovv Kai 6 e eVaywy^s irvAAoytcr/ios TO 8ia TOV 
erepov Qarepov ra> /x7a> croAAoyio'a(r&u. (Pr. Anal. ii. 23, 2.) 

1 It is amusing to hear Bacon state his grounds for rejecting the 
syllogistic theory, which he rather naively left to mob orators and 
theologians, to whom he imagined correct reasoning was only a second- 
ary matter: " At nos demonstrationem per syllogismum rejicimus . . . 
quod syllogismus ex propositionibus constet, propositiones ex verbis, 
verba autem notionum tesseraj ac signa sunt. Itaque si notiones ipsoe 
mentis male ac temere a rebus abstracts fuerunt . . . omnia ruunt . . . 
Rejicimus igitur syllogismum neque id solum quoad principia sed etiam 
quoad propositiones medias." Introduction to the Instauratio Magna. 
This extract clearly shows that Bacon was entirely ignorant of the 
principles he condemns, or he could not have written middle propositions 
for middle terms, or urged as a reason for the rejection of the school 
logic the singular fact, that it was open to the illusion of language; for 
what reasoning is not? Bacon in this extract rejects middle terms as 
useless, yet he could not reason without them, and was necessarily as 
unsparing in their use as St. Thomas Aquinas. 

A great deal of the current notions about the inutility of logic springs 
from the confusion which such loose writing tends to involve the old 
and new methods. "We have seen a graduate escape from the hard 
necessity of allowing himself to be convinced that he was arguing with 
a middle term particular in both premises, by declaring that facts were 
better than syllogisrr.6, ir-hen the forms of his argument would have 
proved that men are ipdants because they require air. " I," he ex- 
claimed, " produce facts like Bacon, you quibble about their combina- 
tion with Aristotle." 



C. II. 2.] VIEWS OF THE JLNtllENTS AND MODEBNS. 151 

The error appears to us to have arisen in a great degree 
from the application of the term induction to the process in 
which there is really no illative inference at all viz., the 
objective process of investigating particular facts as prepara- 
tory to illation, which is entirely intuitive, and also from 
imagining, because the truths arrived at by the process of 
illative induction are ordinarily tested by certain experimen- 
tal canons of inquiry and the laws of the Calculus, that it is 
entirely foreign to the class of truths which the syllogistic 
theory contemplates. The confusion, however, will disappear 
on considering that the syllogism, after all, only presents a 
mode in which an inference may be tested as to the conclu- 
siveness of its form, and that for this purpose its mechanism 
is quite as available for inductive as for deductive reasoning, 
in all cases where an illative inference has been drawn. Now, 
if a train of reasoning can err on its formal side as well as 
with respect to its matter, it is surely no good reason to 
infer, because we are provided with a code of principles by 
which the latter may be tested, that we are quite .at liberty 
to neglect the rules which relate to the correctness of the 
formal illation. 

In both these respects with regard to induction, the 
ancients and moderns appear to have entertained inverse mis- 
conceptions. Bacon and his followers have marvellously 
advanced the doctrine of material induction, but have entirely 
mistaken the import of its formal laws, and the functions 
they are calculated to discharge. Aristotle 1 , on the other 
hand, was right with respect to the form ; while in relation 
to material induction, or the mode of obtaining the materials, 
and determining under what circumstances certain indi- 
viduals could be said to constitute or represent a class, he 
was obviously in error. For though in addition to the in- 
duction per enumerationem simplicem, or that which required 
every individual of a class to be tried, before they could be 
affirmed to constitute a class, he seemed to admit the induc- 
tion of a class from a few of the objects which it embraced, 
founded on the general analogies of nature ; neither he or 
his followers had any distinct conception of the kind of evi- 

1 Aristotle attributes the discovery of induction to Socrates, deriving 
the word eirayuyr) from the Socratic accumulation of instances serv- 
ing as antecedents to establish the requisite conclusion. 



152 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IV. 

dence required to warrant such, induction, but from a few or 
a single instance, and even more frequently from no instance 
at all, but only from some fancied analogy, they jumped at a 
universal law, and strove to submit nature to the fanciful 
hypothesis thus obtained, by concealing every objection 
calculated to weaken or overthrow it. The moderns, with 
Bacon at their head, therefore, justly allege, that in- 
stead of proceeding from well-grounded particulars through 
the platform of intermediate axioms up to general laws, 
they rushed up to axiomata summa, and then attempted 
to deduce the axiomata media, by which they ought to 
have ascended; a method which of course involved them 
in undue assumption, and proved the source of irretrievable 
error 1 . 

As an instance of the mistake of the moderns with regard 
to formal induction, in addition to those already given, may 
be cited the attempt to identify syllogism with deduction, 
and the reduction of reasoning in the inductive form to the 
first figure with a view to show that all reasoning is syllo- 
gistic in the deductive sense of the term. Aldrich describes 
induction as a kind of enthymeme or syllogism in Barbara 
with its minor suppressed 2 ; viz., " This, that, and the other 
magnet attract iron, therefore all magnets attract iron." 
Though the illustration he gives, if thrown into a syllogistic 
form, would really require a major to be supplied, and not a 
minor. Thus, 

"Whatever belongs to this, that, and the other magnet, 
belongs to all ; 

Attracting iron belongs to this, that, and the other 
magnet ; 

Therefore attracting iron belongs to all. 

We are, consequently, obliged to infer that he inverted the 
premises ; in which case the inference would be unintel- 
ligible. 

Archbishop "Whately, on the other hand, takes the sup- 
pressed member of the syllogism in induction to be the major 3 , 
and reduces that method of inference to the deductive form 
in the following manner : 

1 See Karslake's Aids to the Study of Logic, vol. i. p. 97. 2 Artis 
Logicae Kudimenta, p. 175. 3 Whately's Logic, b. iv. c. i. 1. 



C. II. 3.] IN WHAT EESPECTS INDEPENDENT. 153 

Whatever belongs to the individuals we have examined, 

belongs, certainly or probably (as the case may be), 

to the class under which they come. 
Sheep, deer, and other individuals deficient in upper 

cutting teeth, are found to ruminate ; 
Therefore all animals deficient in upper cutting teeth 

ruminate. 

Although many instances of induction like the ones ad- 
duced may be exhibited in a deductive form, yet this does 
not prove that all can ; nor does the transformation add to 
the cogency of the inductive inference, but rather weakens 
its force, by representing it in an unnatural manner. Thus, 

Sir Thomas More was incorruptible, 

Sir Thomas More was a judge ; 

Therefore some judge or judges are incorruptible, 

would appear in the first figure as, 

Sir Thomas More was incorruptible, 
Some judge was Sir Thomas More ; 
Therefore some judge is incorruptible ; 

in which form there is not one trace of deduction, nor is the 
inference strengthened, but despoiled of much of the illative 
force it bore in the third figure. There is consequently no 
object to be gained in such reduction, since each figure has 
its own particular rules for testing the validity of every argu- 
ment that falls within its confines, and none of the dicta, so 
far as certainty is concerned, exercises a prerogative over the 
rest. As long as the dictum de omni et nullo was considered 
as the paramount law of correct inference, there was some 
pretext for reducing all arguments to one of the four moods 
of the first figure, to which that dictum is alone applicable, 
and considering deduction as identical with syllogism ; but 
since that view has been disclaimed, there is as much reason 
and some think far more reason, as we shall presently see 
for resolving all deduction into the inductive process, as there 
is for the contrary procedure. 

3. Theories of Seasoning. 

The false views which arose from making deduction 
synonymous with syllogism have invited attacks from dif- 



154 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IV. 

ferent quarters on the whole doctrine of the school logic, 
which, though varying in some degree in their form, re- 
semble each other so far in their general features as to de- 
note a common origin 

facies non omnibus una 

Nee diversa tamen ; qualem decet esse sororum 1 . 
and, consequently, admit of being dealt with in an aggregate 
form. The common principle from which they spring may 
be traced to the assumption that all axioms are but gene- 
ralisations from particular facts; that there are no such 
things existing as a priori truths, given, as Kant would say, 
as ultimate principles of our intellectual constitution; and 
the consequent coroDary that all inference is from particu- 
lars to particulars, and that general propositions being mere 
registers of such inferences, when interpolated in an argu- 
ment, add nothing to the proof, but simply refresh our 
memories with the number of cases in which the law we are 
about to apply to a new instance has been already observed. 
Thus, when it is inferred, from the fact of the present Pre- 
mier being a man, that he must die, the major premiss from 
which we infer the conclusion is not all men are mortal, for 
that would involve a petitio princvpii, but simply the number 
of particular cases in which we have observed mortality to be 
a mark of the class men 2 . Nor is the formula of previous 
instances in which the inference has been drawn necessary 
to be looked at on all occasions, as there are a great quantity 
of particular inferences evident from the bare statement of 
the minor. We would not require, in order to affirm that 
the lines A, f, and B, C, from being equal to M, N, are 
equal to each other, to recur to former cases in which we 
had observed the truth of the axiom, that things which are 
equal to the same thing are equal to each other. The bare 
enunciation of propositions of this character is sufficiently 
evident of itself, without any previous generalisation, to carry 

1 Met. b. ii. 14. 2 This is Mr. Mill's view, but Dr. Brown will 
not even concede so much, but affirms it is only necessary to know 
that mortality is associated with the idea of man to predicate that 
quality of any individual. Thus, " Prince Albert is a man ; therefore 
Prince Albert is mortal." But the doctor does not seem to have been 
aware that the knowledge of mortality being an essential constituent of 
man's nature, previous to making the inference, was in reality the very 
assumption of the major premiss, " all men are mortal," which he so 
stoutly ignored. 



C. II. 3.] THEOBIES OF THE NOMINALISTS, 155 

conviction to the most undisciplined understanding as soon 
as they are understood. The syllogistic theory, therefore, is 
not the universal type of reasoning, but inference from par- 
ticulars to particulars through marks of marks. The conclu- 
sion of an inference not being drawn from a general pro- 
position, even when it may be advisable to consult it by way 
of collateral security, but according to it; such general 
proposition cannot be considered as the real antecedent or 
premiss, but the particular facts from which that general 
proposition was inferred. Accordingly the rules of the syl- 
logism, and, in fact, every artifice which the peripatetic 
logic embraces, beyond absolute definition, is perfectly use- 
less in the sense of the Scotch school ; and the work should 
be at once sent to the trunk-<makers, were it not as well, for 
the purposes of curiosity, .and out of respect to the past, to 
preserve so cumbersome a piece of mechanism, by which the 
human species at least, for nearly two thousand years, con- 
sented to guide the operations of the reasoning faculty 1 . 

Some recent logicians, though entertaining fundamentally 
the same views, do not go so far. Though we do not draw 
the inference in reasoning from the general proposition, 
where such is employed, it is necessary to preserve con- 
sistency between the particular conclusion we infer from the 
minor premiss and our former experience expressed by such 
general proposition ; and the rules of the syllogism serve as 
an indispensable guarantee for that purpose. The use of 
the syllogism is consequently nothing else than the use of 
general propositions in reasoning ; and these are only certain 
formula generalised from the results of our former expe- 
rience, to determine what inferences may be drawn in any 
particular case. The work of drawing the inference is that 
of applying the formula, and the rules of the school logic are 
a system of security for the correctness of the application 2 . 

This middle ground, between the Scotch school and the 
peripatetic logicians, was raised with a view to defend the 
syllogism from the charge of really assuming the conclusion 
in the premises; an accusation that certainly had some 

1 See Reid's Analysis of the Old Organon, Art. Categ.; Dugald 
Stewart's Philosophy of the Mind, vol. ii. passim ; and Dr. Brown's 
Lectures, passim. * Mill's System of Logic, vol. i. p. 269. He, how- 
ever, does not give these rules, but somewhat naively refers his readers 
to Dr. Whately for them, as evidently too trifling for his notice. 



156 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IV. 

colour of plausibility so long as the syllogism was confounded 
with deduction, and made to guarantee the cogency of every 
inference that could be thrust into the four moods of the 
first figure. For if we argue, from every man being a re- 
sponsible agent, that the present Emperor of Eussia is 
accountable for his actions, it is evident we assert no new 
truth, but merely particularise, or draw out of the general 
formula (major premiss), one of the single instances already 
included under it. Such a form of reasoning it is conse- 
quently contended is incompetent to advance us one step 
in the progress of knowledge, or to corroborate any truth ; 
since it falls into the sophism which renders the conclu- 
sion a mere tautological repetition of the premises. Tet, 
taking logic on the high ground of the deductive syllo- 
gism with which its adversaries have confounded it, there is 
need of little ingenuity to invalidate the charges alleged 
against its method. For waving, at present, the question 
how we come by the majority of general propositions, which 
is really the cardinal point in dispute, it cannot be denied 
that we frequently obtain such formula without realising 
one-tenth of the meaning they are calculated, when fully 
analysed, to convey ; and that we can only exhaust them of 
their latent truth by casting about for middle terms, either 
by experiment or reflection, which link them with other 
classes of phenomena previously unknown to us, and thereby 
extend our knowledge. For example, when Newton first 
propounded his general law that material bodies attract eacli 
other with a force proportionate to the product of their 
masses directly, and the square of their mutual distance in- 
versely, he hardly dreamt that the precession of the equi- 
noxes could be deduced as a natural consequence of the 
same principle. Nor did Pythagoras, when he first realised 
the truth of the necessary relations between the base and 
sides of a right-angled triangle, think of the consequent de- 
velopment to which they subsequently conducted him in the 
construction of the 47th proposition : at least, he is said to 
have comported himself on the discovery of that famous 
Theorem as Columbus in sight of a new world, or as Kepler, 
when he found that the satellites of Jupiter verified his three 
celebrated laws of the elliptical motion of the planets. 

To take another branch of cases, which are generally 
deemed more akin to the syllogistic scheme ; viz., those con- 



C. II. 3.] OBJECTIONS TO NOMINALIST DOCTRINES. 157 

nected with the moral sciences, and concern either legisla- 
tion, theological doctrine, or ethics. Whatever may be said 
as to the rise of general propositions from the agglomeration 
of particular instances in other sciences, it is evident they 
are presented to us in these subjects at the outset in a gene- 
ral form, and that all the subsequent stages of inferences 
which these sciences embrace consist in the application of 
such general formula, by means of middle terms, to particu- 
lar instances never previously contemplated by us. All 
these deductions lead to new truths, so far as tjuths can be 
called new in the human sense of the term, and consequently 
must be looked upon as resulting in a real addition to our 
knowledge. What are all the doctrines, for instance, which 
each denomination of Christians have raised upon the teach- 
ing of Christ but so many inferences deductively inferred 
(how far rightly or otherwise is not for us to say) from the 
general scheme of doctrine he is reputed to have taught ? 
To select a single case, it would be certainly going very far to 
aver that the colossal system of doctrines that the patristic 
fathers built on a few scattered texts of Scriptures were 
assumed in the premises from which they were deductively 
inferred ; and yet all these tenets were embraced as original 
truths, latent, indeed, in the general propositions from which 
they were drawn, but not fully realised by the primitive 
Church, and that by the whole of Christendom in their 
day, and are so held by the majority of professing Christians 
now. 

Now in all these cases, which extend over all the compart- 
ments of knowledge, when a particular conclusion is deduced 
from a general proposition, it is evident that the truth in- 
ferred must be in some measure contained in the premises to 
warrant the illation ; but it does not follow that it must be 
explicitly involved but only in a virtual and implicit manner, 
in which case there can be no direct assumption of the pre- 
mises in the conclusion, in which the petitio principii consists. 
The process of inference, in its deductive as well as its induc- 
tive processes, is perfectly analogous in this respect to the 
counter processes of natural truths which it seeks to evolve. 
There is no effect which is not implied in the cause out of 
which it springs 1 , nor any state of nature which has not its 

1 Introduzione allo Studio dclla Filosofia da Gioberti, tomo secondo, 
p. 221 ; and Teor. del Sovr. note 44, p. 406, by the same author. 



158 IKDTJCTIOIT AND DEDUCTION. [B. IT. 

principles latently concealed in the state immediately pre- 
ceding its existence. The phenomena, notwithstanding, are 
substantially different, though secretly involved and inter- 
laced in one web of mutual dependence, so that one series of 
facts cannot arise until their principles have been furnished 
at least in an inchoate state, by another. If, therefore, the 
syllogistic theory is to be set aside on account of its implied 
assumption of conclusion in the premises, we must set aside all 
exposition of natural truths, and forego reasoning altogether 1 . 
We do not, then, require Mr. Mill's theory to defend even 
the deductive syllogism from a petitio principii ; nor, we fear, 
can that theory be maintained without giving up the main 
uses of the peripatetic logic. For, if as that logician some- 
what strangely avers, the formal portion of inference must 
alone be tested by the experimental canons of inductive in- 
quiry ; while that part which merely refers to the consultation 
of our former experience on the point at issue, and keeping our 
inference in harmony with it, can only fall under the surveil- 
lance of the syllogistic rules, the entire use of logic is at an 
end 2 . The functions which it has to discharge relate entirely to 
that part of inference which Mr. Mill denies its competency 
to fulfil ; nor can it throw any light on the interpretation of 
the general formula by which we seek to cover any particular 
conclusion we have inferred. The latter supposition is r in 
fact, ludicrous, and requires a very Quixotic imagination to 
combine the two things in the same theory. "What help can 
mood and figure with the heavy accompaniment of a group 
of rules and canons which exclusively relate to pure in- 
ference, lend to the interpretation of general propositions 
formed from the results of one's individual experience ? The 

1 Baron Galluppi, in his Lezioni di Logica, answers this futile objec- 
tion in another way. While he allows the two terms of the conclusion 
are fairly contained in the premises, he denies that the illation is con 
tained, in which the truth of the conclusion exists. The latter he desig- 
nates the formal part of the syllogism; the former the material. The 
inference of course springs from the comparison of the two terms of 
the conclusion with the middle, and as the result of that act is only 
expressed in the conclusion, the premises can by no means be said 
to contain it. The logicians whose opinions we combat in the text 
confound the formal with the material part of the syllogism; but 
though we see the latter intuitively, it does not follow we see the 
former, as we have before observed, a middle term is necessary to 
distinguish it. 2 See Mill's Logic : Functions of the Syllogism, where 
he distinctly propounds the doctrine in the text. 



c. n. 4.] iiroircTiow -SOT PABAMOTTST. 159 1 

syllogism, even in its deductive dress, which Mr. Mill takes 
to be an essential part of its nature, has no more relation to 
such a function than a flail has to the office of a windmill, or 
a piston-rod to the uses of a compass. The canons of in- 
ference were exclusively framed to guarantee the reasoning 
process. To deny their competency in their proper sphere, 
and apply them to objects in which,, as Mr. Mill asserts, no 
inference is concerned, would be a burlesque upon the ordi- 
nary notions of adaptability between end and means. 

The only things which can be of any service in the inter" 
pretation of general propositions are a clear perception 
combined with a capacious memory ; and Dugald Stewart 
was consequently more consistent when entertaining the 
same principles with Mr. Mill, he rejected the syllogistic 
theory altogether, and resolved all reasoning into intuition 
and remembrance. 

4. General Truths exist independent of Experience. 
Even in the supposition that all general propositions are 
the result of experience, it would by no means follow that 
the school logic was practically useless ; since such an hypo- 
thesis could not preclude an argument from being incon- 
clusive as to form, or present us with any means of detecting 
its inconclusiveness different from that of throwing it into the 
syllogistic form and bringing it under the universal canon of 
inference. Nevertheless, the assumption would tend to weaken 
the syllogistic doctrine, since it would show that reasoning, at 
least in its elementary stage, was purely restricted to one pre- 
miss, there being no common principle to> serve as major until 
a number of particular inferences had become agglomerated 
into a general proposition. Now, we fairly put it to each 
one's consciousness, whether such an exposition of the 
manner in which he registered his first inferences is correct. 
When a child has once felt the consequences of playing with 
fire, does it ever trust itself again with the dangerous ele- 
ment ? What need has it of a second, experience to certify 
that sugar is sweet and acids bitter ? Do the number of in- 
stances in which these objects are felt through the course of 
the longest life add a single iota of strength to the first in- 
ference ? If no one can say that they do, without contra- 
dicting the general experience of his species, then is that first 
inference a general proposition not singly inferred from the 



160 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IV. 

individual case, but from a constituent principle of our intel- 
lectual constitution taken in conjunction with it, which in- 
teriorly assures us, that whatever qualities we have found in 
combination with particular phenomena, will invariably ac- 
company the subsequent repetitions of that phenomena*. 

If our inferences never travelled beyond the particular 
cases out of which they spring, it would not only follow that 
each repetition of the inference would act as an additional 
guarantee for applying it to an indiscriminate number of 
similar cases, but that all the relative degrees of certainty, as 
well in different minds as in each individual's consciousness, 
would arise exclusively from the number of times the par- 
ticular coincidence, or disagreement, about which it was 
employed had been experienced. To this indisputable conse- 
quence of the assumption of the empirical nature of all 
general propositions each one's experience gives the lie. For 
though there are a class of facts that absolutely follow that 
law (as those connected with contingent events), and re- 
sult in general propositions of an empirical character, 
there are other classes of truths which do not require 
any sensible experience to assure the mind, that they in- 
clude every concrete case to which they are capable of being 
applied as abstract propositions, the truth of which the 
mind perceives intuitively in its ideas ; while there is an ad- 
ditional class which require one exemplification of the in- 
ference, but after that are so indubitable and certain in their 
character, as to be instinctively generalised on the spot, and 
extended to every subsequent instance of the same pheno- 
mena. The indispensable corollaries of the doctrine, that all 
general propositions are only agglutinations of particular in- 
ferences, do not agree with the facts of which each one's 
own consciousness is a steady witness ; the principle itself is, 
consequently, to be rejected as untenable. 

Mr. Mill has attempted to confound abstract, or necessary 
truths, with those of a physical character, by resolving them 
into hypothetical notions, and making the necessity, which 

1 Sir W. Hamilton will not admit this principle, because it does not 
necessitate, but only inclines. We should like to know if the worthy 
Edinburgh professor ever so far doubted of the burning qualities of fire 
as to put his hand into a flame twice, or ever refused to eat bread 
because he mistrusted its nutritive properties. With all due respect 
to so high an authority, the practical exemplification of the principle 
he lays down would be a mark of insanity. 



C. II. 4.] NECESSABY AND CONTINGENT TETJTH. 161 

we suppose to accompany them, the simple result of habit, in 
conformity with the consequence which we have attributed 
to his principle. But here, again, this acute philosopher is 
strangely at strife with himself. For if such propositions 
be hypothetical^ true, it is evident they must be held neces- 
sarily so, as long as the hypothesis is maintained, otherwise it 
would be competent to any one to aver that the same thing 
could be and could not be at the same time. It is, there- 
fore, absurd to say, with such a doctrine in the foreground, 
that their necessity springs from habit 1 . 

But does the necessity of necessary truths spring from 
their hypothetical character, and can the latter mark be 
supposed to exist in combination with them ? "We think 
neither of these cases can be maintained. In the first place, 
there is a class of necessary truths, even conceded by Mr. 
Mill 2 to bear no evidence of hypothesis about them, which 
are, notwithstanding, held by the mind with the same intui- 
tive certainty as those which he deems of a suppositive cha- 
racter. That the two sides of a triangle must be always 
greater than the third ; that two straight lines cannot enclose 
a space, and truths of a similar character, do not involve the 
least particle of hypothesis in their statement, is universally 
admitted, yet they are embraced as soon as enunciated, with 
the same confidence as the propositions which refer to the 

1 Dr. Whewell very properly distinguishes necessary from contingent 
truth by the utter impossibility of the former being otherwise than it is. 
Thus, to take a numerical instance : 3 and 2 are 5 ; we cannot con- 
ceive them, by any freak of thought, to make 7 (Phil. Ind. Sciences, 
i. 54, 55). In reply, Mr. Mill takes the inconceivability of the re- 
verse of a proposition as the only sign of its necessity, and attempts to 
prove the futility of such a mark by citing cases of doctrines (such as 
the antipodes) once deemed inconceivable, which have nevertheless 
subsequently taken their place as scientific truths. But this is playing 
with the double sense of the word inconceivable in a manner which is 
unworthy of a logician of Mr. Mill's attainments. The term evidently 
can be, and is very frequently, applied by Dr. Whewell, to denote two 
classes of objects; one which cannot be entertained without conflicting 
with the primary laws of the reasoning faculty, and the other which, 
like some of the truths of revelation, surpasses our comprehension, 
simply because the truths it embraces belongs to a class of subjects 
which, either through defective faculties, or want of means of informa- 
tion, we are unfitted to realise. It would be doing injustice to Mr. 
Mill not to suppose that he understood Dr. Whewell to take the term 
in the passage animadverted upon in the former sense. ' Logic, 

vol. i. Art. Demonstration and Necessary Truths. 

M 



162 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION". [u. IT. 

equality of the radii of a circle that is supposed to depend 
upon the possibility of abstracting length from breadth for 
its acceptance. Whence comes the difference, if both classes 
of necessary truths are held with the like uniform and un- 
varying degree of certainty by the believing mind ? Even if 
we were disposed to save Mr. Mill from the consequences of 
his first inconsistency, which his words, however, will not 
allow us to do, and assert that the truth of the purely sup- 
positive group springs from their hypothetical character, 
while that of the contrary class arises from habit, the dis- 
tinction could serve no purpose, unless to overthrow Mr. 
Mill's doctrines. For in that case the indisputable conse- 
quence would follow, that the hypothetical class must be 
granted as soon as the condition was expressed ; while that 
series whose truth was the mere creature of habit and asso- 
ciation, would be received with doubt at first, and go on in- 
creasing in certainty according to the number of times the 
phenomena in which they first took their rise was repeated. 
But such a supposition is at war with the plainest truths that 
consciousness reveals to us, and could not be entertained with- 
out convicting the first principles of reasoning of imposture. 
We can only escape from such false consequences by 
ascribing the uniformity of belief, with which all abstract 
truth is held, to the necessary relation between the classes 
of our ideas out of which they spring a relation which is 
assented to in the same moment as it is intuitively perceived, 
and instead of depending on experience does not require one 
confirmation from that source to assure the mind that it in- 
cludes all the cases that actual reality can bring under its 
judgment. When we say that two straight lines cannot en- 
close a space, or affirm that the radii of a circle are equal, 
there is no more hypothesis in the last proposition than 
in the first; since we do not affirm that the things of 
which we speak exist out of our conceptions, but that both 
are necessarily true as beheld in the percipient mind. 
Even viewed with relation to external objects, the only con- 
dition that is required in either case, is the existence of space 
and sensible lines to which they can be referred. For it is no 
more necessary that such lines should exist without breadth 
to realise the truth of the last case than that of the first ; 
since the radii would still be equal, if drawn to the very edge 



C. II. 4.] THEEE CLASSES OF TBTJTHS. 

of the circumference of the circle, and in that sense would 
fulfil the condition imposed by the geometrical definition of 
a straight line 1 . But the fact is, owing to defective instru- 
ments, and the inexactness attending even the most delicate 
manipulations, the mind's conceptions can never be fault- 
lessly cast into physical embodiments : but this by no means 
argues a want of reality in the conceptions themselves, but 
is to be ascribed to the grossness of our sensible perceptions, 
which are not fitted to embody abstract truth to a greater 
degree of perfection than is requisite to attain man's end in 
creation. If mathematical or abstract truth fall short of ab- 
solute perfection when carried into the material world, phy- 
sical truth is in the same predicament, ail concrete know- 
ledge being only so many approximations to absolute reality. 
But to call either it or mathematical truth hypothetical on 
that account, would bring the whole structure of science 
about our ears 2 . 

From the foregoing considerations, we conceive ourselves 
fully warranted in drawing a distinction between three classes 
of truths existing in the mind ; two underlying all our in- 
ferences from particular events, and the other furnishing 
the occasions by which either class are called into action. 
"When we restrict our judgment to a particular event, the 
result is a simple intuitive truth. But when the inference 
travels further than the affirmation of the agreement, or dis- 
agreement of the terms in that particular case, a real illation 
has taken place ; which, upon analysis, will be found to 
consist in the combination of one of the first class of truths 
(major) with the particular case (minor) which called it into 
being. Thus, when a child has once perceived that moisture 
is the effect of rain, it directly concludes that in all future 
cases it cannot come in contact with that element without 
getting soaked, from an interior conviction which assures 
it that similar effects follow from like causes ; and which, 
expressly evolved, constitutes the major proposition to the 

1 Or the truth would be equally preserved if the line was considered 
to be of equal breadth. * The doctrine of hypothesis originated 

with Dugald Stewart. The only distinction between the two classes 
of abstract truth which Mr. Mill strives to discriminate by introducing 
the extraneous idea of hypothesis is, that one admits of direct, the 
other of indirect, proof, or reductio ad absurdum. 

M2 



164 INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. [B. IV. 

inference in question. If such a proposition be not in the 
mind instigating the judgment to leap to the general con- 
clusion, then, we say, there is no ground for illation. For 
when the child forms a judgment in the absence of any such 
a priori truth, it is strictly of a particular character. Thus, 
it never concludes from the single fact that its nurse has 
been angry to-day, that she will be so to-morrow, simply 
because it has no general a priori judgment in the mind 
that could form a major premiss in combination with the in- 
dividual case to warrant the supposition. 

Nor is it even necessary to concede, though it does happen 
in many cases, that individual occurrences are required to 
call the abstract truth into being with respect to every par- 
ticular phenomenon. Before a child has experienced a prac- 
tical exemplification of the truth that every sound must have 
a cause, it is found to burst its drums and break its trum- 
pets, with a view to explore the locality of the noise. Who 
has not smiled at his teacher when first set to learn the de- 
finitions of Euclid, for attempting to increase his knowledge 
by the announcement of the fact, that things which are equal 
to the same thing are equal to each other, a truism as long 
familiar to his memory as his own identity. Such prin- 
ciples as these accompany the first exercise of thought, 
fashion the first judgments that the mind forms, and instead 
of being dependent on particular inferences, comprise the 
very elements out of which such inferences are evolved, and 
present the only means of testing, or legitimating, their 
validity. Had the divine economy ordered this otherwise, 
and left the child entirely dependent for its knowledge upon 
its own solitary experience, it would be the victim of de- 
struction before leaving its nurse's arms ; and such a thing 
as certainty could no more enter into the mind than the 
idea of colour into the conception of a blind man. 

Such a priori judgments, which we agree with Kant 
in accepting as the ultimate elements of our intellectual 
constitution, may be distinguished into two classes, viz., 
those which have direct reference to external facts, and are 
only true in the supposition that the laws of nature remain 
and will continue immutable ; such, however, may be denied, 
as we shall subsequently see in certain cases, without im- 
peaching either the reasoning faculty or consciousness, of 



C. III. 1.] DEGREES OF CERTAINTY. 105 

error. The other class refers to necessary truth arising 
from the necessary relation between our ideas, and which 
cannot be denied without destroying the terms which consti- 
tute the proposition in which they are expressed. Into these 
classes of abstract truths and single intuitive judgments, both 
alike incapable of demonstration, we resolve all reasoning. 



CHAPTEE in. 

DIFFERENT DEGREES OF EVIDENCE. 

1. Various Grades of Certainty. 

THE elements into which we have resolved the syllogistic 
process partly correspond to the three divisions of Aris- 
totle, touching the modality of propositions, or the different 
degrees of belief with which a judgment is held by the mind, 
which the Stagyrite classes under the head of necessary, cer- 
tain, and contingent (probable) 1 . The first term he refers to 
that class which spring out of the necessary relation between 
our ideas, and which are so absolutely true that they cannot 
be denied without invalidating the reasoning principle itself. 
In the scholastic sense, this class was usually styled meta- 
physical ; and even God is declared incompetent to render 
them otherwise than they are, the things which they desig- 
nate remaining the same ; as the supposition would lead to 
the confounding the intrinsic properties of things. Physical 
truth, on the other hand, while capable of demonstrative 
certainty, is altogether dependent on the continuance of 
the laws of the external world, and consequently may be 
abrogated when the author of them chooses to suspend their 
functions. Physical truth, therefore, is confined to the 
boundaries of the material world, to space and time, and is 
dependent on the will of the Creator ; while metaphysical 
truth exists absolutely and universally, and can in no in- 
stance be supervened without the destruction of the concep- 
tions which enter into its composition. The supposition that 
Fresnel's law of the bifurcation of light in certain crystals 
was suspended, would by no means involve the destruction 
of either the crystallised bodies concerned or an illuminat- 

1 Prior Anal. i. 8. Avayicdla : fV8exM a ' a : 



166 DIFFERENT DEGBEES OF EVIDENCE. [fi. IV. 

ing medium ; but we could not for a moment conceive lying 
to be a virtue, or a cylinder to be a sphere, without annihi- 
lating all the conceptions which enter into the respective 
terms of the judgment. 

Contingent, or probable truth, comprises that wide class of 
judgments which depend upon events whose operations we 
are unable to investigate, and concerning which we cannot 
predict anything but with a very doubtful degree of certainty. 
That the weather will be fine to-morrow because it has been 
so to-day is ajudgment that falls under this category, because 
we can furnish no other grounds for it than mere conjecture. 
This class of propositions is generally designated by the word 
chance, accident, &c., and was frequently so deemed by Aris- 
totle and the ancients. But there is no such thing as chance 
or accident existing in nature, everything being controlled by 
systematic laws, and produced by the action of regular 
causes, the only difference being that, in the class of things 
termed contingent, we are unable to penetrate into their 
operation. The result of the Derby, for example, next year, 
depends upon the superior qualifications of a certain horse, 
the manner of treatment in the interim, and the honesty 
with which his owner and rider make use of his speed in 
the contest. But the issue at best can only be conjectured 
with probable certainty, because we cannot foresee the re- 
sult of these causes or ascertain how far they will operate. 

To this list the scholastics added that of moral truth, 
which, though when accompanied with strict marks of vali- 
dity, falls somewhat short of demonstrative certainty, still ap- 
proaches so nigh it that it may almost be ranked in the same 
category. Such are the foundations upon which rest our 
belief in the testimony of others, with regard to facts which 
we have not seen, and which impel us to believe histo- 
rical truth, when accurately verified, with the same tenacity 
as we accept any scientific fact derived from our own inves- 
tigation. For, that a number of men having no connexion 
with each other, and influenced by no personal motives, 
should conspire to cheat mankind with a lie, is a supposition 
which we can no more entertain than any notion which im- 
peaches the reasoning principle itself. Yet in all such pro- 
positions there is room for cavil, as many find it difficult to 
convince themselves that all the required conditions have been 



0. III. 2.] YAEIOTJS PHASES OF CBEDIBILITY. 167 

fulfilled ; and when the testimony of individuals are incon- 
sistent with the permanence and fixity of Nature's laws, 
some philosophers choose to abide by the latter, as more cer* 
tain than the human testimony, no matter how well sup- 
ported, which seeks to set them aside. 

2. Twofold Doctrine of Modality. 

The question of the different degrees of belief by which 
judgments are held, has been deemed of so unsatisfactory a 
character by many modern logicians, as to be excluded from 
the domain of the science, on the ground that the certainty 
affects the predicate of a proposition and not the copula, and 
as such does not come within the reasoning process. There 
is no doubt a quasi species of modality which only concerns 
the predicate, as when we say " the wine is uncommonly good," 
" the sun is very hot ;" but this does not come within the 
proper definition of the term, and consequently must not be 
confounded with it. With regard to strict modality, the 
copula, as the link of connexion between the two extremes 
of a proposition, is undoubtedly modified by any variation of 
the certainty which exist between their union. If two 
weights are held together by a chain, any diminution or in- 
crease of the firmness with which they are held together 
must influence the chain uniting, and not the weights which 
it holds. The consideration of modality, therefore, becomes 
essential to any practical system of reasoning, for the con- 
clusion can in no instance involve any further degrees of cer- 
tainty than is contained in the premises ; and if we would have 
the mind realise its full value, it is essential to know the 
amount of certainty that accompanies each premiss in the 
syllogism. Moreover, since the resolution of a point in dis- 
pute 1 will often depend upon the relative value we attach to 
different degrees of evidence, it becomes a matter of very 
great importance to consider how far, and in what respect, 
one class of judgments is more certain than 'another. 

The complete doctrine of modality would consequently 
embrace every degree of belief which the mind is accustomed 
to attach to the different classes of its judgments, with the 
corresponding motives, commencing with the lowest grade of 

1 Such as of miracles. 



168 DIFFERENT DEGEEES OF EVIDENCE. . [B. TV. 

probability and rising through the intervening shades of 
belief to the highest metaphysical certainty. Each of the 
divisions in that case already given, would admit of a minute 
subdivision. Thus, for instance, the class of moral truths 
might be arranged under four or five distinct heads. First, 
under that of historical testimony, which even in itself has 
different branches of certainty, that which relates to the de- 
struction of Nineveh not being commonly received with the 
same credence as we believe the burning of Moscow or occur- 
rences of a more recent date. In this respect, time seems 
to be, in some respects, the arbiter of the degree of belief 
we may attach to a fact depending on the testimony of tra- 
dition. The fate of Troy has long been considered of very 
doubtful authenticity, and the early account of Eome is be- 
ginning to loom through the twilight of fable, which may, if 
the world last long enough, in the lapse of ages overspread 
its entire history. Secondly, under that class of evidence 
which relates to the existence of the soul in a future state, 
the belief of an overruling Providence, and the impression 
that man in the next life will be punished or rewarded for his 
actions in this ; all which judgments being incapable of de- 
monstration or any very rigid proof, are accepted by a cer- 
tain class of minds with great distrust, and even in the judg- 
ment of those really confiding in them, who form the vast 
majority of the human species, rest upon other foundations 
than the purely moral proofs which are alleged in their sup- 
port. Thirdly, under that class of testimony which relates 
to present facts, whose reality any one, if he chooses, may 
go and convince himself of by the evidence of his senses. 
This class of truths is the most certain of any others de- 
pending on purely moral grounds, and men universally accept 
them with the same amount of credence as they receive the 
plainest revelations of their own consciousness. Fourthly, 
under that of ethical doctrine ; for, though the majority of 
mankind are disposed to call things by their right names, 
and would really stone a man who ventured to preach up a 
loose morality among them, there are not wanting many 
philosophers of very acute penetration who affirm that, intrin- 
sically, there is no more vice in adultery than in saying one's 
prayers, and that the vulgar distinctions of virtue and wicked- 
ness only spring from the conventional notions of society. 
That such opinions, if practically acted upon, would destroy 



C. HI. 3.] CEITEEIA OF EVIDENCE. 169 

the ligaments by which nations and communities exist, is 
universally admitted ; and since man was born for society, it 
becomes a matter not of very hard calculation to determine 
how far it may be presumed that either God or nature 
would make the condition of one of the great ends of his 
destiny dependent on a delusion. 

3. The same subject continued. Criteria of Evidence. 
The Doctrine of sufficient reason. 

The branches of physical truth may be divided into ex- 
perimental and demonstrative. Both are received with suffi- 
cient certainty to displace doubt ; but assurance is doubly 
fortified and strengthened when physical truth has stood all 
the tests of the demonstrative methods ; for we then receive 
two different species of security for the existence of the fact, 
or law, whose validity may have been in question, which is 
tantamount to a confirmation from two distinct sources of 
evidence. The metaphysical portion of the general division 
may be considered under the heads of mathematical and 
logical. The first member is sufficiently evident, having been 
already dilated upon to some extent. The nature of the 
latter will fully appear in considering the different criteria 
which have been laid down by logicians for sustaining the 
mutual dependence and harmony of the different branches 
of evidence, both with themselves and with each other. 

The first of these is, the principle of contradiction, viz., 
" that the same property cannot be at the same time affirmed 
and denied of the same subject." Thus, we could not main- 
tain the existence of Kepler's laws while we believed in the 
Ptolemaic theory of the heavens, for that would be plainly 
tantamount to saying that the planets moved in complete 
circles, at the same time that they described an elliptic 
course through the heavens. Yet trite as even this principle 
may appear, it is more frequently violated in moral judg- 
ments than we imagine. For how often do we meet with 
men who talk about the existence of a free press in con- 
nexion with absolute monarchy, and who cast their lot with 
despotism while they affirm that all their opinions and predi- 
lections are in favour of absolute liberty ? Indeed, there are 
a class of persons in whom this error is so deeply rooted, 
that their statements only cease to be contradictory when 
they become tautological. 



170 DIFFEBENT DEGBEES OF EVIDENCE. [B. IV. 

The second criterion is the complement of the former, viz., 
"that conceptions which agree with each other can be in 
thought united or affirmed of the same subject at the same 
time," and is designated the principle of identity. The third 
is the principle of the excluded middle (lex exclusi niedii) : 
" Either a given judgment must be true of any subject or 
its contradictory, there is no middle course." The result of 
this criterion is, that we cannot accept one proposition as 
true without abandoning its contradictory as false, and vice 
versa. If, therefore, we can prove that the contradictory of 
any judgment is true, we impugn its veracity quite as much 
as if we directly overthrew it. The principle of sufficient 
reason 1 may be said to form the fourth criterion of evidence, 
viz., " that every judgment must rest upon a sufficient ground 
or reason," which excludes from the consideration of evidence 
every belief rooted in ignorance, prejudice, or self-interest. 
From this law it would follow : first, that we cannot grant the 
reason without accepting what follows from it, which is the 
foundation of syllogistic inference : secondly, that if all the 
consequences are held to be true, the reason must be true ; 
thirdly, that we cannot reject the consequence without re- 
jecting the reason. Hence the mode of proof called reductio 
per impossibile*. 

Logical truth, however, does not communicate to the 
mind a distinct degree of certainty from that of mathe- 
matical. Both are accepted with the highest degree of belief 
that can be supposed to exist, and are therefore properly 
termed metaphysical 3 . Physical and moral truths, when con- 
firmed by the strict marks which we shall presently offer, as 
a test of their validity, are accepted with a similar degree of 
belief, though it is hard to conceive this of so certain a cha- 

1 Usually attributed to Leibnitz, since it first received entire de- 
velopment at his hands; but the principle was long known in the 
schools prior to his time. 2 Leibnitz (Wolfs Ontologia, 71), 

Stachenan (Ontologia, 23 25), and Degerando (Hist. Comparee, 
1 ed. b. i. c. iv.) confound the motive which leads us to believe a thing 
with the cause of its existence. Now, though there is always a motive, 
it does not follow that there is a cause for everything. The latter is a 
pure prejudice of philosophers, from which even Bacon was not exempt. 
3 Metaphysical truth is sometimes taken for absolute truth, as by Mr. 
Thompson in his Laws of Thought; but, as we shall presently show, no 
such thing exists. 



0. IV. 1.] ULTIMATE SOUBCES OF JUDGMENT. 171 

racter as that which accompanies metaphysical judgments, 
inasmuch as the hypothesis of their being false does not lace- 
rate the reasoning principle itself, and has been maintained 
with great strength of argument by a group of very able phi- 
losophers. But moral testimony, which does not bear the 
assigned marks of validity, or physical events which seem to 
contradict the usual order of nature, or refer to future 
results, into the causes of which we are unable to penetrate, 
must be regarded as probable, but the precise amount of 
credence with which they must be accepted, will form the 
chapter of a subsequent book. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. 

1. Number of Primitive Elements into which all Knowledge 
can le resolved. Their Relation to each other. 

THE motives which impel us to form those various judg- 
ments we have just considered are stated differently by 
logicians, according to the opinions they have formed on 
the nature of knowledge. The widest division we have seen 
is that of Galluppi, who resolves these motives into seven 
distinct elements ; viz., consciousness, memory, external 
sense, analogy 1 , reasoning, evidence (intuitive we suppose 
he means), and authority; since it is impossible to demon- 
strate the veracity of any one of these means of know- 
ledge without falling into a petitio principii. Thus, when 
Descartes denied the infallibility of any other primitive 
fountain of knowledge, unless that solitary act of conscious- 
ness which informed him of his own existence, and attempted 

1 For analogy, Galluppi, in conjunction with some other logicians, 
uses the word induction. May we be allowed to enter our protest 
against this abuse in applying terms whose functions are already 
sufficiently large, to designate an entirely distinct class of subjects with 
which they have no connexion. If this habit proceed much further, 
all distinctions of philosophical- nomenclature will become confounded, 
and we shall be in the condition of geographers, who, owing to the cus- 
tom of calling all the places in the New World after the titles of the Old, 
cannot tell, when an occurrence is said to have happened at Windsor 
or Halifax, whether it took place in Europe, Australia, or America. 



172 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IV. 

to demonstrate the veracity of the rest, he assumed the 
infallibility of reasoning and memory, as no truth can be 
proved without the exercise of these two motives of judg- 
ments ; and when the scholastics, who were addicted to the 
folly of demonstrating everything, attempted to prove the 
veracity of memory by the veracity of Grod, they fell into as 
palpable a sophism, inasmuch ^s the accuracy of tlie trains of 
inference they employed depended on the infallibility of the 
very faculty they were intended to establish. 

These motives, however, are so related, that while many of 
them can be exercised apart from the rest, each requires a 
separate act of consciousness for the perception of its ex- 
istence 1 . Thus, we believe in the existence of the external 
world on the immediate authority of the senses ; but these 
are entirely dependent for their action on the act of con- 
sciousness, so that the existence of matter is certified to us 
mediately through the act of consciousness. Again, no act 
of memory can be exercised unless through the same 
medium, and when that faculty assures us of our own 
identity, consciousness is required as a means by which that 
act of memory may become manifest to us. But though 
consciousness 2 thus underlies every other primitive truth, 
and is essential to their exercise, it has functions apart from 
them, and, therefore, may be said to have a distinct existence 3 . 
Thus it reveals to us immediately, and that without the aid 
of any of the other faculties, the idea of our existence, with 
that class of intuitive judgments which spring out of the 
relation between our ideas. It consequently may be said to 
enjoy a prerogative over the other motives of judgments, as 
it not only is the direct means of communicating to us a 
wide class of evidence, but is the grand basement on which 
the certainty of the other motives rest, the supposition of 
their invalidity involving in the impeachment of its veracity 
the destruction of all knowledge. 

1 Keid and Royard Collard, following the common-sense doctrine in- 
stituted by Pere Buffier, erected consciousness into a distinct faculty, 
even existing separately from perception ; but for this they are pro- 
perly censured by Sir W. Hamilton. 2 The scholastic definition of 
consciousness, or sensus iutimus, is perceptio qua mens de presenti suo 
statu admonetur, and, as such, it is usually taken as synonymous with 
conscientia. 3 The contrary opinion is maintained by Sir W. 

Hamilton. 



C. IT. 2.] MEMORY UNIMPEACHABLE. 173 

It may be observed that each of these means of evidence 
affords an inlet for original information, except memory, and 
that its function is simply to reproduce the past states or 
modifications of the thinking mind. It is not, therefore, an 
original, but an auxiliary, motive of judgment ; but one of so 
important a character that it ranks next to consciousness 
in the function of generating knowledge ; since, in the ab- 
sence of its veracity, as we shall presently show, none of the 
other motives could be of the slightest avail in constructing 
a system of science. In examining into the nature of the 
other motives, each will be found to have distinct oflices en- 
tirely independent of one another, unless, indeed, evidence 
which, according to our description of consciousness, can 
have no place in the category, even in the narrow sense of 
intuition, in which alone its claims could be considered. 
For the judgments which intuitive evidence embraces are 
either of a metaphysical character, or they refer to particular 
coincidences in the external world. In the former case they 
come immediately under the cognisance of consciousness, 
and in the latter that of the external senses. Its presence, 
consequently, in the list leads to a cross division, besides 
being entirely unnecessary. But as, of the six remaining 
principles, consciousness never becomes the subject of the 
direct assaults of scepticism, unless through the medium of 
the others, we need only inquire in what respect the veracity 
of these may be placed out of the reach of its attacks. 

2. Memory an ultimate source of Evidence. 
"Without the faculty of remembering the past modifications 
of our minds, every moment of life would be the first moment 
for us. "We could not recal one experience, or register one 
single judgment or inference; no science consequently could 
exist. The only conclusion we could arrive at would be, 
"I am," and nothing more. Any attempt, therefore, to im- 
pugn the veracity of this faculty lays the axe to the root 
of all knowledge, and even aims at the destruction of 
personal identity. Sceptics have not neglected to avail 
themselves of the compendious method thus offered for the 
destruction of certainty, and have directed their attack in 
two ways. 
. First, it is contended that memory is faltering and uncer- 



174 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

tain, and in many cases has been convicted of deception. 
"Who has not mistaken one object for another, or been fully 
assured he "was in possession of a fact which, when he came 
to search for it, either eluded his recollection or emerged out 
of his consciousness in another form ? Our courts of justice, 
and the system of arbitration to which mankind find it neces- 
sary to have recourse, hourly present cases of men, each at 
the instigation of this faculty, making the most conflicting 
statements, and staking their veracity on the asseveration of 
an oath. The answer to this objection is patent. "We only 
vindicate the certainty of memory in all those obvious cases 
in which its certainty cannot deceive us without arguing some 
degree of mental derangement in the understanding of the 
person who manifests it. For certainty of memory in such 
cases is all that is required to legitimate the generation 
of knowledge, so far as its operation is concerned ; but ii 
men choose to tax their memory with burdens beyond its 
strength, or if they fail to remember things which persons 
who possess this faculty in any ordinary degree would easily 
recollect, memory is not on that account to be declared inca- 
pable of performing its ordinary functions, otherwise we 
might argue that because man could not bear a camel's load 
he was not able to sustain his body erect, or from the fact 
that there were always a number of valetudinarians, that the 
human organs were incapable of the performance of their 
healthy functions. 

Another attempt has been made to weaken the evidence 
of memory, by depriving that faculty of the collateral secu- 
rity which it derives from its connexion with consciousness. 
For it is contended that consciousness never takes into ac- 
count the objects of memory, but only of an act existing 
within us called by that name. But this is a distinction 
without a difference, for memory is nothing else than the 
perception of the past modifications of our being : render 
these illusory, or wipe out their existence from the act of 
consciousness, and no act of memory can exist. Again, if 
the testimony of consciousness be veracious, we must admit 
all that it reveals; but it certifies to us the existence of 
three distinct faculties, viz., that of the perception of things 
actually existing ; of those which have been and are not ; of 
those which are not and have never been. Now, if the 
objects of memory had no existence, it would be confounded 



0. IV. 2.] MEMOEY A1TD PEBSOHAL IDENTITY. 175 

with the last faculty, that of simple imagination ; or, in other 
words, it would not exist in the manner in which conscious- 
ness reveals its existence to us. We cannot, consequently, 
admit the separation of the objects of memory from con- 
sciousness without impeaching that faculty itself of error. 

One of the principal functions of memory undoubtedly is, 
to assure the consciousness of its individual identity ; but as 
it fails to do this beyond a certain period of existence, it has 
been pronounced unequal to its mission, and accused of 
leaving one of the most essential truths without any tangible 
foundation. For what certainty have we against our exist- 
ence from eternity in a state of metempsychosis, or that we 
have not been in the world for three thousand years, and 
even inhabited the body of a crocodile or a sparrow ? All 
that memory certifies is our existence down to a certain 
period of time ; but with regard to the state in which we 
existed anterior to that period, as the assumed first months 
of our infancy, and the nine months' probation in the womb, 
it says confessedly nothing. It is, consequently, charged 
with leaving our personal identity uncertain, and, as a reflex 
consequence of this defect, with rendering all knowledge 
which is built upon the assumption of this truth, including 
its own posterior acts, of an apocryphal character. 

But this difficulty seems to arise from confounding the 
functions of a faculty with the remembrance of the exercise 
of those functions. It does not at all follow that because 
memory ceases to recal the manner in which it assured con- 
sciousness of the identity of me in the first moments of 
existence, that it did not discharge that office. It is a neces- 
sary condition of our being that, as we progress in years, the 
remembrance of infancy become less and less distinct, until 
we lose sight of its earliest stages altogether ; but if we con- 
cluded, from the inability to recollect the acts of memory by 
which our personal identity was revealed to us at the earliest 
stages of existence, that no such acts took place, we might 
also for a similar reason affirm the same result of those 
periods of adolescence whose manner of existence have 
likewise lapsed out of remembrance. For, in the same man- 
ner as we feel assured that consciousness has always ac- 
companied our being from the first dawn of life, though 
we may not recollect the distinct acts in which it mani- 
fested our existence to us, do we believe that memory, 



176 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

from the earliest stage of being, carried forward the experi- 
ence of one moment to the next, and thus kept alive the 
assurance that the percipient soul constituted one identical 
person. Now, so long as this identity of me has been 
always revealed by memory to our consciousness, whether 
we remember the distinct acts or not, the link of identity 
has always been preserved, and the assurance we feel that 
this condition has been invariably fulfilled, could only be 
contravened by recalling a moment of existence in which 
some knowledge of the past was inaccessible to the mind ; an 
act, of course, which is beyond human power. We then are 
fully authorised to conclude that memory has steadily im- 
pressed the existence of me upon the intimate sense, and 
that from two principles. First, that memory itself certifies 
the fact down to a certain stage of childhood ; and secondly, 
that the amount of sensible experience, which she then 
assures us we possessed, could spring from no other source 
than the constant act of memory keeping the identity of 
one constantly before the mind in transferring the experience 
of one hour to the next 1 . 

The denial of transmigration, or even the maintenance of 
personal identity, is not dependent on the argument we have 
adduced, which, as far as we know, is perfectly novel ; but 
the aid of analogy is called in to assure the individual that 
what he perceives to be the general law of the human species 
has not been departed from in his case, and though memory 
does not expressly guarantee his existence beyond a certain 
period, or place the possibility of his eternal duration out of 
court, that the immutability of nature's laws comes to the aid 
of memory, and proves that his existence could not have 
passed the limit of a certain time, and that in the interval 
the identical nature of me has been preserved. 

1 With regard to personal identity, it is necessary to distinguish 
three things, which Locke confounds, viz., memory, consciousness, and 
the object of memory. Memory is the object of consciousness; the 
substantial and personal identity of me the object of memory. The 
veracity of both is bound up with the reality of their objects. Per- 
sonal identity consists in being able to affirm of one past and present 
existence. Yet Locke makes it consist in the exercise of conscious- 
ness, -whose only function is to declare the present. See Hum. Under, 
b. ii. c. xxvii. 9, 10. 



C. IV. 3.] OBJECTIONS OF SEXTUS EMPIEICUS. 177 



3. External Sense an ultimate Source of Evidence. 

The belief in the existence of matter and its various confor- 
mations in the outward world, is derived immediately from the 
authority of the senses, but mediately is bound up with that 
of consciousness, as sensation cannot exist without render- 
ing us cognisant of the presence of the object felt. Thus, 
when we affirm the existence of the desk on which we write, 
the sense of sight and touch into which, indeed, vision and 
all the other senses may be resolved vouch for the presence 
of the object in question ; but the operation of both of these 
senses are accompanied by consciousness, which guarantees 
their reality, and assures us we are not speaking about a 
mere image or vision, but of a substantial embodiment. 
The authority of the external senses, as a legitimate motive 
of judgment, may be, consequently, invalidated by convicting 
them directly of deception, or by separating either the sen- 
sations themselves or the objects about which they are 
exercised from the domain of consciousness. It was the fate 
of the ancient sceptics to follow the first course. Their 
modern representatives have made quite as potent an attack 
on human certainty by adhering to the second. 

The reasons which impugn the authority of the external 
senses as a certain means of knowledge have received their 
most elaborate exposition at the hands of Sextus Empiricus, 
and may thus be summarily expressed 1 . With regard to 

1 Sextus, surnamed Empiricus, from the school of physicists to 
which he belonged, flourished at the end of the second century. He 
put the finishing stroke to scepticism, by investing it with the form and 
method of a science in his three books entitled Hvppa)i>(ian> vn-orvTrat- 
In this celebrated work Sextus defines scepticism as the faculty 
of comparing the appearances of the senses and thoughts 
re KOI voovpeva) with a view to arrive (Sta 7171* iv rots 
s Trpdypast KOI \oyois lo'oo'dfvfiav) at a suspension of all 
judgment (eVo^i)) on objects whose nature is obscure (urj\ov, afyavts). 
Hence results a certain repose of the mind (arapagid) and perfect equa- 
nimity of disposition (/lerptorra&la) . He admits the existence of re- 
presentations and appearances (tpaivopjva) , and does not deny the 
possibility of cognition, but the reality of the objects of it. The result 
of this doctrine was his maxim ovSev ^oAXoi/, signifying that since 

V 



178 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IV. 

external objects the senses excite different and sometimes 
opposite sensations in men and animals : That atmosphere 

everything was uncertain no one thing was to be preferred to another. 
His system received a further development in his ten books against 
the mathematicians (yrpos TOVS ^ad^anKovs) , in the last five of which 
he sets in a strong light the uncertainty of the principles of those, (Dog- 
matists) who maintain that absolute truth is accessible to man by 
affirming it of their doctrines ; and denies certainty even to the sim- 
plest axioms of geometry and arithmetic. His writings form a com- 
plete storehouse of sceptical reasons, and have been pressed into active 
service by modern sceptics, and by none more zealously than Mon- 
taigne. At the commencement of his first treatise (b. i. c. 1, 4) he 
divides philosophers into three classes, viz., dogmatists, who maintain 
they have found truth ; academics, who affirm that it is impossible to 
discover it; sceptics, who affirm neither. He repeats the latter distinc- 
tion in his seventh book against the mathematicians ( 153). But in 
one respect it does not hold ; since CEnesidemus, the reviver of the 
third academy, taught substantially the same sceptical doctrines as 
himself. The distinction, indeed, had its origin with Cicero (Acad. 
Qusest. i. 12), who discriminated the opinions of Pyrrho from those 
of Arcesilaus and Carneades, the founders, in his time, of the second 
academy : for Pyrrho maintained that the existence of probability 
and doubt itself was doubtful, while these philosophers held that though 
everything was uncertain, still there was such a thing as probable 
knowledge, into which it was wise to inquire. They divided probable 
judgments into three distinct classes: TriQavr] (fravTasia, dTreprjia-Traa-- 
TOS and 8iea>8evfJifvr) rj TrfpioSfvp-evr) tpavTa<ria (Cic. Ac. Qusest. ii. 
9, 31, sqq. Sext. Adv. Math. vii. 159, sqq. 161, 167. Euseb. praepar. 
Evang. xiv. 7, sqq.). The doctrine of doubt, or absolute suspension of 
judgment, which the followers of the third academy maintained, did not, 
however, originate with Pyrrho, but with the sophist Protagoras, who 
flourished about the Ninety-second Olympiad, or 460 years before Christ, 
which places him nearly a century in advance of his more famous disciple. 
Of course there is nothing in the mere name of academician to denote a 
distinct species of opinions, as obtains in that of dogmatists and sceptics, 
since the word, as is well known, originated with the name of the owner 
of the gardens near the gates of Athens, who bequeathed his beautiful 
property to Plato as a convenient spot for the delivery of his philoso- 
phical lectures. The distinction, therefore, cannot be introduced into 
philosophy without a cross division. For the founders of the first 
academy were undoubted dogmatists, though they taught opinion 
which legitimately developed their own thesis, and led to the destruc 
tion of the universal doubt which followed ; while the revivers of the 
last academy were complete sceptics. The correct division of ancient 
philosophical opinions would be that of dogmatism, probabilism, and 
scepticism. Of the latter it is singular to observe the exact resemblance 
in the general outline of its principles and methods to the Hegelian 
system, at present so widely prevalent in Germany. 



C. IV. 3.] RELATIVE KNOWLEDGE UNASSAILABLE. 179 

which is dark to man is perfectly luminous to bats and owls. 
They also excite different impressions in the same individual 
at different ages, and change the appearance of the objects 
which they represent in proportion to the variations of dis- 
tance, and awake different images according as they are 
viewed through different media. The senses, therefore, can- 
not convey to us any certain information respecting the 
objects whose existence they seem to testify; and the as- 
sumption of their competency to that end, on which all 
physical science is reared, is a delusion. 

But this objection can only be urged with consistency 
against those who maintain that the absolute nature of sensi- 
ble objects is attainable by man a vulgar error adopted by 
the first philosophers of Greece ; but it does not invalidate one 
tittle of our belief in the certainty of experience which con- 
stitutes the basis of physical science, since it leaves its three 
fundamental corner stones untouched : 1st. That our sensa- 
tions are real modifications of our beings : 2ndly. That they 
instruct us as to the existence of external objects : 3rdly. That 
these objects have some relations with us or, in other words, 
that they appear such as they appear, and excite in us sensa- 
tions corresponding to the functions we fulfil with regard to 
the healthy preservation of our being. ISTow physical science 
demands the concession of no further principle than is in- 
volved in these truths, to show apodictically the relation 
which must exist between the objects which produce these 
different sensations as they are conceived by our conscious- 
ness. With regard to the absolute nature of the objects 
themselves, whether they reveal to us the actual essence of 
things as viewed by superior intelligences, or excite impres- 
sions merely relative to the important ends which man has 
been destined to fulfil in creation, science in reality pro- 
nounces nothing. 

The observation appears to have escaped this school of 
philosophers, that men, notwithstanding the different varieties 
of sensations, generally contrive to perceive the same rela- 
tions between their sensations. Thus, whatever may be the 
nature of crystal and light, all perceive the same relation 
between crystallised bodies and the illuminating medium. 
This uniformity of judgment about the relation of sensible 
objects is amply sufficient to guarantee the inference of the 



180 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

laws which spring from this source, and connecting their 
phenomena with rational truth to erect the superstructure 
of physical science. 

Again, if the argument of the sceptics be worth anything, 
it places beyond doubt the existence of two facts viz., that 
there are as many different ways of perceiving nature as there 
are different species of beings and organisations, and, more- 
over, that these have as many distinct ways of acting as there 
are different states of the subject on which they act. In- 
stead, therefore, of proving there is nothing certain, it really 
establishes an important truth. In attempting to convict 
its opponents' principles of imposture, it destroys itself. So 
true is the saying of Pascal, that there is a force of truth 
invincible to every scepticism, an independence of demon- 
stration invincible to every dogmatism. 

The sceptics say we are ignorant of things absolutely, and 
can only pretend to an acquaintance with their relative 
nature. But it is absurd to affirm that we know things re- 
latively without being cognisant of the terms of the rela- 
tions. The very idea of a body existing in a certain mode 
postulates the existence of four things viz., existence ; ex- 
istence of a thing distinct from me ; the existence in me of 
certain sensations produced by a thing distinct from me ; and 
that this thing is the cause, and is able to be the cause of 
these sensations. So far, therefore, from destroying cer- 
tainty by such an argument, the sceptics really establish the 
theory they intend to overthrow. They find themselves in 
the position of a class of animals whose instinct leads them 
to seek the destruction of certain insects by performing the 
very act which is essential to their preservation. 

The objections which a modern school of philosophers have 
urged against the testimony of sense, with respect to the 
existence of an external world, have taken their rise in some 
theories of perception, which it will be necessary to explain 
and confute before we can place their nature in a true light, 
or be well satisfied we have escaped from the hard necessity 
of affirming that space and all the worlds which it contains, 
together with " this great globe itself, its cloud-capped 
towers, and gorgeous palaces, are but the splendid fabric of 
a vision," of no substantial reality, and merely existing in 
the mind as subjective states arising out of the pre-esta- 



C. IT. 3.] THEOBIES OF PEECEPTI02T. 181 

Wished mechanism of its own nature. It has from time 
almost immemorial been a belief that the human mind, being 
a spiritual substance, was not cognisant of external objects 
directly, but through the medium of certain spectra (species), 
which by an action analogous to luminous bodies conveyed 
the exact impress of the material substances which cast them 
off through the external senses into the mind. From this 
opinion no moderns presumed to dissent until a very recent 
period 1 ; and even Descartes, in citing every opinion of an- 
tiquity before the bar of reason to show cause why it should 
not be consigned to the category of doubt, allowed this opinion 
to maintain its place, with one important modification, that 
" idea should be assumed in place of spectra as the inter- 
mediate agent by which external objects were impressed upon 
the mind 2 ." It was contended, however, that the presence 
of such ideas in the mind could not be assumed as certain 
evidence of the real existence of the external objects to which 
they refer, as they only arose out of certain modifications of the 
percipient being, and consciousness did not warrant us to 
conclude the existence of anything beyond them. A chasm 
was thus interposed between the existence of the internal 
states of our consciousness and the material world, which 
philosophers attempted to bridge over, by calling to their as- 
sistance the veracity of G-od 3 ; or by ingenious theories, either 
about seeing all things in the divine nature 4 , or concerning a 
pre-established harmony between our internal states and the 
objective world to which they refer, each, however, acting 
independent of the other, and solely dependent for their 
mutual correspondence on the divine will 5 . Such opinions, 
of course, together with the hypothesis of perception, from 
which they flowed, reduced the naked testimony of the 
external senses at best to a probable character, and opened 

1 In this part of the world Reid has the credit of being the first 
philosopher to call the principle into question, but he got the proof of 
its invalidity, at least as he represented it, from Pere Buffier, and 
Pere Buffier obtained it from Arnauld. See the treatise of the latter, 
Des Idees Vrais et Fausses, contre ce qu'enseigne 1'auteur de la re- 
cherche de la ve'rite'. Cologne, 1683. a Genovesi thus very accurately 
expresses Descartes's doctrine: Id quod fit menti pra?sens dum percipit 
aut cogitat, quodque semper rei a mente distinct, et quidem aut 
existentis, aut possibilis imago quaedam est. Genovesi (Logica Critica, 
lib. ii. cap. 1). * Descartes. 4 Malebranche. * Leibnitz. 



182 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

a breach for the sceptic to renew his attack 1 upon the do- 
main of certainty, in a quarter that Sextus Empiricus little 
dreamt of trying the strength of, and with far better vantage 
ground than that from which he had commenced his attack. 
What Sextus and GEnesidemus did for the probabilities of 
Carneades 3 , Hume and Condillac effected for the probabilities 
of Descartes and Locke. They showed that in consistency 
with their own principles no such thing as matter could 
exist ; and that with their postulates in the background even 
the reality of the appearances themselves might be validly 
called in question. But that the principle itself is a true 
theory of perception we have no other proof than the very 
slender one, of the consentaneous belief of nearly all philo- 
sophers up to a very recent date in its veracity. Of itself, it 
is supported by no intrinsic grounds whatever. For even ad- 
mitting its truth, it does not lessen the difficulties it was 
called in to resolve, since it is quite as hard to understand 
how external objects can generate spiritual ideas, as it is to 
conceive their direct action on a thinking substance. If 
matter be declared incapable of the latter, it is doubly so 
of the former ; and Berkeley, Hume, and Condillac were per- 
fectly justified with such a theory in their heads in wiping 
out the external world altogether. 

Moreover, this hypothesis has been introduced not only 
without an object, but in total defiance of the revelations of 
consciousness. If that principle can be said to assure us of 
anything, it certainly is the existence of things external to us 
by the sensations they excite in the mind ; and all men, even 
including those who pretend to disbelieve it, act as if the 
testimony was of an infallible character. The assumption of 
the contrary doctrine is so contrary to the common sense of 
mankind that it requires some advance in philosophy to en- 
tertain it. It involves the supposition that perception can 
exist without the reality of the object perceived, which seems 
a contradiction in terms. The opposition of this theory to 
the plainest instincts of consciousness may be further seen 
from the fact that it is at strife with the idea that we have 

1 As Descartes, Wolf, Malebranche, and even Locke, who adopted 
Descartes's views on the subject maintained. See Hum. Under, b. iv. 
3. 2 evXoyiorta. 



C. IT. 3.] MODEBN SCEPTICS ANSWEBED. 183 

of sensation as a phenomenon, whose cause is identical with 
the object which produces it. Now, sensation offers itself to 
the consciousness as distinct from the object felt and the sub- 
ject which feels, being essentially connected with both. It 
manifests itself as an effect of the same object felt ; not being 
able to refute the testimony of consciousness, we cannot 
deny the objectivity of the sensation, and consequently the 
existence of the body. Again : if we have a conception of a 
body that is not present to our senses, that conception must 
refer to this object solely as an object conceived, but not as 
the cause of the conception. The absence of this double re- 
lation of a conception to the same object converts the act 
into one of pure imagination. "We consequently cannot 
deny the presence of a body actually modifying our spirit in 
a case of sensible perception, without confounding that act 
with the operation of the imaginative faculty; and thus again 
convicting consciousness of imposture in blending two acts, 
which it assures us are perfectly distinct. 

It is urged, however, that dreams manifest cases analogous 
to those of sensible objects, even when no external agents exist 
answering to the images excited in our mind. But, in the first 
place, it may be replied that such impressions exist as simple 
objects of the imagination, which are put to flight as soon as 
consciousness awakes us to the real appearance of things. 
"We do not embrace them with anything like the same de- 
gree of certainty as the objects of the waking senses, nor 
move our bodily organs to correspond with the illusions they 
excite in us in the same manner as we dispose our actions to 
suit the direct impressions of the sensible world. In such 
states we are incapable of reflex acts of thought ; that is, we 
are never able to distinguish between appearances and reali- 
ties, and the first moment in which we feel inclined to ques- 
tion the reality of the impressions in the sensorium we are 
roused into a waking state and feel assured of the delusion. 
That dreams owe their origin to the imaginative faculty must 
be admitted, from the circumstance that the images which they 
excite in us do not occur in the same order in which they exist 
in nature, but arise capriciously out of past modifications of 
the mind, which the fancy sets together in the most ill-sorted 
and fantastic manner, in sport, as it were, witli the solemn 
realities and conventionalisms of nature and society. That we 
appear to accord to her pranks any semblance of belief arises 



184 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IV. 

from the attention of consciousness being entirely withdrawn 
from the real world and fixed upon such representations of it 
that imagination chooses to give, to the entire abstraction of 
everything else ; but that consciousness accords entire belief to 
such representations on that account is no more to be inferred 
than that of a reader's assent to the truth of a tale which 
entirely absorbs his attention, or that of a woman's belief in 
the real characters of the mythic personages of a theatre be- 
cause she swooned away at the finale of the play. The only 
difference in these cases is the minor degree in which con- 
sciousness is abstracted from surrounding objects, which con- 
sequently leaves less play for the exercise of pure imagina- 
tion a modification which is also displayed in dreams them- 
selves, since some appear less real than others, while there 
are others which accompany a half- waking state, whose illu- 
sion is manifest from the commencement of the operation. 

Again, the sensations excited by dreams never convey a 
new class of objects into the mind, but simply reproduce 
the old, and that according to the strength of the impression 
by which those objects have been previously communicated 
to the mind, or the number of times it has experienced their 
presence. Hence, hounds in their sleep open for their 
prey, but no other class of the canine species do, because 
they have never hunted in their waking state: an orator 
who has controlled the decisions of senates, or a general who 
has commanded armies, imagine they hear in their sleep the 
murmur of applause or the thunder of cannon ; but a plough- 
man or a huckster never finds himself in the same predica- 
ment, simply because he has never mounted either a breach 
or a tribune. This principle is undeniable, being attested 
by every one's experience. If, therefore, nothing enters the 
mind in dreams but what has been there in some shape or 
other in its waking state, these delusions, instead of weaken- 
ing our belief in the existence of external bodies, really esta- 
blish it ; or, in other words, they show the impression of the 
existence to have been so strong as to act when the object 
which originally produced it has passed away. 

All the errors which have been propagated on the testimony 
of external sense have sprung out of the supposition that the 
veracity of consciousness can stand without the veracity of 
the other media of knowledge ; but we have shown, at least as 
far as two are concerned, that it assures us of their particular 



0. IV. 4.] EXTEBNAL SENSE UNITED WITH CONSCIOUSNESS. 185 

existence both as to the relation of the exercise of the act and 
the object, and therefore cannot be isolated from them. This 
truth is further strengthened by the illogical consequences 
in which its contradictory has landed its opponents: for 
while Pere Buffier, with Eeid, formed the veracity of external 
sense on the common sense of mankind as distinct from con- 
sciousness, they fell into a palpable petitio principii ; since 
they had previously assumed the universality of the belief, as 
a mark of such testimony being a primitive truth. Or, in other 
words, they first lay down the postulate that every truth which 
is universally received is primitive, and must be received 
on its own evidence ; and then show the testimony of the 
external senses is such, by affirming of it the very character- 
istic which they ought to have proved 1 . Though the Car- 
tesians avoided this paralogism, by resting the veracity of the 
senses on the veracity of God whose existence they placed 
in the idea we have of the infinite, still they were guilty of 
the inconsistency of affirming that consciousness was com- 
petent to certify the presence of that idea, while it was unable 
to assure us of the existence of finite bodies out of which 
such idea may be said to spring. If, however, consciousness 
may be said to warrant us in assuming anything, it is that 
external things are not only the cause of our sensations, but 
the objects we perceive along with our sensation ; or, in other 
words, that our sensations are not only passive modifications, 
but the immediate perceptions of things outside of us, and 
we cannot invalidate such testimony without impugning its 
veracity, and even calling into doubt our own existence 2 . 

4. Analogy an ultimate Source of Evidence. 

Consciousness and the external senses only make us 
acquainted with particular facts. But physical science can- 

1 Pere Buffier gives two other marks of primitive truth besides the 
one in the text, viz. : The incapability they manifest of being esta- 
blished by truths clearer than themselves; 2nd. That those who cavil 
with them act upon the belief of their existence. See PEssai sur les 
verit(?s primitives, c. 3 5. The gross instance of the fallacy in the 
text reminds us of the common reply of the farmer when we ask him 
why we may not ride over his field : " Why why why that's the 
reason why." a For the consideration of spectral illusions, as 

bearing on this subject, the reader is referred to the supplement of this 
book in the Appendix. 



186 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IV. 

not draw any certain inference from them without a belief 
in certain axioms: such as the stability of the course of 
nature ; that individuals similar in their apparent qualities are 
similar in their occult qualities ; that similar effects proceed 
from similar causes, and other principles of the same import, 
which, as they spring from an interior conviction of our 
nature that the future will resemble the past, are designated 
by the common term analogy 1 . As this principle is the 
foundation of all our knowledge of nature, any attempt to 
overset it must be viewed as a direct attack upon the 
existence of the external world, and, therefore, must be met 
before we attempt to expound the leading inferential forms 
by which its laws are established. 

But beyond the objections whose confutation we have 
already attempted 2 , we meet with no direct assault upon this 
principle, unless from the solitary pen of Hume, who con- 
tended that the principle of analogy could not be maintained 
without falling into the sophism so often adverted to. For 
it is impossible to affirm a likeness between two things, one 
of which we have never seen or heard of. We ought, there- 
fore, to know the future in order to compare it with the 
present; and the assumption of this knowledge, which is 
required to be proved, is the only foundation on which 
analogy rests. But this argument supposes that analogy is 
an experimental truth, which Hume affirms it must be, if it 
be any truth at all, since it is obviously neither neces- 
sary or identical. The confusion, however, lurks in the 
word necessary. It is not necessary, as we have already 
shown, in the sense of the highest metaphysical truth, that 
is, independent of all condition ; but it is necessary in the 
supposition that it does not depend upon experience, but 
has been blended with the primordial elements of the mind 
with a view to guide its inferences with respect to the objects 
which envelope and surround its being. In this sense the 

1 We have shown in a former chapter we do not derive these axioms 
from experience but from an instinct which precedes or is co-existent 
with experience. The establishment of this truth shows that inductive 
inference does not differ from demonstrative in the threefold character 
of the judgments involved in its illation. 2 Of course those who 

refuse to admit the testimony of sense as a certain motive of judgment, 
place analogy in the same category as Wolf. Logica, p. 2, $$ 674, 677. 



c. IT. 4.] HUME'S OBJECTION TO ANALOGY. 187 

word necessary is sufficient to raise it out of the category 
of experimental truth, and rescue it from the objection 
which is only brought against it as belonging to that 
category. 

But even on the ground of its being an experimental truth, 
we think the view of this illustrious sceptic cannot be main- 
tained. For it is undoubtedly in our power to regard every 
moment of existence as future in relation to the first instant 
which memory can recal, and every subsequent moment as 
past relative to the objects which succeeded it, and future 
with regard to the moments already past. Thus every instant, 
unless the first, may be regarded as either past or future, and 
running over these several moments we may perceive that 
the course of nature has invariably presented the future like 
the past, and from the comparison are entitled to infer 
that it always will continue to do so, without the illogical 
consequence which Hume attributed to such an illation. 

It may be important to observe, that the analogy produced 
by certain knowledge is not to be confounded with con- 
jecture 1 . For though intellectual superiority consists, in 
some degree, of the skill which is exhibited in employing the 
experience of the past to foresee the future, yet the results 
are never more than probable, as the will of man and the 
capricious nature of human events, which refuse to submit 
themselves to the calculations of the exact sciences, are liable 
to defeat the wisest prognostications. The astronomer, fore- 
seeing with certainty what will be the future relations of 
celestial phenomena in a given time, is able to determine 
the exact moment of the equinoxes, and predict lunar and 
solar eclipses ; because a constant experience manifests to 
him the laws of the motions of the heavenly bodies, and 
mathematical knowledge applied to observation gives him 
infallible results. But if he turn his horoscope on the future 
of society, both the vacillating nature of the will and the 
ignorance of the motives which determine its action in any 
weighty crises, the sudden appearance of great men on the 
scene, who unexpectedly found, overset, or remodel religious 
governments and dynasties, prevent anything further than 

1 Dngald Stewart appears to us to fall into this error. See Phil. 
Mind, a. 3, v. c. 2. 



188 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

probability even in predictions which fall within our own 
time ; while with regard to those which extend beyond it, 
even probability, in some respects, is unattainable. If the 
arms of the republic had been victorious at Filippi, what 
would have been the future of Borne ? If Bonaparte's 
father had not married a Corsican, and thus brought that 
general into the world, what would have been the condition 
of France now ? 

. 5. Reason an ultimate Source of Evidence. 

Another primitive motive of belief is reasoning, or the 
necessity we feel in any legitimate argument of admitting 
the conclusion when we have conceded the premises. The 
legitimacy of such a motive cannot be proved without as- 
suming the thing in dispute, and even those who deny its 
authority can only make out their case by an appeal to the 
authority which they call in question. Sextus Empiricus, 
however, attacked the veracity of reasoning : first, on the 
ground that the majority of men who employ its methods 
come to different conclusions ; and, secondly, that since it is 
impossible to prove everything, the whole structure of in- 
ference rests upon assumed principles, and partakes of the 
uncertain character of their foundation. The first argument 
is logically vicious, as the conclusion contains an illation 
more universal than the premiss, being tantamount to this : 
" Some men have reasoned badly, therefore none can reason 
correctly :" but as all men who reason admit the veracity of 
the means of knowing, why does not their united agreement 
in some particulars coerce the sceptics into the admission of 
some truth, if the discrepancy of opinion which men manifest 
furnish them with a motive for suspending their judgment ? 
Even if the inference be granted it is at the expense of a 
double inconsistency. 

From the premiss of their second argument, that all 
truth is incapable of being demonstrated, it does not at all 
follow that no inference is certain, but points to a totally 
opposite conclusion. That all the layers of stone which an 
edifice comprises are not indented into corresponding layers 
beneath them, but that the first pile rests upon solid rock, 
if it go to establish anything, it surely is the security of the 
building so situate. Now on such solid rock repose primitive 



C. IV. 6.] AUTHOBITY WHEN UNIMPEACHABLE. 189 

truths, for they are vouched for by the direct evidence of 
consciousness, than which there can be no higher security in 
nature. But the sceptics seem to forget, in urging such 
objections ; they suppose the authority of reason in the act 
of destroying it, and thus commit palpable suicide on their 
own principles. They are in the position of the woodman 
who was so busy in felling the branches of a tree, that he 
cut off the very bough on which he was standing 1 . 

6. Authority an ultimate Source of Evidence, 

As man is unable to exist in all times and places, or to 
assure himself of the certainty of every link of evidence 
which demands his attention, he cannot avoid resting his 
belief on the authority of others if he would travel beyond 
personal experience, and in fact does so with a confidence 
not less certain than he accepts the evidence of his senses. 
This certainty, which is termed moral, has been attributed 
to analogy 2 , as we may be said to infer a thing will be 
true under certain circumstances, which has always proved 
so when the marks which attended its veracity has been 
fulfilled. Thus, we have heard that there is such a place 
as Egypt ; by subsequent travel we realise the truth of the 
testimony by which we were led to believe in its existence. 
"We read of the demonstrations by which Newton proved 
that the inequalities of lunar motion was a consequence of 
the universal law of force, and though we may not have ex- 
amined the consecutive train of inference by which that fact 
was established, we do not believe it with less certainty, from 
having proved the correctness of similar testimony when we 
applied the test of personal examination. 

Thougli authority may, as a motive of judgment, derive 
collateral support from such confirmations, we hardly think 
the main trunk of its certainty springs from other ground 

1 Hegel assumes the principle of contradiction, or that everything 
has its opposite, which (Enesidemus taught in the middle of the second 
century, as valid ground for refuting the conclusions of legitimate 
inference; but of course it would be perfectly idle to prove against 
him that one cannot be right and wrong at the same time. 2 By 

Galluppi, Lezioni di Logica, 32. Locke on this account would allow 
no certainty but what sprung out of direct personal experience. 



190 FOUNDATIONS OF EVIDENCE. [B. IT. 

than that of the direct intuitive evidence of consciousness. 
For postulating the durability of the laws of human nature, 
it is quite as impossible to conceive a number of men, sepa- 
rated by gaps of time and dwelling in different hemispheres, 
who can have no personal interest in affirming the truth of 
what they state, and no common ground for acting in 
concert, should conspire to cheat the rest of their species 
with a lie, as to imagine that two straight lines can enclose 
a space, or that the whole should be greater than the parts 
of which it consists. Moreover, the direct pledge of con- 
sciousness is required to certify the infallibility of this motive' 
of judgment ; as there are many truths resting upon authority 
whose evidence is past and cannot be repeated, which it is 
consequently impossible to bring under the cognisance of 
any existing personal knowledge. We accept these, however, 
when duly corroborated, with the same unhesitating belief as 
others, whose truth is hourly confirmed by the evidence of 
additional personal witnesses, and that for no other reason 
than the impossibility we intuitively feel of conceiving the 
testimony of man can be other than true under the circum- 
stances we have supposed above. These conditions may be 
thus formally stated : 1st. That the testimony be universal. 
2nd. That it arise from nature. 3rd. That it be convenient to 
no sect or class. And 4th. That the testimony when it relate 
to present facts, increase with knowledge. 

Authority has been attacked only in its theological rela- 
tions, and that by two distinguished sceptics ; but the argu- 
ment of one respects rather the fulfilment of the conditions 
than the truth of the testimony, which rests upon them. 
Gibbon states the evangelical account of the death of Christ 
is not to be received, as it lacks the testimony of cotem- 
porary writers. If that be so, of course the main condition 
of the veracity of authority has not been fulfilled, and our 
thesis remains untouched. But Hume boldly assumes the 
hypothesis of the conditions being carried out, and asserts 
that even when accompanied by such marks of evidence, 
authority is not to be trusted, when the report it announces 
conflicts with the permanence of the laws of nature. But 
the objection, though urged against the reception of historical 
testimony in the case of miracles, is really to be met on 
other grounds. For if a Providence exist who has impressed 



B. V.] HTTME AGAINST MIEACLES. 191 

those laws on material objects, the assumption that He has 
suspended their action for His own wise designs, is the only 
escape we have from the absurd conception that a number of 
men, who could not possibly act in collusion, should conspire 
to deceive people with no selfish object in view. But if 
no Providence exist, and we believe Hume was not disposed 
to rest his argument on that ground, the assumption that 
those laws could be suspended without material agency could 
not, of course, be entertained ; and the hypothesis of the 
marks of the certainty of authority being in that case ful- 
filled, must fall to the ground. The belief in miracles is thus 
resolved into the belief in the existence of God. If that be 
denied, the hypothesis can not hold ; if it be acknowledged, 
it leads to a consequence it sustains the irrefragable nature 
of authority, when founded on the unanimous testimony of 
men. 

These six fountains of evidence constitute the criteria of 
truth in the widest sense. If there be one criterion which 
exercises any prerogative over the rest answering to the 
description of Cicero Insignis ilia et propria percipiendi 
nota propria veri et certi nota 1 it is reason in its intense 
and primitive purity 2 . 



BOOK V. 

METHODS OP SCIENTIFIC PEOOF AND INVESTIGATION. 
PEOEMITJM. 

HAYING traced in the foregoing pages the subordinate 
compartments in which the structure of evidence may be 
divided, and pointed out the foundations on which the edifice 
rests, we may now proceed to treat of the general outlines of 
the building, and show in what manner such of its parts as 
are dissimilar fit into one another, and form by their union the 
different branches of science of which the structure is com- 

1 Degerando, Hist. Compar. Syst. Phil. b. ii. part ii. c. 4, pronounces 
such criterion impossible, as indeed it is in the sense in which he takes 
it, as a certain seal or stamp, whose impress will lead the reader to 
detect truth without any examination. 2 Ac. Quaest. iv. c. 31, 31. 



192 METHODS OF SCIENTIFIC PBOOF. [u. V. 

posed. This, the leading portion of the treatise, though 
capable of being pursued almost to an indefinite extent 1 , 
easily admits of being brought within the limits we have 
assigned to it, as the only two divisions of the sciences whose 
methods are so radically distinct as to require separate 
treatment, are the moral and the physical ; and the methods, 
which each of the various sciences comprised in these 
two groups embrace, are so homogeneous, as to be dis- 
posed of in five or six sections. For the sciences, included 
under the physical branch of the division, do not exact spe- 
cific methods varying with every subject-matter about which 
each is conversant but with the precise stage of development 
at which they may have arrived. They commence with the 
registry of simple facts and collections of instances, and from 
thence ascend to the most universal laws or axioms, through 
the medium of intermediate ranges of laws, gradually widen- 
ing into them ; while the moral sciences, for the most part, 
embrace the reverse process of descent from axioms of the 
widest generality, through cases of gradually diminishing ex- 
tent to the minutest particulars. The methods entered upon 
at each of these stages are adapted to the further development 
of all the sciences which have reached them ; but since the 
same method by which a law of minor generality has been 
connected with a multitude of particular facts, either by the 
deductive or inductive mode of inference, can be of no avail 
in connecting such minor law with one of wider generality ; 
it is evident that, as the growth of sciences varies, the method 
by which they are investigated must vary along with them. 
In the physical sciences, however, this development may be 
included in three stages, viz., the descriptive, the inductive, 
commonly called the experimental, and the deductive or 
exact stage ; the first corresponding to the position which 
meteorology, and the second to that which chemistry and 
crystalography at present occupies ; while astronomy and me- 
chanics may be taken as examples of the third. The methods 
by which any physical science is forwarded through its first 
stage may be comprised under the head of observation, ex- 
periment, classification, and nomenclature ; these lead to the 

1 And for that reason, i. e. its seeming vagueness, probably hitherto 
neglected in logical treatises. 



B. V.] DIVISION OF PHYSICAL METHODS. 193 

discovery of proximate causes, and laws of the lowest degree 
of generality, through the application of the canons of 
experimental inquiry. The latter, consequently, form the 
methods applicable at the second stage ; while, as a science, 
is made deductive by the formation of theories, and by 
bringing these to the test of quantitative laws, the nature 
and use of hypothesis, with the functions that mathematics 
play in the verification and construction of the exact sciences, 
will comprise the last range of methods which enter into the 
highest development of physics. To the complete explana- 
tion of these different methods, it is essential that some 
account be rendered of the general laws they are designed to 
discover, both in their simple and complex states ; and to 
this end we shall add a section to each of these tripartite 
range of methods, explanatory of the nature of the facts and 
laws they are intended to bring to light, how each are inter- 
woven and fit into the universe of things, and the general 
entanglement from which they are to be disembedded. But 
as many events occur, or facts present themselves, even in 
the physical world, whose laws, if they are amenable to any, 
we cannot exactly ascertain, one of these sections will be 
devoted to the exposition of the general characteristics by 
which such facts or events are accompanied, and the methods 
pursued to construct out of them general propositions, avail- 
able either for scientific purposes or for practical utility. 
Hence this part of the book will embrace six sections, three 
comprising the various methods pursued in the construction 
of the sciences, and the remaining half generalising the multi- 
tudinous cases of phenomena with which those methods have 
to deal. 

The methods which the moral sciences embody are, in 
many respects, identical with those already described, the 
only points in which they much differ being the deduction 
of individual laws and occurrences from abstract proposi- 
tions, which we obtain from other sources than experience ; 
and the dealing with multitudes rather than with individuals, 
in order to neutralise as much as possible the uncertain 
element introduced into these sciences by the action of the 
human will. The complexity involved in mental, spiritual, 
and social phenomena, demand more subtle agencies to trace 
their laws than those which obtain in the material world ; 



194 DIVISION OE MOBAL METHODS. [B. T. 

for, while the principles of the one seem eternal and immu- 
table, those of the other are ever shifting with the current 
of the hour, and continue to exhibit fresh phases at every 
stage of their development. Hence one or two direct modes 
of inference are inadequate to grasp the perpetually changing 
nature of the phenomena they present ; multiplied and di- 
verging lines of argument are required, such as those included 
in the negative process and the cross-examining elenches, 
whose functions in moral proof are precisely analogous to 
those which the calculus performs in the physical sciences. 
The explanation of these methods in conjunction with the 
purely deductive sciences to which they are applied, as 
theology and ethics, will constitute one section, while their 
connexion with the mixed or inverse deductive sciences, as 
politics or ethology, where empirical data are blended with a 
priori principles, will comprise another. In connecting such 
empirical facts with minor or general principles, either by 
way of direct proof or verification, the canons of experi- 
mental inquiry will be found directly available where the 
nature of the phenomena requires us to proceed by the path 
of induction; but in the case of analogy and approximate 
generalisations, a distinct section will be required, on ac- 
count of the shifting nature of the evidence and the in- 
fluence in much of the data of the capricious element of 
human volition. It will be observed that the methods in 
this arm of the division are more irregular in their applica- 
tion than those belonging to the physical branch; since, 
instead of varying simply with the growth of the sciences, 
they adapt their form to the specific matter with which each 
is conversant. As the subjects, however, which they embrace 
are not of so multiform a character, the methods are capable 
of being included within less limits than those of the physical 
sciences, embracing only the three sections we have assigned 
them, an additional one however being added, by way of 
preliminary exposition of the nature of liberty and necessity, 
and the general objects, about which it is the province of the 
subsequent sections to treat. 



C. I. 1.] LAWS ULTIMATE AND DERIVATIVE. 195 

CHAPTEE I. 

METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. 

1. The Nature, Grounds, and Limits of Physical 
Investigation. 

THE object of the inductive sciences may be said to be the 
pointing out what uniformities are perpetually occurring in 
nature, and placing in evidence the causes or laws upon 
which their existence depend. We hear, for instance, a 
sound when a musical chord is struck, and on instituting an 
inquiry into the cause of the phenomena, find it to consist 
in the communication of motion from the sounding body to 
the adjoining particles of the air, and the propagation of 
motion from particle to particle of such intermedium till 
it reach those contiguous to the ear, which convey the 
impression to the auditory nerves, and from thence to 
the brain. The investigation, however, does not terminate 
in extricating the ultimate cause of the phenomena, but 
merely presents us with simpler causes, into which its com- 
plexity may be resolved, viz., the cause of motion and sensa- 
tion. Though we have no infallible proof that the latter 
causes are ultimate, and indeed strong presumptive evidence 
that they are complex phenomena, it is usual to place them 
in the former category, at least until science enables us to 
complete the analysis of the parts into which they are 
capable of being resolved. "Whether ultimate causes or 
laws are attainable by the methods upon which science 
relies for its most successful prosecution, or whether man's 
faculties are too gross to discern them in the undiscernible 
molecules and corpuscular motions in which they may be 
supposed to reside, it is not for man, in the present state of 
science, to hazard an assertion. Suffice it to say, that those 
properties which appear ultimate, such as the gravity of 
matter, the mutual attractions and repulsions of its particles, 
the equal pressure of liquids in all directions, are generally 
considered in the light of original causes, while the unifor- 
mities into which these enter as active agents are ordinarily 
regarded as derivative ones. For example, the rise of mer- 
cury in the Torricellian tube is nothing more than an in- 

o2 



196 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. Y. 

stance of pressure on a fluid in one direction unopposed by 
an equal pressure in the contrary direction, producing 
motion which does not cease till equilibrium is restored. 
But the uniformity in question is regarded as derivative, 
since it is fully accounted for by the weight of the air acting 
on a body which distributes the pressure communicated to it 
throughout all its parts with equal intensity. Hence the 
variations of mercury in the barometer in proportion to the 
density of the atmosphere may be said to take place accord- 
ing to a derivative law, while the two laws in which it 
eventuates may be considered as ultimate, until we are able 
to disentangle the skein of causes which compose their re- 
sults, and estimate their effects in like manner. 

As complex uniformities, like the instances we have ad- 
duced, are virtually implied in the simpler ones of which 
they are the spontaneous effects, and consequently do not 
require a separate act of creative will to necessitate their 
existence, the designation of laws of nature has been denied 
them by an acute writer 1 , who seems disposed to restrict 
the term to those laws which do not admit of subordinate 
analysis. But the statement is upheld in the absence of a 
distinction which is essential to the subject, as going to the 
bottom of the dispute about the nature of the causes and 
laws which it is the function of scientific methods to dis- 
cover. For it is evident that laws may be considered ulti- 
mate with respect to the bodies through which they mani- 
fest their agency, which are, however, not the less resolvable 
into the simpler elements or laws out of which the substance 
arises whose properties they constitute. Thus, the cohesion 
and capillarity of the parts of liquids perish when they are 
resolved into the expansible fluids out of whose combination 
they sprung ; but it is nevertheless certain that such co- 
hesion arose from the increased attraction with which the 
union of the elementary gases invested the minute particles 
of which the resulting liquid was composed. Or, assuming 
the reverse case of the conversion of an inexpansible ^fluid 
into a solid a process of continual occurrence in the animal 
system ; as the liquid approaches a viscid state, mobility 
among its parts, or the law of the propagation of equal 

1 Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 383. In the example which he gives he is 
peculiarly unfortunate, his third ultimate uniformity, as we instance 
in the text, being only a corollary of the second. 



C. I. 1.] CAUSES AND LAWS. 197 

pressure in all directions, gradually disappear, though there 
cannot be the slightest doubt that the change is effected by 
neutralising the peculiar combination of attractive and re- 
pulsive properties which constitute the laws into which that 
mobility may be resolved. Now, to grant that those laws 
which are only ultimate in the extreme sense are solely entitled 
to be regarded as laws of nature, would be to invalidate 
even the claims of those to that designation which form the 
boundary of the present state of scientific analysis, for there 
are none so simple which chemistry does not promise to 
resolve into more elementary laws ; while the concession of 
ultimative properties in the relative sense would not afford 
any ground for the theory that such only can be justly 
termed laws of nature, as requiring a separate fiat of crea- 
tive will ; since such laws arise out of mere combinations 
of ulterior properties, which can be supposed to occur as 
spontaneously as the ^combinations which give rise to de- 
rivative laws into which they enter, without any specific in- 
terference on the part of the ruler of the universe. 

In reality with regard to absolute primordial elements 
nothing is known, and the introduction of the terms ulti- 
mate and derivative can only be accepted to distinguish those 
laws whose elements are known from others whose causes lie 
concealed. But notwithstanding the inquiries which it is the 
object of physical science to institute into the laws of the ma- 
terial universe, at best only conduct to the proximate causes 
of things, they for the most part point out the nature of their 
various properties, and frequently reveal the ingredients of 
the substances of which they are composed. This leads to 
a twofold division of laws really pertinent to their nature, 
one as regards the action of substances, the other referring 
to the elements which enter into their composition. Thus 
it is a law or immutable condition of nature that if two- 
thirds in volume of hydrogen be brought in close contact 
with one-third of oxygen while the two gases are in an elec- 
trified state, water will be produced ; or that if silica, alu- 
mina, soda, sulphur, and a trace of iron be combined in 
certain proportions the result will appear in the creation 
of lapis lazuli ; just as much as it is a law that planets 
move in ellipses round the sun, each describing equal 
areas in equal times, or that in their orbits the squares of 
the periodical times are proportional to the cubes of the dis- 



198 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. T. 

tances; although we know in the latter case that these 
different properties of planetary motion are resolvable into 
laws still more general, which may be in turn deduced from 
the peculiar combination of centripetal and tangential force 
in which they originate, while we are as certain that in the 
former the proximate substances of which water and ultra- 
marine-blue have been shown to consist admit of resolution 
through different stages of more elementary substances into 
the simplest results that chemistry has laid open to us. The 
causes, therefore, which scientific methods seek to discover, 
always imply laws, since they exist through their agency ; 
but laws cannot be regarded without some laxity in the use 
of language as synonymous with causes, unless when in 
addition to the signification of the measure of the forces by 
which other substances and properties act, they generate 
new substances and new properties, or in other words new 
laws. But the web of cause and effect is so intricately 
blended in nature, that we know of no existing law which 
does not produce, and may not be consequently deemed the 
cause of its effect, so that philosophers are conjointly agreed 
in viewing the two terms as interchangeable in the language 
of natural science. The elliptical motion of a planet, for 
instance, though the final result of certain elementary forces, 
is one of the principal conditions on which the return of the 
seasons depend, and the periodical succession of the seasons 
is again an essential element in the production and renova- 
tion of the internal economy of the planet. 

The causes, then, whose discovery forms the object of 
scientific pursuit, may be assumed to be the essential physical 
conditions, or material agencies, on which the different 
uniformities in nature invariably depend, whether such 
agency be the derivative effect of original self-acting agents, 
as is the notion of the development theory both in its 
ancient and modern aspects, or are ultimate agencies them- 
selves, or the result of ultimate agencies created and set in 
action by the direct fiat of God, as is the Theistical doctrine. 
Of the original agents, and the primary forces into which the 
whole phenomena of the material universe may be resolved, 
science takes no direct cognisance, unless through the medium 
of the derivative and intermediate causes, whose action is 
capable of sensible analysis. "Whether such agents exist, or 
are appreciable by the human faculties, science takes no 



0. I. 1.] PROBLEM OF INDUCTIVE SCIENCE. 199 

account. Attempts have been made to grasp them at an 
earlier period of the earth, by seizing upon some vague 
assumption as the radical element of all things, and seeking 
to evolve out of it the constituent furniture of the universe. 
But such efforts, beyond originating in casual discoveries of 
trifling importance, have recoiled upon their promoters, and 
left science, even after the toil of ages, much in the condition 
of the stone of Sysiphus, with no ulterior prospect of ad- 
vancement. Warned by the futility of such efforts, modern 
inquirers are content to take such truths as the analysis of 
sensible phenomena offers, being convinced that if remote or 
primary elements exist, the only path by which they are 
attainable lies through the proximate causes which express 
their complex results; and as the investigation of these 
afford ample room and verge for the employment of their 
highest faculties and the augmentation of their dominion 
over nature, they concentrate their attention on their dis- 
covery with the assurance that if such proximate causes do 
not conduct to primary elements, that the 'pursuit of ulti- 
mate causes is hopeless. Accordingly, astronomers do not 
seek to discover the origin of the planetary movements in 
the application of a determinate projectile force in a deter- 
minate direction, but take such force as already existing, 
and endeavour to follow it out into its results, and trace 
its laws, or the causes of its different combinations. In like 
manner, philosophical chemists no more aim at determining 
the one essential element out of which all matter is framed, 
than sober geologists attempt to infer the origin of our 
system, or the condition of the earth at Creation from the 
present collocations of strata which compose its crust. The 
discoveries, it is true, in these sciences, which the steady 
adhesion to philosophic methods is constantly bringing to 
light, are ever tending in this direction, but this approach, 
like that of the asymptotes, may have a limit, and never reach 
its object, though constantly approximating to it. On ac- 
count of this direct tendency of scientific discoveries to 
simplify the multifarious uniformities existing throughout 
nature, and trace them through a gradually diminishing 
series of subordinate uniformities to the fewest simplest 
uniformities cognisable by the human faculties, the problem 
which the scientific methods are intended to resolve may be 
stated to be what are the fewest general elements into 



200 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

which the existing uniformities of nature may be resolved, 
and what are the laws which guide such elements into their 
complex results, and necessitate their existing collocations ? 

As a preliminary step towards the solution of such problem, 
it is important to remember that the grounds on which the in- 
quiry proceeds are independent of experience, though all the 
subsequent processes are either determined by the results of 
experience or are amenable to them by way of verification. 
We cannot help believing that certain properties which we 
have once perceived to accompany certain substances will 
invariably accompany them, and that the connexion be- 
tween them has existed since such substances came into 
being. We believe that wood will burn a century hence if 
fire be applied to it, just as we believe it burned some four 
thousand years ago iu Assyria, or as we believe it burns to- 
day in Cochin China under similar circumstances. This class of 
uniformities comprise the first spontaneous inductions which 
the philosopher is obliged to accept, in common with the child 
and the peasant 1 , as the groundwork of his reasonings, and to 
employ them in the commencement as guiding marks by 
which he may be led to discover the unknown uniformities 
which exist in nature. To attempt their proof would involve 
him in what logicians call a vicious circle ; just as much as if 
he were to demonstrate any other primitive truth, since he 
could not establish their cogency without the medium of the 
truths already built upon the assumption of their correct- 
ness. Were such inductions referable to mere experience 
it is obvious they must wax strong by repetition, and be 
consequently weaker in the child than in the adult, and ob- 
tain greater credence now than in the infancy of the world. 
But all that we know of our progressive state, and those of 
our species, is in conflict with such a supposition. A child 
believes that flour Avill continue to whiten and water to wet 
any substance with which they are brought into contact, 
when it has once experienced such effects, as firmly as it does 

1 We are reminded of an apposite passage in Shakspeare, which our 
readers will not blame us for quoting: 

TOUCHSTONE. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd ? 

CORIN. No more than that I know that the property of rain is to 
wet, and fire to burn ; that good pasture makes fat sheep, and that a 
great cause of the night is lack of the sun. 

TOUCHSTONE. Such a one is a natural philosopher. 

As You Like It, Act iii. Sc. ii. 



C. I. 1.] TWOFOLD NATUBE OF INDUCTIONS. 201 

after a hundred thousand repetitions of the same impres- 
sion ; nor have we any reason to believe that the faith of 
the ancients in the permanence of similar uniformities was 
inferior to our own 1 . 

But whence comes it that credence in the permanent 
nature of such phenomena is confined to a special class, and 
that many qualities exist which the mind never expects 
to find invariably concomitant with the substances in con- 
nexion with which they first meet its gaze ? "We believe that 
fire will burn and water will wet, but never expect those 
objects to maintain the same colour. We should esteem it 
little less than marvellous if, having once tasted the effects of 
bread, we should, on recurring again to that aliment, find it 
accompanied with the flavour of cinnamon-juice, and the unnu- 
tritive properties of deal shavings : after meeting with a green 
chameleon, however, we should be by no means startled on 
a renewal of his acquaintance at beholding the same object 
assume a bluish aspect. How is it that uniformity in one 
case is never looked for beyond the immediate instance, 
while in the other it is expected to occur at every repetition 
of the object ? That some principle is at work beside mere 
experience is evident from the fact, that however invariably 
some properties may accompany certain objects, we never 
place sufficient reliance on the uniformity to generalise such 

1 Some may be disposed to quote the ode of Horace, ending with 
Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? 
./Etas parentum, pejor avis, tulit 
Nos nequiores, mox daturos 

Progeniem vitiosiorem. Lib. iii. c, 6. 

against the statement in the text, but the allusions of the bard simply 
refer to a gradual paralysis of the powers of nature becoming effete 
with age, and not to any capricious interchange of properties on the 
part of the natural elements, which would invalidate our confidence in 
the constancy of their effects. If the substances in nature decay, their 
properties of course perish with them ; but no ancient of sane mind 
ever doubted for a moment that while the substances continued in 
their healthy state, they would manifest other properties than those 
which his first experience had attributed to them. There is no ulti- 
mate principle of our constitution which urges us to believe the uni- 
verse will always remain as it is; against which the doctrines of Chris- 
tianity and the tenets of the development theory alike contend ; but 
only that while it does continue, the substances of which it is composed 
will not manifest different properties than those on which their in- 
ternal constitution depend. 



202 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

results or extend them beyond the instances we have ex- 
perienced ; while in others, one single case impels the mind 
to place no limit to the uniformity, but to make it co-equal 
with space and time. The solution of the difficulty will be 
found in the sheer impossibility of the mind to believe that 
a thing can be otherwise than what it is ; or, in other words, 
that a substance can exist and manifest properties conflict- 
ing with those which depend on its internal organisation. 
Now, no philosophical instruments are required, or, indeed, 
the slightest process of investigation, to enable us to draw a 
line in the common elements of nature between those pro- 
perties of objects which spring from variable external agencies 
and those which depend on their internal constitution. A 
child has but to taste bread to feel that the nutritive proper- 
ties it possesses springs from the peculiar constitution of the 
several particles of which it consists : it has only to open its 
eyes to perceive that certain substances may be accompanied 
with a variety of colours, and thus infer that such quality is 
not essential to their existence. A crowd of similar acci- 
dental and essential uniformities are spontaneously offered 
by nature ; and that written so legibly that the peasant, in 
common with the philosopher, may read them ; the only 
difference between the two minds being, that the one contents 
itself with such as nature writes upon her surface, while the 
other, searching for the crowd of uniformities that lie beneath 
them, asks what facts are needed to enable it to come to a 
sure conclusion, and then looks out for these. 

As nature may be regarded as an immense web of causes 
and effects, curiously intertangled and combined, the main 
difficulty in this research lies in unravelling the various 
threads, and estimating the influence of each fibre which 
enters into their composition. If one consequent were only 
the result of one antecedent, the investigation would be com- 
paratively easy, but in the generality of cases the opposite is 
the rule, one effect being commonly the product of a variety 
of causes, the influence of each of which in producing the 
phenomena in question it is necessary to estimate, if we 
would come to a certain conclusion about its origin. For 
instance, in the production of the neap tides there is the in- 
fluence of the sun, moon, and earth, each neutralising one 
another's attractive force, over a body which admits of 
mobility among its parts to such a degree as to move in the 



C. I. 1.] PLURALITY OF CAUSES. 203 

direction of the impulse communicated to it by three distant 
bodies acting in contrary directions. In ordinary parlance, 
among the conditions of an effect, one cause is commonly 
selected to which the result is attributed, either through its 
being the principal or the culminating agent in its production. 
Thus, a person in a feeble state of health takes mercury, and 
exposes himself while in that state to night air; the effect is 
sudden cold, which is at once ascribed to the influence of the 
atmosphere, though the result was doubtless as much attribu- 
table to the mercury 1 and his weak condition : any statement, 
therefore, of the cause of the cold which did not include the 
three antecedent conditions must be considered imperfect. 
Again, the death of the Duke of Wellington was attributed to 
the effect of some fruit pie, of which he had voraciously eaten 
the day preceding his demise, though no one could for a mo- 
ment doubt that the great agent in the business was a general 
decay in the digestive organs, which only required the slight 
temporary derangement produced by the fruit in question 
to completely incapacitate them for discharging those func- 
tions on which life depends. In like manner, a boy rolls a 
ball which, towards the end of its progress, is stopped by a 
stone ; yet it is very probable that such an event would not 
have taken place had not the resistance of the air and the 
counteracting force of the earth's attraction weakened its 
motion to such a degree as to prevent it overleaping the 
stone, though the two latter causes are omitted in the 
account of the phenomenon. When the culminating condition 
is superficially the most conspicuous in the production of the 
effect, it is invariably set down as the sole agent in the 
business. Thus we say, that the Crown's assent to a Bill 
makes it law ; or the casting vote of the Speaker was the 
cause of the resolution on the part of the Commons, in whose 
support it was given : and if we happen to be insisting on 
the requisiteness of such condition at the moment, one of a 
negative character is styled the cause of an effect with which 
it could have no positive relation ; as, when we state, the cause 
of the army being surprised was the sentinel being off his 
post ; or, the body fell because it was unsupported. We must, 
however, be aware, that as the absence of the sentinel neither 
created the enemy, or made the soldiers sleep, it could not 

|_ > Mill's Logic, vol. i. p. 400. 



204 METHODS OF TUB PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

be the cause of their surprise ; and, moreover, that the mere 
absence of a prop underlying a body could no more make it 
fall, than the absence of any obstruction to its motion above 
could make it ascend, or the removal of any lateral hin- 
drance cause it to move horizontally. All such conditions 
being mere negations, are equivalent to non-existence, and 
from nothing, nothing can proceed. The real cause must 
obviously be placed in the fact of the stone being within the 
sphere of the earth's attraction, which impelled it to its surface 
with a force in direct proportion to its mass. 

The cause of a phenomenon is, therefore, that condition, or 
aggregate of conditions, on which alone the effect depends. 
Its essential mark is in invariable and unconditional con- 
comitance with its effect, so that from its simple presence 
the result follows without the interference of any other 
agency. Mere invariable sequence between two phenomena 
proves nothing, unless we can produce indubitable evidence 
of the fact that the one is the tangible result of the agency 
of the other. Day never ceases without introducing night, 
and night without being followed by day: yet everybody 
knows that day is caused by the sun illuminating our hemi- 
sphere, and that whether the night preceded or not, the 
appearance of that luminary in our sky would always be 
attended with the same effect. Though we cannot help in- 
ferring, having once witnessed certain agencies generate cer- 
tain results, that wherever such causes operate unmolested 
by any counteracting agency the same effects must ensue, 
we cannot inversely take the presence of the effect as an 
irrefragable sign of the agency of the same causes. Thus, 
sugar can be produced from linen rags, under the agency of 
sulphuric acid, as well as from beet-root and West Indian 
cane. Honey would not at present furnish us with undeni- 
able proof that the bee had been at work in hoarding its 
sweets, for that substance can be produced by subjecting 
starch to certain chemical processes. Death may be the 
effect of a variety of causes ; nor can we infer from the mere 
presence of a shell on a rock, whether it dropped from the 
shallop of a pilgrim, the beak of a bird, or was swept there 
by the ever- shifting waves of the sea. 

The ultimate basis of such investigations evidently pro- 
ceeds upon the principle that every natural phenomenon 
must have a cause sufficient to account for its existence ; and 



C. I. 1.] CAUSAL AGENCY UN1VEESAL. 205 

it is as well to ask ourselves at the outset of the inquiry, 
what evidence have we of the truth of such a proposition, 
and whether there is any limit to its generality in nature ? 
If such a principle spring from mere experience, it is evident 
we are unauthorised to apply it to any other class of effects 
than those whose causes we have discovered ; and that a 
great many of the present researches of philosophers may be 
employed in looking out for causes that may not exist, and 
eventuate in demonstrations of the indemonstrable, and ex- 
planations of what cannot be explained. But such a belief 
no rational intellect can practically entertain. Its adoption 
would shut up the philosopher's laboratory as well as the 
courts of justice, since we could neither predict future results 
or infer from the present anything relative to the past. Among 
the ancients, indeed, to whom the material universe was a 
sealed book, some trace of such an opinion may be said to be 
discovered in their doctrine of chance ; but that tenet by no 
means implied that objects could be produced without any 
sufficient cause, but simply that the causes which produced 
them, not being under the influence of any deity, were the 
result of capricious agency ; a notion which modern science 
has completely destroyed by showing that the so-called 
theistic agencies are nothing else than laws so dependent on 
the internal constitutions of things, that when once the tie 
has been fairly established, we can in no instance, without the 
interposition of supernatural agency, infagine a separation. 
Accordingly, the introduction of the word chance in the an- 
cient philosophy, instead of strengthening the empirical view 
of the question, only proves the utter repugnance of the 
mind to the belief that an effect can exist without a cause ; 
since, when man in entire ignorance of natural laws re- 
ferred every successive uniformity in nature to the direct 
action of a deity, rather than leave those phenomena 
which bore upon their front the marks of no forethought 
or design in their origin, without a cause, he at once as- 
signed their production to agencies acting without rule or 
principle, and called their parent chance. But had he dis- 
enchanted space of his imaginary divinities, and transferred 
their functions to the agency of general laws, he would have 
wiped out of his vocabulary the word chance as a notion 
impossible to be entertained. He would have found it as 
repugnant to conceive a substance, acting according to other 



206 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. T. 

principles than those which accorded with its own constitu- 
tion, as to conceive the same substance existing without a 
cause ; and have ascended with the moderns the ladder of 
scientific induction, applying the law of regular causal agency 
to every corner of the universe. 

As relations, however, may be said to exist between co- 
existent as well as sequential phenomena, a distinction is 
sometimes attempted to be drawn between those properties 
which are merely derivative and the ultimate collocations of 
matter from which they spring. Though we can give a 
causal account of the manner in which the threads are inter- 
woven which compose the fabric of the universe, and show 
how 'the figures are produced which dot its surface, by un- 
ravelling the skeins' of which the web consists, it is argued 
that our power stops here ; that we cannot pursue our inves- 
tigation into the cause of the primordial fibres, into which we 
have decomposed the fabric, or produce any reasons for the 
proportions in which such ultimate qualities are found to 
co-exist. "We can trace the influence, for instance, of the 
sun's attraction, and the tangential force imparted to each 
planet among the movements of the heavenly bodies, and 
derive all the phenomena which such motions involve from 
the effects of their combination, but it is said we can give no 
reason for the existence of the combination itself, nor trace 
any coincidence between it and the proportions in which the 
other elementary agencies of the universe are intermingled. 
In referring existing phenomena to their ultimate elements, 
through a series of complicated effects, we generally find, 
according to this view, that derivative laws do not depend 
solely upon the primary laws into which they are resolvable, 
but imply in addition a certain mode of co-existence among 
some of the original elements of the universe. Now this last- 
mentioned element, which is not a law of causation, but a 
collocation of causes, cannot be reduced to any law. Among 
such elements we are unable to explain why one substance 
exists in greater abundance than another, or why different 
powers act through various degrees and directions in space. 
The original elements of the universe may have existed in 
the greatest disorder, but if they act according-to uniform 
laws they cannot fail to produce regularity of some kind ; 
just as the capricious arrangement of coloured bits of glass 
in the kaleidoscope, through carrying the law of refraction 



C. I. 1.] FINAL CAUSES INADMISSIBLE. 207 

into their subsequent movements, produces a beautiful im- 
pression of order on the mind of the beholder 1 . 

This reasoning, however, is founded upon assumptions 
which are not in harmony with the actual progress of science, 
and in reality conflicts with the results to which the religious, 
deistic, and pantheistic cosmogonies would alike lead us. That 
the universe grew out of primordial elements, existing in a 
confused and disordered shape, discoveries of modern che- 
mistry tends strongly to contradict, which show that the 
ultimate particles into which matter may be resolved, though 
bearing evidence of essential difference among themselves, 
may be arranged in a very limited number of groups or 
classes, all the individuals of which are exactly alike in all 
their properties, and when placed in similar circumstances 
exhibit no variety of deportment. Now, as the number of 
such atoms defies the multiplying powers of the calculus to 
compute, the inference is irresistible, that the uniformity 
they exhibit has been impressed upon them by an external 
agent, and that the evidence of variety which obtains among 
their indiscerptible molecules is just that very combination of 
properties by which such agent intended to produce that op- 
position and consistence of parts necessary to generate the 
great globe itself and the universe which it inhabits. From 
the ends produced in such case we can infer the precise 
collocation of original materials required to effect it ; just as 
an architect can tell, on examining the design of an edifice, 
the combination of wood, masonry, glass, and other materials 
necessary to execute it. To call, therefore, such collocation 
a confused heap of causes obeying no regulating principle or 
law, is about as great a perversion of terms as imagination 
can conceive. 

To say that final causes are not admissible in any account 
of this branch of scientific evidence is only correct in the 
sense which would place ultimate ones under the same ban 
of exclusion : of neither, inductive science, strictly speaking, 
can be said to know anything. Chemistry distinctly shows 
that the final results into which philosophical methods can 
analyse sensible phenomena are compound atoms, which 
admit of no further decomposition by any instruments that 
human agency can grasp ; and with regard to the last word 

1 Mill's Logic, vol. ii. p. 45. 



208 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

which mechanics have to say upon the origin of planetary 
motion, viz., a certain combination of centripetal and tan- 
gential force, Laplace has shown that both can be rationally 
accounted for, on the admission of the simple hypothesis 
that the sun, weakened by the enormous supplies of heat 
emitted from its surface, has gradually cooled down, aban- 
doning successive rings of vapour consequent on the in- 
creased centrifugal force imparted to it by the diminution 
of its bulk. Science, consequently, knows neither force or 
substance bearing any semblance of an ultimate character ; 
and to assume their existence in a certain manner, in any 
account of its methods, is a case of unwarrantable hypothesis, 
which may be said to be fairly disposed of if found to clash 
with legitimate generalisations in any other department of 
science. 

But in reality the hypothesis in question necessitates the 
doctrine of final causes, and is found inconsistent with it. 
Among other conditions, it supposes a period when these 
original collocations of matter began to act according to 
regular laws, and in so doing involves itself in an inextricable 
dilemma. For if matter did not commence to act as soon as 
created, according to the uniform laws of the substances of 
which it was composed, it must have existed either from 
eternity or from some antecedent period of time in amor- 
phous shapes, obeying no laws, or, in other words, exhibiting 
no marks of change among its properties. Now this latter 
supposition it is impossible to entertain, without weakening 
our notions of that steady uniformity of nature's laws on 
which all scientific methods are built. For what once hap- 
pened might occur again. If it were possible for substances 
to exist without manifesting any action, uniform or otherwise, 
between their several properties, a suspension of all natural 
laws, without the interference of an internal agent, might 
take place to-morrow. We are consequently driven back by 
the hypothesis to the notion of creation, but find it completely 
at war with every notion of intelligent agency in the produc- 
tion of the universe In fact, there are only two kinds of 
cosmogonies possible : either the world must have been pro- 
duced by a spiritual being, or the causes which we see at work 
must have no limit to their existence either in time or space. 
The absolute generality of the causal theory, as we have 



C. I. 2.] FIBST STEP IN SCIENCE. 209 

enounced it, agrees with both. The hypothesis which would 
circumscribe it within a limited range of phenomena will not 
admit the one, and is completely sabred by the other 1 . 



2. Observation 

Prom the foregoing view of the nature and objects of 
physical investigation, it follows that the first step in the 
inquiry is the ascertainment of the particular effects of which 
the universe consists, the several appearances, systematic or 
irregular, which their properties manifest, that we may be in 
a position, from a comparison of the results, to get some 
glimpse of their causes, by pursuing the analogies they sug- 
gest, and by subjecting the phenomena to such influences as 
the nature of the case shall point out as most likely to re- 
veal their latent origin. As long as the notion prevailed 
that natural phenomena was the direct result of spiritual 
agency; that the whole of the present facts which the 
universe presents, instead of being the infallible product 
of all the facts which existed at the moment previous, 
were the immediate results of a divine intelligence, it could 
hardly be deemed unwise in the philosopher to shut him- 
self up in his room and to attempt to reason out the prior 
states, or even the primordial elements of the existing frame 
of things, apart from the fluctuating phenomena he saw 
around him. But since the objects of nature have been 
shown to be connected in a compact web of mutual relations 
and dependencies, and to precede each other in a regular 
order of sequence, each effect being generated by certain 
material conditions, which immediately preceded its occur- 
rence, every individual of which in turn were generated by 
others, it is obvious if we would analyse this complexity 

1 Though " metaphors are no arguments," as Lady Hermione says in 
the " Fortunes of Nigel," we may observe in passing, that the regu- 
larity springing from the capricious combination of coloured bits of 
glass in the kaleidoscope is the effect of one unique substance acting in 
accordance with its own laws, and that if any other substance were 
introduced into the arrangement, in similar disorder, the most chaotic 
confusion would ensue. The simile consequently fails in that precise 
point where illustration was wanting. That a confused collection of 
elements, without principle or method in the assortment of their parts, 
can ever generate harmonious phenomena, though acting according to 
the laws of their respective substances, we will believe when we see 
but not till then. 



210 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. Y. 

with a view to attribute to every cause its effect, to every 
antecedent the consequent which it produced, we have no 
other course than to commence with examining the partial 
threads of which the web is composed, viewing them in every 
light that is calculated to afford any glimpse into their in- 
ternal structure, and making a faithful record of the proper- 
ties they exhibit in the various situations in which they have 
been tried, that reason may be guided by the resulting evi- 
dence, not only to lay its hands on the direct mechanism by 
which they have been produced, but to compute the amount 
of influence which they exercise over other elements, and the 
modification they receive by being acted upon by other sub- 
stances in return. Throughout the whole of this process 
reason can only be considered in the light of a subordinate 
agent. She can only interpret the facts which nature puts 
in her possession : one single result of experience is suffi- 
cient to dissipate her brightest theories. 

The mode of collecting instances must have distinct re- 
ference to the point we have in view, some requiring the 
registered observations of individuals situated in different 
hemispheres and centuries to establish anything in the 
nature of evidence co-extensive with the subject, whilst 
others are perfectly open to individual exploitation. If a 
single person wished to discover the actual direction in which 
changes of relative level are taking place between the exist- 
ing continents and seas, it is evident that no exertion on 
his part could achieve his purpose, unless made in consort 
with observers scattered over every part of the globe. For 
the only way in which the point can be decided is, to select 
on the most prominent coasts, situated in different hemi- 
spheres, such marks as seem unlikely to change during the 
next century, and ascertain their true elevation above the 
mean level of the sea in the interval, by instruments adapted 
to the purpose. But such agencies, extending over genera* 
tions and hemispheres, can only be set and maintained in 
action by different governments; or, at least, by mutual 
compact between scientific corporations. 

The motives, however, which lead to the record of pheno- 
mena may be various ; and provided the instance narrated be 
a faithful and complete account of objects before unobserved, 
their registry cannot fail to be of the highest moment to 
that branch of science to which they bear reference. Thus it 



C. I. 2.] IMPORTANCE OF OBSERVATION. 211 

had long been known that the cell is the type of vegetable 
structure ; that the simplest, as well as the most complex, 
plants are composed either of single cells or multiform aggre- 
gations of the same vesicle ; but this truth was comparatively 
of minor importance until Schwann, led by the observation 
of the embryonic structure of certain tissues of animals, esta- 
blished the fact that the animal, like the vegetable tissue, 
originate in cells, and that all the laws of vegetable cellular 
formation apply, in every essential particular, to the sim- 
plest as well as the most complex organism of animal crea- 
tion. Physiologists, previous to Schwann, had, while sub- 
jecting animal tissues to the microscope, perceived the ap- 
pearances which indicate their origin in similar germ cells to 
plants, but passed them by as something mysterious, or too 
unimportant to be inquired into. Schwann, on the other 
hand, subjected them to minute examination, and by pur- 
suing the analogy which the cellular structure of plants 
pointed out to him, opened the way to the most startling 
truths of the animal organism, and completely changed the 
aspect of physiological science 1 . Again, a soap manufac- 
turer observes that the residuum of his ley, when exhausted 
of the alkali for which he employs it, produces a cor- 
rosion of his copper boiler, for which he cannot account. 
A scientific chemist, on analysing the matter, discovers one 
of the most singular and important chemical elements 
iodine, which is found to occur most appositely in support of 
a variety of novel and instructive views then gaining ground 
in chemistry, and thus exercised a marked influence over the 
whole body of that science. The new substance is subse- 
quently discovered to be a prompt cure for the goitre, being 
traced through sea plants and other marine substances from 
whose ashes the principal ingredients of soap is extracted to 
sponge, which had administered some relief to the victims of 
that disorder. Intelligent workmen, therefore, at this stage 
of the inquiry, are capable of being of immense service to 
philosophy, and might write their names in its annals if they 
chose to record every singular instance that crossed their 
path, and noted all the particular circumstances attendant 
upon it. The habit of minutely observing and particula- 
rising the results of such phenomena could hardly fail to 
i Mikroscopische Untersuchungen iiber die Ubereinstimmung in der 
structur und dem Wachsthum der Thiere & Pflanzen. Berlin, 1839. 

P2 



212 METHODS OP THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

suggest to intelligent minds analogies similar to those just 
narrated, which might prove the germ of equally brilliant dis- 
coveries. Physical science has advanced rapidly since Bacon 
pointed out the great importance of this branch of the subject, 
leaving a noble pattern both of the industry and zeal 1 with 
which it should be prosecuted. But had each one felt in the 
interim the extent to which he was capable of assuming fellow- 
ship with so great a mind, it is hardly too much to say that 
science would have been looking back on the positions she has 
reached to-day as mere starting-posts in her dazzling career. 

In geology, meteorology, and other sciences, which can 
hardly be said to be out of the descriptive stage, and whose 
objects are co-extensive with the globe we inhabit, the obser- 
vations of great numbers of individuals, widely dispersed, 
are of manifest importance, as constituting the only means 
by which these sciences can be carried through their infancy, 
and connected by a series of intermediate generalisations 
with laws sufficiently ultimate to allow the deductive element 
to become an agent in their progress. But to ensure the 
widest advantage to the labours which all well-informed 
persons might carry on, and to stimulate them in the pur- 
suit, it ought to be an object with every scientific body to 
point out in what direction certain groups of instances tend ; 
what kind of facts are required either to turn the rising 
generalisation into a law, or to test its accuracy ; what class 
of persons are most favourably situated, either by their 
calling or position, for meeting with them; and what at- 
tendant circumstances are most likely to prove influential in 
modifying the phenomena. By such division of labour the 
inquiries of large masses of individuals would be stripped of 
vague generality and concentrated upon critical objects ; and 
the separate results of their experience transmitted to a com- 
mon centre, might enable judges skilled in interpretation at 
once to pounce upon the law. 

In recording or observing facts, whether to answer any 

1 His Sylva Sylvarum, in the attempt to extend which he sacrificed 
his life. When dying he said the experiment which caused his death 
" had succeeded excellently well." The elder Pliny, whose collection 
of registries would have broken the back of an elephant, perished in 
exploring the crater of Vesuvius. His note-books, four hundred in 
number, have not come down to us. Aristotle afforded another great 
instance of this kind of industry in his work on animals, but only frag- 
ments of his labours have reached posterity. 



C. I. 2.] CANONS OF OBSEETATION. 213 

definite question, or simply to register some peculiar pheno- 
menon which has presented itself to us, we must be careful 
to omit no circumstance in the account, as the neglected 
condition, like one of the quantities in an algebraic state- 
ment, might be essentially connected with the solution, and 
so mar the revelation of the cause. For instance, the fall of 
meteoric stones, being accompanied with flashes of fire, issuing 
from a cloud, and a loud rattling noise like thunder, was long 
confounded with that of thunderbolts ; but had it been ob- 
served that the flash and sound occasionally emanated from a 
very small cloud insulated in a clear sky, instead of attributing 
them to electric agency, philosophers would have sought for 
their cause in the very circumstance which separated them 
from that phenomenon. In order to guard against such 
omissions it is necessary to have each of our senses brought 
in actual contact with the phenomenon, and let nothing 
escape notice which affects any one of them. Thus, if light- 
ning were to strike a house we inhabit, we ought to notice 
the form, colour, and duration of the light we saw, and to 
what objects it adhered ; whether any smell of fire was per- 
ceptible, and if sulphurous, metallic, or such as would arise 
from substances scorched with flash; what sounds were 
heard, and whether we felt any shock, stroke, or peculiar 
sensation, or experienced any strange taste in our mouths. 
The modifying circumstances should then be noted, such as 
the presence of conductors, the neighbouring objects, the 
state of the atmosphere, and the disposition of the clouds. 
After all this particularity the question how the house came 
to be struck, would have to be determined : whether by what 
is termed a returning stroke, or by a flash of lightning pass- 
ing from the clouds to the earth. 

Our record of observation should not only be circum- 
stantial but faithful, or, in other words, consist of what we 
have observed, and nothing else. "Without any intention of 
perverting the description, we may distort simple facts by 
clothing them in the views and language of an erroneous 
theory. Thus, if we said the thunderbolt struck with vio- 
lence the side of the house and beat in the wall, our hearers 
would be led to believe, by the statement of a fact which we 
did not see, that a solid, or ponderable projectile was con- 
cerned. The smell of sulphur which is sometimes said to 
accompany the electric fluid, is a remnant of the theory which 



214 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

made thunder and lightning the explosion of aerial gun- 
powder, composed of nitrous exhalations. The elder chemists 
were so addicted to the mischief of representing facts in the lan- 
guage of idle theories, as to falsify the descriptions of innu- 
merable important and curious experiments. In geology, par- 
ticularly, the Vulcanists and Neptunists so far set the purposes 
of language at defiance through this practice, that it was totally 
impossible in their descriptions to get at the facts observed. In 
like manner, Faujas de St. Fond, in his work on the volcanoes of 
Central France, describes, with that particularity which belongs 
to fact, craters existing nowhere but in his own imagination 1 . 
It is of immense importance, with a view to guard against 
such errors, and to secure our observations from the illusions 
frequently practised on us by the senses, to verify or accom- 
pany them with accurate numerical statements, according to 
such measure of time, space, or quantity as they appear to 
admit of. It was entirely to the omission of exact numerical 
determinations of quantity that the blunders of the Stahlian 
chemistry and the Ptolemaic system of astronomy are attri- 
butable ; and the correct expansion of these, as well as the rest 
of the physical sciences, may be said to have been in propor- 
tion to the extent to which their objects have been open to the 
legitimate application of this element. All phenomena more 
or less admit of accurate measurement, to such a degree that 
the very class which are so fluctuating and irregular in their 
occurrence as to appear an exception, cannot be pressed into 
the service of science by any other means. The thousand capri- 
cious agencies by which the atmosphere is hourly influenced, 
and the irregular action of winds, tides, and currents, must 
ever prevent us from ascertaining either the general tempera- 
ture, or the mean level of the sea at any particular locality, by 
the unassisted senses. If we would reduce such irregular 

1 Herschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, p. 130. 
A vague and loose mode of looking at facts very easily observable, left 
men for a long time under the belief that a body ten times as heavy as 
another falls ten times as fast ; that objects immersed in water are 
always magnified, without regard to the form of the surface; that 
the magnet exerts an irresistible force ; that crystal is always found 
associated with ice, and the like. These and many other examples 
show how blind and careless man can be, even in registering the 
plainest and commonest appearances; and prove that the mere 
faculties of perception, although constantly exercised upon innu- 
merable objects, may long fail in leading to any exact knowledge. 



C. I. 2.] USE OF EXPEEIMENT. 215 

agents to any kind of law, or hinder them from defeating our 
discovery of the laws of the elements with which they come 
in contact, we must call in the assistance of instruments 
adapted to measure the precise scale of their variation within 
a given period and locality, and combine the mean amount 
with the result 1 . 

Observation, even where supported by exact measurement, 
in many cases, will go very little way towards establishing 
the cause of a phenomenon, unless we are able to vary the 
concomitant circumstances, and view the cause, generate the 
effect, or vary in exact proportion along with it. Though 
there was every reason to attribute lightning to electric 
agency, the fact was never considered definitely made out 
until Franklin threw up his kite in the air at the approach of 
a thunder-storm, and obtained the same sparks from his cord 
as invariably accompanied its connexion with an electric ma- 
chine. As nature is constructed for a widely different object 
than that of facilitating our studies, it frequently happens, 
indeed, that she refuses to afford the precise kind of variation 
needed to establish the law we are in search of, and leaves us 
to rack our invention to institute a case in point by direct 
experiment. Thus, were it required to ascertain the principle 
in the atmosphere which enables it to sustain life, we should 
find no instance in which nature produces either oxygen or 
azote in a separate state, to enable us, by immersing a living 
animal alternately in both gases, to decide the question. "We 
are exclusively indebted to experiment for the fact, that re- 
spiration is supported by oxygen, and also for our knowledge 
of the ingredients of which the atmosphere is composed. 

Hence experiment, besides multiplying the advantages de- 
rived from passive observation, accomplishes that which pas- 
sive observation is seldom adequate to perform. It enables 
us to march directly to our object and to link it indubitably 
with its cause. By experiment we are enabled to study the 
laws of nature in our laboratory, and subject the wildest 
elements to our control ; to multiply our knowledge of their 
several properties by introducing such agents among them 
as seem calculated to reveal their laws. By experiment we 
are enabled to bring theories to the touchstone of fact, and 
prevent hypothetical fictions from spreading darkness over 

1 This process concerns the doctrine of chance, which will be treated 
of under the section of empirical laws. 



216 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

centuries, and making genius actually instrumental in push- 
ing back science instead of becoming an impulsive lever in 
its advancement. To this element is to be ascribed the 
creation of physical science in the fifteenth century, and 
much of its wonderful progress during the intervening years. 
To its absence among the ancients must be mainly attributed 
their entire ignorance of physical laws, and their subjection 
of nature to imaginary divinities. 

It is, however, of importance to observe that the use of 
this great instrument is suggested in a large degree by the 
results the mind has gathered from pure observation, which 
generally takes the initial step in the physical sciences. Before 
mounting to the cause of any phenomena, we patiently ob- 
serve its effects and examine its laws. Here pure observa- 
tion alone is applicable. But the results to which it arrives 
suggest in what agencies it may originate, and experiment 
is ever ready to bring such hints to the test, and where 
nature does not present a case in point to create an instance 
that will decide the question. Hence experiment is mainly 
applicable in inquiring into the effect of a given cause. So 
far as we are strictly concerned with investigating the causes 
of a given effect the process is one of pure observation 1 . 

3. The Methods of Experimental Inquiry. Discovery of 
Minor Laics ; their Extension and Verification. 

Having collected a certain number of instances bearing 
upon the chosen point of inquiry, it remains to determine the 
nature of the evidence which will entitle us to conclude that 
u certain course is followed by a given effect, or under 
what circumstances invariable sequence may be allowed to 
establish a causal connexion between the phenomena. The 
marks commonly adduced in evidence of such relation may 
be generalised under four heads 3 , though in practice, the 
actual signs by which causes reveal themselves are frequently 
only corollaries from them, or are traceable not to one dis- 
tinct cause alone, but to two or three in conjunction. It 
mil then be sufficient, for an accurate knowledge of the 

1 The reader is referred for classification and nomenclature to the 
Supplement of this Book in the Appendix. 2 Bacon's Novum Orga- 
nuni, commencement of 2nd book; Herschel's Pis. Stud. Nat. Phil, 
p. 151; Mill's System of Logic, vol. i. p. 450. 



C. I. 3.] METHOD OF AGBEEMENT. 217 

subject, to give the leading causes of induction in full, point- 
ing out their specific ground, differences, and merits, and 
leave their mode of application to be gathered from the in- 
stances we shall adduce in illustration of their properties. 

The first mark, by which we are generally led to infer the 
presence of the relation we intend by cause and effect, is 
uniform connexion, provided the circumstances in which the 
concomitance has been observed are sufficiently various to 
exclude doubt that it could have originated from any relation 
but the one assigned. For instance, let the object in view 
be to ascertain the cause of death produced by metallic 
poisons. It is observed that arsenious acid, and the salts of 
lead, bismuth, copper, and mercury, if administered, except 
in the smallest doses, destroy life. Now this effect obviously 
can only follow from the violation of some of the conditions 
on which animal organism depends, so that the question 
arises which of those conditions seems most likely to be 
interfered with by the substances in question, and how can 
metallic poisons be brought in contact with it. The most 
obvious mode is to trace the effects of these substances on 
the composite ingredients of the animal system, and observe 
what law or vital function of organism they arrest or enfeeble. 
If the effect obtain in the separate parts at different periods 
of their formation in an isolated as well as in a combined 
state ; and if the remotest quantities of such poisons tend to 
disturb the same law of the animal economy, there could 
remain no doubt that interference with its functions was the 
effect of introducing them into the animal system and the 
proximate cause of death in every case in which they were 
administered. But the effect of placing solutions of metallic 
poisons in contact with albumen, milk, muscular fibre, mem- 
branes, and other animal products, is that the acid or salt 
having left the water in which it was dissolved unites with 
the animal substance, and destroys its tendency to decompo- 
sition. The same effect is perceived in cases where death 
has been produced by these poisons, the parts of the body 
with which the poisonous substances have been brought into 
contact not afterwards undergoing the law of putrefaction : 
and when the poisons have been supplied in too small a 
quantity to destroy life eschars are produced, through the 
destruction of superficial portions of the tissues, which are 
subsequently thrown off by the reparative process taking 



218 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [s. V. 

place in the healthy parts. Hence the conclusion is patent 
that these metallic compounds, when taken into the system, 
cause death, by arresting the law of decomposition. In the 
instances adduced all point to the arrest of the same law, 
and this could not have occurred with antecedents varying 
according to every conceivable mode of which the case ad- 
mits, unless they had generated the consequent apart from 
every other agent. 

In this illustration we have proceeded, according to the 
general route of scientific inquiry, from the effect to the cause. 
But it may happen that the effect of a cause is required to be 
known, in which case we must find or produce the cause in such 
a variety of circumstances that it may be fairly presumed that 
the different instances could have no other antecedent in com- 
mon. Then it is obvious that if any unvariable result appear 
in each combination of consequents, that must be attributed to 
the cause which is the only invariable element in every new 
set of antecedents. Thus reversing the example already 
adduced, as the effect of metallic poisons in every instance, 
in which it can be brought into connexion with organic com- 
pounds is to arrest the process of decomposition, we experi- 
ence no hesitation in attributing that result to their agency. 

But it must be observed that this method, which proceeds 
by comparing instances to observe in what they agree, is not 
of very wide application, as it is liable to be defeated by two 
obstacles at every stage of the inquiry. Either nature may 
not present, or experiment fail to obtain, instances in suffi- 
cient abundance to ensure the variety necessary to lead to 
a legitimate induction ; or the number of instances being 
secured, counteracting causes may interfere to modify or 
neutralise the agents at work, and so prevent the instance 
from throwing any clear light on the inquiry. In a great 
number of natural phenomena the effect is produced gradu- 
ally, and frequently diminishes in strength, while the cause 
often goes on increasing in intensity, so that the antecedents 
of the one and the consequents of the other become diffi- 
cult to trace. On the other hand, the effect often follows 
the cause so instantaneously that the interval cannot be per- 
ceived, and we are left without any marks to discriminate 
the cause from the effect. Owing to the frequent occurrence 
of these cases, the method of agreement in the generality of 
inquiries is incapable by itself of leading to a certain resiilt. 



C. I. 3.] METHOD OF DIITEBENCE. 219 

The second mark of causal relation between two pheno- 
mena is invariable negation of the effect with absence of the 
cause, and vice versa, unless some other cause be capable of 
producing the same effect. This may be styled the method 
of difference. In the former method we endeavoured to 
obtain instances which agreed in the presence of the object 
whose cause or effect was sought. In the present method 
we require, on the contrary, instances resembling each other 
in every respect but the presence or absence of the pheno- 
menon we desire to study. Thus, if our object be to discover 
if air be an essential condition of sound, we need only place 
a watch under a glass receiver, and observe its ticks fade on 
the ear as the air is withdrawn from the interior, until by the 
completion of the exhaustive process they cease altogether. 
Here we have an instance of the presence of motion in the 
sounding body combined with the contiguity of the ear to 
catch the beats, but unaccompanied with sonorous vibration ; 
or, in other words, the absence of one of the essential con- 
ditions the cause, with the negation of the effect. On 
re-admitting the air, the beats are again found to strike the 
ear, thus proving by the strongest evidence the dependence 
of sound on that medium, and suggesting in some measure 
the nature of its functions. Again, in the case of introducing 
metallic poisons into the animal organism, if we can show 
that death is prevented by administering an antidote which 
shall hinder the acid from arresting decomposition by com- 
bining with the animal tissues, we should exclude the effect by 
taking away the cause, or, in other words, prove, by the 
method of difference, that metallic poisons destroy life through 
the agency in question. Now, such antidotes are afforded by 
the application of sugar, sulphuric acid, or hydrated peroxide 
of iron ; for each of these substances as soon as administered 
prevent, by different agencies, the salts of copper from enter- 
ing into combination with the animal tissues, and in this wise 
preserve the law of decomposition intact 1 . Occasionally this 

1 It may be observed in the two examples adduced that the instances 
in the first case only differ by the absence or presence of the same cir- 
cumstance, viz.: air under a glass receiver; while the difference of the 
last consists in the introduction or exclusion of a single substance. 
But as every substance may have innumerable properties, the suppo- 
sition is just conceivable that these antidotes may counteract the 
poison through some other mode than that of forming an insoluble 



220 METHODS OP THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [_B. V. 

mark of causation, besides leading to the establishment of a 
general fact, points to contrary, or opposing facts, as equally 
established by the same evidence. Thus, if rust be produced 
by confining iron filings in a closed vessel over water, the 
enclosed atmosphere will be found to quench the flame, or 
destroy the life of any animal immersed in it. Now this ex- 
periment not only shows that the remaining gas of which the 
enclosed atmosphere is constituted will not support life, but 
that the ingredient of the atmosphere which supports flame 
and animal life must be attributed to that which the iron 
absorbs and which rusts it. It is to similar inferences we owe 
almost all the inductions of daily life. "When a man is shot 
through the heart, we learn by this process that it was the 
gun-shot which killed him ; for he was in the fulness of life 
immediately before, all circumstances being the same except 
the wound. 

Hence the method of difference stands on the ground that 
whatever cannot be eliminated without the subtraction of 
the phenomenon is connected with the phenomenon by law ; 
while that of agreement has for its foundation, that what- 
ever can be eliminated without removing the phenomenon is 
not connected with the phenomenon by law. Of the two 
methods, that of difference is more particularly open to ex- 
periment ; while the other is commonly the resource we 
employ where artificial experiment is impossible. In examin- 
ing the nature of any effect with a view to ascertain its 
origin, we compare its points of agreement in as many vari- 
able circumstances as possible. The method of difference 
tries the causes which such cases suggest by comparing two 
instances exactly similar in every circumstance except the 
cause in question. If, with the same set of circumstances 
in which the presence of the cause is succeeded by that of 
the effect, the absence of the cause is followed by its ne- 
gation, what was simply a suggestion before becomes an 
established certainty. We need hardly say, however, that 
nature is not so propitious to our studies as to lavish such 
instances upon us. If we want them, in eight cases out of 
ten we must devise instruments by which they may be pro- 
compound with it, in which case the evidence would fall to pieces. 
Hence, as the first class of cases do not admit of this barely conceivable 
uncertainty, the conclusions established by them belong to the highest 
rank of physical certainties. 



C. I. 3.] INDIEECT METHOD OF DIFFEBENCE. 221 

duced. The majority of the great truths established by the 
method of difference, and they are the most important that 
science reveals to us, have been extorted from nature by arti- 
ficial experiment. On the other hand, in comparing instances 
of agreement, we must rely on pure observation for the 
result ; unless, indeed, we can produce the cause whose effect 
is sought in sets^of circumstances, sufficiently various to ex- 
clude doubt that the result common to every instance origi- 
nates from any other source than itself ; a belief which, as it 
grows with every instance, is never of that convincing nature 
with that produced by the method of difference, which 
enables us, by one well-chosen experiment, to lay our hand 
upon the cause, and say indisputably it is there. In the 
former method, as the circumstances are different in every 
case, we can never be infallibly secure that the constantly- 
recurring effect may not arise from some latent cause or par- 
ticular combination of the various properties which substances 
are apt to manifest in different situations, instead of being 
generated by the constant antecedent whose effect that com- 
bination may neutralise in each instance. Now the method 
of difference, in its most rigorous sense, excludes even that 
shadow of possible doubt. !For the two instances compared 
only differ in one circumstance the absence or presence of 
the phenomenon we wish to explore ; so that we actually see 
the effect generated under our eyes. 

The two methods, however, are not unfrequently combined 
in scientific investigations, though the juncture arises from a 
lax application of the method of difference in cases where 
the rigorous employment of it is impossible. Sometimes the 
phenomenon we wish to investigate is associated with a 
number of properties combined in the same substance, which 
we are incompetent to separate so as to render the production 
of a substance impossible which shall exactly resemble the one 
in question, except in the particular property we desire to 
study. Suppose, for example, the polarisation of light is the 
subject of inquiry. The complicated phenomena which are 
designated by that name are impressed upon light in the act 
of double refraction, or by ordinary reflection at the surface 
of a transparent body. But we cannot produce any sub- 
stance winch shall resemble either transparent bodies or 
doubly refracting crystals, except in the one property of 
polarisation. Our only mode is to examine in what kindred 



222 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

qualities polarisation, ordinary reflection, and double re- 
fraction, individually agree and differ, and endeavour from 
the resulting analogies to get at the causal relation. This 
mode of inquiry combines the method of agreement with 
that of difference taken in an indirect sense. The in- 
stances which fall under the latter branch, instead of agreeing 
in all but the presence or absence of the phenomenon in 
question, may differ in many other qualities besides ; so that 
although, when conjoined with the method of agreement, all 
doubt may be eliminated where the individual inductions have 
been sufficiently extensive, yet the possibility is never com- 
pletely banished that the remaining differences may not have 
had some share in producing the established connexion. 
Thus we compare instances of bodies which undergo putre- 
faction with those which do not manifest that tendency, and 
discover that water is always present in the one case, and 
absent in the other ; and find, moreover, that salt, which is 
an admirable preventative of this tendency in animal sub- 
stances, has a strong attraction for this element. Though the 
evidence amounts to scientific certainty that the ingredients 
of water, Combining with some properties of the substance 1 , 
produce decomposition, we are not driven to the conclusion 
with the same force as if the evidence had rested upon two 
instances differing in nothing but the conjoined absence and 
presence of the element in question. For, in the former 
case, the possibility remains that putrefaction, or non-putre- 
faction, in the instances compared, may arise from the pre- 
sence or absence of other properties besides water. This 
method, however, which unites all the advantages of the 
method of agreement with a modified portion of the method 
of difference, is undoubtedly one of the most universal in- 
struments which science employs. Its use is simple and 
obvious, and the conclusions to which it leads are less 
exposed to cavil than those which entirely depend on the strict 
method of agreement. 

The precise sphere of the application of this method is co- 
extensive with that large class of phenomena which, on account 

1 It has been shown by Liebig that the properties in question are 
carbon and azote, the hydrogen of the water combining with the for- 
mer and producing carbonic acid, while the oxygen unites with the 
azote and generates ammonia. Now carbonic acid and ammonia con- 
stitutes the gaseous compound which animal and other azotised bodies 
throw off in a state of decomposition. 



C. I. 3.] METHOD OF EESIDUES. 223 

of the complexity of their nature, will not admit of the direct 
method of difference ; and whose properties do not appear in cir- 
cumstances sufficiently diverse to allow any cogent conclusion 
to be drawn by the method of agreement. For instance, if we 
wish to investigate the proximate cause of animal heat, the phe- 
nomenon being constantly associated with the living organism, 
can neither be detached from a crowd of other properties, 
nor viewed in connexion with any variable combination of 
them. Now, even if we should observe in a thousand cases 
that all animals, whose respiratory system is well developed 
and aerates the blood perfectly, are warm-blooded, we should 
never be justified in attributing, with more than probable 
certainty, the phenomenon in question to the change which 
takes place in the blood by respiration ; but when we observe 
that those whose respiratory system is imperfect do not 
maintain a temperature much above the surrounding at- 
mosphere, that inference assumes the character of scientific 
certainty. 

This method answers to what Bacon called negative and 
positive instances, and has been happily termed by Mr. Mill 
the indirect method of difference 1 . 

The fourth mark of causation is that of residual pheno- 
mena, which remain in many cases after subducting the 
effects of all the known causes, and which point to an agency 
that, from the nature of the circumstances, could only 
generate their production. For instance, in the return of 
comets, there is perceived that general agreement between 
their observed and calculated places as to lead to the in- 
ference that the sole cause of their orbitual motion is the 
gravitation of the sun and planets ; but when the effect of 
this cause is strictly calculated and subducted from the 
observed motion, we find some diminution of its periodic 
time, which cannot be accounted for by any other sup- 
position than the resistance of a medium disseminated 
through the celestial regions. Now, as there is good ground 
from other quarters for believing that such a medium actually 
exists, this anticipation of a comet's periodic time has been 
ascribed to such a resistance 2 . We cannot, however, be cer- 
tain that such residual phenomenon is actually produced by 
the cause it suggests, unless we are perfectly assured of the 

1 System of Logic, vol. L p. 462. 2 Professor Encke. See Her- 

schel's Astronomy. 



224 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

existence of such cause, and can also prove that no other agent 
could have produced the residual effect. Now, as this rarely 
happens, the strict application of the method of residues is 
limited to very few cases. It may, however, serve to suggest 
causes which we may try to produce artificially, according to 
one of the two first methods, or which can be explained and 
proved deductively from known laws. The last case is one 
of frequent occurrence, and constitutes one of the principles by 
which science in our day has been so much extended. Thus, 
in calculating the velocity of sound, although the general re- 
sult was sufficient to show the correctness of the cause and 
mode of its propagation through the air, yet the velocity was 
a little above what could be legitimately ascribed to this 
theory. Laplace at length surmising that the residual velo- 
city might arise from the heat developed in the act of con- 
densation which ensues at every vibration of the air, sub- 
jected the idea to exact calculation, and the result was at 
once the complete explanation of the residual phenomenon, 
and an unexpected confirmation of the general law of the 
development of heat by compression. 

The fifth mark of causal connexion is increase or dimi- 
nution of the effect with corresponding variation in the 
cause, an example of which may be observed in the method 
by which Pascal satisfied himself of the gravity of air. That 
philosopher knew that if the weight of the incumbent air be 
the direct cause of the elevation of the barometer, that the 
column of mercury would sink in proportion as he ascended 
the Puy de Dome*, as the pressure of the air would diminish 
with every step he took. The result of the experiment verified 
his conviction of Torricelli's views, and settled the dispute to 
which they had given rise for ever. This method of investiga- 
tion/ which is called that of concomitant variations, though 
constantly employed in conjunction with the other methods, is 
mostly of use in ascertaining the law of permanent causes, 
which it is impossible either to exclude or to isolate ; which 
we can neither hinder from being present, or contrive that 
they shall be present alone. To these cases the other me- 
thods are confessedly inapplicable. Suppose, for instance, it 
arise as a suggestion that the oscillations of the pendulum 
are produced by the earth's gravitation, we can in no case 
exclude the earth as an influencing agent, nor can we argue 
1 A high mountain in Auvergne. 



C. I. 3.] METHOD OF CONCOMITANT TAEIATIONS. 225 

from its constant presence, that it causes the phenomenon in 
question ; for by parity of reasoning we migh t affirm the 
same of the sun, which is equally co-existent in all the ex- 
periments. Now, though we cannot remove the earth, we 
may modify its influence, and that to a sufficient extent to 
enable us to decide upon the point in question. For if, as 
Bacon suggested, the pendulum tends downward in its oscil- 
lations by the influence of the earth's attraction, " it will 
follow, the nearer it approach to the earth the stronger, and 
with the greater force and velocity will the pendulum be 
drawn to it ; but the further the pendulum be removed, the 
weaker and slower will be its oscillations 1 ;" a suggestion 
which Professors Airy and Whewell fully realised by compar- 
ing the motions of a pendulum in Dolcoath Mine with a 
chronometer balance, and striking the difference between the 
velocity of the same, motions as previously ascertained at 
certain elevations above the earth's surface. By the same 
method Bacon also pointed out 2 that the tides might be 
proved to originate in the influence the moon exerts on the 
earth's surface, if it could be established that the variations 
in the position of that satellite are attended by correspond- 
ing variations in the time and place of high water. The 
great Newton subjected the phenomena to the laws of the 
calculus, and proving the concomitant variation to the nicest 
degree of exactness, revealed the laws of one of the most 
admirable contrivances in the economy of nature. 

Hence it may be inferred, when objects vary according to 
some fixed quantity which is the ordinary rule, that it is in- 
dispensable to the establishment of causal connexion by this 
method, that the phenomena should be submitted to quanti- 
tative laws, and their mutual influence proved to increase or 
diminish in the same proportion with the action of their 
causes. Now in such cases we cannot determine the exact 
proportion in which the relations vary, unless we know the 
total quantities of which they consist. Thus in the case 
of contraction of substance, since we neither know how 
much heat there is in any body, nor what is the real dis- 
tance between any of its particles on which its bulk de- 
pends, we are not in a condition to infer that the con- 

1 Novutn Organ, vol. ii. Instantiee Prerogatives. * NoYum Org. 

vol. ii. Ibid. 



226 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

traction of the distance between them would follow the 
diminution of the quantity of heat, according to the nume- 
rical relation that the two quantities would vanish simul- 
taneously. It would, therefore, be hazardous to conclude 
that because the diminution of temperature in a body con- 
tracts the space between its particles, that we could bring its 
particles into contact, provided the process of exhaustion 
was urged to its full extent. In conjunction with the uncer- 
tainty that beyond the limits and in circumstances of which 
we have no direct experience some contracting cause may 
manifest itself, we have the doubt that the law of varia- 
tion which the quantities exhibit within the observed 
limits will hold beyond those limits. There are many laws 
of variation in phenomena whose differences are inappre- 
ciable when confined within narrow limits ; but which mani- 
fest a wide discrepancy when the absolute amounts of varia- 
tion are considerable. In such cases, therefore, when the 
variations which fall within the sphere of observation are of 
limited range, there is considerable danger, if the numerical 
laws which express those variations be stretched to a consi- 
derable extent beyond the limits originally calculated, that 
they will fail to support the theoretical structures built upon 
them 1 . 

The employment of this method may be occasionally 
attended with doubt as to which of the phenomena is 
the operating cause. The only way to clear up the mat- 
ter is by endeavouring to ascertain whether one set of 
variations can be produced by means of the other. In the 
case of heat, for example, by increasing the temperature of a 
body we increase its bulk ; but by increasing its bulk we 
diminish its temperature. The conclusion is obvious, that 
heat is not an effect but a cause of increase of bulk. If ex- 
periment, however, be not available in the case, we must 
look out for instances produced by nature in cases where the 
pre-existing circumstances are already known. 

1 A striking example of such miscalculation may be observed in the for- 
mulae by which it was computed, from the amount of coal that a steamer 
of average horse-power would consume in a transatlantic voyage, that 
no vessel could be found to carry fuel sufficient to supply the engines 
which she carried throughout the journey; a computation which led 
many to infer, before the experiment was tried, that the undertaking 
was impracticable. 



C. I. 3.] GENEEAl CAUTIONS. 227 

It will be observed not only tbat most of these methods 
may apply to the same act of induction, and so operate to test 
or verify the correctness of each other's processes ; but that 
they are all, with the single exception of the method of differ- 
ence taken in its most rigorous sense, exposed to the same 
uncertainty ; viz., that the presumed effects may be brought 
about by the action of other causes than the uniform ante- 
cedents to which we attribute them ; or, at best, if they should 
really act as influencing agents, that their ubiquity with the 
effects does not make out direct causation, but only a colla- 
teral effect of it. Such uncertainties, however, where the 
conditions of each method have been satisfied in a suffi- 
ciently large circle of instances, and especially where the 
methods tend to verify each other's results, dwindle down 
to an almost inappreciable value. They become, therefore, 
objects of metaphysical, rather than of logical concernment. 
In circumstances, however, which do not admit of rigorous 
precision in the application of each method, a strong proba- 
bility of causal connexion can only be considered to have 
been established, or at most the collateral dependence of the 
phenomena in question, on some common cause. Unless, for 
instance, in the case of concomitant variations, we can really 
ascertain that the phenomena do vary in exact proportion 
to their mutual operations, the result is only one of strong 
probability ; nor, indeed, can it be relied upon even when 
made out by quantitative laws, if those laws only express 
the results of observation restricted to narrow limits. 

Where the induction, however, has been established by 
the fulfilment of all the conditions that scientific certainty 
requires, we are not to throw our conclusions lightly aside 
when a single fact starts up which seems to convict them of 
error, but rather to set the outstanding exception apart for 
future examination, being convinced that further inquiry 
will either destroy its hostility to past results, or verify or 
extend the facts which they have established. Tims the 
objection was brought against the Newtonian theory of 
gravitation, that it did not account for the perplexing ine- 
qualities of the moon's motions, and several minor irre- 
gularities in the planetary system, which seemed violent 
outstanding exceptions to it. Further inquiry, however, 
transformed these seeming discrepancies into the strongest 

Q 2 



228 METHODS OP THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [fi. V. 

confirmations which that theory could receive, and ex- 
tended its influence from those globular masses which 
Newton had previously included under it to every par- 
ticle of matter in the frame of the universe. An additional 
instance may be cited in the law of isomorphism, discovered 
by Mitscherlich, which announced that certain distinct 
groups of chemical elements of which all bodies consist are 
so related that when similar combinations are formed of in- 
dividuals belonging to two, three, or more of them, such com- 
binations will crystallise in the same geometrical forms. To 
this law there appeared a remarkable exception in arsenic 
and phosphoric acid, which, though seeming to constitute 
identical combinations with those included under Mitscher- 
lich's law, yet refused to crystallise in similar forms. But on 
further investigation, the compositions of the two salts were 
found to deviate essentially from that similarity required by 
the law of isomorphism, and a new phosphate of soda was pro- 
duced, differing from that generally known under the name 
of phosphoric acid, in containing a different portion of water 
and agreeing in composition exactly with the arseniate, the 
crystals of which, when examined, agreed precisely in form 
with the arseniate. The removal of the objection conse- 
quently led to a further verification of the law. Again, in 
the same science, it has been observed 1 that, though am- 
monia is a strong contradiction of the law which attributes 
the alkaline quality of the alkaline and earthy bases to the 
presence of oxygen combined with one or other of a peculiar 
class of metals, that there are almost certain indications that 
this exception is not a real one, but assumes that appearance 
in consequence of some modifying cause not understood. 
Such objections generally appear in the form of residual 
phenomenon, which, when minutely examined, are invariably 
found either to extend and corroborate the induction against 
which they were brought, or give rise to an unexpected and 
novel class of laws. 

(1st.) As the processes by which nature conducts her opera- 
tions are frequently of an analogous character, one of the 
most ready means of extending single inductions is by dis- 
covering cases in which, from the general constitution of 
things, similar laws are able to act, and endeavouring to 

1 Herschel, Stud. Nat. Phil. p. 154. 



C. I. 3.] EXTENSION OF INDUCTIONS. 229 

establish results precisely analogous to those already adopted. 
Thus, Schwann having observed that certain animal tissues 
originated in cells, was led by the analogy of plants to the 
discovery that all the organs of the animal structure, together 
with the original foetus, took their rise in similar cells, and 
reached their highest development by aggregations of the 
same or slightly different vesicles. In like manner Young 
was led to infer, from the fact that two vibrations of sounds 
arriving at the same place by different routes, either strength- 
ened or wholly or partially destroyed each other's effects, 
that, if the undulatory theory was true, two rays of light 
might be made to combine so as to produce darkness; a 
fact which had no sooner been established than it led to the 
explanation of optical phenomena of a most remote kind. 

(2nd.) Another mode of extension is that of examining all 
the cases which present the necessary conditions for bringing 
the newly-revealed law into action ; a process, indeed, which 
commonly leads to the discovery of special laws before un- 
suspected, and explanations of others only empirically known. 
Thus Faraday having established the fact that electricity is 
evolved by all magnets, great or small, even including the 
earth, provided a conductor move at right angles to the 
direction of its poles, began to look out for fresh instances 
in which these conditions meet. Now, in the northern 
regions, where the earth's magnetic poles are nearly per- 
pendicular to the horizon, all horizontal wheels made of 
metal, running streams, and other conductors, moving at 
right angles to the polar direction, must comply with the 
conditions of the law and charge the air with electricity. Ill 
these latitudes, therefore, a larger display of the phenomena 
produced by this element must be expected, and we find it 
in the Aurora Borealis 1 . 

Another example of the latter kind of extension is to be 
found in the mode by which Professor Graham was led, from 
the general law that gases have a strong tendency to per- 
meate animal membranes and diffuse themselves through the 
spaces which they enclose, to establish a number of special 
laws explanatory of various phenomena in connexion with 

1 Faraday does not attribute the entire effect of this startling phe- 
nomenon to his law, as it would be unscientific to do so. He is, how- 
ever, fully justified in the inference that it has a great share in the 
operation. 



230 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

the animal system. Thus malaria is accounted for by the 
tendency in the animal body to absorb those gases rapidly, 
which are not already contained in the system ; as, for in- 
stance, carbonic acid and ammonia, the gases which putri- 
fying bodies exhale. By the same law, the heat and in- 
toxication consequent on the consumption of spirituous 
liquors may be attributed to the rapid spread of vapour 
throughout the system, as the alcohol is driven above the 
boiling point by the temperature of the stomach. These, 
with many other explanations of phenomena to which the 
same law leads, are only so many special cases of its action, 
and started into being as soon as its acute discoverer began to 
inquire in what cases the law might be expected to operate. 

Now there is no place in which a new element is so 
likely to have influence as in those sciences whose subject- 
matter is of a kindred character, or which manifest phe- 
nomena of an analogous tendency. Hence it becomes im- 
portant when a new induction has been established, that the 
property or law to which it refers should be studied as many 
ways as possible in connexion with laws which exhibit 
similar relations. By this method of extension many classes 
of facts viewed as the nucleus of so many distinct sciences 
have been merged into each other, and afterwards included 
in one or two general laws. Thus the class of properties con- 
templated by magnetism has been resolved into two opposite 
currents of electricity ; and there can hardly be a doubt that 
the property of polarity may yet be similarly derived from 
those of attraction and repulsion, and both in some measure 
shown to have a direct connexion with gravitation. There 
is nothing so instructive as this pursuit of the consequences 
of a new law into cases where its operation is likely to 
be traced; and illustrations of its successful action may 
be encountered at every stage of scientific history. Thus, 
Kepler having ascertained the orbit of Mars to be an 
ellipse in which the sun was one of the foci, and that the 
square of the periodical times was proportional to the cube 
of the distance, sought the same laws in the motion of the 
other planets, and found that each, together with the motions 
of their satellites, were only so many additional instances of 
their operation. By a similar extension of induction to ana- 
logous cases, Galileo broke down the barrier which Aristotle 
had erected between the laws of terrestrial and heavenly 



0. I. 3.] EXTENSION OF INDUCTIONS. 231 

mechanics, and showed the motions they mutually exhibit 
were resolvable into the same dynamical forces. Newton 
had no sooner enounced the principle of gravitation than 
illustrations of its action were found in every corner of the 
universe, and every minute particle of matter included in 
the operation of the same law. In like manner selenium 
was hardly discovered by Berzelius in the vitriol works of 
Fahlun, when it presently made its appearance in the subli- 
mates of Stromboli, and the rare and curious products of 
the Hungarian mines. And thus it is with every new law 
and general fact. It is hardly enounced before its traces are 
found everywhere, and every one is astonished at its having 
remained so long concealed. 

(3rd.) Since each natural phenomenon is united, through a 
series of mutually dependent agencies, with every branch of 
science, there is no induction which, by the outlay of a little 
sagacity, is not capable of leading to the most important 
results in whatever direction it may be applied. The laws of 
light no sooner led to the formation of a correct theory of 
vision than Kepler explained the functions in that act, of 
each part of the eye ; and thus prepared the way for the 
invention of the telescope and microscope, by which the 
kingdoms of nature were ransacked at both ends, and man 
endued, as it were, with a new sense to enable him to 
explore her most minute as well as her grandest operations. 
If we would, then, extend the boundaries of knowledge, each 
induction must not only be looked at with a view to obtain 
exemplifying cases, but also as a certain species of vantage 
ground from which the unknown in other sciences may be 
attacked with the greatest prospect of success. The precise 
relation of each induction to the phenomena which surround 
its confines, both in its own science and others to which it 
manifests a direct relation, should be considered, with a view to 
obtain further insight into their character, as well as instances 
which extend and illustrate its action. It was owing to the 
intimate nature which exists between crystalography and 
optics that the laws of light led to the discovery of the 
most important qualities of crystalline substances ; and those 
bodies in turn extended our knowledge of the laws of light, and 
even in some degree decided the merits of the rival theories 
concerning its transmission. So true is the remark of Bacon, 
that no natural phenomenon can be adequately studied in 



232 METHODS OP THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

itself alone, but to be understood must be viewed in con- 
nexion with all nature. 

(1st.) Every additional instance of the application of the 
induction to new cases not originally included in the law will, 
of course, help as so many distinct illustrations of its truth to 
verify the correctness of the process by which it was reached ; 
nevertheless, when the cause or law which it has laid bare 
assumes the form of an additional instance of a more general 
cause already well known and recognised, the verification 
cannot be considered complete until we trace the action of 
the original cause as modified by the circumstances of the 
particular case, and prove that the induction is corroborated 
by the result. Thus the law that salt preserves animal 
substances from putrefaction by its attraction for water, 
could not be considered as completely established till Liebig 
showed the phenomenon was a direct consequent of the 
necessity of the presence of water to generate the gases 
thrown off by bodies in a state of decomposition. And in 
like manner the induction which led the same illustrious 
chemist to the relative functions performed by the serum 
and globules of the blood in the act of respiration, was not 
fully verified until traced deductively from the chemical 
properties of oxide of iron, the substance which the globules 
secrete, and proved to be the precise consequences to which 
those laws lead when modified by the extraneous conditions 
on which respiration depends. 

(2nd.) But when the law to which we are conducted is alto- 
gether new, we cannot rely on its enabling us to extend our 
views beyond the circle of instances from which it has been 
obtained, unless it has previously enabled us to predict with 
certainty what will take place in cases analogous to those 
originally contemplated. In such inductions, therefore, one 
of the most decisive means of verification consists in the 
application of the newly-discovered law to extreme cases, 
with a view to ascertain how far its effect is general. For 
instance, though there could be no doubt, as Galileo had 
convinced himself, by allowing various substances of different 
weights to fall at the same instant from the tower of Pisa, 
that the accelerating power of gravity is the same on all sorts 
of bodies, yet as extremely light substances could not be tried 
on account of the resistance of the air, the law could hardly 



C. I. 3.] VEBIFICATION OF INDUCTIONS. 233 

be said to be established in its utmost degree of generality, 
until the invention of the air-pump had enabled it to be put 
to the test of an extreme case. A guinea and a feather, then, 
dropped from the upper part of a glass cylinder exhausted of 
air, struck the bottom at the same moment, and rendered 
further doubt on the subject visionary. 

(3rd.) Where the inductions arrived at like those of con- 
comitant variations belong to that class which require the 
application of the calculus, their verification cannot be con- 
sidered complete without every case of trial is one of precise 
measurement, and without some of the instances chosen are 
of such a nature as to multiply any deviation till it amount 
to an appreciable* result. Thus Kepler's three laws of 
planetary motions were only confirmed in the instance of 
Jupiter's satellites, by submitting the periodical appearances 
of these bodies to the test of quantitative laws : nor could even 
this computation be relied upon, till it was proved that if any 
deviation existed it must have become apparent in the result. 
The use of this branch of the verificatory process in har- 
monising individual inductions with the results to which the 
higher laws with which they are connected deductively lead, 
is beautifully exemplified in the mode by which Newton 
proved that the law of falling bodies, inferred by Galileo, 
was only another expression of the law to which his theory 
of gravitation had conducted him ; viz., that the gravity of 
every material body is in the direct proportion of its mass. 
Now to ascertain this, a mode of experiment was required 
which not only neutralised the interference of the air, but 
also enabled the trial to be made a great number of times 
without loss or gain in the intervals. The object was accom- 
plished by inclosing in a hollow pendulum at different times 
equal weights of the most various substances that could be 
found, and ascertaining the time required for the pendulum 
so charged to make a certain number of oscillations. Each 
substance having to fall and rise successively without loss of 
time through the same identical spaces, it is clear that any 
difference that might exist in the time of one such oscillation 
could not fail to be multiplied and become sensible in the 
result. But none such having been discovered, the law 
above stated was considered verified both in respect of ge- 
nerality and exactness. 



234 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [u. V. 

We shall now proceed to illustrate the general principles 
laid down in this section bj an inquiry into a cause 1 whose 
incomplete investigation requires the application of the main 
points on which we have insisted. Such a phenomenon is pre- 
sented by dew. Now, at the outset of the inquiry, we must 
precisely determine what dew is, and separate it from rain, the 
moisture of fogs, evaporation of steam, and other phenomena of 
a kindred quality, and confine the term to what is really meant ; 
viz., the spontaneous appearance of moisture on substances 
exposed in the open air when no rain or visible wet is fall- 
ing (b. i. c. iii. 1). In the second place, we must search 
for or endeavour to produce a phenomena identical or pre- 
cisely analogous to the object of our inquiry (b. v. 2), 
which occurs, for instance, in the moisture which bedews a 
cold metal or stone when we breathe upon it; in that 
which appears on a glass of water fresh from the well in hot 
weather; in that which appears on the inside of windows 
when sudden rain or hail chills the external air; in that 
which runs down our walls when a warm, moist thaw ensues 
after a long frost. Now all these instances agree in one point 
(1st meth.), the coldness of the object dewed in comparison 
with the air in contact with it. But in the case of night- 
dew, is it a fact that the object dewed is colder than the air ? 
To ascertain this we need only place a thermometer in con- 
tact with the dewed substance, and hang one at a little dis- 
tance above it, out of reach of its influence. The result has 
invariably decided the question in the affirmative. Whenever 
an object contracts dew, it is colder than the air (1st meth.). 
But is this chill an effect of dew or its cause ? That dews 
are accompanied with chill is a common remark ; but vulgar 
prejudice would make the cold the effect rather than the 
cause. We must, therefore, collect more facts, or, which 
comes to the same thing, vary the circumstances ; since every 
instance in which the circumstances differ affords a fresh fact ; 
and note the contrary or negative cases (3rd meth.) . 

Now, in the first place, no dew is produced on the surfaces 

1 See Wells on dew, Herschel's Study of Nat. Phil. p. 159, and 
Mill's System of Logic, vol. i. p. 491. We have principally followed 
the astronomer, who has invested Wells's lucubrations with such ele- 
gant features as might have seduced Plato into a study which he 
abhorred. 



G. I. 3.] WELLS'S THEORY OP DEW. 235 

of polished metals ; but it is produced very copiously on glass, 
both exposed with their faces upwards, and in some cases the 
under side of a horizontal plate of glass is also dewed, which 
last circumstance (2nd rneth.) excludes the fall of moisture 
from the sky in an invisible form, that would naturally ex- 
clude the vulgar attribution of the cause. In the cases of 
polished metal and polished glass, the contrast shows that 
the substance has much to do with the phenomenon (b. v. 
2). Therefore, let the substance alone be diversified as 
much as possible, by exposing polished surfaces of various 
kinds. The result is a scale of intensity in the phenomenon 
(5th meth.), those polished substances being found to be 
most strongly dewed which conduct heat worst ; while 
those which conduct heat best resist dew most effectually. 
Here we encounter a law (5th meth.) of the first degree 
of generality ; but if we expose rough surfaces instead of 
polished, we occasionally find this law interfered with. Thus, 
roughened iron, especially if painted over or blackened, 
becomes dewed sooner than varnished paper. The kind of 
surface, therefore, has a great influence. Expose then the 
same material in very diversified states as to surface (2nd 
meth.), and another scale of intensity becomes apparent ; 
those surfaces which part with their heat most readily by 
radiation are found to contract dew more copiously, and thus 
we obtain (5th meth.) another law of the same generality 
with the former, by a comparison of two classes of facts, 
one relating to dew, the other to radiation of heat from 
surfaces. 

Again, the influence ascertained to exist of substance and 
surface, leads to the consideration of that of texture (2nd 
exten.), which presents us with remarkable differences on a 
third scale of intensity, pointing out substances of a solid 
texture, as stones, metals, &c., as unfavourable ; but those of 
a loose texture, as cloth, wool, velvet, and others of a similar 
class, as eminently hostile to the contraction of dew, and 
these are precisely those which are best adapted to clothing, 
since they impede the free passage of heat from the skin into 
the air, so as to allow their outer surfaces to be very cold, 
while remaining warm within (2nd exten., 1st verif.). 

Lastly, among the negative instances it is observed that 
dew is never copiously deposited in situations much screened 



236 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

from the open sky, and not at all in a cloudy night ; but if 
the clouds withdraw even for a few minutes, and leave a clear 
opening, a deposition of dew presently begins, and goes on 
increasing. Here, then, a cause is distinctly pointed out by 
its antecedence to the effect in question (2nd meth.). A 
cloudless sky is, then, an essential condition, or, which comes 
to the same thing, clouds or surrounding objects act as 
opposing causes. This is so much the case, that dew formed 
in clear intervals will even evaporate again when the sky 
becomes thickly overcast (2nd exten., 1st verif.). 

Assembling all these partial inductions, with a view to 
raise from them a general conclusion, it may be observed 
that all the inferences we have made point to that first 
general fact the cooling of the exposed surface of the body 
dewed below the temperature of the air. Those surfaces 
which part with their heat outward most readily, and have it 
supplied from within most copiously, become coldest if there 
be an opportunity for their heat to escape, without being 
restored to them from other objects. Now a clear sky affords 
such an opportunity. It is a well-known law, that heat is 
constantly escaping from all bodies in rays, or by radiation, 
but is as constantly restored to them by the similar radia- 
tion of surrounding objects (1st verif.). Clouds, therefore, 
act as opposing causes, by replacing the whole, or a great 
part, of the heat so radiated away, which can only escape 
without being replaced through openings into infinite space 
(1st verif.). Thus, at length, we arrive at the general proxi- 
mate cause of dew, in the cooling of the dewed surface by 
radiation faster than its heat can be restored to it by com- 
munication with the ground, or by counter-radiation, so as to 
become colder than the air, and thereby to cause a condensa- 
tion of its moisture. 

Thus the inquiry may be said to terminate by resolving 
the laws of the phenomenon into two more general laws, viz., 
the radiation of heat and the condensation of invisible vapour 
by cold, which become in turn capable of similar investigation 
and resolution into phenomena of wider generalisation. The 
laws of radiation had, however, been previously established, 
and received no new confirmation by the explanation of this 
theory, which, indeed, they only tended to explain (2nd verif.) : 
and the condensation of invisible vapour by cold had already 



C. I. 4.] STTMMAKY OF INDUCTION. 237 

become a portion of physical inquiry. Thus, the explanation 
of the laws of nature only lead to the resolution of a sensible 
knot of complicated effects into others more simple but less 
known, and so far only substitutes for a mystery which has 
become familiar, a phenomenon still more strange. To ex- 
plain natural laws means nothing more than to assign other 
laws of a higher character, which, modified by peculiar circum- 
stances, will lead to the particular consequences they include. 

4. General Outline of the Inductive ^Method. Difficulties 
and Limits Attending the Application of its special Canons. 

From the example already given of Dr. Wells' s theory of 
dew, may be obtained a correct idea of the relative functions 
of the different rules of induction, and the mode in which 
they generally combine in interweaving the partial inferences 
of which the texture of scientific evidence is composed. The 
process may be summarily collected under the following heads : 
1st. The obtaining a precise idea of the nature of the thing 
whose cause we are in search of, by separating it from 
subjects which exhibit a superficial resemblance to it. 2nd. 
The collection and examination of every instance that seems 
to bear upon the inquiry, including those which manifest the 
property in question, as well as kindred instances in which 
the property is not produced. 3rd. The variation of these 
instances, to reveal the law which they suggest as the proxi- 
mate cause, or the artificial production of others calculated 
to accomplish the same purpose. 4th. The connexion of 
such law with others of which it may happen to prove a 
special instance, or the pursuit of it into individual cases, 
with a view to ascertain if it rationally accounts for the 
peculiarities they manifest. Any law which concentrates 
within itself the united evidence of such an investigation, 
must be accepted as the real proximate agent of the pheno- 
menon for which it accounts. 

Hence it will be observed, that no single method is 
ever sufficient by itself to raise a law of high degree of 
universality. In the examination of instances where the 
law inquired into is modified by extraneous circumstances, 
each method is competent to draw whatever induction 
seems warranted by the circumstances of the case ; but since 



238 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [u. V. 

a law of any degree of generality embraces several of such 
inductions, the evidence by which it is established must in- 
clude and harmonise all the methods, otherwise the law is liable 
to be overset, through covering more ground than its founda- 
tions are warranted to support. In the investigation of 
some physical laws, however, one method is more available 
than another, and that to a greater or less degree, according 
as the nature of the concomitant circumstances admit of their 
action. These laws it will be necessary to point out, with their 
correlative methods, and the limits which some branches of 
physical science oppose to their action even on the threshold 
of investigation. 

The methods of induction explained in the last section 
proceed upon the assumption that every effect is so con- 
nected with a constant proximate cause, that it is impossible 
to meet with an instance of divorce between them ; so that we 
may always infer, from the presence of the effect, the opera- 
tion of the same cause we have previously assigned to it. 
Now we have already had occasion to observe, that this is by 
no means universally the case. The same effect may, and 
often is, generated by different proximate causes, especially 
where its nature is the result of many compound conditions 
as death, motion, heat, moisture, &c., and this in so remark- 
able a manner, that the producing agents which alternately 
concur in the creation of the same property are frequently of 
a very dissimilar and heteroclite character. What conditions, 
for example, can be so various and changeable as those on 
which heat depends ? It may be produced by friction, by 
electricity, by percussion, by chemical action, and the pre- 
sence of the sun. To argue, therefore, from the sensation of 
heat, that any single one of these agents were, or had been, 
occupied in its production, would be illusory in the extreme 1 . 

1 An error which Mr. Mill accuses Bacon with committing in his in- 
quisition into the cause of heat. We do not think Bacon's mistake lay 
exactly where this distinguished logician places it. Bacon attempted 
to trace the different sources of heat to one common law. So far his 
investigation was scientific; hut he entered on the task before ac- 
counting for the effects of the different proximate causes which pro- 
duced it. Here lay his error, as we are not privileged to merge minor 
causes into higher generalisations before ascertaining their special laws. 
Mr. Mill says Bacon was wrong in seeking for an ultimate cause which 
might have no existence. But if this censure be worth anything, it 
would bastardise every attempt at scientific analysis. 



C. I. 4.] INTEBFEBENCE OF PLUBAL CAUSES. 

We do not hazard the assertion that each of these proximate 
causes of the phenomena may be resolvable into one common 
property on which they ultimately depend, or that effects 
generally, which are dependent on different proximate causes, 
may not likewise be traced back to one source. Of ultimate 
causes, as such, science takes no account : she is entirely occu- 
pied with proximate ones, and since a variety of these may 
lead to one common effect, it becomes important to consider 
how this uncertainty affects her methods. 

It is obvious that when one effect has a plurality of 
causes, the method of agreement must be put out of court, 
since we could not infer from the bare presence of a constant 
antecedent in the instances we had examined, that it alone 
had generated the single invariable consequent which accom- 
panied it. But no other method is invalidated by it, at least 
in the single inductions we make concerning each special 
case. For if the constant effect varies exactly according to 
a direct ratio with the accompanying antecedent, or if we can 
produce two instances which differ alone in the absence or 
presence of the assigned cause, we need no further evidence 
that the antecedent produces the effect in the case in 
question. We can, indeed, proceed further, and generalise 
the inference, predicting that wherever the conditions are 
which we have discovered, the same effect must follow, though 
we cannot reverse the statement, and affirm the ubiquity of 
the cause with the effect. In cases where the plurality of 
the cause is doubtful, what amount of experience will warrant 
us to venture the latter prediction must be a consideration 
for a subsequent section. 

But as the operations of nature are characterised by eco- 
nomical simplicity, diversity of cause is by no means the 
ordinary rule, and the uncertainty with which it surrounds 
the application of the first method can easily be dissipated 
by a proportionate multiplication and diversity of instances. 
It is no more possible that a single antecedent discovered in 
a crowd of most dissimilar cases should be attended with a 
constant invariable antecedent without a causal tie between 
them, than it would be for the same antecedent to vary in 
direct proportion with the same consequent, amid a number 
of unvariable phenomena without connexion with it. Such 
an element of doubt, therefore, only requires the method of 



240 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

agreement to rest upon a proportionally greater number of 
cases than any of the others, in order to invest the results to 
which it leads with the same amount of scientific value. 

The consideration of the different modes in which causes 
compound their effects, will help us to further distinctions 
with regard to the use of these methods, and conduct us to 
the limits of inductive inquiry. This composition resolves 
itself into two branches, each of which are in some measure 
co-extensive with chemistry and mechanics. "When one 
effect is compounded of many causes, the result either mani- 
fests itself in a composition or mixture of the individual 
causes which enter into it, or leads to the formation of a new 
substance, having no analogous properties with the elements 
from which it sprung. For example, in the case of motion, 
if a body is propelled by two forces meeting it in transverse 
directions, it will describe the diagonal of a square, and be 
conducted to the precise point it would have reached had it- 
been acted upon by the two forces separately. Hence, in 
this branch of the subject, if we happen to know the effects 
of the separate causes we can arrive deductively or a priori 
at a correct knowledge of the effect that will result in any 
given case from their conjunct agency. In the chemical 
branch of the subject the composition of causes is attended 
with results of an opposite character. If potash and tartaric 
acid be mixed together in certain proportions, instead of 
obtaining a mere mixture composed of the joint properties of 
both, we obtain a solid saline substance quite different from 
either potash or tartaric acid, and not betraying any sensible 
mark to lead to their distinction. Not a trace of the original 
properties is to be discovered in the compound result. This 
explains why mechanics is a deductive or demonstrative 
science and chemistry is not. In the one, we can compute 
the effects of all combinations of causes, both actual and 
possible, from the laws which govern those causes when 
acting separately. In the other, we are left entirely to 
experiment, every induction terminating with the peculiar 
combination which led to it : nor can it include other 
combinations in any generalisations until assured by expe- 
rience of the actual truth of the facts whose recurrence under 
certain conditions it predicts. 

Now, of these compound effects, those which follow 



C. I. 4.] TWOFOLD COMPOSITION OF CAUSES. 241 

chemical laws are the most easy to investigate by the direct 
methods of induction ; owing chiefly to the simplicity of their 
development, which arises from their ceasing to carry into 
the complex result the properties of the different causes 
which produced them. They appear, like ultimate properties, 
disinvested of the involuted web of causal agencies, and 
present marks so characteristic, that their presence cannot 
fail to be distinguished among a crowd of surrounding phe- 
nomena. The methods of induction consequently can meet 
with no other difficulty in their solution than the failure 
of instances to reveal their causes present, or the absence of 
artificial experiments to produce them. On the other hand, 
in mechanical composition the effects of the separate causes 
do not terminate and cease to form any part of the phe- 
nomena to be investigated, but carry their results onward 
until they intermingle with the homogeneous effects of other 
causes. They are no longer simple integers existing in a 
distinguishable shape, but appear as insoluble quantities, 
some of which cancel one another, while many others merge 
into one sum, forming altogether a result, between which 
and the causes that produced them, observation is often in- 
competent to trace any fixed relation whatever. Moreover, 
it is a common feature of these laws to have their causes 
counteracted, and exhibit no marks of action in many cases 
where they have spent their full effects. If two equal forces, 
for example, act upon a body in lines diametrically opposite, 
the body so impelled does not manifest the slightest tendency 
to motion, but remains where it was, notwithstanding the act- 
ing forces have each produced its own quantum of effect. Or 
if a force act upon a body which it is unable to move, we do 
not perceive any result proceeding from the operation of such 
force, although an effect has been produced in the tendency 
of the particles of the passive body to move in the direction of 
the impulsive force. But how can we expect to find the law 
of a tendency by an induction from cases in which the ten- 
dency is counteracted? Could the laws of motion have 
ever been brought to light from the observation of bodies 
kept at rest by the equilibrium of opposing forces ? In this 
department of science the inductive methods are obviously 
inapplicable : we have no other resource than to study the 
effects of each cause separately, and to infer, by deductive 

B 



242 METHODS OE THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

reasoning, the result that must eventuate from their combi- 
nation in any given case. Happily Dynamics, which embraces 
the greatest branch of the latter kind of causal composition, 
is so far independent of the ^inductive methods as to have 
reached its highest generalisations, and to lack nothing in 
their application to particular facts, by the deductive method, 
than a further simplification of mathematical analysis ; while 
the remaining branches, which play a great part in every 
science except chemistry and physiology, depend in a great 
degree on the experimental methods only, with a view to 
obtain accurate data to justify and extend the use of the 
descending scale of inference. 

And even in the two sciences just mentioned, there are 
many phenomena which are amenable through a similar com- 
position for causes to the same method, and the tendency 
which chemistry and physiology manifest to multiply laws 
of this kind leaves us not without a hope that they are 
destined one day to become deductive. Though it would be 
of course impossible to deduce all chemical and physiological 
truths from the laws or properties of simple substances or 
elementary agents, it is by no means difficult to believe what 
the general analogy of these sciences already points out, that 
such particular truths may be deduced from the laws which 
ensue when these elementary agents are brought together 
into some moderate number of simple combinations. The 
great law of definite proportions already has discovered a 
certain relation between the quantities of a compound and 
those of its elements, which enables us to predict, provided 
our data be accurate, the exact proportion in which two sub- 
stances will combine before actual trial. And we are already 
in possession of some particular generalisations which indicate 
the possibility of forecasting similar results in relation to the 
qualities of compounds. We have also the law of isomor- 
phism already alluded to, and the curious fact revealed by 
Berthollet, that two soluble salts mutually decompose each 
other, whenever the new combinations which result produce 
an insoluble compound, or one less soluble than the two 
former pointing in the same direction. In like manner the 
complicated phenomena of life may all be deducible from 
comparatively simple laws, which, though depending upon 
certain combinations of antecedents, may in more complex 



C. I. 5.] THE DEDUCTIVE PBOCESS. 243 

circumstances be strictly compounded with one another, 
and with the physical and chemical laws of the ingredients. 
The details of the vital phenomena even now afford innu- 
merable instances of the composition of causes ; and in pro- 
portion as their laws are accurately studied, there is every 
appearance that more facts will be brought to light which 
will connect complex cases with higher generalisations, and 
legitimate a further extension of the deductive element. 

Here we have arrived at a perfect type of those cases in 
which the inductive methods can be of little service, where 
an unknown multitude of clashing and combining agencies 
being engaged in the production of one phenomenon, require 
the aid of instruments to unravel, more subtile and diversified 
in their application, more potent and decisive in their results. 
In the physical sciences such are supplied by the calculus in 
its deductive range, and the ratiocinative process ; but these 
cannot be applied unless experience furnish them with suffi- 
cient data on which to proceed, or unless, in case of the data 
being assumed, the result can be brought to the touchstone 
of facts, and clearly shown to accord with their actual 
combinations. In proportion as the experimental sciences 
display similar effects and allow their various conjunct 
results to be traced back, and, consequently, deduced from 
the separate action of the simple agencies of which they are 
composed, do they become deductive and amenable to the 
highest processes of generalisation. 

5. Nature of Scientific Deduction. Formation and Veri- 
fication of Theories. 

"We have already alluded to the employment of the de- 
ductive method as essential to the verification of single 
inductions when the law they reveal is found to be a mere 
exemplification of a higher law acting in combination witli 
peculiar circumstances. Two cases in point occur in the 
inductive process which led Dr. "Wells to his theory of dew. 
It is a law, for example, that moisture which falls from the 
sky never appears on the under surface of substances ; so that 
the theory would be materially confirmed if an instance of dew 
could be brought which shut out that law as an acting prin- 
ciple. Such an instance was produced in some horizontal 



METHODS OP THE PHISICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

plates of glass with, their under surfaces dewed to the exclu- 
sion of the upper, which enabled Dr. Wells to infer that the 
fall of moisture from the sky could not have produced the 
phenomenon in question. Again, it is a well-known law that 
heat is continually escaping from all bodies by radiation, but 
is as constantly restored to them by similar radiation from 
surrounding objects. Now, if dew was caused by such a 
modification of this law as the theory purported, it is clear 
that in places where the sky was overcast and the neighbour- 
hood much sheltered from the influence of the atmosphere 
little or no dew could be deposited ; an inference borne out 
by actual observation, for dew is never copious in situations 
much screened from the open sky, and does not appear at 
all in a cloudy night. Hence the theory harmonised with 
the deductive inference to which the law led, and strengthened 
the series of partial inductions that pointed to it as the 
operating cause. 

Hence it will be seen that the inductive and deductive 
methods are closely blended together in the successful pro- 
cess of scientific inquiry. We cannot establish, even by 
induction, any law of a moderate degree of generality 
without the assistance of its correlative method, nor can we 
proceed in the scale of descent unless the data from which 
we set out have been at some stage or other guaranteed by 
preceding inductions, except, indeed, we reason hypotheti- 
cally, in which case the result will have to be verified by 
induction from the actual instances to which it leads. Thus 
Dalton could not have inferred that a complete combination 
between two elementary substances in chemistry would 
ensue when their weights were found in a certain definite 
proportion, unless by the method of agreement the law had 
been previously ascertained to occur in a sufficient number of 
instances to place its universality beyond the pale of doubt ; 
nor could Newton have identified the central force of the solar 
system with terrestrial gravity without proceeding from a law, 
which, though proximately the fruit of a deductive process, 
could not have been received unless verified by facts based 
on the inductive method. The fact that the earth attracted 
the moon with a force varying according to the inverse 
square of the distance, and the proof that this would cause the 
moon to fall, were that luminary at no greater distance from 



C. I. 5.] UNION OF INDUCTION AND DEDUCTION. 245 

the earth's surface than terrestrial bodies, with a rapidity 
precisely equal to the increasing ratio of their velocities, 
could not have helped Newton to his object unless he had 
previously ascertained that the sun attracted the planets with 
the same force as the earth attracted the moon, by showing 
not only that the force in question led at once to the in- 
ference of Kepler's laws, but that no other supposition could 
lead to them. Thus, the path by which we rise to know- 
ledge must be often ascended and descended before we can 
scale our way to any eminence, much less reach the summit. 
No great principle can be reached by a single eifort, or by 
confining ourselves to one method. In every science sta- 
tions must be established, and communications kept open 
between all well ascertained truths of law, that minor facts 
may be verified by the higher generalisations to which they 
lead, and the correctness of hypothesis decided by an appeal 
to inductive laws. 

There is, consequently, no necessary opposition between 
deduction and induction. Both are essential steps in the 
process by which any law is reached of moderate generality : 
nor is there any reason why the physical sciences should be 
called inductive rather than deductive, unless, indeed, that the 
former element generally predominates at the earlier stages 
of their progress. The sciences, however, which have not got 
beyond their infancy, are correctly designated experimental, 
by way of contrast to that branch of physics with which deduc- 
tion is principally concerned, simply because they include no 
cases of laws sufficiently general to admit of extensive ratio- 
cination, and are consequently dependent on observation and 
experiment for new accessions to their store of truths. But 
in proportion as conclusions can be drawn in such sciences 
respecting cases of a new kind, by processes which bring those 
cases under old inductions, do they become deductive, and are 
open to receive the aids attendant on this method. Thus, 
when Kepler announced his three laws of planetary motions, 
astronomy could not be called deductive. The laws them- 
selves pointed to no inference below them, unless movement 
in an elliptical orbit a fact already ascertained by the in- 
ductive process which led to them. For the rest, they left 
the science where they found it ; a mere mass of descriptive 
and statistical details, without any common bond or con- 



246 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [fi. V. 

necting principle "between them. But when Newton showed 
that Kepler's laws were only partial inferences of a centripetal 
force, varying directly as the mass, and inversely as the square 
of the distance from the central power, he linked together a 
host of particular inferences, and established a principle which 
ultimately contributed to identify terrestrial with celestial 
gravity, and to account for all the motions, whether regular 
or anomalous, of all the bodies of the solar system. Astro- 
nomy, consequently, became at once eminently deductive: 
an arch was raised high in air which connected all the in- 
ferior stations which had been established, with the highest 
point of ascent. In the sweeping application of this prin- 
ciple to the deductive range of inference, no fact was left 
without its law, and no law but what became included in its 
wider proximate generalisation. Chemistry, on the other 
hand, though pointing to results which seem to promise a 
great extension and simplification of its complex laws, is still 
an experimental science, and is likely so to remain until 
some comprehensive principle like Newton's shall bridge 
over a vast number of the smaller inductions, and connect 
them through intermediate links with its most extensive 
inferences ; a principle, in a word, which should enable us 
to foresee the result of any new combination of elements 
previously untried, and to dispense with actual analysis in 
pronouncing at sight upon the ingredients of any new com- 
pound submitted for inspection. 

It is at this stage of the sciences, when they are throwing 
off their experimental character, that the principles of number 
and geometry are instrumental in widening their bases and 
imparting to them the simplicity and generality of their 
methods. When laws act according to some numerical 
quantity, or their effect takes place in space, and consequently 
involve motion and extension ; or when they exhibit variations 
of qualities, in exact correspondence to variations of quantity, 
the reasoning by which they are carried down to their indi- 
vidual limits may include among their premises all the 
theorems of mathematics from common arithmetic up to the 
calculus of variations. The application of such laws to particu- 
lar objects consequently becomes multiplied in a proportionate 
extent, and since the truths of number already ascertained 
appear infinite, there seems no boundary to the extension of 



C. I. 5.] LEGITIMATE USE OF HYPOTHESES. 247 

those sciences which admit of their influence but the intricacy 
of the problems to which the expression of their data lead. 
The prolific generation of new truths, which proceeds from the 
conjunction of a science already deductive with so potent an 
agent as number, may be witnessed in the indefinite exten- 
sion of the axioms of geometry, as soon as it was observed 
by Descartes and Clairaut, that every variety of position in 
points, directions in lines, or forms in curves or surfaces 
corresponded with a peculiar relation of quantity between 
one or two rectilineal co-ordinates in such a manner, that, if 
the law were known according to which those co-ordinates 
vary relatively to one another, every other geometrical pro- 
perty might be inferred relating to the quantity or quality of 
the line or surface in question. Thus it resulted that the 
axioms of geometry were taken out of mere lines and figures, 
and made co-extensive with the range of algebraical analysis, 
receiving an accession actual or potential of new truths cor- 
responding to every property of numbers which the progress 
of the calculus had discovered or might in future bring to 
light. 

To legitimise the use of this instrument, however, and to 
allow free scope for ratiocination, it is obvious, where par- 
ticular results are to be investigated, that the general 
principle must rest on prior inductive or deductive evidence, 
or at least be the fruit of a well matured hypothesis, whose 
consequences are able to be tested by a direct appeal to facts. 
Lagrange, for instance, could not have been warranted to 
deduce all the known properties of sound from the laws of 
the propagation of motion through an elastic medium, unless 
it had been previously established by experiment, that every 
variety of sound was consequent upon a distinct and definable 
variety of oscillatory motions among the particles of the air. 
Where such preliminary principle is not reached, we may 
indeed assume one, but the details of the hypothesis must 
not only be shown to accord exactly with all the facts which 
it presumes to explain, but it must likewise be proved that 
no other supposition could account for them. Thus it would 
not have been competent to Newton to assume that the moon 
was drawn to the earth by a force varying as the inverse 
square of the distance, simply because that ratio would allow 
him to accoun for the falling velocity of terrestrial bodies by a 



248 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

similar attraction and identity of gravity with the central force 
of the solar system. For in that case, he could not subse- 
quently have proved that no other supposition of a force was 
able to account for the law in question, save one extending to 
the moon, and proportional to the inverse square. In the 
proof, however, of the existence of the centripetal force, 
varying in the same ratio, the assumption with which he 
set out, viz., that the force which deflects a planet from its 
rectilineal course and makes it describe a curve round the 
sun, is a force tending directly towards the sun, was per- 
fectly legitimate. For he not only demonstrated that the 
hypothesis which the nature of the phenomena had suggested 
led by direct deduction to the inference of Kepler's laws, 
but he also proved that no other supposition could lead to 
them. Now Kepler's laws were facts resting on the strongest 
inductive evidence. The case, therefore, was completely made 
out, and the hypothesis became a law established by the 
method of difference. 

Owing to the limited extent of the resources on which the 
inductive processes depend, there is no greater instrument 
for the discovery of scientific truths than the formation of 
legitimate and well matured hypotheses. They allow pure 
reason to wing its flight through the realms of science eman- 
cipated from a servile attendance on facts, and to assert its 
prerogative over them by interweaving on its way that mul- 
tiplied and ever diverging thread of argument, through which 
a few inductions are connected with a labyrinth of laws, and 
nature coerced to reveal her mysteries, not one by one as in 
the case of tardy experiment, but to surrender up hosts at 
once as under the talismanic spell of a superior spirit. But 
in order to effect this object, the law must be so completely 
made out as to render it impossible, consistently with pre- 
vious inductions, for any other theory to be true. Reason 
must not do her work by halves. She must show that out 
of all possible suppositions which the case admits of, the 
theory which she produces, is the only one that exactly fits 
into the exact frame of the phenomena involved in the 
inquiry. Now this can hardly be, unless we have good 
grounds for the belief that the causes which the hypothesis 
assumes actually exist in nature, and perform a part in 
phenomena analogous to the laws we would render an ac- 
eount of. Thus, Newton correctly assumed that the planets 



C. I. 5.] FUNCTIONS OP HYPOTHESES. 249 

were attracted towards the sun by a force exerted in the 
centre of their orbits ; for, in every instance of similar 
motion around him, of slung stones, of balls, or wheels re- 
volving round a fixed point, he never failed to observe a 
material tie existing in that direction, and could not imagine 
that the bodies in question were retained in their circles by 
any other force. The hypothesis consequently involved what 
he designated a vera causa, or really existing cause producing 
effects in nature similar to the phenomena he contemplated, 
and limited the range of admissible suppositions to the 
various possible numerical relations between the variations of 
the distance and the variations of the attractive force. But 
when Descartes ventured to explain the planetary movements 
by the supposition of vortices acting in accordance with the 
known laws of rotatory motion, he attributed a series of 
effects to a cause which not only produced no analogous 
instance in nature, but whose existence could in no single 
case be demonstrated. Fictitious or random suppositions, 
even if they coincide with fact, cannot be supposed to ex- 
plain them. The inferences to which they lead, though, ever 
so plausible, will partake of the doubtful character of their 
origin, and as long as nature refuses to decide upon their 
existence, no striking illustration of their coincidence with 
actual facts can furnish more grounds for belief in their 
reality than a vague probability 1 . 

It is not, however, to be inferred, because we know of no 
case in which the cause assigned by the hypothesis produces 
the effect in question, that the supposition must be thrown 
away as idle, or regarded as absolutely incapable of being 
transformed into actual reality. Nature works so secretly, 
and produces even similar effects by agents occasionally so 
novel and diverse, that it would be the height of presump- 
tion to suppose that she could not operate by other causes 
than those of which we were already cognisant, and that 
the augmentation of future coincidences between the doubt- 
ful agent and the visible effects might not at some future 
stage transform the alleged hypothesis into fact. Even if 
this desirable result should not happen, yet if the hypothesis 
enables us to group together several laws under wider gene- 

1 These remarks may appear trite, but we refer the reader to b. i. 
c. iii. 4 for the baneful influence which such visionary hypotheses 
have exercised over science. 



250 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

ralisations, and sets experiment to work by suggesting 
modes of action analogous to what obtains in similar cases, 
it can hardly fail to promote the purposes of science, by 
bringing to light many facts which would have lain concealed 
were it not for the presumed proximate causes or ana- 
logies it had pointed out. The undulatory theory of light 
is one of the most favourable instances of hypotheses of this 
character. Considering the manner in which this theory 
ascribed the transmission of light to the vibratory motions of 
an elastic ether, Dr. Young was led to infer, from an analogous 
property of the transmission of sound through a similar 
medium, the beautiful law already adverted to of the inter- 
ference of the rays of light. But it is not to be lost sight of, 
notwithstanding this theory very plausibly accounts for all 
the known properties of light (and might consequently be 
supposed, should it not prove an actual statement of the 
proximate causes of optical phenomena, to be in some manner 
connected with them, or at least to run so close a parallel 
with them as to admit of some expression common to both), 
that the Newtonian theory, which sets out from an opposite 
point of view, is capable of rendering a no less rational 
account of all the facts embraced by the same science, if we 
admit the very reasonable supposition advanced by M. Biot, 
of a rotatory motion of the particles of light about their axes. 
These apparent agreements and clashing discrepancies ought 
to make us extremely chary in placing any strong reliance on 
theories, and refuse to regard any hypothesis as legitimate, 
at least where a cause is to be investigated, unless the cause 
assigned be already known to produce the effect in question, 
in which case the supposition will be limited to the precise 
mode of the dependence ; or, in other words, to the exact 
law according to which the effect varies with variations in the 
quantity of, or in relation to the cause. 

It may happen, indeed, that the supposition do not relate 
to causation, but only to the law of correspondence between 
facts, which being effects of one common cause, accompany 
each other in a certain fixed proportion. But as the laws of 
such variations are always open to precise measurements, 
there is no difficulty in bringing any hypothesis concerning 
them to the touchstone of facts, and thus pronouncing on 
their reality. It was known, for example, that the direction 



C. I. 0.] HYPOTHESES WHEBE INAPPLICABLE. 251 

of the line of refraction varied in a certain proportion with 
that of incidence, but the different false hypotheses by 
which Kepler sought to discover the law of the variation, 
were cast aside as soon as they were brought to the test of 
measurement, and none subsequently framed stood its ground 
for the same reason, until Willebrod Snell pointed out the 
angular proportion of the two rays, and M. Fresnil showed 
the law, together with that of the deviation of the extraordi- 
nary refracted ray, were necessary inferences from higher 
generalisations of an indisputable character. 

We need hardly say that it is indispensable to the two con- 
ditions already enumerated for transforming hypotheses into 
correct exponents of general laws, that they coincide with all 
the observed facts and inductions previously known which 
those laws include. Hence the comparison of the inferences 
to which they deductively lead, with the mass of established 
truths which every important theory embraces, is one of 
the most secure means of their verification. When the 
cause assigned by an hypothesis is already known to produce 
similar effects to those attributed to it, and is found to agree 
with all the facts included in its generalisation, it can hardly 
fail to be true, especially if the previous inductions arrived at 
be of a very diverse character. In such case the hypothesis 
will rest on the method of agreement, and the number of in- 
ductive inferences which it meets, will, therefore, be required 
to spring from such different quarters as to place it beyond 
doubt that any hypothesis, bearing the character of a vera 
causa, could fit them without being the actual agent in ques- 
tion. 

Hypotheses, however, are not available in all subjects. In 
many the general principle to be reached can only be gained 
by ascending inductively from the minor to the more general 
laws which it includes ; which ascent is not without its ad- 
vantage in enabling us to perceive how laws which we had 
previously regarded as unconnected become particular cases, 
either one of the other, or each of one still more general, and 
at length blend all together in the general principle, which 
is the object of our search. If chemistry ever pass the limits 
of an experimental science we fear it can only be by a process 
analogous to this. The proximate generalisations in which 
its complex laws are now commencing to resolve themselves 



252 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

are so unlike any agents which we could have suggested a 
priori, as to make the use of hypothesis on any large scale in 
this science visionary in the extreme. "Where the principles 
of a science are peculiar to itself, and exhibit no analogous 
laws, or facts to other sciences whose agents are more 
thoroughly understood, the condition of hypothesis is despe- 
rate. We have no choice hut to proceed in tardy gradation 
and toilsome ascent from law to law, until we trace out a 
general principle that will allow ratiocination its deductive 
range. 

It must, in fine, be noted, that in all cases of reasoning 
from general theories, whether obtained by the inductive or 
hypothetical process, every step of the ratiocination must be 
verified, if possible, by an appeal to facts ; since, even should 
the theory prove true, an error committed in pursuing it into 
detail would of course lead to wrong inferences, and inva- 
lidate the general statement in which it was expressed. An 
apposite illustration of the necessity of this step is to be found 
in Newton's Theory of Sound, which, although accounting 
correctly for the general principle, and leading to a numerical 
conclusion for the actual velocity of sound which agreed in 
general respects with reality, yet was found defective in an 
essential point when Lagrange looked more closely at the 
facts, owing to one or two important considerations being 
overlooked by his predecessor in pursuing the subject into its 
minor details. Hence, it is indispensable to the secure com- 
pletion of the deductive inferential process, that all the de- 
tails to which it leads should be verified by an extensive com- 
parison with observed facts. 

6. Empirical Generalisations ; Theory of Probability ; 
and Analogical Evidence. 

So far we have considered the methods by which concealed 
laws, or universal propositions, admitting of no exceptions, 
are hunted out and demonstrated: but in addition to the 
positive truths, of which natural philosophy is constituted, 
there are a large class of irregular occurrences in nature that 
depend on causes so variable and uncertain as to incapacitate 
science either from pronouncing on their anterior conditions 
or predicting their return in any determinate instance. These 



C. I. 6.] USE OF PROBABLE GENEBALISATIOITS. 253 

it is necessary to invest with as much scientific certainty as 
the case admits of. Though we cannot reclaim them entirely 
from the dominion of doubt, we may, nevertheless, ascertain 
the precise extent to which they are to be trusted : and, in 
many instances, raise important conclusions from them of a 
practical nature. 

The most favourable of these cases meet us in the shape 
of phenomena, whose concomitant occurrence is so frequent 
as to warrant the inference of some antecedent connexion 
between them, without affording us any secure ground for 
affirming the manner of its existence. Thus, the fact that most 
dark-eyed persons have dark hair; that most Swedes have light 
complexions ; that most stratified formations contain fossils ; 
that most mineral springs possess salt, and other coincidences 
of a similar character, being the effects of latent conditions 
which are liable to be marred in particular cases by uncertain 
laws, do not present any ground on which science can erect 
a proposition of more than probable universality, The time 
may arrive when the condition, both of their occurrence and 
failure in every known case, will be traced to the action of 
laws of a distinctive character. At least, the present advance 
of science is raising many similar coincidences out of the 
category of empirical generalisations, to the rank of scientific 
truths : but as fast as science proceeds in this direction it 
brings to light other coincidences of like nature ; so that it is 
never likely the philosopher will lack occasion to apply them 
in evidence, or that cases will not continue to occur in which 
they alone will constitute the only landmarks by which he 
can guide his way. 

Now, it is obvious that until the conditions on which sucli 
coincidences depend are in whole or part laid bare, that we 
can place no further reliance on them than simple experience 
warrants. If we have observed that nine Swedes out of every 
ten have light complexions, the probability that the next 
Swede we meet will possess that feature will of course 
be in the same proportion. There are, however, some em- 
pirical generalisations whose anterior conditions are in 
some degree known, and whose truth, therefore, admits of 
prediction from another source. Tor example, it may be 
ascertained that most Prussians are arithmeticians, not only 
from personal observation and the reports of travellers, but 



254 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

also from the fact of government schools existing in that 
country, to which every parent is obliged to send its offspring 
for a certain period, and in which the science of number is 
taught. The approximation to universality may consequently 
be easily calculated, without depending on a single result of 
experience, by allowing for the casualties of sickness and 
incapacity, within reasonable limits of error. Where the 
marks of the individual coincidence are latent, as in the latter 
case, we can sometimes ascertain whether the particular in- 
stance of the generalisation is included under it, by other 
marks which lead to its recognition. Thus, were it required 
to be known that a particular witness in any case was an 
instance of the empirical proposition that most men speak 
truth, we need only ascertain his general character, and the 
bearings of his testimony on his own interest, to make up 
our minds with sufficient certainty on the subject. 

Where the coincidence, however, is so rare as to create 
doubt as to its dependence on any recognised law, or to 
lead us to attribute its origin to mere casualty, notwith- 
standing a similar rule holds, it is necessary here to point 
out some particular cases of its application. Suppose, for 
example, the object of inquiry be the connexion of rain 
with a particular wind; it is not sufficient to observe 
the number of times this phenomenon occurs with one 
wind more than another, but we must also take into 
account the relative proportion of periods in which the other 
winds blow. If a west wind blows twice as often annually as 
an easterly wind, which is the case in England, we have no rea- 
son to infer that rain co-exists with the former wind through 
some law common to both, which does not obtain in the latter, 
simply because it rains twice as often with the first wind 
as with the last. But if it rain more than twice as often, 
we may conclude that there is some cause in nature tending 
to produce both rain and a westerly wind, or that a westerly 
wind has itself some tendency to produce rain. But should 
it rain less than twice as often, we may draw, for the contrary 
reason, a directly opposite inference. Hence, if we pursue 
the inference which points to some kind of connexion be- 
tween a particular wind and rain, we generally find the cause 
to lie in the nature of the earth's surface over which the 
wind passes ; those which have a long tract of water to sweep 



C. I. 6.] CASUAL AGENTS HOW ELIMINATED. 255 

over, as the south-westerly, being generally accompanied 
with wet ; while easterly winds are dry, on account of the 
arid continents which prevail in that direction. But as we do 
not know how far these causes affect the phenomena in ques- 
tion, or how much they are assisted or marred by other 
causes, unless by experience ; the coincidences they exhibit 
can only be regarded in the light of an empirical law, and 
their effects predicted within a proximate degree of exactness 
by the method already given. 

The largest number of empirical generalisations embrace 
those phenomena which are conjointly the result of law and 
casualty, or in which the effects of casual conjunctions of 
causes are habitually blended with the affects of a constant 
cause. To ascertain the precise effect that ought to be 
ascribed to the cause invariably acting, as it is impossible to 
proceed according to the ordinary method of eliminating 
the action of the inconstant agents, our only resource 
is, to observe the variations which arise from their combina- 
tion with the constant cause, and strike an average of the 
mean result. Should the trials prove sufficiently numerous 
as to include all the various states in which the capricious 
causes enter into combination with the invariable one, any 
further repetition of the experiments will only exhibit the 
same fluctuations, reducible to the same fixed average ; so 
that we cannot go astray, if we assign the mean point at- 
tending all the sets of experiments to the presence of the 
constant agent alone capable of producing it, while we attri- 
bute the oscillations about it, to the casual influences which 
modify its action. For example, the state of the barometer 
at any particular period depends upon the air's gravity, 
which is liable to be modified by a multitude of capricious 
agencies, such as clouds, rarefaction, evaporation, and the 
like ; but if the fluctuations of the quicksilver be regularly 
noted, they will be found to be reduced to a small number, 
periodic in their occurrence, and constantly oscillating about 
a certain fixed point. The conclusion, consequently, is irre- 
sistible, that the mean height is to be attributed to the 
ordinary gravity of the atmosphere, and the periodic fluctua- 
tions to the daily interference of some constant agent with 
ita natural density ; which, on examination, proved to be the 
rarefaction of the air, occasioned by the increase of tern- 



256 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

perature as the day advances. The inconstant fluctuations 
were then set down to the inconstant agents which pro- 
duced them. It is by such observations we are enabled to 
ascertain the sun's medium heat at any point of the earth's 
surface, and the exact level of the sea on any particular 
coast, or the height at which the water of the ocean would 
stand if undisturbed by winds, waves, or tides. We also 
afford an example of the same method when we repeat an 
experiment, in order to escape the unavoidable errors of each 
individual experiment, by taking the mean of the different 
results. 

From the discovery of the cause of the periodic fluctua- 
tions in the barometer, it will be seen, that when we are not 
aware of the presence of a constant cause in the anterior 
conditions of the effect, it may be discovered by striking a 
similar average of the mean result. For in that case, if the 
effects of the different causes do not cancel each other, but 
continually oscillate about a certain fixed point, we may infer 
the presence of an invariable antecedent among the anterior 
conditions, and detect that agent by some of the scientific me- 
thods already treated of. In this manner loaded dice may be 
discovered. For if, after a sufficient number of throws, we do 
not find the average of the particular results to balance each 
other, but exhibit a preponderance in favour of some particular 
throw, we may infallibly infer that some constant cause is act- 
ing in favour of that particular throw, and the precise amount 
of its influence. Hence we may conclude, with the same de- 
gree of assurance, an invariable agent to be absent among 
the anterior conditions when the average result is zero, and 
attribute each individual instance of the effect to pure 
casualty. But in these cases it remains to be determined, 
firstly, considering the average results of the coincidences of 
a sufficient number of trials, or the anterior cases possible, 
what is the amount of probability with which a particular 
instance may be inferred ; and, secondly, with what amount 
of probability, in the case of several causes to explain a 
given effect, but of the presence of which in this particular 
case nothing is known, may this effect be assigned to any 
one of these causes. 

The principles on which these problems depend for solu- 
tion are laid down in a refined branch of mathematical 



C. I. 6.] DOCTB1NE OF PEOBABILITY. 257 

inquiry, called the doctrine of probabilities, and may thus be 
summarily stated 1 : the probability in favour of the occur- 
rence of any particular instance out of the antecedent pos- 
sibility of a multitude of others is, in the ratio, between the 
number of cases in which the event occurs, and the sum of 
all the cases, including those in which the event occurs, and 
those in which it does not occur ; or when the anterior con- 
ditions are known to be equally possible, in the ratio which, 
the entire number bears to the single condition. Thus, in 
play at cross and pile, the probability of cross is one half, 
because it is found on an average that cross is thrown about 
once in every two throws ; whereas in the cast of a die the 
probability of ace is one-sixth, because in every hundred 
throws ace will be found to comprise one-sixth of the 
number. Secondly, the probability that the effect was pro- 
duced by any one of the unknown causes which might have 
been in operation, is, in the ratio of the probability of the 
cause, multiplied by the probability that the cause, if it 
existed, would have produced the effect. Suppose, for example, 
that a woman was found drowned in low water : if the spot 
lay on any part of the sea-coast, three possible causes suggest 
themselves as the only agents by which the circumstance 
could be produced. First, the person slipping off" the beach 
in a state of stupor or intoxication, and not having sufficient 
self-control to recover herself; or falling in while the tide 
was sufficiently high to drown her: secondly, the being 
drowned at sea, and subsequently cast ashore : thirdly, an 
act of violence, by which she was detained under water until 
suffocated. Now, if the woman was seen a few hours pre- 
vious, perfectly rational, proceeding, during the ebb of the 
tide, in the company of a man in the direction of the locality 
where her body was discovered, and if a shriek was heard 
shortly afterwards in the neighbourhood whence they had 
proceeded ; if, in addition, it could be proved that the man 
had been recently engaged in violent altercations with the 
woman in question, a strong case of probability, almost 
amounting to circumstantial evidence, would be made out in 
favour of the cause last mentioned. The second cause would 
be put out of court ; the only doubt left in the case being that 
created by the first supposition that she had strayed some 
distance from her attendant, and having fallen into the sea 
1 Essai PhUosophique sur les Probabilites, par Laplace, pp. 18, 19. 

8 



258 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

during a fit, perished before he could reach, her ; a supposi- 
tion which, remaining circumstances taken into account, is 
hardly appreciable, when compared with the culminating pro- 
babilities on the other side of the question. 

In the first case the causes to which the effect could be 
attributed were neither equally likely to have existed, nor 
equally certain to produce the effect. Had the woman been 
attacked with epilepsy, for the first time in her life, the pro- 
bability that the fit would have thrown her on the beach, is 
much stronger than it should have caused her to be immersed 
in the sea ; and even in the latter case, the probability that 
she should have been drowned before her companion reached 
her, is fainter still. The first cause, therefore, is made up of 
a series of very faint probabilities, which weaken each other 
in multiplied proportion, while the last cause admits only 
of one probability, and that, when blended with the adjacent 
circumstances, of a very strong character 1 . 

There are two other cases of the second theorem of very 
common application in judicial and scientific inquiry, viz., 
where the supposed possible causes, though equally certain to 
produce the given effect, are not equally certain to have existed 
in the case in question ; and where their existence is equally 
certain, without being, under the circumstances, equally likely 
to have produced the effect. But in these cases, the proba- 
bility in favour of any one cause will, of course, only lie in the 
ratio of their unequal probabilities. Thus, if one cause existed 
twice as often in nature as another, that is, occurred two hun- 
dred times where the other has only existed one hundred, and 
that one or the other must have existed where a certain effect 
has been produced, the probability in favour of the more fre- 
quent cause being the agent in question would be in the ratio 
of two to one, which is the ratio of their antecedent proba- 
bilities. Suppose, on the other hand, that the causes, though 
equally frequent, are not equally likely to have operated in 
one particular case ; that, for example, out of three times 
that one cause occurs, it produces the effect twice for the 

1 It may be in the recollection of the reader that the probabilities on 
the side of the last cause were so culminating as to lead the jury to 
convict Mr. Kirwan, whose case is here summarily stated; but that the 
extreme penalty of the law was subsequently commuted, on account of 
the slight element of doubt that still remained in favour of the first 
supposition. 



C. I. 6.] ANALOGICAL EVIDENCE. 259 

other's once, it is obvious that the antecedent probability in 
favour of the more frequent cause will be as before, in the 
ratio of two to one. The third case is but a compound of 
these two, where the unequal probabilities of each set of 
causes are multiplied or compounded together, and the 
balance struck in favour of the greatest probability. 

Another class of inferences, which lie equally out of the 
range of direct scientific methods, and rest to a great extent 
on probable evidence, are those which we draw concerning 
the state of nature in circumstances, times, and localities, to 
which our observations have not extended, either through 
the durability which nature manifests throughout all her 
works, or from her tendency to bring about similar effects by 
similar agencies, and to work out her ends by designs which 
leave no arrangement half completed, or void of the object 
it was intended to meet. For example, from the fact that 
the sea has gained one hundred yards on the Sussex coast 
within the last century and a half l , we conclude that it will 
continue to advance in the same proportion in succeeding 
years. Again, because day and night on our globe depend on 
the periodical passage of the spectator into and out of the 
earth's shadow, consequent on the earth's rotation and the 
illuminating property of the sun, we conclude the same phe- 
nomenon occurs with the other planets, which also revolve 
on their axes, and possess the sun's light in similar degree. 
In like manner, because the earth has never swerved out of 
its orbit, or exhibited any oscillations in its course destructive 
of its present internal economy, since the memory of man, 
we find no difficulty in believing it will continue to preserve 
the same beautiful order throughout all coming time. It is 
also no uncommon thing to draw analogies between the con- 
dition of other planets and this earth, with a view to obtain 
evidence of the nature of their inhabitants and their internal 
structure. 

Now each of these, and similar cases of inference, are to 
be received with different degrees of probability, according 
to the amount of evidence in each case, and the limits 
of time and space to which each inference extends. It 
is obvious that with regard to the succession of day and 

1 The town of Brighton of Elizabeth's era is now deep enough 
under the waves, and the erosion of the sea on the adjacent cliffa is 
noticeable every year. 

s2 



260 METHODS OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. [u. V. 

night in the remaining planets of the solar system, the sup- 
position is of the strongest character, bordering in fact on a 
complete induction; but if we extend it to other spheres 
which revolve on their axes, the inference descends lower in 
the scale of probability, since we are not certain, on account of 
their absence from our system, that their rotatory motion may 
be accompanied with the illuminating properties of another 
sun, so related to them as to cause the phenomenon in question. 
Again, it is an inference resting upon the strongest grounds 
that the sun will rise to-morrow, and the earth continue its 
usual daily round ; for both have continued to do so for the 
last five thousand years ; and we know the laws on which 
these occurrences depend have not exhibited the slightest 
degree of deterioration in the interval. The supposition, 
therefore, that these agencies will be counteracted to-morrow 
by some cause, the effects of which have not appeared for five 
thousand years, and whose approach we have not the slightest 
grounds to anticipate, so far transcends human conception 
as to be considered an impossibility. The effects of no cause 
that science can take into account, which had not been per- 
ceptible for five thousand years, could in one night grow up 
to such startling magnitude as to become overwhelming. 
But if we extend the inference from to-morrow to this day 
ten thousand years, the inference loses its conclusive value ; 
for there is nothing which is not perfectly consonant with 
our idea of causes to hinder the belief that a cause, which for 
five thousand years had produced no sensible effect, might 
produce a very considerable one at the end of ten thousand. 
In the inference from analogy, the strength of the proba- 
bility will depend upon the extent of ascertained resemblance, 
both compared with the amount of ascertained difference and 
taken in connexion with the extent of the unexplored region 
of unknown^properties. Thus, in ascertaining the amount of 
probability in favour of the moon being inhabited, we must 
not only take into account the general points of resemblance 
between it and the earth, in its being a solid, opaque, and 
nearly spherical body, containing active volcanoes, and re- 
ceiving heat and light from the sun in about the same quantity 
as the earth, and revolving on its axis ; but we must consider 
its comparatively smaller dimensions, and the differences it 
exhibits in having its surface more unequal, and apparently 
volcanic throughout in having no atmosphere sufficient to re- 



C. II. 1.] STJEVET OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. 261 

fract light no clouds, and therefore inferentially no water; and 
strike the balance according as the resemblances or differences 
predominate which bear upon the subject for decision. If 
mere point of similarity between the moon's and the earth's 
internal economy were in question, it is obvious, according 
to the above observations, the probabilities would about 
balance each other. But when we consider that some of the 
discrepancies in the moon refer to those objects which are 
found indispensable to animal life on our globe, we must 
conclude that if inhabitants do exist in the moon, the 
conditions on which their life depends differ considerably 
from those which obtain on the earth. There are, however, 
other bodies in the solar system, between which and the 
earth there is a much closer resemblance, which possess an 
atmosphere, clouds, and water, and which exhibit strong 
indications of snow in the Polar regions ; while as the ascer- 
tained differences only refer to their average light and heat, 
their velocity of rotation and intensity of gravity, and similar 
unimportant circumstances, the argument of analogy pre- 
sents a striking preponderance on the side of an internal 
disposition of parts analogous to the earth, and in favour of 
their being similarly inhabited. Nevertheless, when we con- 
sider the immense distance of these planets, and contrast the 
infinite number of properties they possess, of which we are 
entirely ignorant, with the few we know, we must confess this 
probability dwindles down to an almost inconceivable value. 

CHAPTEE II. 

METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. 

1. Nature of the Moral Sciences. In what respect their 

Methods differ from the Physical. 

WE intend to devote this chapter to a succinct analysis of 
those methods by which truths are reached, appertaining to 
the social, mental, and spiritual constitution of man, in con- 
tradistinction to those which belong to the physical world. 
The subjects of these methods not only differ from those 
comprised in the last chapter by the whole diameter of mind 
and matter, but are hardly at less variance with each other. 
The two great branches of the spiritual sciences, theology 
and ethics, being exclusively founded on revealed truths, and 



2G2 METHODS OF THE MORAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

the universal principles of the natural law, are directly 
amenable to the geometrical or abstract deductive method, 
which, from a few aphorisms or salient propositions, deduces 
the complexity of truths of which those sciences consist ; 
while sociology comprises a group of sciences depending for 
the most part on the action of men on circumstances, and 
the action of circumstances on men, the laws of which can 
by no means be learned a priori, but must be gleaned from an 
accurate examination of the past, and referred as a kind of 
axiomata media to the higher principles of human nature. 
Hence the methods of this division of the subject referring 
to past sequences between successive stages of phenomena, 
are very closely allied to those of physical inquiry ; while 
those, like theology and ethics, appertaining to inferences 
from laws already discovered, which admit of no modifying 
or neutralising forces, but demand ubiquitous enforcement, 
are open at once to the sweeping range of direct deduction 
in its most obvious and least intricate form. Such sciences 
do not comprise relations between successive phenomena, 
but mere interpretations of universal formulas to meet 
every variety of case which the intellect may devise for their 
application. 

Mental science, or psychology, is another department of 
this division, [the laws of whose sequential phenomena for 
the most part are also to be gleaned from experience ; but 
whose co-existing principles are obtained by a deep analysis 
of the individual consciousness, and educed by deductive se- 
quence out of the primordial elements of the human mind. The 
former branch of psychology is connected as an art with edu- 
cation ; the latter with the inferential process, which, true to 
its a priori character, was matured 1 as soon as the human 
intellect began to exercise the reflex principle ; while educa- 
tion, depending on experience, is daily adding to its past 
results. This science consequently is open to receive the 
double aids of the experimental and abstract deductive 
methods, though little has yet been done, however much 
may have been attempted, to harmonise the truths collected 
from these two sources 3 . 

Legislation, which belongs to the sociological branch, is not 
amenable to the corresponding method, its leading principles 

1 By Aristotle. - Dugald Stewart's Philosophy of the Human 

Mind is the leading work of this character. 



C. H. 1.] CONNEXION OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. 263 

being deduced from the highest ethical laws, or rather being 
so many practical inferences from those laws, to suit the 
various occasions which arise for their application in civil 
society. As such they are strictly amenable to the abstract 
deductive method, and were, in fact, so intended to be 
treated by Lord Bacon in the heads of his fountains of 
equity 1 . 

These sciences, so apparently diverse, have a close affi- 
nity to each other. Ethics with psychology, forming by their 
conjunction the science of human nature, may be said to 
stand in the same relation to the sociological sciences as 
mechanics to astronomy. They comprise the simple law of 
which the latter sciences only afford the concrete exemplifi- 
cation in all the diversity of circumstances in which human 
nature has been placed. The highest results of the socio- 
logical sciences are therefore only automata media, or laws 
derived from the fundamental principles of ethics and psy- 
chology, and when unresolved into them, must be regarded as 
so many unverified and consequently empirical generalisa- 
tions. Legislation is only a similar offshoot of the natural 
law ; and since human nature, which includes the whole, is 
but a direct emanation from the Deity, theology may be 
said to be the fountain, or parent source of the rest. 

While, however, there exist this close relationship between 
the several groups of these sciences, they present, by no means, 
a state of finish proportionate to their rank ; nor, until the lead- 
ing branches are in a more forward state, can we anticipate 
any large development of the laws of the complex phenomena 
to which they lead. While the science of mechanics was in 
its infancy, astronomy, which presents only a concrete exem- 
plification of its laws, could not propound a single generali- 
sation to be depended upon with any degree of assurance ; 
and while the laws of mind are for the most part obscure or 
uncertain, we cannot rely upon any axiom that sociology may 
furnish beyond the instances in which its truth has been 
observed. The moral sciences, instead of being developed 
according to their rank in the scale, owe their expansion 
more or less to the extent of the a priori element in them, 
those depending on experience being the slowest in pro- 

De Augmentis, b. vii. Bacon had, however, during his solicitor- 
ship, written a treatise oil English laws in exemplification of the in- 
ductive method. 



264 METHODS OF THE MORAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

gress and the most tardy of appearance. While ethics have 
reached a high degree of perfection, the laws of mind are a 
blank ; while legislation has emulated ethics in extent of re- 
finement, the science of social progress has hardly burst from 
its shell. 

Combined with the disadvantages produced through the 
absence of proportionate development between the higher 
and lower groups of the moral sciences, there arises the 
startling anomaly of the widest diversity of opinion between 
large masses of men, even with regard to the fundamental 
axioms and derivative principles of those which are in then* 
more advanced stage. In physics this is never the case with 
sciences that have advanced beyond the empirical stage. In 
astronomy, indeed, there are a few temerous enough to con- 
front the Newtonian mechanics, but with the generality of 
civilised communities the Principia is taken as a correct 
exponent of the truths it endeavours to demonstrate, and 
this to so universal an extent, that the philosopher who rises 
to impugn them, succeeds in nothing but the demonstration 
of his folly 1 . With theology and ethics, and even poli- 
tical economy, one of the sociological branches, the case is 
far otherwise. Every person thinks himself at liberty to 
propound what opinions he chooses concerning these sub- 
jects ; and, unless he belong to a certain school whose tenets 
on the leading points he accepts as irrefragable, every new 
writer generally sets out with the Cartesian principle of 
pulling down whatever has been previously erected, and 
clearing the ground for a new structure upon foundations 
for the most part at variance with those assumed by his pre- 
decessors. If his labours are characterised by systematic 
thought and bold flights of genius, he also succeeds in esta- 
blishing a school, and instead of advancing the science upon 
which his mind has been concentrated one step onward, he 

1 The censure in the text only applies to those who admit the reality 
of celestial phenomena as implied both in the Ptolemaic and Coperni- 
can systems, while they ignore the superstructure which has been 
raised upon them by Newton and his successors. Of course, with re- 
spect to those who, like Bishop Berkeley and the present Cardinal 
Archbishop of Lyons, deny or throw doubt on the reality of the New- 
tonian premises on purely metaphysical grounds, the author ventures 
no reproof, though he respectfully adduces the reasoning in b. v. c. iv. 
3, as a complete answer to what has been advanced on this side of the 
subject. 



C. II. 1.] DIFFICULTIES OF THE SUBJECT. 265 

has only increased the diversity of lights in which the same 
subject may be viewed. This divergence of opinion, between 
men of eminently scientific character, upon moral subjects has 
introduced among the unlearned classes of society the same 
fluctuating and conflicting views, and led them to consider 
moral topics, as much open to their lucubrations as the most 
inferior subjects upon which their minds can be employed. 
A man who would deem his ignorant neighbour mad were 
he to speculate in sober earnest on the higher principles of 
acoustics or thermology without knowing anything about 
their elementary properties, pays him the greatest atten- 
tion when he chooses to discourse on the highest functions 
of government, or ventures to propound the principles by 
which churches and empires should be governed. On every 
subject respecting man, religion, and society, conceit of 
knowledge still reigns without the reality, and if Socrates 
were in this age to descend into our market-places he would 
encounter the same dogmatic assurance as in his own. 

Such clashing variety of opinion upon the most elementary 
principles of the different moral sciences at once arises out of, 
and is daily increased by, the obscure character of psycholo- 
gical laws and the capricious action of human volition. Phy- 
sical laws may often be obscure, but their effects admit of 
certain calculation ; and the order of sequence, being constant 
and inevitable when once discovered, enables us not only to 
predict the future, in any given instance, but also to recon- 
struct the past. Astronomy, for instance, will afford us data 
for calculating the precise conditions of the heavenly bodies 
at any distant epoch, already elapsed, or in the womb of 
futurity, and that to so great an extent that even were all 
the astronomical archives burnt they could be completely re- 
placed, and the past history of the heavens entirely supplied by 
the observation of the present. But with moral phenomena 
the case is otherwise. Here the chief motive power is mind, 
and we are not only ignorant of the laws through which it mani- 
fests its agency, but the order of its production is so irregular 
that we can never reckon upon the precise quality or degree 
of its action. Were psychological laws discovered, at least in 
sufficient abundance to verify many inductive generalisations 
in sociological science, still there arises the question, in ex- 
tending those laws to future cases, of the exact force in which 
they will act. Now on this very hinge turns the fate of man 



METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

and the destinies of nations. No psychological revelations 
that man can expect to discover could have predicted the 
advent of those minds who have established religions, over- 
thrown empires, founded dynasties, pulled down altars, or 
reformed creeds. This class of minds are distributed over 
the masses of generations by no presumable law that we can 
discover, but in the most anomalous and confused manner. 
Occasionally their appearance is separated by centuries, 
sometimes by gaps of years ; now they come in clusters, and 
then they stand alone. But whenever they appear, revolu- 
tion of language and manners, creation and overset of insti- 
tutions follow ; conjoined states are erected into new nations, 
and distinct empires fused down into one. Hence were the 
laws of mind known, and the phenomena it manifests as sub- 
ject to the regular action of causation as the creatures of the 
material universe ; yet the uncertainty alone of the quality 
of the agent would render any calculation, founded upon them 
for any distance of time, chimerical in the extreme. 

Although it is a principle of our nature to assign to every- 
thing an efficient cause, yet so difficult is the task, in moral 
inquiries, of tracing any proportion between the apparent force 
of any moral causes we may select and their known operation, 
that we are often obliged to deliver up that operation to chance, 
or, more rationally, to the irresistible hand of the great Dis- 
poser. The death of a man at a critical juncture, his disgust, 
his retreat, his disgrace, have brought innumerable calami- 
ties on a whole nation ; a common soldier, a child, a girl at 
the door of an inn, have changed the face of fortune and 
almost of nature. The effects to which such slight incidents 
led, may, indeed, be traced through the intervening series of 
eventualities which generated the result, but these are of so 
casual and multifarious a character, and so much depend at 
every link upon the determining agency of the will, that to 
attempt to found upon them any conclusion of a scientific na- 
ture, either for future guidance or present application, would 
be a waste of thought. Such cases are never likely to happen 
again, and even were their occurrence possible, no power 
short of omniscience could enable us to grasp all the condi- 
tions upon which each step of the sequence would eventually 
depend, and forecast the result. The will, which is the deciding 
agent in such circumstances, is no doubt strongly influenced 
by motives, if not completely governed by them ; but we have 



C. II. 1.] OPERATION OF PREJUDICE. 267 

no power to calculate its action in a single individual under 
any trying circumstances, much less in cases where a thousand 
volitions are concerned. The rules of causation may hold, 
at least to an extent sufficient for the application of scientific 
methods, but we lack the power to get at the conditions upon 
which the effect depends. The task of diving into the human 
breast and tracing the crowd of agencies which are control- 
ling each volition, is even too great for its owner, who is often 
uncertain enough of the issue ; but the insuperable difficulties 
which hinder an external observer from grasping the same 
conditions, become multiplied in infinitesimal proportion. 

Even in subjects which have no relation to sequence, as 
theology and ethics, the irregular agency of the will is mani- 
fested in interfering with the inferential process and leading 
the mind to modify or oppose conclusions which are at war 
with its tendencies. Such speculations not being of a tan- 
gible nature, cannot be brought to any other test than that 
of pure reason ; and since it is the fate of great talents to be 
almost invariably accompanied with deep sensibilities, it oc- 
casionally happens that the strongest reason obeys the be- 
hests of some more predominating passion, in dethroning the 
true system and setting up a more convenient, but a false 
system in its place. The absence of close compact inference 
is easily supplied by ingenious sophisms and brilliant rhetoric ; 
feeling and interest is listed on the side of argument, and 
with the majority conviction is the result. When the tenets 
established by -such a method became fostered in subsequent 
ages by the associations of infancy and kindred, it is no 
marvel they should thrive and flourish so as to perpetuate, 
among the generations of vast communities, the opinions to 
which they gave rise. It is to such influences, combined 
with the action of the imaginative feelings, which these sub- 
jects very largely call into operation, that conflicting 
views on the more purely spiritual sciences are to be traced. 
It is simply because this class of the abstract sciences can 
only be built up by pure reason, that the generality of men 
who allow prejudice and imagination to interfere with the in- 
ferential process in them, are least able to decide between 
the rival claimants of orthodoxy. Could we, indeed, shut out 
human volition and the action of disturbing fancies, mankind 
would no more differ about the conclusions to be drawn from 
the primary elements of theology and ethics than with the de- 



268 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

ductions from geometrical postulates and definitions. "Were 
prejudice and feeling, on the other hand, let in upon the 
mathematical branch of these sciences, were it any one's 
interest to impugn some of the derivative principles of the 
calculus of variations, or did the overthrow of any proposi- 
tions of the higher geometry strongly administer to any 
party's gratifications, the world would not be long without a 
new system, of conic sections and a fresh doctrine of limits. 

Yet we are not to relinquish, on account of these disturb- 
ing influences and great obstacles, the erection of an impos- 
ing group of moral sciences, on grounds quite as solid as those 
which refer to the material world. Notwithstanding the socio- 
logical portion may not give 'us the same power to predict oc- 
currences without a cloud of conditions, they will help us to 
many generalisations of practical importance and theoretic 
value, affording a guide to the statesman in the control of 
communities, and throwing light, in the eyes of the philo- 
sopher, on the ultimate laws of human nature. Upon such 
generalisations, provided they arise from a wide induction of 
historical phenomena, and enable us to account deductively 
for any past occurrences to which they are capable of being 
applied, no cavil or doubt can arise. They can be brought 
to the touchstone of fact, and men cannot call in question 
what they see: while with regard to those subjects which 
admit of no such verification, but simply concern complex in- 
ferences from a priori data, we must rely on the variety of 
proof that correct reason is capable of receiving, and the in- 
consistencies which are the never failing attendants of erro- 
neous inference, for securing their derivative principles from 
error. 

2. The Sciences amenable to the Abstract Deductive Method. 
The Functions of the Cross-examining Blenches and the 
Negative Process. Examples of Scientific Praxis. 

The moral sciences may be divided into two large groups 
viz., those which consist of inferences drawn from a priori 
resources, and others which in conjunction with many 
branches of such inferences are raised out of generalisations 
drawn from an extensive examination of the past. The last 
group refers to coincidences between the order of succession,or 
to the laws by which one state of phenomena generate another, 



C. II. 2.] PRINCIPLES OF ETHICS. 269 

and is co-extensive with the sociological branch ; while the 
first comprises the conclusions our reason obliges us to infer 
from general principles, either co-existing within, or deli- 
vered to us from external authority ; in which case, the sphere 
of inference will extend over the ground from which we are 
led to infer the existence of such indubitable authority, and 
the fact that the revelations we receive come entirely from its 
hands. The proof, however, is a priori and deductive even 
throughout those links of it which deal with sequence be- 
tween a certain order of facts ; depending not on the causal 
tie between the facts themselves, but solely on the relation 
which these bear, or the point of view in which they may be 
considered, to the external authority, or to the co-existing 
principles, whether natural or revealed, which are said to 
have emanated from it. Now, such relation being decided 
by the rational principles of the intellect, the proof at this 
stage of the process is no less abstractedly deductive than 
when the legitimacy of the general propositions having been 
made out, we are only concerning ourselves with drawing 
inferences from them. 

The sciences which compose this group are evidently theo- 
logy, ethics, legislation, and that portion of psychology whose 
laws may be completely learned by a study of the co-existing 
laws of the mental constitution without reference to the de- 
pendence of one state of mind on another, or the connexion 
between antecedent states and the present, which, of course, 
involve generalisations from experience. The elementary 
principles of each of these subjects may be regarded as so 
many definitions, axioms, and postulates, from which the 
complete body of their respective truths are evolved by a 
process exactly identical with the geometrical method. For 
example, the primary data of ethics and legislation are 
certain irreversible and irrepressible convictions stamped on 
every breast, by which each human creature is urged to fulfil 
the destiny of his being, and preserve his faculties, appetites, 
and feelings which make up his individual constitution, in 
that healthy state of action and subordination which will 
most conduce to his own happiness and the welfare of others. 
Such convictions as admonish us to do injury to no man, to 
preserve our veracity, to submit our passions to the control 
of reason, and in general to abstain from actions which 
awake censure or shame, all which principles are co-existent 



270 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

with human nature, and compose the spiritual instincts which 
enter into its constitution. They comprise, in one word, the 
natural code by which, in compliance with the mandate of 
the Apostle, every man is bound to govern himself 1 . Some 
persons, indeed, may be found to deny the existence of such 
principles a priori, and resolve them into the mere creatures 
of conventionalism ; just as there are persons who will deny 
the existence of matter, or the commonest axioms of physical 
science ; but the generality of men in every position of life 
savage, civilised, or semi-barbarous bear witness to the in- 
digenous character of their origin. Now, it is in the appli- 
cation of these common principles to adjust the actions of 
man with relation to himself, his Creator, and his species, 
that ethics consists : so far as the violation of such prin- 
ciples, either in their ultimate or derivative form, interferes 
with the welfare of society, it is the business of legislation 
to take cognisance of their influence. But the process in 
either case is identical with the geometrical method. When 
we examine any particular question that may arise with a 
view to establish a new derivative proposition, we simply 
survey the relations which the case bears to the main prin- 
ciples and the subordinate ones already deduced from them, 
and cast up the result. Should a new theorem be demon- 
strated, the links of inference by which the previous pro- 
positions led to its establishment are brought into systematic 
connexion, and the new law takes its place in the series of 
constructed truths, and performs its functions in the gene- 
ration of others. 

Thus, were it required to solve the ethical problem whether 
any action is formally indifferent, it would be necessary to 
examine first in what good or evil consists, and then con- 
sider if there are any human actions which do not enter 
into either category 2 . But the first case is determined by 
the theorem previously established, that an act is good or bad 
according as it accords or conflicts with the natural law ; the 
sole point, then, for investigation is, whether any act can be 
realised without doing either. Now, as a preliminary step 
to the decision, we ought to distinguish everything which a 

1 "For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the 
things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law to 
themselves." Romans ii. 14. 2 Summa Theologia of St. Thomas 

Aquinas, pars. ii. sect. 1st, 2nd, and 3rd. 



C. II. 2.] THE NEGATIVE PROCESS. 271 

human act includes that we may know in how many ways an 
act is capable of being viewed in connexion with the natural 
law : first, there is the material thing done with its attendant 
circumstances ; secondly, the motive which incited the action. 
As to the material object, it is evident many acts do not come 
within the cognisance of the natural law. If we walk, or play 
an instrument, abstracting from the purposes which urge us 
to do these things, no good or evil can attach to the naked 
act itself : but if either be executed with a good or bad pur- 
port, the law is directly applicable, and will pronounce its 
sentence. The question, then, is narrowed to the simple 
case, whether any motive can be indifferent, which is easily 
determined in the negative by the consideration that man is 
bound to direct all his actions in harmony with the fixed 
constitution of things, and to do nothing through levity or 
without a rational motive. A conclusion, indeed, which is 
doubly corroborated by the Christian law, which exacts an 
account of every idle word and action 1 , and requires its fol- 
lowers to consecrate the intention of all their actions to the 
glory of the Supreme Being. 

The establishment, however, of such propositions do not 
end with direct proof: before they can be accepted as indu- 
bitable truths, it is necessary not only to demonstrate their 
certainty, but to show that every other mode of looking at 
the question is illusory. This, which is called the negative 
process, performs the same functions in moral evidence as 
mathematics do in the physical sciences, at least as far as 
verification is concerned, placing the demonstration beyond 
the shadow of doubt by the decided manner in which 
every objection is met, and by investing the proposition 
with double proof, viz., the direct, and the reductio per impos- 
sibile, which is so powerful in elementary geometry. Thus the 
proof of the intrinsic moral nature of man's actions, arising 
out of the natural law, is not only based on each one's indi- 
vidual consciousness, and the universal consent of mankind ; 
but it also rests on the fact that no other principle can be 
assigned which will account for it. For if such exist, it 
must be either the utility of society, or the free election of 
Providence, or the manichean principle of two antagonistic 
deities. The last supposition, implying a contradiction, is 
philosophically absurd ; the second is contrary to the attri- 
1 St. Matthew, xii. 26. 



272 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

butes of Q-od ; and the third is inadequate to explain the 
keen perception of right and wrong which is found among 
isolated savages, bound to each other by no links in the 
way of treaties and compacts. Hence all other possible 
cases being put out of court, the understanding bounds back 
to the direct proof with a confidence equal to that with which 
it embraces the strongest demonstration of physical science. 
Ethics are connected with theology, natural and revealed, by 
the principle which insists upon the worship of theDeity a law 
that is as irrepressible and fundamental as any in its category. 
Natural theology, however, to silence the cavils of atheists, 
proves the existence of the Supreme Being by the a priori 
argument that mechanism cannot exist without an artificer, 
and that the evidence of design is on so stupendous a scale 
in the universe as to require a Being of the grandest capacity 
to project it. The demonstration of His infinite attributes 
follows from the necessity of His existence as the fountain of 
being ; and consists of many diverging lines of argument, each 
strengthening one another and meeting in the same point. 
The negative process is also employed to prove there is no 
assumption which accounts for the existence of the universe 
apart from the Creator, without landing its maintainers in 
startling contradictions. Thus every step in this link of the 
proof is purely deductive, certain common principles being laid 
down, which we are compelled by the intellectual laws of our 
nature to accept as the conditions of the world's existence, 
from which are reasoned out successively the existence of the 
Deity and all the qualities with which His nature is endued. 
The other branch of proof by which His revealed will is esta- 
blished is similarly deductive ; it being assumed to be impos- 
sible that rational men could bear witness to certain truths 
and miracles which they knew to be impositions, or of which 
they were only half certain, with no other prospect of reward 
for their pains than punishment and death. This assumption 
rises out of the constitution of human nature. The case which 
it involves is sufficiently evident from history. There are, 
moreover, multiplied lines of inference corroborating the same 
point, all of a strictly a priori kind : such as, the existence of 
God being proved, the strong antecedent probability in favour 
of revelation, and the consonance of the doctrines taught 
with the natural attributes of Deity. As soon as the funda- 
mental tenets appertaining to revealed dogma are thus esta- 



C. II. 2.] EXAMPLE FBOM PALEY. 273 

Wished, the process of inference from them is quite of a 
similar character with the ethical deductions already de- 
scribed, and is amenable to the same verifications. With 
respect to the moral b'ranch of them, or Christian ethics, thia 
confirmation partakes of a duplicate character. For the 
moral doctrines of Christ are in unison with the natural law, 
and no inference from His teaching can be accepted which 
conflicts with any portion of that law either in its ultimate 
or in its derivative principles ; and every inference which 
cannot be shown to have a strict connexion with it, must be 
received with doubt, until resolved, like a complex law, into 
the higher principles of natural ethics, and shown to be a 
particular exemplification of them. 

Of the former kind of argument an example may be ad- 
duced from Paley. His thesis that the Christian ' religion 
came from God, is made to rest with respect to historic 
evidence on the premises that " a religion attested by 
miracles is from God," and that the " Christian religion is 
so attested 1 ." The minor proposition, about which only 
men are to cavil, is proved by a syllogism in Barbara : " Ail 
miracles attested by such witnesses as we have named are 
worthy of credit. The Christian miracles are attested by such 
witnesses ; they are therefore worthy of credit." The minor 
premiss of the latter syllogism is then divided into the seve- 
ral propositions of which it consists, each of which is esta- 
blished separately. In the first place, it is proved that the 
witnesses had no prospect but suffering from the nature of 
the case, because they were preachers of a religion unexpected 
and unwelcome to the Jews and the Gentiles. That they 
actually suffered, is proved from the testimony of the Jewish, 
Heathen, and Christian writers ; and that they voluntarily ex- 
posed themselves to suffering, rests on the authority of the 
same writers. In the second place, it is proved that what they 
suffered for, was a miraculous story ; by the nature of the case, 
as they could have had nothing but miracles on which to rest 
the claims of the new religion ; by the allusions to miracles, 

1 It is remarked by Dr. Whately that the minor of this syllogism 
was admitted, while the major was denied, by the Pagans; but as the 
case at present is reversed, Paley's argument goes to establish the 
minor premiss, about which alone in these days there is likely to be 
any question. Logic, Appendix, iii. 

T 



274 METHODS OF THE MOEA.L SCIENCES. [B. T. 

particularly to the Resurrection, both in Christian and profane 
writers, as the evidence on which the Christian religion 
rested. It is also shown by the same evidence that the 
miracles in attestation of which they suffered, were such as 
they professed to have witnessed. In the third place, it is 
proved that the miracles thus attested, are what we call the 
Christian miracles, by the nature of the case that it is im- 
probable that a new fiction should have replaced the original 
story ; by the incidental allusions of ancient writers, both 
Christian and profane, to accounts agreeing with those of 
the inspired writings ; by the credibility of the Scriptures, 
established by several distinct arguments, each separately 
tending to show that these books were, from the earliest 
ages of Christianity, well known and carefully preserved 
among Christians. Again, it is proved by similar premises, 
that the early Christians not only submitted to new rules of 
conduct, but that they did so in consequence of their belief 
in miracles wrought before them. 

The major premiss, that miracles thus attested are worthy 
of credit, Paley next proceeds to establish ; first, by the im- 
probability that men who could have avoided all their suffer- 
ings had they lived quietly, should have provoked the knife 
of the executioner, by pretending to have seen what they 
never saw ; that they should go about lying, to teach virtue, 
and persist, with a full knowledge of Christ's imposture, in 
propagating the frauds, which met with such reprisals as the 
crucifixion, and shed their blood in attestation of their reality : 
secondly, by the fact that no false story ever has been so at- 
tested ; which is shown by adducing the several stories that 
can be produced as parallels to the Christian, and proving 
either that they are not so attested, or that they are not pro- 
perly miraculous. Hence the minor of the leading syllogism 
is fully made out, and granting the major, which has been full}* 
conceded since the pretensions of magic have been exploded, 
viz., that a religion attested by miracles is from Grod ; the 
conclusion inevitably follows that the Christian religion came 
from God. 

To avoid unnecessary prolixity in the analysis of this argu- 
ment, we have left the obvious premiss in most of the syllo- 
gisms unexpressed, it not being needful in the analysis of any 
train of reasoning to express the implied premiss. When 
wanted to reduce the syllogism to its strictly technical form, 



C. II. 2.] ANALYSIS OF DEDTJCTIYE SEASONING. 275 

with a view to detect a lurking fallacy, tlie implied premiss is 
promptly suggested by the leading premiss and conclusion. 
In following out a process of this kind it is necessary to begin 
with the last point established, and, tracing the reasoning 
backwards, to examine on what grounds the inference is made. 
The assertion will be the conclusion, the grounds on which it 
rests, the premises. The premises must then be taken sepa- 
rately, and the grounds on which they rest examined, accord- 
ing to the plan we observed with the first conclusion. A 
premiss must have been used as such, either because it 
required no proof, or because it had been proved. In the 
former case it must either be self-evident, or universally 
admitted, or conceded by the opponents of the argument. 
In the latter it must be regarded as a new conclusion, de- 
rived from other assertions which are premises to it, which 
are to be examined in turn, and if found correct, treated as 
other conclusions derived from other assertions. If the 
train of reasoning be correct, the analysis will continue till 
the premises with which the whole commences are reached, 
which, of course, should consist of assertions requiring no 
proof; but if the chain be anywhere faulty some proposition 
will arise in the course of it, either assumed as self-evident 
or incorrectly deduced from other assertions 1 . 

1 The substance of the directions in the text are taken from the 
preface to Hind's Introduction to Logic. Dr. Whately exhibits the 
logical analysis of a course of argument in the form of logical division. 
Thus: 

[Ultimate conclusion.] 

ZisX 
proved by 



YisX Zis Y 

proved by proved by 







1 




A IB Y 
[suppose admitted.] 


ZisA 
proved by, &c. 


the argument that 


and by the 
th 


argument 
at 


SisX 
&c. 


YisB 
&c. 


CiaX 
&c. 


Yia C 
&c. 
T 2 



276 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. T. 

The branch of psychological science which falls under the 
head of the abstract deductive method, is the study of the 
structure of the intellectual constitution, with a view to 
ascertain the laws through which the different faculties 
manifest their statical agency, so far as the reasoning pro- 
cess is concerned, and the estimation of evidence in all its 
branches. These laws have been pretty extensively de- 
veloped, in the Organon of Aristotle, and the Kritik of Kant, 
who may be taken as fair exponents of the methods by 
which their highest generalisations have been reached, and 
the modes by which they are to be extended. No reflection 
upon experience, or analysis of scientific proof, enabled the 
Stagyrite to see the syllogism in the human mind, and point 
out the nineteen different ways in which men may naturally 
reason. He showed, from the necessity of the case, that 
every conclusion required two premises ; that the three pro- 
positions concerned were only capable of a limited number 
of legitimate combinations ; that such combinations involved 
distinct qualities in the propositions themselves, which arose 
out of the relation of the subject with the predicate ; and 
that the nature of the subject and the predicate implied the 
logical properties of terms. The mode by which Aristotle 
constructed in a few weeks the system which has employed,, 
and is destined to employ, men's thoughts for decades of 
centuries, was precisely identical to the method by which 
the early mathematicians ran up the splendid series of 
proofs which constitutes the lower geometry. Descartes in 
a similar manner established his methods, and Kant con- 
nected the derivative laws of the old philosophy and the new, 
with the ultimate principles of the intellect. No attempt 
has been made to expound the laws of the imaginative faculty, 
by seizing one or two of its elementary principles, and making 
them the parent source of the rest. Yet there is the same 
mutual dependence between their functions as exist between 
those of the reasoning faculty, and they only lack some genius 
rivalling Aristotle in systematic and ratiocinative power to 
yield up similar results. 



C. II. 3.] SCIENCE OP HUMAN NATUBE. 277 

3. The Laws which regulate successive states of Mind. 
The Sociological Sciences. The Concrete Deductive Method, 
direct and inverse. 

The remaining group of moral sciences concern the laws 
of sequence between phenomena, whether individual or social. 
In the former they regard the laws which generate particular 
mental states, either with regard to the entire mind, or only 
with reference to some of its dependencies. For instance, 
the law of association of ideas unfolds the series of relations 
existing between different classes of thoughts and feelings, 
which make one suggestive of another : as such, this law is only 
one of the hundred operating agencies by which the -mind is 
constantly modified and gradually urged from one state into 
another. Each of these single agencies work according to 
constant laws, though their force varies in different persons. 
Thus it is a law of memory, that a page' is sooner committed 
by learning it by section, alternately closing the book and 
looking at the passage only to catch the escaped word, than 
to attempt to grasp the whole at once by keeping the eye 
continuously on the sheet ; yet the precise force with which 
the law operates is never found exactly the same in two 
persons. The affections, appetites, feelings, and passions 
have each also distinct principles of action as well as the 
intellect, and though capable of being modified by many 
circumstances, manifest invariably certain tendencies, which 
are capable of being singly calculated within certain limits 
of error. Now, besides the laws peculiar to themselves, each 
of these phenomena have some properties in common. For 
instance, it is a law that the force by which each of these 
powers act increases in quick progression the power of its 
action, so that if any one be indulged to the exclusion of the 
others, that one is sure to predominate over the mind. It is 
the study of these agents, both singly, and in unison with 
each 'other ; their peculiar together with their common pro- 
perties ; the uses for which nature designed them, and their 
effects both in ourselves and others, that constitutes the 
science of human nature in its largest extent ; a study how- 
ever which, apart from writers of fiction, seems not to have 
engrossed any portion of the attention of mankind. We 
have no treatises on the passions or affections, yet the special 



278 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

treatment of each of these in the various points of view we 
have marked out, is indispensable to a complete system of 
education, and an accurate knowledge of the development of 
society. 

It is obvious, from the complex nature of the phenomena, 
that we have no other mode of tracing the effects of the 
agents we have considered, in any given case, than by follow- 
ing out their laws singly, by comparing their relative strength, 
by taking into consideration the circumstances concerned, and 
forecasting the result deductively. It is precisely a case 
of the composition of causes considered in the last chap- 
ter, where the result, comprising a crowd of clashing and 
strengthening forces, baffles every attempt to unravel the 
knot of effects and to assign to each its separate cause, some 
of which are entirely neutralised in the action, and others 
blended into one result. The only obstacle to so complete a 
prediction of the result as would attend a similar investiga- 
tion in mechanical philosophy, is the uncertainty generated 
by the action of the will, and the impossibility of estimating 
all the influences which may direct its action in any given 
case. Nor can we expect the progress of the science of 
human nature will ever place us in so favourable a condition. 
All our data, consequently, must express tendencies, not certain 
effects ; and notwithstanding the inferences built upon them 
will not warrant unconditional prediction in any case, they will 
be of eminent importance as a guide to the knowledge both 
of any person's conduct, under certain circumstances, and of 
the special training required to produce certain habits of cha- 
racter. In some instances, erroneous or incomplete data 
may lead us into wrong conclusions, but these are not to be 
set down to the subject's unfitness to be invested with 
scientific formula, but simply to wrong calculations. "We 
may rely upon the fact that causes are at work in instances 
which appear the most complex and casual, and though com- 
pounding their results, acting according to invariable law, 
whose effects, were we in possession of all the data, are 
capable of being computed a priori, even throughout their 
most intricate combinations. 

Nor are the moral sciences alone in this uncertain predica- 
ment. There are elements in meteorology, in the motions of 
fluid masses, and the laws of the tides, which must always 



C. II. ~3.] PROBLEM OP ETHOLOGY. 279 

remain unfathomable, and for which allowance must conse- 
quently be made in the calculations which compute their 
effects in any given instance. We know, for example, the 
great operating causes at work in the production of the tides, 
and are able, under certain conditions, to compute their 
general effects, even in unknown quarters of the globe ; but 
if precise accuracy be required, the calculation wSl be of no 
avail in any single instance. For there are causes of a local 
or casual nature, such as the configuration of the bottom of 
the ocean, the indentations of shores, the direction and 
strength of the wind, which it is impossible to foresee, and 
which are always sure to interpose, and in some single cases 
may altogether conspire to defeat the result. In meteorology, 
again, the chief proximate operating causes, and the laws 
which regulate their influences, are so unknown that it is im- 
possible to predict the order of antecedence and consequence 
between its phenomena with more than a very moderate de- 
gree of probability. Yet no one doubts that tidology is a 
science, and that meteorology is destined to become one ; or, 
in other words, that all the phenomena which these sciences 
embrace are not generated by special causes, which act 
throughout all their combinations in accordance with in- 
variable laws, and that the general action of such causes is 
sufficiently cognisable to the human intellect to admit of 
being predicted within limits of time and space wide enough 
to leave a broad margin for the realisation of purposes of 
practical utility. Nothing further is claimed for the science 
of human nature, and, indeed, hardly anything further is re- 
quired. If we are able to foretel from a general examination 
of any individual character what will be his conduct in any 
given emergency, or what course of discipline will generate 
certain states of mind, or what principles of action, in the 
generality of instances, are at work in the production of the 
varieties of habits, tempers, and characters, we need no 
further theoretical knowledge to produce results of the 
greatest practicable importance to our species. 

It is not through any belief that such knowledge is unat- 
tainable that the present backwardness of this science is 
owing, but chiefly to the unscientific methods by which men 
have sought to obtain it. They have generalised from the 
smallest empirical data, and rushed into the highest regions 



"280 METHODS OF THE MOBAL SCIENCES. [_B. T. 

of art before drawing out, or having any definite conception 
of, the propriety of the theory which the art involved. 
Having stumbled upon the agreement of certain states of 
mind with a certain- anterior routine of practice, they inquire 
no further, but chain themselves down to the system which 
embodies the result. This crude generalisation of passive 
experience is at the bottom of all our systems of civil, of mili- 
tary, and ecclesiastical education, and constitutes the prescient 
wisdom of those who are said to be observant of character 
and profoundly read in the world. Without any idea of the 
action of the individual laws at work, or correct insight into 
the complex agencies which concur to the production of the 
effect they have the temerity to predict, they consult the 
note-book of their former experience, and decide according 
to the superficial aspects of the case. This, to draw an illus- 
tration from a science whose methods are inevery respect 
analogical, is precisely as if a man, without any knowledge 
of the internal structure of the human body, were to con- 
struct a system of therapeutics, or to predict simply from 
his past experience the effects of a certain medicine on any 
constitution of body. If it is a universal complaint, that the 
treatment of many disorders in the system is founded on 
mere empiricism, the censure is doubly applicable to the 
efforts commonly made to regenerate human nature. 

One of the first steps required to cpnstruct this science 
on its true foundation is the production of separate treatises 
on the different groups of homogeneous phenomena which 
enter into it, as respects the action of their particular laws 
taken singly, and in conjunction with others. Something of this 
kind Bacon intended for the intellectual faculties in the little 
tract he wrote for Sir Henry Saville, the provost of Eton ; 
but the treatise was limited solely to the improvement they 
are capable of receiving by due attention to psychology in a 
course of preliminary education, an attempt which Dugald 
Stewart further followed out in his Philosophy of the Human 
Mind. The latter work, however, notwithstanding the learn- 
ing and the attainments of the author, from aiming at too 
much within its limited compass, accomplished little. Had 
the two volumes, in which the treatise is comprised, merely 
examined the operations of one or two special faculties, a step 
would have been made in the direction we point out. Upon 
the passions and feelings we have not even an attempt at 



C. II. 3.] ETHOLOGY WHERE INDUCTIVE. 281 

distinct treatises 1 . The early fathers and a modern class of 
theologians, in their disquisitions on practical morality, have 
marked out many derivative laws which this class of mental 
phenomena manifest, but entirely with a view to the acquire- 
ment of certain habits of virtue, and not to enlighten us on 
the general nature of their action, though this, to some degree, 
is their collateral effect. Of course, in connexion with the 
purely mental consideration of each of these special classes 
of subjects, the physical condition of the body ought to be 
studied, as there is no doubt of the influence of temperament 
in producing moral and emotional peculiarities, and also of 
the relation of certain cerebral conformations with specific 
intellectual qualities. 

This branch of the process, which concerns the obtaining 
materials out of which to construct a science of human nature, 
is obviously one, to a great extent, of observation. The 
world, however, has existed long enough to give us facts in 
abundance if we will only take the trouble to look out for 
them ; and every different position in which man has been 
placed, every phase of character he has assumed, is a store- 
house from which the most valuable results may be drawn. 
The great fear, however, is, that in collating the experience 
afforded by various institutions and countries, antipathies or 
predilections in relation to one or other may interfere, and 
make correct inference on any given point impossible : but 
such prejudices must be cast aside, as we dismiss in natural phi- 
losophy illusions of sense, or prepossessions in favour of any 
ill-judged theory, being conscious that while such distortions 
remain we are incapable of moral science. Indeed, more cau- 
tion is required in divesting ourselves of such preconceived 
notions in this division of the sciences than in physics. Tor 
observation, here, is almost solely at work in the preliminary 
process, with little or no help from artificial experiment, and 
relying to a great degree on the methods of agreement and 
concomitant variations : any perversion of fact, therefore, is 
less likely to be eliminated by more extended observation than 
where the five methods come into play ; and if it concern the 
operation of any institution of magnitude, it will doubtless 

1 Smith's moral sentiments hardly comes under this class, its aim 
being to examine the feelings not so much with reference to the laws 
of their own nature as to a particular theory viz., that of their empi- 
rical origin. 



METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

prevent our obtaining a correct notion of some important law 
of human nature on which such institution relies for its suc- 
cess, and so interfere with the process by which the specific 
law is resolved into the ultimate principles of psychology. 

It is only after a careful examination of the laws of the 
homogeneous groups, both in their simple and conjunct action, 
that we can expect to reach that general knowledge of the 
order of antecedence and sequence in psychological pheno- 
mena which will enable us, from a few combinations, to 
rise to the general principles at work in the production 
of their complex states, and connect them by deductive in- 
ference with the axiomata media, from which they branch out 
into ramified connexion with particular facts. jSTow, since it 
is entirely in our power to modify such general principles by 
directing them to a given end, man, by the faculty which 
such knowledge would confer upon him, might become in 
some measure his own automaton. He need only calculate 
the human agencies at work in the production of a given 
character to superinduce that character either upon himself 
or others, that is, allowing that time permitted the operating 
causes to work out the result, and that his physical and 
mental constitution opposed no insuperable barrier to their 
action. Knowing from the general laws of mind what actual 
or possible combination of circumstances are capable of pro- 
moting or preventing the production of certain qualities, it is 
obvious he can not only predict the particular type of cha- 
racter which would follow any assumed set of circumstances, 
but generate any quality he wishes in others, if those circum- 
stances should be in his power 1 . As the science, however, 
in its elementary stages is inductive, and as all its subse- 
quent processes concern tangible facts, the deduction of 
specific qualities accruing from particular circumstances of 
position, must always be verified by the recognised results 
of actual experience. As in the physical concrete deductive 
sciences, whose method the science of human nature assumes, 
each a priori deduction must be compared with inductive 
inference from particulars. The theoretic conclusion as to the 
type of character which should be formed by any given set of 

1 One of the facts which such investigations are calculated to bring 
to light is, that men differ less in natural capacities than is commonly 
supposed, and that much is set down to genius which is only the result 
of artificial aids and methods. 



C. II. 3.] EMPIEICISM IN SOCIOLOGY. 283 

circumstances, must be tested by the specific experience 01 
those circumstances whenever obtainable ; and the whole con- 
clusions of the science must undergo constant verification 
and correction from the general observations of mankind 1 . 

The phenomena of society are produced by the operation 
of outward circumstances upon masses of human beings, but 
as the laws in operation among the single individuals, which 
compose the aggregate body, are those of human nature, it 
follows that the phenomena of society are produced by 
complex combinations of the principles which govern human 
thought, feeling, and action. Hence, the social states are 
quite as much the product of fixed laws as the individual 
states ; the phenomena are only more complex, and the proxi- 
mate principles more derivative, not, indeed, from the 
number of laws in operation, but from the extraordinary 
number and variety of the elements, or agents, which in obe- 
dience to that small number of laws co-operate in producing 
the effect. If the laws of human nature, when concerned 
with individual phenomena, required the deductive method to 
unravel the complexity of the results, the need for the appli- 
cation of the same method to social phenomena is doubly in- 
creased, when we consider that this group of subjects arises 
out of a multiplication of the complexity considered in the 
most intricate phenomena of individual character. If, in- 
deed, in the latter subject crude empiricism was to be con- 
demned, in sociology it is far more censurable ; since the laws 
of human nature at this stage exist in far more complex 
states, and present more intricate problems for solution than 
are to be met with in individual character. 

Up to this time, however, with few exceptions, the only 
attempts made to modify social states, or even to theorise 
upon the regeneration of society, have been of this character. 
Apart from all consideration as to the organisation of any 
particular state of society, men have advocated measures for 
their amelioration, influenced by no other motive than that 
the specifics recommended had been found good in other in- 
stances; forgetting that one remedy could not cure all 
diseases, and that what was salutary in one climate might 

1 Mr. Mill treats these laws as a distinct science, under the name of 
Ethology. In this and the other portions of his treatise he follows the 
doctrine of Comte, but with such allowance for the free action of the 
will as not to disturb the ashes either of St. Augustine or Pelagius. 



284 METHODS OF THE MORAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

prove poisonous in another. After a measure was deemed 
good in itself, the only question which these philosophic poli- 
ticians asked themselves was, how can we get the people to 
adopt it ? No social arrangement that might be deemed 
desirable was expected to encounter any obstacles from the 
organism of the society to which it was to be applied, but solely 
from the private interests or prejudices of the individuals 
who constituted its members. Statesmen thus attempted to 
master the pathology and therapeutics of the social system 
before they had laid the necessary foundations in its physio- 
logy to remove distempers without understanding the laws 
of health ; and the result was such as it must always be when 
men, even of conspicuous ability, attempt to deal with the 
complex questions of a science before its simpler and more 
elementary propositions have been established. 

There is a close analogy between the organisation of dif- 
ferent states of individual character and those of social com- 
munities. In the latter, as in the former, there are homo- 
geneous groups of phenomena capable of being studied apart 
from the general subject, and forming in themselves the 
nucleus of distinct sciences. Such are political economy ; 
the science which concerns the formation of political charac- 
ter, or the character belonging to each age and country ; and 
the science of government. Each of these subjects takes into 
consideration a distinct class of phenomena mutually de- 
pendent upon one another, and not likely to be much inter- 
fered with by the action of the other agencies which enter 
into the organisation of society, at least beyond results which 
are capable of being calculated and allowed for in every 
instance. Thus political economy takes cognisance of such 
phenomena of the social state as are generated by the pur- 
suit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of every other 
human passion or motive, except those which may be regarded 
as antagonist to the desire of gain : viz., aversion to labour and 
desire of present enjoyment. Nor are its results, when the data 
are fairly expressed, ever wide of the truth. For, notwithstand- 
ing men in all cases are not influenced by the desire of obtain- 
ing wealth with the least possible labour, upon which supposi- 
tion the fundamental axioms of the science proceed, it cannot 
be denied that in commercial speculations such assumptions 
hold ; and since the principles of political economy are only 



C. II. 3.] SOCIOLOGY WHERE DEDUCTIVE. 285 

applied to transactions of this nature, provided they exactly 
express the laws of the tendencies to which they refer, they 
are never likely to mislead. Now it is only when the phe- 
nomena are so restricted to a definite class of subjects, that we 
are favourably situated for acquiring a knowledge of the 
minuter agencies which enter into the organism of the 
social state, and calculating (a priori) by direct deduction 
the eifect of any single law. For in such cases, the circum- 
stances with which the new law will interfere are previously 
known ; and no counteracting or disturbing agent can lie con- 
cealed to mar the correctness of the calculation founded upon 
their absence. For instance, suppose the effect is required 
to be known of commuting a certain quantity of indirect for 
direct taxation : will the result be an augmentation of the 
wealth and productive labour of the community ? Such a ques- 
tion is able to be answered by purely a priori considerations j 
for the phenomena with which the law has to deal are distinctly 
marked out by the nature of the case, and little inference is 
required to calculate how far the changes in question are 
likely to operate to the advantage of the community. The 
result of such direct reasoning can of course be easily veri- 
fied by an appeal to actual experiment. In this manner Peel 
worked out those judicious alterations in the British tariff 
which have already made his name illustrious among European 
statesmen. It was commonly thought that during his first 
trials he was picking his way by the empirical process of 
observation, and thus making experiments on the nation as 
M. Majendie used to try his specifics on dogs and rabbits. 
But the fact was otherwise. Peel had convinced him- 
self that such alterations were judicious, and the deliberate 
manner in which he worked them out, was simply to afford 
timely warning to the interests concerned, as well as to 
realise the sage counsel of Bacon, " in all your innovations 
imitate nature, whose changes are quiet and imperceptible," 
&c. 

But it is obvious that the conclusion arrived at in this 
particular case could not be generalised and erected into a 
universal proposition of political economy. Had Peel been 
desirous to extend the same principle to any other European 
country, his object should have been to ascertain how far its 
financial condition was analogous to that of England, and to 



286 METHODS OF TIIE MOBAL SCIENCES. [B T. 

what extent and in what direction the industry and habits of 
the people were likely to be influenced by the change. If the 
wealth of the nation was more equally distributed than in 
England, were its merchants and principal speculators just 
struggling into importance, and its artisans in a flourishing 
condition, it is obvious that a commutation of a portion of 
the customs and excise for a direct tax upon capital would 
be attended with ruinous effects. It would be a blow against 
the rising civilisation of the community calculated to strike 
down those who manifested any aptitude to direct or manage 
its resources, and prevent them from grasping those facilities 
which might enable them to economise labour, to open new 
commercial channels to the ' enterprise of their countrymen, 
and found institutions of education and benevolence. Hence 
the results of such speculations are necessarily hypothetical. 
No branch of the sociological sciences will help us to a uni- 
versal proposition, stating in every case the effect of any 
given law, but simply enables us to adapt the law to suit the 
circumstances of any given case. The separate study of the 
structure of the homogeneous parts of the social organism 
makes the statesman acquainted with all the phenomena 
with which the contemplated law is likely to interfere, just 
as the knowledge of any particular organ of the human 
system enables the physician to state a priori what agencies 
are destined to be neutralised, counteracted, or promoted by 
the action of certain diets and medicine ; and it is the pro- 
vince of the medical or political operator to frame a law whose 
action on that particular function of the system is destined 
to eliminate the unsound tendencies and promote the healthy 
action of the vigorous parts. The several branches of the 
sociological sciences will furnish him with a multitude of 
generalisations for this purpose true under the circumstances 
in which they were obtained. It depends on his own tact, 
how far he may be enabled to bring the new case contem- 
plated, under any one of these heads, in order that the same 
specific may be applied with as little alteration of the text of 
the law as the circumstances warrant : but it is obviously the 
duty of every statesman, before he applies his law, however 
cautiously its provisions may have been framed, to meet the 
peculiar circumstances of the case, to examine if the kindred 
sociological science will supply him with any instances of 



C. II. 3.] VEBIMCATIONS OF SOCIOLOGY. 287 

the effects of similar laws on analogical phenomena, and so 
verify his conclusions by actual experience. If such prece- 
dents, however, cannot be found, if either the law, or the 
circumstances to which it was applied, manifest any startling 
discrepancies of character, or if he has reason to think that, 
notwithstanding the generalisation is similar which form the 
peculiarities of the case, many of the operating conditions 
lie concealed, the only possible mode of verification open to 
the statesman is to deduce from the principles involved in 
his law as much of the phenomena to which it refers both 
in past ages and different communities, as would be likely to 
be affected by it, and show that the results of past experience 
completely harmonises with the conclusions of his theory. 
If his expectations of the effects of any given cause in an 
assumed set of circumstances will not enable the statesman 
to explain and account for all that portion of the social phe- 
nomena existing in times past or present which that cause 
would have a tendency to influence, it is a proof either that 
the facts which ought to be taken into account are not 
known, or that the theory is not sufficiently accurate to meet 
all the consequences. In either case a statesman would do 
well to reconstruct his theory, and not venture to predict 
the future by inference from any data that could not be 
brought in unison with the present and the past. 

The .inquiries which concern these special branches of 
social phenomena generally concern the effects which will 
follow from single causes in a certain condition of social cir- 
cumstances ; but there is also a second inquiry with relation 
to the laws which preside over the general circumstances 
themselves, and determine the order of sequence and ante- 
cedence between one social state and another. It is found, 
for example, when the history of past ages is consulted, among 
the various states of society existing in the different regions 
of the earth, that certain uniformities exist between succes- 
sions of phenomena ; so that one feature of society never as- 
sumes a particular state without affecting the co-existing 
states in a more or less precisely determinate manner. For 
example : among highly civilised communities the existence 
of an extremely despotic monarchy is invariably attended 
with laxity of moral ties, and, if perpetuated for a long period, 
causes a decline of the arts, degradation of literature, and a 



288 METHODS OF THE MORAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

general retrogression of humanity. And, in like manner, 
where insuperable harriers are erected between the classes 
of any community, and the highest social functions are only 
open to certain privileged castes, mankind are never sure to 
emerge from a semi-barbarous state, or to make any advance 
in civilisation. Such uniformities between certain states of 
society and institutions are mere derivative laws from the 
higher principles of human nature, and can readily be ac- 
counted for a priori. For, if it be an axiom, as it assuredly is, 
that the phenomena of society are mere creatures of mind, 
and that the arrangements which they manifest, are more or 
less in accordance with the fitness of things according to the 
degree in which the mental agent manifests its supremacy ,- 
it follows that every society will flourish or decay in propor- 
tion as obstacles or inducements are flung in the way of its 
influence, or according to the mode in which the institutions 
of the country act upon its growth, or stimulate or depress 
its development. Now, the existence of castes, or slavery to 
any large extent, or an imprimateur clapped on the press, or 
the gagging of public opinion has this direct tendency ; and 
such exclusions and prohibitions cannot be perpetuated 
through generations without engendering corruption of man- 
ners, and turning society itself into an instrument for the 
degradation of humanity. 

The prosecution of sociology, nevertheless, in its present 
stage, labours under great disadvantages, on account of the 
backward state of psychological science, into which its laws 
are destitaed to be ultimately resolved. "While the prin- 
ciples of psychology fluctuate, no derivative uniformity ob- 
servable between co-existing or successive states of social 
phenomena can be verified by its connexion with the corre- 
sponding psychological laws ; and the only mode of ascertain- 
ing the correctness of generalisations obtained by an analytical 
survey of history, is to resolve them into the simpler laws to 
which they inferentially lead, and to test their correctness 
at this stage by comparing the results to which they conduct, 
both in social and psychological phenomena, with specific ex- 
perience. Thus, in the cases already cited, of the obnoxious 
character of those institutions which tend to depress intellect, 
the principle into which the uniform phenomena were re- 
solved obtains, not only in individual instances, but in every 
single exertion of the human faculties. For those men are 



C. II. 3.] SOCIAL STATICS AND DYNAMICS. 289 

the foremost of our species, in whom mind has most largely 
predominated, and who have opposed the least obstacle to its 
influence ; and every reflex act of thought directed to resolve 
any problem, is more likely to obtain its purpose in propor- 
tion to the continuity and vigour with which it is exercised, 
or according to the abstracting power by which it shuts out 
extraneous influence and fastens on its object : a truth, of 
which Newton acknowledged the force when, on being asked 
by what means he succeeded in revealing that wonderful law 
which unlocked the mechanism of the heavens, he replied, 
by always thinking about it. "When principles are reached 
of this extensive kind, which account deductively for all the 
social phenomena in which they can be supposed to possess 
any large influence, if they may not be assumed to be the 
ultimate psychological laws wanting in the case, at least they 
may fairly be relied on as corollaries from them, and so far 
allowed to form the standard of indirect verification. 

The empirical uniformities which it is the object of obser- 
vation to set apart, as most likely to lead to the discovery of 
sociological laws, relate either to co-existent or successive 
phenomena ; and according as this science is occupied in 
ascertaining and verifying the former sort of uniformities, or 
the latter, M. Comte gives it the title of social statics, or of 
social dynamics, conformably to the distinction in mechanics 
between the conditions of equilibrium and those of move- 
ment ; or in biology, between the laws of organisation and 
those of life 1 . The first branch of the science ascertains the 
conditions of stability in the social union the nature of the 
relation existing between the different parts of the social 
organism in its healthiest state ; the second concerns the 
laws of progress, or the theory of society in a state of con- 
tinuous movement. It must, however, be observed, that the 
study of social statics can never be so completely disentangled 
from the second branch as not to be in a great degree modi- 
fied and controlled by its laws, as the uniformities of co- 
existence obtaining between social phenomena are mere 
corollaries from the laws of causation by which the succes- 
sive states of those phenomena are determined. The mutual 
actions and reactions of cotemporaneous social states are 

1 Cours de Philosophie Positive, iv. 325. 
u 



290 METHODS OF THE MORAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

mere complex effects arising from the fundamental movement 
going on among them. The mutual correlation, therefore, 
between the different elements of each state of society is a 
derivative law resulting from the laws of succession between 
one state of society and another ; and if we make a provi- 
sional abstraction for the purpose of marking the coincidences 
between their simultaneous effects, it is not only with a view 
to ascertain the elements of social stability and many unifor- 
mities of practical importance, but also to approach closer to 
the resolution of the fundamental problem of sociology, and 
discover the laws according to which any state of society pro- 
duces the state which succeeds it and takes its place. 

Of the practical value of this division of the science there 
cannot be a doubt to him who considers the flood of light 
capable of being shed upon the laws of social phenomena by 
regarding them in the two special states of mutual depen- 
dence and correlation, and making the uniformities of co- 
existence and succession act as verificatory tests of each other. 
It is, moreover, through the study of the uniformities of co- 
existence that we are led to observe the more recondite laws 
which preside over the generation of successive states of 
society, of which the derivative laws of correlation are mere 
complex exemplifications ; and to form those general maxims, 
of the widest possible utility in statesmanship, which embody 
the elements of social union, the principles which consti- 
tute the ligaments by which the different parts of the social 
organism is bound together, the ingredients which enter 
into those ligaments and tend to increase or corrode their 
vigour, and the chief properties on which the healthy action 
of the leading functions depend, both in their individual 
states and conjunct agency. By this branch of sociology we 
are able to determine, from the absence or the presence of 
certain elements in any given society, the general features 
which characterised its past condition, just as we may infer 
from the state of the abstract sciences in any age the amount 
of erudition possessed by its leading sages 1 . 

In examining the elements of social stability the states- 
man will not only regard the essential requisites whose 

1 A case in point is furnished in the dissipation of the pretended 
astronomical lore ascribed to the Egyptian priests, as soon as it was 
known that abstract geometry did not exist among them. 



C. II. 3.] OBJECT OF SOCIAL DYNAMICS. 291 

presence is indispensable to the perpetuity of its functions, 
but the precise effect which has attended the relative degree 
in which they have exerted their action. He cannot fail to 
observe, for example, the effects of severe restraining disci- 
pline in fashioning the heroic states of antiquity, and the 
martial spirit infused into their population, both by the cultiva- 
tion of a strong feeling of nationality, and by throwing open 
the highest posts of command to the ambition of the meanest 
soldier. He will not fail to observe the effect of an equitable 
administration of justice in teaching men to respect law ; and 
the diminution of national wealth in proportion as property 
became insecure and as excessive commercial restrictions were 
adhered to. Nor can it escape his attention that without 
some form of religion no society can hold together long, and 
that the degree of its influence may be taken as a fair index 
of the soundness and durability of the concomitant parts. 
The indispensable conditions for the foundations of the 
social fabric may, indeed, be deduced a priori from the laws 
of human nature ; but the precise degree in which they 
ought to be combined, to bring about a certain result, must 
be gleaned from a close examination of social phenomena, 
and the knowledge so obtained afterwards verified by com- 
parison with psychological laws, and the known results of 
analogical combinations. By the pursuit of such methods 
men have erected social fabrics in times of great anarchy, 
founded empires on the ruins of old societies, and made the 
mean capital of a petty state the meridian of the earth's 
glory. "Witness Charlemagne, Frederic the Great, and Na- 
poleon. 

The great object of social dynamics is to trace each of the 
principal features of every generation to its causes in the 
generation immediately preceding it. This may appear, where 
single states are concerned, to present little difficulty ; for 
every element in each nation can have its causes distinctly 
marked out among the aggregate conditions that constituted 
the state of society in the preceding centuries. But such 
special cases only compose the materials of the elements 
which determine the leading qualities attaching in common 
to vast groups of progressive communities, which it is the 
aim of social dynamics to resolve in their complex causes, 
in showing what group of antecedents have generated each 

172 



292 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [E. T. 

of the general phases which constitute the character of any 
one generation. The difficulty of establishing this filiation, 
and mounting to the most general laws of the succession of 
social states, is increased in proportion to the number of 
distinct nations, and to the discrepancies of government, 
which they involve ; for, according as men are kept under 
the action of various, and often clashing agencies, the uni- 
formities of succession, as well as of co-existence, become 
more fragmentary, and present insuperable obstacles to the 
science which seeks to evolve them out of general laws. 
Nevertheless, this difficulty is not without its advantage, in 
affording a more ample field for the verification of the middle 
axioms of the science ; since the assumed general uniformity 
may fairly be regarded as a derivative law of human nature, if 
it accounts for all the phenomena which falls under its influ- 
ence in so diversified a theatre. 

As it is only through the intermediate uniformities that 
we can hope to grasp the higher generalisations of the 
science, the means of testing their correctness cannot be too 
highly valued. Now this is afforded to us through the varie- 
gated social phenomena which constitute the living society 
of every age, and the different degrees of prosperity and 
decline they manifest in the various stages of their existence. 
If any uniformities of succession will enable us to explain 
why some nations continue to remain as they have begun, 
and scarcely seem to ebb and flow, while others have spent 
their vigour at the commencement, and others blazed out 
in glory a little before their extinction ; why the meridian 
of some have been the most splendid, and others have fluc- 
tuated, and experienced at different periods of their existence 
different reverses of fortune ; it is evident that such uni- 
formities, found available for scientific explanation in so many 
contrary instances, may be relied upon as derivative laws, 
even if they only make out the case so far as their influence 
in the generation of the phenomena could be expected to 
extend. Axioms of this nature, which can be brought to the 
test of diversified experience, must form the first stepping- 
stones to higher laws ; and if they can be deduced from the 
ultimate principles of human nature, these higher generalisa- 
tions which it is the object of sociology to reach, will be 
brought within the limits of judicious conjecture, and the 



C. II. 3.] GENERALISATIONS OF SOCIOLOGY. 293 

suggestion started easily verified by comparison, either with 
the a priori law, or with the simpler uniformities already 
revealed. 

The laws of social dynamics have been hitherto sought by 
two distinct paths, the consilience of which on any one 
point, has been deemed to furnish a strong verification of the 
generality of the resulting uniformity. The progressive 
tendencies of society have been pursued both in individual 
communities and large groups of nations, whose social ele- 
ments bore in any respects a kindred character. The con- 
clusion, in M. Comte's view, broadly announces the law that 
the course of progressive states of society, as well as that 
of separate nations and individuals, is marked by three dis- 
tinct phases : the theological, which presides over the elemen- 
tary stage ; the metaphysical, which is the distinguishing 
characteristic of the middle ; and the sceptical, or positive 
philosophic feature, which is the predominant element in the 
third. This generalisation, however, notwithstanding some 
striking coincidences, is not reconcileable with fact; nor 
is one of so sweeping a nature likely to be gained while 
the elementary laws of the science, which must form the 
platform to such a principle, are not yet raised from 
the ground. Similar empirical axioms have been gathered 
from an analytical survey of social phenomena, of a less pre- 
tentious character, and more within the limits of truth, but 
still open to occasional exceptions, and of course unverified 
by psychological laws ; such as the aphorism of Bacon, that 
in the beginning of states arms flourish, while intellectual 
qualities are predominant in their maturity, and mechanical 
agencies characterise their decline ; and those of some French 
historians, which imply that as society advances mental quali- 
fications gradually assume control over animal force, and 
masses prevail over individuals ; that the first occupation of 
mankind is chiefly military, which becomes by degrees ab- 
sorbed in productive pursuits, until the spirit of clanship is 
entirely transformed into an agent of the industrial arts. 
These generalisations, even if strictly true, only assume the 
appearance of so many sage conjectures, and can be held of 
no scientific value, until shown to arise out of psychological 
principles, and connected with the more complex uniformi- 
ties to which they are akin. The error of speculation in 



294 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

this branch of sociology appears to consist in grasping at 
vague generalities, which seem to coincide with fact, but 
leave us without knowledge to state why they do so. 

Such generalisations, however useful they may prove in 
the subsequent stages of the science, can be of no avail 
before the science can hardly be said to have commenced. 
To attempt to inaugurate the study of an a posteriori science 
by the fashioning of such universal propositions, is like com- 
mencing to erect a building by the formation of pediments 
to which we have no reason to know that the edifice will 
correspond. The only mode by which any advance can be 
made in the construction of sociological science is by 
mounting from the simplest and most evident unifor- 
mities to those of a more universal and complex character, 
and seeking at every step to infer what laws of human 
nature are involved in their production. A successful in- 
ference will lead us to connect many generalisations before 
deemed empirical with the ultimate principles of psychology, 
and to interweave them in a web of confirmatory relation with 
the lowest uniformities of the science. Thus, stations will 
ultimately become opened in all quarters, and cross-lines 
interposed, so that no accurate generalisation can be drawn 
from history without having its higher laws assigned, and 
being fitted into its precise place in the system. This is 
the invariable method by which all sciences that relate to 
successive phenomena, which have reached a high degree of 
development, have been cultivated. Nor can we see any- 
thing in sociology to exempt it from its influence. Yet the 
science was no sooner propounded by Vico, and began to 
excite any degree of attention, than its cultivators entered 
into hot discussion upon the last question that the science 
even in the highest state of maturity could be expected to 
resolve viz., whether there results from the progressive 
movements of society either a cycle or a trajectory course ? 
"Whether society revolves in an orbit, or moves in a straight 
line and so never returns to any of its former states ? a 
problem whose resolution has about the same relation to 
the discovery of social laws, as the disquisitions of Thales on 
the first element of all things, have to the Galilean physics 1 . 

1 The work of Giambattista Vico, entitled, Principi di Scienza nuova 
d'Intorno alia Commune Natura delle Nazione, first saw the light at 
Naples in 1725. But the most eulogistic of his editors admit that he 



C. II. 4.] CALCTJIiATION OF PROBABILITIES. 295 

4. Probable Inference. Example and Analogy. 

The moral sciences have their department of probable 
evidence as well as the physical, and that to a far greater 
extent. Since, in addition to their subjects being less ad- 
vanced and exposed to more uncertain, intricate, and fluctu- 
ating agencies, there are many branches of evidence in them 
where direct certainty is unattainable, and the most that can 
be gained is a high degree of probability. By far the 
greater portion of the inferences we draw with reference to 
ordinary life, from the government of a kingdom to the 
crossing of a street, is of this character. Did we wait for 
grounds of complete certainty before we moved in the per- 
formance of any action, we should ever stand still. Human 
society would be in a state of perpetual blockade. Our 
only resource in the generality of cases is to calculate 
probabilities, and act upon them. "We perceive that a 
specific point cannot be definitely established, and examine 
all the probabilities capable of being adduced in its favour, 
and weigh the aggregate amount with those against it. 
In proportion to the exact degree in which one or the 
other preponderate, ought to be our acceptance or dis- 
trust of the proposition. When arguments tend to esta- 

was quite incapable, on account of the narrow circle of his erudition, 
to construct theories reducing to the philosophical union of causal con- 
nexion the multifarious phenomena of history. Vico, as far as Greek 
and Latin antiquity went, was erudite enough, and his historical 
theorems and postulates receive plausible support from that side of 
humanity; but he knew little either of the Oriental world or of the 
Middle Ages ; and hence his abstract generalisations met with complete 
discomfiture when applied to interpret the phenomena which these 
stages of humanity present. His theory of the course of nations, being 
exclusively modelled on the Boman world, is quite in conflict with 
the vast confederations of European civilisation ; and he regards those 
instruments on which the generality of the seers of the present age rely 
for the indefinite amelioration of their species, as the principal agents 
in bringing about that decline iu European commonwealths which, ac- 
cording to his system, is again to reduce mankind to a state of primitive 
barbarism. The press, in Vico's view, is an engine calculated to obscure 
and weaken the judgment by the spread of useless facts (Op. lat. i. 
p. 41); religious toleration, a mark of the entire want of sincerity in re- 
ligious conviction (Scienza nuova, pp. 350, 424). The abandonment of 
the ancient languages as a means of transmitting thought, according 
to the same author, will lead to the destruction of taste and philoso- 
phical acuteness (Opusc. p. 16). We need say no more to show the 
reader that Vico can hardly be trusted as a telescope of the future. 



296 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. T. 

blish the point they are intended to support with various 
degrees of probability, no bare summing up of the single 
results will give us an accurate idea of the strength of the 
cumulative evidence without taking into account the de- 
flection of the converging lines of argument and the amount 
of probability the conclusion receives, not only from the 
number, but from the variety and opposite nature of the 
proofs. For example, if a certain conclusion be made out by 
three lines of argument, each establishing a probability in its 
favour, varying as , -f, and - ; in adding up these fractional 
probabilities, it ought to be taken into account, to what 
degree the adduced reasons vary in their subject-matter ; 
and if this be to any extent, an additional fraction should 
be annexed to the aggregate sum to represent the im- 
probability arising from the inference that a proposition 
should be untrue which was supported by testimony of so 
discordant a nature. There are likewise cases in which 
some deduction must be made from the total result for 
a contrary reason. For example, if the testimony of three 
witnesses be taken who have been in collusion with each 
other, in casting up the individual probabilities in favour 
of each party's testimony an abatement must be made in con- 
sideration of the identity of interest existing between them. 

The latter is an instance of joining probabilities by way of 
addition, the result of which is an aggregate probability greater 
than the individual instances of which it is composed. There 
is another mode by way of deduction, where the certainty 
diminishes with every new instance of probability implied in 
the proof; as when we adduce the testimony of one witness, 
that he has heard a thing asserted by another, who was not 
himself an original witness, but who obtained it from one 
who professed to have ocular evidence of the fact. The 
former chain of evidence was termed by Mr. Bentham a self- 
corroborative chain ; the latter, a self-infirmative chain 1 . 

Both are applicable to the summation of that class of pro- 
positions, whether physical or moral, which approximate to 
the truth, but do not universally obtain in all cases ; such as, 
Most pious men are grave ; Most rulers are influenced by 
self-interest ; The generality of aged persons are cautious. 

1 Kationale of Judicial Evidence, book v. 



C. II. 4.] LIMITATION OF PEOBABILIT1ES. 297 

Now, it often happens when such proximate generalisations 
are connected with others in a given proportion, through a 
term which is common to both, that it is required to be 
known what probability will attach to the occurrence of the 
new term with either of the other terms. Thus, if two out 
of every three pious men are grave, and three out of every 
four studious men are grave, what probability is there that 
every pious and studious man will have the property of 
gravity? The answer will obviously be -y-. For the pro- 
bability against the supposition will arise out of the com- 
pound of the single probabilities. Now, against the occur- 
rence of the first there is the chance of , and against the 
second -J, the compound result of which ( T ^) deduced from 
unity assigns the probability we have determined upon. 
Hence the aggregate probability is greater than the indi- 
vidual ones f or -|. Again, suppose that proximate generali- 
sations similarly connected were required to be dealt with 
by way of deduction, the probability arising from two pro- 
positions taken together in this case will be correctly mea- 
sured by the probability arising from one abated in the ratio 
of that arising from the other. Thus, if nine out of ten 
charitable persons are religious, and five out of every twenty 
inhabitants in London are charitable, the probability that 
any metropolitan citizen is religious will be -^y, or somewhat 
less than -i. It is evident that there can be many links to 
such calculations, but each additional step only involves a 
repetition of the principle we have laid down. 

Proximate truths of this kind may, however, occasionally 
be transformed into universal propositions of scientific accu- 
racy, by assigning some mark which clearly separates the 
accordant from the exceptional cases; and reasonings de- 
pendent upon them may be carried to any length we please, 
by taking care, in the introduction and composition of every 
fresh generalisation, to annex the sign on which its uni- 
versality depends. For instance, the proposition Most per- 
sons who have uncontrolled power employ it ill, may be in- 
vested with a universal character, either by assigning the 
features which invariably characterise licentious despots; 
viz., weakness of judgment and will, with depraved habits, 
or by assuming the opposite qualities to these as exceptional 
cases. Thus, All persons of weak judgment and depraved 



298 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

habits who have uncontrolled power employ it ill ; or, All 
persons who have uncontrolled power employ it ill, provided 
they are not persons of unusual strength of judgment and 
confirmed habits of virtue. Now, if we annex to this pro- 
position another of a similar character, as, All absolute 
monarchs have uncontrolled power who are independent of 
the active support of their subjects, we may deduce from both 
the universal conclusion that all absolute monarchs employ 
their power ill who do not need the active support of their 
subjects, unless they are persons of unusual strength of 
judgment and confirmed habits of virtue. It is of no con- 
cern how rapidly such conditions accumulate, provided we 
assign the distinguishing rank to each proposition, and ex- 
press the aggregate with every additional conclusion. 

Occasionally, as in reasonings which concern large masses, 
and do not in the slightest degree affect the actions of iso- 
lated individuals, proximate generalisations are all that is 
required, even to establish a conclusion of scientific value. 
Neither the general or the statesman desires complete accu- 
racy in the data on which they found their respective mea- 
sures for the guidance of the numbers over whom they pos- 
sess control. It is enough for them to know that most 
persons comport themselves in a particular way, since their 
speculations refer almost exclusively to cases in which vast 
groups of men are acted upon simultaneously, and in which, 
therefore, what is done or felt by most persons determines 
the result produced by or upon the general body. In these 
cases proximate truths assume the nature of precise gene- 
ralisations with reference to the results to which they are in- 
tended to lead. The properties of multitudes can only be 
ascertained by approximations of this nature, but they are 
not the less strictly amenable on that account to scientific 
law than those of individuals. 

The probable inferences in the moral sciences which corre- 
spond to those drawn in the physical, from the resemblance 
of their objects to phenomena whose properties for the most 
part lie beyond the grasp of our faculties, may be ranged 
under the head of example and analogy. We are not able to 
penetrate beyond the vista of the present, and form indu- 
bitable inferences with respect to the future effects of certain 
actions upon any specific individual ; for, being ignorant of the 



C. II. 4.] ARGUMENT OF EXAMPLE. 299 

impulsive forces which generate individual character, and the 
laws according to which they act, we want all the data that 
could help us to a conclusion of scientific value ; yet we augur 
the complexion of those effects, and in the generality of cases 
find we are not far short of the truth. These conclusions 
are found to predict in many cases with tolerable accuracy 
what will be the future position of a character chiefly de- 
pendent on fame, on knowledge, and talent, for success; 
and that with no further data on the part of their framers 
than what is afforded by superficial observation. They 
know what has occurred in past instances will occur again 
if similar conditions supervene, and they leap from the re- 
semblance of properties to that of effects. This is strictly 
the argument of example. It is induction on practical mat- 
ters, the laws of whose action are hidden from us, but whose 
uniformities we nevertheless predict, grounding our inference 
upon the effects which the laws have exhibited in the past. 
Of this kind of loose induction Horace will afford us an 
example: "If my father," says the poet, "wished to per- 
suade me from squandering my estate in profligate living, he 
would point to some spendthrift who had ruined himself 1 ." 
The father of the bard left him to infer from the example of 
Barrus, and the son of Albus, who had both impoverished 
themselves by luxurious living, that those who so act com- 
monly come to ruin. The staple argument of most people 
assumes a similar form. They judge simply from past effects ; 
and according to the constancy with which the uniformity in 
question has obtained, they imply its occurrence in future. 

To such kind of inference there can be no objection, if not 
stretched further than the limits in which it has been ob- 
served warrant ; but the evil is, that men leap from a few 
casual instances of successive or concomitant uniformity to a 
wide generalisation, implying a law of causation between the 
phenomena concerned. Having observed that the country 
prospered under unfair institutions, or that trade flourished 

" Insuevit pater optimus hoc me : 
Ut fugerem, exemplis, vitiorum quaeque notando. 
Cum me hortaretur parce, frugaliter, atque 
Viverem uti contentus eo quod mi ipse paressetu, 
Nonne vides Albi ut male vivat filius? atque 
Barrus inops? magnum documentum ne patriam rem 
Perdere quis velit." HOT. Serm. L 4. 



300 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. V. 

during the last war, they arrive at the sweeping conclusion, 
without looking into the circumstances of the case, that such 
institutions are essential to the welfare of the community, 
and that commerce is increased by foreign war. But pre- 
vious to any inference being made, men should not only 
regard things as they are, but look to the causes which pro- 
duce them, and endeavour to discover their mutual inde- 
pendence. If the uniformity seem to be connected with no 
law that we can discover, the extent to which it is to be 
relied upon, is simply a case of calculation by the ordinary 
laws of probability : where, however, it appears as the result 
of a causal tie between the sequential or concomitant pheno- 
mena, the laws of which, however, we cannot calculate, we 
may regard the uniformities as universal laws, and predict 
their occurrence in all instances which do not present coun- 
teracting obstacles to their agency. The discovery, however, 
of such conflicting agencies, and the nature of the law on 
which the uniformities themselves depend, are necessary to 
raise them out of the category of conditional truths, and 
invest their prediction with scientific certainty. 

Analogical evidence, in a strictly moral sense, comprises 
that kind of inference which is drawn from mere resem- 
blance of relations 1 ; as if from the assumption that the colo- 
nies stand in the same relation to the mother country as a 
child to its parent, any one were to argue that unconditional 

1 " Every one knows," says Bishop Berkeley, in his Minute Philo- 
sopher, " that analogy is a Greek word, used by mathematicians to 
signify a similitude of proportions. For instance, when we observe 
that two is to six in the same proportion (ratio) as three is to nine, 
this similarity or equality of proportions (ratios) is termed analogy. . . . 
The schoolmen tell us that there is analogy between intellect and sight ; 
forasmuch as intellect is to the mind what sight is to the body ; and 
that he who governs the state is analogous to him who steers a ship." 
It would, however, greatly contribute to philosophical exactness if the 
word were confined to one of the three senses for which it is now too 
indiscriminately used. We have called, in conjunction with most 
metaphysicians*, the grounds of analogy those on which the physical 
sciences rest. If this term be accurate, another ought to be found to 
distinguish resemblance of qualities, and a third, distinct from the two 
preceding, to express similarity of relation. While the three meanings 
are huddled together under one name, confusion of ideas must ine- 
vitably ensue. 



* See Foundations of Evidence, p. 171, with note. 



C. II. 4.] ARGUMENT OF ANALOGY. 301 

obedience to all the degrees of the central authority was the 
clear duty of the colonists ; or from the similarity of relation 
existing between a nation and its rulers, and a joint-stock 
company and its board, that the people were perfectly at 
liberty to choose their own governors, cashier them for mis- 
conduct, and in case of need to frame a government for 
themselves. In this narrow sense, however, analogy is rather 
suited for illustration than argument, nor can we adduce any 
example in which its force arises above that of weak proba- 
bility. Arguments which arise from the direct similarity of 
things are weak enough when the evidence does not amount 
to a complete induction ; but when we introduce the element 
of the similarity of relation of things, the amount of proba- 
bility dwindles in rapid proportion, and exhibits an inherent 
inferiority of conclusiveness. 

It, however, very frequently happens that analogical argu- 
ment is capable of meeting both cases, and rests its inference 
not only on similarity of relation, but on the direct resem- 
blance between the things themselves. As an instance of 
the high conclusive force which double analogies of this kind 
are capable of attaining, we may adduce Butler's famous 
argument in favour of the divine origin of Christianity. The 
proof may be said to consist in close compact inference from 
the resemblance of the system of nature and the economy of 
God's visible dispensation in the natural world, to the system 
of religion and the economy of God with regard to the present 
and future state of our moral being. We may also regard it 
as an argument by strict analogy, inferring the truth of the 
Christian religion from the fact that it puts forth the same 
relations to man and its author as the system of nature. If 
we grant, therefore, that God created nature, we cannot well 
avoid the conclusion that the Christian scheme, so similar to 
it in its deepest and broadest relations, should have sprung 
from the hands of the same artificer. The force, however, of 
the argument in the last case is derived from the strength 
which attends it in the former, or may be said to be con- 
founded with it. From the evidence of design and profound 
adaptation of parts to meet certain ends which the Christian 
religion exhibits, we infer its divine origin, just because similar 
evidence in the case of nature has led mankind to the conclu- 
sion that it came from God. The conclusiveness of the proof 
does not proceed from mere similarity of relation, but from the 



302 METHODS OF THE MOEAL SCIENCES. [B. Y. 

fact of that resemblance arising out of vastness of design, and 
intricate and elaborate co-ordination of parts with reference 
to a constituted whole which mark both systems, and stamp 
them as the works of the same author. The degree of con- 
fidence to be placed in this and similar analogical arguments 
will depend, of course, on the amount of similarity as con- 
trasted with that of dissimilarity involved in the case, taken 
in conjunction with the extent of our knowledge of the indi- 
vidual subjects whose properties are compared. If the unex- 
plored region of unascertained properties be large, or if we 
have reason to think that many remain concealed whose dis- 
covery might affect the probability to which the recognised 
resemblances point, faint stress indeed should be laid upon 
the evidence. 

Notwithstanding the argument of analogy in the cases 
already contemplated, is never able to reach/above a high de- 
gree of probability, it may occasionally form the ground of rigid 
scientific inference in disproof of the position of an adversary. 
Though it cannot help the philosopher to a certain conclusion 
on any one point, it can enable him by means of what the 
ancients called tWrao-is 1 , to demolish every position which his 
adversary takes up against it. Evidence which may be inade- 
quate to establish a complete inference, may be amply suffi- 
cient for refutation. If the peculiar character of the subject 
prevented Butler from demonstrating with scientific rigour 
the divine origin of the Christian faith, he, at all events, 
annihilated, with the analogical weapon, the position assumed 
by the deists of his day, viz., that the Christian religion could 
not be true since it contradicted and falsified the natural pre- 
sumptions and intuitive convictions of mankind, by proving 
that the system of nature involves difficulties of no less 
startling a character. He thus overthrew a falsely assumed 
principle by the allegation of an unanswerable fact 2 . 

1 Instance brought forward to disprove the general principle of an 
adversary. See Karslake's Aids to the Study of Logic, vol. ii. p. 83. 
2 Butler himself seems to have regarded his argument in this light, 
for he writes: "If there be an analogy or likeness between that 
system of things and dispensations of Providence which revelation in- 
forms us of, and that system of things and dispensation of Providence 
which experience, together with reason, informs us of, i. e. the known 
course of nature, this is a presumption that they both have the same 



B. VI.] FALLACIES. 303 



BOOK VI. 

FALLACIES. 
PEOEMniM. 

As we have followed the reasoning process in every diver- 
sified combination it assumes in science, and laid bare the 
mechanism by which every description of scientific truth is 
reached, it only remains for us to notice the variety of illu- 
sions to which the process is exposed, the different forms in 
which error is capable of simulating reason and deceiving 
mankind. To some extent, indeed, this has been already 
performed. At every stage of the scientific process certain 
errors were to be guarded against and corresponding decep- 
tions pointed out ; yet, since many remain unnoticed, and all 
are more or less connected in a chain of mutual dependence 
and relation, it becomes essential to a scientific view of the 
subject, to allot to them a distinct portion of the treatise. 

Fallacies are commonly divided into two grand classes ac- 
cording as they interfere either with the canons of the syllo- 
gism ; or introduce false premises, or lead to a conclusion 
different to that of which proof is required. The first are called 
fallacies in dictione, or formal fallacies, in which the conclusion 
does not follow from the premises. The latter are termed 
extra dictionem, or material fallacies, which are good as far as 
the reasoning is concerned, but false as to the matter, the 
premises being either wrongly assumed, or the conclusion 
foreign to the subject. The first kind may be considered under 
two heads. The fallaciousness of some being evident from 
the bare form of the expression, without regard to the mean- 
ing of the terms, such as undistributed middle, illicit process, 
and negative premiss ; while that of others requires the mate- 
rial sense of the middle term to be inquired into before the 
ambiguity can be cleared up, which happens in all cases of 
ambiguous middle term, except its non-distribution. Of 

author and cause; at least so far as to answer objections against the 
former being from God, drawn from anything which is analogical or 
similar to what is in the. latter; for an author of nature is here sup- 
posed." Introduction to the Analogy. See Karslakc's Aids, &c., vol. 
ii. p. 83. 



304 FALLA.CIES. [B. VI. 

these we shall treat in two chapters under the head of formal 
fallacies and fallacies of language. 

The material fallacies, in their moral and physical rela- 
tions, may be ranked under premiss unduly assumed, and 
irrelevant conclusion. The former class will lead to the 
consideration of non causa pro causa in all the various phases 
it is capable of assuming in both order of sciences, as incom- 
plete enunciation, groundless assumption, false analogies, and 
petitio principii, or the assumption of a premiss, either iden- 
tical with the conclusion or unfairly implying it. Irrelevant 
conclusion will comprise that large magazine of fallacies so 
commonly drawn upon by vulgar dialecticians, such as ap- 
peals to the passions, shifting ground, eternal raising of 
objections, and use of complex terms, which enable the dia- 
lectician, while employing the same words, to make out his 
case in a sense quite foreign to the matter in dispute. An 
additional chapter on this branch of fallacies will exhaust 
the subject. 

There is no fallacy which does not fall naturally under 
one of the foregoing heads. Even those sophisms which 
arise from self-love, interest, or passion, and which so power- 
fully influence civil concerns, ordinarily involve some of the 
intellectual obliquities above referred to, and are capable of 
being hunted out and condemned on the same grounds. The 
idola of Bacon might appear to be fallacies of another genus, 
and have been so characterised by Dr. Whewell ; yet, on a 
close analysis, they will be found mere exemplifications of 
the fallacies above enumerated, only expressed in a more 
popular form. For, what else is characterised by Bacon's 
illusions of the Forum (idola Fori), but the common ambi- 
guities of language ; or what other thing does he caution his 
readers against, under the name of illusions of the tribe and 
illusions of the den (idola tribus, idola specus), but the fal- 
lacies of groundless assumption and unwarrantable induction ? 
In reality, no fallacies have risen out of the application of the 
inferential process to modern science, which had not been 
already provided for under the heads of the old logical 
division. 

It must not be assumed, from the strict manner in which 
we have laid down the boundaries of the different fallacies, 
that each is only capable of being referred to one distinct 



C. I. 1.] TWOFOLD DIVISION. 305 

head. It occasionally happens that one fallacy may present 
so many different aspects, according to the light in which it 
is looked at, as to be referable to one or two heads, under 
both the formal and material division ; in which case, the 
only resource is to place it among that class to which it 
bears the nearest kinship. This is most frequently the case 
with dialectical fallacies, where the sophist either envelopes 
his false principle in a variety of disguises, or avoids its 
distinct statements in the elliptical language of ordinary 
reasoning by a suppressed premiss, leaving his hearers to 
supply one which is either untrue or does not establish 
the conclusion. In the latter case the fallacy may not 
only have as many relations to one genus as another, but, 
until the sophist has drawn his inference, it remains a matter 
of doubt to what particular head it may be referred. For 
example, if a man, after dwelling on the abuses of religion, 
proceed to infer that the system so deformed is false, we must 
suppose him to assume either that every power distorted 
from its natural uses cannot come from God, which is a 
palpable falsehood, or that every false religion is corrupt, 
which, however true, proves nothing, the middle term being 
undistributed. Now, in the former case, the fallacy would 
be referred to the head of extra dictionem ; in the latter, to 
that of in dictions. It is a matter of no concern to the 
sophist whether his hearers assent to the false premiss or 
to the unsound syllogism, as long as they can be brought 
to admit the conclusion 1 . 



CHAPTER I. 

FOBMAL FALLACIES. 

1 . Illicit Process and Undistributed Middle. 

To this head may be referred all those forms of reasoning 
which violate any of the canons of pure inference, as laid 
down in the book on syllogisms. Of this kind is the fallacy 
so much in vogue of supposing the conclusion false because 
the premiss is false, or because the argument is illegitimate ; 

' Whately's Logic, chap. v. 
X 



306 FORMAL TALLACIES. [B. VI. 

as if any one should show the futility of an argument ad- 
vanced to prove the Divine existence, and thence infer that 
God did not exist. In reality, the discarded argument ought 
to go for nothing : its refutation proves nought beyond its 
individual weakness, nor can it be extended further without 
involving an illicit process of the major. Thus, supposing 
the existence of God was rested on the universality of the 
belief, and a nation was adduced as destitute of belief, the 
sophism by which such a refutation would be erected into a 
disproof of the existence of the Deity would be Whatever is 
universally true must be believed ; the existence of God is 
not universally believed, therefore it is not true ; in which 
true is taken universally in the conclusion, and only par- 
ticularly in the major premiss. In like manner, others are 
inclined to infer the truth of the premises from that of the 
conclusion, which involves the fallacy of undistributed middle : 
As what is universally believed is true ; the existence of God 
is universally believed, therefore it is true ; where the term 
universally believed is taken twice particularly. Tet it may 
be fairly assumed, if an able reasoner produce no other argu- 
ments in defence of his position than such as are easily 
exploded, that his opinions are untenable, and that the con- 
verse of his doctrine is true. Hence no greater damage can 
accrue to a cause than to leave its defence in the hands of 
feeble advocates, since ordinary people take their exposition 
as an accurate measure of all that can be said in its favour. 
Nothing is more common to persons who are fluctuating 
between two sets of tenets, than to become firmly attached 
to one of them through hearing a weak-minded advocate 
argue against them. 

Another fallacy akin to the present is mistaking a con- 
trary for a contradictory proposition, or inferring, against the 
rules of opposition, that because one view is false its contrary 
must be true. Thus, if any one were to argue from the fact 
that the cholera was a visitation from God, that its causes 
did not depend upon any physical laws, he would fall into a 
fallacy of this kind. For there is not such direct opposition 
between the two cases that both cannot be true together, 
which is the law of contraries. In fact, the probabilities 
are strongly in favour of the latter supposition ; since we 
know nothing of pestilence that may not be traced to some 



.C. II. 1.] FALLACIES OF HYPOTHETICALS. 307 

kind of material agency, though we cannot lay our hands 
upon the precise combination of causes in which some of 
them take their rise. This fallacy appears in the form of 
undistributed middle. "Whatever does not depend on phy- 
sical laws is a visitation from God ; the cholera is a visitation 
from God ; therefore it does not depend on physical laws. 

It may be observed, that the infraction of the rules of 
hypotheticals viz., proceeding from the denial of the ante- 
cedent to that of the consequent, or from the establishment 
of the consequent to the affirmation of the antecedent, also 
involves illicit process of the major and undistributed middle. 
Thus, if the existence of God be universally believed, it must 
be true ; but it is not universally believed, therefore it is not 
true ; and if the existence of God be true it must be uni- 
versally believed, but it is not universally believed, therefore 
it is not true. 



CHAPTEE II. 

TEEBAL FALLACIES. 

1. Ambiguous Middle. 

IK the case of undistributed middle, the extremes of the 
syllogism are compared with two different parts of the same 
term : we have now to consider a series of fallacies in which 
the middle, being used in two different senses in the two pre- 
mises, is compared with two different terms. The first class 
of them may be referred to the head of fallacies of equivo- 
cation. Of this kind is the argument of Plato 1 , which is 
generally taken up by those who advocate a system of 
national education as a panacea for everything: No one 
desires evil knowing it to be so; to do wrong is evil, 
therefore no one desires to do wrong cognisant of the true 
nature of what he desires, but only in consequence of 
ignorance. No one could assent to the major unless the 
term evil were restricted to that class of objects which either 
interfered with our own happiness, or frustrated that of 
others in matters where our own interests were not con- 

1 In his Gorgiaa. 
x2 



308 VERBAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

cerned. In the minor, however, the term is taken in its 
most general sense, and being in that character applied to 
the major term, leads to a palpably wrong inference. Yet 
from this argument Plato inferred that virtue is a branch of 
intelligence, and is to be produced by intellectual cultivation ; 
and made the proposition the basis of his ethical system, 
in which he was followed by most of the philosophical 
schools among the later Greeks 1 . With a similar " paltering 
with words in a double sense" were the arguments of the 
ancients relative to the summum bonum infected, the word 
good being at one time intended to mean what was good for 
oneself, and at another what was good for other people. 
The proper mode of dissipating such verbal ambiguities is 
by drawing a distinction, and granting or denying the pro- 
position according to the different meanings implied in the 
statement. Of the use of this instrument the scholastics 
were the most powerful masters ; and it still furnishes in the 
continental universities one of the most powerful weapons of 
theological controversy. 

Another example of ambiguous middle may be instanced 
in the argument by which many set themselves against a 
judicious reform of the electoral system. Thus, whatever 
interferes with the influence of property is pernicious ; the 
measure in question interferes with the influence of pro- 
perty, &c. Now, the major should never be accepted in an 
unrestricted sense ; because property may exercise a perni- 
cious as well as a beneficial influence, according as it is 
administered ; and if the proposed measure simply tended to 
deprive the possessor of property of the power to abuse his 
influence, the objection would, of course, fall to the ground. 
There are a class of words which, from being indiscriminately 
applied to distinct meanings, are peculiarly liable to lead 
those who employ them into fallacies of this character. 
Of this kind is the word same, which sometimes denotes 
similarity, but is as often employed to point out identity ; 
as when we say : " The same person whom we observed 
yesterday," we do not mean an individual resembling the 
one whom we saw in dress and features, but the same 
identical person ; but if the word is applied to a house or 
a stone, the expression by no means signifies identity, but 

1 Mill's System of Logic, vol. ii. p. 446. 



C. II. 1.] EQUIVOCAL AND PABONYMOUS WOBDS. 309 

mere similarity of ^relation. From this double signification 
of words arise frequent cases of ambiguous middle, as in the 
argument of Bishop Berkeley to prove the existence of an 
eternal mind : " Ideas cannot exist without a mind in which 
they inhere ; I have the same idea to-day as I had yester- 
day ; but this would be impossible, unless there was a mind 
in which it could exist during the interval of its absence." 
Here Dr. Berkeley confounds, under the word same, resem- 
blance with identity, and uses the term in the latter sense 
when he ought only to have employed it in the former 1 . 

OccasionaDy this fallacy assumes the form of an interro- 
gation, in which many questions are asked under the guise 
of one ; so that whatever answer is given the sophist may 
bring under the response the cases to which it does not 
apply. To detect the ambiguity it is necessary to answer 
each question separately. Thus, the question discussed by 
Cicero in the third book of the He Officiis, whether anything 
vicious is expedient, belongs to the fallacy of interrogation ; 
from the ambiguity of the word expedient, which sometimes 
means conducive to temporal prosperity, sometimes con- 
ducive to the greatest good. Now, if the reply to this 
question be in the negative that is, if the latter sense be 
applied to the word expedient, it is the custom of the sophist 
to introduce the former. For example : What is vicious is not 
expedient ; whatever conduces to wealth and aggrandisement 
is expedient ; therefore it cannot be vicious. If the response 
be affirmative, of course the order will be reversed : Some- 
thing vicious is expedient ; whatever is expedient is desirable ; 
therefore something vicious is desirable. 

Another group of fallacies under this head arises from 
men taking for granted that paronymous words i. e. those 
which spring from one root must convey exactly the same 
meaning. This assumption is of common occurrence, as few 
express the terms in precisely the same words throughout 
the discourse, but continually vary them to suit the structure 
of the sentence, and to divest their style of a pedantic air. 
Nor is the practice at all illogical, so long as the variety of 
expressions in which the terms are clothed point to the 
same identical meaning ; but since paronymous terms do not 
invariably do so, the assumption, when not carefully watched, 

1 Mill's System of Logic, vol. ii. p. 451. 



310 VERBAL FALLACIES. [B. TI. 

is often likely to mislead. Thus, if any one inferred from 
the fact that theorists and projectors are unfit to be trusted, 
that his neighbour ought not to be trusted because he has 
formed projects or theories ; he would imply that the bad 
sense which we attach to mere theorists and projectors is 
equally applicable to any one who forms theories and pro- 
jects, which is by no means the case. It is not indispensable 
to sophisms of this kind that the fallacy lurk in the middle 
term. Though classed under that head, it may lie in one of 
the terms of the conclusions. Thus : To be acquainted with 
the guilty is a presumption of guilt ; this man is so acquainted, 
therefore we may presume that he is guilty. This argument 
proceeds on the supposition of an exact correspondence 
between presume and presumption, which, however, does not 
exist ; for presumption is commonly used to express a kind 
of slight suspicion, whereas to presume amounts to abso- 
lute belief 1 . Such fallacies being built on the grammatical 
structure of language, are usually termed Fallacia figure 
dictionis. 

As an additional instance of this class we may cite the use 
of the word representative, which, from the verb which forms 
its root, is taken not unfrequently to mean, in the case of a 
member of a legislative assembly, a person who is bound to re- 
present the exact opinions of the majority of his constituents on 
all points, and never to act on his own responsibility; whereas, 
law and usage has defined the term to mean one who is 
chosen to represent the interests of a certain constituency 
according to the best dictates of his own judgment, and un- 
biassed by any undue extraneous influence. Such a person 
may consult the opinions of his constituents before making 
up his mind on a question that may concern them, but he is 
not bound either to be their spokesman, or resign his seat, 
though he may pursue the latter course from motives of 
delicacy. 

Under the head of ambiguous middle may be ranked the 
fallacy of division, which consists in the middle term being 
used in the major premiss collectively and in the minor dis- 
tributively ; and the fallacy of composition, which simply re- 
verses this order, taking the distributive sense first and the 
collective sense after. Of these the most glaring examples 

1 Whately's Logic, ch. v. 



C. II. 1.] FALLACIES OF DIVISIOK A.JTD COMPOSITION. 311 

are : Seven is one number ; five and two are seven ; therefore 
five and two are one number ; or the reverse : Five and two 
are two numbers ; seven is five and two, therefore seven is 
two numbers. Of the last kind is the Owenite fallacy, di- 
rected against the doctrine of human responsibility : He 
who necessarily goes or stays is not a free agent ; you must 
necessarily go or stay, &c., in which the major is " he who is 
compelled to go or compelled to stay, is not a free agent," 
which can be readily conceded ; but as the minor changes the 
middle term into sheer compulsion to take the alternative of 
these two courses, the conclusion is abortive. Such, likewise, 
is the fallacy which leads many to speculate in lotteries, 
which is thus stated by Dr. Whately 1 : The gaining of a high 
prize is no uncommon occurrence ; and what is no uncommon 
occurrence may reasonably be expected ; therefore the gain- 
ing of a high prize may reasonably be expected. The con- 
clusion, being evidently confined to the person who makes the 
inference, must mean " reasonably expected by a certain in- 
dividual ;" therefore, for the major premiss to be true, the 
middle term must be understood to mean, " no uncommon 
occurrence to someone particular person ;" but the minor, 
which has been placed first, can only be true in the sense of 
no uncommon occurrence to some one or other, and thus 
gives rise to the fallacy of composition. 

This fallacy is of frequent occurrence in civil concerns, as 
is instanced in the mode in which people lose sight of the 
aggregate results of acts in their separate insignificance. 
Thus the profligate forgets while he infers that each single 
indulgence can be of little harm to his constitution, that the 
collective amount may undermine its vigour; nor do the 
avaricious seem to be aware, while they attempt to convince 
their own conscience and others that they are not bound to 
subscribe to this or the other benevolent institution, that the 
practical conclusion which they draw is that all charity may 
be dispensed with. 

The last verbal fallacy we shall notice is tkefallacia acci- 
dentis, together with its converse, fallacia a dicto secundum 
quid ad dictum simpliciter; in each of which the middle is used 
m one premiss to signify something considered in its absolute 
essence, and in the other to imply, besides its simple nature, 

1 Logic, ch. v. 



312 VEEBAL FALLACIES. [E. TI. 

the accidents and relative conditions it is liable to assume. 
Thus, in thefallacia accidentis we draw a simple, unrestricted 
absolute conclusion from one that is only true by accident, 
as if we were to decry antimony because (on account of its 
misapplication) it produces bad effects ; or to attribute to elo- 
quence all the evils to which its abuse leads ; or to medicine 
the errors of certain ignorant practitioners. Of a similar kind 
is the fallacy of the epicureans, who concluded the gods must 
have human form, because, among all creatures in the world, 
men alone had the use of reason. The gods, said these philoso- 
phers, are very happy ; none can be happy without virtue ; 
there is no virtue without reason ; and reason is found nowhere 
except in the human form : it must be avowed, therefore, 
that the gods have the human form. Eeason, however, is not 
essential to the human form, but only accidentally connected 
with it : it was, therefore, puerile to conclude that because 
the gods were endowed with mind they must also have hands, 
feet, and other human appurtenances. The converse fallacy 
of passing from what is true in some respects to what is true 
absolutely, may be instanced in another argument of this 
school of philosophers to prove the same proposition. The 
gods must be invested with the human form, because that form 
is most beautiful, and everything beautiful must be in God. 
For, as the human figure is not beautiful absolutely, but only 
in relation to bodies, it does not follow -that it must be in 
God, who is only the inheritor of absolute perfection : i. e. 
perfection without any imperfection. The following is a 
similar fallacy, which Cicero puts into the mouth of Cotta to 
disprove the existence of God : If God exist, he must be in 
possession of all virtue ; but we can attribute no virtues to 
God like those in men, therefore no deity exists 1 . It did not 

1 " How," says Cotta, " can \ve conceive God, since we can attribute 
no virtue to Him? For shall we say that He has prudence? But since 
prudence consists in the choice between good and evil, what need can 
God have for this choice, not being capable of any evil? Shall we say 
He has intelligence and reason ? But reason and intelligence serve to 
discover to us that which is unknown from that which is known. Now 
there can he nothing unknown to God. Neither can justice be in God; 
because this relates only to the intercourse of men ; nor temperance, 
since He has no desires to moderate; nor strength, since He is susceptible 
of neither pain or labour, and is not exposed to any danger. How, 
therefore, can that be a God which has neither intelligence or virtue?" 
Cicero, Natura Deorum, b. iii. 



C. III. 1.] OBLIQUE ASSUMPTIONS. 313 

strike the framer of this argument that there was just a 
possibility that virtue in man might only exist in a relative 
state from the imperfection it exhibits, and that the source 
from which it was derived might be traced back to its full 
plenitude in God. To deny that there is no virtue in God, 
because the imperfect virtue which exists in , man cannot be 
ascribed to Him, is tantamount to the assertion that because 
no rivers can exist in the sea, the ocean has no water ; or is 
equivalent to saying that the fact which proves God to have 
no intelligence is that nothing can be hid from Him ; that, 
in other words, He sees nothing, because He sees everything ; 
that He can do nothing, because He can do everything ; that 
He enjoys no happiness, because He possesses all happiness. 
It is, as if a rustic, who having never seen any houses but 
those covered with thatch, and having heard that there were 
no roofs of this nature in towns, should conclude that there 
were no houses in towns, and that the dwellers in them were 
exposed to all the inclemencies of the weather. 



CHAPTEE III. 

MATEEIAL FALLACIES. 

1. Non Causa pro Causa. Fallacy of Groundless 
Assumptions. 

THE largest group of material fallacies may be assigned to 
undue assumption of premiss ; which is in fact the cause of 
iiearlv all the sophisms which have obstructed the progress 
of science, either in the shape of incongruous theory, false 
objections, or any erroneous statement of fact. The false 

remiss is not unfrequently introduced as a thing quite in- 
ubitable, of which mankind never ventured to exercise the 
slightest doubt ; just as Charles the Second made the mem- 
bers of the Eoyal Society believe, that a live fish did not 
increase the weight of any vessel of water in which it was 
placed, by requesting an explanation of the phenomenon 
as a real fact. Sometimes the groundless statement is in- 
troduced as " a well-known fact, universally admitted," 
or " a circumstance not a little remarkable ;" or it may 
be covertly insinuated, by way of illustrating the pre- 
tended fact which is so assumed. Thus, the opponents of 



314 MATEBIAL FALLACIES. [B. TI. 

Copernicus argued that the earth did not move ; because, in 
that event, a stone let fall from the top of a high tower would 
not reach the ground at the foot of the tower, but at a little 
distance from it, in a contrary direction to the earth's course. 
In the same manner (said they) as a ball ivhen dropped from 
the mast-head of a ship in full sail does not fall exactly at 
the foot of the mast, but nearer to the stern of the vessel. The 
Copernicans might have silenced these objections by drop- 
ping a ball from the mast-head; as it turned out upon 
actual experiment that it does fall at the foot as the theory 
requires. But the spurious fact was so plausibly stated that 
the Copernicans admitted its truth, and struggled vainly to 
make out a difference between the two cases. 

To this head may be referred that wide class of fallacies 
which ascribes objective existence to abstractions. From 
the abstract principle that nature abhors a vacuum, philoso- 
phers formerly taught that vessels full of water break when 
they freeze, and by the contraction of the water leave a 
vacuum which nature cannot endure. It has, however, been 
discovered that the fracture arises from a contrary reason ; 
since water when frozen occupies more space than in a state 
of fluidity, and consequently breaks the vessels which do not 
afford room for the expansion. Of a similar nature were the 
abstractions which corroded the .bulk of the Aristotelian 
physics ; such as the abstract perfection of circular motion, by 
which the Stagyrite attempted to prove that the planets move 
in perfect circles ; and the assumption that generation and 
corruption only happen between contraries, which led him to 
infer that the heavenly bodies were incorruptible, simply 
because circular motion had no contraries 1 . Extreme in- 
stances of this tendency to substitute a priori conceptions for 
actual realities, may be found in the abstract notions by which 
many of the ancients sought to resolve the principles of the 
universe. Some placed the explanation of all phenomena in 
the "TO curfipov," or infinitude of things ; others in the TO ov 
and the TO ^ ov, that is to say, in entity and nonentity; 
while an authority,' which was destined to command opinions 
for nearly two thousand years, settled this important point 
by deciding that matter, form, and privation were to be con- 
sidered the principle of all things. 

1 Galileo Systema Cosmicum, Dial. L p. 30. 



C. HI. 1.] FALLACIES OF THE GBEEK PHILOSOPHEES. 315 

Another prejudice that leads to the fallacy of groundless 
assumption, is the notion that differences in nature corre- 
spond to distinctions in language ; extreme instances of 
which may be found in modern as well as in ancient inquiries. 
"With the Greeks, however, this fallacy was most conspicu- 
ously prominent, partly on account of the philosophic struc- 
ture of their own language, which led them to imagine that 
all its generalisations of natural phenomena were exact tran- 
scripts of reality ; and partly because their own ignorance of 
every other language debarred them from, perceiving the true 
functions of language, or from drawing a distinction between 
terms loosely abstracted from things by vulgar perception, 
and others which had been scientifically invested with a 
determinate connotation. Hence they never [dreamt it was 
necessary to distinguish things which their language con- 
founded, or to combine objects that the popular phraseology 
of the country had kept apart ; but they set on analysing and 
sifting the general terms of their language, as if the vague 
notions they embodied, had been formed by some inspired 
process, and warranted by Heaven to reflect the exact reality 
of things. Accordingly, when Thales was asked what is the 
greatest thing ? he replied, Place ; for all other things are in 
the world, but the world is in it. In Aristotle we have the 
consummation of this mode of speculation. Thus, in in- 
quiring into the existence of void, or empty space, he enu- 
merates the different senses in which we say one thing is 
contained in another. For example, the part is in the 
whole, as the finger is in the hand ; the species is in the 
genus as man is included in animal; the government of 
Greece is in the king, and various other senses are exem- 
plified, but of all these the most proper is when we say a- 
thing is in a vessel, or, generally, in a place. Then examining 
what place is, he comes to the conclusion that if about a 
body there be another body including it, it is in place, and 
not, if otherwise. Proceeding, then, to the question of, a 
void, he, as usual, examines the different senses in which the 
term is used, and adopts, as the most proper, place without 
matter. He then proves that so blank a thing cannot exist, 
from such arguments as these : In a void there could be no 
difference of up and down ; for as in nothing there are no 
differences, so there are none in privation or negation ; but a 
void is merely a privation or negation of matter ; therefore, 



316 MATEBIAL FALLACIES. [u. TI. 

in a void bodies could not move up and down, which it is in 
their nature to do. "When we compare such attempts to 
extract facts out of the loosest forms of language with the 
scientific reasoning of our day, we may cheerfully allow the 
ancients their decided supremacy in the walks of sculpture 
and eloquence, in consideration of our more splendid domi- 
nion over nature. 

"We are not unfrequently led to take our own conceptions 
of the possible, as furnishing the actual limits to which its 
boundary extends ; nor is this unfair, if the things we place 
outside the line be really impossible, in the light of being 
absolutely inconceivable without over-riding some of the 
elementary principles of the thinking faculty. Thus it 
would be by no means wrong to assume that the same object 
cannot be in two places at the same time ; that something 
can spring out of nothing ; or that the laws of number can 
be otherwise than what they are. But the evil is, that men 
confound this strict sense of the word impossibility, with that 
which belongs to what is purely inconceivable ; on the score 
of the matter which is placed in that category being entirely 
strange to them, and requiring some strain on their concep- 
tions before they can bring their mind to entertain it. Thus 
St. Augustine denied the existence of the antipodes, be- 
cause he could not see how it could be brought about ; 
and Bacon rejected the Copernican system simply because 
he could not conceive so great a void in the celestial regions 
as that system assigns to them. In like manner the Carte- 
sians waged war against Newton's law of gravitation, assum- 
ing the principle that a thing cannot act where it is not ; and 
so plausible did the objection seem to that great astronomer, 
that he imagined a subtile ether to line space, through the 
medium of which the attraction of the various planetary 
bodies might be conveyed to each other. " It is inconceivable" 
said Newton, in propounding this theory, " that inanimate 
brute matter should, without the mediation of something 
else which is not material, operate upon and afiect other 

matter without mutual contact That gravity should 

be innate and essential to matter so that one body should act 
on another through a vacuum, is to me so great an absurdity 
that I believe no man who has a competent faculty of 
thinking in philosophical matters can ever fall into it." It 
does not appear to have struck Newton, that with regard to 



0. m. 1.] FALSE SENSE OF " INCONCEIVABLE." 317 

the mere inexplicability of the phenomena, that motion by 
impact is quite as mysterious as impulsion at a distance, with 
no intermediate agencies between ; and that since the latter, 
as we are fully assured, is the ordinary mode by which one 
spiritual substance acts upon another, we can find no diffi- 
culty, if circumstances require it, to invest material sub- 
stances with a similar property. 

The same conception of impossibility has been at the 
bottom of most of the absurd theories of modern times, from 
the vortices of Descartes to the Neptunian system of geology. 
In metaphysics it has exercised rampant sway, as may be wit- 
nessed in the theories of Malebranche and Leibnitz to ac- 
count for the conformity of states of mind with peculiar dis- 
positions of bodies without direct contact, which these phi- 
losophers believed impossible. Leibnitz attributed the fact 
of such dissimilar substances acting in concert to a " pre-esta- 
blished harmony" existing between them ; which caused their 
motions to beat always in unison, just as two clocks which, 
though unconnected, strike simultaneously, and always point 
to the same hour. Malebranche's theory of "occasional 
causes" was a refinement on this conception. Instead of 
supposing the clocks originally arranged so as to strike 
together, he held that when the one strikes God interposes, 
and makes the other strike in correspondence with it. 

No prejudice is so apt to lead men to assign real causes in 
nature to the agency of pure chimeras, as that of mistaking 
their subjective notions for objective laws; as may be witnessed 
to a great extent in astrologers, who, referring every natural 
production to the influence of the stars, made out that there 
must be an immoveable heaven beyond the celestial orbs, 
because the earth produces different things in different 
countries ; just as if India could not produce ivory, and Sabea 
precious drugs, and Italy wine and oil, unless there were an 
immoveable heaven to present a diversified and unchangeable 
aspect towards different portions of the globe. To the influence 
of this prejudice may be ascribed the popular notion, that the 
advent of comets and eclipses always portend great evils to 
subjects and princes ; which has caused an infinite waste of 
stout prophesying and prediction to the no small terror of 
nations. Had the chronologies of Helvicus borne the most 
distant approximation to truth, Borne would have been de- 
stroyed some scores of times ; nor has it been for want of 



318 MATEEIAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

similar forethought in modern times that Paris and London 
have not as often undergone the same fate 1 . The marvel, 
however, is not that direful mortalities and plague, or the 
death of some great potentate happen to coincide with the 
arrival of a comet or an eclipse, but that they fall out so 
often without them ; for such celestial phenomena come 
round so frequently, that we are inclined to suspect by the 
laws of chance that wars and pestilence should be oftener 
associated with them. Moreover, there is no reason why 
causes so general and removed as these should have any con- 
siderable effect on the earth, or act at one point more than 
another, or threaten a king rather than a tobacconist. 

With the latter class of groundless assumptions may be 
ranked the inclination to take refuge in omens and au- 
guries as exponents of the future, which is so prevalent 
among the inferior orders of our day, and which exercised 
so potent an influence over the destinies of the ancient 
empires. Even Dr. Johnson would not go abroad on Fri- 
day, through a pre-existing notion that he must encounter 
misfortune ; and we all know that no Italian host will 
dine thirteen together, or sit down with a party of eleven. 
If an ancient general missed his footing in landing on any 
expedition, the omen told so fearfully on the courage of the 
soldiers, that the chances of his success were consider- 
ably diminished. Hence Caesar, who was much in advance 
of his time in all respects, on accidentally stumbling in effect- 
ing an embarkation on the African coast, had the presence of 
mind to convert the direful presage into a favourable one, by 
exclaiming, "Africa, I embrace thee." Frequently the omen 
took the form of a lucky or unlucky name, which the gods 
were supposed to send in prognostication of a future event. 
Thus the Greeks, as Herodotus tells us, were encouraged in 
their enterprise on then 1 way to Mycale by the arrival of a 
deputation from Lamos ; from the fact that one of the indi- 
viduals comprising it was called Hegisistratus, or the leader 
of armies. 

Another fallacy no less generally diffused, may be noticed in 
the practice of blending our own inferences with descriptions 
of what we have seen, so as to confound the conclusions 

1 What Cervantes did for the old romancers, Dean Swift accom- 
plished for this class of propheciers : none have survived the renowned 
predictions of his Isaac Bickerstaif. 



C. HI. 1.] INFEEENCE CONFOUNDED WITH PEECEPTION. 319 

drawn from fact with actual observation. Thus it was stoutly 
maintained by the anti-Copernicans, that the system of 
the Danish astronomer could not be true, because they saw 
the sun rise and set ; the stars revolve in circles round the 
pole ; and they felt the earth to remain immoveable under their 
feet. But we now know that their alleged experience con- 
sisted entirely of inferences from a set of phenomena equally 
reconcileable both with the Ptolemaic system, and with that 
against which they objected. To the same absence of ability 
to discriminate between inference and the perception on which 
inference is grounded, may be attributed many of the marvel- 
lous stories by which posterity is astounded and amused. A 
wandering meteor in a churchyard is sufficient to call up in 
the mind of a rustic the presence of a supernatural visitor ; 
nor could many observant travellers of antiquity get rid of 
the impression derived from the sight of some Africans in a 
state of abject abasement, that they belonged to a race of men 
whose heads grew out of their breasts, and not from their 
shoulders. * It is singular to observe how full of conjectural 
inference is the most naked statement that can be wrung 
out of an illiterate person concerning the facts which he saw. 
He observes a sheet of lightning strike a house, and imme- 
diately asseverates his conviction that he saw a bolt drive in 
the wall, and not unfrequently goes in search of it. Every 
word in his description has its surmise, and each sentence is 
accompanied with a theory. So far, as Dugald Stewart ob- 
serves, is a plain ungarnished statement of natural fact from 
being a result of nature, that the capacity to perform it may 
be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind trained by 
long and successful study to the most difficult of all arts, the 
interpretation of nature 1 . 

A common assumption, and one by no means confined to 
vulgar minds, is the habit of assigning anything as a cause 
which precedes another, or exists in casual connexion with it. 
Thus, because the wealth and power of the country increased 
under the old electoral system, and during the continuance 
of the Test Act, it was a standing argument with a large 
portion of the community when the abolition of such things 
were talked of, that the prosperity of England was owing to 
their influence. Eor a similar reason it has been assumed that 

1 Elements of the Philosophy of Mind, vol. ii ch. ii. sec. 5. 



320 MATEEIAL FALLACIES. [E. VI. 

the national debt is the cause of the national prosperity ; 
that, because in mediaeval times provisions were more equally 
distributed, a low degree of refinement is more favourable 
to the enjoyment of the masses of a community than a high 
state of civilisation 1 . In the same manner it was concluded 
that the star which is called the dog-star is the cause of the 
heat which prevails during the time of its ascension, and the 
increased mortality which attends its zenith in warm cities. 
Virgil himself, unless his language may be deemed figurative, 
was guilty of this fallacy when he wrote : 

Aut Sirius ardor : 

Ille sitim morbosque ferens mortalibus segris 
Nascitur, et laevo contristat lumine ccelum. sEn. x. 273. 



Now if there were any truth in such conjectures, it would 
follow that in those countries where the situation of the star 
above the horizon is most perpendicular, heat should be the 
most severely felt ; but so far is this from being the case, that 
its greatest altitude is accompanied with extreme cold. Sucli 
fallacies, though receiving a distinct name in the scholastic 
logic, as that of post hoc, ergo propter hoc, or cum hoc, ergo 
propter hoc are only violations of the cautions with which we 
have surrounded the method of agreement ; and all infractions 
of similar rules with respect to the other methods may be 
regarded as so many distinct fallacies, and invested with 
corresponding designations. 

2. Incomplete Enumeration. 

One of the most common infringements of a principle 
affecting the validity of three of the experimental methods is 
that of incomplete enumeration, or of forming a conclusion 
upon the effects or causes of certain phenomena before ex- 
amining all the circumstances in connexion with them. This 
is the fallacy of inductio per enwnerationem simplicem, which 
Bacon censured as one of the primary sources of the errors 
which infected the ancient systems of philosophy. Men, 
after observing a few facts, grasped at the most sweeping- 
generalisations, being impatient of the tardy results of passive 
observation, and having no idea of the experimental mode of 
investigation. Hence in everything which concerns natural 

' Nov. Org. Aph. 46. 






C. III. 2.] INCOMPLETE ENUMERATION. 321 

phenomena their theories went astray, as they assumed in- 
stances which nature either flatly contradicted, or failed to 
corroborate by actual fact. On such loose inductions Bacon 
attempted to throw ridicule by citing the case of an ancient 
sceptic who, on being shown by a Pagan priest the register 
of those who had discharged the benefactions they had made 
to the gods on condition of their preservation from impend- 
ing shipwreck, as a proof of the miraculous interposition of 
God, drily asked, where were the names of those registered 
who, after making similar vows, had perished. 

Yet instances of such loose reasoning are by no means 
wanting in modern times, even among men of great 
eminence, and are to be traced in many of the ordinary 
axioms of civil intercourse. Locke, for example, in his 
Treatise on Education, seriously advises all parents and go- 
vernors of children to inure them to great hardship, dining 
them at all hours in the day, bathing them in snow during 
winter, and habituating them to long fasts and fatigues ; 
because, he remarks, those who have undergone such dis- 
cipline never fail to carry a robust body through manhood, 
and live to extreme old age : but had this distinguished 
metaphysician taken pains to collect the number of those 
who had died under the experiment, he would most likely 
have modified his opinion. Another instance occurs in the 
plausible notion so generally entertained by the old political 
economists, that men of lavish expenditure encourage in- 
dustry, while the mere hoarder confers no benefit on society 
by his gains 1 . Here, then, are two sets of phenomena in- 
volved, one open and palpable to the senses, while the other 
lies under the surface, and cannot be reached unless by a 
penetration which, irrespective of sense, follows out things to 
their natural results. The fallacy consists, as most sophisms 
of this kind commonly do, in losing sight of the latent effects, 
and restricting the generalisation to mere sensible pheno- 
mena, as if they were the only instances concerned. The 
generous expenditure of the liberal is observed to feed 
labour, encourage industry, and stimulate the arts : every 
tradesman flourishes with whom they have connexion, and no 
misery is seen at their gates. It is, however, overlooked 

The first paradox was maintained by Coleridge, the second by 
Rousseau. 

Y 



822 MATEEIAL FALLACIES. [B. Til 

that the money of the avaricious, as far as the great masses 
of the community are concerned, is more usefully employed; 
for their savings, after passing into the hands of their banker, 
or having been invested in the funds, is lent to some mer- 
chant or manufacturer, and employed in hiring spinners and 
weavers, or opening some new channel of commercial enter- 
prise, and thus gives occupation and bread to far more hands, 
at one venture, than the money of the generous employ 
during the whole of their career. But the careless observer 
does not see what becomes of the miser's money. The 
vulgar impression is, that it is locked up in an iron chest, 
which is not opened unless at the dictation of stern neces- 
sity ; while the number of flourishing tradesmen that the 
profusion of the liberal feeds, is at once evident to the most 
obtuse vision ; and this in so palpable a manner, that no 
one ever thinks of the far greater group of artisans whom 
it might employ in industrial and far more remunerative 
occupations. Hence comes the prejudice universal previous 
to the time of Adam Smith, and even not yet exploded among 
the majority of the educated classes, that prodigality encou- 
rages industry and parsimony oppresses it 1 . 

3. Fallacy of False Analogies. 

Analogies, whether including similarity of relations or 
resemblance between the properties of objects themselves, 
are generally introduced in discourse either for the purpose 
of mere illustration, or of moving the intellect to the recep- 
tion of certain opinions in the shape of direct evidence, or 
by way of argument and illustration combined. In the two 
latter cases only it falls under the cognisance of logic ; the 
former branch of the subject belongs to the rhetorician. 

An error in analogical reasoning may occur either in over- 
estimating the probative force of the proof, or in asserting or 
implying resemblance in points which are essential to the 
argument, simply from resemblance in other features which 
are indifferent to it. It is to the last case that the fallacy 
in question more particularly applies. A common instance 
may be cited in the inference commonly drawn in favour of 
despotic government, from the similarity of relation which 
holds between a prince and his subjects and a father and his 

1 Mill's System of Logic, vol. ii. p. 400. 



C. HI. 3.] FALSE POLITICAL ANALOGIES. 323 

family. The common people of every community are always 
in a state of infancy, and since paternal authority is neces- 
sary to promote the happiness of children, it is argued that 
the superior sagacity of the prince ought to interpose by 
direct mandate to advance the welfare of his subjects. Nor 
would the inference be at all unfair, if the analogy agreed 
in the essential point which contributes to make paternal 
government the best possible form for the administration of 
private concerns viz., the affection of a father for his family 
and his superior wisdom and experience. But it is just in 
this very point where it breaks down. For experience shows 
that we can never rely upon the existence of these properties 
in political despots ; evil favourites in many cases getting 
between them and their subjects, and creating jealousies and 
misunderstandings which involve either one or both in ruin. 
Were parental management likely to be disordered by similar 
causes, the result would be anything but good government. 
Another instance of this fallacy may be adduced in the 
common opinion that states, by the very constitution of 
things, have the same periods of infancy, manhood, and de- 
crepitude that are found in the individuals who compose 
them, that after the enjoyment of a certain amount of 
vigorous action decay must stamp its furrows upon empire 
just as it writes its wrinkles on the human body. Loose 
generalisations of this sort from history may furnish simi- 
litudes to illustrate or adorn ; but if obtruded in the shape of 
analogies from whence to reason, they will occasionally be 
found upon examination rather to turn the argument the 
opposite way than make out the conclusion. Thus, in the 
present case, the decay of the vital powers in natural bodies 
are traceable to the spontaneous progress of those very 
changes of structure which in their earlier stages constitute 
their growth to maturity; while so far is this from being 
the case in political bodies, that the advance of those changes 
cannot, unless by palpable mismanagement, have any effect 
but the still further continuance of growth. Hence the 
analogy in question establishes an opposite conclusion to 
what it was intended to make out. For, if it prove any- 
thing, it certainly is this, that bodies politic can only die 
of disease or violent death ; or, in other words, that they 
can have no old age. 

T2 



324 MATEEIAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

Tliis sophism, which scholastics termed a non tali pro tali, 
is generally allied with that of petitio principii, the analogy, 
which is the very thing to be proved before it can be ad- 
duced in evidence, being first assumed and argued from as if 
universally admitted. In this form it is frequently used to 
throw ridicule upon an opponent's reasoning, when he has in- 
cautiously let slip one or two loose expressions which admit 
of being illustrated by a burlesque parallelism. A ludicrous 
example of the fallacy in this guise may be found in the 
parliamentary debate on unlawful societies in Ireland, which 
took place in 1824 1 . "True philosophy," Mr. Mackintosh 
had said, in alluding to the word hate applied by the Catholic 
Association to the Orangemen of Ireland, " true philosophy 
will always contrive to lead men to virtue by the instru- 
mentality of their conflicting vices. The virtues, where 
more than one exist, live in harmony together. But the 
vices bear a mortal antipathy to each other, and furnish to 
the moral engineer the power by which he can keep them 
under control." "Admirable!" replied Mr. Canning ; "but 
the poor man who has but one vice must be in a very poor way 
no fulcrum, no moral power for effecting his cure ; whereas 
his more fortunate neighbour, who has more vices than one 
in his composition, is in a very fair way, indeed, of becoming 
an honest member of society. How would the honourable 
gentleman like to have this doctrine introduced into his 
domestic establishment ? If I had a drunkard in my house- 
hold and dismissed him on account of this fault, it would be 
totally out of my power to recommend him to the honour- 
able gentleman. But if I had the good fortune to discover 
he was also a thief, might I not with a safe conscience send 
him with an excellent recommendation, saying, I send you a 
man whom I know is a drunkard, but whom I am happy to 
inform you is also a thief; you cannot do better than employ 
him ; you will make his drunkenness counteract his thieving, 
and bring him out of the conflict a very moral personage." 
This felicitous exaggeration is founded on a misconception 
of the word vice, confounding it with crime, and then se- 
lecting two cases which instead of being conflicting are in 
reality accessory to each other. It may be remarked that 
the most brilliant raillery of this logical statesman may be 
traced to a dexterous employment of analogical fallacies. 
1 Hansard. 



C. III. 3.] FALSE PHILOSOPHICAL ANALOGIES. 325 

There is no more effective weapon in dispute than the fallacy 
of a non tali pro tali sharpened with an ironical edge. 

Under this head may be classed those fanciful analogies 
upon which many of the ancients founded physical theories, 
and which have drawn some of the moderns into inferences 
quite at war with common sense. Thus Pythagoras, finding 
that the relative distances of the planets bore an exact pro- 
portion to the divisions of the monochord, concluded that 
the action of these bodies in their orbitual motion gave rise 
to the fictitious music of the spheres 1 ; as if the melody of 
the harp entirely depended on the proportion of certain dis- 
tances between the strings, and not in the least on the sound- 
ing-board or wires of the instrument. It has been similarly 
held, that because certain combinations of numbers prevailed 
in some natural phenomena, they must run through the whole 
of nature ; as, that there must be four elements, since there 
are only four possible combinations of hot and cold, wet and 
dry ; that there must be seven planets, because there were 
seven metals, and even because there were seven days in the 
week. Kepler himself limited the number to six, simply 
because there were only five regular solids: besides, six 
was a perfect number that is equal to all its factors viz., 
2 + 2 + 2 or 3 + 3, which was an additional reason why 
there must be exactly six planets. The Pythagorians, in a 
similar way, were unanimous in thinking that the decimal 
number, as it surpassed most others in perfection, must be 
found in every celestial combination ; and being acquainted 
with only nine heavenly bodies, to make up the enumeration, 
stoutly maintained that there was an antichthon or counter- 
earth on the other side of the sun invisible to us. Even Huy- 

1 Shakspeare's delightful allusion to this conceit in the Merchant of 
Venice will, no doubt, be familiar to many of our readers: 
"How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank; 
Here we will sit, and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears : soft stillness and the night 
Becomes the touches of sweet harmony. 
Sit, Jessica : look how the floor of heaven 
Is thick inlaid with patterns of bright gold ; 
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
But in his motion like an angel sings, 
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubims: 
Such harmony is in immortal souls ; 
But while this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it." Act v. sc. 1. 



MATERIAL FALLACIES. [B. YI. 

gens was persuaded that when the number of the heavenly 
bodies had reached twelve, that further look-out was useless ; 
even Divine power could not go beyond that sacred number. 
Of a similar kind was the assumption of the ancients, that 
because nature in many objects realised their abstract ideas 
of perfection, that a similar adherence to the most perfect 
imaginable entities ought to pervade the entire universe. 
This was a most convenient principle, which dispensed with 
all examination of instances, and enabled them to come to a 
conclusion upon the laws of any natural phenomenon with 
little expenditure of thought. Thus, if any action of nature 
was to be investigated, the ancients had only to ask them- 
selves in how many possible ways a thing could be brought 
about, and select the most perfect, as the sure course which 
nature followed. For instance, because the heavenly bodies 
were perfect, they must move in circles, and that with uniform 
motion ; for irregularity of movement would be censurable in 
men, and could not be tolerated in the celestial regions. Nor 
was the force of such reasoning lost upon some of the moderns ; 
for the Copernicans alleged in favour of their system, that it 
placed fire in the centre of the universe, the only position which 
the noblest element could consistently occupy in conformity 
with that precedence given to dignity, and those customary 
rules of etiquette which prevailed in other parts of the universe. 

4. Petitio Principii. 

The fallacy of petitio principii, or begging the question, 
consists either in arguing in a circle or assuming a premiss 
which unfairly implies the conclusion. The theologian would 
furnish an instance of the first, were he to prove the au- 
thority of the Church from Scripture, and the inspiration of 
Scripture from the authority of the Church. To prove the 
existence of God on the same authority, or to argue that a 
government was good because we ought to support it, would 
afford an extreme instance of the second. 

Notwithstanding Aristotle is very circumstantial in the 
description of this fallacy 1 , no philosopher fell so frequently 
into it as himself. As an instance of his performances in 
this way, we may adduce his proof of the earth being the 
central spot of the universe : 

1 Arist de Soph. Elenc. cap. xxviL 



C. III. 4.] FALLACIES OF PHBENOLOGY. 327 

The nature of heavy things is to tend to the centre of the 

universe, and of light things to fly off from it ; 
But experience proves that heavy things tend towards 

the centre of the earth, and that light things go off 

from it, 
Therefore the centre of the earth is the same as the 

centre of the universe. 

It is clear that heavy things tend towards the centre of 
the earth ; but how could Aristotle deduce from this fact that 
they tend to the centre of the universe, unless by assuming 
in the major that the two centres are identical, which is the 
very thing he had to prove ? 

There is no fallacy in the category which is apt to put on 
more disguises, and to hoodwink men more readily into false 
principles, or to present them with more plausible reasons 
for their errors, than the assumption of the thing in dispute. 
Sometimes it appears in support of a bad generalisation to 
explain away the outstanding exceptions which conflict with 
the theory. Thus, when it was objected to the psychological 
system of Grail and Sphurzheim, that Voltaire (if the phreno- 
logical busts were accurate) had the organ of veneration very 
large; it was alleged by the phrenologists that the reverence 
of that philosopher for the Deity was so great that he scouted 
all existing forms of worship, simply because they fell below 
his idea of the majestic and sublime nature of that worship 
which befitted so great a Being. Goethe's deficiency in 
ideality, and Mozart's want of harmonic perception when 
judged by the phrenological standard, were accounted for in 
a similar manner. These individuals had the organs very large, 
but owing to the casual thinness of the plates of the skull, and 
the transparent tenuity of the muscle at that particular spot, 
the organ did not protrude on the upper surface. It is ob- 
vious that such a convenient system of answering objections 
amounted to this : The system of phrenology is true, there- 
fore no exceptions to the theory exist which cannot be 
rationally accounted for, and proved to accord with it ; which 
is one of the most glaring instances of reasoning in a circle 
that the vagaries of philosophy afford 1 . 

1 These instances do not invalidate the entire system, but only the 
hasty generalisations which led its framers, in a night and a day, to 
assign to every inch of the cerebrum the precise feeling and faculty of 
which it was the organ. The tripartite division of the brain which this 



328 MATEEIAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

Occasionally this fallacy comes before us in the shape of 
mistaking a sign of a thing for the thing itself a mistake, 
however, of so gross a nature that it could not possibly pass 
current, unless a large space of time interfered as an agent 
in the deception. In past ages, for example, certain opinions 
were casually associated with peculiar interests, and though 
the interests have long been buried with the circumstances 
in which they had their origin, yet the opinions are still 
taken as presumptive proof of their tangible existence. A 
glaring instance of mistaking a sign, from which one might 
fairly infer a certain phenomenon, for a cause of it, occurred 
in the arguments of those who resisted Boman Catholic 
claims. The greater part of the enactment commonly known 
by the name of the Penal Laws, was framed at the epoch of 
the revolution, and was enforced with a view to discover the 
partisans of the Pretender. The creed of the Catholic, as 
Canning remarked, was not his guilt, but the means of de- 
tecting it. The creed was simply a sign or badge of those 
who had a leaning to a prince outlawed by the constitution. 
But to uphold the penal laws after the attachment had ex- 
pired, and the political danger passed away, was, as if a 
magistrate having received information that a murder had 
been committed by a man who wore spectacles and a wig, 
and having apprehended a man distinguished by these ap- 
pendages, should, upon its being ascertained that no murder 
was committed, still refuse to relinquish his man, persisting 
that the spectacles and the wig were conclusive evidence of the 
murder. All believers in transubstantiation being suspected 
of an attachment which the law deemed treasonable to the 
possessor of the throne, their creed was taken as a certain 
badge of the treason, and exposed its professors to severe 
punishment. But when the foreign attachment with the 
exiled family had ceased, the Catholic was punished for be- 
lieving in transubstantiation. 

One of the most notable disguises which this fallacy puts 
on, is to assign as the original cause of a thing in dispute an 
eifect or collateral consequence of the very principle which is 
sought to be explained away. By such a procedure Gibbon 
endeavours to undermine that part of the evidence adduced 

system assumes, cannot, we think, be doubted; but, then, it had been 
pointed out long before by Galen, and was a favourite theory of Hip- 
pocrates. 



C. III. 4.] BEGGING THE QUESTION. 329 

to prove the divine origin of Christianity, which is derived 
from the marvellous speed with which it subjected the world 
to its tenets. "We need no miraculous interposition, argues 
the historian 1 , to account for what is fully explainable by 
human agency ; and he immediately collects under distinct 
heads the causes which had conjointly operated to the wild- 
fire spread of the Christian doctrine. The principal of these 
are the pure lives of its professors ; the inflexible firmness 
with which they adhered to their principles, despite of rack, 
gaol, and all the horrid instruments of death ; the zeal they 
manifested in the propagation of their doctrines, and the 
subserviency of all other views to that end ; the social bond 
of brotherhood perpetuated among their members, and the 
regularities of daily worship. But Gibbon forgot in stating 
these and similar reasons as natural agents in the spread of 
Christianity, that he was assuming the very thing in dispute. 
It is obvious that the features he alleged so far from being 
natural, were about the most startling phenomena that could 
present themselves in a corrupt state of society corroded by 
moral pestilence of every kind : so that his pretended proof 
leaves the swift propagation of Christianity quite as in- 
explicable on human grounds as it was before. This kind of 
explanation is not a whit better than the light let in upon 
the foundations of the earth by the cosmogony of the Indians. 
" The world rests upon an elephant, and the elephant upon a 
tortoise," say the Brahmins. But, then, what does the tor- 
toise rest upon ? 

A similar instance of this fallacy in its most concealed 
guise is presented in the reasoning, by which Hobbes and 
Eousseau rest the mutual obligations of members of a civil 
community upon a supposed social compact, apart from all 
motives of utility and interest. According to the latter, 
sovereigns are compelled to provide for the welfare of their 
subjects, and subjects are bound to maintain dutiful allegiance 
to their sovereigns, by the terms of a contract entered into by 
their barbarous progenitors in renouncing savage life, and 
agreeing to establish a political society. In the same manner 
Hobbes, throughout his Leviathan, deduces with elaborate 
skill, the obligations which men are under, to obey even the 
most despotic mandates of their rulers, from a promise made 
by their ancestors, at the foundations of society, to leave their 
1 Decline and Fall, eh. xvi. 



330 MATERIAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

destinies in their hands. A great deal of good ingenuity, 
however, might have been spared by these philosophers had 
they reflected that even if the compact had been drawn out 
in precise terms, and the document on which it was written 
hermetically sealed, and transmitted to future generations, it 
could only have bound the race of men who subscribed it. 
In no further case could it have held without the admission 
of the very principle of expediency and interest they discarded 
as a ground of obligation. Thus we are forced back by the 
conclusion they adopted, to the enunciation of the operating 
motive their reasoning endeavoured to exclude. To have 
established that conclusion, they should have proved not 
only that a social compact did exist, but that it was an all- 
sufficient ground to link generations of men together in sup- 
port of the same institutions and the same line of policy. 
But they assumed this which was the radical point in the 
argument, and consequently proved nothing. 

Occasionally this fallacy masks itself in mere forms of 
expression, either assigning as a reason for a thing expressed 
in the abstract the same thing re-stated in the concrete, or 
making the concrete statement first, and then alleging as proof, 
the same thing expressed in a concrete form. Thus the load- 
stone attracts amber by reason of its magnetic virtue ; the 
poppy has a soporific virtue because it lulls to sleep. These 
sort of pretended explanations, though ungallantly termed 
ladies' reasons, are by no means confined to the gentler sex. 
The gravest philosophers have dealt in them, and none, per- 
haps, so much as the Stagyrite himself. The English lan- 
guage, on account of the diverse character of its origin, which 
has crowded it with words nearly synonymous in meaning 
but widely different in expression, is peculiarly suitable to this 
form of begging the question. For a sophist can, if he chooses, 
bring forward a proposition expressed in words of Saxon 
origin, and pretend to prove it by giving utterance to the 
very same sentiment in language of Norman derivation, or 
vice versa. This is the common mode of reasoning adopted 
by a peculiar class of political speakers. " The measure 
under consideration is the best fitted to meet the circum- 
stances of the case (Saxon propos.) ; because it provides for 
all the exigencies that can be supposed to be involved in the 
question" (JS"or. proof). " The bill before the House is 
calculated to elevate the character of the education of the 



C. III. 5.] IBBELEVANT CONCLUSION. 331 

country (Nor. prop.) ; for it raises the general standard of 
instruction throughout all the schools 1 " (Sax. proof). So 
true is the saying of Hobbes, that words are the counters of 
wise men but the money of fools. 

The reader must be on his guard against what Bentham 
termed " begging question appellatives," which assume the 
question under the guise of stating it. Thus, were a person 
to argue that because liberal institutions were beneficial to 
the country, that a Whig government ought to be preferred ; 
he would assume the point in dispute by the use of the word 
liberal, the connexion of which term with such institutions 
being the very matter which requires proof. Instances of 
this kind of begging the question are presented in all dis- 
cussions in which words of a laudatory or a vituperative 
character are used. For instance, the opponents of the 
recent establishment of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in 
these dominions, in all their arguments' on the subject set 
out with the assumption of the act being an aggression, and 
thence proceeded to show it was a wanton outrage on the 
feelings of the country. Whether right or wrong, elaborate 
reasoning on the point might have been dispensed with, for 
the conclusion was palpably begged in the statement of the 
premiss. 

5. Ignoratio Elenchi. 

The concluding fallacy we have to advert to is called by 
Aristotle ignoratio elencM 2 , or ignorance of the contradictory 
of an opponent's assertion, which we fall into when, instead 
of proving the contradictory or elenchus of our adversary's 
proposition, we attempt to establish something else re- 
sembling it : but as it is substantially the same thing to 
prove what was not denied as to disprove what was not as- 
serted, the fallacy may be employed for the apparent esta- 
blishment of our own proposition as well as for the feigned 
refutation of that of an opponent's. Though the Stagyrite 
is as carefully minute in his description of this fallacy as of 
the last, his own reasonings will afford not the least striking 
specimens of its practice. Thus he assumes that Parmenides 
and Melissus admitted only a single principle of all things ; 
as if they had understood by this principle that of which 

1 The phrases in question are selected from Hansard. Every par- 
liamentary debate affords many choice specimens of similar inanities. 
2 De Soph. Elen. c. v. 



332 MATERIAL FALLACIES. [B. VI. 

all things are composed, and refutes them on that ground ; but 
his reasoning was nothing to the purpose, since they meant 
the single and unique principle from which all things have 
derived their origin which is God. In like manner, he 
attributed to his predecessors, ignorance of the principle of 
privation, viz., that a thing could not exist before it was made, 
and treated them as clowns and fools, for not employing 
it, in the explanation of natural phenomena. Whereas no 
one could be ignorant of so palpable a truth, and he must 
have been blind indeed, who could have expected it to unlock 
for him, the least of the mysteries of nature. 

This is the standing sophism of polemical writers, and 
accompanies all controversy which is much connected with 
the passions, or which engages the attention of an over-heated 
crowd of disputants. The field of debate is so large that 
the combatants either join issue on the wrong points or do 
not join issue at all. One goes to the east, another to the 
west ; one loses the principle in dispute, and wanders amidst 
a crowd of irrelevant details : one mistakes contraries for 
contradictories ; another particulars for universals ; and after 
many hours' storm, they know not what they have been dis- 
cussing 1 : one is above, another below, another at the side ; 
each either making out a case which his adversary admits, or 
pursuing a line of argument which, when fully established, 
has not the slightest bearing on the point in dispute : one 
tugs at a word or similitude, or takes up a collateral pro- 
position having no essential connexion with the main argu- 
ment, and, overthrowing that, makes his pretended triumph 
resound over the field : another, being rather shattered by 
reasons, appeals to the prejudices of his auditory, and over- 
whelming his more rational antagonist with ridicule and 
abuse, comes off the apparent victor of the contest 2 . 

1 Hence it is not unusual, after a protracted debate in the House of 
Commons, for the cooler thinkers to preface their observations with re- 
minding the House of the real nature of the point on which they are to 
join issue ; and the longer the subject in question has been under the 
consideration of the House, the greater the necessity has appeared for 
these premonitory exordiums. The same precaution is generally taken 
by judges in summing up, after trials of protracted length. 2 Ben 

Jonson satirically expressed the vain disputes of a certain class of 
divines by Inigo Lanthorne disputing with his puppet in Bartholomew 
Fair: "It is so; it is not so; it is so; it is not so," &c. The majority 
of theological disputes, we fear, practically amount to the same result. 



C. III. 5.] FORMS OF IEEELEVANT CONCLUSION. 333 

The various kinds of irrelevant conclusions contained in 
the above description, have distinct names assigned to them 
by logicians, according to the matter they embrace. Thus, 
all unfair use of personal opinions (argumentum ad Tiomi- 
nem), of popular prejudices (argumentum ad populutn), and 
respected authorities (argumentum ad verecundiam), are 
classed under the head of the fallacy of appeals to the 
passions ; as attempts to decide the question on other 
grounds than the reason of the thing (argumentum ad rein), 
or than that of the dispassionate exercise of the individual 
judgment (argumentum ad judicium). It is not that such 
appeals are not allowed, but that more should be built upon 
them than what the circumstances of the case necessarily 
warrant. For instance, were we to prove, from the peculiar 
circumstances, character, or avowed opinions of an individual, 
that he was bound in consistency to admit a certain con- 
clusion, and thence to argue that the proposition was true, 
we should seek to establish a relative and particular conclu- 
sion for one absolute and general, and thus be guilty of 
irrelevant inference : or should we attach more than probable 
weight to the argument, that a certain course was the best to 
pursue, under the circumstances ; simply because a certain 
authority had recommended its adoption, we should fall into 
the same fallacy, by mistaking a relative for an absolute degree 
of certainty. It is, however, often legitimate and even neces- 
sary to use such arguments in order to silence those who will 
not yield to fair argument, or to convince those whose weak- 
ness and prejudice will not allow them to assign to any reason 
its true weight. With this view Jesus Christ silenced the 
cavils of the Jews when they reproached him with healing on 
the Sabbath, by citing the parallel case of drawing out a beast 
from a pit on the same day, which none of them would have 
deemed sinful. The argument (ad Jiominem), however, was 
not pressed further by our Lord than to convict his objectors 
of gross inconsistency. 

Another form of this fallacy is that of shifting ground, 
when an adversary, after having vainly attempted to maintain 
his position, covertly exchanges it for another instead of 
honestly giving up the dispute. To this is akin the fallacy 
of objections, by which people conclude that because argu- 
ments can be alleged against any plan, theory, or system, 
it ought to be rejected, or that it cannot be true : when it 



334 MATERIAL FALLACIES. [B. YT. 

ought to be shown, in order to warrant them to hold such 
an opinion, that the objections against the adoption of the 
thing are stronger and more numerous than those urged 
in its favour. This is the main fallacy of sceptics, who con- 
clude that Christianity cannot be true as long as strong 
objections can be urged against any portion of the evidence 
on which it rests ; and of bigoted anti-innovators, who oppose 
all reforms on the ground that no alteration can be pro- 
posed against which they cannot urge strong and unanswer- 
able objections. But did such reasoning hold, and men 
choose to delay accepting any proposition until all the ob- 
jections that could be brought against it were unequivocally 
disposed of, it is obvious that society could not advance a 
step in the way of speculative belief or of useful reforms. 

An ordinary case of this fallacy is exhibited when we 
prove only a part of what is required, and dwell on that to 
the exclusion of the rest. Thus, if a man is charged with 
an offence, and some portion of the evidence adduced against 
him be of equivocal character, a skilful advocate will com- 
pletely sink the sound part of the allegations, and expatiate 
on the others as if they constituted the only proof before 
the court. Hence in advancing more than can be well 
maintained, we expose the entire line of evidence to a com- 
plete overthrow ; for a clever tactician will seize on the weak 
point introduced, and by dwelling upon that part of his 
adversary's argument, make it appear that it involves the 
whole question at issue, and resound his triumph over the field, 
as if he had demolished all the outworks of his opponent's 
position. Wo person, therefore, should lay down a principle 
without guarding or restricting it by modifications, since a 
clever antagonist is always sure to avail himself of his neglect 
in this particular, by pushing his principle over the boundaries 
of moderation. This course is frequently pursued in par- 
liamentary rejoinders; and frequently afforded Canning a 
way to the citadel of his adversary, when reason and justice 
had fortified every other path against him. There is no 
principle, however just in theory, however reasonable in 
argument, or expedient in practice, which is not capable in 
its naked state of being carried to an extreme length, or 
represented in so ludicrous a light as to make it shiver in 
the hands of its nunciator as a weapon of reasoning. One 
of the most glaring examples of this kind of irrelevant 



0. III. 5.] THE LAST TWO FALLACIES COMBINED. 335 

conclusion occurred in the debate on the institution of a 
commission of inquiry into the state of the universities. 
The principal opponent of the ministerial proposition took 
up the ground, that government had no right to inquire into 
the state of municipal or corporate bodies; a principle of 
which no one can dispute the justice so long as the movements 
of those societies do not interfere with the interests of the 
commonwealth, or impede the progress of the community ; 
matters, of course, over which the government have complete 
control. The defender of the universities, however, neglected 
so to restrict it, and the minister threw ridicule on his op- 
ponent by representing many cases in which a wise govern- 
ment could not abstain from interfering with corporate 
societies. The onus which lay on the minister, of proving 
that the universities presented a case for public interference 
was thus lost sight of, in the feelings excited by the con- 
futation of the principle in the sense to which its propounder 
did not intend it to apply. 

"With the last form of ignoratio elenchi may be classed 
the common case of substituting a particular for a universal 
conclusion, or of proving something to be possible when it 
ought to have been proved highly probable; or probable 
when it ought to have been proved necessary ; or contrary 
instead of contradictory; or improbable when it ought to 
have been proved impossible. Aristotle complains of this 
last branch of the fallacy as giving an undue advantage to 
the respondent 1 . Many a guilty person owes his acquittal 
to this ; the jury considering that the evidence brought does 
not demonstrate the absolute impossibility of his innocence, 
notwithstanding the chances are innumerable against it. 

This fallacy is not unfrequently combined with that of 
getitio principii, when the premiss implying the conclusion 
is assumed on the ground of something resembling it having 
been already established. An instance of this kind occurs 
in the speech of Cleon concerning the Mitylenians, who urges 
the justice of putting the revolters to death ; which, as Dio- 
totus, a subsequent speaker, remarked, was nothing at all to 
the purpose, since the Athenians were not sitting in judgment, 
but in deliberation, of which the proper end was expediency 2 * 
A similar illustration of the hybrid form of this fallacy may 
be seen in the objection urged against a scheme of national 
1 Rhet. b. ii. * Thucidydes, quoted by Dr. Whately. 






33G MATERIAL FALLACIES. [B. TI. 

education ; which assumes that the humbler classes, if pro- 
perly instructed, would not submit to the low drudgery of 
their station, from the fact that those few at present who 
scrape together a little knowledge are apt to think them- 
selves gentlemen and become discontented with their posi- 
tion. Now the force of the argument rests on the perfect 
similitude between the two cases, which is most gratuitously 
assumed. For when education is universal it must cease to 
be a distinction, which, as Archbishop Whately remarks, is 
most likely the very circumstance which renders such indi- 
viduals too proud for their employment. 

The combination of these two fallacies is very usual in 
parliamentary debates ; and Canning's speeches afford several 
instances of then: employment and detection. One of the 
most striking of the latter will be found in his reply to 
Mr. Perceval in the debate on Horner's resolutions, which 
emanated from the bullion committee of 1811. That states- 
man having referred to the continuance of our triumphs in 
the Peninsula and our conflicts with Napoleon as a reason 
for perpetuating an exclusive paper-currency, Mr. Canning 
replied : " I will not pay my right honourable friend so ill a 
compliment, as to suppose that he is not himself perfectly 
aware that in thus shaping his argument he has, in fact, rather 
assumed or omitted the question in dispute. The question 
is not whether we shall continue the war in the Peninsula 
with all our heart. Who doubts, who dissuades that deter- 
mination? That point might have been assumed without 
hazard of contradiction. But my right honourable friend 
argues that point as if it were disputed, and assumes without 
argument that which was necessary for him to prove viz., 
that to the continuance of the war and our successes in the 
Peninsula it is essential that the present system of cur- 
rency should remain unchanged. Just as fairly might I 
assume without argument that a change in our currency is 
necessary to this same purpose of continuing the war, and 
then retort upon my right honourable friend his own ex- 
postulations against fettering the energies and cramping the 
exertions of the country. In either case the point which is 
alone in dispute remains to be decided." 



APPENDIX. 



MODEBN SCHOOLS OP LOGIC. 

A DISTINCTION is sometimes sought to be erected be- 
tween the different modern schools of logic, as if the 
predominant elements in each contained something neces- 
sarily antagonistic to one another. Thus we find the 
verbal school of logicians including men whose views 
differ so widely as Hobbes, Dr. "Whately, and the school- 
men set up in antagonism to the sensational or pheno- 
menal school, which numbers Bacon, Helvetius, Comte, 
and Mill among its chief expositors ; and these again con- 
trasted by way of opposition with the conceptualist school 
of logic, of which Kant is the chief exponent 1 . The student 
having been introduced to these different varieties of logical 
sects, is told that he can make only one choice, and that the 
set of tenets which is pointed out for his acceptance must 
necessarily place him in antagonism with the opposite 
schools. 

It must not, however, be overlooked, as the functions of 
words, conceptions, and things, are conjointly admitted in 
every rational system of logic, that there is no necessary anta- 
gonism between these separate elements in logic, further, 
indeed, than what may arise from the importance of any one 
being so unduly exaggerated as to exclude or unduly inter- 
fere with the functions of the others, in the inferential process. 
Each school, with the exception of one or two extreme sec- 
tions, admit that words are only the embodiments of the 
mind's conceptions, while the latter are only so many ways of 
regarding external phenomena, so that there is in reality 

1 Essay on Logical Method, by Charles P. Chretien, ch. v. p. 94. 
Oxford. 1348. 



338 APPENDIX. 

nothing to prevent the main body of their individual 
opinions from being collected into one system of logic, and 
thus to exclude that sectarianism in this department of 
philosophy which is the disgrace of religion. What is there 
in Mill beyond his nominalist views which interferes with 
Kant's logical doctrines as propounded by Jahsche ? or in 
"Whately's exposition of the scholastic logic, which conflicts 
with either, unless matters of metaphysical concernment, 
which have no claims to be acknowledged in logic, as the 
ground of antagonistic schools ? Mill's nominalist views 
would certainly, if carried out to their extreme conse- 
quences, upset the scholastic theory of logic, but as a proof 
that he did not consider his purely logical opinions at all 
conflicting with those put forth by that school, he refers his 
readers to Dr. Whately's treatise, as containing views 'in a 
great measure supplementary to his own. In eliminating, 
therefore, in the foregoing treatise, the conflicting metaphy- 
sical opinions of the different schools of logical writers, we 
have found nothing in the body of their logical doctrines 
which refused to combine harmoniously in one system. 

In referring, however, to the extreme sections of some of 
these schools, we might find matter to legitimate an opposi- 
tion of logical doctrines; but this, so far from leading 
to the distinction upon which we have animadverted, would 
really take it to pieces. Thus the extreme exponents of the 
verbal school are Hobbes and Condillac, who, denying alto- 
gether the antithesis between thought and language, assert 
the identity of each, and make every question purely verbal. 
With Hobbes, logic is only a peculiar kind of mental arith- 
metic : " Season is nothing but reckoning (that is, adding 
and subtracting) of the consequences of general names 
agreed upon for the marking and signifying of our thoughts. 
Logicians," he further says, " add together two names to 
make an affirmative, and two affirmatives to make a syllo- 
gism, and many syllogisms to make a demonstration, and 
from the sum or conclusion of a syllogism they subtract one 
proposition to find the other 1 ." Condillac, though in other 
terms, expresses precisely the same doctrines 2 . With him 
reasoning is only a kind of algebraical computation, and 

1 Leriathan, ch. v. a Hist. Introd. p. 19. 



MODEEN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 339 

definition the only weapon in the logical armoury ; and the 
greatest results to which the most successful scientific re- 
searches can lead is a well-assorted language : " Science, c'est 
une langue bien faite." There is nothing, however, in these 
views, even so far as verbal logic is concerned, to place them in 
the same category with those entertained by "Whately and the 
scholastic logicians. While the scholastics, and their modern 
representatives, overstrained at one time the conceptual and 
rational faculties, and at another placed too much reliance 
on the powers of language to explain fundamental differences 
of principle 1 , they nevertheless admitted the reality of external 
phenomena and the correlative functions of language and 
conception in the elaboration of thought. Hobbes and Con- 
dillac, on the other hand, denied as rigidly the distinction 
between mind and [matter, and implied that reason was a 
consequence of our bodily organisation, and depended on 
speech for its existence. They consequently belong to that 
group of logicians who, with Locke and Dugald Stewart, 
ignore the functions of the school logic as far as proposi- 
tions and syllogisms are concerned, and as such stand in 
direct opposition to that school of logicians with whom they 
are sometimes classed. 

There is, notwithstanding, among the general body of 
logicians who admit the syllogistic theory with proper 
limitations, a tendency to give undue expansion to one ele- 
ment in the triad to which we have alluded; the a priori 
school, placing too much stress either on words or on con- 
ceptions, while the nominalist branch are too apt to degrade 
the former and place external phenomena in the ascendant. 
Thus it cannot be denied that one of the chief defects of 
Whately' s exposition of the Aristotelian logic is the attempt 
to seek for the origin of every dispute in verbal equivoca- 
tion 2 , and to measure the powers of thought by the verbal 

1 Home Tooke, who took Shakspeare's expression that " the lip ia 
parcel of the mind" (Merry Wives of Windsor, act i. sc. iv.) as a great 
philosophical axiom, refused to admit there was anything simple or 
complex, general or abstract, in ideas apart from the terms them- 
selves. (Div. of Purley, p. i. ch. ii.) ' These views have been advocated 
by French and the leading High Church divines, and were cherished 
by De Maistre. (See his criticism on Bacon, art. Syllogism, in the 
collection of his posthumous works.) 2 Thus he resolves the dis- 

pute on Arianism and Sabellianism, which for nearly two centu- 

z2 



340 APPENDIX. 

conventionalisms by which men choose to invest its mys- 
terious processes with external embodiment. Thus in treat- 
ing of hypothetical and inductive arguments, he compels 
methods of reasoning which when viewed in the thinking 
mind are clearly distinct from the deductive process and 
from each other to bow to an artifice of language and submit 
to the unvarying formula of the deductive syllogism. His 
manifest aim is to underrate the number of real questions at 
issue among mankind, and to increase in proportion the 
number of verbal; differences. In dealing with contending 
disputants he either accuses them of an equivocation, t. e. 
that they mean the same thing by different words, or use 
the same word to signify distinct things or he looks for 
some formal error in the argument of one of the parties, to 
which he assigns the discrepancy, rather than refer the cause 
to some broad difference of principle underlying the whole 
discussion 1 . In a similar spirit it is the tendency of con- 
ceptional writers to confound logic with metaphysics 3 , and to 
make both language and external realities submit themselves 
to the domineering influence of mental theories. 

Mr. Mill's " System of Logic," on the other hand, may be 
taken as an instance of the undue preponderance given to 
external phenomena, and the subjugation of language and 
conception to phyaics. The favourite notions of logic are 
transferred from the inner to the outer world: sequence 
causation with abstract and general terms are held to be de- 
rived from phenomena, and not to be the conditions of the 
mind's perceiving them. Logic, in this view, is represented 

ries divided the opinions of some of the leading minds of Christendom, 
into a mere play upon the words one and same. We need hardly say 
that there is no difference of opinion, however fundamental, which could 
not be explained away in like manner. Thus the dispute between the 
Spinozists and the Christians, with respect to the existence of God, 
might be resolved into a mere verbal shuffling upon the word Deity. 
Both classes of disputants really admit the same power existing from 
eternity, and endued with creative energies the only difference being 
that one call it Nature, and the other God; but what is there in a 
mere nominal discrepancy to keep the Spinozists and the Christians 
apart so long as they imply in substance the same thing? l Chre- 

tien, Log. Meth. p. 101. - As is observed in the title of Mr. Thom- 
son's Logic, viz., Laws of Thought. Logic, however, has nothing to 
do with laws of thought further than these are involved in the process 
of inference. 



MODEBN SCHOOLS OF LOGIC. 341 

not as dealing with conceptions, but as employed directly 
about things. In like manner, words are considered as signs 
rather of things than of our conception of them 1 ; and pro- 
positions are treated not as connecting two ideas or concep- 
tions, but two things. The mind is thus thrown on the out- 
ward world for the conditions of its laws, and is deprived of 
the dignity of independent action, which its superior nature 
would lead us to think was its natural prerogative. 

There is, however, no conflicting opposition between the 
main body of the strict logical doctrines of these several 
schools, but only in the exaggerated expansion they are apt 
to receive from the hands of zealous partisans. 

1 VoL i. p. 28. 



342 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 



APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

CHAPTER II. 1, 2. 
Nominalism and Realism, 

A PEW lines of Porphyry on the predicables of Aristotle, 
raising the question long before agitated between the Stagy- 
rite and Plato, as to whether universal conceptions or gene- 
ral ideas which include classes have any existence out of 
the human mind, gave rise to the angry disputes concern- 
ing nominalism and realism which disturbed the repose of 
Christendom from the eleventh to the fifteenth century, and 
which had previously evoked the same stormy discussions 
among the doctors of Islam. The question both in the 
Mussulman and Christian camp had assumed a more com- 
plicated form from being involved in theological quarrels; 
and as 'long as the most vital dogmas of religion were 
thought to depend on the issue, the fire of spiritual zeal in- 
vested these debates, which almost cotemporaneously excited 
the passions of two hemispheres, with an interest to which 
the most absorbing discussions of the present epoch can 
furnish no parallel, and which were frequently silenced, but 
never suppressed, by the mandates of the civil, and the 
anathemas of the spiritual, authorities. 

Now, when all the smote has been cleared away, and the 
question has been again presented free from any adventitious 
element, it does not appear to have derived much elucidation 
from the searching investigation of so many learned doctors, 
though the inquiry, if we take the Mussulman abbas into 
account, extended over a period of six centuries. These 
gentlemen, after a fearful waste of time and zeal, left the 
question just where they found it, with the exception of 
Avicenna, who is said to have started the doubtful theory of 
conceptualism, which Abelard and Occham had the poor merit 
of transplanting into the Christian arena of the dispute. 
This theory, however, though not directly broached by Aris- 
totle, would evidently impress itself on any reader of the pre- 



NOMINALISM AND REALISM. 343 

dicables as the very solution of the difficulty which the Stagy- 
rite had embraced : its formal originators have, therefore, 
little claim to novelty, except, indeed, for the improper use 
to which they applied it, in accounting not only for the mode 
in which class notions or general ideas enter into the mind, 
but also in confounding this with their absolute existence a 
point which Aristotle very properly left undecided. 

With regard, indeed, to the mode in which the mind ac- 
quires universals or class ideas, philosophers are generally 
united in assigning the process of abstraction which we have 
attempted to explain in the text. In every object there is 
always some property analogous to others in surrounding ob- 
jects, which compel us, as it were, to generalise in a particular 
way. Thus we place houses in one class and men in another ; 
nor are there any people so uncultured as to rank some houses 
and some men in one category because they are red, or to con- 
found tastes and sounds together because, in many cases, 
they are accompanied with agreeable sensations. In like 
manner, the mind traces among classes of phenomena similar 
organisations and properties within them, and, having formed 
conceptions out of these classes, always applies the name wher- 
ever it meets with an individual instance of the general pro- 
perty. Such designations have generally led to the classifi- 
cations we meet with in zoology and botany, where animals 
and plants are ranged into classes to bring out in bold relief 
the most striking differences of their organisation ; and ac- 
cording as such conceptions in the mind are founded upon 
the real properties of external objects, and classified accord- 
ing to their importance in creation, are they to be relied 
upon as correct representations of class properties in nature. 
Now if creation had a spiritual designer, it is impossible to 
resist the conclusion that, before He evolved the world 
out of chaos, such class properties existed in His mind as 
archetypes or moulds after which the fabric of existing things 
was fashioned to which they correspond. If the same 
vertebral column is found in a hundred species of animals, 
occasionally joined to large powerful limbs, and sometimes to 
small rudimental ones, we are compelled upon the Christian 
hypothesis of creation to infer that this part of the frame was 
pre-ordained to be the connecting link of these species, and 
that in forming a class of vertebrate animals, we are seeking 



344 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

after a form or idea which existed in the divine mind when 
animals were created. Universals or class ideas, therefore, 
may be said in this view to exist without the mind of man, in 
as far as they are in another mind. The divine mind stampa 
them on material things ; the human mind reads them there. 
The controversy is thus resolved into questions which are 
extrinsic to pure philosophy, and would, perhaps, never have 
arisen, had not natural theology been confounded with it. 
Plato, through his love of system-making, would explain 
everything, and regarding nature as a sealed book, he 
taught his followers that they might easily put themselves 
in possession of all the truths it contained by a priori spe- 
culations on the divine mind, in which the original designs 
existed upon which nature had been modelled. This, 
though to a certain extent true as regards morals and 
aesthetics, was absurd as regarded the material creation ; and 
Aristotle very naturally challenged the whole doctrine as 
an assumption in the department of philosophy ; being an 
attempt to explain what was certain by what was mystical 
and obscure. How do these ideas, asked the Stagyrite, exist 
in the divine mind? "Whether as an attribute or a sub- 
stance ; and if the latter, as the Platonists maintained, how 
can the universal exist in the singular? Again, Eoscelin 
and the scholastic nominalists required to know if such 
ideas existed in the divine mind from eternity, or were sub- 
sequently evolved out of it by an after process of thought ? 
If the first case, other substances existed from eternity 
besides God, which is inconsistent with the divine existence 
as a necessary being ; if the latter, the attribute of his im- 
mutability was set aside. Again, must there be an idea for 
every sensible object ? If so, before Socrates could be born 
there must have been an eternal idea of Socrates; which 
would lead to a multiplication of ideas too great even for the 
imagination to grasp. Then there arose the multifarious 
questions concerning the mode by which they entered into 
the mind, and how they became connected with the things 
to which they belonged. To say that the things participate 
in, or are copies of the ideas to which they correspond, was, 
the nominalists alleged, to avoid the difficulty by vague meta- 
phorical language. In this manner it was by no means diffi- 
cult to show that the Platonist realism jarred with its own 
hypothesis, through the exaggerated view which it took 



NOMINALISM AND EEALISM. 345 

of a principle having its foundation in truth. Aristotle 
confronted Plato's doctrine, because it closed the era of 
physical inquiry ; and the scholastic nominalists, because it 
clashed with the plainest facts of our own consciousness, 
with regard to the mode by which we come into possession 
of class conceptions. 

The nominalists, however, erred by the tendency they 
manifested to push the doctrine concerning class concep- 
tions to the other extreme, in asserting that these universals 
were mere names, and were not only unconnected with any 
class properties in nature, but had not even a mental con- 
ception to support them. But unless general names can be 
assumed at will, it must be admitted that they are inseparably 
attached to the general qualities which they connote. Be- 
tween the individual object and the general name, we must 
insert the notions for which the name stands ; as between 
Socrates and the name " man" there intervenes the mental 
notion of the properties which make man. Nominalism 
thus, in its strict sense, is indefensible ; and those who held it 
deserve the censures which were heaped upon them as the 
virtual destroyers of philosophy. Their theory tends to re- 
present the operation of thought as purely mechanical, and 
to invert the obvious facts of the case by making reason a 
function of language, instead of viewing language as a con- 
sequence of reasoning. 

To escape the absurdities of the ultra-nominalist theory, 
Abelard, and subsequently Occham, alleged that general 
names signify general notions dependent on the abstracting 
powers of the mind, but though independent of single ob- 
jects, without any real substantial entity corresponding to 
them in nature. They made no distinctions between moral 
and physical notions, or attempted to explain how we obtain 
the general ideas of goodness, virtue, and beauty from the 
faint exemplars of surrounding objects ; nor did they attempt 
to reconcile their theory with the existence of the divine mind, 
or the Christian hypothesis of creation. This theory of univer- 
sals, which is called conceptualism, is, therefore, open to grave 
objections. Even so far as the mode is concerned by which 
the mind comes into possession of general notions, it only 
accounts for those which are derived from physical creation; 
while, if followed out to its extreme consequences, it would 
strip that creation of an intelligent artificer. 



846 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

In rejecting, however, the nominalist view of universals, 
both in its ultra and moderate coneeptualist aspect, we do 
not venture to recommend the acceptance even of a modified 
view of the realist doctrine, on the ground that the claaa 
ideas which the mind abstracts from physical objects must, 
in the present state of science, be correct representations 
either of the primary ideas in the divine mind, or of their 
correlative properties in nature. The process by which the 
mind seeks to attain these universals often leads to erroneous 
results; and even when we attempt to arrange them in 
subordination to each other, in few cases can we positively 
assert that the arrangement is a correct expression of their 
gradation in nature. Viewed as a statement of abstract truth, 
if the zoological system of Linnaeus was right, that of Cuvier 
is wrong. Only when we are assured on the best evidence 
that we have attained to the real nature of things, and under- 
stand their relative positions in the scale of creation, can we 
rely on the validity of our class terms as correct exponents 
of natural universals 1 . Until we are certain that our class 
conceptions have reached this point of accuracy, they will 
only stand as symbols of a provisional classification, which 
greater research, or more skilful analogies, may at any mo- 
ment supersede. 

In summing up this important controversy, we may take, 
as far as regards morals and aesthetics, the Platonic theory of 
universals to be in the main correct; while in relation to 
physical truths we must accept such universals as purely 
conceptual which simply correspond to artificial systems of no- 
menclature ; as, for instance, the Linnsean system of botany ; 
or those of whose correspondence to the actual order of 
things in the external world we have no direct certainty. 
"With respect to those general conceptions which may be 
fairly relied upon as correct exponents of outward realities, 
they may be regarded in the Platonic sense as copies of the 
designs existing in the divine mind at the period of creation ; 
while the coneeptualist view must be adopted with reference 
to their origin in the human mind from an analysis of things. 
The ultra-nominalist account of universals we discard alto- 
gether, and place the correct theory in a combination of 
Abelard's views with Platonic realism. 

1 Chretien, Logical Method, p. 76. 



CATEGORIES IN LOGIC. 347 

CHAPTEB II. 6. 
The Categories of Aristotle. 

These categories have been cited in the text as an example 
of correct division, and also as an appendage to that part of 
the Aristotelian logic which refers to the hunting out of 
genera and proximate species in the process of definition. 
They are, however, in a practical system of logic of no real 
value, and were very properly banished by Arnauld to meta- 
physics. 

Some dispute has arisen whether the categories referred 
to things, to words, or to conceptions; and, according as 
they have been deemed a division of one of these three 
subjects, they have been exposed to much criticism. Chre- 
tien asserts 1 , that the ten predicaments are purely "an 
analysis of the leading parts of speech and certain modifica- 
tions of them," and endeavours to point out the mode in 
which they might have been obtained by any philosophical 
grammarian. As such he allows the correctness of the 
division, but questions their utility beyond the specimen 
they afford of subtile analysis. Kant, on the other hand, 
accepts the predicaments in an exclusive sense as a division 
of the conceptions which dwell in the pure understanding ; 
and endeavoured to make it more complete by the addition 
of post-predicaments, or five supplementary categories. It 
was not difficult, in this erroneous view of the case, to cavil 
with the Aristotelian division as blending empirical and 
deduced conceptions viz., motion, action, and passion, with 
primary notions ; and also to show, by extending the term 
conception to mere subjective conditions of thought, that 
there were many such conceptions not even implied in the 
predicaments of the Stagyrite. Kant, on these grounds, sub- 
sequently substituted for the old list of predicaments and 
post-predicaments a new division of categories viz., Unity, 
Plurality, Totality, Affirmation, Negation, Limitation, Inde- 
pendence, Dependence, Inter-dependence, Actuality, Possi- 
bility, and Necessity, which he defined as ^the " subjective 
conditions of thinking, or the rules which the understanding, 

1 Logical Method, p. 119. 



348 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

foregoing all the given diversity of consciousness, lays at the 
foundation of nature by means of its own essential laws." 

The predicaments of Aristotle have again been accused of 
incorrectness, on the ground of being strictly a division of 
things. In this light Mill fairly shows that they are open 
to a charge of cross-division, quality, and relation for in- 
stance, running into each other in the case of habit, and 
position falling under relation as a species under a genus. 
Mr. Mill then proceeds to state his own categories of all 
nameable things in the following order: 1st. Peelings, or 
states of consciousness ; 2nd. Minds which experience these 
feelings ; 3rd. Bodies or external objects which excite certain 
classes of these feelings, together with the powers or pro- 
perties whereby they excite them ; and 4th. The successions 
and co-existences, the likenesses and unlikenesses between 
feelings and states of consciousness. 

Aristotle's categories, however, are not to be judged ex- 
clusively on any of the grounds above enumerated, being 
intended, as Mr. Mill indeed admits, as an enumeration of 
the most extensive conceptions, or summa genera, into which 
all things capable of being named can be distributed. They 
are not names of things, or of words, or of conceptions apart 
from each other, but simply a division of things into the 
most extensive conceptions that the mind is capable of dis- 
tributing them, and as such correspond, of course, to the 
natural divisions of language which is framed on the model 
of those conceptions. Kant's view of the Aristotelian cate- 
gories was, therefore, entirely a mistaken one. Mr. Mill, 
notwithstanding his correctness with respect to the point of 
view in which the predicaments are to be considered, is, we 
think, in error as respects the superiority of his own 
categories in a logical system. Waiving the objection that 
it confines spiritual existence to human minds, and, there- 
fore, does not seem exhaustive, the generalisations which it 
involves cannot be assumed, on Mr. Mill's own principles, 
to be correct, till inductive science has worked its way up 
to the boundaries of knowledge and thrown aside the curtain 
which hides the universal frame of things. In a word, as 
logical it is out of place ; as a correct distribution of name- 
able things, even shutting out the spiritual world, its correct- 
ness and usefulness are only conjectural. 



CATEGOBIES IN LOGIC. 349 

Of the list of categories already given to the world, the 
peripatetic is the only one which aims at Baking a distinct 
place in logical science ; and so far, indeed, as the scholastic 
conception of this science is concerned, it will be found to 
answer the requirements of its framer. Being devised at a 
period when nothing beyond language was very philosophi- 
cally elaborated, it may be faulty in giving too great a pre- 
ponderance to the verbal element ; but we must not lose 
sight of the fact, that considering the narrowness of the 
human faculties, no division of this kind, which aims at the 
distribution of every nameable thing under the highest heads 
in which they are conceived by divine intelligence, can 
possibly be devised without being open to many objections. 
Aristotle's attempt, to say the least of it, is the most perfect 
that has been made. All the others seem to be quite inde- 
pendent of logic, being conceived more or less in reference to 
the metaphysical system adopted by their framers. The 
Pythagorian, Platonic, and Stoic schools among the Greeks, 
had each its corresponding tables. And in modern times the 
word has come to denote the distinctive classification of each 
metaphysician, whatsoever his system leads him to discuss, 
or howsoever he divides it. Thus, Reid tells us that the 
categories of Locke are three Substance, Modes, and Eela- 
tions ; and those of Hume two Ideas and Impressions ; and, 
he adds, amusingly enough, that an excellent mathematician 
of his day desired to substitute for the peripatetic predica- 
ments two only viz., Data and Qu&sita. 



CHAPTEB IY. 1. 
Use of Language in Logic. 

Some confusion has originated in former treatises from 
the absence of a distinct conception with regard to the rela- 
tion of language to thought in logic. Dr. Whately, for ex- 
ample, has defined logic as the art of employing language 
properly for the purposes of reasoning, and thus implied, 
either that thought and language are invariably united, or 
that the mere words, by which the results and the process of 
inference are expressed, form the substantial element about 



350 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

which the science is employed. The latter is to mistake the 
shadow for the substance ; the former involves a false meta- 
physical hypothesis. 

Even taking the high ground of the Scripture theory in its 
literal sense with regard to the origin of language 1 , it implies 
no more than that man was endowed with the power of 
framing words to correspond to his conceptions: as such 
it dissevers thought and language, and allows the latter no 
other value than as its vehicle and exponent. There is, how- 
ever, a wide school, principally consisting of High Church 
divines, who believe that words are something more than 
mere signs who stoutly contend that they are vital powers, 
and seem inclined to reverse the ingenious remark of Hobbes, 
that words are the counters of wise men, but the money of 
fools 2 . We have, notwithstanding the crowd of assertions in 
favour of this view, met with nothing like a single reason 
in its favour. That words may be employed as strong 
impulsive forces may be easily admitted by any one who 
has observed the power which the skilful rhetorician ex- 
ercises over the crowd, or the influence of language in the 
advancement or deterioration of society; but that words 
derive this power from any other source than their sym- 
bolical character, no one can maintain with even the sem- 
blance of argument. If words are used as the signs of things 
and conceptions, it is very natural they should, as Bacon 
alleges 3 , react upon the intellect, and limit and, in some 
measure, control its operations ; but from this surely nothing 
can be inferred except the liability with certain minds, from 
the constant association of language with thought, to mistake 
words for realities, and believe that they command language, 
when in reality language commands them. 

1 Gen. ii. 19. 2 Trench expressly does so, and goes out of his way 
to call the Malmesbury philosopher " one of England's false prophets." 
Study of Words, p. 25, 3rd ed. " There is a sense of reality about 
children which makes them rejoice to find there is a reality about 
words." Ibid. Their reality, however, is derivative, and not primary. 
There is nothing in Trench's valuable treatise whichreally conflicts with 
Hobbes's views, unless his uncharitable expression and the reversal of 
Hobbes's brilliant aphorism. 3 " Credunt enim homines rationem 

suam verbis imperare. Sed fit etiam ut verba vim suam super intel- 
lectum retorqueant et reflectant." 



USE OF JiANGtrAGE UT LOGIC. 351 

Words being simply instrumental in aiding the mind to 
travel much further by means of general terms than it could 
without their aid, can only be considered in logic so far as 
their employment either tends to assist or to defeat the 
process of inference ; and, as with instruments of another 
kind, our care' should be that they faithfully transmit the 
properties they were intended to convey, and not "palter 
with us in a double sense," or be allowed to float about 
either with a loose, unsettled, or inaccurate connotation. 



CHAPTER IV. 2. 
Abuse of General Terms. 

As an instance of the disputes to which the employment 
of general terms may give rise in fundamental questions of 
law or government, Trench adduces the Latin word Bene- 
ficium. This word, it appears, anciently implied either benefit 
or benefice, either we suppose on account of the advantages 
that accrued to the minister from the possession of the 
revenues, or the benefits that were believed to flow to the 
people from his pastoral functions ; and is used in both senses 
by "Wicliff in his translation of the Bible (1 Tim. vi. 2). As 
the term, however, was early connected with the conflicting 
claims of imperial and priestly jurisdiction, it was not long be- 
fore its bifold signification was turned to account. Pope 
Adrian IV., writing to the Emperor Frederic I. against cer- 
tain lay encroachments on the spiritual authority, reminded 
the Emperor " that he had placed the imperial crown upon 
his head, and would willingly have conferred even greater 
Seneficia upon him than this." Had the word been accepted 
without a remonstrance, it might have been afterwards ap- 
pealed to as an admission on the part of Frederic that he held 
the empire as a feud or fief (for beneficiwm was then the 
technical word for this, though the meaning has been much 
narrowed since) from the Pope the very point in dispute 
between them. The word, however, was repelled by the 
Emperor, whereupon the Pope appealed to the etymology, 



352 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

that Beneficium was but bonum factum, and protested that he 
meant no more than to remind the Emperor of the " benefits" 
which he had done him, and which he would have willingly 
multiplied still more 1 . 

CHAPTER IV. 3. 
Transitive Application of Words. 

The transformation of words from one distinct sense to 
another, without either widening or diminishing their appli- 
cation, may be taken as one of the most general laws of 
language. A striking example of it may be adduced in the 
application of the term " classics" to denote, according as the 
object either refers to languages or books, those of the highest 
excellence. Thus, when we speak of the classical languages, 
we refer exclusively to the Greek and Latin, because these 
tongues have been always considered by Europeans as exem- 
plars after which they might improve their own. In like 
manner we refer to the works of Milton or Dryden, Racine 
or Boileau, as English and French classics, the productions 
of these authors being ranked as the best of their kind by the 
general body of their countrymen. The word " classics," or 
classici, however, was attended at first with a very different 
signification. This word was originally applied by the po- 
litical economists of Rome to designate men who possessed 
the largest income Roman society being divided into classes 
according to the amount of property its respective members 
possessed, with a view that each might be rated in proportion 
to his ability to contribute towards the expenses of the state. 
The individuals in the foremost rank were called classici, in 
contradistinction to men of the second, third, or fourth class, 
who are termed infra classem. When the Roman political 
system was broken up, and the term wandered about without 
a meaning, it was associated by an obvious analogy with the 
works of the ancient writers ; since, at the time when the 
appellation was bestowed, no works were written either in 
the East or the "West except in Greek and Latin, and it could 

1 We have not verified the accuracy of this statement, but give it on 
Trench's authority, and almost in his own words. Study of Words, 
p. 157, 3rd ed. 



CHANGES IN THE MEANING OF WOEDS. 353 

not be considered that the mediaeval writers were able to rival 
the Pagans in the use of their own tongue. By degrees, how- 
ever, as the barbarous dialects of Europe took " the form and 
pressure" of the ancient languages, and men felt sufficient 
confidence in their stability to make them the vehicle of their 
literary bequests to posterity, the term classics made another 
leap, and is now applied in conjunction with its mediaeval 
signification to designate the best writers in any of the modern 
languages. 

As an instance of the disputes to which the transitive 
application of words occasionally give rise, we may cite the 
history of the word sacramentum. This word is first met with 
in the Roman law as signifying a deposit or pledge, which 
in certain suits defendant and plaintiff were alike obliged to 
risk upon the condition that the loser of the action should 
forfeit his, to the nearest temple. Hence the name sacra- 
mentum or consecrated thing was applied to the property 
thus offered as a guarantee of sincerity. "We next find the 
word used in connexion with the military oath by which the 
soldiers of the Eepublic bound themselves never to desert 
their standards, or turn their back upon the enemy. From 
being applied to denote the sacredness which the Kornaiis 
attached to their military engagements, it soon became 
synonymous with any oath whatever. 

The early Christian writers in appropriating all the terms 
of a solemn or sacred character in the heathen vocabulary, 
and applying them to the nascent theology, were not always 
careful to avoid a bifold meaning. As something peculiarly 
sacred was attached by the ancients to the solemnity of an 
oath, the first Christians applied the word sacrament to 
designate in particular a class of actions which were also 
deemed of peculiar sanctity in their system, and in return 
for which divine grace was communicated to the soul by 
certain ordained ceremonies ; and solemn engagements were 
entered into by the recipients to continue true to the fulfil- 
ment of certain duties. But the early Christian writers also 
applied the word sacramentum in a loose, secondary, or 
analogous sense to denote any sacred transaction that had 
some special solemnity or sanctity attached to it ; as the incar- 
nation, the lifting up of the brazen serpent, the giving of the 
manna; which in time led the two senses to become confounded. 

2A 



APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

Hence the controversy has arisen, how many sacraments 
the early Church acknowledged of divine institution. The 
Catholic stoutly maintains there are seven, while the Lutheran 
will only admit two, explaining away the passages cited 
against him from the early fathers which call matrimony, 
extreme unction or confirmation sacraments, as so many uses 
of the word in its second signification 1 . 



CHAPTER IT. 4. 
Twofold Law of the Transformation of Names. 

A crowd of examples might be produced from French or 
any similar treatise in illustration of this law ; nor is the ob- 
servance of the course which words take in obedience to it 
without historical or even moral significance. Thus, with 
regard to the specialisation of words of general meanings to 
denote some peculiar object or function, we could not form 
a very favourable idea of Roman chastity at the time when 
Conciliatrix was employed to designate a female pander ; or 
of French and English manners from the particular application 
of the word "esteem" in the reigns of Louis XIV. and the 
second Charles. More favourable instances of specialisation 
may be noticed in our day in the use of the word " irregular" 
to characterise a person of profligate manners, or of "the 
acceptance of a consideration" to signify the receipt of a 
salary. This tendency to denote things by words which 
convey the faintest impression of their disagreeable pro- 
perties is not confined to the refined classes of society, but is 
occasionally apparent among the commonalty, as in the appli- 
cation of the word " love-child" to designate illegitimate 

1 Trench defends the latter view on the ground of its adaptation to 
the old Roman signification. " The remembrance of the use of sacra- 
ment to signify the plighted troth of the Boman soldier to his imperator, 
was that I think which specially wrought to the adaptation of the 
word to baptism ; wherein we also, with a manifest allusion to this 
oath of theirs, pledge ourselves to fight manfully under Christ's ban- 
ner, and to continue his faithful soldiers and servants to the end." But 
Trench forgets that by a similar parity of reasoning confirmation 
ought to be placed in the same category. 



TEANSFOEMATION OF NAMES. 355 

children, or the word " tally" to a female living with a man. 
out of matrimony 1 . 

Instances of the contrary law of generalisation are still more 
common. The word bigot (bigote), for example, from being 
in the Spanish language the name for moustache, which in 
that country was deemed a mark of resolution and firmness 2 , 
came to be employed in this country as a by-name for Roman 
Catholic, and on account of the unhappy notoriety of Spain 
in religious persecution, the term was afterwards extended 
indiscriminately to all those who exhibited any symptoms of 
exclusiveness or of a persecuting spirit in matters of religion. 
In like manner the term rivals was originally confined to those 
who dwelt on the opposite banks of the same river, from the 
disputes which they had at diiferent periods concerning their 
right to turn off the stream into their own fields, or keep the 
sluices open as it suited their convenience. Prom this the 
term was gradually extended to conflicting claimants of every 
kind, and finally included all persons engaged in unfriendly 
competition with each other. 



CHAPTEB IV. 

Primary and Secondary Intentions. Analogical use of 
Terms. 

The first intention of a term is a certain vague and general 
signification of it in contradistinction to one more precise and 
limited which it bears in some particular art or science, 
that is called its second intention. Thus a " line" expresses 
a certain idea of extension which constitutes its primary sig- 
nification, and which nearly corresponds with the employment* 
of the term in mathematics ; while in military art it signifies 
a certain form of drawing up ships and troops ; in geography 
a certain division of the earth ; in angling a string to catch 
fish. These, therefore, constitute its secondary intention, 
the term in each being employed not in its broad, naked sig- 

1 Extreme instances of the law of specialisation generally go under 
the name of Euphemism. * Hombre de bigote is the Spanish for a 

man of resolution, and tener bigotei, in the same tongue, means to stand 
firm. 

2 A2 



356 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

nification, but expressing something foreign in addition, ac- 
cording to the purposes for which it is employed. 

Occasionally words are turned from their* primary signifi- 
cation and used in an analogical sense, as we talk about 
" weighing reasons," or when we attribute the sense of sweet- 
ness to sounds ; nor can error arise from this employment of 
terms so long as we do not take the analogy for more than it 
is worth, or imagine that things must be similar in themselves 
because they have similar relations to each other. But this 
error, as we have seen in the word sacrament, will sometimes 
happen ; men confounding the primary with the analogical 
meaning of the term, and deeming the one signification in 
many cases of no more importance than the other. The same 
destiny has attended the word servant. Because this word 
was applied to persons under the Jewish law whose lives and 
property were completely at the mercy of their masters, some 
persons in our day seem inclined, from the old word being 
still in use, to exact the same peremptory service from those 
Avho serve them, as if the ancient duty of slaves still attached 
to persons in an analogous position. In a similar manner, 
because we can hardly speak of the operations of the spirit 
without employing the terms which are commonly used to 
express analogous physical action, it has been alleged that 
no such thing as spiritual substance exists, and that thought 
must be an attribute of matter ; or, in other words, because 
mind and body have similarity of relation they must be iden- 
tical. 

There are two more classes of words which are apt to intro- 
duce confusion, as far as an accurate rendering of thought is 
concerned : viz., those which under one name apply to several 
distinct things ; and others vulgarly called synonymes, which, 
while differing slightly from each other, are associated with 
one meaning. As an example of the first kind, we may take 
the word "stock," which from being anciently the past par- 
ticiple of " to stick," came to designate everything into which 
the idea of "fixedness" entered in a definite manner. Thus 
we have live-" stock," the stock of a gun, stock in trade ; 
the " stock" -dove, the stock which goes round the neck, the 
family stock, the village stocks, the stocks in the public 
funds, the stocks on which ships are built, and an infinity of 
other stocks of an analogous kind. In like manner we find 



ANALOGICAL USE OF TEEMS. 357 

the word "post" from the Latin positus, that which is 
" placed," applying to a variety of objects into which the idea 
of that participle enters : as a military station, an office for 
letters, a piece of timber placed in the ground, and an official 
position. The same term is also used in a verbal sense, as to 
"post" a ledger, and also adverbially, as to travel "post," 
" post" -haste, &c. The same variety of meanings occurs 
with the word "case," and hundreds of other terms in the 
English language. 

When the diiference of meaning between the several signi- 
fications of one word is not clear, great confusion is likely to 
arise from their use. Thus, when we say the " rose smells 
sweet," " I smell the rose," the term " smell" refers to two 
objects widely different. In the first sentence we speak of a 
quality in the flower ; in the second, of a certain sensation in 
our minds. On this ambiguity have been founded the striking 
paradoxes of those who maintain there is 110 heat in fire, and 
no cold in ice. In the same manner the term "certain," as 
used with reference to the state of the speaker's mind, as " I 
am certain of the fact," or to denote the accuracy of any in- 
telligence, points to two different objects ; and philosophers 
have not been wanting to avail themselves of such equivoca- 
tion to deny the existence of certainty altogether. 

In guarding against similar ambiguities of speech, all lan- 
guages -are not equally fortunate. The Greek and the 
German are much more philosophically accurate than the 
Latin ; and the Latin in this respect may be said to surpass 
the French, Italian, and Spanish, while our own language is 
behind each of the latter triad in the same quality, however 
much it may surpass them in strength and copiousness of 
diction. Thus, the German takes care in using the same 
word in different senses to make some change in the spelling, 
or in the gender of the term, or in his mode of forming the 
plural, that the meaning may be distinguished. In this 
manner, we find der Band to signify a book, dieBdnde books ; 
das Band a tie and ribbon, die Bande ties, and die Bander 
ribbons. In like manner die Worte signify spoken words, 
and die Wdrter written words ; die Strausen mean ostriches, 
die Strduse bouquets of flowers. A similar arrangement oc- 
curs in Italian to distinguish the primary and analogical 
meaning of words. Thus, lefondamenta means the founda- 



358 APPENDIX TO BOOK I. 

tions of a house, or material edifice, but when applied to the 
first elemeuts of an art or science ifondamenti must be used. 
In like manner we have le membra to denote the members of 
the human body, and i membri the members of society, or of 
any other social corporation. The same distinction may be 
traced between the words le frutta and ifrutti, le coma and 
i corni, and many others. The same subtilty of distinction 
is manifest in the employment of the Spanish and Italian pro- 
noun, which entirely excludes the possibility of those mis- 
takes which sometimes occur in the English use of the same 
article of speech. 

In German and Greek a systematic order of distinction is 
observed to make words correspond by a little alteration, 
generally on the final Byllable, with all the shades of difference 
in which they can present themselves to the subject mind. Ac- 
cordingly we find a distinction preserved in the two languages 
between the same term used in the concrete and in the ab- 
stract, and also between the result of an act and the act itself, 
so that it would require a person to be in some respects a phi- 
losopher to understand their simplest conventionalities. Thus 
we find in the Greek re^vij, the abstract term for art ; but 
rexvai, the concrete name for the exercise of any particular 
art ; and in German That, an action or deed ; Thatigkeit, or 
activeness ; so Kenntschaf't and Kenntniss. In like manner 
n-pasis, the doing of anything, TrpayfM, the thing done ; so 
8os and 8a>pov, Xrj-^is and X^/xa, &c. In English, however, 
there is no similar arrangement, and we are frequently obliged 
to use the same word in different senses. Thus, " learning" 
may either mean the act of acquiring knowledge, or know- 
ledge itself; " shot," the materials of ramming a gun, or the 
act of firing it, and so with others. 

Confusion is also apt to rise from the opposite practice of 
using many words to express the same sense, especially when 
such terms are on the eve of being desynonymised, or when 
the shade of distinction that begins to obtain among them is 
far from being universally acknowledged. The English lan- 
guage is, perhaps, more open to confusion of this kind from 
the various elements of foreign words which have become 
amalgamated with it in the course of history, and which 
have given it many names for the same thing. Thus from 
Norman Latin and Greek sources, in addition to our native 



WOBDS NEASLT SYNONYMOUS. 359 

Saxon, we have shepherd and pastor, feeling and sentiment, 
handbook and manual, love and charity, freedom and liberty, 
numeration and arithmetic, supposition, theory, and hypo- 
thesis, almighty and omnipotent, unreadable and illegible, 
reason and understanding, fancy and imagination, poetry and 
poesy, burdensome and onerous, keenness and subtlety ; and 
so with duplicate verbs : to heal and to cure, to whiten and 
to blanch, to soften and to mollify, to cloak and to palliate, 
and many others. Now, notwithstanding each of these 
duplicates, words were used originally in the same sense, they 
have now separated from one another, and acquired separate 
meanings to answer the varieties of fresh thoughts and feel- 
ings which society acquires in advancing to a high state of 
civilisation. Hence, as this desynonymising process is con- 
stantly going on, mistakes are apt to arise from the use of 
words in a sense exactly equivalent, when a broad distinction 
is acknowledged between them 1 . 

1 See Coleridge, Biog. Lit. v. i. p. 90, and Lit. Eem. v. i. p. 219, and 
v. ii. p. 365, and Table-talk, p. 140, and Trench, Study of Words, 
Lect. v. p. 142, from whom these quotations are taken. 



360 APPENDIX TO BOOK IY. 



APPENDIX TO BOOK IV. 

CHAPTEE I. 1. 
Analysis and Synthesis. 

WHAT we have advanced on analysis and synthesis in the 
text mainly refers to the applied sciences, where it is usual 
when the tentative process of analysis is complete, to con- 
struct the synthesis by way of verification, and also to employ, 
the latter method of statement in teaching as more scientific 
and complete. Analysis, however, is not always thus subor- 
dinate to synthesis, as may be shown by any simple instance 
from the analytical mathematics. In a common algebraical 
equation one or more unknown quantities are given, and the 
consequences are traced backward till those quantities become 
known. It is not considered necessary to show, by reversing 
the process, that the results obtained actually fulfil the con- 
ditions which the unknown quantities were assumed to fulfil 
in the original formula. 

Another instance in which analysis is perfect without any 
corresponding synthesis is found in the ordinary process 
of deliberation, which has sometimes gained, in consequence, 
the name of practical analysis. Those who deliberately desire 
any object which they have reason to suppose within their 
reach, begin by assuming it is attainable by them, and then 
proceed to consider on what antecedent conditions the attain- 
ment of the object depends, and to what conditions these in 
turn are subject. Thus they continue precisely as in mathe- 
matical analysis, until they arrive at certain elementary con- 
ditions, which their own consciousness tells them are within 
their power certain acts of their individual will, and the 
natural expression of it in word or deed. The analysis is 
perfect when the agent can clearly perceive that all the actions 
or means on which the result depends are fully within his 
power, and when he is conscious of the force of his own will 
to bear him through them. The analytical process is com- 
plete in itself, because the subsequent actions which corre- 
spond to them do not reverse the order of thought, as in cor- 



ANALYSIS IN THE AETS. 361 

rect synthesis, although the result of the actions should 
verify the accuracy of the analyser's speculative inferences. 

It remains to consider in what mode art avails itself of 
these methods. "With respect to aesthetics, it does not appear 
they have any but a faint application, on account of their a 
priori nature, and the consequent reverse method of pro- 
cedure which obtains in the fine arts in contradistinction to the 
applied Sciences. It often happens that principles are really 
involved in the works of an artist which the artist himself has 
probably never realised except in their abstract form. He 
exemplifies the laws of science not in consequence of any 
particular study of them, but in virtue of that taste and keen 
perception of beauty which imagination continually feeds 
within him, and which is only casually influenced in the 
highest genius by exterior observation and the study of the 
phenomenal world. 

Perhaps in this field the most common use of analysis is in 
investigating the causes of defects. Something offends ; we 
know not why. But in the endeavour to refer it back to 
first principles, we shall discover that some rule has been 
transgressed, some harmony violated, some canon of incon- 
sistency broken. Thus very early attempts at art, through 
the want of consistency, often fail at the first touch of 
analysis. Notwithstanding the parts may be right in them- 
selves, on no possible hypothesis could the whole be true. 
The same reason is fatal to the attempt of a Chinese artist to 
depict all the six sides of an interior at once ; and to the con- 
ventional Egyptian representation of a man, in which the 
head, body, and lower members are depicted in three incom- 
patible positions ; and to the head of Minerva, on the archaic 
coins of Athens, in which the full eye, which figures appro- 
priately in the front face, is transferred without modification 
to the profile. 

In the earlier stages of the fine arts this seems to be the 
only use of analysis. In their most flourishing state there is 
nothing of that doubt and indecision which the analytical 
process implies. Great works are owing to the magic of 
genius, and not to any artificial study of particulars or 
formal process of thought. But when invention waxes cold, 
and the mind relies less readily on its own resources than 
the imitations of the past, then analysis steps in. It gives 



362 APPENDIX TO BOOK IV. 

rules according to which the highest processes of genius has 
spontaneously produced certain effects ; and these rules will 
fall under the leading idea of the art, so far as the nature of 
the case admits, according to the ordinary methods of science. 
These remarks are strictly confined to esthetics, including 
not only music, painting, and poetry, but other works of an 
analogous kind which appertain to the highest order of 
genius. The case is different with many mechanical arts, in 
which an opportunity is afforded for strict consequence in 
the formation of the rules which can be deduced from certain 
empirical principles by means of the laws of space and 
number. Of this nature are many practical exemplifications 
of the laws of hydraulics, and pneumatics, and projectiles. 
Here the synthetical arrangement is more than a form, and 
the method of art, by'coinciding with its type, loses its indi- 
viduality, and melts into that of applied science 1 . 



CHAPTEE IV. 3. 
The Senses an ultimate Source of Evidence. 

Notwithstanding spectres and apparitions are generally 
brought in proof of the reality of sensible impressions, they 
are sometimes adduced on the contrary side ; so that it is in 
some measure necessary to consider them here to complete 
the argument of the text. 

If, as some contend, the senses can convey such delusive 
impressions as to lead persons who are usually accounted 
sane, to mistake the figures engendered by their own mind for 
realities, and converse with them as creatures of flesh and 
blood, why may not the senses generally be labouring under 
a similar delusion, and generating around us a world of 
shadows which have no existence out of the mind ? Of the 
fact that the senses have thus grossly imposed upon the 
minds of many there can be no doubt. Eespectable physicians, 
of whose veracity there can be no suspicion, have stated 
many striking instances of such deceptions ; and the victims 
themselves have pined away, and in many cases died, of the 

1 Chretien, Logical Method, p. 205. 



CAUSES OF APPABITIONS. 363 

suffering produced by their shadowy tormentors, and the in- 
ability on their part to get rid of the impression that they 
were something more than mere shadows. Dr. Gregory tells 
us of a patient who daily, as the evening clock struck six, en- 
countered a witch in form, something like those which* are 
said to have greeted Macbeth on the heath of Pores, and 
who was so distressed by the grimaces of his weird visitor 
that he languished and finally died of a broken heart. Thus 
the Duke of Olivarez, in Le Sage, who was worried to death 
by the presence of an apparition, which he fancied always 
pursued him, was no imaginary character. 

"We find another case still more striking, vouched for on 
the most indisputable authority 1 , in a lawyer who was first 
haunted by a cat, which subsequently took the shape of a 
gentleman usher, and appeared with cap, plume, and sword, 
like the ghost of Beau Nash, and then denuded itself of 
flesh and clothes altogether, taking the form of a skeleton. 
The last metamorphosis was fatal to the life of the sufferer. 
Sir David Brewster also narrates a series of remarkable 
apparitions to which a lady of his acquaintance was subject, 
sometimes assuming the garb of deceased friends, occasionally 
the shape of absent ones, and in every instance comporting 
themselves as to speech and behaviour like substantial crea- 
tures. She encountered her husband in the drawing-room, 
and held some moments' conversation with him at a time 
when he must have been two hundred miles distant, and she 
spoke to friends at her toilette who must have been rotting 
in their shrouds some five years before. 

These apparitions would be certainly marvellous, and might 
throw grave .doubt upon the testimony of the senses, if they 
did not admit of lucid explanation. But this, fortunately, is 
not wanting. We can not only theoretically account for the 
cause, but point out many instances of the cessation of the 
apparitions consequent on its removal. Spectral illusions, 
as Dr. Hibbert has shown, are nothing more than ideas, or 
the recollected images of the mind, which in certain states 
of bodily indisposition have been rendered more vivid than 
actual impressions ; or, to use other words, that the pictures 
in the mind's are far more vivid than pictures in the body's 
eye. The mind's eye may be said to be the body's eye, and 
1 Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft. 



364 APPENDIX TO BOOK IV. 

the retina the common tablet on which both classes of im- 
pressions are painted, and by means of which they receive 
their visual existence according to the same optical laws. 

In the healthy state of the mind and the body, these two 
classes of impressions on the retina are nicely adjusted. The 
mental pictures are transient and feeble, and in ordinary 
states never capable of disturbing or effacing the direct 
images of objects. The two opposite impressions could not 
co-exist. The same nervous fibre which is carrying from the 
brain to the retina the figures of the memory, could not at 
the same moment be carrying back the impressions of exter- 
nal objects from the retina to the brain. The direction of the 
mind's attention to one of the two classes of impressions 
necessarily produces the extinction of the other. Hence, in 
darkness and solitude, when external objects no longer inter- 
fere with the pictures of the mind, they become more vivid 
and distinct, and in the state between waking and sleeping 
the intensity of the impression approaches to that of visible 
objects. With studious persons, who are much occupied 
with the operations of their own minds, the mental pictures 
are much more distinct than in ordinary persons, and in the 
midst of abstract thought external objects even cease to make 
any impression on the retina. A philosopher in his study 
experiences a temporary deprivation of his senses : noises 
and objects are conveyed to his eyes and ears, and his nerves 
actually receive the impressions of light, sound, and touch, 
but he fails to realise them. Now pictures of the mind and 
spectral illusions are equally impressions on the retina, only 
differing in vividness ; and frightful apparitions are nothing 
more than the results of a disordered imagination acting on 
some accidental disarrangement of the vital functions. 

The substantial correctness of this reasoning is evident 
from the state of those persons subject to such hallucina- 
tions, and the disappearance of the malady as soon as they 
returned to a healthy condition. Thus, the crowd of persons 
whom Nicholai 1 imagined he saw constantly moving and 
acting in his sight, gradually faded away as soon as he sub- 
jected himself to a course of medical treatment ; and the 
ugly spectres with which the bright imagination of Tasso 

1 A bookseller of Berlin, who had the courage to lay his case before 
the philosophical society of that capital. 



CAUSES OF APPABITIONS. 365 

peopled his cell, and who sometimes contested with him his 
daily meal, grew imperceptibly less palpable as he recovered 
his health, and only annoyed him during inveterate periods 
of sickness. Again, the lady whose spectres were recounted 
by Sir David Brewster, convinced herself of their emptiness 
by standing in the positions and sitting in the same chairs 
the apparitions occupied, and finding nothing where they 
appeared to stand or sit but vacuity. All parity is conse- 
quently destroyed between such impressions and those which 
follow from the presence of tangible objects in the external 
world. Like the ordinary illusions of the visual organ, on 
pressing one eye or straining both, the apparitions are seen 
doubled ; which of course could not be, had they, like sensible 
objects, any solid reality. They, therefore, must be classed with 
shadows ; nor does their relation to that category throw the 
remotest doubt on the reality of the outward phenomenal 
world, with which, beyond the mere impression, they have 
nothing in common 1 . 

1 For a further elucidation of the subject, see Eding. Journ. (new 
series) No. iv. p. 218 19, No. vi. p. 244, and No. viii. p. 261. 



366 APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 



APPEISDIX TO BOOK V. 

< 

CHAPTEB I. 2. 
Classification and Nomenclature. 

WHEN we attempt to arrange natural objects in groups, 
according as they possess similar properties, and again to 
range these groups in regular gradation corresponding to the 
rank which each holds in the department of nature to which 
it belongs, the result is a system of classification. Considering 
the vast number of different objects embraced in each of the 
tripartite divisions of nature, and the necessity of having the 
evidence of all brought to bear on scientific inquiry at that 
stage of the proceeding in which their testimony is likely to be 
of any value, the importance of such classifications, and the 
care with which they should be framed, so as to bring not only 
all the properties of the objects they embrace into notice, but 
also the causes on which these properties depend, cannot be 
too much overrated. According, indeed, as these classifications 
are loosely or accurately framed will the respective sciences to 
which they correspond lag tardily behind, or exhibit signs of 
progress. When the facts of a case are lucidly and com- 
pletely stated, a clever judge is not long in coming to a just 
decision. When any branch of natural phenomena is ar- 
ranged in that form which is best calculated to bring out in 
bold relief all the striking properties it embraces, and the 
elements upon which those properties mainly depend for 
their origin and development, a sagacious observer seldom 
fails to get into the secret recesses of the phenomena and to 
pounce upon the law. 

Such classifications have failed hitherto principally from 
their framers selecting arbitrarily some subordinate or non- 
essential point of agreement as the basis of their system, and 
thus throwing into the same group objects which in the 
general aggregate of their properties present no resemblance, 
and into different and remote groups others which have the 
closest similarity. Thus, the Linnsean arrangement of plants 
according to the number of stamens and pistils, or Tourne- 
fort's system, founded on the shape and the division of the 



CLASSIFICATION BY GEOUPS. 867 

corolla, are positively mischievous ; since they direct the 
attention to those properties in plants which are of the least 
interest, and thus hinder the mind from regarding them in 
the groups which have the greatest number of the most 
striking properties in common. Artificial arrangements of 
this kind hardly deserve the name of scientific classifications. 
They are more properly divisions in which the taste of the 
framer, or the particular end he may have in view, rather than 
the footprints of nature, serve as the guiding principle of the 
arrangement. 

the classifications by which science is advanced are widely 
different from these. Instead of agreeing in nothing but 
arbitrary heads, from which the most important natural 
relations are rejected, these relations themselves are sought 
out and adopted as the basis of the system, and every object 
ranged in accordance with them, so as to represent the 
various kinds which exist in nature as much as possible in 
the precise order in which they occur, and bring into view 
the most distinctive properties they exhibit. Classifications 
in natural history, for example, which have any claim to be 
natural, are founded upon those distinctions of kind winch 
run throughout nature, and which place impassable limits 
between the different groups to which they refer ; and not 
upon any arbitrary choice of the naturalist. These kinds are, 
of course, determined by the properties which are so funda- 
mentally distinct as to interpose an insuperable barrier be- 
tween the classes into which they enter ; and such characters 
are selected to be a mark or type of the kind which point to 
the greatest number of subordinate properties in common 
with each group. Distinctions of kind, however, are not 
numerous enough to supply the whole basis of a classifica- 
tion. Very few, for instance, of the genera of plants, or 
even of the families, can be pronounced with certainty to be 
kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular, 
Dicotyledonous or Exogenous, and Monocotyledonous or 
Endogenous, are perhaps differences of kind, since the lines 
of demarcation which divide these classes seem to go through 
the whole nature of the plants. But the different species of 
a genus, or genera of a family, usually have in common only 
a limited number of characters. A Rosa does not seem to 
differ from, a Kubus, or the Umbelliferse from the Banun- 



368 APPENDIX TO BOOK T. 

culacese, in much else than the characters botanically as- 
signed to those genera or families. Notwithstanding such 
distinctions are marked out by properties limited in number, 
they may be eminently natural, provided those properties 
are important, and the objects contained in each group 
resemble each other more than they resemble anything which 
is excluded from it. But then these lower groups are to be 
arranged into higher classes and made, when it is possible, to 
correspond to kinds, the latter serving as a kind of exemplars 
or types of the subordinate classes which are grouped around 
them. 

Such arrangements as we have described have reference to 
distinct compartments of natural history. There are, how- 
ever, other classifications of a similar tendency which enter 
into every science, and which are based upon any prominent 
resemblance or analogy, whether as regard objects or laws. 
As soon as such point of agreement is perceived between any 
phenomena, they constitute themselves into a group or class 
which may become enlarged to any extent by the accession 
of new phenomena bound together by the same point of 
resemblance. In this manner the materials of science become 
grouped in classes, such as chemistry furnishes examples of 
in its various groups of acids, alkalies, sulphurets, &c., or 
optics in those classes of phenomena ranged under the heads 
of periodic colours, double refraction, &c. ; and that re- 
semblances themselves become traced, which it is the busi- 
ness of induction to generalise and include in abstract pro- 
positions. 

The preceding kinds of classification refer not to any 
specific end, but are simply framed with a view to put the 
mind in possession of the whole of the properties and rela- 
tions of objects embracing any wide department of nature ; 
that when, in the course of its inquiries, any startling facts 
occur, or any theory is formed, it may bring to the contem- 
plation of either one or the other all the knowledge which 
can possibly bear upon the subject. But classification is not 
confined to this method of arrangement by groups, nor do its 
advantages flow in any one channel. There is another kind 
which still bears more directly on the successful issue of 
scientific inquiry, and that is when we select as the ground- 
work of the classification some particular phenomenon whose 



CLASSIFICATION BY SEEIES. 3G9 

laws are to be investigated, and range all the objects which 
bear any resemblance to it in regular gradation, according to 
the degree in which they seem to possess the property the law 
of which is sought. This has been termed classification by 
series 1 . Suppose, for example, the law of transparency was the 
subject of inquiry, the collection of the most striking instances 2 
of this phenomenon would be the first step in the investiga- 
tion, as most likely to lead, by the method of concomitant 
variations, to the discovery of the cause. Hence classifica- 
tion by series often brings together a number of objects 
which have nothing in common except the one peculiar pro- 
perty which is taken as the head of the classification ; as in 
that of colourless transparency, the list would comprise ob- 
jects differing most widely in their nature, such as water, air, 
diamond, spirits of wine, glass, &c. ; while the arrangement 
by groups, as in the botanical families of Euphorbiaceae, 
TJmbelliferae, &c., or in the chemical classes of alkalies, 
metals, &c., bring together those objects which have most 
properties in common, and appear to possess a natural rela- 
tion. 

But every class formed on a positive resemblance of cha- 
racters draws with it the consideration of a negative class, in 
which the resemblance does not subsist at all, or the contrary 
takes place. Now it is important, as Herschel observes, to 
distinguish between cases in which there is a real opposition 
of quality, or a mere diminution of intensity, in some quality 
susceptible of degrees, till it becomes imperceptible. For 
example, between transparency and opacity, there would at 
first sight appear a direct opposition ; but on nearer con- 
sideration, when we consider the gradations by which trans- 
parency diminishes in natural substances, we shall see reason 
to admit that the latter quality, instead of being the opposite 
of the former, is only its extreme lowest degree. On the 
other hand, the opposite electricities ; the north and south 
magnetic polarities ; the alkaline and acid qualities of che- 

1 Mr. Mill assigns the merit to Comte of being the first to treat 
systematically this branch of classification (vol. ii. p. 321); but the 
subject was developed by Hunter in his physiological arrangements 
long before Comte had published his work. a Enumerated by 
Bacon in the second book of the Nov. Org. under the head of preroga- 
tive instances. 

2B 



370 APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 

mical agents, and many other cases, exemplify not merely 
a negation of quality as levity or opacity, but an active oppo- 
sition. Both these modes of classification were distinguished 
by Bacon in his positive and negative instances, and have 
their peculiar importance in the inductive process, by afford- 
ing an opportunity of tracing a relation between phenomena 
by way of contrast, and by the observation of a correspond- 
ence in the scale of intensity 1 . 

With regard to nomenclature, three things are particularly 
desirable ; first, completeness, or a name for each definite 
object; secondly, precision, or the necessity of one name 
applying to that object and to nothing else ; thirdly, expres- 
siveness, or that the name either denote the peculiar proper- 
ties of the object or the position which it occupies in the 
system. Now science possesses two splendid examples of 
systematic nomenclature which combine these requirements ; 
that of plants and animals, constructed by Linnasus and his 
successors, and that of chemistry, which we owe to the illus- 
trious group of French cliemists who flourished towards the 
close of the eighteenth century. There is, however, an 
essential difference between the two systems, which assigns 
the palm of perfection in this department to the latter. In 
chemistry the compound substances possess one property 
(the chemical composition), which is of itself sufficient to dis- 
tinguish the kind, being a sure mark of all the other pro- 
perties of the compound. All, therefore, that was required 
to meet the third condition of a systematic nomenclature was 
to give a name to every compound expressive of its chemical 
composition. But in botany and zoology no one property is 
of such a prominent nature as to allow itself to be taken as 
indicative of the others ; Linnsous therefore was obliged to 

1 The two modes of classification by groups and series may be com- 
bined in zoology on the supposition that the investigations concern the 
laws of animal life, since all the natural groups which zoology em- 
braces may be arranged in that precise order which is most calculated 
to reveal the law in question. But in any other compartment such 
a combination is hopeless. As in botany, for instance, were the phe- 
nomena of vegetative life to be inquired into, there is no arrangement 
of the different classes of plants in a serial gradation which could throw 
the remotest light on the subject, since their leading groups present 
no cases of variations in the particular point assumed as the basis of 
investigation. 



FOBMAL AKALT3IS IK PHYSICS. 371 

express the nearest natural affinities of the kind, in lieu of 
its distinctive properties, by incorporating into its name the 
name of the proximate natural group, of which it is one of 
the species. Thus the name of every species was made to 
consist of the name of the genus, or natural group next above 
it, with a word added to distinguish the peculiar species. On 
this principle is founded the admirable binary nomenclature 
of botany and zoology. Linnaeus found about seventeen 
hundred generic names, with a moderate number of specific 
names, sufficient to designate with precision the ten thou- 
sand species of vegetables known in his time ; and, notwith- 
standing the number of generic names has since greatly in- 
creased, the augmentation has not kept pace with the multi- 
plication of known species 1 . 



CHAPTEB I. 3, 4. 
Formal Analysis in Physics. 

To exemplify the mode by which the inductive inferences 
may be thrown into a corresponding series of syllogisms, and 
thus laid open to formal analysis, we subjoin the following 
example from Mr. Thomson's Outlines of the Laws of 
Thought : 

" In Sir Humphrey Davy's experiments upon the decompo- 
sition of water by galvanism, it was found that besides the 
two components of water, oxygen and hydrogen, an acid and 
aii alkali were developed at the two opposite poles of the 
machine. As the theory of the analysis of water did not give 
reason to expect these products, they were a residual phe- 
nomenon, the cause of which was still to be found. Some 
chemists thought that electricity had the power of producing 
these substances of itself; and if their erroneous conjecture 
had been adopted, succeeding researches would have gone 
upon a false scent, considering galvanic electricity as a pro- 
ducing rather than a decomposing force. The happier insight 
of Davy conjectured that there might be some hidden cause 
of this portion of the effect ; the glass vessel containing the 
water might suffer partial decomposition, or some foreign 

1 WheweU's Hist. Induct. Scien. i. 489, and Mill's System of Logic, 
ii. p. 316. 

2u2 



372 APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 

matter might be mingled with the water, and the acid and 
alkali be disengaged from it, so that the water would have no 
share in their production. Assuming this, he proceeded to 
try whether the total removal of the cause would destroy the 
effect, or at least the diminution of it cause a corresponding 
change in the amount of effect produced. By the substitu- 
tion of gold vessels for the glass without any change in the 
effect, he at once determined that the glass was not the cause. 
Employing distilled water, he found a marked diminution of 
the quantity of acid and alkali evolved ; still there was enough 
to show that the cause, whatever it was, was still in opera- 
tion. Impurity of the water then was not the sole, but a con- 
current cause. He now conceived that the perspiration from 
the hands, touching the instruments, might affect the case, 
as it would contain common salt, and an acid and an alkali 
would result from its decomposition under the agency of 
electricity. By carefully avoiding such contact, he reduced 
the quantity of the products still further, until no more than 
slight traces of them were perceptible. "What remained of the 
effect might be traceable to impurities of the atmosphere, de- 
composed by contact with the electrical apparatus. An ex- 
periment determined this ; the machine was placed under an 
exhausted receiver, and when thus secured from atmospheric 
influence, it no longer evolved the acid and the alkali. 

" A formal analysis of these beautiful experiments will illus- 
trate the method of applying the rules of pure logic in other 
cases. 

"I. Statement of the case, the residual cause being still undiscovered. 
' The decomposition of water by electricity, produces oxygen and 
hydrogen, with an acid and an alkali.' 

II. Separation of the residual from the principal cause. 

a. ' The decomposition of water produces oxygen and hydrogen.' 

b. ' The production of an acid and alkali in the decomposition of 
water may be caused by action on the glass vessel containing the 
water.' (Problematical Judgment A.) 

III. The latter Judgment disproved by a syllogism in Mood E A O, 
Fig. iii. with a conclusion that contradicts it. 

' A case in which I employ a vessel of gold cannot involve any 

decomposing action on a glass vessel, 
' A case in which I employ a gold vessel still gives the acid and 

the alkali, 
' Therefore cases of the production of the acid and alkali are not 

always cases in which glass is decomposed.' 



FOBMAL ANALYSIS IN PHYSIOS. 373 

IV. Another attempt to suggest the residual cause. 

' The acid and alkali are produced by the decomposition and im- 
purities in the water employed.' 
Syllogism in A A I, Fig. iii. tending to prove this, 
' An experiment with distilled water must admit less impurity, 
' An experiment with distilled water gives less acid and alkali, 
' Therefore sometimes with less impurity we have less acid and 
alkali.' 

V. ' The contact of moist hands' may be an additional cause of the 

residual phenomenon. 
Improved syllogism in A A I, Fig. iii. to include this concurrent 

cause. 
' An experiment with distilled water, and apparatus kept from 

contact of hands will admit still less impurity ;' 
' An experiment, &c. results in the production of still less acid 

and alkali, 
' Therefore sometimes with still less impurity we have still less 

acid and alkali.' 
VL Amended syllogism. A A A. Fig. iii. 

' A case where we use these precautions in vacua is a case of no 

impurity,' 

' A case where we use, &c. in vacua is a case of no acid and alkali, 
' Therefore a case of no impurity is a case of no acid and alkali.' 
VII. Immediate inference from last conclusion. 

' Cases of no- impurity are cases of non-production of acid and 

alkali,' 
' Therefore all cases of production of acid and alkali are cases of 

some impurity;' 
which was to be proved. 

" An example like this brings into a strong light many of 
the characteristics of inductive reasoning. Forms usually 
considered to be deductive are here freely employed. The 
later steps tend to confirm the earlier, on which, however, 
they themselves depend ; so that a mutual confirmation is ob- 
tained from setting them together. When the chemist sub- 
stituted gold vessels for the glass, and inferred from the con- 
tinuance of the effect under this change that the glass could 
have nothing to do with its production, it was formally 
possible in the then state of knowledge that the glass might 
be the cause in the one experiment, and the decomposition of 
the gold in the other. But the later steps, which showed 
that the effect varied with the variations in a circumstance 
wholly distinct from the decomposition of glass or gold, re- 
duced the possibility of maintaining such a view to the very 
lowest amount. Even the premisses of particular syllogisms 



374 APPEKDLX TO BOOK V. 

in the chain are sometimes tested and corrected by the con- 
clusion, although formally the conclusion should entirely de- 
pend upon the premisses. The experimenter expected to find 
that the use of distilled water would exclude all impurity ; 
and he intended that his premiss should assert as much ; hut 
when it turned out in the conclusion that the supposed pro- 
ducts of the impurity were still present, he was reduced to 
the choice between abandoning that cause and recasting his 
premiss so as to admit that the cause was still present 
' the use of distilled water gives less impurity.' " 

CHAPTEB I. 5. 

Mathematical Reasoning. 

Sir "W. Hamilton has written an essay to disparage mathe- 
matical reasoning as a mental discipline, and quoted a host 
of writers who support the same view. His arguments, how- 
ever, do not seem to us to go farther than to condemn an 
exclusive devotion to this species of learning as injurious to 
the mental faculties, and in this view can prove nothing. 
Excess in every study warps the mind to a degree propor- 
tionate to the intellectual capability of the learner ; nor do 
we see anything in the isolated pursuit of mathematics 
calculated to produce this derangement more conspicuously 
than an exclusive devotion to classics or to metaphysics, or 
any other department of learning. For our part, if we are 
to be bored with learned monoculists, we should prefer the 
company of D'Alembert to Person, of Lagrange to Dr. 
Bentley, desirous that the discourse should turn rather on 
substances than words, on realities than shadows. 

The most that can be said is that the exclusive study of 
mathematics seems to injure the more common and useful 
mode of inference viz., that by induction. Mathematical 
truths being, so to speak, infallible, the moral feelings, if 
neglected by their study, become less sensitive to the various 
degrees of certainty attending probable inference. As when 
one sense is carried to great perfection, the others are 
usually less acute; so mathematical reasoning seems in 
some degree to injure the other modes of ratiocination. 
Thus Napier wrote nonsense on the historical evidence con- 
nected with revelation, though he invented logarithms; 



BACON'S CHAKT OB KNOWLEDGE. 375 

Galileo published a most absurd criticism on the finest 
modern epic in the same month in which lie expounded the 
correct laws of motion ; and JXewton played the deuce with 
chronology and the prophecies of Daniel, while he was un- 
folding the arcana of the heavens. 



Division of the Sciences. 

Having treated logic as the science of inference, it will 
not form an inappropriate conclusion to a work of this 
character, if we direct the reader's attention to the various 
subjects in which its methods and rules are employed. As 
in the categories we found several tables differing from each 
other by the broad lines of demarcation set up by the dif- 
ferent metaphysical systems on which they were projected, 
so in the classification of the various departments of human 
knowledge we meet with a similar diversity of arrangement, 
with this difference that the ancient attempts have been long 
ago abandoned as imperfect, owing to the false views which 
their framers entertained of physical science 1 . 

The modern attempts at a general classification of the 
sciences may be said to commence with Bacon, whose pro- 
iection, though surprising for his age, is based on a false 
principle. Considering all human knowledge as relative, 
Bacon was led to believe that the sciences would unfold 
themselves in natural order, if mapped out in relation to the 
three distinctive powers of the mind, Memory, Imagination, 
and Reason ; as, however, these faculties are simultaneously 
engaged in the production of every mental work, the most 
complete confusion was the result of carrying Bacon's prin- 
ciple into detail. Formal science was confounded with real, 
experimental with deductive, relation of law and relations 
of theory with relations of facts groups of sciences con- 
nected w4th the closest affinity divorced from each other, 
and the most heterogeneous subjects forced into the bonds 

1 Mr. Thomson discriminates a table of categories from a division 
of the sciences, by assigning to the former the function of pointing out 
the different attributes with which a conception may be clothed, and 
to the latter that of separating the different districts of knowledge 
with the leading and subordinate conceptions which belong to them 
from one another. 



376 APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 

of association. The history of minerals, of vegetables, of 
animals, being confounded in this chart with the history of 
nations and the history of man, would place the labours of 
Boswell, in company with the labours of Cuvier and the 
researches of Hunter, by the side of the researches of Gib- 
bon. Botany, zoology, and chemistry were separated from 
their histories and joined to metaphysics. Painting and 
music were ranked under the head of artes voluptarias with 
cookery and cosmetics. The anatomy of the human frame 
was severed from the anatomy of animals, and the doctrine of 
angels and spirits confounded with natural theology. 

After Bacon, whose chart was adopted by Diderot and 
D'Alembert as the basis of their celebrated Encyclopaedia, 
no similar attempt was made until Locke's time, who en- 
larged the Greek classification, as follows : 



aj sica 



TEconomics. TLogic. 

Practica... < Politics. S^eiam*?) ...... \ Rhetoric. 

|_Ethics. ^Grammar. 

"With the exception of Smith and Turgot, who followed 
Locke, the subject has not been philosophically considered by 
any writer of public importance down to very recent times. 
Dugald Stewart, in reviewing the past efforts to construct a 
genealogical chart of the sciences, pronounced the labour 
hopeless, at least in his generation. 

Coleridge, however, imagined he saw in the relations of 
necessity and the relations of choice a clue to the entire 
labyrinth of human knowledge in the systematic order in 
which it is viewed by superior intelligences ; and after a 
vague and sanguine development of his theory, in a style 
suited rather to the dim magnificence of poetry than to 
philosophic disquisition, he surveys the domain of knowledge 
from 
T1 , r ("Formal i. e. purely intellectual. 

t +vT Necessary relations { -R , (Moral sciences. 
point of the ^Real j Mixed ^^ 

intellect, I 

Cause and effect, 
and thence or 

proceeds to (. Relations of theory 



COLEBLDGE'S AND BERTRAM'S DIVISION. 377 

But as this division was far from exhausting the sub- 
ject, Coleridge found himself obliged to institute a distinct 
head under "Miscellaneous," to which he consigned one- 
third of the Encyclopedia Metropolitana, whose ground- 
work was taken from his plan. To profess, however, to map 
out all the compartments of knowledge, and annex as a sequel 
to the chart a voluminous chapter of miscellanea, is precisely 
the case of Smalgruenius, who wrote a work entitled " De 
Omnibus Rebus" and afterwards added a supplementary 
treatise, "De Quibusdam Aliis." 

But the chart is as theoretically wrong as it is prac- 
tically worthless. Eelations of necessity, and relations of 
cause and effect, instead of being co-ordinate branches of 
philosophy, are, considered abstractedly, no less intimately 
connected, than a general law with one of its particular ex- 
emplifications. "We cannot, without subverting our mental 
constitution, consider matter otherwise than as subject to the 
great law which regulates the procession of phenomena, than 
we can believe that two and three make six, or that the 
whole is less than its part. Even in the objective light that 
Coleridge seems to have regarded the causal relation, far from 
being confined to any peculiar class of sciences, it runs 
through them all, and claims a co-extensive dominion with 
the empirical element itself. Instead, therefore, of being con- 
centric with the transcendental relation, the laws of cause 
and effect, as here considered, are as subordinate to it as 
"Scientia activa," in Bacon's sense, is subordinate to the 
primary philosophy. Throughout the entire range of the 
sciences, with the single exceptions of logic and mathematics, 
necessary and causal relations are more or less interwoven 
with each other, and to regard them as separate branches 
leading to distinct groups of science, is to revive in a worse 
form the error of Bacon, which we have pointed out in the 
text. 

Bentham in his Chrestomathia, adopting the bifurcate 
division which Eamus took from the Isagoge of Porphyry, 
attempted to draw a similar genealogical tree of the sciences, 
but found the first rough sketch so unpromising that he did 
not attempt to pursue the subject into detail. He fixed his 
point of departure, of course, in utility, which he divided into 
being in general, and what is not being ; the first branch 
giving rise to metaphysics and the natural sciences, in so far 



378 APPENDIX TO BOOK V. 

as they relate to the essences of things ; the latter to the 
formal sciences, and those which embrace the accidents or 
changes to which all bodies spiritual or corporal are liable to 
undergo. It is needless to dwell upon a division which, if 
practically adopted, would confound all human knowledge, in 
obliterating the old landmarks which have, since science had 
a name, served to map out the boundaries of its diversified 
dominions, and in splitting up each subject heretofore con- 
sidered unique and inseparable, into elements as various and 
multiform as the shifting light of opinion may choose to 
invest them with. 

It was reserved for Ampere to distance all his competitors 
in constructing a chart of universal knowledge as theore- 
tically perfect as it is practically useful, by adopting Du- 
gald Stewart's fundamental division of matter and mind, 
and classifying everything he considered, in either of the two 
categories. The questions he asked himself concerning each 
science were, what subjects did it embrace, and in what 
point of view was it regarded by others ? The first led him 
to fix its boundaries, and assign its correlations ; the second 
to determine its place in the chart, and the groups of sciences 
by which it should be surrounded. In every other respect 
the order followed is precisely analogous to that adopted by 
Linna3us in the classification of the vegetable kingdom. 
Having divided his field into the two great kingdoms of 
matter and mind, Ampere groups the sciences whose bounda- 
ries he had previously laid down, in distinct families or kinds, 
which he collects into species of a higher order ; and then 
proceeds to assign the leading branches or genera into which 
the cognate kingdom is divided, and in which the species of 
the scientific groups are included. The kingdom and 
branches with their subordinate orders and distinct families 
of sciences are connected with each other by a bifurcate divi- 
sion which separates the experimental sections the pro- 
dromi, as Bacon calls them from those which refer to the 
perfect sciences, and thus keeps distinct throughout, the 
deductive and empirical departments of knowledge. At the 
head of each rank stands its peculiar and leading idea. The 
subordinate orders being at once divergent and concentric, 
branching out into the numerous sciences of which they are 
composed, as well as guiding to the unique trunk whence 



AMPEBE'S TABLES. 379 

they spring. "When we say that no groups of sciences are 
found together but those which reflect mutual light on each 
other, and whose proximity is therefore desirable in the 
study of the same art or profession ; and that the knowledge 
of no science in the chart presupposes the acquisition of any 
which have not gone before, we have given the highest testi- 
mony in favour of its practical utility. We subjoin the 
tables in extenso, which Ampere spent the best part of his 
life in constructing. The Latin verses which follow point 
out the leading conception of each science in the chart, to 
which they bear literal reference, and enable the classical 
reader by a slight mnemonic effort to grasp the leading divi- 
sions of human knowledge in their most minute scientific 
speciality, and in that order most calculated to favour their 
study and development. 



380 



AMPEEE'S TABLES. 



CLASSIFICATION OP HUMAN KNOWLEDGE; OR, SYNOP- 
TICAL TABLES OP THE SCIENCES AND ARTS. 



FIRST TABLE. DIVISION OF KNOWLEDGE INTO Two KINGDOMS, 
AND OF EACH KINGDOM INTO SOB-KINGDOMS AND BRANCHES. 

FIRST KINGDOM. 



Kingdom. 


Sub- Kingdoms. 


Branches. 


Cosmological Sci- 
ences 


f A. Cosmologies, pro- 
perly so called... 


( I. Mathematics. 
I II. Physics. 
r III. Natural Sci- 






N ences. 






1 IV. Medical Sci- 
V. ences. 



SECOND KINGDOM. 



Kingdom. 


Sub-Kingdoms. 


Branches. 




f~C. Noologics, properly 
so called 


5 V. Philosophies. 
| VI. Dialegmatics. 


Noological Sciences 


-1 
! D. Social Sciences 


f VII. Ethnological 
j Sciences. 
Ivm. Political Sci- 



SECOND TABLE. DIVISION OF EACH BRANCH INTO SUB-BRANCHES 
AND SCIENCES OF THE FIRST ORDER. 

FIRST KINGDOM. 





Branches. 


Sub-Branches. 


Sciences of the First 
Order. 


A. 


I. Mathema- 
tical Sci- 
ences 

II. Physical 


" a. Mathematics, pro- 
perly, so called 
5. Physico-mathema- 
tical Sciences 
" c. Physics, properly so 
called 


5 1 . Arithmology. 
1 2. Geometry. 
5 3. Mechanics. 
1 4. Uranology. 
C 5. General Physics. 
( 6. Technology. 




Sciences 
III Natural 


d. Geological Sciences 

" e. Phytological Sci- 
ences ... 


5 7. Geology. 
I 8. Oryctotechny. 
( 1. Botany. 
7 2 Agriculture. 




Sciences 


/, Zoologies, properly 
so called 


5 3. Zoology. 
1 4. Zootechny. 


B.- 




" g. Physico-medical 
{Sciences 


5 5. Medical Physics. 
( 6. Hygiene. 




IV. Medical 

Sciences 


h. Medical Sciences, 
properly so called. 


C 7. Nosology. 
] 8. Practice of Medi- 
(. cine. 



AMPEBE'S TABLES. 



381 



SECOND TABLE continued. 



SECOND KINGDOM. 



Branches. 


Sub-Branches. 


Sciences of the First 
Order. 


C V. Philoso- 
phical 
Sciences 
P *t 


f f. Philosophies, pro- 
\ perly so called ... 

/ k. Moral Sciences 


j 1. Psychology. 
\ 2. Metaphysics. 
5 3. Ethics. 
( 4. Thelesiology. 


i 

VI. Dialegma^ 

tical Sci- 
L ences.... 


f 1. Dialegmatics, pro- 
N perly so called ... 

/ m. Eleutherotechnics . . 


3 5. Glossology. 
1 6. Literature, 
j 7. Technesthetics. 
i 8. Pedagogy. 


C VII. Ethnologi- 


f n. Ethnologies, pro- 
\ perly so called ... 


C 1. Ethnology. 
1 2. Archeology. 


J ences.... 


/ o. Historical Sciences. 


( 3. History. 
1 4. Hierology. 


j 


C p. Ethnorytics 


( 5. Nomology. 


VIH. Political 




\ 6. Military art. 


v Sciences 


/ 5. Ethnegetics 


V 7. Social economy. 






1 8. Politics. 



THHID TABLE. DIVISION OF EACH SCIENCE OF THE FIRST ORDER 
INTO SCIENCES OF THE SECOND AND THIRD ORDERS. 

FIRST KINGDOM. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


A.J 


/ 

1. Arithmology .. 

2. Geometry 
V 


' a. Elementary Arith- 
mology 


"11. Arithmography. 
12. Mathematical 
Analysis. 
"13. Theory of func- 
tions. 
14. Theory of proba- 
bilities. 
"21. Synthetical Geo- 
metry. 
22. Analytical Geo- 
metry. 
"23. Theory of lines 
and surfaces. 
24. Molecular Geo- 
metry. 
(continued) 


6. Megethology 


f c. Elementary Geome- 
Itry .. 


d. Theory of Forms ... 



382 



AMPERE'S TABLES. 



THIRD TABLE continued. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


A, 
B.< 


/3. Mechanics-.... 

4. Uranolpgy 

5. General Phy- 
sics 

6. Technology ... 
7. Geology 


,- e. Elementary Mecha- 
nics 


(31. Cinematics. 
\ 32. Statics. 
f33. Dynamics. 
I 34. Molecular Me- 
chanics. 
(41. Uranography. 
1 42. Heliostatics. 
i43. Astronomy. 
44. Celestial Mecha- 
nics. 
51. Experimental 
Physics. 
52. Chemistry. 
( 53. Stereonomy. 
t 54. Atomology. 
("61. Technography. 
-| 62. Industrial Cer- 
doristics. 
T63. Industrial Eco- 
nomy. 
64. Industrial Phy- 
sics. 
"71. Physical Geo- 
graphy. 
72. Mineralogy. 
"73. Geonomy. 
74. Theory of the 
Earth. 
f 81. Mining. 
I 82. Docimacy. 
C 83. Oryxionomy. 
( 84. Mineral Physics. 
[11. Phytography. 
i 12. Vegetable Ana- 
tomy. 
: 13. Phytonomy. 
14. Vegetable Phy- 
siology. 
: 21. Geoponics. 
22. Agricultural 
Cerdoristics. 
23. Agronomy. 
24. Agricultural 
Physiology. 
(continued) 


] /. Transcendental Me- 
chanics 


(g. Elementary Urano- 
loo'V... 


h. IJranognosy 


C i. Elementary general 
Physics 


I k. Mathematical Phy- 
*- sics . 


r I. Elementary Tech- 
nology ... 


m. Comparative Tech- 
L nology 


f n. Elementary Geo- 


| o. Comparative Geo- 

lojTV... 


\8. Oryctotechny 
fl Botany 


(p. Elementary Oryc- 
totechny 


q. Comparative Oryc- 
totechny 


{a. Elementary Botany 
b. Phytognosy 


2. Agriculture ... 


{c. Elementary Agri- 


d. Comparative Agri- 





AMPEBE'S TABLES. 



383 



THIRD TABLE continued. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


, 


3. Zoology 

4. Zootechny .... 

5. Medical Phy- 
sics 

6. Hygiene 
7. Nosology 

8. Practical Me- 
\ dicinc 


s e. Elementary Zoo- 
\ losrv . . . 


(31. Zoography. 
} 32. Animal Ana- 
(. tomy. 
f 33. Zoonomy. 
3 34. Animal Physio- 
(. logy. 
(41. Zoochresy. 
( 42. Zooristics. 
( 43. CEcionomy. 
\ 44. Threpsiology. 
?51. Pharmaceutics. 
52. Traumatology. 
( 53. Dietetics. 
\ 54. Phrenygietics. 
( 61. Crasiography. 
\ 62. Crasioristics. 
( 63. Hygionomy. 
{ 64. Prophylactics. 
(71. Nosography. 
^ 72. Pathological 
{ Anatomy. 
r 73. General Thera- 
\ peutics. 
1 74. Medical Phy- 
( siology. 
t 81. Semiography. 
1 82. Diagnostics. 
C 83. Special Thera- 
peutics. 
(.84. Prognosy. 


v./. Zoognosy 

( g. Elementary Zoo- 
j techny 


1 h. Comparative Zoo- 
(_ techny 


f i. Medical Physics, 
\ properly so called 

/ k. Biotology 


C I. Crasiology 


j m. Hygiene, properly 
(, BO called 


{n. Nosology, properly 
so called , 




f p. Semiology 


1 q. Medical Practice, 
(. properly so called 







SECOND KINGDOM. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


C 


fa. Elementary Psycho- 

JlOfiTV... 


(11. Psychography. 
(12. Logic. 


G.ll. Psychology ... 


1 b. Psychognosy 


(13. Methodology. 
{14. Ideogeny. 
(continued) 



384 



AMPERE'S TABLES. 



THIED TABLE continued. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


H 

D. 


2. Metaphysics... 
3. Ethics 


C c. Ontothetics 


(21. Elementary Ont- 
) ology. 
1 22. Natural Theo- 
C logy. 
(23. Comparative 
Theology. 
( 24. Theodicy. 
(31. Ethography. 
1 32. Physiognomy. 
( 33. Practical Morals. 
1 34. Ethogeny. 
(41. Thelesiography. 
1 42. Diceology. 
r43. Apodictical 
Morals. 
(. 44. Anthropotelics. 
(51. Lexiography. 
1 52. Lexiognosy. 
(53. Glossonomy. 
^ 54. Philosophy of 
{ Languages. 
(61. Bibliography. 
1 62. Bibliognosy. 
^63. Literary Criti- 
^ cism. 
~) 64. Philosophy of 
(_ Literature. 
(71. Terpnography. 
1 72, Terpnognosy. 
( 73. Technesthetical 
j Criticism. 
j 74. Philosophy of the 
f Fine Arts. 
(81. Pediography. 
\ 82. Idioristics. 
( 83. Mathesiology. 
^ 84. Theory of Edu- 
l cation. 
(11. Ethnography. 
12. Toporistics. 
(13. Comparative 
Geography. 
14. Ethnogeny. 
(continued) 


[_d. Ontognosy 

e. Elementary Ethics 
f Ethognosy 


4. Thelesiology... 
5. Glossology .... 

6. Literature 

7. Technesthetics 
8. Pedagogics ... 
j 1. Ethnology .... 


" g. Elementary Thele- 
sioraphy 


_ h. Thelesiognosy 
z'. Lexiology 


\^k. Glossognosy 


1. Bibliology 


m. Comparative Lite- 


1 n Terpnology 


1 o. Comparative Tech- 
^ nesthetics 

C p. Pedagogics, pro- 
perly so called .... 

[_ q. Pediognosy 

f a. Elementary Ethno- 
\ logy... 


1 b. Comparative Eth- 
(. nology 



AMPERE'S TABLES. 



385 



THIRD TABLE continued. 



Sciences of the First 
Order. 


Sciences of the Second 
Order. 


Sciences of the Third 
Order. 


D. 


/2. Archeology ... 
3. History 


-/* c. Mnemiology 


(21. Mnemiography. 
1 22. Mnemiognosy. 
f 23. Archeological 
Criticism. 
C24. Archeogeny. 
t31. Diegematics. 
\ 32. Chronology. 
f 33. Historical Criti- 
\ cism. 
"j 34. Philosophy of 
(_ History, 
j 41. Hierography. 
( 42. Symbolics. 
C 43. Controversy. 
^44. Hierogeny. 
f51. Nomography. 
\ 52. Jurisprudence. 
{53. Comparative Le- 
gislation. 
54. Theory of Law. 
f 61. Hoplograpby. 
1 62. Tactics. 
( 63. Strategy. 
1 64. Nicology. 
(71. Statistics. 
1 72. Chrematogeny. 
C 73. Dianemetics. 
1 74. Coeuolbology. 
(81. Ethnodicy. 
\ 82. Diplomacy. 
( 83. Cybernetics. 
1 84. Theory of Power. 


1 d. Comparative Ar- 
(. cheology 

f e. Elementary History 

1 f. Comparative His- 
f torv... 


4. Hierology 
5. Nomology 

6. Military Art... 

7. Social Eco- 
nomy 


\ g. Sebasmatics 


1 h. Comparative Hiero- 
logy 


f i. Nomology, properly 
\ so called 


(. k. Legislation 

C /. Hoplismatics 

j m. Military Art, pro- 
(. perly so called .... 

V n. Chrematology 

1 o. Social Economy, 
(. properly so called 

( p. Syncimenics 


If. Politics 


j g. Politics, properly so 
(. called 





2c 



TERSE S 



BENEVOLO LECTOEI. 
CARMEN MNEMONICUM. 



PRO(EMITJM. 



Ut Mundum* noscas, moles A et 
vita B notandas : 

A. Mensura et motus primunii, 

mox corpora 11 et omne, 

B. Viventum genus 1 " ct vitam quse 

cura tuetur iv . 



Ad Mentera** referas qua; 
menti c aut gentibus D insunt : 

C. Nunc animum T , nunc signa 

animi prodentia sensus-n, 

D. Nunc populos disces et qua 

ratione regendi'. 



PROLEGOMENA. 



A. 



I. HJEC ubi cuncta animo rap- 

tim peragrare libebit, 
Jam numeros 1 , spatium 2 . 
vires 3 et sidera 4 noris ; 
II. Corpora 5 , fabrorumque 

artes 6 tractabis, et orbem 7 
Lustrabis ; latebras penitus 
rimabere terrre 8 . 

B. 

III. Herbarum inquires genus 1 , 

agricolaeque labores 2 ; 
Jam quae sint 3 , jam quos 
hominum fingantur in 
usus 4 , 

IV. Et quibus aegrescant rige- 

antve 5 animalia disces ; 
Nunc firmanda salus 6 , nunc 

tempus noscere morbos 7 , 
Nunc segrislethum durosque 

arcere dolores 8 . 



V. Turn mentem 1 , res atquc 

Deum 2 medi tabere et inter 
Affectus hominum 3 virtus 

ut libera regnet 4 ; 
VI. Turn voces 5 et scripta 6 simul, 

turn noveris artes 
Ingenuas 7 , et qua? pueri sit 
cura magistro 8 . 

D. 

VII. Mox populos 1 , monurnenta 2 

et facta 3 notabis ; 
Quos gentes servent ritus, 

quod numen adorent 4 ; 
VIII. Jura fori, leges populorunv 

et rnunia disce 
Bellantum 6 , mox gentium 

opes 7 scrutare, ducesque 
Ut paci valeant et bello im- 

ponere morem 6 . 



AND MNEMONIC. 



387 



SYNOPSIS. 



A. 



1 . Si scrutari aveas quidquid cog- 

noscere fas est, 
Compones prim urn numeros 11 , 

igiiota requires 12 ; 
Nunc incrementa 13 et casus 14 , 

nunc discere formas 

2. Est opus 21 , et formis numero- 

rum imponere signa 22 ; 

Noscere quae gradiens generet 
curvamina punctum 23 ; 

Primave concrescant queis re- 
rum elementa figuris 24 ; 
.'5. Et motus 31 , et cum pulsum in 
contraria vires 

Corpus agunt,ubi stare queat 32 , 
quorsumve moveri 33 ; 

Quo pacto haerescant, trepident 
quo corpora prima 34 ; 

4. Sidereasque vices 41 , tellus quos 

erret in orbes 42 ; 
Quasque regant vastos leges per 

inania motus 43 ; 
Impulsus quae causa latens, 

atque insita rerum 
Seminibus quo; vis undo astra 

per astheris alti 
Volvuntur spatia et cursus in- 

flectere discunt 41 . 

5. Prceterea scire in terris ut 

cuncta genantur, 
Ut moveant sensum, formas 

vertantur in omnes 51 ; 
Queis nexis inter se elementis 

corpora constent 52 ; 
Necuon materiae leges 53 vires- 

que atomorum 54 

6. Noscendaj, et variae quas usus 

protulit artes 61 . 
Turn quaestus 62 operumque 

mod os conferre memento, 
Ut potiora legas 63 causasque 

evolvere tentes 04 . 

7. Tumjuga, turn campos disces 

et flumina 71 , tellus 
Corporibus 72 stratisque 73 quibus 

conficta sit intus; 
Hacc ut longa dies imis forma- 

verit undis, 



Utque eSerbueriut olim igui- 

vomi undique montes 74 ; 
8. Eruat ut caecis occlusa metalla 
latebris 

Fossor, et ardenti tractet mol- 
lita vapore 81 ; 

Nee dubias telluris opes rimare 
priusquam 

Impensas, lucrum 62 , leges 83 , 
causasque laborum 

Et terraj ut subeas tutus pene- 
tralia noris 84 . 

B. 

1. Jam quae plantarum species 

ubicumque vigescant 
Scire juvat 11 ; jam quas celent 

sub tegmine partes 12 ; 
Utque pares paribus recte 

sociehtur 13 , ut arbor 
Herbaque nascantur, crescant 

et semina fundat 14 ; 

2. Agricola ut laetas fruges ferre 

imperet arvis 21 , 
Qua sint cuique solo foenus 22 

culturaque 23 , et unde 
Langueat ilia seges, gravidis 

haec nutet aristis 24 ; 

3. Quas soboli tradant generatim 

auimalia formas 31 , 
Corporis et qua3 sit compages 

intima 32 , vito3 
Qua? leges 33 , gliscatque artus ut 

vita per omnes 31 . 

4. Nee tibi turpe puta, jucunda 

per otia ruris, 
Bombyces nutrire, et oves 

vitulosque tueri ; 
Turn captare feras, turn lino 

fallere pisces 41 ; 
Noscere quis pecudum sump- 

tus 42 , qua; cura bubulco 4 *; 
Cur uunc utilius viridantia 

gramina carpant, 
Nunc pecora in stabulis melius 

saturentur opimis 41 . 

5. Vitam multa juvant animan- 

turn, multaque lacdunt; 



388 



YERSES EXPLANATORY 



Saepe graves possunt expellcre 

toxica morbos 51 ; 
Nostraque nunc laedit, nunc 

sanat corpora ferrum 52 ; 
Ilia nocent alimenta, haec 

prudens sumere malis 53 , 
Sedulus insanos animi com- 

ponere motus 54 . 
0. Non tamen ars medica est ulli 

tentanda priusquam 
Noscat ut infundant nobis 

natura genusque 
Jam varies habitus 61 , quorum 

scrutabere signa 61 ; 
Ut quod cuique nocens, quod 

cuique sit utile noris 83 ; 
Tune morbo disces venienti oc- 

currere 64 , et omnis 

7. Naturam 71 sedemque 72 mali, 

medicamina 73 , causas 74 , 

8. Queisque notis detur morbos 

dignoscere 81 , et segri 
Scire quis 82 et qua sit languor 

sanabilis arte 83 , 
Quis metus immineat, qua; spes 

sit mixta timori 84 , 

C. 
;. Mentem nosse velis" : utpossit 

cernere verum 12 ; 
Utque nova inveniat, vel ponat 

in ordine nota 13 
Qusaras, et quo pacto ab origine 

cogitet 14 ac se 
'2. Noscere non tantum valeat, 

sed resque 21 Deumque 22 . 
Turn subeunt scrutanda tibi 

commenta sophorum 23 ; 
Humana ratione Deo qua3 
dantur inesse 24 ; 

3. Affectus hominum, studia, ob- 

lectamina, curae 31 ; 
Quae tibi corda notae, quse 

morum arcana recludunt 32 ; 
Quod decet et quae sunt me- 

tuenda optandaque 33 , etunde 
Indolis omne genus 34 ; quaa 

mentibus insita nostris 

4. Libera vis animi 41 , justo se- 

cernit iniquum 42 ; 



Qua: recti ffiternae leges 43 ; qua.- 

prasmia sontes 
Insontesque manent 44 : stimulos 

haec mentibus addunt 
Ut nova discendi semper rapia- 

mur amore. 

5. Jam verborum usus 51 , et verbis 

quae sit origo 52 ; 
Diversos ut apud populos 

mutentur 53 , et undo 
Concessa humani generi tarn 

mira facultas 
Quidquid inest animo ut voces 

expromere possint 54 , 

6. Assidua evolves cura. Kunc 

alma poesis, 
Nee minus arridens interdum 

sermo pedestris, 
Pectora mulcebunt 61 , scripta 

explorare libebit 62 ; 
Et quae digna legi indignis 

secernere 63 , et arte 
Noscere qua sacrum nomen 

mereare poetae 64 ; 

7. ^des, suave melos, picturac et 

daedala signa 71 ; 
Necnon unde placent 72 , artis 

pracepta modusque 73 , 
Principium et ratio 74 pergunt 

dulcedine mentem 
Pellicere ad studium longosque 

levare labores, 

8. Nunc puerum edoceat sapientis 

cura magistri 81 , 
Discipuli ingeuium tentet 82 , 

fingatque vicissim 
Ad studium veri 8 * prasscripta- 

que muuia vitae 84 . 



D. 

1. Inde loca' 1 , inde situs datur 

explorare locorum 12 , 
Prisca licet conferre novis 13 , et 

verba habitusque 
Corporis, ut valeas populorum 

exordia nosse 14 . 

2. Jam veterum monimenta 

virum 51 , jam scire memento 



AND MNEMONIC. 



389 



Qua retegant 2 *; ut vera queas 

dignoscere fictis' 3 , 
Qua, fuerint exstructa manu, 

qua condita causa 24 . 

3. Factaque perquires 31 , factorum 

tempora 32 , veris 
Unde fides 33 , quae causa olim 

concusserit orbem, 
Cum tot bella forent, tot regna 

eversa jacerent, 
Ambirentque novae return fas- 

tigia gentes 14 . 

4. Jam nosces ritus et dogmata 

relligionum 41 , 
Symbola quas celant mysteria 

sacra profanos 41 , 
Et quo sit cultu . veneranda 

aeterna potestas 43 , 
Quoque modo oblitos aevi prae- 

cepta prioris 
Diffusus late populos invaserit 

error 44 . 
.3. Quae sint, quae fuerint leges et 

publica jura 51 , 
Quae solerti egeant praesertim 

interprete noris 52 ; 



Quaeque nova instituenda, sevo 
cum prisca fatiscunt, 

Nunc exempla decent 53 , et nunc 
enitere recti 

Legibus aaternis humanas pro- 
mere leges 54 . 

6. Disce et queis armis arcendi 

finibus hostes 61 ; 
Quo pacto instaurandae acies* 4 , 

quo bella gerenda 63 , 
Fregerit et virtus ingentes 

saepe catervas 64 . 

7. Mox et opes 71 , mox unde 

fluant 72 , populisque parentur 
Nunc facilis victus 73 , nunc 

laetae munera vitae, 
Et sortem ut mutare queat 

gens inscia rerum, 
Cum segnes torpent mentes 

meliora perosse 74 . 

8. Foedera quid jubeant 81 , qua 

sint servanda sagaci 
Arte 82 , et secura cives ut pace 

fruantur 83 ; 
Quae fluxa et quae sit mansura 

potentia regum 84 . 



INDEX 



A. 

ABELARD adopts the conceptualist 
theory, 342, 345 

Absolute terms, 35 

Abstract and concrete terms, 34 

Abstract deductive method, its ap- 
plicability to the moral sciences, 
268 

Abstraction, the principal act by 
which the mind arrives at con- 
ceptions, 37 

Abstraction and generalisation, 37 

Abuse of general terms, disputes 
arising from, 351 

Academies, the various, their doc- 
trines, 178 

Accident, 39; how distinguished 
from property, 41 

Adrian IV., Pope, his use of the 
word beneficium, 351 

Agreement, method of, 217 

Airy and Whewell, their observa- 
tions on the pendulum, 225 

Ambiguous middle, fallacy of, 307 

Ampere, his chart of universal 
knowledge, 378 

Analogical evidence, its value, 259 

Analogical use of terms, confusion 
occasioned by the, 356 

Analogy, various meanings of the 
term, 300; an ultimate source of 
evidence, 185; Hume's objec- 
tion, 187 

Analogy, logic of, 21 ; argument of, 
301; its high conclusive force, 
301 

Analysis, methods of, 2 ; analysis 
and synthesis, 143, 360 

Analysis, formal, in physics, 371 

Analytic, the New, 28, 92; con- 
sidered with reference to mood 
and figure, 115 

Antisthenes, dilemma of, 137 

2 



Apparitions, explanation of, 362 

Argument of example, 299; of 
analogy, 301 

Aristotle, logical doctrines of, 4; 
glaring error in, 7 ; ascribes the 
discovery of induction to So- 
crates, 151 ; his fallacies, 315; 
opponents of his system, 10 

Association of ideas, law of, 277 

Assumptions, groundless, fallacy 
of, 313 

Attributes, essential and contin- 
gent, 33 

Authority an ultimate source of 
evidence, 189 . 

Avicenna, the theory of concep- 
tualism attributed to, 342 

B. 

Bacon, Lord, not so opposed to the 
views of Aristotle as commonly 
reputed, 13; his error, 45; mis- 
took the formal laws of induc- 
tion, 151; his devotion to ob- 
servation and experiment, 212; 
his aphorisms on the progress of 
society, 293 ; his Chart of Know- 
ledge, 375 

Bacon, Roger, the inductive me- 
thod recommended by, 14 

Barbara, syllogism in, 152 

Baynes, Spencer, his proposed al- 
terations in logic, 28 

Begging the qyestion, fallacy of, 
326, 329 ; instance of, from the 
phrenologists, 327; from Gibbon, 
329 

Belsham, an indifferent writer on 
logic, 25 

Beneflcium, employment of the 
word, 351 

Bentham on evidence, 296; his 
classification of the sciences, 377 



392 



INDEX. 



Berkeley, Bishop, on analogy, 300 
Bias, his argument in defence of 

the bachelorate, 137 
Bigot, history of the word, 355 
Brighton, of the time of Elizabeth, 

submerged by the sea, 259 
Brown, condemnation of logic by, 

25 

Butler, Bishop, his famous argu- 
ment in favour of the divine 
origin of Christianity, 301 



C. 

Calculation of probabilities, 295 
Canning, detection of fallacies by, 

336 

Casual agents, elimination of, 255 
Categorical propositions, 80; re- 
duction of other propositions to 
the categorical form, 83 
Categories, or Predicaments, Aris- 
totle's enumeration of, 47, 347; 
ludicrous illustration of, 48 ; 
Kant's new division of catego- 
ries, 347 

Causal agency, universality of, 205 ; 
final causes inadmissible, 207; 
plural causes, 239 
Causal method, its author, 10 
Causes, plurality of, 203, 239 ; two- 
fold composition of, 241 ; final 
causes inadmissible, 207 ; Male- 
branche's theory of occasional 
causes, 317 

Causes and laws in physical sci- 
ence, 197 

Certainty, various grades of, 165 
Chain syllogism or sorites, 138 
Charles II., his fallacious question 

to the Koyal Society, 313 
Christianity, argument of Butler 
in favour of, 301 ; of Paley, 273; 
of Gibbon against, 329. See 
Miracles 

Classics, history of the word, 352 
Classification by groups, 367 ; by 
series, 369; of the sciences, 375 
Classification and nomenclature, 

366 

Combinatorial art of Raymond 
Lully, foundation of the, 22 



Complex terms, 51; illustration, 
from iron, 52 

Composition, fallacies of, 311 

Compound expressed propositions. 
80 

Comte, M., value of his division of 
sociology into statics and dyna- 
mics, 290; his empirical axioms 
on the progressive tendencies of 
society, 293 

Conception, conditions of, 33 ; di- 
visible into the qualities which 
distinguish co-ordinate species. 
43 

Conceptions, formation of distinct. 
49 ; distinct and confused, 53; 
double mode of resolving, 54; 
observation and experiment 
tests of accurate conception, 58 ; 
double capacity of, 60; in rela- 
tion to signs, 60 

Conceptualism, definition of, 345: 
ascribed to Avicenna, 342 

Conceptualist school of logicians. 
337 

Concio, an opponent of the Aris- 
totelian system, 10 

Conclusion, irrelevant, fallacy of. 
331 

Concomitant variations, methods 
of, 225 

Concrete deductive method, direct 
and inverse, 285 

Condillac, an opponent of the 
Aristotelian system, 10 ; de- 
velopes the views of Locke, 19 

Conditional propositions, 83; re- 
duction of, to categorical, S3 

Connotative and non-connotative 
terms, 34 

Contingent, different senses in 
Avhich used, 88 

Contingent or probable truth, what 
comprised under, 166; how dis- 
tinguishable from necessary 
truth, 161 

Contradiction, principles of, 189 

Conversion of propositions, 97 

Copulative propositions, 81 

Crackenthorpe, a writer on logic. 
26 

Credibility, various phases of, 167 



IKDEX. 



393 



Criteria of evidence, 169 

Cross - examining elenches, func- 
tions of the, 271 

Crousaz, on probability and cau- 
sality, 21 

D. 

Deduction, 148; confounded with 
syllogism, 150 

Deduction, scientific, nature of, 
243; not necessarily opposed to 
induction, 245 

Deductive reasoning, analysis of, 
275 

Definition, logical, its end, 67; 
how far real, 68; nominal, 71; 
scientific, 7 1 ; other classes, 74 

De Morgan inclines to the views of 
Sir William Hamilton, 28 

Descartes, general principle of his 
system, 14 ; his rules for the 
direction of the mind, 15; his 
error, 16 

Dew, principles of physical inquiry 
applied to the investigation of 
the phenomena of, 234 * 2^ 

Difference, method of, 219 ; in- 
direct method of, 221 

Differentia, 39 

Dilemma, the, 135; principles, 137 

Disjunctive propositions, 82; re- 
duction of, to categorical, 83 

Division, fallacies of, 311 

Dreams, examination of, 183 

E 

Eldon, Lord, syllogism by, 138,141 

Elements, primitive, of knowledge, 
171 ; their relation to each other, 
172 

Elenches, cross-examining, func- 
tions of the, 271 

Empirical generalisations, impor- 
tant conclusions arrived at from, 
253 

Enthymerae, or imperfect syllo- 
gism, 140 

Enumeration, incomplete, fallacy of, 
320 

Equivocal and paronymous words, 
fallacy of, 309 

Essences, real and nominal, 68 

Ethics, principles of, 269 



Ethics, how connected with theo- 
logy, 272 

Ethology, the science of, 279 ; cause 
of the backwardness of, 279; 
where inductive, 281; how 
treated by Mill, 283 

Euclid, the author of many falla- 
cies attributed to the Stoical 
school, 3 

Eudemus, an early writer on logic, 7 

Euler, logical notation of, 23; his 
notation of the syllogism, 120 

Evidence, different degrees of, 165; 
criteria of, 169; foundations of, 
171; memory, 173; external 
sense, 177, 362; analogy, 185; 
reason, 188; authority, 189 

Experience, general truths inde- 
pendent of, 1 59 

Experiment in physical science, 
use of, 214 

Experiment and observation the 
first steps in physical science, 
209 

Experimental inquiry, methods of, 
216 

Extension of inductions, 228 

Extension and intension, 42 

External sense an ultimate source 
of evidence, 177,362; objections 
of Sextus Empiricus, 177 

F. 

Fallacies, classes of, 303; formal. 

305; verbal, 307; material, 313 
False analogies, fallacy of, 322; 

political, 323; philosophical, 325 
Faraday on the magnetism of the 

earth, 229 
Final causes inadmissible, 207 

G. 

alen, his treatise on logic, 8 
alluppi, logical treatise of, its 
high character, 24, 25 
General terms, abuse of, 351 
reneral truths independent of ex- 
perience, 195 

Generalisation and abstraction, 37 
generalisations, empirical, impor- 
tant practical conclusion drawn 
from, 253 



394 



INDEX. 



Genovesi, logical treatise of, its 
character, 24, 25 

Genus and species, 38 

German school of logic, 20, 24 

Gibbon, unsoundness of his argu- 
ment against Christianity, 329 

Graham on the law of the diffusion 
of gases, 229 

Greek philosophers, fallacies of 
the, 315 

H. 

Hamilton's (Sir William) logical 
notation, 23; his proposed al- 
terations in logic, 28; his nota- 
tion of the syllogism, 124; con- 
demns mathematical reasoning, 
374 

Hegel, his development of Kant's 
principles, 24 

Hippocrates, the basis of phreno- 
logy a favourite theory of, 328 

Hispanus, Peter, his verses on 
logic, 115 

Hobbes, instance of unsound rea- 
soning from, 329 

Human nature, science of, 277 

Human responsibility, the Owenite 
fallacy regarding, exposed, 311 

Hume's objection to analogy, 187; 
to miracles, 190 

Hypotheses, legitimate uses of, 
247; where inapplicable, 251; 
functions of, 249; empirical 
generalisations, 252 

Hypotheticals, fallacies of, 307 

I. 

Idea, different definitions of, by 
Aristotle, Descartes, and Locke, 
72 

Implied, or tacit compound pro- 
positions, 85 

Ignoratio elenchi, fallacy of, 331 

Illicit process and undistributed 
middle, fallacy of, 305 

Incomplete enumeration, fallacy of, 
320 

" Inconceivable," false sense of, 317 

Induction, different kinds of, 150; 
twofold nature of, 201 ; summary 
of, 237 ; its formal laws mistaken 
by Bacon and his followers, 151 ; 



not necessarily opposed to de-' 
duction, 245 

Induction and deduction, 148; in 
what respects independent, 15& 

Inductions, extension of, 229; veri- 
fication of, 233 

Inductive method, general outline 
of the, 237 

Inductive science, problem of, 199 

Inference, two kinds of, 101 ; uni- 
versal canon of, 102; general 
principles of, 141 ; universal 
method of, 143, 148; analysis 
and synthesis, 143; induction 
and deduction, 148 

Inference confounded with per- 
ception, 319 

Inquiry, experimental, methods of, 
216; scientific, 191 

Intension, definition of, 42 

Interference of plural causes, 239 

Iron, illustration of a complex term 
from, 52 

Irrelevant conclusion, fallacy of, 
331 ; various forms of, 333 

Isomorphism, law of, 228 

J. 
Judgment, ultimate sources of, 171 

K. 

Kant separates pure and applied 

logic, 24; his new division of 

categories, 347 
Kepler's laws of planetary motion, 

233 
Kirwan, an indifferent writer on 

logic, 25 
Kirwan, the doctrine of probability 

illustrated from the case of, 257 
Knowledge, primitive elements of. 

171 ; their relation, 172 

L. 

Lambert on logical notation, 22; 
his notation of the syllogism, 
123 

Language, use of, in logic, 60, 349 ; 
confusion arising from the tran- 
sitive application of words, 63, 
353; greater or less distinctness 
of various languages, 357 



395 



Laws in physical science, 197; 
twofold division of, 197 

Leibnitz, his logical labours, 20 

Linnaean nomenclature, the, 370; 
why inferior to the French che- 
mical nomenclature, 370 

Locke, an opponent of the Aristo- 
telian system, 18; his views de- 
veloped by Condillac, 19; his 
definition of real essence, 68; 
his classification of the sciences, 
376 

Logic, foundation of, laid by So- 
crates, 2; Plato's method, 3; 
Aristotle's Organon, 4 ; his incon- 
sistencies, 5; early commenta- 
tors on Aristotle, 8 ; the Scholas- 
tics, 8, 345 ; attacks on Aristotle, 
9; Bacon, 12; Descartes, 15; 
Mariotte and the Port Royalists, 
17; Locke and Condillac, 18; 
Leibnitz, Wolf, and the German 
school, 20; introduction of logi- 
cal notation, 22; Italian and 
English logicians, 25; the New 
Analytic, 28 ; Terms, their ma- 
terial relation, 33; formal rela- 
tion, 37 ; with regard to things, 
49; in relation to signs, 60; 
Propositions, 74; division of, 77; 
with regard to matter, 78; to 
form, 87; Syllogisms, 100; pro- 
perties, 102; the New Analytic 
tested, 117; notation, various 
methods of, 120; kinds of syllo- 
gisms, 127; Inference, general 
principles of, 141 ; universal me- 
thods, 143; different degrees of 
evidence, 165; foundations of 
evidence, 171; miracles, 191; 
Methods of Scientific Proof and 
Investigation, 191; in physical 
science, 195; in moral science, 
261; Fallacies, 303 ; formal, 305; 
verbal, 307; material, 313; spec- 
tral illusions, 362 
Logic, modern schools of, 337 ; no 
real opposition of doctrine, ex- 
cept with extreme partisans, 
341 

Logical division, nature and rules 
of, 43 



Logical notation, various schemes 

of, 22 
Logicians, conceptualist school of, 

337; sensational, 337; verbal, 

337 
Lully, Raymond, foundation of his 

combinatorial art, 22 

M. 

Malebranche's theory of occasional 
causes, 317 

Mariotte and the Port Royalists, 
endeavour of, to reconcile the 
Aristotelian and Cartesian me- 
thods, 17 

Material fallacies, various classes 
of, 313 

Memory an ultimate source of 
knowledge, 173 

Methods of proof, in the moral 
and physical sciences, 193 

Middle, ambiguous, fallacy of, 307 ; 
undistributed, 305 

Mill, John Stuart, places logic on 
its legitimate foundation, 28; 
on propositions, 76; on syllo- 
gisms, 158; on ethology, 283; 
gives undue preponderance to 
external phenomena, 340; his 
objections to Aristotle's predica- 
ments, 348 

Mind, laws which regulate succes- 
sive states of, 277 

Miracles, Hume's objection to, 19^ / fo 

Mitscherlich's discovery of the law 
of isomorphism, 228 

Modality, twofold doctrine of, 167 

Mode and substance, distinction 
between, 34 

Moon, question as to its having 
inhabitants, 260 

Moral sciences, methods of the, 
193, 261 ; their nature, 261 ; how 
their methods differ from those 
of the physical, 262; connexion 
of the moral sciences, 263; diffi- 
culties of the subject, 267 ; the 
sciences amenable to the ab- 
stract deductive method, 268; 
the sociological sciences, 277; 
probabilities, 295 ; example and 
analogy, 299, 301 



396 



INDEX. 



Moral truth falls short of demon- 
strative certainty, 166 

N. 

Names, twofold law of the trans- 
formation of, 64; examples of, 
354 

Necessary and contingent truth, 
161 

Negative process, its functions in 
the elucidation of the moral 
sciences, 271 

Newton, his examination of the 
laws cf the tides, 225 

Nizolius, an opponent of the Aris- 
totelian system, 9 

Nominal definition, 71; neglect of, 
occasions interminable disputes, 
73 ; confounded by Aristotle and 
the Scholastics with the defi- 
nition of things, 73 

Nominal essences, definition of, 68 

Nominalism and realism, 342 

Notation, logical, introduction of, 
22; of the syllogism, various 
methods, 120 

O. 

Observation in physical science, 

209 ; its importance, 211; canons, 

213 
Observation and experiment the 

first steps in physical science, 

209 
Occasional causes, Malebranche's 

theory of, 317 
Occham adopts the conceptualist 

theory, 342, 345 
CEuesidemus teaches the principle 

of contradiction, 189 
Omens, belief in, a material fallacy, 

318 
Opposition of propositions, 94 ; 

scheme of, 97 
Owen, his fallacy regarding human 

responsibility, 311 

P. 

Paley, examination of an argu- 
ment by, 273 

Paronymous words, fallacy of, 309 
Particular propositions, how dis- 
tinguished from universal, 87 



Pascal, his verification of the hypo- 
thesis of the gravity of air, 224 

Patrizzi, an opponent of the Aris- 
totelian system, 10 

Peel, Sir Robert, his gradual altera- 
tions in the British tariff justi- 
fied, 285 

Perception, theories of, 111 

Perception, inference confounded 
with, 319 

Personal identity, 175 

Peter Hispanus, his verses on logic. 
115 

Petitio principii, fallacy of, 326 

Phenomenal or sensational school 
of logicians, 337 

Phrenology, fallacies of, 327; its 
basis sound, but as old as Hippo- 
crates, 328 

Physical investigation, nature, 
grounds and limits of, 195 

Physical sciences, methods of 
proof in the, 192; nature, grounds 
and limits of investigation, 195; 
observation and experiment, 
209; methods of experimental 
inquiry, 216; general cautions. 
227 

Physics, formal analysis in, 371 

Planets, question as to their being 
inhabited, 260, 261 

Plato, his conceptions of analysis 
and synthesis, 3 

Ploucquet on logical notation, 22 ; 
his notation of the syllogism. 
123 

Plural causes, interference of, 239 

Porphyry gives rise to the disputes 
on nominalism and realism, 342 

Positive and negative terms, 35 

Praxis, scientific, examples of, 275 

Predicables, the five, 41, 48 

Predicaments, Aristotle's enume- 
ration of, 47, 347 ; ludicrous il- 
lustration of, 48 

Predication, modes of, 93 

Prejudice, operation of, in the 
moral sciences, 267 

Probabilities, calculation of, 295; 
limitation of, 297 

Probability, theory of, 252 

Proof, scientific, methods of, 191 



IKDEX. 



397 



Property, 39; distinguished from 
accident, 41 

Propositions, their constituents. 
74; division of, 77; considered 
with regard to matter, 78; sim- 
ple, 79 ; compound, 80; reduction 
of, 83 ; with regard to form, 87 ; 
quantity, 87; quality, 89; dis- 
tribution of terms, 90 ; opposition 
of, 94; conversion of, 97; quan- 
tification of the predicate pro- 
posed instead of conversion, 98; 
shown to be useless, 99 

Q. 

Quantification of the predicate, or 
New Analytic, 92 ; considered 
with reference to mood and 
figure, 115 

Quantity and quality of propo- 
sitions, 87, 89 

Question, begging the, 326, 329; 
instances, 327, 329 

Quiditas, or essential nature, 66 

R. 

Ramus, an opponent of the Aris- 
totelian system, 10 ; mode of 
logical division ascribed to him, 
really employed by Aristotle 
and the Scholastics, 44 

Real and nominal essences, GS 

Realism and nominalism, 342 

Reason an ultimate source of evi- 
dence, 188 

Reasoning, on what founded, 32; 
theories of, 153; Nominalist the- 
ories, 155; objections, 157 

Reasoning, mathematical, injurious 
to other modes of ratiocination, 
374 

Regnault, his attempt to popu- 
larise logic, 22 

Relative and absolute terms, 35 

Residues, method of, 223 

Royal Society, Charles IL's ques- 
tion to the, 313 

Rudiger, introducer of the logic of 
analogy, 21 

o. 

Sacramentum, history of the word, 
353 



Saunderson, a writer on logic, 26 

Scepticism reduced to a science by 
Sextus Empiricus, 177 

Sceptics, their objections to the 
evidence of the senses, answered, 
179, 183 

Scholastics, the, their merits and 
defects, 8, 345 

Sciences, division of the, 375; Ba- 
con's Chart of Knowledge, 375 ; 
Locke's classification, 376; Cole- 
ridge's, 376; Bentham's, 377; 
Ampere's tables, 378; explana- 
tory and mnemonic verses, 386 

Scientific definition, often pro- 
visional, 71 

Scientific praxis, examples of, 275 

Scientific proof and investigation, 
methods of, 191 

Sensational or phenomenal school 
of logicians, 337 

Senses, evidence of the external, 
177; sometimes deceptive, 362 

Sextua Empiricus, impugns the 
authority of the external senses, 
177 

Simmias of Thebes, an early wri- 
ter on logic, 3 

Simon of Athens, an early writer 
on logic, 3 

Simple complex propositions, ex- 
ample of, 79 

Singular propositions, when ranked 
with universal, 87; when rec- 
koned particular, 87 

Social statics and dynamics, what, 
289 ; practical value of this di- 
vision of sociology, 290 ; object 
of social dynamics, 291 

Society, progressive tendencies of, 
293; Bacon's aphorism, 293; 
Cornte's generalisations, 293; 
such generalisations premature, 
294 

Sociological sciences, the, 277; em- 
piricism in, 283; where deduc- 
tive, 285; verifications of, 287; 
divisions of M. Comte, their 
practical value, 290; generalisa- 
tions, 293 

Socrates employs the interrogatory 
mode of disputation, 1 ; lays the 



398 



INDEX. 



foundation of logic proper, 2; 
his pupils, 3; discovery of in- 
duction ascribed to him, 151 

Sorites, or chain syllogism, 138 

Species, definition of, 38 

Spectral illusions, explanation of, 
362 

Stewart, Dugald, condemnation of 
logic by, 25 ; the syllogism dis- 
carded by him, 159 

Subaltern genera and species, defi- 
nition of, 39 

Subalternans, what kind of propo- 
sitions so called, 95 

Subcontraries, qualities of, 95 

Substance and attribute, distinc- 
tion of, 33 

Syllogisms, 100; properties of, 102; 
figures, 108; moods, 113; nota- 
tion, 120; kinds, 127; complex, 
127; conditional, 132; disjunc- 
tive, 134; copulative, 135; the 
dilemma, 135; chain syllogism, 
or sorites, 138; enthymeme, or 
imperfect syllogism, 140; de- 
duction confounded with syllo- 
gism, 150 

Svnthesis, 143; its subject-matter, 
147 

T. 

Tacit, or implied compound propo- 
sitions, 85 

Terms, definition of, 32; material 
relation of, to each other, 33 ; 
formal relation, 37; terms with 
regard to things, 49 

Test, universal, of syllogisms, 131 

Theophrastus, an early writer on 
logic, 7 

Theories, formation and verifica- 
tion of, 243 

Thomson attempts to popularise 
the New Analytic, 29; formal 
analysis in physics, explanation 
of, by, 371 

Transformation of names, twofold 
law of the, 64 



Transitive application of words, 
confusion arising from the, 63, 
352 

Trench, his idea of the reality of 
words, 350 ; his censure of 
Hobbes, 350 

Truths, three classes of, 163; ge- 
neral, independentof experience, 
159; necessary and contingent. 
161; logical, 170 

U. 

Undistributed middle, fallacy of, 
305 

Union of induction and deduction, 
245 

Universal canon of inference, 102; 
test of syllogisms, 131 

Universal propositions, how dis- 
tinguished from particular, 87 

V. 

Verbal fallacies, 307 ; enumeration, 

307312 

Verbal school of logicians, 337 
Vico, unphilosophical views of, 294 

\V. 

Wallis, a writer on logic, 26 

Watts's Logic, indifferent cha- 
racter of, 46 

Wells's theory of dew, 235 

Whately, Archbishop, his views of 
the office of logic, 26; his defini- 
tion of logical division ques- 
tioned, 43; his exposition of the 
Aristotelian logic, 339 

Whewell and Airy, their observa- 
tions on the pendulum, 225 

Wolf, an eclectic, his attempt to 
reconcile the old and new me- 
thods in science, 20; his suc- 
cessors in Germany, 21 

Words, confusion arising from the 
transitive application of, 63, 352 

Z. 

Zeno the Eleatic, the earliest known 
logician, 1 



THE END. 



C. WHITiKG, JiEAUFOET HOUSE, STEAND. 



AN 



ALPHABETICAL LIST 

OF BOOKS CONTAINED IN 

BOHN'S LIBRARIES 



Detailed Catalogue^ arranged according to the various 
Libraries^ will be sent on application. 



ADDISON'S Works. With the 
Notes of Bishop Hurd, Portrait, 
and 8 Plates of Medals and Coins. 
Edited by H. G. Bohn. 6 vols. 
3.?. 6J. each. 

-ESCHYLUS, The Dramas of. 
Translated into English Verse by 
Anna Swanwick. 4th Edition, 
revised. 5.1. 

The Tragedies of. Trans- 
lated into Prose by T. A. Buckley, 
B.A. y. 6d. 

AQASSIZ and GOULD'S Out- 
line of Comparative Physi- 
ology. Enlarged by Dr. Wright. 
With 390 Woodcuts. 5*. 

ALFTERI'S Tragedies. Trans- 
lated into English Verse by Edgar 
A. Bowring, C.B. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 

ALLEN'S (Joseph, R. N.) Battles 
of the British Navy. Revised 
Edition, with 57 Stsel Engravings. 
2 vols. 5-r. each. 

AMMIANTJS MARCELLINUS. 
History of Rome during the 
Reigns of Constantius, Julian, 
Jovianus, Valcntinian, and Valens. 



Translated by Prof. C. D. Vonge, 
M.A. js. 6d. 

ANDERSEN'S Danish Legends 
and Fairy Tales. Translated 
by Caroline Peachey. With 120 
Wood Engravings. 5.1. 

ANTONINUS (M. Aurelius), The 
Thoughts of. Trans, literally, 
with Notes and Introduction by 
George Long, M.A. 31. 6d. 

APOLLONIUS RHODIDS. 
'The Argonautioa.' Translated 
by E. P. Coleridge, B.A. 

APPIAN'S Roman History. 
Translated by Horace White, 
M.A., LL.D. With Maps and 
Illustrations. 2 vols. 6s. each. 

APULEIUS, The Works of. 
Comprising the Golden Ass, God 
of Socrates, Florida, and Dis- 
course of Magic. 5^. 

ARJOSTO'S Orlando Furloso. 
Translated into English Verse by 
W. S. Rose. With Portrait, and 2 \ 
Steel Engravings. 2 vols. 5^. eJicl 

ARISTOPHANES' Comedies. 
Translated by W. J. Hickie. 2 
vols. 5*. each. 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



ARISTOTLE'S Nicomachean 
Ethics. Translated, with Intro- 
duction and Notes, by the Vener- 
able Archdeacon Browne. $s. 

Politics and Economies. 

Translated by E. Walford, M.A., 
with Introduction by Dr. Gillies. 
&> 

Metaphysics. Translated by 

the Rev. John H. M'Mahon, 
M.A. $s. 

History of Animals. Trans. 

by Richard Cresswell, M.A. 5*. 

Organon; or, Logical Trea- 
tises, and the Introduction of 
Porphyry. Translated by the 
Rev. O. F. Owen, M.A. 2 vols. 
3$. 6d. each. 

Rhetoric and Poetics. 

Trans, by T. Buckley, B.A. $s. 

ARRIAN'S Anabasis of Alex- 
ander, together with the Indica. 
Translated by E. J. Chinnock, 
M.A., LL.D. With Maps and 
Plans. 5*. 

ATHENJEUS. The Deipnoso- 
phists; or, the Banquet of the 
Learned. Trans, by Prof. C. D. 
Yonge, M.A. 3 vols. 5.?. each. 

BACON'S Moral and Historical 
"Works, including the Essays, 
Apophthegms, Wisdom of the 
Ancients, New Atlantis, Henry 
VII., Henry VIII., Elizabeth, 
Henry Prince of Wales, History 
of Great Britain, Julius Caesar, 
\nd Augustus Csesar. Edited by 
J. Devey, M.A. 3.?. 6d. 

Novum Organum and Ad- 
vancement of Learning. Edited 
by J. Devey, M.A. $s. 

BALLADS AND SONGS of the 
Peasantry of England. Edited 
oy Robert Bell. 3*. 6d. 

BASS'S Lexicon to the Greek 
Testament. 2s. 



BAX'S Manual of the History 
of Philosophy, for the use ot 
Students. By E. Belfort Bax. 5*. 

BEAUMONT and FLETCHER, 

their finest Scenes, Lyrics, and 
other Beauties, selected from the 
whole of their works, and edited 
by Leigh Hunt. 3.?. 6d. 

BECHSTEIN'S Cage and 
Chamber Birds, their Natural 
History, Habits, Food, Diseases, 
and Modes of Capture. Translated, 
with considerable additions on 
Structure, Migration, and Eco- 
nomy, by H. G. Adams. Together 
with SWEET BRITISH WARBLERS. 
With 43 coloured Plates and 
Woodcut Illustrations. 5*. 

BE OK MANN (J.) History of 
Inventions, Discoveries, and 
Origins. 4th edition, revised by 
W. Francis and J. W. Griffith. 

2 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

BEDE'S (Venerable) Ecclesias- 
tical History of England. To- 
gether with the ANGLO-SAXON 
CHRONICLE. Edited by J. A. 
Giles, D.C.L. With Map. 5*. 

BELL (Sir Charles). The Ana- 
tomy and Philosophy of Ex- 
pression, as connected with 
the Fine Arts. By Sir Charles 
Bell, K.H. ;th edition, revised. 
5*- 

BERKELEY (George), Bishop 
of Cloyne, The Works of. 
Edited by George Sampson. With 
Biographical Introduction by the 
Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, M.P. 

3 vols. 5^. each. 

BION. See THEOCRITUS. 

BJORNSON'S Arne and the 
Fisher Lassie. Translated by 
W. H. Low, M.A. 35. bd. 

BLAIR'S Chronological Tables 
Revised and Enlarged. Compre- 
hending the Chronology and His- 



Contained in feohris Libraries, 



toryof the World,from the Earliest 
Times to the Russian Treaty of 
Peace, April 1856. By J. Wil- 
loughby Rosse. Double vol. los. 

BLAIR'S Index of Dates. Com- 
prehending the principal Facts in 
the Chronology and History of 
the World, alphabetically ar- 
ranged ; being a complete Index 
to Blair's Chronological Tables. 
By J. W. Rosse. 2 vols. 51. each. 

BLEEK, Introduction to the 
Old Testament. By Friedrich 
Bleek. Edited by Johann Bleek 
and Adolf Kamphausen. Trans- 
lated by G. H. Venables, under 
the supervision of the Rev. Canon 
Venables. 2 vols. $s. each. 

BOETHIUS'S Consolation of 
Philosophy. King Alfred's Anglo- 
Saxon Version of. With a literal 
English Translation on opposite 
pages, Notes, Introduction, and 
Glossary, by Rev. S. Fox, M.A. 
5'- 

BOHN'S Dictionary of Poetical 
Quotations. 4th edition. 6s. 

Handbooks of Athletic 

Sports. In 8 vols., each con- 
taining numerous Illustrations. 
y. f>d. each. 

I. Cricket, Lawn Tennis, 
Tennis, Rackets, Fives, 
Golf. 
II. Rowing and Sculling, 

Sailing, Swimming. 
III. Boxing, Broadsword, 
Single Stick,&c., Wrest- 
ling, Fencing. 

IV. Rugby Football, Associa- 
tion Football, Baseball, 
Rounders, Fie Id ball, 
Quoits, Skittles, Bowls, 
Curling. 

V. Cycling, Athletics, Skat- 
ing. 

VI. Practical Horsemanship, 
including Riding for 
Ladies. 

VII. Camping Out, Canoeing. 
VIII. Gymnastics, Indian Clubs. 



BOHN'S Handbooks of Games. 
New edition. In 2 vols., with 
numerous Illustrations 3*. 6d. 
each. 

Vol. I. TABLK GAMES : Bil- 
liards, Chess, Draughts, Back- 
gammon, Dominoes, Solitaire, 
Reversi, Go-Bang, Rouge et Noir, 
Roulette, E.O., Hazard, Faro. 

Vol. II. CARD GAMES : 
Whist, Solo Whist, Poker, Piquet, 
Ecarte, Euchre, Bezique, Crib- 
bage, Loo, Vingt-et-un, Napoleon, 
Newmarket, Pope Joan, 'Specula- 
tion, &c., &c. 

BOND'S A Handy Book of Rules 
and Tables for verifying Dates 
with the Christian Era, &c. Giving 
an account of the Chief Eras and 
Systems used by various Nations ; 
with the easy Methods for deter- 
mining the Corresponding Dates. 
By J. J. Bond. $s. 

BONOMI'S Nineveh and its 
Palaces. 7 Plates and 294 Wood 
cut Illustrations. 5*. 

BOSWELL'S Life of Johnson, 
with the TOUR IN THE HEBRIDES 
and JOHNSONIANA. Edited by 
the Rev. A. Napier, M.A. 'With 
Frontispiece to each vol. 6 vols. 
3J. 6d. each. 

BRAND'S Popular Antiquities 
of England, Scotland, and Ire- 
land. Arranged, revised, and 
greatly enlarged, by Sir Henry 
Ellis, K.H., F.R.S., &c., &c. 3 
vols. S.T. each. 

BREMER'S (Prederika) Works. 
Translated by Mary Howitt. 4 
vols. 3*. &/. each. 

BRIDOWATER TREATISES. 
Bell (Sir Charles) on the Hand. 

With numerous Woodcuts. $s. 
Kirby on the History, Habits, 

and Instincts of Animals. 

Edited by T. Rymer Jones. 

With upwards of 100 Woodcuts. 

2 vols. 51. each. 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



BRIDGWATER TREATISES continued. 

Kidd on the Adaptation of Ex- 
ternal Nature to the Physical 
Condition of Man. 3*. 6d. 

Chalmers on the Adaptation 
of External Nature to the 
Moral and Intellectual Con- 
stitution of Man. $s. 

BRINK (B. ten) Early English 
Literature. By Bernhard ten 
Brink. Vol. I. To Wyclif. Trans- 
lated by Horace M. Kennedy. 



Vol.11. Wyclif, Chaucer, Ear- 
liest Drama Renaissance. Trans- 
lated by W. Clarke Robinson, 
Ph.D. 35. 6d. 

Vol. III. From the Fourteenth 
Century to the Death of Surrey. 
Edited by Dr. Alois Brandl. 
Trans, by L. Dora Schmitz. 
3.. 6d. 

- Five Lectures on Shake- 
speare. Trans, by Tulia Franklin. 
35. 6d. 

BROWNE'S (Sir Thomas) Works 
Edited by Simon Wilkin. 3 vols. 
35. 6d. each. 

BUCHANAN'S Dictionary of 
Science and Technical Terms 
used in Philosophy, Literature, 
Professions, Commerce, Arts, and 
Trades. 6s. 

BTJRKE'S Works. 8 vols. $s. 6d. 
each. 

I. Vindication of Natural So- 
ciety Essay on the Sub- 
lime and Beautiful, and 
various Political Miscel- 
lanies. 

II. Reflections on the French 
Revolution Letters re- 
lating to the Bristol Elec- 
tion Speech on Fox's 
East India Bill, &c. 



BURKE'S WORKS continued. 

III. Appeal from the New to the 
Old Whigs On the Na- 
bob of Arcot's Debts 
The Catholic Claims, &c. 

IV. Report on the Affairs of 
India, and Articles of 
Charge against Warren 
Hastings. 

V. Conclusion of the Articles of 
Charge against Warren 
Hastings Political Let- 
ters on the American War, 
on a Regicide Peace, to 
the Empress of Russia. 
VI. Miscellaneous Speeches 
Letters and Fragments 
Abridgments of English 
History, &c. With a 
General Index. 

VII. & VIII. Speeches on the Im- 
peachment of Warren 
Hastings ; and Letters. 
With Index. 2 vols. 
$s. 6d. each. 

- Life. By Sir J. Prior. 35. 6d. 

BURNEY'S Evelina. By Frances 
Burney (Mme. D'Arblay). With 
an Introduction and Notes by 
A. R. Ellis. 35. 6d. 

- Cecilia. With an Introduc- 
tion and Notes by A. R. Ellis. 
2 vols. 35. 6d. each. 

BURN (R) Ancient Rome and 
its Neighbourhood. An Illus- 
trated Handbook to the Ruins in 
the City and the Campagna, for 
the use of Travellers. By Robert 
Burn, M.A. With numerous 
Illustrations, Maps, and Plans. 



BURNS (Robert), Life of. By 
J. G. Lockhart, D.C.L. A 
new and enlarged Edition. Re- 
vised by William Scott Douglas. 



contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



5 



BURTON'S (Robert) Anatomy of 
Melancholy. Edited by the Rev. 
A. R. Shilleto, M.A. With In- 
troduction by A. H. Bullen, and 
full Index. 3 vols. y. 6d. each. 

BURTON (Sir R. P.) Personal 
Narrative of a Pilgrimage to 
Al-Madinah and Meooah. By 
Captain Sir Richard F. Burton, 
K.C.M.G. With an Introduction 
by Stanley Lane-Poole, and all 
the original Illustrations. 2 vols. 
y. 6d. each. 

\ This is the copyright edi- 
tion, containing the author's latest 
notes. 

BUTLER'S (Bishop) Analogy of 
Religion, Natural and Revealed, 
to the Constitution and Course of 
Nature ; together with two Dis- 
sertations on Personal Identity and 
on the Nature of Virtue, and 
Fifteen Sermons, y. 6d. 

BUTLER'S (Samuel) Hudlbras. 
With Variorum Notes, a Bio- 
graphy, Portrait, and 28 Illus- 
trations. S.T. 

or, further Illustrated with 60 

Outline Portraits. 2 vols. 5^. 
each. 

C.33SAR. Commentaries on the 
Gallic and Civil Wars, Trans- 
lated by W. A. McDevitte, B.A. 

5*- 

CAMOENS' Lusiad ; or, the Dis- 
covery of India. An Epic Poem. 
Translated by W. J. Mickle. 5th 
Edition, revised by E. R. Hodges, 
M-C.P. 3*. 6<J. 

CARAFAS (The) of Maddaloni. 
Naples under Spanish Dominion. 
Translated from the German of 
Alfred de Reumont. y. 6d. 

CARLYLE'S Sartor Resartus. 
With 75 Illustrations by Edmund 
J. Sullivan. 55. 

CARPENTER'S (Dr. W. B.) 

Zoology. Revised Edition, by 

\V. S. Dallas, F.L.S. With very 

numerous Woodcuts. Vol. I. 6s. 

[ Vol. II. out of print. 



CARPENTER'S Mechanical 
Philosophy, Astronomy, and 
Horology. 181 Woodcuts. 5^. 

Vegetable Physiology and 

Systematic Botany. Revised 
Edition, by E. Lankester, M.D., 
&c. With very numerous Wood- 
cuts. 6s. 

Animal Physiology. Revised 
Edition. With upwards of 300 
Woodcuts. 6s. 

CASTLE (E.) Schools and 
Masters of Peace, from the 
Middle Ages to the End of the 
Eighteenth Century. By Egerton 
Castle, M.A., F.S.A. With a 
Complete Bibliography. Illus- 
trated with 140 Reproductions of 
Old Engravings and 6 Plates of 
Swords, showing 114 Examples. 
6s. 

CATTERMOLE'S Evenings at 
Haddon Hall. With 24 En- 
gravings on Steel from designs by 
Cattermole, the Letterpress by the 
Baroness de Carabella. 51. 

CATULLUS, Tibullus, and the 
Vigil of Venus. A Literal Prose 
Translation. 5^. 

CELLINI (Benvenuto). Me- 
moirs of, written by Himself. 
Translated by Thomas Roscoe. 
3.. 6J. 

CERVANTES' Don Quixote de 
la Mancha. Motteaux's Trans- 
lation revised. 2 vols. y. 6d. 
each. 

Galatea. A Pastoral Ro- 
mance. Translated by G. W. J. 
Gyll. y. 6d. 

Exemplary Novels. Trans- 
lated by Walter K. Kelly, y. 6d. 

CHAUCER'S Poetical Works. 
Edited by Robert Bell. Revised 
Edition, wilh a Preliminary Essay 
by Prof. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 4 
vols. y. 6d. each. 



An Alphabetical Lisf^o/ Books 



CHESS CONGRESS of 1862. 

A Collection of the Games played. 
Edited by J. Lowenthal. $s. 

CHEVREUL on Colour. Trans- 
lated from the French by Charles 
Martel. Third Edition, with 
Plates, 5*. ; or with an additional 
series of 16 Plates in Colours, 
'js. 6d, 

CHILLINGWORTH'S Religion 
of Protestants. A Safe Way to 
Salvation. $s. 6d. 

CHINA, Pictorial, Descriptive, 
and Historical. With Map and 
nearly 100 Illustrations. 55. 

CHRONICLES OF THE CRU- 
SADES. Contemporary Narra- 
tives of the Crusade of Richard 
Cosur de Lion, by Richard of 
Devizes and Geoffrey de Vinsauf ; 
and of the Crusade at St. Louis, 
by Lord John de Joinville. $s. 

CICERO'S Orations. Translated 
by Prof. C. D. Yonge, M.A. 4 
vols. $s. each. 

Letters. Translated by Evelyn 

S. Shuckburgh. 4 vols. $s. each. 

On Oratory and Orators. 

With Letters to Quintus and 
Brutus. Translated by the Rev. 
J. S. Watson, M.A. $s. 

On the Nature of the Gods, 

Divination, Fate, Laws, a Re- 
public, Consulship. Translated 
by Prof. C. D. Yonge, M.A., and 
Francis Barham. 5 5> 

Academics, De Finibus, and 

Tusculan Questions. By Prof. 
C. D. Yonge, M.A. 5*. 

CICERO'S Offices ; or, Moral 
Duties. Cato Major, an Essay 
on Old Age; Lselius, an Essay 
on Friendship ; Scipio's Dream ; 
Paradoxes ; Letter to Quintus on 
Magistrates. Translated by C. R. 
Edmonds. 3^. 6d. 

CORNELIUS NEPOS. See 
JUSTIN. 



CLARK'S (Hugh) Introduction 
to Heraldry. i8th Edition, Re- 
vised and Enlarged by J. R. 
Planche, Rouge Croix. With 
nearly 1000 Illustrations. $s. Or 
with the Illustrations Coloured, 
Ijjft 

CLASSIC TALES, containing 
Rasselas, Vicar of Wakefield, 
Gulliver's Travels, and The Senti- 
mental Journey. 3*. 6d. 

COLERIDGE'S (S. T.) Friend. 
A Series of Essays on Morals, 
Politics, and Religion. 35. 6d. 

Aids to Reflection, and the 

CONFESSIONS OF AN INQUIRING 
SPIRIT, to which are added the 
ESSAYS ON FAITH and the BOOK 
OF COMMON PRAYER, y. 6d. 

Lectures and Notes on 

Shakespeare and other English 
Poets. Edited by T. Ashe. y.6d. 

Biographia Literaria ; to- 
gether with Two Lay Sermons. 
3.. 6d. 

Table- Talk and Omniana. 

Edited by T. Ashe, B.A. y. 6d. 

Miscellanies, JEsthetic and 

Literary; to which is added, 
THE THEORY OF LIFE. Col- 
lected and arranged by T. Ashe, 
B.A. y. 6d. 

COMTE'S Positive Philosophy. 
Translated and condensed by 
Harriet Martineau. With Intro- 
duction by Frederic Harrison. 
3 vols. 5-r. each. 

COMTE'S Philosophy of the 
Sciences, being an Exposition of 
the Principles of the Coitrs de 
Philosophie Positive. By G. H. 
Lewes. 5 J> 

CONDE'S History of the Do- 
minion of the Arabs in Spain. 
Translated by Mrs. Foster. 3 
vols. 35. 6d. each. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



COOPER'S Biographical Dic- 
tionary. Containing Concise 
Notices (upwards of 15,000) of 
Eminent Persons of all Ages and 
Countries. By Thompson Cooper, 
F.S.A. With a Supplement, 
bringing the work down, to 1883. 
2 vols. 5.?. each. 

COXE'S Memoirs of the Duke of 
Marlborough. With his original 
Correspondence. By W. Coxe, 
M.A., F.R.S. Revised edition 
by John Wade. 3 vols. 3*. 6d, 
each. 

%* An Atlas of the plans of 
Marlborough's campaigns, 4to. 
i or. 6d. 

History of the House of 
Austria (1218-1792). With a 
Continuation from the Accession 
of Francis I. to the Revolution of 
1848. 4 vols. 3^. 6d. each. 

CRATE'S (G. L.) Pursuit of Know- 
ledge under Difficulties. Illus- 
trated by Anecdotes and Memoirs. 
Revised edition, with numerous 
Woodcut Portraits and Plates. 55. 

CRUIKSHANK'S Punch and 
Judy. The Dialogue of the 
Puppet Show ; an Account of its 
Origin, &c. With 24 Illustra- 
tions, and Coloured Plates, de- 
signed and engraved by G. Cruik- 
sharik. 5;. 

CUNNINGHAM'S Lives of the 
Most Eminent British Painters. 
A New Edition, with Notes and 
Sixteen fresh Lives. By Mrs. 
Heaton. 3 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

DANTE. Divine Comedy. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. H. F. Gary, 
M.A. 3*. 6d. 

Translated into English Verse 

by I. C. Wright, M.A. 3rd Edi- 
tion, revised. With Portrait, and 
34 Illustrations on Steel, after 
Flax man. 



DANTE. The Inferno. A Literal 
Prose Translation, with the Text 
of the Original printed on the same 
page. By John A. Carlyle, M.D. 
5*. 

The Purgatorio. A Literal 
Prose Translation, with the Text 
printed on the same page. By 
W. S. Dugdale. 5*. 

DE COMMINES (Philip), Me- 
moirs of. Containing the Histories 
of Louis XL and Charles VIII., 
Kings of France, and Charles 
the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. 
Together with the Scandalous 
Chronicle, or Secret History of 
Louis XL, by Jean de Troyes. 
Translated by Andrew R. Scoble. 
With Portraits. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 

DEFOE'S Novels and Miscel- 
laneous Works. With Prefaces 
and Notes, including those attri- 
buted to Sir W. Scott. 7 vols. 
3.?. 6d. each. 

I. Captain Singleton, and 
Colonel Jack. 

II. Memoirs of a Cavalier, 
Captain Carleton, 
Uickory Cronke, &c. 

III. Moll Flanders, and the 
History of the Devil. 

IV. Roxana, and Life of Mrs. 
Christian Davies. 

V. Historyof theGreat Plague 
of London, 1665 ; The 
Storm (1703) ; and the 
True-born Englishman. 

VI. Duncan Campbell, New 
Voyage round the 
World, and Political 
Tracts. 

VII. Robinson Crusoe. 

DE LOLME on the Constitution 
of England. Edited by John 
Macgregor. 3*. 6d. 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



DEMMIN'S History of Arms 

and Armour from the Earliest 

Period. By Auguste Demmin. 

Translated by C. C. Black, M.A. 

With nearly 2000 Illustrations. 

7-r. 6d. 
DEMOSTHENES' Orations. 

Translated by C. Rann Kennedy. 

5 vols. Vol. I., 3-r. 6d.; Vols. 

II. -V., 5-f. each. 

DE STAEL'S Gorimie or Italy. 
By Madame de Stael. Trans- 
lated by Emily Baldwin and 
Paulina Driver. y. 6d. 

DEVEY'S Logic, or the Science 
of Inference. A Popular Manual. 
By J. Devey. 55. 

DICTIONARY of Latin and 
Greek Quotations ; including 
Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law 
Terms and Phrases. With all the 
Quantities marked, and English 
Translations. With Index Ver- 
borum (622 pages). $s. 

DICTIONARY of Obsolete and 
Provincial English. Compiled 
by Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S A., 
&c. 2 vols. S.T. each. 

D I D R O N ' S Christian Icono- 
graphy : a History of Christian 
Art in the Middle Ages. Trans- 
lated by E. J Millington and 
completed by Margaret Stokes. 
With 240 Illustrations. 2 vols. 
$s. each. 

DIOG-ENES LAERTIUS. Lives 
and Opinions of the Ancient 
Philosophers. Translated by 
Prof. C. D. Yonge, M A. $s. 

DOBREE'S Adversaria. Edited 
by the late Prof. Wagner. 2 vols. 
5-r. each. 

D O D D ' S Epigrammatists. A 
Selection from the Epigrammatic 
Literature of Ancient, Mediaeval, 
and Modern Times. By the Rev. 
Henry Philip Dodd, M.A. Ox- 
ford. 2nd Edition, revised and 
enlarged. 6s. 



DONALDSON'S The Theatre of 
the Greeks. A Treatise on the 
History and Exhibition of the 
Greek Drama. With numerous 
I] lustrations and 3 Plans. By John 
William Donaldson, D.D. $s. 

DRAPER'S History of the 
Intellectual Development of 
Europe. By John William Draper, 
M.D., LL.D. 2 vols. $s. each. 

DUNLOP'S History of Fiction. 
A new Edition. Revised by 
Henry Wilson. 2 vols. $s. each. 

DYER (Dr T. H.). Pompeii : its 
Buildings and Antiquities. By 
T. H. Dyer, LL.D. With nearly 
300 Wood Engravings, a large 
Map, and a Plan of the Forum. 
7*. (xt. 

The City of Rome : its History 

and Monuments. With Illustra- 
tions. 5.?. 

DYER (T. F. T.) British Popular 
Customs, Present and Past. 
An Account of the various Games 
and Customs associated with Dif- 
ferent Days of the Year in the 
British Isles, arranged according 
to the Calendar. By the Rev. 
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, M.A. $s. 

EARLY TRAVELS IN PALES- 
TINE. Edited by Thomas 
Wright, M.A: With Map of 
Jerusalem. 5^ 

EBERS' Egyptian Princess. An 
Historical Novel. By George 
Ebers. Translated by E. S. 
Buchheim. 3.?. 6d. 

EDGE WORTH'S Stories for 
Children. With 8 Illustrations 
by L. Speed. 3^. 6d. 

ELZE'S William Shakespeare. 
See SHAKESPEARE. 

EMERSON'S Works. 3 vols 

3.?. 6d. each. 

I. Essays, Lectures and Poems. 
II. English Traits, Nature, and 
Conduct of Life. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



EMERSON'S WORKS comt,....j 
III. Society and Solitude Letters 
and Social aims Miscel- 
laneous Papers (hitherto 
uncollected) May Day, 
and other Poems. 

ELLIS (G.) Specimens of Early 
English Metrical Romances. 
With an Historical Introduction 
on the Rise and Progress of 
Romantic Composition in France 
and England. Revised Edition. 
ByJ. O. Halliwell, F.R.S. y. 

ENNEMOSER'S History of 
Magic. Translated by William 
Howitt. 2 vols. 55. each. 

EPICTETUS, The Discourses of. 
With the ENCHEIRIDION and 
Fragments. Translated by George 
Long, M.A. 5.1. 

EURIPIDES. A New Literal 
Translation in Prose. By E. P. 
Coleridge, M.A. 2 vols. 5^. each. 

ECJTROPIUS. See JUSTIN. 

EUSEBIUS PAMPHILUS, 
Ecclesiastical History of. Trans- 
lated by Rev. C.F. Cruse, M.A. 5*. 

EVELYN'S Diary and Corre- 
spondendence. Edited from the 
Oiiginal MSS. by W. Bray, 
F.A.S. With 45 engravings. 4 
vols. 5-r. each. 

FAJRHOLT'S Costume in Eng- 
land. A History of Dress to the 
end of the Eighteenth Century. 
3rd Edition, revised, by Viscount 
Dillon, V.P.S.A. Illustrated with 
above 700 Engravings. 2 vols. 
5*. each. 

FIELDING S Adventures of 
Joseph Andrews and his Friend 
Mr. Abraham Adams. With 
Cruikshank's Illustrations. 35. 6d. 
History of Tom Jones, a 
Foundling. With Ciuikshank's 
Illustrations. 2 vols. 3.1. 6d. each. 

Amelia. With Cruikshank's 

Illustrations. 5*. 



FLAXMAN'S Lectures on Sculp- 

tTvl r> B Y J ohn Flaxman, R.A. 
With Portriu ^.j. 53 P , ates 6j 

FLORENCE of WORCESTER'S 
Chronicle, with the Two Con- 
tinuations : comprising Annals of 
English History, from the De- 
parture of the Romans to the 
Reign of Edward I. Translated 
by Thomas Forester, M.A. 5*. 

FOSTER'S (John) Life and Cor- 
respondence. Edited by J. E. 
Ryland. 2 vols. $s. 6d. each. 

Critical Essays. Edited by 

J. E. Ryland. 2 vols. 35. 6d. 
each. 

Essays : on Decision of Cha- 
racter ; on a Man's writing Me- 
moirs of Himself ; on the epithet 
Romantic ; on the aversion of 
Men of Taste to Evangelical Re- 
ligion. 3-r. 6d. 

Essays on the Evils of Popular 

Ignorance ; to which is added, a 
Discourse on the Propagation of 
Christianity in India. 3^. 6d. 

Essays on the Improvement 
of Time. With NOTES OK 
SERMONS and other Pieces. 
y. 6d. 

Fosteriana. Selected and 

Edited by Henry G. Bolm. 3*. 6i/. 

GASPARY'S History of Italian 
Literature. Translated by Her- 
man Oelsner, M.A., Ph.D. 
Vol. I. 3*. 6d. 

GEOFFRfcY OF MONMOUTH, 
Chronicle of. See St'jc O. E. 
Chronicles. 

GESTA ROMANORUM. or En- 
tertaining Moral Stories invented 
by the Monks. Translaied by the 
Rev. Charles Swan Revised 
Edition, by Wynnard Hooper, 
15. A. 5*. 

GIL DAS, Chronicles of See Six 
O. E. Chronicles. 



10 



An Aiphabetical List of Books 



GIBBON'S Deoline and Fall of 
the Roman Empire. Coir 1 - 40 
and Unabr^o-J, mn Variorum 
nvies. Edited by an English 
Churchman. With 2 Maps and 
Portrait. 7 vols. 35. 6d. each. 

GILBART'S History, Principles, 
and Practice of Banking. By 
the late J. W. Gilbart, F.R.S. 
New Edition, revised by A. S. 
Michie. 2 vols. icxr. 

GIL BLAS, The Adventures of. 
Translated from the French of 
Lesage by Smollett. With 24 
Engravings on Steel, after Smirke, 
and 10 Etchings by George Cruik- 
shank. 6s. 

GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS' 
Historical Works. Translated 
by Th. Forester, M.A., and Sir 
R. Colt Hoare. Revised Edition, 
Edited by Thomas Wright, M.A., 
F.S.A. ST. 

GOETHE'S Faust. Part I. Ger- 
man Text with Hayward's Prose 
Translation and Notes. Revised 
by C. A. Buchheim, Ph.D. 5.?. 
GOETHE'S Works. Translated 
into English by various hands. 
14 vols. 3-r. 6d. each. 
I. and II. Autobiography and 

Annals. 

III. Faust. Two Parts, com- 
plete. (Swanwick.) 
IV. Novels and Tales. 
V. Wilhelm Meister's Appren- 
ticeship. 
VI. Conversations with Ecker- 

mann and Soret. 
VIII. Dramatic Works. 
IX. Wilhelm Meister's Travels. 
X. Tour in Italy, and Second 

Residence in Rome. 
XI. Miscellaneous Travels. 
XII. Early and Miscellaneous 

Letters. 

XIII. Correspondence with Zelter. 
XIV. Reineke Fox, West-Eastern 
Divan and Achilleid. 



GOT .rwoariTH'S Works. A new 
Edition, by J. W. M. Gibbs. 5 
vols. 3.?. 6d. each. 

GRAMMONT'S Memoirs of the 
Court of Charles II. Edited by 
Sir Walter Scott. Together with 
the BOSCOBEL TRACTS, including 
two not before published, &c. 
New Edition. 55. 

GRAY'S Letters. Including the 
Correspondence of Gray and 
Mason. Edited by the Rev. 
D. C. Tovcy, M.A. Vol. I. 
3^. 6d. [ Vol. ii. in the press. 

GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans- 
lated by George Burges, M.A. 5*. 

GREEK ROMANCES of Helio- 
dorus, Longus, and Achilles 
Tatius viz., The Adventures of 
Theagenes & Chariclea ; Amours 
of Daphnis and Chloe ; and Loves 
of Clitopho and Leucippe. Trans- 
lated by Rev. R. Smith, M.A. 
5*- 

GREGORY'S Letters on the 
Evidences, Doctrines, & Duties 
of the Christian Religion. By 
Dr. Olinthus Gregory. 35, 6d. 

GREENE, MARLOWE, and 
BEN JONSON. Poems of. 
Edited by Robert Bell. 3*. 6d. 

GRIMM'S TALES. With the 
Notes of the Original. Translated 
by Mrs. A. Hunt. With Intro- 
duction by Andrew Lang, M.A. 
2 vols. 3-r. 6d. each. 

Gammer Grethel; or, Ger- 
man Fairy Tales and Popular 
Stories. Containing 42 Fairy 
Tales. Trans, by Edgar Taylor. 
With numerous Woodcuts after 
George Cruikshank and Ludwig 
Grimm, y. 6d. 

GROSSI'S Marco Visconti. 
Translated by A. F. D. The 
Ballads rendered into English 
Verse by C. M. P. 3*. 6d. 



Contained in Bohrfs Libraries. 



II 



GUIZOT'S History of the 
English Revolution of 1640. 
From the Accession of Charles 
I. to his Death. Translated by 
William Hazlitt. $s. 6d. 

- History of Civilisation, from 
the Fall of the Roman Empire to 
the French Revolution. Trans- 
lated by William Hazlitt. 3 vols. 
y. 6d. each. 

HALL'S (Rev. Robert) Miscel- 
laneous Works and Remains. 



HAMPTON COURT: A Short 
History of the Manor and 
Palace. By Ernest Law, B.A. 
With numerous Illustrations, $s. 

HARD WICK'S History of the 
Articles of Religion. By the late 
C. Hard wick. Revised b'y the 
Rev. Francis Procter, M.A. 5*. 

HAUFF'S Tales. The Caravan 
The Sheik of Alexandria The 
Inn in the Spessart. Trans, from 
the German by S. Mendel. y. 6d. 

HAWTHORNE'S Tales. 4 vols. 
3.?. 6d. each. 
I. Twice-told Tales, and the 

Snow Image. 
II. Scarlet Letter.andthe House 

with the Seven Gables. 
III. Transformation [The Marble 
Faun], and Blithedale Ro- 
mance. 
IV. Mosses from an Old Manse. 

HAZLITT'S Table-talk. Essays 
on Men and Manners. By W. 
Hazlitt. 3-r. 6d. 

Lectures on the Literature 
of the Age of Elizabeth and on 
Characters of Shakespeare's Plays 
3*. 6V. 

Lectures on the English 
Poets, and on the English Comic 
Writers. 3*. 6J. 

- The Plain Speaker. Opinions 
on Books, Men, and Things, y. 6J. 

- Round Table. 3*. &/. 



HAZLITT'S Sketches and 
Essays. 3^. 6d. 

- The Spirit of the Age ; or, 
Contemporary Portraits. Edited 
by W. Carew Hazlitt. 3,1. 6d. 

HEATON'S Concise History of 
Painting. New Edition, revised 
by Cosmo Monkhouse. 5-r. 

HEGEL'S Lectures on the Philo- 
sophy of History. Translated by 
J. Sibree, M.A. 

HEINE'S Poems, Complete. 
Translated by Edgar A. Bowring, 
C.B. y. 6d. 

Travel-Pictures, including the 

Tour in the Harz, Norderney, and 
Book of Ideas, together with the 
Romantic School. Translated by 
Francis Storr. A New Edition, 
revised throughout. With Appen- 
dices and Maps. 3*. 6d. 

HELP'S Life of Christopher 
Columbus, the Discoverer of 
America. By Sir Arthur Helps, 
K.C.B. y. 6d. 

HELP'S Life of Hernando Cortes, 
and the Conquest of Mexico. 2 
vols. y. 6d. each. 

Life of Pizarro. 35. 6V/. 

Life of Las Casas the Apostle 

of the Indies. 35. &/. 

HENDERSON (E.) Select His- 
torical Documents of the Middle 
Ages, including the most famous 
Charters relating to England, the 
Empire, the Church, &c., from 
the 6th to the I4th Centuries. 
Translated from the Latin and 
edited by Ernest F. Henderson, 
A.B., A.M., Ph.D. 5-f. 

HENFREY'S Guide to English 
Coins, from the Conquest to the 
present time. New and revised 
Edition by C. F. Keary, M.A., 
F.S.A. 6s. 

HENRY OF HUNTINGDON'S 
History of the English. Trans- 
lated by T. Forester, M.A. $J. 



12 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



HENRY'S (Matthew) Exposition 
of the Book of the Psalms. $s. 

HELIODORUS. Theagenes and 
Chariclea. See GREEK RO- 
MANCES. 

HERODOTUS. Translated by the 
Rev. Henry Gary, M.A. 35. 6d. 

Notes on. Original and Se- 
lected from the best Commenta- 
tors. By D. W. Turner, M.A. 
With Coloured Map. 55. 

Analysis and Summary of 

By J. T. Wheeler, cj. 

HESIOD, CALLIMACHL.S, and 
THEOGNIS. Translated by the 
Rev. J. Banks, M.A. 5*. 

HOFFMANN'S (E. T. W ) The 
Serapion Brethren. Translated 
from the German by Lt.-Col. Alex. 
fcwing. 2 vols. 3-f. 6d. each. 

HOLBEIN'S Dance of Death 
and Bible Cuts. Upwards of 150 
Subjects, engraved in facsimile, 
with Introduction and Descrip 
tions by Francis Douce and Dr. 
Thomas Frognall Dibclen. 51. 

HOMER'S Iliad. Translated into 
English Prose by T. A. Buckley, 
B.A. $s. 

Odyssey. Hymns, Epigrams, 

and Battle of the Frogs and Mice. 
Translated into English Prose by 
T. A. Buckley, B.A. 5*. 

See also POPE. 

HOOPER'S (G.) Waterloo : The 

Downfall of the First Napo- 
leon : a History of the Campaign 
of 1815. By George Hooper. 
With Maps and Plans. $s. 6d. 

The Campaign of Sedan : 

The Downfall of the Second Em- 
pire, August - September, 1870. 
With General Map and Six Plans 
of Battle. y. 6d. 

HORACE. A new literal Prose 
translation, byA. Hamilton Bryce, 
LL.D. 31. 6rf. 



HUGO'S (Victor) Dramatic 
Works. Hernani - Ruy Bias 
The King's Diversion. Translated 
by Mrs. Newton Crosland and 
F. L. Slous. 3.?. 6<i. 

Poems, chiefly Lyrical. Trans- 
lated by various Writers, now first 
collected by J. II. L. Williams. 
y.6<t. 

HUMBOLDT'S Cosmos. Trans- 
lated by E. C. Otte, B. H. Paul, 
and W. S. Dallas, F.L.S. 5 vols. 
y. 6d. each, excepting Vol. V. 55. 

Personal Narrative of his 

Travels to the Equinoctial Regions 
of America during the years 1799- 
1804. Translated by T. Ross. 3 
vols. $s. each. 

Views of Nature. Translated 

by E. C. Otte and H. G. Bohn. 

5*- 

HUMPHREYS' Coin Collector's 
Manual. By H. N. Humphreys, 
with upwards of 140 Illustrations 
on Wood and Steel. 2 vols. 55. 
each. 

HUNGARY : its History and Re- 
volution, together with a copious 
Memoir of Kossuth. %s. 6d. 

HUTCHINSON (Colonel). Me- 
moirs of the Life of. By his 
Widow, Lucy : together with her 
Autobiography, and an Account 
of the Siege of Lathom House. 
35. 6d. 

HUNT'S Poetry of Science. By 
Richard Hunt. 3rd Edition, re- 
vised and enlarged. 51. 

INDIA BEFORE THE SEPOY 
MUTINY. A Pictorial, De- 
scriptive, and Historical Ac- 
count, from the Earliest Times 
to the Annexation of the Punjab. 
with upwards of 100 Engravings 
on Wood, and a Map. 55. 

INGULPH'H Chronicles of the 
Abbey of Croyland, with the 
CONTINUATION by Peter of Blois 
and other Writers. Translated by 
H. T. Riley, M.A. Cr 



Contained in Bohris Libraries. 



IRVING'S (Washington) Com- 
plete 'K'orks. i5vols. With Por- 
traits, &c. 3-r. 6d. each. 
I. Salmagundi, Knicker- 
bocker's History of New 
York. 

II. The Sketch- Book, and the 
Life of Oliver Goldsmith. 
III. Bracebridge Hall, Abbots- 
ford and Newstead Abbey. 
IV. The Alhambra, Tales of a 

Traveller. 

V. Chronicle of the Conquest 
of Granada, Legends of 
the Conquest of Spain. 
VI. & VII. Life and Voyages of 
Columbus, together with 
the Voyages of his Com- 
panions. 
VIII. Astoria, A Tour on the 

Prairies. 
XI. Life of Mahomet, Livesof the 

Successors of Mahomet. 
X. Adventures of Captain Bon 
neville, U.S.A., Wolfert's 
Roost. 

XI. Biographies and Miscella- 
neous Papers. 

XII.-XV. Life of George Wash- 
ington. 4 vols. 

- Life and Letters. By his 
Nephew, Pierre E. Irving. 2 vols. 
31. 6</. each. 

ISOCRATES, The Orations of 
Translated by J. II. Freese, M.A. 
Vol. I. 55. 

JAMES'S (O. P R.) Life of 
Richard Cceur de Lion. 2 vols. 
3.?. 6c/. each. 

The Life and Times of Louis 



XIV. 2 vols. y. 6d. each. 

JAMESON'S (Mrs.) Shake- 
speare's Heroines. Character- 
istics of Women: Moral, Poetical, 
and Historical. By Mrs. Jameson. 
y. 6d. 

JESSE'S (E.) Anecdotes of Dogs 
With 40 Woodcuts and 34 Steel 
Engravings. 5 J * 



JESSE'S (J. H.) Memoirs of the 
Court of England during the 
Reign of the Stuarts, including 
the Protectorate. 3 vols. With 
42 Portraits. $s. each. 

- Memoirs of the Pretenders 
and their Adherents. With 6 
Portraits. $s. 

JOHNSON'S Lives of the Poets. 
Edited by Mrs. Alexander Napier, 
with Introduction by Professor 
Hales. 3 vols. y. (td. each. 

JOSEPHUS (Plavius), The Works 
of. Whiston's Translation, re- 
vised by Rev. A. R. Shilleto, M.A 
With Topographical and Geo. 
graphical Notes by Colonel Sir 
C. W. Wilson, K.C.B. 5 vols. 
3J. (td. each. 

JOYCE'S Scientific Dialogues. 
With numerous Woodcuts. 5*. 

JUKES-BROWNE (A. J.), The 
Building of the British Isles: 
a Study in Geographical Evolu- 
tion. Illustrated by numerous 
Maps and Woodcuts. 2nd Edition, 
revised, Js. 6J. 

Student's Handbook of 

Physical Geology. With nu- 
merous Diagrams and Illustra- 
tions. 2nd Edition, much en- 
larged, 7-r. 6d. 

JULIAN, the Emperor. Contain- 
ing Gregory Nazianzen's Two In- 
vectives and Libanus' Monody, 
with Julian's extant Theosophical 
Works. Translated by C. W. 
King, M.A. $s. 

JUSTIN, CORNELIUS NEPOS, 
and EUTROP1US. Translated 
by the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. 

5'- 

JUVENAL. PERS1US. S'L- 
PICIA and LUCILIUS. Trans- 
lated by L. Evans, M.A. $s. 

JUNIUS'S Letters. With all the 
Notes of Wood fall's Edition, and 
important Additions. 2 vols. 
y. 6ti. each. 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



KANT'S Critique of Pure Reason. 
Translated by J. M. D. Meikle- 
john. 5.1-. 

Prolegomena and Meta- 

physicalFoundatlonsofNatural 
Science. Translated by E. Belfort 
Bax. 5-r. 

KEIGHTLEY'S (Thomas) My- 
thology of Ancient Greece and 
Italy. 4th Edition, revised by 
Leonard Schmitz, Ph.D., LL.D. 
With 12 Plates from the Antique. 

5* 

Fairy Mythology, illustrative 

of the Romance and Superstition 
of Various Countries. Revised 
Edition, with Frontispiece by 
Cruikshank. 5*. 

LA FONTAINE'S Fables. Trans- 
lated into English Verse by Elizur 
Wright. New Edition, with Notes 
by J. W. M. Gibbs. 3*. 6d. 

LAMARTINE'S History of the 
Girondists. Translated by H. T. 
Ryde. 3 vols. 35. 6d. each. 

History of the Restoration 

of Monarchy in France (a Sequel 
to the History of the Girondists). 
4 vols. y. 6d. each. 

History of the French Re- 
volution of 1848. 3*. &/. 

LAMB'S (Charles) Essays of Ella 
and Eliana. Complete Edition. 
3s. (>d. 

Specimens of English Dra- 
matic Poets of the Time of 
Elizabeth. 3*. 6d. 

Memorials and Letters of 

Charles Lamb. By Serjeant 
Talfourd. New Edition, revised, 
by W. Carew Hazlitt. 2 vols. 
y. 6d. each. 

LANZI'S History of Painting in 
Italy, from the Period of the 
Revival of the Fine Arts to the 
End of the Eighteenth Century. 
Translated by Thomas Roscoe. 
3 vols. y. 6d. each. 



LAPPENBERG'S History of 
England under the Anglo- 
Saxon Kings. Translated by 
B. Thorpe, F.S.A. New edition, 
revised by E. C. Otte. 2 vols. 
y. 6d. each. 

LECTURES ON PAINTING, 
by Barry, Opie, Fuseli. Edited 
by R. Wornum. 51. 

LEONARDO DA VINCI'S 
Treatise on Fainting. Trans- 
lated by J. F. Rigaud, R.A,, 
With a Life of Leonardo by John 
William Brown. With numerous 
Plates. 5-r. 

LELAND'S Itinerary. Edited by 

Laurence Gomme, F.S.A. Vol. I. 

[In the Press. 

LEPSIUS'S Letters from Egypt, 
Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of 
Sinai. Translated by L. and 
J. B. Homer. With Maps. $s. 

LESSING'S Dramatic Works, 
Complete. Edited by Ernest Bell, 
M.A. With Memoir of Lessing 
by Helen Zimmern. 2 vols. 
3^. 6d. each. 

Laokoon, Dramatic Notes, 

and the Representation of 
Death by the Ancients. Trans- 
lated by E. C. Beasley and Helen 
Zimmern. Edited by Edward 
Bell, M.A. With a Frontispiece 
of the Laokoon group. 35. 6d. 

LILLY'S Introduction to Astro- 
logy. With a GRAMMAR OF 
ASTROLOGY and Tables for Cal- 
culating Nativities, by Zadkiel. $s. 

LIVY'S History of Rome. Trans- 
lated by Dr. Spillan, C. Edmonds, 
and others. 4 vols. $s. each. 

LOCKE'S Philosophical Works. 
Edited by J. A. St. John. 2 vols. 
35. 6d. each. 

Life and Letters: By Lord 

King. y. 6</. 

LOCKHART (J. G.)_ See BURNS. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



LODGE'S Portraits of Illustrious 
Personages of Great Britain, 
with Biographical and Historical 
Memoirs. 240 Portraits engraved 
on Steel, with the respective Bio- 
graphies unabridged. 8 vols. 51. 
each. 

LONGFELLOW'S Prose 
Works. With 16 full- page Wood 
Engravings. $s. 

LOUDON'S (Mrs.) Natural 

History. Revised edition, by 

W. S. Dallas, F.L.S. With 

numerous Woodcut Illus. $s. 

L O W N D E S ' Bibliographer's 

Manual of English Literature. 

Enlarged Edition. By H. G. 

Bohn. 6 vols. cloth, 5-r. each. 

Or 4 vols. half morocco, 2/. 2s. 

LONGUS. Daphnis and Chloe. 

See GREEK ROMANCES. 
LUCAN'S Pharsalia. Translated 

by H. T. Riley, M.A. 5^. 
LUCIAN'S Dialogues of the 
Gods, of the Sea Gods, and 
of the Dead. Translated by 
Howard Williams, M.A. 5*. 
LUCRETIUS. Translated by the 

Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. $s. 
LUTHER'S Table-Talk. Trans- 
lated and Edited by William 
Hazlitt. 3*. 6d. 

Autobiography. See 

MICHELET. 

MACHIAVELLI'S History of 
Florence, together with the 
Prince, Savonarola, various His- 
torical Tracts, and a Memoir of 
Machiavelli. y. 6d. 
MALLET'S Northern Antiqui- 
ties, or an Historical Account of 
the Manners, Customs, Religions 
and Laws, Maritime Expeditions 
and Discoveries, Language and 
Literature, of the Ancient Scandi- 
navians. Translated by Bishop 
Percy. Revised and Enlarged 
Edition, with a Translation of the 
PROSE EDDA, by J. A. Black- 
well. $s. 



MANTELL'S (Dr.) Petrifactions 
and their Teachings. With nu- 
merous illustrative Woodcuts. 6s. 



- Wonders of Geology. 8th 
Edition, revised by T. Rupert 
Jones, F.G.S. With a coloured 
Geological Map of England, 
Plates, and upwards ol 200 
Woodcuts. 2 vols. 7*. 6d. each. 

MANZONI. The Betrothed : 
being a Translation of ' I Pro- 
messi Sposi.' By Alessandro 
Manzoni. With numerous Wood- 
cuts. 5*. 



MARCO POLO'S Travels; the 
Translation of Marsden revised 
by T. Wright, M.A., F.S.A. 5*. 

MARRYAT'S (Capt. R.N.) 
Masterman Ready. With 93 
Woodcuts. 3*. (>d. 

- Mission ; or, Scenes in Africa. 
Illustrated by Gilbert and Dalziel. 
y. 6d. 

-- Pirate and Three Cutters. 
With 8 Steel Engravings, from 
Drawings by Clarkson Stanfield, 
R.A. y. 6rf. 

- Prlvateersman. 8 Engrav- 
ings on Steel. 3*. 6a 

- Settlers in Canada. 10 En- 
gravings by Gilbert and Dalziel. 
y. 6d. 

- Poor Jack. With 16 Illus- 
trations after Clarkson Stansfield, 
R.A. y.f>d. 

- Peter Simple, With 8 full- 
page Illustrations. 3*. M. 

_ Midshipman Easy/ With 8 
full page Illustrations. 3*. (xt. 

MARTIAL'S Epigrams, complete. 
Translated into Prose, each ac- 
companied by one or more Verse 
Translations selected from the 
Works of English Poets, and 
other sources. 7 J - &' 



i6 



Alphabetical List of Books 



MARTINEAU'S (Harriet) His- 
tory of England, from 1800- 
1815. 3-r. 6d. 

History of the Thirty Years' 

Peace, A.D. 1815-46. 4 vols. 
31. 6d. each. 

See Conifers Positive Philosophy ; 

MATTHEW PARIS'S English 
History, from the Year 1235 to 
1273. Translated by Rev. J. A. 
Giles, D.C.L. 3 vols. 55. each. 

MATTHEW OF WESTMIN- 
STER'S Flowers of History, 
from the beginning of the World 
to A.D. 1307. Translated by C. D. 
Yonge, M.A. 2 vols. 5.?. each. 

MAXWELL'S Victories of w e l- 
iogton and the British Armies. 
Frontispiece and 5 Portraits. 55. 

MENZEL'S History of Germany, 
from the Earliest Period to 1842. 
3 vols. 3^. 6d. each. 

MICHAEL ANGELO AND 
RAPHAEL, their Lives and 
Works. By Duppa aud Quatre- 
mere de Quincy. With Portraits, 
and Engravings on Steel. $s. 

MIGHELET'S Luther's Auto- 
biography. Trans, by William j 
Hazlitt With an Appendix (no 
pages) of Notes. 35. 6</. 

History of the French Revo- 
lution from its earliest indications 
to the flight of the King in 1791. 
y. 6rf. 

MIGNET'SHistory of theFrench 
Revolution, from 1789 to 1814. 
35. 6d. 

MILL (J. S.) Early Essays by 
John Stuart Mill. Collected from 
various sources by J. W. M. Gibbs. 
3s.6d. 

MILLER (Professor). History 
Philosophically Illustrated, from 
the Fall of the Roman Empire to 
the French Revolution. 4 vols. 
35. 6d. each. 



MILTON'S Prose Works. Edited 
by J. A, St. John. 5 vols. 3^. 6d. 
each. 

Poetical Works, with a Me- 
moir and Critical Remarks by 
James Montgomery, an Index to 
Paradise Lost, Todd's Verbal Index 
to all the Poems, and a Selection 
of Explanatory Notes by Henry 
G. Bohn. Illustrated with 120 
Wood Engravings from Drawings 
by W. Harvey. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 

MITFORD'S (Miss) Our Village 
Sketches of Rural Character and 
Scenery. With 2 Engravings on 
Steel. 2 vols. 3^. 6d. each. 

MOLIERE'S Dramatic Works. 

A new Translation in English 

Prose, by C. H. Wall. 3 vols. 
3-r. 6d. each. 

MONTAGU. The Letters and 
Works of Lady Mary Wortley 
Montagu. Edited by her great- 
grandson, Lord Wharncliffe's Edi- 
tion, and revised by W. Moy 
Thomas. New Edition, revised, 
with 5 Portraits. 2 vols. 5*. each. 

MONTAIGNE'S Essays. Cotton's 
Translation, revised by W. C. 
Hazlitt. New Edition. 3 vols. 
3-v. 6d. each. 

MONTESQUIEU'S Spirit of 
Laws. New Edition, re vised and 
corrected. By J. V. Pritchard, 
A.M. 2 vols. $s. 6d. each. 

MOTLEY (J. L.). The Rise of 
the Dutch Republic. A History. 
By John Lothrop Motley. New 
Edition, with Biographical Intro- 
duction by Moncure D. Conway. 
3 vols $s. 6t/. each. 

MORPHY'S Games of Chess. 
Being the Matches and best Games 
played by the American Champion, 
with Explanatory and Analytical 
Notes by J. Lowenthal. 55. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



MUDIE'S British Birds ; or, His- 
tory of the Feathered Tribes of the 
British Islands. Revised by W. 
C. L. Martin. With 52 Figures 
of Birds and ^ Coloured Plates of 
Eggs. 2 vols. 

MEANDER (Dr. A.). History 
of the Christian Religion aud 
Church. Trans, from the German 
byj. Torrey. lovols. 35.6^. each. 

Life of Jesus Christ. Trans- 
lated by J. McClintock and C. 
Blumenthal. 3*. 6rf. 

History ol the Planting and 

Training of the Christian 
Church by the Apostles. 
Translated by J. E. Ryland. 
2 vols. 35. 6d. each. 

Memorials of Christian Life 

hi the Early and Middle Ages ; 
including Light in Dark Places. 
Trans, by J. E. Ryland. 3^. 6d. 

NIBELUNQEN LIED. The 
Lay of the Nibelungs, metrically 
translated from the old German 
text by Alice Morton, and edited 
by Edward Bell, M.A. To which 
is prefixed the Essay on the Nibe- 
lungen Lied by Thomas Carlyle. 
51. 

NEW TESTAMENT (The) in 
Greek. Griesbach's Text, with 
various Readings at the foot of 
the page, and Parallel References 
in the margin ; also a Critical 
Introduction and Chronological 
Tables. By an eminent Scholar, 
with a Greek and English Lexicon. 
'3rd Edition, revised and corrected. 
Two Facsimiles of Greek Manu- 
scripts. 900 pages. 51. 

The Lexicon may le had sepa- 
rately, price 23. 

NICOLINI'S History of the 
Jesuits : their Origin, Progress, 
Doctrines, and Designs. With 8 
Portraits. 5.1. 



NORTH (R.) Lives of the Right 
Hon. Francis North, Baron Guild - 
ford, the Hon. Sir Dudley North, 
and the Hon. and Rev. Dr. John 
North. By the Hon. Roger 
North. Together with the Auto- 
biography of the Author. Edited 
by Augustus Jessopp, D.D. 3 vols. 
3.1. 6</. each. 

NFJGENT'S (Lord) Memorials 
of Hampden, his Party and 
Times. With a Memoir of the 
Author, an Autograph Letter, and 
Portrait. $s. 

OCKLEY (S.) History of the 
Saracens and their Conquests 
in Syria, Persia, and Egypt. 
By Simon Ockley, B.D., Professor 
of Arabic in the University of 
Cambiidge. 3^. 6d. 

OMAN (J. C.) The Great Indian 
Epics : the Stories of the RAMA- 
YANA and the MAHABHARATA. 
By John Campbell Oman, Prin- 
cipal of Khalsa College, Amritsar. 
With Notes, Appendices, and 
Illustrations. 3;. 6d. 

ORDERICUS VITALIS J Eocle 
siastical History of England 
and Normandy. Translated by 
T. Forester, M.A. To which is 
added the CHRONICLE OF ST. 
EVROULT. 4 voLs. 55. each. 

OVID'S Works, complete. Literally 
translated into Prose. 3 vols. 
5.?. each. 

PASCAL'S Thoughts. Translated 
from the Text of M. Augustc 
Molinier by C. Kegan Paul. 3rd 
Edition. 3*. 6d. 

PAULI'S (Dr. R.) Life of Alfred 
the Great. Translated from the 
German. To which is appended 
Alfred's ANGLO-SAXON VERSION 
OF OROSIUS. With a literal 
Translation interpaged, Notes, 
and an ANGLO-SAXON GRAMMAR 
and GLOSSARY, by B. Thorpe. 51. 



18 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



PAUSANIAS' Description of 
Greece. Newly translated by A. R. 
Shilleto, M.A. 2 vols. 5*. each. 

PEARSON'S Exposition of the 
Greed. Edited by E. Walford, 
M.A. 51. 

PEPYS' Diary and Correspond- 
ence. Deciphered by the Rev. 
J. Smith, M.A., from the original 
Shorthand MS. in the Pepysian 
Library. Edited by Lord Bray- 
brooke. 4 vols. With 31 En- 
gravings. $s. each. 

PERCY'S Reliques of Ancient 
English Poetry. With an Essay 
on Ancient Minstrels and a Glos- 
sary. Edited by J. V. Pritchard, 
A.M. 2 vols. 3-r. 6d. each. 

PERSIUS. See JUVENAL. 

PETRARCH'S Sonnets, Tri- 
umphs, and other Poems. 
Translated into English Verse by 
various Hands. With a Life of 
the Poet by Thomas Campbell. 
With Portrait and 15 Steel En- 
gravings. 5.?. 

PHILO - JUD.EUJS, Works of. 
Translated by Prof. C. D. Yonge, 
M.A. 4 vols. 5*. each. 

PICKERING'S History of the 
Races of Man, and their Geo- 
graphical Distribution. With AN 
ANALYTICAL SYNOPSIS OF THE 
NATURAL HISTORY OF MAN by 
Dr. Hall. With a Map of the 
World and 1 2 coloured Plates. $s. 

PINDAR. Translated into Prose 
by Dawson W. Turner. To which 
is added the Metrical Version by 
Abraham Moore. $s. 

PLANCHE. History of British 
Costume, from the Earliest Time 
to the Close of the Eighteenth 
Century. By J. R. Planche, 
Somerset Herald. With upwards 
of 400 Illustrations. $s. 



PLATO'S Works. Literally trans- 
lated, with Introduction and 
Notes. 6 vols. 5.?. each. 

I- The Apology of Socrates, 
Crito, Phsedo, Gorgias, Pro- 
tagoras, Phsedrus, Thesetetus, 
Euthypbron, Lysis. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. H. Carey. 

II. The Republic, Timreus, and 
Critias. Translated by Henry 
Davis. 

III. Meno, Euthydemus, The 
Sophist, Statesman, Cratylus, 
Parmenides, and the Banquet. 
Translated by G. Burges. 

IV. Philebus, Charmides, Laches, 
Menexenus, Hippias, Ion, 
The Two Alcibiades, The- 
ages, Rivals, Hipparchus, 
Minos, Clitopho, Epistles. 
Translated by G. Burges. 

V The Laws. Translated by 
G. Burges. 

VI. The Doubtful Works. Trans- 
lated by G. Burges. 

Summary and Analysis of 

the Dialogues. With Analytical 
Index. By A. Day, LL.D. 5^. 

PLAUTCTS'S Comedies. Trans- 
lated by H. T. Riley, M.A. 2 
vols. 5.5-. each. 

PLINY'S Natural History. 
Translated by the late John 
Bostock, M.D., F.R.S., and H. T. 
Riley, M.A. 6 vols. 5.?. each. 

PLINY. The Letters of Pliny 
the Younger. Melmoth's trans- 
lation, revised by the Rev. F. C. 
T. Bosanquet, M.A. 5-r. 

PLOTINUS, Select Works of. 
Translated by Thomas Taylor. 
With an Introduction containing 
the substance of Porphyry's Plo- 
tinus. Edited by G. R. S. Mead, 
B.A., M.R.A.S. 5*. 



Contained in Bohiis Libraries. 



PLUTARCH'S Lives. Translated 
by A. Stewart, M.A., and George 
Long, M.A. 4 vols. 3^. 6d. each. 

Morals. Theosophical Essays. 
Translated by C. W. King, M.A. 
P- 

- Morals. Ethical Essays. 
Translated by the Rev. A. R. 
Shilleto, M.A. $s. 

POETRY OF AMERICA. Se- 
lections from One Hundred 
American Poets, from 1776 to 
1876. By W. J. Linton. 3j. cW. 

POLITICAL CYCLOPAEDIA. 
A Dictionary of Political, Con- 
stitutional, Statistical, and Fo- 
rensic Knowledge ; forming a 
Work of Reference on subjects of 
Civil Administration, Political 
Economy, Finance, Commerce, 
Laws, and Social Relations. 4 
vols. 31. 6d. each. 

POPE'S Poetical Works. Edited, 
with copious Notes, by Robert 
Carruthers. With numerous Illus 
trations. 2 vols. 5^-. each. 

Homer's Iliad. Edited by 
the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. 
Illustrated by the entire Series of 
Flaxman's Designs. 5*. 

- Homer's Odyssey, with the 
Battle of Frogs and Mice, Hymns, 
&c. , by other translators. Edited 
by the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. j 
With the entire Series of Flax- I 
man's Designs. $s. 

Life, including many of his 

Letters. By Robert Carruthers. 
With numerous Illustrations. 5*. 

POUSHKIN'S Prose Tales: The 
Captain's Daughter Doubrovsky 

The Queen of Spades An 
Amateur Peasant Girl The Shot 
The Snow Storm The Post- 
master The Coffin Maker 
Kirdjali The Egyptian Nights 
I'eter the Great's Negro. Trans- 
lated by T. Keane. V. 6J. 



PRE SCOTT'S Conquest of 
Mexico. Copyright edition, with 
the notes by John Foster Kirk, 
and an introduction by G. P. 
Winship. 3 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

PROPERTIUS. Translated by 
Rev. P. J. F. Gantillon, M.A., 
and accompanied by Poetical 
Versions, from various sources. 
3-r. 6d. 

PROVERBS, Handbook of. Con- 
taining an entire Republication 
of Ray's Collection of English 
Proverbs, with his additions from 
Foreign Languages and a com- 
plete Alphabetical Index ; in which 
are introduced large additions as 
well of Proverbs as of Sayings, 
Sentences, Maxims, and Phrases, 
collected by H. G. Bohn. 51. 

PROVERBS, A Polyglot of 
Foreign. Comprising French, 
Italian, German, Dutch, Spanish, 
Portuguese, and Danish. With 
English Translations & a General 
Index by H. G. Bohn. 5*. 

POTTERY AND PORCELAIN, 
and other Objects of Vertu. Com- 
prising an Illustrated Catalogue of 
the Bernal Collection of Works 
of Art, with the prices at which 
they were sold by auction, and 
names of the possessors. To which 
are added, an Introductory Lecture 
on Pottery and Porcelain, and an 
Engraved List of all the known 
Marks and Monograms. By Henry 
G. Bohn With numerous Wood 
Engravings, $s. ; or with Coloured 
Illustrations, \os. 6d. 

PROUT'S (Father) Reliques. Col- 
lected and arranged by Rev. F. 
Mahony. New issue, with 21 
Etchings by D. Maclise, R.A. 
Nearly 600 pages. 5-r. 

QUINTILIAN'S Institutes of 
Oratory, or Education of an 
Orator. Translated l>y the Rev. 
J. S. Watson, M.A. 2 vols. 5* 
each. 



2O 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



RACINE'S (Jean) Dramatic 
Works. A metrical English ver- 
sion. By R. Bruce Boswell, M. A. 
Oxon. 2 vols. 3?. 6d. each. 

RANKE'S History of the Popes, 
their Church and State, and espe- 
cially of their Conflicts with Pro- 
testantism in the i6th and I7th 
centuries. Translated by E. 
Foster. 3 vols. $s. 6d, each. 

History of Servia and the 

Servian Revolution. With an 
Account of the Insurrection in 
Bosnia. Translated by Mrs. Kerr. 
3*. 6d. 

REUMONT (Alfred de). See 
CARAFAS. 

RECREATIONS in SHOOTING. 
By ' Craven.' With 62 Engravings 
on Wood after Harvey, and 9 
Engravings on Steel, chiefly after 
A. Cooper, R.A. 51. 

RENNIE'S Insect Architecture. 
Revised and enlarged by Rev. 
J. G. Wood, M.A. With 186 
Woodcut Illustrations. $s. 

REYNOLD'S (Sir J.) Literary 
Works. Edited by H.W. Beechy. 
2 vols. 3-f. (>d. each. 

RICARDO on the Principles of 
Political Economy and Taxa- 
tion, Edited by E. C. K. Conner, 
M.A. $s. 

RICHTER (Jean Paul Friedrich). 
Levana, a Treatise on Education : 
together with the Autobiography 
(a Fragment), and a short Pre- 
fatory Memoir. 3.?. 6d. 

Flower, Fruit, and Thorn 

Pieces, or the Wedded Life, Death, 
and Marriage of Firmian Stanis- 
laus Siebenkaes, Parish Advocate 
in the Parish of Kuhschnapptel. 
Newly translated by Lt. Col. Alex. 
Ewing. 35. f>d. 



ROGER DE HOVEDEN'S An- 
nals of English History, com- 
prising the History of England 
and of other Countries of Europe 
from A. D. 732 to A. n. 1201. 
Translated by II T. Riley, M.A. 
2 vols. 51. each 

ROGER OF WENDOVER'S 
Flowers of History, comprising 
the History of England from the 
Descent of the Saxons to A.D. 
1 235, formerly ascribed to Matthew 
Paris. Translated by J. A. Giles, 
D.C.L. 2 vols. 5-r. each. 

ROME in the NINETEENTH 
CENTURY. Containing a com- 
plete Account of the Ruins of the 
Ancient City, the Remains of the 
Middle Ages, and the Monuments 
of Modern Times. By C. A. Eaton. 
With 34 Steel Engravings. 2 vols. 
5-r. each. 

See BURN and DYER. 

ROSCOE'S (W.) Life and Ponti- 
flcate of Leo X. Final edition, 
revised by Thomas Roscoe. 2 
vols. 3-r. 6d. each. 

Life of Lorenzo de' Medici, 

called ' the Magnificent.' With 
his poems, letters, &c. loth 
Edition, revised, with Memoir of 
Roscoe by his Son. $s. 6d. 

RUSSIA. History of, from the 
earliest Period, compiled from 
the most authentic sources by 
Walter K. Kelly. With Portraits. 
2 vols. y (>d. each. 

SALLUST, FLORUS, and VEL- 
LEIUS PATERCULUS. 
Translated by J. S.Watson, M.A. 

5*. 

SCHILLER'S Works. Translated 
by various hands. 7 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each : 

I. History of the Thirty Years' 
War. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



21 



SCHILLER'S WORKS continued. 

II. History of the Revolt in the 
Netherlands, the Trials of 
Counts Egmont and Horn, 
the Siege of Antwerp, and 
the Disturbances in France 
preceding the Reign of 
Henry IV. 

III. Don Carlos, Mary Stuart, 
Maid of Orleans, Bride of 
Messina, together with the 
Use of the Chorus in 
Tragedy (a short Essay). 

These Dramas are all 
translated in metre. 

IV. Robbers ( with Schiller's 
original Preface), Fiesco, 
Love and Intrigue, De- 
metrius, Ghost Seer, Sport 
of Divinity. 

The Dramas in this 
volume are translated into 
Prose. 

V. Poems. 

VI. Essays, ^Esthetical and Philo- 
sophical 

VII. Wallenstein's Camp, Pic- 
colomini and Death of 
Wallenstein, William Tell. 

SCHILLER and GOETHE. 
Correspondence between, from 
A.D. 1794-1805. Translated by 
L. Dora Schmitz. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 

SCHLEGEL'S (P.) Lectures on 
the Philosophy of Life and the 
Philosophy of Language. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. A. J. W. Mor- 
rison, M.A. 3*. 6cf. 

- Lectures on the History of 
Literature, Ancient and Modern. 
Translated from the German. 



Lectures on the Philosophy 
of History. Translated by J. B. 
Ro)*rtson. $s. 6,/. 



SCHLEGEL'S Lectures on 
Modern History, together with 
the Lectures entitled Ccesar and 
Alexander, and The Beginning of 
our History. Translated by L. 
Purcell and R. H. Whitetock. 
y. 6d. 

.Esthetic and Miscellaneous 

Works. Translated by E. J. 
Millington. 35. 6d. 

SCHLEGEL (A. W.) Lectures 
on Dramatic Art andLiterature. 
Translated by J. Black. Revised 
Edition, by the Rev. A. J. W. 
Morrison, M.A. 3-r. 6d. 

SCHOPENHAUER on the Pour- 
fold Root of the Principle of 
Sufficient Reason, and On the 
Will in Nature. Translated by 
Madame Hillebrand. 5.?. 

Essays. Selected and Trans- 
lated. With a Biographical Intro- 
duction and Sketch of his Philo- 
sophy, by E. Belfort Bax. 5*. 

SCHOUW'S Earth, Plants, and 
Man. Translated by A. Henfrey. 
With coloured Map of the Geo- 
graphy of Plants. 5.5. 

SCHUMANN (Robert). His Life 
and Works, by August Reissmann. 
Translated by A. L. Alger. y. 6d. 

- Early Letters. Originally pub- 
blished by his Wife. Translated 
by May Herbert. With a Preface 
by Sir George Grove, D.C.L. 

SENECA on Benefits. Newly 
translated by A. Stewart, M.A. 

i Minor Essays and On Clem- 
ency. Translated by A. Stewart , 
M.A. 55. 

i SHAKESPEARE'S Dramatic 
Art. The History and Character 
of Shakespeare's Plays. By Dr. 
Hermann Ulrici. Translated by 
L. Dora Schmitz. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 



22 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



SHAKESPEARE (William). A 
Literary Biography by Karl Elze, 
Ph.D., LL.D. Translated by 
L. Dora Schmitz. 5^. 

SHARPE (S.) The History of 
Egypt, from the Earliest Times 
till the Conquest by the Arabs, 
A.D. 640. By Samuel Sharpe. 
2 Maps and upwards of 400 Illus- 
trative Woodcuts. 2 vols. $s. each. 

SHERIDAN'S Dramatic Works, 
Complete. With Life by G. G. S. 
3.f. 6<i. 

SISMONDTS History of the 
Literature of the South ol 
Europe. Translated by Thomas 
Roscoe. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

SIX OLD ENGLISH CHRON- 
ICLES: viz., ASSER'S LIFE OF 
ALFRED AND THECHRONICLESOF 
ETHELWERD, GILDAS, NENNIUS, 
GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH, AND 
RICHARD OF CIRENCESTER. 
Edited by J. A. Giles, D.C. L. 5*. 

SYNONYMS and ANTONYMS, 
or Kindred Words and their 
Opposites, Collected and Con- 
trasted by Ven. C.J. Smith, M.A. 
Revised Edition. 55. 

SMITH'S (Adam) The Wealth of 
Nations. Edited by E. Belfort 
Bax. 2 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

Theory of Moral Sentiments ; 

with his Essay on the First For- 
mation of Languages ; to which is 
added a Memoir of the Author by 
Dugald Stewart. 3.?. 6d. 

SMYTH'S (Professor) Lectures 
on Modern History; from the 
Irruption of the Northern Nations 
to the close of the American Re- 
volution. 2 vols. y. 6d. each. 

Lectures on the French Re- 
volution. 2 vols. 3-r. 6d. each. 



SMITH'S ( Pye ) Geology and 
Scripture. 2nd Edition. 5*. 

SMOLLETT'S Adventures 01 
Roderick Random. With short 
Memoir and Bibliography, and 
Cruikshank's Illustrations. 31. 6d. 

- Adventures of Peregrine 
Pickle, in which are included the 
Memoirs of a Lady of Quality. 
With Bibliography and Cruik- 
shank's Illustrations. 2 vols. T,s.f>d. 
each. 

- The Expedition of Hum- 
phry Clinker. With Bibliography 
and Cruikshank's Illustrations. 



SOCRATES (surnamed 'Scholas- 
ticus '). The Ecclesiastical His- 
tory of (A. 0.305-445). Translated 
from the Greek; $s. 

SOPHOCLES, The Tragedies of. 
A New Prose Translation, with 
Memoir, Notes, &c., by E. P. 
Coleridge. Jj. 

- The Oxford Translation. $*. 



S OUT KEY'S Life of Nelson. 
With Facsimiles of Nelson's writ- 
ing, Portraits, Plans, and upwards 
of 50 Engravings on Steel and 
Wood. Jj. 

Life of Wesley, and the Rise 

and Progress of Methodism. $s. 

Robert Southey. The Story 

of his Life written in his Letters. 
With an Introduction. Edited by 
John Dennis. 3*. f>d. 

SOZOMEN'S Ecclesiastical His- 
tory. Comprising a History of 
the Church from A.D. 324-440. 
Translated from the Greek. To- 
gether with the ECCLESIASTICAL 
HISTORY OF PHILOSTORGIUS, as 
epitomised by Photius. Trans- 
lated from the Greek by Rev. E. 
Walford, M.A. V. 



Contained in Bohris Libraries. 



SPINOZA'S Chief Works. Trans- 
lated, with Introduction,byR.H.M. 
Elwes. 2 vols. 5-r. each. 

STANLEY'S Classified Synopsis 
of the Principal Painters of the 
Dutch and Flemish Schools. 
By George Stanley. 5*. 

STARLING'S (Miss) Noble Deeds 
of Women; or, Examples of 
Female Courage, Fortitude, and 
Virtue. With 14 Steel Engrav- 
ings. $s. 

STAUNTON'S Chess - Player's 
Handbook. A Popular and Scien- 
tific Introduction to the Game. 
With numerous Diagrams. $s. 

- Chess Praxis. A Supplement 
to the Chess-player's Handbook. 
Containing the most important 
modern improvements in the Open- 
ings ; Code of Chess Laws ; and 
a Selection of Morphy's Games. 
Annotated. $s. 

Chess-player's Companion. 
Comprising a Treatise on Odds, 
Collection of Match Games, and a 
Selection of Original Problems. 5*. 

Chess Tournament of 1851. 

A Collection of Games played at 
this celebrated assemblage. With 
Introduction and Notes. $s. 

STOCKHARDT'S Experimental 
Chemistry. A Handbook for the 
Study of the Science by simple 
experiments. Edited by C. W. 
Heaton, F.C.S. With numerous 
Woodcuts. New Edition, revised 
throughout. 51. 

STRABO'S Geography. Trans- 
lated by W. Falconer, M.A., 
and II. C. Hamilton. 3 vols. 

Cj. each. 

f 

STRICKLAND'S (Agnes) Lives 
of the Queens of England, from 
the Norman Conquest. Revised 
Edition. With 6 Portraits. 6 vols. 
5*. each. 



STRICKLAND'S Life of Mary 
Queen of Scots. 2 vols. 5*. each. 

- Lives of the Tudor and Stuart 
Princesses. With Portraits. 5.1. 

STUART and REVETT'S Anti- 
quities of Athens, and other 
Monuments of Greece ; to which 
is added, a Glossary of Terms used 
in Grecian Architecture. With 7 1 
Plates engraved on Steel, and 
numerous Woodcut Capitals. 51. 

SUETONIUS' Lives of the Twelve 
Caesars and Lives of the Gram- 
marians. The translation of 
Thomson, revised by T. Forester. 



SWIFT'S Prose Works. Edited 
by Temple Scott. With a Bio- 
graphical Introduction by the Right 
Hon. W. E. H. Lecky, M.P. 
With Portraits and Facsimiles. 
ii vols. 31. 6d. each. 

[Vols. I.-V. &> VIII. ready. 

I. Edited by Temple Scott. 
With a Biographical In- 
troduction by the Right 
Hon. W. E. H. Lecky, 
M. P. Containing : A 
Tale of a Tub, The Battle 
of the Books, and other 
early works. 

II. The Journal to Stella. Edited 
by Frederick Ryland.M. A. 
With 2 Portraits of Stella, 
and a Facsimile of one of 
the Letters. 

III.& IV. Writings on Religion and 
the Church. Edited by 
Temple Scott. 

V. Historical and Political 
. Tracts (English). Edited 
by Temple Scolt. 

VIII. Gulliver's Travels. Ivlitcd 
l>y G. R. Dennis. With 
Portrait and Maps. 



2 4 



An Alphabetical List of Books 



SWIFT'S PROSE WORKS continued. 

The order and contents of 

the remaining volumes will 

probably be as follows : 

VI.&VIL Historical and Political 

Tracts (Irish). 

IX. Contributions to the 'Ex- 
aminer,' 'Taller,' 'Spec- 
tator,' &c. 

X. Historical Writings. 
XI. Literary Essays and Biblio- 
graphy. 

STOWE (Mrs. H.B.) Uncle Tom's 
Cabin, or Life among the Lowly. 
With Introductory Remarks by 
Rev. J. Sherman. With 8 full- 
page Illustrations. 3-r. 6d. 

TACITUS. The Works of. Liter- 
ally translated. 2 vols. 5^- each. 

TALES OF THE GENII; or, the 
Delightful Lessons of Horam, the 
Son of Asmar. Translated from 
the Persian by Sir Charles Morell. 
Numerous Woodcuts and 12 Steel 
Engravings. 5-r. 

TASSO'3 Jerusalem Delivered. 
Translated into English Spenserian 
Verse by J. H. Wiffen. With 8 
Engravings on Steel and 24 Wood- 
cuts by Thurston. $s. 

TAYLOR'S (Bishop Jeremy) j 
Holy Living and Dying, with | 
Prayers containing the Whole Duty 
of a Christian and the parts of De- 
votion fitted to all Occasions and 
furnished for all Necessities. 3.!. 6d. 

TEN BRINK. See BRINK. 

TERENCE and PH.3EDRUS. 
Literally translated byH.T. Riley, 
M.A. To which is added, SMART'S 
METRICALVERSIONOFPH^DRUS. 
5*. 

THEOCRITUS, BION, MOS- 
CHUS, and TYRT2EUS. Liter- 
ally translated by the Rev. J. 
Banks, M.A. To which are ap- 



pended the Metrical Versions of 
Chapman. 5-c. 

THEODORET andEVAGRIUS 
Histories of the Church from A.D. 
332 to A.D. 427; and from A.D. 
431 to A.D. 544. Translated from 
the Greek. 5^. 

THIERRY'S History of the 
Conquest of England by the 
Normans; its Causes, and its 
Consequences in England, Scot- 
land, Ireland, and the Continent. 
Translated by William Hazlitt. 
2 vols. y. 6d. each. 

THUCYDIDES. The Pelopon- 
nesian War. Literally translated 
by the Rev. H. Dale. 2 vols. 
3.5-. 6d. each. 

An Analysis and Summary 

of. With Chronological Table o* 
Events, &c. By J. T. Wheeler. 
5* 

THUDICHUM (J. L. W.) A Trea- 
tise on Wines: their Origin, 
Nature, and Varieties. With Prac- 
tical Directions for Viticulture and 
Vinification. By T. L. W. Thudi- 
chum, M.D., F.R.C.P. (Lond.). 
Illustrated. 55. 

URE'S (Dr. A.) Cotton Manufac- 
ture of Great Britain, systemati- 
cally investigated. Revised Edit, 
by P. L. Simmonds. With 150 
original Illustrations. 2 vols. $s. 
each. 

Philosophy of Manufactures. 

Revised Edition, by P. L. Sim- 
monds. With numerous Figures. 
Doublevolume. Js. 6d. 

VASARI'S Lives of the most 
Eminent Painters, Sculptors, 
and Architects. Translated by 
Mrs. J. Foster, with a Commen- 
tary by J. P. Richter, Ph.D. 6 
vols. 3.?. 6d. 'each. 

VIRGIL. A Literal Prose Trans- 
lation by A. Hamilton Bryce, 
LL.D., F.R.S.E. With Portrait. 



Contained in Bohn's Libraries. 



VOLTAIRE'S Tales. Translated 
by R. B. Boswell. Vol. I., con- 
taining Bebouc, Memnon, Can- 
dide, L'Ingenu, and other Tales. 
3*. 6d. 

WALTON'S Complete Angler, 
or the Contemplative Man's Re- 
creation, by Izaak Walton and 
Charles Cotton. Edited by Ed- 
ward Jesse. To which is added 
an account of Fishing Stations, 
Tackle, &c., by Henry G. Bohn. 
With Portrait and 203 Engravings 
on Wood and 26 Engravings on 
Steel. 5^. 

Lives of Donne, Hooker, &o. 

New Edition revised by A. H. 
Bullen, with a Memoir of Izaak 
Walton by Wm. Dowling. With 
numerous Illustrations. 51. 

WELLINGTON, Life of. By ' An 
Old Soldier.' From the materials 
of Maxwell. With Index and 18 
Steel Engravings. $s. 

Victories of. See MAXWELL. 

WERNER'S Templars in 
Cyprus. Translated by E. A. M. 
Lewis. 35. 6J. 

WESTROPP (H. M.) A Hand- 
book of Archaeology, Egyptian, 
Greek, Etruscan, Roman. By 
H. M. Westropp. 2nd Edition, 
revised. With very numerous 
Illustrations. 5*. 

WHITE'S Natural History of 
Selborne, with Observations on 
various Parts of Nature, and the 
Naturalists' Calendar. With Notes 
by Sir William Jardine. Edited 
by Edward Jesse. With 40 Por- 
traits and coloured Plates. 5*. 



WHEATLEY'S A Rational Illus- 
tration of the Book of Common 
Prayer. y. 6d. 

WHEELER'S Noted Names of 
Fiction, Dictionary of. Includ- 
ing also Familiar Pseudonyms, 
Surnames bestowed on Eminent 
Men, and Analogous Popular Ap- 
pellations otten referred to in 
Literature and Conversation. By 
W. A. Wheeler, M.A. 5*. 

WIESELER'S Chronological 
Synopsis of the Four Gospels. 
Translated by the Rev. Canon 
Venables. $s. 6d. 

WILLIAM of MALMESBURY'S 
Chronicle of the Kings of Eng- 
land, from the Earliest Period 
to the Reign of King Stephen. 
Translated by the Rev. J. Sharpe. 
Edited by J. A. Giles, D.C.L. 51. 

XENOPHON'S Works. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. J. S. Watson, 
M.A., and the Rev. H. Dale. In 
3 vols. 55. each. 

YOUNG (Arthur). Travels in 
France during the years 1787, 
1788, and 1789. Edited by 
M. Betham Edwards. 31. 6rf. 

Tour In Ireland, with 

General Observations on the state 
of the country during the years 
1776 - 79. Edited by A. W. 
Hutton. With Complete Biblio- 
graphy by J. P. Anderson, and 
Map. 2 vols. 3*. 6</. each. 

YULE-TIDE STORIES. A Col- 
lection of Scandinavian and North- 
German Popular Tales and Tra- 
ditions, from the Swedish, Danish, 
and German. Edited by B.Thorpe. 



I 26 ) 

NEW AND FORTHCOMING VOLUMES OF 

BOHN'S LIBRARIES. 



THE PROSE WORKS OF JONATHAN SWIFT. Edited by 
Temple Scott. With an Introduction by the Right Hon. W. E. II. 
Lecky, M.P. In II volumes, $s. 6d. each. 

Vol. I.' A Tale of a Tub,' ' The Battle of the Books,' and other 
early works. Edited by Temple Scott. With Introduction by the 
Right Hon. W. E. H. Lecky, M.P. Portrait and Facsimiles. 

Vol. II. 'The Journal to Stella.' Edited by F. Ryland, M.A. 
With a Facsimile Letter and two Portraits of Stella. 

Vols. III. and IV. Writings on Religion and the Church. 
Edited by Temple Scott. With portraits and facsimiles of title pages. 

Vol. V. Historical and Political Tracts (English). Edited by 
Temple Scott. With Portrait and Facsimiles. 

Vol. VIII. Gulliver's Travels. Edited by G. R. Dennis. With 
the original Maps and Illustrations. 

PRESCOTT'S CONQUEST OF MEXICO. Copyright edition, 
with the author's latest corrections and additions, and the notes of 
John Foster Kirk. With an introduction by George Parker Winship. 
3 vols. [/ the Press. 

GRAY'S LETTERS. Edited by Duncan C. Tovey, M.A., Editor of 
'Gray and his Friends,' &c., late Clark Lecturer at Trinity College, 
Cambridge. Vol. I. y. 6d. [ Vol. II. in the Press. 

CICERO'S LETTERS. The whole extant Correspondence. Trans- 
lated by Evelyn S. Shuckburgh, M.A. In 4 vols. 5*. each. 

CARLYLE'S SARTOR RESARTUS. With 75 Illustrations. By 
Edmund J. Sullivan. $s. 

HAMPTON COURT: A SHORT HISTORY OF THE MANOR 
AND PALACE. By Ernest Law, B.A. Illustrated. 55. 

GASPARY'S HISTORY OF EARLY ITALIAN LITERATURE 
TO THE DEATH OF DANTE. Translated, with supple- 
mentary bibliographical notes, by Herman Oelsner, M.A., Ph.D, 
Vol. I. 31. 6d. 



BELL'S HANDBOOKS 



OF 



THE GREAT MASTERS 

IN PAINTING AND SCULPTURE. 

EDITED BY G. C. WILLIAMSON, LiTT.D. 
Post 8vo. With 40 Illustrations and Photogravure Frontispiece. 5*. net each. 



The following Volumes have been issued : 

BERNADINO LUINI. By GEORGE C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. 2nd Edition. 
VELASQUEZ. By R. A. M. STEVENSON, and Edition. 
ANDREA DEL SARTO. By H. GUINNESS. 
LUCA SIGNORELLI. By MAUD CRUTTWELL. 
RAPHAEL. By H. STRACHEY. 

CARLO CRIVELLI. By G. McNEiL RUSHFGRTH, M.A. 
CORREGGIO. By SELWYN BRINTON, M.A. 
DONATELLO. By HOPE REA. 
PERUGINO. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. 
SODOM A. By the CONTESSA LORENZO PRIULI-BON. 
LUCA DELLA ROBBIA. By the MARCHESA BURLAMACCHI. 
GIORGIONE. By HERBEBT COOK, M.A. 
MEMLINC. By W. H. JAMES WEALE. 
PINTORICCHIO. By EVELYN MARCH PHILLIPPS. 
PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA. By W. G. WATERS, M.A. 

In preparation. 
EL GRECO. By MANUEL B. Cossio, Litt.D., Ph.D., Director of the Musee 

Pedagogique, Madrid. 

FRANCIA. By GEORGE C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D., Editor of the Series. 

MANTEGNA. By MAUD CRUTTWELL. 

BRUNELLESCHI. By LEADER SCOTT. 

REMBRANDT. By MALCOLM BELL. 

GIOTTO. By F. MASON PERKINS. 

WILKIE. By Lord RONALD SUTHERLAND-COWER, M.A., F.S.A. 

MICHAEL ANGELO. By CHARLES HOLROYD, Keeper of the National 

Gallery of British Art. 
GERARD DOU. By Dr. W. MARTIN, Sub-director of the Royal Print 

Room, The Hague. 
DURER. By HANS W. SINOER, M.A., Ph.D., Assistant Director of the 

Royal Print Room, Dresden. 

TINTORETTO. By J. B. STOUGHTON HOLBORN, M.A. 

THE BROTHERS BELLINI. By S ARTHUR STRONG, M.A., Librarian 

to the House of Lords. 

Others to folhw. 



THE 



CHISWICK SHAKESPEARE 

Illustrated by BYAM SHAW. 
WITH INTRODUCTIONS AND GLOSSARIES BY JOHN DENNIS, 



This Edition of the Works of Shakespeare is being issued in single- 
plays, each containing six full-page Illustrations by M*r. BYAM SHAW, 
as well as head and tailpieces. The volumes are printed at the Chiswick 
Press, price is. 6d. net per volume, handsomely bound in linen, with gilt 
decoration ; or in limp leather, zs. net. A few copies, to be sold only in 
sets, printed on Japanese vellum, price 55. net. 

Now ready. 
HAMLET. 

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE. 
ROMEO AND JULIET. 
THE WINTER'S TALE. 
A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM. 
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING. 
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA. 
TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA. 
KING HENRY IV. Part I. 
KING HENRY IV. Part II. 
CYMBELINE. 

THE MERRY WIVES OF 



OTHELLO. 
MACBETH. 
AS YOU LIKE IT. 
THE TEMPEST. 
KING LEAR. 
TWELFTH NIGHT. 
JULIUS OESAK. 
CORIOLANUS. 
KING JOHN. 
KING RICHARD II. 
KING HENRY V. 
WINDSOR. 



Further Volumes at Monthly Intervals. 



' A ascinating little edition.' Notes and Queries. 

'A cheap, very comely, and altogether desirable edition.' Westminster Gazette. 

' But a few years ago such volumes would have heen deemed worthy to be considered 
editions de luxe. To-day, the low price at which they are offered to the public alone 
prevents them being so regarded.' Studio. 

' Handy in shape and size, wonderfully cheap, beautifully printed from the Cam- 
bridge text, and illustrated quaintly yet admirably by Mr. Byam Shaw, we have nothing 
but praise for it. No one who wants a good and convenient Shakespeare without 
excursuses, discursuses, or even top many notes can do better, in our opinion, than 
subscribe to this issue : which is saying a good deal in these days of cheap reprints.' 
Vanity Fair. 

'Altogether, it is a pretty and desirable little edition, and its moderate price should 
make it accessible to all classes of readers.' Scotsman. 

'What we like about these elegant booklets is the attention that has been paid to the 
paper, as well as to the print and decoration ; such stout laid paper will last for ages. 
On this account alone, the 'Chiswick' should easily be first among pocket Shake- 
speares ' Pall Mall Gazette. 

' No more delightful edition of Shakespeare has ever come under our notice. The 
price (is 6d. net) brings sumptuous Shakespeare within reach of all. . . . With each 
new volume our admiration of this dainty edition deepens.' Independent. 



New Editions, fcap. 8vo. 2*. 6d. each net. 

THE ALDINE EDITION 



BRITISH POETS. 

'This excellent edition of the English classics, -with their complete texts and 
scholarly introductions, are something very different from the cheap volumes of 
extracts which are just now so much too common.' St. James's Gazette. 

' An excellent series. Small, handy, and complete.' Saturday Review. 



Akenside. Edited by Rev. A. Dyce. 
Seattle. Edited by Rev. A. Dyce. 

Edited by W. M. Rossetti. 

Edited by G. A. Aitken. 



Edited by B. B. Johnson. 



"Blake. 
Burns. 

3 vols. 
Butler. 

2 vols. 

Campbell. Edited by His Son- 
in-law, the Rev. A. W. Hill. With 
Memoir by W. Ailing-ham. 

Chatterton. Edited by the Rev. 

W. W. Skeat, M.A. 2 voh. 
Chaucer. Edited by Dr. R. Morris, 

with Memoir by Sir H. Nicolas. 6 vols. 
Churchill. Edited by Jas. Hannay. 

2 vols. 

*Coleridge. Edited by T. Ashe, 

li. A. 2 vols. 

Collins. Edited by W. Moy 

Thomas. 

Cowper. Edited by John Bruce, 

FS.A 3 vols. 
Dryden. Edited by the Rev. R. 

Hooper, M.A. 5 vols 
Falconer. Edited by the Rev. J. 

Mitford. 
Goldsmith. Revised Edition by 

Austin Dobaon. With Portrait. 
Gray. Edited by J. Bradshaw, 

LL.U. 

Herbert. Edited by the Rev A. B. 
Grosart. 

*Herrlck. Edited by George 

Saintsbury. 2 vols. 
"Keats. Edited by the late Lord 

Honghton. 



Klrke White. Edited, with a 
Mamoir, by Sir H. Nicolas. 

Milton. Edited by Dr. Bradshaw. 
2 vols. 

Parnell. Edited by G. A. Aitken. 

Pope. Edited by G. R. Dennis. 
With Memoir by John Dennis. 3 vols. 

Prior. Edited by R. B. Johnson. 
2 vols. 

Kalelgh and Wotton. With Se- 
lections from the Writings of other 
COURTLY POETS from 1540 to 1650. 
Edited by Ten. Archdeacon Hannah, 
D.C.L. 

Rogers. Edited by Edward Bell, 

M.A. 
Scott. Edited by John Dennis. 

5 vols. 
Shakespeare's Poems. Edited by 

Rev. A. Dyce. 
Shelley. Edited by H. Buxton 

Forinan. 5 vols. 

Spenser. Edited by J. Payne Col- 
lier. 5 vols. 
Surrey. Edited by J. Yeowell. 

Swift. Edited by the Rev. J. 

Mitford. 3 vols. 
Thomson. Edited by the Rev. D. 

C. Tovey. 2 vols. 
V a u g h a n. Saored Poems and 

Pions Ejaculations. Edited by the 

Rev. H. Lyte. 

Wordsworth Edited by Prof. 

Dowden. 7 vols. 
Wyatt. Edited by J. Yeowell. 

Young 2 vole. Edited by the 
Rev. J. Mitford. 



* These volumes may also be had bound in Irish lineu, with design in gold on side 
nd back by Uleesou White, and gilt top, 3s. 6d. each net. 









}i^THE ALL-ENGLAND SERIES. 

^ HANDBOOKS OF ATHLETIC GAMES. 

The only Series issued at a moderate price, by Writers who are in 
the first rank in their respective departments. 

* The best instruction on games and sports by the best authorities, at the lowest 
prices.' Oxford, Magazine. 

Small 8vo. cloth, Illustrated. Price Is. each. 



Cricket. By the Hon. and Bev. 

E. LYTTELTON. 
Croquet. By Lieut. -Col. the Hon. 

H. 0. NEEDHAM. 
Lawn Tennis. By H. W. W. 

WILBERFORCE. With a Chapter for 

Ladies, by Mrs. HILLYARD. 
Tennis and Rackets and Fives. 

By JULIAN MARSHALL, Major J. SPENS, 

and Kev. J. A. ARNAN TAIT. 
Golf. By H. S. C. EVEBAED. 

Double vol. 2s. 

Rowing and Sculling. By W. B. 

WOODGATE. 

Sailing. By E . F. KNIGHT, dbi.vol. 2s. 

Swimming. By MARTIN and J. 

RACSTER COBBETT. 
Camping out. By A. A. MACDON- 

ELL. Double vol. 28. 
Canoeing. By Dr. J. D. HATWABD. 

Double vol. 2s.. 
Mountaineering. By Dr. CLAUDE 

WILSON. Double vol. 2s. 
Athletics. By H. H. GRIFFIN. 

Riding. By W. A. KERH, V.C. 

Double vol. 2s. 

Ladies' Riding. By W.A. KEBB.V.C. 
Boxing. By B. G. ALLANSON-WINN. 

With Prefatory Note by Bat Mullins. 

Fencing. By H. A. COLMOBE DUNN. 



Cycling. By H. H. GRIFFIN, L.A.C., 
N.C.U., O.T.C. With a Chapter for 
Ladies, by Miss AGNES WOOD. 

Wrestling. By WALTER ABM- 
STRONG ('Cross-buttocker'). 

Broadsword and Singlestick. 
By E. G-. ALLANSON-WINN and C. PHIL- 

LIPPS-WOLLEY. 

Gymnastics. By A. F. JENKIN. 
Double vol. 2s. 

Gymnastic Competition and Dis- 
play Exercises. Compiled by 
P. GRAF. 

Indian Clubs. By G. T. B. COB- 
BETT and A. F. JENKIN. 

Dumb-bells. By F. GRAF. 

Football Rugby Game. By 
HARRY VASSALL. 

Football Association Game. By 
C. W. ALCOCK. Revised Edition. 

Hockey. By F. S. CRESWELL. 
New Edition. 

Skating. By DOUGLAS ADAMS. 
With a Chapter for Ladies, by Miss L. 
CHEETHAM, and a Chapter on Speed 
Skating, by a Fen Skater. Dbl. vol. 2s. 

Baseball. By NEWTON CRANE. 

Rounders, Fieldball. Bowls, 
Quoits, Curling, Skittles, &c. 
By J. M. WALKER and 0. C. MOTT. 

Dancing. By EDWABD SCOTT. 
Double vol. 2s. 



THE CLUB SERIES OF CARD AND TABLE GAMES. 

' No well-regulated club or country house should be without this useful series of books. 

Small 8vo. cloth, Illustrated. Price Is. each. 



Whist. By Dr. WM. POLE, F.R.S. 
Solo Whist. By ROBERT F. GBEEN. 

Billiards. By Major-Gen. A. W. 
DRAYSON, F.B.A.S. With a Preface 
by W. J. Peall. 

Chess. By BOBEBT F. GBEEN. 

The Two-Move Chess Problem. 

By B. &. LAWS. 
Chess Openings. By I. GUNSBEBG. 

Draughts and Backgammon. 

By ' BEEKELEX.' 
Reversi and Go Bang. 

By ' BERKELEY.' 



Globe. 

Dominoes and Solitaire. 

By BERKELEY.' 
Bezique and Cribbage. 

By ' BERKELEY.' 
Ecart6 and Euchre. 

By ' BERKELEY.' 
Piquet and Rubicon Piquet 

By ' BERKELEY." 
Skat. By Louis DIEHL. 

** A Skat Scoring-book. Is. 
Round Games, including Poker, 

Napoleon, Loo, Vingt-et-un, &c. By 

BAXTER- WRAY. 
Parlour and Playground Games. 

By Mrs. LAURENCE QOMME. 



BELL'S CATHEDRAL SERIES. 

Profusely Illustrated, cloth , crown 8vo. is. 6d. net each. 

ENGLISH CATHEDRALS. An Itinerary and Description. Compiled 
by JAMES G. GILCHRIST, A.M., M.D. Revised and edited with an 
Introduction on Cathedral Architecture by the Rev. T. PERKINS, 
M.A., F.R.A.S. 

BRISTOL. By H. J. L. J. MASSE, M.A. 

CANTERBURY. By HARTLEY WITHERS. 3rd Edition, revised. 

CARLISLE. By C. KING ELEY. 

CHESTER. By CHARLES HIATT. 2nd Edition, revised. 

DURHAM. By J. E. BYGATE, A.R.C.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

ELY. By Rev. W. D. SWEETING, M.A. 

EXETER. By PERCY ADDLESHAW, B.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

GLOUCESTER. By H. J. L. J. MASSED M,A. 2nd Edition. 

HEREFORD. By A. HUGH FISHER, A.R.E. 2nd Edition, revised. 

LICHFIELD. By A. B. CLIFTON. 2nd Edition. 

LINCOLN. By A. F. KENDRICK, B.A. 2nd Edition, revised, 

NORWICH. By C. H. B. QUENNELL. 2nd Edition. 

OXFORD. By Rev. PERCY DEARMER, M.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

PETERBOROUGH. By Rev. W. D. SWEETING. 2nd Edition, revised. 

RIPON. By CECIL HALLETT, B.A. 

ROCHESTER. By G. H. PALMER, B.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

ST. DAVID'S. By PHILIP ROBSON, A.R.I.B.A. 

ST. PAUL'S. By Rev. ARTHUR DIMOCK, M.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

SALISBURY. By GLEESON WHITE. 2nd Edition, revised. 

SOUTHWELL. By Rev. ARTHUR DIMOCK, M.A. 2nd Edition, revised. 

WELLS. By Rev. PERCY DEARMER, M.A. 2nd Edition. 

WINCHESTER. By P. W. SERGEANT. 2nd Edition, revised. 

WORCESTER. By E. F. STRANGE. 

YORK. By A. GLUTTON- BROCK, M.A. 2nd Edition. 

Preparing. 



ST. ALBANS. By Rev. W. D. SWEETING. 
CHICHESTER. By H. C. CORLETTE, 

A.R.I.B.A. 
ST. ASAPH and BANGOR. By P. B. 

IRONSIDE BAX. 



GLASGOW. By P. MACGREGOR CHAL 

MERS, I.A., F.S.A.(Scot.). 
LLANDAFF. By HERBERT PRIOR. 
MANCHESTER. By REV. T. PERKINS, 

M.A. 



Uniform with above Series. Now ready, is. 6d. net each. 

ST. MARTIN'S CHURCH, CANTERBURY. By the Rev. CANON ROITTI.KDGB, 

M.A., F.S.A. 

BEVERLEY MINSTER. By CHARLES HIATT. 
WIMBORNE MINSTER and CHRISTCHURCH PRIORY. By the Rev. T. 

PERKINS, M.A. 

TEWKESBURY ABBEY AND DEERHURST PRIORY. By H. J. L. J. MASSE, M.A 
BATH ABBEY, MALMESBURY ABBEY, and BRADFORD-ON-AVON CHURCH. 

By Rev. T. PERKINS, M.A. 
WESTMINSTER ABBEY. By CHARLES HIATT. {Preparing. 



BULLS HANDBOOKS TO CONTINENTAL CHURCHES. 

Profusely Illustrated. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6ct. net each. 

CHARTRES : The Cathedral and Other Churches. By H. J. L. J. MASS*, M.A. {Ready. 
ROUEN : The Cathedral and Other Churches. By the Rev. T. PKRKINS, M.A. {Ready. 
AMIENS. By the Rev. T. PERKINS, M.A. {Preparing 

PARIS (NOTRE-DAME). By CHARLES HIATT. [Predating 



( 2 ) 

WEBSTER'S 

INTERNATIONAL 

DICTIONARY 

OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. 
2118 Pages. 3500 Illustrations. 



PRICES: 

Cloth, I/, us. 6d.; half calf, 2/. 2s.; half russia, 2/. 5.?.; full calf, 
2/. 8s.; full russia, 2/. I2J.; half morocco, with Patent Marginal Index, 
2/. 8s. ; full calf, with Marginal Index, 2/. izs. Also bound in 2 vols., 
cloth, I/. I4J. ; half calf, 2/. 125. ; half russia, 2/. i8.r. ; full calf, 3/. 3.?. ; 
full russia, 3/. 15^. 

The Appendices comprise a Pronouncing Gazetteer of the World, 
Vocabularies of Scripture, Greek, Latin, and English Proper Names > 
a Dictionary of the Noted Names of Fiction, a Brief History of the 
English Language, a Dictionary of Foreign Quotations, Words, Phrases, 
Proverbs, &c., a Biographical Dictionary with 10,000 names, &c., &c. 



' We believe that, all things considered, this will be found to be the best 
existing English dictionary in one volume. We do not know of any work 
similar in size and price which can approach it in completeness of a vocabu- 
ary, variety of information, and general usefulness.' Guardian. 

' We recommend the New Webster to every man of business, every 
father of a family, every teacher, and almost every student to everybody, 
in fact, who is likely to be posed at an unfamiliar or half-understood word or 
phrase. '- Si. James's Gazette. 

Prospectuses, with Specimen Pages, on Application. 
THE ONLY AUTHORISED AND COMPLETE EDITION. 



LONDON : GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK STREET, 
COVENT GARDEN. 

50,000. S. & S. 6.01. 



UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 



A 000 775 892 3 